THE ANATOMY OF VRINES.

CONTAINING THE CONVICtion and condemnation of them.

Or, the second Part of our discourse of vrines.

Detecting and unfolding the manifold falsehoods and abuses committed by the
vulgar sort of Practitioners, in the judgment of diseases by the vrines only:
together with a narrow survey of their substance, chief colors, and manifold
contents, joining withal the right use of vrines.

Wherein is contained plenty of profitable and delectable Histories concerning
this subject.

Collected, as well out of the ancient Greek, Latin, and Arabian Authors, as
out of our late famous Physicians of several Nations: their authorities quoted
and translated out of the original tongues, together with some of the Authors
own observations.

By JAMES HEART of NORTHAMPTON.

Never heretofore published.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Field for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be sold at
his shop at the South door of Paul's. 1625.

of vrines, to wit, such as do decline from any one extreme, what concerns
the same, may easily, by that which has been said of the same extreme, be
understood. Now if any shall enquire what is the cause I spend so much time
about this subject: I answer, it is by reason of the old inueterate opinion, or
rather error, which most people have conceived concerning this strumpet; whom
for this cause I have here unmasked, and laid open to the view of every one
that will not shut his eyes in the clear Sunshine; and that to the end that
none may be circumuented by the fraud and cozenage of such as abuse her for
their own benefit. But lest any should imagine these things to be but fancies
fetched from mine own brain, therefore not contented to set down mine own
positive opinion, I have both backed, fortified and flanked it with the bulwarks
of the best writers of ancient and later times, whose own words I have truly
translated, directing thee likewise, learned Reader, to the marginall
quotations, where for thy recreation and better satisfaction, not the names of
the authors only, and the particular places, but the very words of the
original are often set down, that so it may more evidently appear, that this
latter jury finds her guilty, as the former great enquest after the
indictment found Billa vera. The condemnation must then of necessity follow,
since the parties offending having had these three last assizes allowed them to
plead for themselves, have said nothing. This sentence I refer to this The
honorable Court of Parliament.
sage assembly, who, as I hope, will take this public business, as a matter
of no small moment, into their serious considerations. But me thinks I hear
some say, what is then the use of vrines in discerning of diseases? or serves
it for no use at all? I answer, that so far am I from abrogating this so
ancient and necessary a sign, received by all our ancient and late writers,
which I do highly esteem, and account of the same being rightly used, howbeit
as it is commonly used, it is most shamefully abused.

The right use of urine then is, The right use of vrines.
together with all the rest of the signs and several circumstances of the
disease (in such diseases I mean where it is of any force or validity, in
some diseases being of no use at all) to give us notice of the nature, together
with the changes and alterations, as likewise what is like to be the issue of
the same. The Physician is therefore first to enquire diligently into the
nature of the disease, together with all the other signs and circumstances
thereof: and then, comparing all together, to give forth his best and most
assured judgment. Foolish custom of the country people.
Most foolish therefore and absurd is the sottish custom of the country
people now a days, bringing the urine to the Physician, it may be in some old
oily or inkie bottle, and then to demand of him as of some Delphian oracle,
the whole nature of the disease, the patients age, and diverse other things
wherewith they ought to acquaint us, as also with all the other signs and
circumstances of the disease: even as the client is to lay open his cause to
the Lawyer, how learned soever, and skillful in his profession. It is yet not
unworthy the observation, that one and the same urine has often diverse and
several significations, and therefore unless by diverse other signs and
circumstances limited, can never afford us any certainty, as hereafter both
in the colors and contents the ensuing discourse shall make manifest. And thus
may the right use to the wise and understanding easily appear; especially to
such as have been or yet shall hereafter be admitted unto such mysteries. And
therefore ignorant Empiricks, women, and many other such, have no share or
interest in these affairs, as not being able to diue into the depth of the
premises. And as for clergy men, they cannot be ignorant, that they ought to
be employed about businesses of an higher nature. And if they will have a care
of the souls entrusted to them, they need not trouble themselves with their
bodies. Now that one sign, in some diseases only to be observed to be of any
use, should with a Papal prerogative assume all authority unto it self, is
both against common sense, The pulse in many diseases to be preferred before
the urine.
daily experience, and the authorities of the learned. The pulse will plead
for a pre-eminence above the urine: and to judge of this, as of a number of
other signs, it will of necessity require the Physicians presence. Now that
the vrines in many diseases, and those of undoubted danger, do often show thee
no more then the ground thou go on; and that many other signs besides are
of necessity to be observed, has been at great length related in the former
tractate, and shall yet more plainly and particularly in this which follows
appear. And for thy more particular information, I have set down the several
significations of vrines, and that according to the opinions of such Authors as
have written of them; together with some particulars which have never yet been
published by any English writer that I have as yet seen, as by the contents of
the books and chapters may appear. Some things also which have been by others
written and avouched for uncontrolled truths, I have confuted as false and
erroneous: and that, as I thinkt, by unanswerable arguments, illustrating the
same with variety of ancient and recent authorities, together with plenty of
pertinent examples, being true historical relations, observed both by my self
and other Authors: the which howsoever they do not simply prove; yet do they
not a little illustrate the matter in hand, and make it more perspicuous to the
meaner sort. Now whereas I sometimes insert something of the ignorance and
insufficiency of some offenders, some may, perhaps, reply, that it may
sometimes befall a good Physician to fail as well as any of them. I confess
Indeed, Bernardus non videt omnia: He is a good horse that never stumbled.
Never to fail is a privilege denied to any of the offspring of sinful Adam:
Quand^que b^nus dormitat H^merus. Horat.
howbeit the learned Physician building upon reason and experience, keeps
always an orderly and methodicall course in all his proceedings: and if he may
sometimes err (as being a man and not a God) how much more then an ignorant
Empiricke, a shee-Physitian (such a one as now lives in Northamptonshire, and
in whom I wonder that any that has any brains in his head can see any
sufficiency) that I say nothing of a meddling Minister that never was trained
up in that profession; shall they I say be obnoxious to error in so intricate
an Art, wherein they have no interest, as being mere usurpers upon other men's
right? Besides, the vulgar not being able to judge of the sufficiency of the
learned Physician, prefers often the pains of some ignorant Empiricke,
(soothed up it may be by the success of some casual cure) before the labors
of the most learned and honest artist. But my meaning is here of an ordinary
erroneous course of practicing, eue^ against the rules of art, and the very
grounds and principles of this physical profession. Of such errors I could
have set down a multitude, besides those few which I had by relation, either
from the patients themselves, or else from some of their most familiar friends
and acquaintances, who have protested, that they will be ready to justify the
same upon their oaths. Casual cures sometimes succeeding, do not prove a
sufficiency in the par^ies thus practi^ing.
Neither yet let this suffice, that some of their proctors plead for them a
number of happy and successful events; since that thus we may often magnify
the most vile wizard, and most ignorant old wife in the country: this argument
taken from issue and event being a mere Paralogisme, a fallacy and deceit,
taking that often for a true cause which is no cause indeed, as in the
conclusion of this discourse shall more plainly appear. And in this I appeal
to the learned and honest Artist, not to such a persons parasite, who takes
for good and current coin what soever comes out of his mint, nor yet their
otherwise honest, yet in this point, too partial patients, in this particular
blinded with the mist of ignorance, or a preiudicate opinion of such men's
supposed sufficiency, they themselves not being able herein to discern
betwixt right and wrong.

Now that this has been no An usual and ordina^ie custom to browbeat and
overthrow errors and imposture, and to plead for truth.
unusual custom to browbeat and ouerthow errors, even in this profession, and
for the maintaining of truth to plead against imposture, might easily, as well
by ancient as later authorities, be euinced, which would be too tedious here to
relate. But amongst many, one late writer I cannot pass by (the learned
Libauius I mean) who has wrestled with many such monsters; as namely
Michelius, Hartmannus, Scheunemannus, the impudent Priest Gramau^s, and that
famous, I mean infamous impostor Ambaldus, author of that counterfeit This
Panacaea was a certain medicine made of saffron, quick silver, vermilion,
antimonie, and certain sea shells made up in fashion of triangular lozenges,
stamped and sealed with certain strange characters, and sold at a very dear
rate, the very name importing as much as a medicine against all diseases; and
was in as great, or greater esteem among the Germans, as ever Aurum potabile
once here amongst our selves. Liban contra Ambald and defens. syntagm. a^can.
chym. contra Henuingum Scheunem.
Panacea, like our Aurum potabile, supposed good against most, if not all
infirmities; who notwithstanding, for his ignorance not being able to undergo
the trial and examination of the Physicians of the City of Ausburg, was most
justly by the Magistate banished the same, and so his fame after a while turned
to fume or smoke. And have we not of late days had here at home D. Gwin. and
D. Ra^igh against aurum potabile, D. Cotta against this and diverse ignorant
erroneous practisers.
some maintainers of truth and opposers of imposture, some living even at this
day? And against this same abuse in particular, besides Forest, Euritius Cordus
published in Latin a learned book: so did likewise Guilielmus Adolphus
Scribonius, the learned Langius in some of his Epistles, and many others also,
as hereafter shall appear. But I am not ignorant, that whosoever will publ^sh
any thing in this last and learned age, cannot choose but undergo the censure of
many judges, as witnesses the worthy Hieron epist. ^32. partis tertia
referente Langio.
^erome. Some will perhaps say the style is too mean and plain: and others,
if there were any elegancie in it, would cry out, he plays the Orator (perhaps
odious in handling vrines) not the Physician. And some preoccupied with a
partial and preiudicate opinion, like the diseased of some choleric fever,
to who^ the sweetest things seem bitter: so whatsoever fruit grows in some
men's gardens, be it never so good, will give no content to some men's over
curious and nice relishes: so hard a thing is it to practice this one point,
Omnibus placeto.

Howsoever, kind Reader, if thou come with a desire to submit thy self to the
rules of reason, to have thy judgment rectified if erroneous, and with an
earnest desire to be fully informed of the truth, let not my labor be lost,
but peruse, I pray thee, this tractate, wherein thou may perhaps find
something for thy satisfaction. And howsoever, perhaps, the cookerie may not
give thee full content, yet remember the matter is but mean, in the which I
have had a greater regard to the matter it self, then to the curious manner of
delivering the same; and a greater care to satisfy the simplest understandings
(for whose cause I have principally published these may pains) then with the
ornaments of an Orator to please the ears of the most learned. Optimum
condimentum fames: A good appetite needs no sauce. The Germans in diverse
places of Saxony, in stead of currants bake their cakes with black Poppy
seeds: and in stead of stewed broth boil wild or horse radishes with their
beef. The French finds a good relish in his sour sauces: and a Spaniard
makes often as great account of a Lemmon, as an English man of a pecce of
powdered beef. Whatsoever it is, and howsoever liked, yet my principal
purpose was and is to profit the public. If I should plead a privilege from
backbiters, and immunitie from malignant tongues, I should su^ for that which
has been denied the greatest and worthiest personages of ancient and later
times. And some varlets have been found, who would rather fire the famous
temple of Diana, then not minister matter to talk of them. And as for my
self, I deny not but I shall find some of the offenders here mentioned, who
will snarle and grumble at my so plain and impartial reproving of their
faults. Some, who should have showed better example, conscious to themselves of
their own guiltiness, have broken the ice already, and as I am informed, have
much repined at the Preface of my former tractate. John 18. 23.
If I have spoken evil be are witness of the evil: but if well, why smitest
thou me? If they can justify their actions, let them publish their apology,
and let the Reader judge. But if they can do nothing else but malign other
men's labors, and themselves loyter, I wish them to be filent.

Carpere vel noli nostra vel ede tua. Martia^.

Bring forth thy birth, or bark not thus at mine.
But all they can say, moves me no more then the barking of a dog, or the
yelping of a fox, as knowing that,

Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. Terent.

Flattery gets friends, but truth often envy finds.
It is for thy sake therefore, kind and impartial reader, who have learned to
value virtue at her highest worth, that I have undertaken this task: which I
acknowledge to be so far from perfection, that I confess I have but with a
rude pencill pourtrayed out the lineaments of this picture, giving hereby fit
opportunity to some cunning Apelles to perfect the same hereafter. Homo sum,
Terent.
humani a me nihil alienu^ puto: A man I am, and as all the sons of Adam,
subject to error. But let the righteous reprove me, Psalm. 141. 5.
it shall be as a precious ointment, and shall not hurt my head. So entreating
thy patience to take these my pains in good part, not to be too sharp and
censorious, nor yet too open eared to hearken to envious inuectiue speeches of
any whose sores are here lanced, and to keep one ear open for thy friends
just apology, I rest,

Thy ever unfeigned, well-wishing friend, a favorer of the public good, and a
professed enemy to all fraud and imposture, ^AMES HEART.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Chapters contained in this whole Tractate.
IN THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. 1.
THe Introduction, where some thing of the antiquity, excellency, and
eminency of Physic, and of the lawless intrusion of some ignorant persons
upon the profession of Physic, with the absurdity of the same. CHAP. 2. Of
the uncertain judgment affoorded us by vrines in general, together with
their limitation to certain diseases, and that out of a many learned and
approved Authors. CHAP. 3. That even in diseases of the Liver and within the
veins, the urine does often deceive the most skillful Physician. CHAP. 4. That
by the urine only it cannot absolutely be known whether a woman be with child
or no, contrary to the vulgar opinion. CHAP. 5. That the sex cannot be
discerned by the urine.
IN THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. 1.
THat the regions of the urine are not answerable to the regions of the body of
man, as also concerning the substance of vrines thick and thin; their manifold
significations, and uncertainty of judgment by the same. CHAP. 2. Of the
accidents of urine, the quantity, smell, etc. and that no certain and assured
truth can by them be presaged or known. CHAP. 3. Of the colors of vrines, how
deceitful they prove, and first of the color commonly called palew, and
light saffron. CHAP. 4. Of red vrines; how easily one may thereby be deceived:
of pissing of blood. CHAP. 5. Of black vrines, and that they are not always
so dangerous as they are deemed. Of blew, ash-colored, leaden and green
colored vrines, together with their several significations and uncertainties.
CHAP. 6. The manifold significations of white vrines, as also the great
uncertainty of judgment by the same. CHAP. 7. Of the circle or garland,
spume, and froth, bubbles, smoke, or vapor, and fat in the ouermost region of
the urine, and what certainty from thence can be collected. CHAP. 8. Of the
cloud, swim, or sublimation, together with diverse sorts of residences, and
the uncertainty of their significations. CHAP. 9. Of the manner of pissing:
the retention or stoppage of urine, total or in part: of inuoluntarie pissing,
both in sickness and in health. CHAP. 10. Of the fond and foolish opinion
concerning distillation of vrines. Of the water of separation, together with
the uncertainty of judgment by such means. CHAP. 11. The conclusion of the
whole discourse, where something concerning issue and event, and of causuall
cures.
THE NAMES OF SVCH FAMOVS Physicians as are alleged in this present Tractate.
ACtuarius. Aetius. Ancient Greek Physicians. Alexander Benedictus. A learned
Italian Physician. Alexander Trallianus. An ancient Greek Physician. Amatus. A
learned Portugal Physician. Ambrosius Paraeus. Surgeon to three French Kings.
Andreas Laurentius. Physician to King Henry the fourth. Andreas Libauius. A
very learned Germane Physician. Antonius Valetius. A learned French Physician.
Archigenes. An ancient Physician of Syria. Aretaeus Cappadox: or of Cappadocia.
Benjamin Lobshuts. A learned Germane Physician. Chrystophorus a Vega. A
Physician to the high and mighty Prince Charles, Prince of Spain, and D. of
the chair in the University of Complutum. Claudius Galenus. Diomedes
Cornarius. Physician to Maximilian Archduke of Austria, and brother to
Rodolphus and Matthias late Emperors. Duncanus Liddelius of Aberdene in
Scotland, Physician to Henricus Julius, the late and last Duke of Brawnswicke,
and D. of the chair for Physic and the Mathematickes in the University of
Helmstadt. Felix Platerus. Physician to the illustrious Duke of Wirtemberg, and
one of the D. of the chair in the famous University of Basil in Switzerland.
Franciscus Emericus, D. in Physic, and practical professor in the
University of Vienna. Franciscus Valleriola. A learned French Physician.
Gasper Bauhinus. Physician to the late mentioned Duke of Wirtemberg, and D. of
the chair in the aforesaid University of Basil. Guilielmus Adolphus
Scribonius. A famous Germane Physician. Guilielmus Rondeletius. D. of the
chair in the famous University of Montpeliers in France. Hieronymus Cardanus.
A learned Italian Physician. Hieronymus Mercurialis. A learned Italian
Physician, and D. of the chair in the University of Padua. Hieronymus
Montuus. Physician to Frances the 1. French King. Hieronymus Reusnerus. A
learned Germane Physician. Hippocrates. Iacobus Douinetus. A Germane Physician.
Iacobus Holliricus. A famous Physician of Paris in France. Iacobus Syluius. A
French Physician of good account. Iean Marinello, of Forli in Italy, an
Italian Physician. I. Flesher. A learned English Physician. Iodocus Willichius.
D. of the chair in the University of Franckford on the Oder in Germany.
Johannes Anglicus, or Gatesden, the Author of Rosa Anglica, a famous English
Physician, who lived in anno 1320. Johannes Belfortis. Johannes le Bon. A
French Physician of good note. Johannes Caius. A learned English Physician.
Johannes Crato a Kra^^theim. Physician to three Emperors of the house of
Aust^ia. Johannes Damascenus. Johannes Fernelius. Physician to Henry the 2.
French King. Johannes Heurnius. A learned Low country Physician, and D. of the
chair in the University of Leyden in Holland. Johannes Langius. Physician to
five Electors, Princes Palatines of Rhene. Johannes Michael Sauonarola.
Physician to Borsius sometimes Duke of Ferrara in Italy. Johannes Montanus. A
learned French Physician. Johannes Renodaeus. A famous Physician of the same
nation. Johannes Schenckius. A learned Germane Physician. Laurentius Ioubertus.
Physician to Henry the 3. French King, Chancellor in the University of
Mont-peliers, and D. of the chair there. Leo Roganus. A famous Roman
Physician. Leonardus Turnheisserus. A Germane Physician. Leuinus Lemnius. A
learned Physician of Zeland. Ludouicus Mercatus. Physician to Philip the 2. and
3. kings of Spain, and D. of the chair in the University of Vallad'olid in
Spain. Marcellus Donatus of Mantua in Italy, a Physician of good account,
Knight and D. in Physic. Martinus Akakia. A learned French Physician.
Matthaeus de Gradi. Nicolus Florentinus. Paulus Aegineta. Petrus Forestus. A
famous Physician of Holland. Petrus Sphaererius. Physician to the Archbishop of
Mentz. Rembertus Dodonaeus. Physician to the Emperor Rodolphus 2. Rhases. An
Arabian Physician. Rufus Ephesius. Timotheus Bricht of Cambridge. A learned
English Physician. Thomas Rodericus a Vega. A learned Spanish Physician.
Besides these, many more might have been to the same purpose, not impertinently
produced, which I thought might well be spared, these being to an indifferent
and impartial Reader sufficient.

SOME OTHER AVTHORS.
Aelianus. Aristoteles. Bible. Carrion. Catullus. Cicero. Henricus Ranzouius.
Herodotus. Homerus. Jerome. Josephus. Iuuenalis. Lactantius. Martialis.
Nicetas. Plinius. Polibius. Sabellicus. Statius. Terentius. Zonaras.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE ANATOMY OF VRINES.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN these two books is a continuation of the discourse concerning the
uncertainty of judgment in diseases by the sole and bare inspection of the
urine only, without the concourse of the rest of the other signs; whereunto
the sight of the patient is altogether necessary. In the first book and first
Chapter, by way of introduction, something is said of the antiquity,
excellency, and eminency of physic; as also concerning the lawless
intrusion of some ignorant persons upon this profession, with the absurdities
of the same. Then in the next place follow certain authorities of some famous
Physicians against this abuse in general: and afterward also in some such
diseases where it is thought to be of greatest force and validity. And after
shall fully be confuted that foolish, absurd, and inueterate opinion, of
discerning whether a woman be with child or no, by the bare inspection of the
urine only: and that by unanswerable arguments, together with some instances,
both of mine own and other ancient and late Physicians of no small note. And
lastly shall be plainly demonstrated, that the sex cannot by the urine only
be discerned, contrary to the vulgar opinion.

CHAP. I.
The introduction, wheresome thing concerning the antiquity, excellency, and
eminency of physic, and of the lawless intrusion of some ignorant persons
upon this profession, with the absurdity of the same.
Our most great and omnipotent God, of his great goodness, having first
created and framed these glorious globes and orbs of the universe, together
with the earth and all the ornaments and furniture of the same, at last made
man, that microcosme, or little world, as it were an epitome or abridgment of
this great universal world: and that according to his own likeness, and
placed him in earthly paradise. But not long after being by the serpent that
old inuetera^e enemy of mankind, seduced to sin, he became a map of misery,
obnoxious to death and eternal damnation; and even in this life subject to
innumerable sicknesses. So far notwithstanding, did his makers bounty
abound, that not only sent he him a Savior to redeem him from damnation, but
furnished him with innumerable remedies against his manifold infirmities.
Joseph. antiquit. Iudaic. l. 1. cap. 4. Zonaras annal. lib. 1.
These Adam taught his son Seth; and he again (lest water or fire should
destroy them) wrote the principles of physic in hieroglyphicke letters, upon
two pillars; one of stone, against the rage of the water, the other on brick
against the fury of the fire. Thus came the art to be propagated to
posterity: and Abraham's seed soiourning in Egypt that unthankful nation, yet
for their hospitality to Gods people reaped this benefit, that they were by
them instructed in the principles of this profession, and many more be^ides. The
Greeks gained this knowledge of the Egyptians, who were not idle, but
improuing the same, would willingly have assumed all the honor to themselves.
High account of physic amongst the Graecians.
In great honor and reputation was it amongst this nation for many years, and
the professors of the same in great credit and account with the mightiest
Monarchs: witness the honor exhibited to Hippocrates and his posterity, by
the Athenians in particular. And the account the Persians made of it, may from
hence evidently appear, Amongst the Persians.
that the great Artaxerxes sends to Histanes governor of the Hellespont this
message. Hippocr. in epist.
The fame and renown of the noble Hippocrates, of the race and lineage of
Aesculapius, borne in the I Will of Cos, together with his great skill and
sufficiency, are come to mine ears: bestow thou therefore upon him as much
gold as he shall demand of thee, and whatsoever he shall have need of, bestow
it upon him in most plentiful manner, and have a care to send him to me: for
he shall be equal in honor and dignity with the greatest Princes of Persia.
And moreover, if there be any other wise learned man in Europe, let him be
enrolled amongst the Kings domesticke and familiar friends, not sparing for any
cost whatsoever: for such men are not every where easily to be found. Vide
Sabell ennead. 9. lib. 2. Zonar. annal. tomo. 3. aliosque neoter.
After many years, the Turkish tyranny like a violent inundation ouerflowing
the most part of Asia, together with no small part of Europe, this profession
being now banished out of Greece its own natural soil, together with the
rest of the Muses, it sought for shelter and succor amongst the rude Arabians,
Entertainment amongst the Arabians.
where it was welcomed with such entertainment, as such a country could
afford it: where howbeit it was enlarged by many such simples as India and
Arabia would yield, yet have their books been so branded by barbarous
translators, that they are not even until this day freed from the same.
Amongst the Romans.
Amongst the Romans likewise it was not a little respected, where that worthy
Emperor Augustus having among many others, some intelligence of the great
abuses committed by ignorant intruders upon this profession, together with the
great damage redounding to the subject, by means of this lawless liberty,
The law of Augustus Caesar against ignorant and unskillful practisers of
physic.
made a law as follows* That no person, of what estate or degree soever,
within the Roman Empire, should either teach or practice physic, undertaking
the cure of any sick persons, unless he were first licensed and authorized by
the Emperor himself, or by such as should by him be deputed or appointed for
this purpose. This law was long inuiolably kept by the succeeding Caesar's,
until such time as the barbarous Vide supra, and inter neoter. Chronic.
Carrion. aedit. 1608. in 8.
Saracens and Turks, under the conduct of that monster of mankind Mahomet, did
with fire and sword waste and destroy a great part of Asia, especially Syria,
together with Greece and the country about Constantinople: the Goths, Huns,
and Vandals omitting no kind of cruelty in the other parts of Europe, Mars
enemy to Minerua.
Italy in particular. These, besides many other miseries, did also subvert and
destroy most of the Universities and schools of good learning, burning the
books they could come by, and bringing in by this means mere barbarousnesse
and ignorance. This great inundation and deluge gave no small encouragement to
all manner of cozeners to practice their imposture, sparing neither the persons
nor the purses of the oppressed people. Lotharius first Emperor of the house
of Saxony restored learning and learned men in the west.
This woeful calamity continued until Lotharius Duke of Saxony was crowned
Emperor at Rome. This worthy Emperor both erected a number of new nurseries
of good learning, and repaired such as were founded before his time, adding and
increasing means for the maintenance of these new erected schools and
Universities. Moreover, De his vide orationem doctoris Benjamin Lobschuts
impressam cum obseruat. medic. Diomedis Cornarij medicina Doctoris.
he caused to be sent for out of every country and kingdom, the most famous
and learned men that were to be found, and such as did most excel in every art
and science. And for the better furtherance of this his purpose, he granted
many privileges and immunities to the aforesaid Universities and schools, the
whole Professors and Students in the same. And thus physic with the rest
revived again; and being healed of her former wounds, was drawn out of the
dark dungeon and prison wherein she had so long lien in thraldom and
captivity, and by means of this noble Emperor restored to her former
dignity and liberty again. Now to add more grace and dignity to this noble
profession, he renewed again that worthy law of Augustus, inhibiting and
discharging any person whatsoever, either to practice or profess this or any
other art or science, unless he were first licensed from the Emperors court.
But well foreseeing the inconveniences which might from hence arise, if all
such businesses should depend upon his court; for this cause he granted this
privilege and authority to the aforesaid Universities throughout the whole
Empire. This so wholesome constitution of Lotharius all the succeeding
Emperors to this day have continued. First original of Doctors and other
degrees in the Universities.
And thus came first in these titles of Doctor, Master, etc. not by the
appointment of any private man, but by the laws of Emperors and Kings of
Christendom. Now besides the premises, I would easily euince both the
eminency and excellency of this profession from the utility and necessity,
Utility and necessity of this profession.
as being of necessary use for every age, estate and degree; as also the
worthy subject thereof, to wit, the body of man, so far forth as diseases
are expelled, and health preserved; it being also the shrine of the soul, and
the costly coffer wherein it is contained, do conciliate no small authority
unto the same. Neither yet is the skill in this profession so easily attained
unto, as many ignorant people do persuade themselves. But that there are many
things required in him who is to be called natures darling, and great
Secretary of state, at all times to help and assist her, when oftentimes she
cannot help her self (unto which this confused multitude never has attained,
and therefore unworthy to be admitted unto such mysteries) has ever been
received for an uncontrolled truth. The causes of the disease must be exactly
known before the cure, and many other things besides. And thus it is recorded
of Aristotle, that at a certain time falling sick, his Physician there by him
prating apace, answered very wittily after this manner. (...).
Neither cure me like a cowheard, nor yet like a plowman; but first of all let
me know the cause, then shall thou find me obsequious to thy prescriptions.

The ever praise worthy Hippocrates, howbeit in few, yet in effectual words,
sets down such things as are requisite in a true Physician. Aelian. lib. 9.
cap. 23. Polib. lib. hist. 2. and 3. indeque Lang. epist. medicin. lib. 2.
epist. 48. Hippoc. lib. 2. de lege.
Whosoever will exactly and diligently purchase to himself a firm knowledge
in this profession, must of necessity be furnished with these which follow.
Nature (that is, a potentiall aptness, wit and understanding, with a certain
pronenesse and inclination to this profession) precepts of art, a fit and
convenient place for study; instruction in the same from younger years;
diligent and painful study, together with a competent and convenient time.
This likewise did the ancients paint forth unto us in the arms or enseignes
of Aesculapius, The arms or enseignes of Aesculapius.
to whom were attributed all the badges and enseignes which do of right belong
to a true Physician, and do all argue assiduitie and painful industry.

The first was an Owl, to give him warning of the watchful pains and care
the learned Physician ought to take in finding out the several signs and
circumstances of the disease, to the end he may be the more able to foretell
the several issues and events of the same. A crooked staff.
A crooked staff in his hand; which intimates unto us, that he ought with
great care and diligence bestirre himself, to attain to the right and perfect
knowledge, not only of the structure of man's body, and every part of the
same, as well inward as outward: but also the several qualities and virtues of
all manner of remedies appropriated for the use of mankind; whether they be
above the earth, enclosed in the intrals thereof; or yet contained in the vast
dominions of the endless ocean: as also with careful circumspection, to
observe and mark the strength of his patients, and their several natures and
constitutions; applying to each and every one of them in due and convenient
time, such proper and peculiar remedies, as may best befit them, and that
always having a watchful eye upon the several indications in such cases
required. In his right hand he held a Dragons head, A dragons head in his right
hand and a dog hard by him.
coming from the Greek word (...), signifying a sharp and clear sight: and
next unto the same was a watchful dog; both of them declaring unto us, that
the Physician ought with a certain promptness of dexterity of understanding
foresee the issue and event of diseases, and then with as great ease and
facility as is possible, and without sparing any pains, ease the patients
grief; preserving likewise and maintaining, as much as in him lies, his
present healthful state of body, and preventing to the uttermost of his
power, A pine apple in his left hand.
the imminent danger of doleful diseases. In his left hand a pine apple,
thereby letting us to understand, that the outward shell of this profession is
very hard, the inward fruit and marrow, notwithstanding, being most pleasant,
delectable and profitable. The winged picture of health with a pullet in her
hand.
At his right side was the winged picture of health, with a pullet in her hand;
and that to the end the Physician might know, that he ought to aim at the
health and happy estate of his patient principally, and not to become the
slave of base and filthy lucre and gain: in like manner manifesting unto us,
that by the pains and industrious skill of the learned Physician, health is
oftentimes maintained; as by his careless negligence, ignorance, and
insufficiency it is easily overthrown. A pullet, to show forth the
Physicians care, in prescribing fit and convenient diet, according to his
patients nature and constitution, as also the quality and motion of the
disease. How careful the Physician ought to be in prescribing diet according
to the nature of the disease and diseased.
For in acute diseases, and such as are of a sudden and speedy motion, as the
remedies must be speedy, so must the diet be sparing, answering both to the
strength of the patient, and nature of the disease; not being in the mean time
unmindful of his former custom, country or place wherein he lives, with many
more circumstances in such cases required. In diseases again of a long and
lingering nature, we must not be so close fisted, but allow them more liberal
allowance; yet keeping always in mind the former caueats and cautions. In the
end he must be armed against all occasions and sudden occurrents, not
forgetting to gratify the sick, so far forth as may stand with
conueniencie. And lastly this Aesculapian pourtraict was pictured with a beard:
Aesculapius bearded.
signifying hereby, that such as meddled with such abstruse mysteries, having
first been trained up in the grounds and principles of this profession, ought
to be of a reasonable mature judgment and understanding, to the end they may
prove so much the fitter to manage such weighty matters.

But to what end and purpose (will some perhaps say) tends this long
discourse? Even to the end it may more evidently appear, into what disgrace
and contempt this noble profession is now grown, and that by means of the
lawless and uncontrolled intrusion of ignorant and insufficient persons. Let
the Reader judge ingenuously, whether the offenders be furnished with any such
sufficiency, and let this touchstone try them all. Professions far
inferior to this, have a number of years allowed them to serve and learn,
before any be suffered to exercise the same. Liberty allowed ignorant
Physicians, cause of great mischief.
But here, howsoever the Universities be not deprived of their privileges, in
granting the degrees to the well deserving: yet is there no restraint of the
most ignorant and insufficient persons, of whatsoever sex or calling. An
ignorant Empiricke that knows scarce the property of pepper, whether it be
hot or cold, yet may practice publicly. Now that I say nothing of ignorant
Apothecaries, Surgeons, etc. the other sex will needs have a share in these
businesses also: and yet in holy writ they are tied to their houswiuerie.
Proverb. 31. Terent. in Andr.
And the heathen Poet brings in women meddling with their spinning and
carding. Their frail sex is both unfit and unfurnished with sufficiency for
managing of so great matters. It is no ways suitable to the modesty which
ought to be seen in that sex, to meddle with so public a profession. And
besides, there being no small commerce betwixt the Physician and his patient,
Hippocr. lib. de medico.
as witnesses the worthy Hippocrates, who sees not the absurdity of this
their practice? Women altogether unfit to practice physic.
And as for their sufficiency, it may easily, by that which has been said
already, appear. My purpose is not to dwell upon this subject, nor yet to
urge many arguments against it, the thing being so absurd in it self. I will
relate but one tragical story out of a late writer, of a mother who made away
her own child, A tragical story.
with an intent, as she thought to cure him. A country woman (says mine
author) having a young son of cacheoticall disposition, and now entering into
a dropsy, Alexand. Bened. de curand. morb. lib. 15. cap. 25.
by the advice of her women-gossips, thrust him, sore against his will, his
head foremost, into an oven, immediately after the drawing of the bread,
stopping up again immediately the mouth of her oven. Her gabling gossips were
officiously attending a better event then they found, as also helping her to
bring to pass this brave exploit. He being once in, was presently suffocated
with the smoke for want of fresh air. The mother within a little space calls
to her son oftener then once in an audible voice, enquiring what benefit he
found; who answered her no more then Baal did his Priests. 1. King. 18. 26 27.
28.
These prattling gossips persuaded this simple woman, that his silence was an
assured sign of the benefit he thereby received: the which this credulous
woman, still hoping where no hope was, easily believed: but at length found
that which she least looked for; drawing out of the oven her dead son, cured
not only of this, but of all other diseases also; and then (but all too late)
blames as well her own too too credulous simplicity, as the malapert
boldness of the she-physitians, inducing her to use a remedy far worse then
the disease it self. As for you, Ladies and Gentlewomen (with your good leaves
let me be so bold as to tell you my mind in a word or two) howsoever I cannot
but much commend your great charity and love, in affoording both your pains
and your purses for the relieuing of sick distressed people: yet let me
entreat you, not to be too officiously busy, the life of a man being no
matter of small importance, and which being once lost, Soles occidere and
redire possunt* nobis cum semel occidit breuis lux, Nox est perpetua vna
dormienda* Catull.
can never till the resurrection be recovered. And remember, that there may be
an oversight as well in neglecting a fit and convenient remedy in due time, as
in exhibiting a dangerous and desperate remedy. And whereas often it comes to
pass, that either your necessity or importunity does extort from the learned
Physician good and wholesome remedies either for your own or others
infirmities: yet I entreat you, not to be so indiscreete, as to make one salve
serve for every sore. A good remedy ignorantly or out of season exhibited, may
yet prove dangerous to the diseased.
The remedy indeed may be good, but (as often comes to pass) ill used, or
rather abused. And that which you have sometimes tried to be a sovereign
medicine for your selves; yet another time, by reason of a number of new
occurrents, the same remedy may produce an effect far differing from the
former: how much more then in another? The constitution of the party should be
considered, the sex, age, time of year, yea and of the disease it self; as
whether it be in the beginning, in the increase, in the height, or declining,
with many more circumstances are here to be considered. But put yet the case the
remedy be good against such a disease; yet may many other circumstances cross
this iudication in any individual person, which were here too tedious to
relate. It may then easily appear, that this is a business of an higher
strain then many do well consider: but of this matter no more. Now howbeit
this fretting canker (I mean of insufficient, unlearned, and unskillful
Physicians) has crept over the whole Christian world, yet the inconvenience is
not in all alike. For howbeit in Germany Empiricks do so abound that they have
begun of late years (supposing it may be that we are here unfurnished) to come
and visit us here in this Island, The laudable custom of the Germane nation in
providing fit and learned Physicians, and allowing them good maintenance.
yet can I not but much commend and praise their care and industry in
providing for the maintenance of the honest and learned Physician. There each
several City, town, or corporation, has certain Physicians entertained by
stipends out of the chamber stocks (which there by reason of their admirable
industry, as being much addicted to the public good are very rich) a
dwelling house being likewise allowed them for their lives: and each City or
town according to the proportionable bigness, has more or fewer of those
stipendiarie Physicians: and none among them admitted, but such as for their
sufficiency, and long time spent in the study of that profession, have taken
their degrees in some famous University. All the Apothecaries and Surgeons
within the place where they live are subject to their censures, and by them to
be controlled; They often visit the Apothecaries shops, and take a s^^uey of
his drugs.
and the midwiues likewise by them must be admitted. And of all the
Apothecaries drugs, as well simples as compounds, they take a narrow survey
twice a year; to wit, every Spring and fall: besides the viewing of their
drugs immediately after the buying of them (which comes most commonly to pass
twice a year, at Lerpzig or Franckfort fair) not being lawful for them to
make use of any of them until such time as they be first visited and allowed
by the aforesaid Physicians. At the viewing and visiting of their wares, is
appointed one from the chief Magistrate of the City, commonly called the
Burger master, to sit in commission with the Physicians. If the Apothecarie
shall be found faulty, or his drugs any ways insufficient, the aforesaid
persons fine him at their pleasures; as also set a reasonable rate or tax upon
all his drugs and compositions, and that according to the rising or falling of
the prizes of the drugs. Neither yet may the Apothecarie of himself make,
mix, or compound any great composition of many several ingredients, unless
the Physicians, one or more being present, first see all the several
ingredients, and then allow of the same. He can likewise take no apprentice
into his service, but such as first shall be sworn faithfully to make and
compound according to the Physicians prescriptions, not altering any thing in
his bill without his knowledge and allowance: the which oath the Physicians
have power to exact of the aforesaid apprentices. The great commodity of this
so laudable a custom.
Of this so laudable and praiseworthy a constitution this benefit they reap,
that first of all, the inhabitants are never unfurnished of fit and sufficient
Physicians, to whom in time of need they may have recourse for good, and
wholesome counsel: as also that the inhabitants in their extremity are
preferred before strangers. The moderation of fees likewise, in regard of their
standing stipends, is some ease to the purses of private men, but especially to
the poorer sort, to whom by this means they are the better enabled to afford
their counsel for little or nothing. The country round about finds likewise
every where learned Physicians to advise with, as also good and sufficient
stuff, neither fustie not sophisticate, and that at a reasonable rate. Now how
far we come short of this so laudable and worthy policy, those that know
any thing are not ignorant. We are apt enough to imitate that which is naught
in our neighbor nations, and why make we not use of such things as deserve
praise and commendation? From the aforenamed nation we have so well learned
quaffing and carrousing, together with their unhappy healths, indeed hinderers
of all health, that it seems now to be naturalized amongst us: and why are we
not as forward for this and such other laudable constitutions as tend to the
benefit of the commonwealth? But now to our purpose.

One thing which does principally encourage all manner of cozeners, The idle
inspection of urine, as it is at this day practiced, opens a gap to every
cozener and impostor.
and every ignorant and insufficient person, to adventure upon this profession,
is the vain and idle inspection of Vrines, as it is at this day every where
practiced; by means whereof most people are persuaded that the Physician is
able to find out, not only the disease in general, but even every sign and
circumstance of the same. I my self have often been importuned to tell that by
this sign, which the wits of all the wisest Physicians in the world could
never assuredly and certainly find out. To instance but in one thing, to wit,
the discerning of the conception, whether a woman be with child or no: there is
not an Empiricke or quack-saluer in the country, that will not make thee
believe he can tell thee that assuredly. Our she-physitians (for such monsters
now this country yields) will say no less. Iohann. le bon. de therap. puerp.
But hear the judgment of a learned French Physician concerning this point:
To abuse the inspection of urine, to know whether a woman be with child, or no,
belongs to a cozening impostor, and not to an honest Physician; howsoever
some have not been ashamed to vent such vanities. But of this at more length
hereafter: now let us proceed to the maine matter, to wit, to handle this
subject in order.

CHAP. II.
Of the uncertain judgment affoorded us by Vrines in general, together with
their limitation to certain diseases, and that out of many learned writers.
IT is grown now adays a common custom, by the sole and bare inspection of
the urine to undertake to declare and lay open the whole disease, It is
impossible to judge of the disease, and what concerns the same, by the
inspection of the urine only.
together with the state and constitution of every part of the body, without
any regard had to such things as the most wise and circumspect Physicians have
left us in this case to be considered: the which notwithstanding, is as
impossible to bring to pass, as by the heat or cold of an house to judge of
the perfection of the same, together with the soundness of the walls and
timber thereof: or yet by the rubbish of any house carried to some other place,
to find out the stateliness of the former building. To this end and purpose
besides the authorities produced in the former Discourse, I will yet bring in a
cloud of witnesses to confirm this mine opinion. And in the first place, I
will set down some famous authors condemning this vromantical conjecture, and
limiting and confining it within its lawful lists and limits. Afterward also
shall appear how our judgment may err and mistake, even in some such
diseases as may sometimes by the same be discerned: proceeding afterward to
instance in some particular diseases: where shall not be omitted the
confutation of the erroneous opinion of the vrines of women with child, as also
of finding out of the sex thereby. Then will we proceed to a particular
confutation of all the parts of urine; whereby shall be set down the true use
of the same. Now the first author that shall march in the auantgard of this
batallion shall be the learned Langius; and that both in regard of his great
worth and learning, as also because our former author (Forest I mean) had
singled out these two following Epistles, as making for the same purpose to set
down at the end of his discourse of vrines, which I have thought good with
some other authorities to insert into this place.

Concerning Physitian^ who by the inspection of the Urine only, do rashly and
unadvisedly pronounce their opinion concerning the nature and substance of any
disease.
It seems not a little strange to thee (kind gossip) how it should come to
pass that the same and reputation of Germane Physicians should be so little
set by either at home or abroad, Langius tom^. 1. epist. 11.
since notwithstanding, praised be God, Germany is a very fruitful soil,
stored with most excellent wits, where the liberal Arts and sciences do not a
little flourish (insomuch as that most noble and illustrius Picus Earl of
Mirandole, truly praiseworthie and ever to be admired, as well for his high
pedigree and noble descent, as for his excellent and admirable gifts in good
learning, did witness that the river of Tiber had now of late run into the
Rhene:) and yet for all this, the noble faculty of Physic lies contemned
and despised. In symposio. de republica.
The causes of the same I have elsewhere declared to be diverse, whereof this is
the chief, to wit, that the chief and principal part of Physic
diagnosticke or semioticke, which teaches us to know the nature, causes, and
substance of the disease by the signs and grounds of the same, is either not
known at all, or at least altogether, in regard of their idleness, neglected;
while as the ordinary sort of Physicians do only labor to know and discern
the nature and substance of the disease by the sole and fraudulent indication
of the stuckring urine. But it is acknowledged of all true Physicians, that the
ground and beginning of finding out aright the true method of curing diseases,
is the knowledge of the disease, together with the place seized with the same,
which is not known by the bare inspection of the urine only, being but a
doubtful sign; but (as Galen says well) the knowledge of the disease is
collected by means of the place affected, together with the disposition of the
same besides nature: which being the internal cause of the disease (or the
disease it self) annoying the action, it is no marvel if the signs of each
be common to both: and thus is the disease and place affected discerned and
known, both by the parts of the substance thereof, the contents, adherents, the
action interessed, together with the accidents of the disease, from the parts
of the substance of the part affected: as if we shall perceive any gristle of
the windpipe to be spit up with coughing, it does argue and indicate to us an
exulceration of the lungs, together with a consumption of the same. From the
contents; as if thou shall perceive the chyle (that is, the meat received into
the stomach and a little altered) or the ordure issue out of a wound, thou
may from thence safely collect that either the stomach, or guts are wounded.
Such things also as do adhere or grow to the part, do both declare the disease
and the part annoyed therewith. For if upon a fracture of the scull there grow
out little round lumps like unto little mushromes, it does argue the damage
and hurt of the membrane or skin covering the brains. No less does the hurt
of the action bewray as well the hurt of the organe and instrument of it, as
the disease it self: as the retention of the urine does argue an obstruction
in the pipes conueighing the urine from the kidneyes to the bladder: or the
excessive flux of the same being crude and not concocted, does argue the
indisposition of the kidneyes. Join yet with the former, as most pregnant
proofs and testimonies of the disease, these inseparable accidents of the
same, commonly called pathognomonica, the which the disease it self does
procure and beget: as a stinging and pricking pain in the side, joined with a
burning fever, does argue not only a Pleurisy, but also that the skin or
membrane which enuironeth the ribs is inflamed. And unto all the aforesaid
signs thou may, if thou will, add the intricate knowledge of the pulse of
the arteries, rather then the uncertain judgment by urine: the which as we do
not altogether reject, The great care of the ancient Physicians in searching
out the signs of diseases.
so do we not attribute so much thereunto as these impostors do. Now what
extraordinary pains some of the ancient Physicians took in searching out any
thing which might afford them any knowledge or insight in the nature of the
disease, thou may from hence collect, that to the end they might more easily
find out the nature and quality of the humor faulty and abounding in the
body, they did taste of the very swear that was rubbed off the body in the
hotehouses, as also of that superfluous matter found in the ears: like as the
horse-leaches were wont to taste of the horses dung, whom for that cause that
pleasant Poet Aristophanes calls (...), what if by the authority of
Hippocrates I should prove, that the color of the tongue, and the rest of the
body, gives us more assured and certain knowledge of the state of the
humors contained in the body and inward bowels, then the urine? And yet this
the ordinary sort of vrine-monging Physicians will never be able to discern,
as not being present with the patient. For as in the yellow Iaundise, a yellow
and saffron like color of the skin does better declare any obstruction of
the gall-bagge, and an ouerflowing of choler over the whole body, then the
urine: so does in like sort the leaden color of the face, and the rest of the
body, demonstrate better unto us some indisposition of the Liver and spleen
then the urine. No less also does the color of the tongue and taste, it
finds and performs the like. For such as is the humor abou^ding in the
stomach or veins, especially when it grows fierce and unruly, with such a
color and taste is the tongue most commonly imbrued. Wherefore well and
learnedly said the worthy Hippocrates (...), that is, the tongue gives us
notice, as well of the state and nature of the urine, as of all the rest of the
humors of the body. But if thou will yet further contend and contest with me,
behold I will appeal to Galen, who ought to be as our common Master, so Judge
also in such cases of controversy. Lib. 4. salub. The sweat a more general
sign then the urine.
The sweat (says he) gives us notice of the humors super abounding in the
whole body, but the urine only of such as are contained within the veins.
And howbeit these be the chief elements and grounds of the most principal
part of physic, called diagnosticke, without which the other part called
therapeuticke, or handling the cure of diseases, cannot subsist, and that they
be convinced by most pregnant proofs and testimonies; yet will they neither
give place to the same, nor yet observe and mark them: but trusting to the
urine only, De Alexandrinorum medicorum desidia. Gal. lib. 2. de natura
humana. lib. 6. epid. and passim alibi.
loytering idle at home like the Physicians of Alexandria, and sitting in their
chaires like Apolloes Priests, or some old wise fortune tellers by her crystal
looking-glass, it is a wonder to hear how doubtfully and perplexedly, without
any sight of the sick, but looking on the urine only, they will with brazen
faces prate of the patients sickness: yea further yet, will pronounce of life
and death thereby; and that for so small a gain, as scarce would the most
common hedge-whore be hired for the same. What great ambiguitie and doubtful
speeches (good Reader) need they here to use, lest they be taken tripping? Now
if it shall happen that any old wife that brings the urine shall find them
out, thou would wonder to see the Victu Quintiliane colorem.
changes of their countenances. But as if this were yet a small matter, to
prate by the sight of the urine only, Thus do most of our practicing Parsons
and Vicars become suddenly Physicians.
they are not ashamed to prescribe physic to the parties (whom they have
never seen) and that by reading of books, of the which experiments they have
never made any trial at all: to whom thou may most justly object the
ancient Proverb. (...).
A mariner by his book or sea card. But Hippocrates and the ancient Physicians
of the race of Asclepiades, not superficially, but solidly learned, did never
settle their judgments concerning the substance of the disease upon the urine
alone: no nor yet if some contents had proceeded from the substance of the
kidneyes, bladder, or parts contained in them, and so issued out with the
urine: but did rather by the color, contents, swim or sublimation, observe the
strength of the natural parts about the liver and stomach, as likewise the
concoction of the humors in the veins; to the end that in fevers they might
find out the times of the same; and so might more easily foretell the time of
the future crise, whether the same were like to be hopeful and healthful, or
dangerous and deadly; and withal to find out the fittest time for purging. The
which Galen, Hippocrates his true interpreter, does intimate unto young
Physicians in these words. The urine gives notice of these parts, to wit, the
liver, kidneyes, bladder, and the strength of the vessels which contain the
blood, and the weakness of the same, as also that faculty which engenders
the humors: but as concerning the infirmities of the brain, the chest, and
lungs, there be other signs and symptoms of the same, whereby their diseases
are discerned. All these things therefore the wise Physician is to enquire,
search, and find out, from the sick himself, and not from the urine.
Damascenu^ in Aphorism.
For this cause well said Damascenus in his Aphorisms: Concerning diseases
pronounce not rashly thine opinion, neither yet look thou upon the urine,
until such time as thou have first seen the sick, and of him demanded and
found forth every circumstance belonging to the disease. Rhaz. in aphor.
With him does Rhazes an Arabian Physician agree in his Aphorisms, in these
words: It becomes the Physician to ask diverse questions of his patient, to
the end he may attain to the internal cause of the disease, that by such
means he may afterward be able to pronounce sound judgment according to
reason: neither yet let him be ashamed to ask of the patient, whether the
disease be within or without the vein. But our Physicians, being like unto the
lazy sedentarie Physicians of Alexandria, lest they should be by the vulgar
people (who do commonly believe, that the Physician knows all by the urine)
taxed of ignorance, are ashamed to ask of the patient the causes and symptoms
of his disease. And to the end they may the better accommodate themselves to
the foolish humor of the simple and more ignorant sort, they are not a whit
afraid to prate of diseases by the inspection of the urine only. But would to
God the truth were with them in greater esteem then any popular applause, and
that they would be warned by the Poet Persius: Si quid turbida Roma eleuaret,
etc. Pers. sat. 1.
If troubled Rome do too much dispraise any thing, then not to rest and rely
upon her judgment: and that they would both ingenuously confess, and tell the
people how fraudulent and deceitful, pernicious and lying, is this manner of
inspection of the urine, brought in by some Physicians and impostors of later
days, to the great mischief of mankind. Then for certain would they be more
careful and diligent in searching out the natures of diseases by their causes,
the hurt and hinderance of the action, as also by the Pa^hognomonicke signs:
and then without all doubt should they cure a great many more, as also by this
means should their names become a great deal more famous, both among their
own friends and acquaintance, and among strangers. And by this means also
should these wandering and cozening rogues, impostors, apostaticall monks,
perfidious Jews, enemies to all Christians, the ignorant Parish Priests,
alchymists, and all the rabble of such rake-hels, (but I had almost forgotten
those old trots, fortunetellers) be thrust out from professing physic: all
the which offenders not having learned so much as the first grounds and
principles of natural Philosophy or Physic, do without control or
punishment try their desperate remedies, by the death of many a man. Wherefore
there could nothing be devised more profitable and beneficial for the good of
the commonwealth, then that at length all Christian people were freed from the
tyranny and mischief of these cruel impostors, who by means of the secret
observation of the urine, unknown to the vulgar sort, do conceal their own
ignorance, and have, as drones do into the Bec-hiue, crept into this
profession. By the premises, I hope thou have heard what is the cause that
Physic and the Professors of the same are not of so high an esteem in these
our countries at this time.

Of the differences of signs, by the which Physicians do discern and know
diseases, and do presage the future issue of the same.
As I hear, Epist. 83.
these barbarous and wicked persons, falsely assuming unto themselves the name
of Physicians, do mutter and grumble against me, because of condemning their
mad, rash, and foole-hardie finding out of diseases, by means of the urine
only, for whose slanderous backbiting I care not a rush. For such as cannot
help, I see not how they can hurt me. No more can I conceive what the
Physician can perform, as concerning the cure of the disease, being ignorant
of the nature and estate of the same. For this cause the ancient Physicians did
with great labor, travel, and industry, search out the cause, the nature and
substance of the disease, from the which the indications of remedies are
derived, and not from the urine only, but from the signs called
Pathognomonicke, and from the whole concourse of the symptoms or accidents:
who did likewise divide Physic principally into two parts, to wit, that which
we commonly call Therapeuticke, whose most large and common scope, is to cure
diseases by contrary remedies: and into that part which we call Diagnosticke;
whose most common scope is to discern the whole and sound from the like, and
the sick and infirm from the whole, being unlike the one to the other. And
this part of Physic does far excel the other, to wit, the Therapeuticke,
the which without the Diagnosticke is of small use or profit. And because it
did lay open the perfect and absolute knowledge of the disease, by means of
the signs Pathognomonicke, proper and peculiar to every disease, together with
the concurrence of accidents, which the Empiricks called (...) (which were
nothing else but the collection by observation of certain accidents and
circumstances of diseases) the later Physicians therefore gave it the name
(...), or that part of Physic which handles the signs of diseases.
Wherefore we cannot but much wonder at Galen, a man of so great learning, who
besides two hundredth and fifty books written of diverse sciences, and of all
the other parts of Physic above four hundredth; all being likewise written in
so good order and method, that notwithstanding he has not brought to full
perfection this so noble a part of Physic, called Diagnosticke, but only
dispersedly here and there, especially in that book called the Constitution or
ordering of the Art of Physic, has as it were sown some seeds of the same.
But yet Auicenna, Rhazes, and other Arabian Physicians, and such among the
Greeks as have written of late after Galen, as Paulus, Aegineta, Aetius,
Actuarius, and Alexander Trallianus, following the footsteps of the ancient
Empiricks, did collect and gather together in every several Chapter which did
discourse of the disease, a great number of the signs and several accidents
of the same: but so confusedly and indistinctly, that hardly could thou
discern one manner of sign from another insomuch as thou may, not without
cause, call their Diagnosticke Physic, the confused chaos of Democritus. And
further they do not instruct us sufficiently what sign of the disease does
argue or show forth the greater or smaller strength. But there is in Germany
at this day, And in England also.
a sort of idle prating fellows, more foolish then any others, who, as if all
the signs of every disease were to be seen in the urine, are not ashamed, by
the sole and bare inspection thereof, to prate and pronounce sentence
concerning the substance of the disease, and the life and death of the
diseased, as has been said already. To the end therefore that their
impudency may be made manifest, and laid open to every one, I purpose to
insert something in this Epistle concerning the differences of signs, to the
end that I may minister occasion to some others more learned then my self, to
handle the same by an absolute and exquisite method: the which task I will
also willingly undertake for the good of the sick, if I may obtain so much
time and leisure, that at length this so heinous a fault, and worthy of no
small punishment, may be banished from among the company of all honest and
ingenuous Physicians, and a right and perfect method, as well for discerning as
for curing, Division of the signs.
may be set down. Now it is granted, as well among Philosophers as Physicians,
that the effects and accidents do indicate and declare their causes. It is
likewise well known, that the accidents are nothing else but the effects of
the disposition of the disease. No man therefore can deny, that the accidents
(of which number are also the actions interessed, and some things which
essentially do adhere thereunto) do indicate and declare, as well the disease
as the place affected, as being the harbor and receptacle of the same, and
unto which the remedies ought to be applied. Now as concerning the accidents,
some of them are called by the Greeks Epiphaenomena, that is, such as do
appear indeed, but vanish away again before the disease be at an end: others
again called Pathognomonica, which being of the essence of the disease, do
both begin and end with the same. And these be inseparable and certain signs
of the disease, the concourse of which does more certainly and truly declare
unto us, the nature, manner, and kind of the disease, then any urine can do. As
a continual fever, together with a pricking and stinging pain in the side, a
great cough and shortness of breath, when as they concur together, and come
as it were all at one instant, are evident and certain signs of a Pleuresie.
But other accidents which do after succeed, are called Epiphaenomena or
Synedreouonta, as if thou should say, assessors or assistants to the
disease, unto the which also they are not inseparably annexed, nor yet have
their original together with the same; but for the most part, either seldom,
or after a doubtful manner, do accompany the disease, not making up the
substance, but certain differences of diseases. As in a Pleuresie a red,
bloody, or yet yellowish spittle, a pain extending it self to the breast
bone or nether part of the midriffe, watching, deliberation, and terrible
dreams: these accidents are called assistant or accompanying, and do declare
either the difference of the disease; or else the mildness or malignitie of
the same. Now it behooves the Physician to ponder and expend with himself in
such a concourse of accidents equally, the strength of every accident apart,
and to compare together such as be dangerous, with the other which do promise
greater security. For if those which are dangerous do vanquish and overcome
the strength and vigor of nature, either by their force or number, then may
thou boldly pronounce, that danger is not far from the door. And again on
the contrary, if such as do promise security be of greater power then the
former, then shall the sick escape out of the deep danger of Scylla and
Charybdis, and by the virtue and power of a happy Crisis, sail forth into the
haven of health: and that yet more assuredly, if in the mean time perfect
signs of concoction shall appear. Amongst such signs some are called
Decretorie, or Iudicatorie; other signs of cruditie and concoction; others
again do foretell the security or danger of the disease. Signs of concoction.
Now the signs of concoction, after the beginning of the disease is past over,
and the humors by means of the natural heat, well concocted, sequestered,
and separated from that which is putride and corrupt, do appear about the time
of the increasing or vigor of the disease, in the urine, spittle, suppuration
of Impostumes, (which is not unlike unto concoction performed in the veins) as
also in other excretions: for the excretions of every part of the body, as also
of the humors, which are nothing else but the superfluities and relickes of
concoction, do show forth the indisposition of the same. Wherefore in the
infirmities of the chest, and instruments of respiration, a spittle white, even
of an equal consistence, is always a good and laudable sign of concoction.
But if the sick be not at all able to spit out any thing, then does it show
forth absolute cruditie; and if he should chance to spit a spittle without any
mixture, being thin, waterish, and of a leaden color, or of the color of
verdigrease, it does not only argue cruditie, but does also portend the utter
overthrow of the patient. But the urine being an excretion of the second
concoction, does certainly show forth the crudity and concoction of the
humors contained in the veins, guts, liver, and places adjoining, the said
parts being annoyed, either with fever, inflammation, Scirrhus, or yet any
other distemper whatsoever. For if the same both in color and substance be
like unto such vrines as are usually seen in perfect health, having a
residence white, even, and like unto well concocted matter, it does truly
witness unto us, not only the concoction of the disease, especially in
feauers, but also that the natural force and power is a great deal stronger
then the disease, and therefore that it is like to obtain the victory in the
conflict with the crisis. Urine no Pathognomonick sign of concoction, and yet
to be observed.
But by this means the urine is no Pathognomonicke sign, and yet a necessary
sign of concoction and cruditie, and worth the observing in feauers, diseases
of the nether belly or intrails, and places adjoining to them. Wherefore Galen
in the exposition of the predictions of Hippocrates, does grant, that the urine
does show forth and demonstrate the state and disposition of the parts of the
liver, kidneyes, and bladder; as likewise of the strength or weakness of the
vessels containing the blood, and of the natural power and virtue which is the
ingenderer of the humors: howbeit the same Galen again affirms, that there
are other Pathognomonicke signs belonging to the brains, lungs, mother,
sinews, etc. And yet notwithstanding, might one, not without cause, avouch,
that the urine gives notice of some infirmities of the place through which it
passes, not primarily and principally, but by accident, to wit, by reason of
the contents thereof, which are nothing else but excretions proceeding from
those parts which do conueigh and carry the urine. Wherefore Hippocrates
witnesses, Praenot. lib. ex edit. Pres. vel prognost. 2. ex edit. Heur. and
lib. de natura hominis circa finem.
that if any do void by urine, either gravel, or little thin scurfe, or
matter like unto scales, or coursest dressings of bran, little gobbets of
flesh, congealed blood, matter or small hairs or threeds, like unto the small
veins knit together under the creuices tail; these things declare that the
bladder is annoyed with a scab, and the kidneyes with the stone, suppuration,
the rupture of some vein, or some other infirmity. But lest any should rashly
apply the signs of urine to any other then the aforenamed diseases, this
famous father of Physicians does add immediately: Take heed therefore lest thou
be deceived, the party making such an urine when the bladder is amiss; for
then such vrines belong not to the whole body, but ought to be referred to the
bladder only. There is yet another fearful and dangerous disease belonging
to the kidneyes, Diabete.
called Diabete or Poldropsy; being an extraordinary flux of the urine,
called of the Greeks by reason of this insatiable desire of drinking Dipsacus.
This disease is answerable to the disease called Lienteria: and for this cause
they are continually forced to drink, all which being nothing at all changed,
in color, substance, or in smell, they do void forth again as they received
it, and that by reason of the imbecility of the returning and altering powers
and faculties of the kidneyes. Now that such an urine is the proper and
pathognomonicke sign of this disease, no man of understanding, I think, will
deny. Follows now the third sort of signs of concoction of superfluities,
to wit, the excretions of the belly, belonging to the first concoction; the
which being soft, fashioned according to the concauitie of the guts, and
somewhat fastened or stiff* being also voyded at the accustomed time, and
answering in proportion to the food received: then, as says Hippocrates, they
do show forth and declare the strength of the natural faculties of the
stomach, together with the good digestion thereof. These three sorts of
superfluities then give particular notice of the proper state and disposition
of such parts of the body as they pass through, together with the strength of
the natural powers: and first the superfluities of the meat do argue and
declare the force and strength of the stomach. For this cause the Emperor
Antoninus his grooms of his stable did daily both taste and smell to the
ordure of his stately horse, known by his green furniture, to know whether he
had well digested his food or not. Now the vrines are signs of the state of
the blood in the veins, and disposition of the Liver, which is appointed to be
the hot harth or kitchen for concoction of the humors. The spittle in
diseases of the chest, is unto us a sign and token of concoction or cruditie:
and those of the first sort, to wit, of cruditie, are for the most part evil,
and often prove very dangerous: the others again are often messengers of an
healthful and long looked for crisis: whence is this saying of Hippocrates:
Concoction does portend and signify both the speediness of the crise and
assured health: but on the contrary, cruditie does menace and threaten either
the breaking forth of some tumor, or great swelling, or else some great pain
or grief, or yet a relapse into the same disease again. There are yet many
more decretorie signs which concern the future crise, as also diverse
prognosticke signs foreshewing life or death, the full explication of which
would rather require a great volume then an Epistle (the which have been
exactly described by Hippocrates,) but especially the intricate signs of
prediction by the pulse, as also the signs both of the disease it self, and
of the place affected or interessed; the which also I willingly pass over, by
reason that their power, force, efficacy, and signification, does depend upon
the signs of concoction; neither are there any amongst all the signs of
concoction more necessary for the Physicians use, then these pathognomonicke
signs. And tell me, I pray thee, how shall the Physician ever be able to cure
uncouth and unknown diseases, unless the pathognomonicke signs first lay
them open to his view and consideration; in the finding out of which, the
ancients took so great pains, as has been said already. But since it is not
the work of the Physician, but of nature, to concoct and cure diseases, it
shall be very needful for the Physician to know assuredly the vigor and
strength of the natural power and force, whether it be like to overcome the
disease, or to faint under the burden of it* by which means we shall attain
unto more certain and assured signs of life and death, then ever did those
soothsayers and wizards, whom the Romans did maintain for the benefit of
their sick people; whose prophecies and predictions no man of sound judgment
will ever believe to contain any matter of truth. But such prognosticke signs
as are collected from concoction, are so firm and sure, that Galen does boast
and brag, that he was never by them deceived. Now our pisse-prophet Physicians
are either utterly ignorant of them, or else notwithstanding set light by them*
who, notwithstanding, sitting idle at home, are nothing at all ashamed, by the
urine alone to deliver their Delphian oracles concerniug all diseases: who
nevertheless, have never so much as tasted of this so noble part of Physic
called diagnosticke, without the which the other, to wit, therapeuticke, can
never subsist: yet are they neither ashamed to assume unto themselves the cure
of unknown diseases, nor yet to arrogate and usurp the name of Physicians.
Farewell, and write back unto me again, after what method and order this
diagnosticke part of Physic ought to be both written and taught. Thus far
Langius.

We will now proceed to some more authorities, proving the imposture committed
by some, assuming to themselves the skill of discerning any disease by the
inspection of the urine only; and then will we produce some authorities to
tell us what diseases may by the urine be seen, and how in the very same we
may sometimes be deceived.

From the premises it may plainly appear, Iohann. Michael* Sauonar. lib. de
vrin. cap. 1.
how easily such Physicians are deceived, who trust too much to the judgment
of the urine only: for such may well be compared to the vulgar sort of people,
who are of opinion that not only the disease it self, but even the primitive
or external cause may also be seen in the same: as did appear by that clown
who reproched a very learned Physician, because he could not discern his cart
and oxen in his urine. Now that this our assertion is true, it may easily
appear, in that the urine may alter and change upon diverse occasions: as by
the quantity and quality of diet: by reason of excessive motion: by
plentiful euacuation, etc.

Of the erronius and preposterous judgment of diseases by urine.
Georgius Rithamer a Gentleman of Vienna, History.
being incited by the great concourse of people which did daily in so great
abundance stock about this base roguing and c^zening Empiricke (who came
hither of late) to hear his opinion concerning their vrines, D^omedes
Cornariu^, lib. consil. medicinal. de histor. admirand. ra^^^.
woulds needs likewise in some matter hear his opinion. Having discoursed a
little with this Scoggia concerning the errand he came for, casting his eyes
upon the table, he espied a Greek book lying upon the same, whereupon he
began presently to smell out his knauerie. Of such base stuff we are not
unfurnished here at home.
For this cozening varlet was altogether ignorant of all manner of learning and
good literature, insomuch that he could scarce speak two Latin words: and as
for the Greek, so far was he from understanding the same, that he knew not
so much as one letter of that language, as being brought up under an Empiricke
as ignorant as himself. He afterward confessed unto v^, that the sto^e where
he lodged had two doors, at one of the which people ordinarily entered to talk
with him: the other joined close to the kitchen, at the which a blind woman
went out and in, who asked people before they came to speak with the Impostor,
what their errand was: and then having learned what she would, returned again
by the same way, acquainting the villain with the whole matter and several
circumstances: by which means he did exceedingly abuse the simpler sort of
people. It came to pass another time, that a certain grave matrone did most
earnestly require that she might have access to him (for he would not easily
admit every one to his presence, to the end his credit might seem the greater)
affirming likewise to this blind woman, that her husband was now ready to dye
by reason of his excessive bleeding at the nose, unless he had some present
remedy provided. She being at length let in, he told her presently without
asking her any question, thy husband bleedeth at the nose, and so wrote her
down some thing in a paper, with the which she departed, and every where did
magnify and extol the great skill of this notorius cozening rascal. O most
execrable fraud and imposture! And yet now adays, not a few, not without great
^urt and prejudice to the poor distressed patients, do thus increase their
means, and by the like imposture posture purchase to themselves no small
gain. Such a one is that notable impostor, the Jew I mean, practicing his
imposture at Vienna, these many years by past. But hear again the cunning
imposture of another of these knaves, recorded by the same author. Another.


It is not unknown to many, Idem ibidem.
how that a few years ago there lived here a certain cozening knave, who by
the bare inspection of the urine only did most boldly and confidently affirm,
that every one whose urine was brought to him was either surprised with that
fever commonly called Synochus; or else would tell them some strange and more
then ridiculous and monstrous tales: as that some drop of blood was fallen
down from the heart into the nether belly, and so had produced the disease;
or else that the heart was environed about, as it were with some bonds, which
did bind it hard, with many other such ridiculous conceits. After the delivery
of this his so ridiculous vrinarie oracles, he prescribed most commonly for
every one to sweat; administering to this end and purpose this medicine
following, well known to every Apothecaries apprentice: to wit, a little Venice
treacle, mingled with a little Campher: and after their sweating, he caused them
bleed abundantly. In this age wherein we live, there is every where in these
our countries so great and so frequent a number of them, which without any
control or punishment, even in the best Cities and towns, both where is and
Jews, as also any desperate villain, and bold ignorant Empirickes, do kill
and destroy the simple and ignorant people. And all of them by means of this
so necessary a sign does nothing else but practice their imposture. Surely
such rogues ought most severely and exemplarily to be publickely punished, and
to be banished out of all well governed Cities and commonwealths; like as we
see robbers and thieves by the high ways to be driven out of the thickets and
forests to be punished. But alas, so far are we from banishing this abuse,
that many of good worth amongst our selves, have required, and do yet require,
not of my self alone, but of many others also both judicious and learned
Physicians, that by the sole inspection of the urine, without any further
inquisition or artificial conjecture going before, we should Prophet-like tell
them, whether the urine be a man's or a woman's; of what age the party is, what
is the nature of the disease; as also what the antecedent and primitive cause
of the disease may be: and whether they have contracted the same by drinking of
bad wi^es, by eating too many puddings, or any such like thing. Now if thou
shall herein profess thy self ignorant, and can not Lyncius-like see all
this and more in the urine, thou shall hear them reply, thou art a dunce,
knowing nothing, and that they have been with them who have told them wonders
by the water. Thou see then how absurd an opinion is crept in, not among the
vulgar sort only, but even among many others also, who would seem to be of a
more refined understanding; as also what great danger does from hence arise.
But yet when as in some cases, with certain cautions, we do attribute some
certainty to the urine, in giving us some notice either of the security of the
disease, or yet the danger of the same: we are so far from maintaining and
upholding such base b^ld varlets, that we desire nothing more, then the driving
of such dunces out of all well governed countries and commonwealthes.

But now let us proceed to declare the uncertainty of this sign, together with
the limitation of the same to some certain diseases, wherein it gives us best
satisfaction: and we will begin with the famous Fernel.

Now the urine if it be neither mingled with too much drink, ^^rnel. Pathol.
(...). 3. cap. 8.
or with some other mixture, gives us clear and evident notice of the
quality of the humors contained in the Liver and great veins: but more
obscurely of such as are contained in the small veins and every part of the
body. And a little after.

It does in like manner evidently declare and set forth the infirmities of such
parts as it passes through: as of the kidneyes, the vrine-pipes, the bladder
and the yard. For although it make no long abode nor stay in those passages,
yet does it cleanse away any filth or uncleanness if any there be. For this
cause does it show forth the infirmities of such parts as it does immediately
touch. And again afterward.

But now because the custom has so prevailed, that besides the premises,
many there are who like Prophets will seem to divine and conjecture by the
sole inspection of the urine, many things which concern the disease: whosoever
therefore for gaining of a little vaineglorie and popular applause, will
accommodate himself to imitate them, let him first of all reckon up at once
whatsoever he knows by the urine. For by the exchange of many words foolish
wits are easily entrapped, etc. And then concludes thus: Whosoever then shall
urge the Physician, as if he were some Prophet, by rash aduenturing, to deliver
his judgment concerning the sick by the sole inspection of the urine, shall
carry back but uncertainty; and for the most part nothing but doubting for
their pains. But he or she who after a wise and discreet manner does crave
the counsel of an understanding Physician, shall reap for his pains the
fruit of good and wholesome advice.

Now let us hear again what the Italian Sauonarola says to this business.

From the premises then we may conclude, Sauonarolo loco supracitato.
that the knowledge we have of the urine does principally concern the Liver;
and the gibbous or back part of the same chiefly. Next, and in the second
place, concerning the infirmities of the veins: thirdly, and last of all, the
infirmities of the other parts of the body. And a little after. From whence we
may infer, that the judgment taken from the urine only, but especially of
most other parts of the body, excepting the Liver, is not of any power or
efficacy. Mercatus a learned Spanish Physician attributes as much to the
sweat as to the urine. But hear himself speak.

Now coming to the infirmities of the Liver, Mercatus tom. 2. lib. 3. page 25.
edit. Pali^. 1608.
we must declare and lay open such predictions as are taken from the urine and
the sweat: for these two do give us certain notice and knowledge, not only of
this part and the veins, but sometimes also they prove to be certain signs
of the state of the nourishing or vegetable power over the whole body. Tom. 2.
page 492.
The same author in another place gives the pulse a great pre-eminence above
the urine in many diseases, but especially in such as concern the vital
faculty; which place, as many others to the same purpose out of many learned
and approved authors, for brevity I will here pass by. But Liddel, howbeit a
late, yet a learned Physician, and borne in our own Island, because he speaks
so to the purpose in this point of urine now in hand, I could not nor would not
pass by.

Wherefore since the vrines do chiefly proceed from the superfluity of the
parts of the body, Duncan. Liddel. art. med. lib. cap. 8.
they can give us but a general knowledge of the disease, giving unto us most
evident notice of the good or bad disposition of the Liver, the veins, the
blood, and humors contained in them, as likewise of the concoction or cruditie
of the humors within the veins. Next, they shewforth the disposition of such
parts as they pass by, to wit, of the kidneyes, vreters, or vrine-pipes, and
the bladder: together with such parts whose superfluities they carry with
them: but do nothing so well set forth the state and disposition of such parts
as they do not touch, and from the which they receive no excretions or
superfluities. Again in the end of the Chapter: But we must not rashly
pronounce our opinion concerning the disease, or yet of the event thereof,
trusting solely to these signs of the urine, except we be first acquainted
with the state and constitution of the party, and other accidents and
occurrences which do concern him. For sometimes in diseases void of danger,
the vrines are far unlike to them which do appear in perfect health, and do
show themselves in a most hideous and fearful form, especially upon the
approaching of the crisis; or when as upon the sudden, by the vigor and
strength of nature, the obstructions being opened, a great part of the faulty
matter is expelled forth by the urine. On the other side again, in dangerous
and deadly diseases, as in Pestilentiall and Hecticke feauers, the vrines
cannot be discerned from those that are made in perfect health: by reason that
the malignitie of the disease has seized upon the solid substance of the
heart, and therefore the whole matter of the disease having the course thither,
there is no portion nor part of the same to be seen in the urine.

It were no hard matter for me to make an enumeration of many more authors,
tending all to the same purpose, and so to fill up many more pages, the which, I
think, would be but to small purpose, since these ^ew may suffice in stead of
many more, all being of the same mind. Now howbeit the uncertainty of this
sign has sufficiently been proved by the preceding discourse, and it were
easy for me to make up a large volume concerning this particular only, the
which howbeit it be not my purpose, yet before I proceed to the uncertainty of
the same in diseases of the Liver, and within the veins, I will instance in
two or three particular diseases. The first shall be of an impostume in the
head.

In the year 1617. in the beginning of January, History.
a young Gentlewoman unmarried, and daughter to a Gentleman of worth dwelling
not far from NORTHAMPTON, Deceitfulness of the urine in an Impostume and
pain of the head.
the season being very cold, and she before of a crasie constitution, was
suddenly surprised with swounding fits, which ended with an extreme pain,
especially about the crown of her head, being accompanied with a suppression
of her monthly disease. The pain was for certain days without intermission,
howsoever sometimes some remission might be observed: as likewise both in her
pulse and urine signs of a fever did plainly appear. After I had used diverse
means of diuersion, as well by Phlebotomie and attractiue glisters, as by
other means, not neglecting hypnoticke, cordial, and deoppilatiue medicines,
according to the several occurrences, the disease gave her some reasonable
time of intermission, with some alleuiation of the accidents. The urine also
after a few days, began to flatter us with a fair and laudable color,
shortly seconded with contents answerable. The pulse played his part also, and
dissembled as well as his neighbor. The Gentlewoman to any outward appearance,
the very day before her death, was like to have lived many, not only days but
years also: moving and stirring with great alacrity and cheerfulness up and
down her chamber, busied about her ordinary employments. When behold, he who
spares not the mightiest Monarchs, on an evening knocking suddenly, demands
his debt long before his day, and would scarce allow her full two hours respit
for the payment of the same. After death issued out of her mouth and nose great
abundance of corrupt blood and matter, as was afterward told me; giving us
intelligence of an Impostume in the head, which had occasioned, not the former
accidents only, but even death it self also.

About the same time in this town and country about us, diverse were
surprised with Impostumes, both in the head and other parts, whereof diverse
died, among the rest my counsel was craved for a maid about twenty years of
age, suddenly suffocated by an Impostume in her stomach, which after her death
did appear, by the great abundance of blood and matter cast out of her mouth.
At my coming to her, I found her deprived as well of speech, as of sense and
reason, and scarce lived above 2. hours after my departure. But I will now
relate a true history of the deceitfulness of the urine in a consumption of
the Lungs.

In April 1622. my counsel and personal presence for a Gentlewoman in
Bedfordshire being desired, Another.
I repaired thither, where I found her infirmity to be a Quotidian fever, In
an ulcer of the Lungs.
accompanied with some accidents which did somewhat amaze her. During my abode
in that place, there was brought to me the urine of a young Gentleman dwelling
hard by, to have my opinion of the same. Having well viewed it, I found it both
in color and contents, answerable to the most healthful man's urine. But after
certain interrogatories, I found that he had been for a long time troubled
with a cough. Being desired to see the party, I found that he had been for a
long time vexed with this cough, accompanying an ulcer in the lungs: and seeing
in him strength now decayed, with an Of the Hippocraticall face see our
arraignment of vrines. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Hippocraticall face, deaths trusty messenger, I left him to the Prognosticke,
which within less then the space of three weeks was verified.

Now would I willingly demand of the most cunning Pisse-prophet, what could he
have found out by either of these vrines? or could he ever have attained to the
height and depth of these diseases, by the bare inspection of the urine only?
And if he had been beholden to the use of the best perspectiue glass that ever
was made, could he ever have seen any such matter in the urine? But concerning
this point we will here surceasse, and proceed to the diseases within the
veins.

CHAP. III.
That even in diseases of the Liver, and within the veins, the urine does
often deceive the most skillful Physician.
NOw it may seem a small matter to instance in diverse diseases without the
veins, the uncertainty of judgment in diseases by the urine only; but it
will, perhaps, seem more pertinent to declare, that the like uncertainty
sometimes is found in some such diseases as seem to afford us greater
certainty, as in feauers, etc. Now that the urine is not always a certain
sign in every fever, may from hence appear, Leo Rogan. lib. 3. de prouid* ex
vrin. cap. vlt.
that often in that fever commonly called Synochus cum vel sine putredine,
that is, that kind of continual fever which proceeds from the abundance of
blood, with or without putrefaction, the urine differs little or nothing from
the vrines of such as live in perfect health, Paulus Aegineta lib. 2. cap. 27.
as witnesses Paulus Aegineta. The reason why such vrines proceeding of so
hot a cause, yet do not appear of so high a color, is because of the same
immoderate and excessive heat, which being increased by means of the fever,
conuerteth the blood it self into the nature of choler: and thus are such
vrines not of so high intense a color, as those which proceed of choler. Hence
also may the error of such Physicians easily appear, Dangerous errors.
who never admit of Phlebotomie, but when the urine is of high and intense red
color; thinking that this does always argue abundance of blood, which
nevertheless is most false, as has been said. And besides, in that the vrines
afford us but some general notice of the cruditie and concoction of the
disease, they can never inform our judgment, whether the fever be primarie
or a principal guest, or symptomaticall accompanying the disease as the shadow
does the body, as is to be seen in Pleuresiet and diverse other internal
inflammations: which is, notwithstanding of no small moment for the methodicall
curing of the disease. And yet moreover, how can thou ever tell whether it be
an intermittent or continual fever by this uncertain sign? Neither
Hippocrates nor Galen did ever presume to know so much; howsoever A^^uarius in
this, as in many other things concerning this point, has troubled himself
more then he needed. But again, what if the fever be composed of diverse
humors, melancholy being one, which will not always color the urine? Galen
lib. 2. de cris. cap. 3. and 6.
Galen himself instructing us what vrines accompany a Qua^tane in the
beginning of the same, says, they are thin, white, and waterish: and a little
after, he ascribes the like vrines to the beginning of a Quotidian. And I know
for certain, that sometimes in the beginning of a Qua^tane, the urine cannot
be discerned from a sound and healthful man's. And handling hereafter the
colors of vrines, I shall make it appear, that these thin, white, waterish
vrines, do often accompany other diseases. It is also worth the observation,
that Galen himself, where as of set purpose he handles both the differences
and signs of seauers, makes so small account of the urine, that he neither
names it among the signs of the Quotidian, Tertian, Quartane, nor yet of such
as are continual or without intermission. Timoth. Brichius Cantabrig. lib. de
m^d. the. 1. aph. page 94.
And a learned Physician borne in this kingdom, setting down all the signs
of a Tertian, not omitting the pulse, yet makes no mention of the urine. But
what if any malignitie be joined with a fever, may it not mar thy judgment?
It has ever been so agreed upon by the learned, and daily experience teaches
us this truth, that when greatest danger is nearest, it is then there least of
all to be discerned. But concerning this point, hear yet the authority of a
learned man borne within this land, I^hannes Caius Britannus de Ephemera
Britannica, page 136.
speaking of that fearful and terrible fever, called commonly the sweating
sickness.

The urine in this disease was somewhat colored, thick in substance, variable
and inconstant in the swim and sublimation (for nature kept no certain rule
or order by reason of the violence of the venom) and in all other parts kept
within compass.

Now to any vulgar eye, so great danger in the like urine could never have
appeared. I my self have viewed many more dangerous to the outward appearance,
and yet neither death nor danger was to be feared. The vrines in malign and
pestilent feauers very deceitful.
The vrines in malign and pestilent feauers are very variable and hard to lay
hold on. In some the urine differs nothing from a healthful man's: sometimes
again but a little, as in this last instance. Again, in others it follows
the nature of the humor, showing only the abundance and putrefaction of the
humors; as I my self observed 1610. at London in a lusty young fellow,
servant to a Gentleman a friend of mine, and dwelling in the Strand near to
Charing-crosse.

This fellows urine was very high colored, History.
with a copious residence of red and some yellow contents: and the fever kept
the peri^d of an intermittent Tertian ague, as was related unto me; and was
accompanied with a painful swelling in the throat: his body plethoricke and
cacochymicke, and of a strong constitution, and in the April of his age. For
this cause I prescribed both phlebotomie and other euacuations. But the noise
of the neighbors about, affirming it to be the Plague (as it proved indeed,
many of them dying shortly of the same disease) was the cause that means were
by his friends neglected, and he after a few days dyed of this disease.

But before we go out of our own Island, Johannes Anglicus, vulgo Gatesden, in
opere practico communiter Rosa Anglica nuncupato.
let us yet hear the authority of another learned Physician, who lived in
this land about 300. years ago. Hear therefore his own words concerning
Quartanes and other diseases.

Now because the Quartane ague is engendered of diverse humors, therefore the
urine is many ways changed. What the vrines do here declare unto. us.
And thus says Richardus concerning the predictions by vrines: I take God and
all the Saints in heaven to witness, that neither by skill and art, nor yet by
use and long experience in practice, I could ever attain to any certain
knowledge of the urine, either in the conception, a Quartane ague, the Falling
sickness, etc.

Now although I might be a great deal larger in this point, yet will I content
my self with that which has been already said. Let it then not any more be
doubted, that the urine is not always a certain and infallible sign of the
estate of diseases contained in the urine, as feauers etc. But what then (may
one reply) does it declare? The cruditie or concoction of these diseases,
together with the length or shortness of the same, according to the
appearance, and the early or late appearing of the signs of the one or of the
other (I mean cruditie or concoction) in the urine. Now omitting also many
things which might be said concerning diseases proceeding from the same, I will
instance only in one, to wit, that loathsome disease of Leprosy. Now as our
senses do teach us, that in all the sorts of the same, the (...), id est,
vitiligo, (...) sieve pruritus aut prurigo, (...), id est, impetigo, (...),
nomina sunt affectionu^, in quibus omnibus male afficitur cutis, a vinoso
aliquo succo, qui nescit assimulari, etc. Holler. schol. ad cap. 64. lib. 1. de
morb. intern.
skin is ever infected: so whether thou understand that which the Greeks or
yet the Arabians so called, In quouis horum affectuum (lepra scilicet and morbo
Gallico) membra nutrimentalia (praecipue iecur, a quo omnes corporis partessuum
recipient alimentum) sere habitualiter laborant. Market. oper. praedict. tom.
2. page 126.
it is agreed among all our Physicians, that as well the Liver, which is the
fountain and root, as the mass of blood, which is as the branches or
streams proceeding from the same, are much interessed and endammaged in this
disease: and therefore by right the urine here should carry a great stroke, it
being also the opinion of diverse Physicians, that as well the blood as the
urine of such as are infected with this loathsome disease do much differ from
other men's. And yet hear I pray thee what a learned late writer of no small
experience witnesses concerning this matter.

But as for my self, Felix Plater. oper. pract. tract. 3. cap. 4.
who have these thirty years and upwards, most diligently viewed, and
carefully observed and marked the blood of a great number of such as were
infected with this loathsome plague of Leprosy, I do most constantly and
assuredly avouch, that neither I my self, nor yet such Surgeons as assisted
me, could ever in the blood find out any assured mark or infallible token of
Leprosy: but in every respect like unto the blond of such as enjoyed their
perfect health: or if at any time it happened to swerue from the foresaid
perfection, that it then appeared no more corrupted or infected then ordinarily
we do behold it in the ^aundise, fever, or any such like disease. The like
also I may truly pronounce of the urine, on the which the vulgar sort does so
much dote. In the same rank may I also with good right place the pulse, whose
change and alteration to enquire after, were to search for a knot in a rush,
etc.

But now let us proceed to a point surpassing vulgar capacity, and which will
seem to many a strange Paradox, or a tale of Robin Hood: my meaning is
concerning women with child, whether by the urine only conception may be
discerned: the which point, howbeit it has been touched in our former
discourse; yet because this is so inueterate an error that hardly can it be
expelled out of the minds of many, I will insist a little the longer upon the
same, entreating a little thy patience (gentle Reader) and I hope thou shall
not afterward repent thee of this pains.

CHAP. IIII.
That by the urine only, it cannot absolutely be told, whether a woman be with
child or no, contrary to the vulgar opinion.
AS in many other things, so in this point also concerning the conception,
ignorance and error have so far prevailed, that he who cannot upon the bare
inspection of the urine only, tell whether a woman be with child or no, and
whether of a male or female, is thought by many not to merit the name of a
learned and skillful Physician. The which has made many, lest they should be
discredited among the vulgar, cunningly sometimes to learn what they could
concerning other signs of conception, and upon the sight of the urine, make
them believe they had found out the whole truth by means thereof: and others
again, when as they could learn nothing, have upon some presumptions and
probabilities put all to the venture, and told them that which they most longed
after: and if the prediction happened right, then was this person admired as
more then a mortal man: but if otherwise, then might he look for a mock or
flout for his pains, besides the imputation of ignorance and insufficiency.
Howbeit some are yet more cunning then others, to impute the fault to some
other accident, by this means still maintaining the ignorant in their former
error. This has been a great means that hitherto the people has been gulled,
having conceived a sinister and wrong opinion of the honest and learned
Physician, who would not sooth them up in the same error. Arguments euincing
that by the sole inspection of the urine, it cannot be discerned whether a
woman be with child or no.
For the better confutation of this point, my purpose is, first to propound
some reasons against the same: and in the next place shall march some
authorities of the learned: and in the last place something shall be added out
of mine own experience. Now in the first place, according to the common rule
set down, and confirmed by a number of learned writers, That the urine
ordinarily gives us notice of such diseases as are contained within the
veins, as also of such places through which it passes, it is apparent, that
the conception participateth of neither. For in the first place, it is apparent
and manifest, that the matrix or womb is none of those parts contained within
the veins: neither yet in the next place, does the urine pass through the
same. How then is it possible to perceive any infirmity of this part by the
urine? Now besides, the bladder and the womb are two distinct and several
parts, appropriated to several ends and uses. And put yet the case that
sometimes something might be, by reason of the nearenesse of the two orifices,
conveyed through the common passage, yet this would but seldom come to pass.
And moreover in women with child this conueyance could not be granted, in
regard of the exact shutting up of the aforesaid passage during the whole time
of this burden, insomuch that the least superfluity can then have no passage,
In aphor. 51. and 54. lib. 6 and 3. de nature. facult. cap. 3. 6. de locis
affect. cap. 5. 15. de vsu part.
as witnesses Galen in diverse places. Now if any will deny the truth of this
point, in the first place I answer, that as I grant that sometimes there my be,
notwithstanding that which has been said, some euacuation during that time,
and that some part of the same matter might be conveyed into the bladder, yet
this comes to pass but very seldom, and in a few. And again, this would
make more against them: for all that is by the learned at the most granted in
this case is, that the urine may sometimes declare a retention and stopping of
the menstruous flux, whereof if any part during their being with child is
voyded forth (as sometimes some women have some to spare) the urine can no
more declare any stoppage of this flux, and by consequent nothing concerning
the conception, unless thou would imagine that there be certain ideas or
shapes and pictures of young children conveyed at that time into the vrines of
women with child. And yet if this were true, who told these vrine-mongers that
the womb daunced attendance on the bladder, to void their several excretions
at one and the same time? But put yet the case that some part of this
menstruous flux, now and then issuing out at the common conduit with the
urine, might show us something, yet could it not follow, but that a number of
other signs were also necessary, as hereafter shall appear. Their chief
ringleader Actuarius himself, confesses that the urine alone is not able to
lead us unto this truth. Moreover Aristotle acknowledges, Arist. 4. de gener.
anim. cap. 6.
that the vrines of women with child do differ according to the time that is
past since the conception; so that there is not one certain urine whereon to
repose our judgment. And according to the opinion of diverse others, the
vrines of women with child alter almost every day. One of these vrines
therefore shall never give notice of the conception, although it might be
sometimes discerned by the urine. And is not this absurdity, to presume to
know that by one sign, which many joined together can hardly declare unto us?
Diverse contents are set down by some authors following Auicenna, which are
said to be found in such vrines, which nevertheless, have been often observed
as well in the vrines of citizens as country people of the malekinde, who I am
sure, were never so much as suspected to be with child. A certain practical
Professor of the university of Pisa in Italy (says Scribonius) a grave
ancient Physician, Gu^l. Adolph. Scribon. lib. de vrin. inspect.
was wont to say, that such as trusted most to this prediction, were most of
all deceived; and yet he never yet in his life time had observed any such
vrines in women with child, as Auicenna describes: and that moreover he had
often observed such contents in men's vrines. Add yet this argument to the
former, that the conception, as also the further growth of the child in the
womb, is properly a natural action, and no disease at all: for this cause
their vrines ought to differ little or nothing from other healthful woman's
waters, especially in the first months, as I have my self often observed.
Again what if a woman with child be surprised with some acute disease, as
comes often to pass, will this then think you, make no alteration in the
urine? And if there were any certainty in this sign alone, what needed our
Physicians trouble themselves with so many? and oftentimes all will not serve
the turn. Let it therefore remain firm and ^^able, that no certainty can be
collected by the sole observation of this sign, and that to maintain the
same, is nothing else but mere imposture and coz^^age. But that this is not
mine own private opinion only, I will now make it appear: hear therefore
some of our learned Physicians deliver their own minds, that out of the mouth
of many witnesses this truth may be confirmed. Let Rondeletius first speak.

It would seem (says he) justifiable, Rondel. lib. de vrin* cap. 40. de vrina
praegnantium.
as well by reason as by experience, that the urine may give vt certain and
assured notice of a woman's being with child. And D. Gabride said, he knew it as
assuredly as if he had seen a child in the urine. But of another opinion are
all the ancient Physicians, who have left us no signs of the same in the
urine: as also reason it self teaches us no less. For since the birth or
conception is without the veins, and the urine chiefly gives us notice of
such diseases as are contained within the veins, it can give us no certain
assurance of this matter, unless we join therewith all other signs, as the
retention of her monthly disease, swelling of her belly, she, notwithstanding
enjoying her perfect health. etc.

Hear now the opinion of some of our Italian Physicians, and first of all let
the learned Mercuriall utter his mind.

Be it known, Mercur. lib de vrin. cap. 7.
notwithstanding, that I am not altogether of the Arabian Physicians mind, who
have devised certain contents which are not to be found in vrines, to wit,
certain grounds like unto carded wool, little motes, etc. No more am I of
that opinion, that a Physician may assuredly know by the urine whether a woman
be with child or no; by reason that of all the signs which Hippocrates has in
diverse places set down, there is not one that we can certainly trust to.

The same opinion is by his country man Sauonarola yet seconded.

But here we must be very circumspect, Sauonarola libr. de vrin. cap. 2. rubr.
10. de vrin. praegnantium.
in regard that all these signs of conception may sometimes be without the
same, as in the stoppage of her monthly course, joined with a false
conception; in which case many famous Physicians have been deceived, and their
too forwardness has turned to their great disgrace and infamy: as it befell
two learned and skillful Physicians in the University of Pauie, Marsilius de
sancta Sophia, and Petrus de Tussignano, both in my time. Let young Physicians
therefore be careful, that with the urine they join all the other signs
belonging to conception; amongst which one is chief, which belongs to the
midwife to find out, etc.

And Leo Roganus, a learned Roman Physician, is of no other opinion.

The vrines of women with child (says he) differ nothing but by accident from
other women's, Leo Roganu^ lib. 2. de cause. vrin. cap. 15. de vrin. v^ero
gerentium.
to wit, that then in such women, as well the action of the stomach, as the
appetite and concoction use ordinarily to be troubled. And yet such is the
block^shnesse and stupiditie of some Physicians, that they are persuaded women
with child make vrines differing from other women's. It is true, that in women
with child, that blood which was wont to be voyded monthly, is now stayed and
kept in, wherefore because the same in the first months especially, not being
wholly spent on the nourishment of the child, as being then but small, it
comes to pass that the action of the stomach, as likewise the appetite,
together with the concoction are not a little troubled. And therefore being
often, by reason of their longing desires, carried away with a desire of such
things as engender little good nourishment, they engender great store of
crudities, which may plainly be seen by their vrines, the which are also
common to all such as abound in crudities.

To the former we will add yet a late writer of the same nation, Iean
Marinello de Formie lib. 3. chap. 5. de malady des femmes.
because he speaks so plainly and to the purpose. The book was first written
in the Italian tongue, and since translated into French, out of the which I
have translated this parcel.

Truth it is, that we must not altogether rely upon the urine, to know whether
a woman be with child or no. For the urine can give thee no further assurance
of the same, then by the retention of her accustomed monthly course, and by
the which we do commonly collect some presumption of conception. Now it may
easily come to pass, that a woman may be surprised with many infirmities,
which may hide and darken the principal sign of conception (if any there
were) in the urine: such as be headache, any cold, especially being accompanied
with a cough, cruditie, or indigestion of the stomach, great pain in the
kidneyes, etc. And which is yet more, the eating of raw fruit, sallets, milk,
porke, pease, sperage, cabbage, artichocks, mushromes, and many other such kind
of food, not being ordinary or usual to the party, are sufficient to alter
and change, not the color only, but the contents of the urine also. Moreover
the urine does most properly and assuredly declare unto us, the infirmities of
the parts from whence it comes, and through the which at length it passes.
For the which cause it is more then manifest, that there is no assured
knowledge to be had by the urine concerning the conception, no more then by the
retention of her monthly course, sin^e that without conception the foresaid
retention and stopping is found, as well in maids as in married women. The
last and most certain sign of conception is, when as the child begins to
stir and move.

Mercatus a learned Spaniard, 2. Market. tomo. 3. lib. 3. page 669.
after he has set down a number of other signs, at length adds these words.

As concerning the urine, howbeit in this case it does afford us but a very
uncertain judgment, yet may we sometimes draw some certainty out of the same.
But how I pray thee? By observing her several vrines at diverse times,
beginning with the first month of supposed conception, and so observing the
several alterations until the time of her delivery approach. Then withal
sets he down all the several trials which the famous Hippocrates has left
unto us, all which were needless and superfluous, if the urine of it self
were sufficient for this purpose. Now let us add yet one story of the
deceitfulness of this sign in conception, recorded by a learned Germane
Physician.

Franciscus Emericus Doctor in Physic, History.
and of the chair in the University of Vienna, Diomedes Cornarius in lib.
consil. medicin. inter historias admirandas, historia tertia, and prima de
pe^uerso vrin. in ^icio.
in his discourse entitled, whether the observation of the pulse or of the
urine does afford unto the Physician more certain and assured foreknowledge
of the life or death of the patient, and printed anno 1557. relatet^, that in
the year 1555. in the City of Vienna, a certain friend of mine (says he)
called Georgius Rithamerus, a man of singular learning, being very desirous of
issue, came to one of the Physicians of the College of best note, bringing
with him his wives urine, to know whether she were with child, as he deemed, or
no. The Physician upon the bare sight of the urine only, did peremptorily
affirm, that she was for certain with child, and that of a boy. After the
which time Rithamerus began quite to distaste me; and that only by reason that
upon the sight of her urine, together with diverse other signs and
circumstances thereto belonging, I had delivered my opinion, that she was not
at all with child. And besides, he provided with all expedition both midwife,
nurse, and all other things belonging to that business. It was afterward
constantly and confidently every where noysed abroad, that she was with child.
The women her attendants by reason of some accidents wherewith she was now and
then troubled, appointed her diverse baths, by means whereof being surprised
with the falling sickness, she was in a very short time freed from all the
miseries of this mortal life. Of whose death being advertised, I did very
earnestly entreat the aforesaid Rithamerus, that both in regard of that
ancient bond of love and amity betwixt him and me, as likewise to find out
the whole truth of this matter, he would be pleased to give way to the opening
of the dead corpse. The which at length, being overcome, as well by my earnest
suing unto him, as for the great and earnest desire he had to be resolved of
the truth of the matter, he did willingly yield unto. In making the incision,
we began first with the muscles of the nether belly, discovering such parts
as before were hid, and afterward ripping up the peritonaeum, we proceeded to
the place where the womb was situate; and although we did perceive it to be
but very small, and to contain nothing within it; yet to the end we might the
more clearly see the truth with our eyes, we ripped it up also, and found it
clean, and empty of any thing within it. Now in her life time she was of a
whitish bleake color, and of a cachecticall disposition, and had never in all
her life time borne any child: from whence I did by very probable coniccture
collect, that she was troubled with some other infirmity. For the which cause
we proceed still in our incision toward the stomach; whereas betwixt the
peritonaeum, and the guts we found good store of water, which did according to
the motion of the body, fall sometimes to the right and sometimes to the left
side; and from hence arose this erronius opinion of the supposed motion of a
live child. This being after this manner finished, I spoke after this manner,
My good friend George, you see now after what manner your wife proves with
child. And he, seeing the case so plain, did ingenuously acknowledge, that he
had wrongfully and undeservedly been offended with me, and withal did freely
acknowledge his error. Witnesses with me at this incision, were Doctor lacobus
Walch, companion with me in my Italian studies; as also Andreas Perlachius, a
great Mathematician, being also the only man who had so steadfastly maintained
that she was with child.

Now with two instances of mine own experience I will finish this point.
History of a woman with child in the first months.


A Gentlewoman dwelling near Northampton some years ago, sent me her urine,
which in every respect, as well in color as contents, resembled the urine of
an healthful young man. Having found out by some circumstances that it was a
woman's, I began to suspect that which afterward proved true, that she was with
child. The messenger demanding whether she was not entered into a Dropsy: I
replied, I rather inclined to the opinion that she was with child, the which
proved to be true. The servant confessed, another Physician had before put her
in needless fear of a Dropsy. The Gentlewoman afterward conceived a better
opinion of my skill in this point, then I confess it deserved.

The same Harvest, Another of one in the latter months.
within seven miles of this town of Northampton, a Lady great with child,
being now within two months at most of her delivery, sent me first her urine,
and then desired mine own personal presence for some infirmity whereof she
then complained. The urine sent resembled, as the former, the urine of a lusty
young man in the April of his age: I observed it very narrowly, and yet could
I discern none of those Arabian contents, neither cardedwooll, flax, nor
huswiues cloth. Being afterward with her, I found no alteration in her urine,
save that it was paler colored which was made in the night, and higher
colored which was made in the day time, contrary to that which we commonly
observe; and yet neither of them exceeding the color of a choleric man's
urine. The Gentlewoman had been for a long time, even before her being with
child, much troubled with a hot and feauer-like distemper.

This point then being cleared, we proceed now to the sex, where we shall find
no less uncertainty then in the former.

CHAP. V.
That the sex cannot be discerned by the Urine.
NO less absurd an opinion then the former, Absurdity of this opinion proved.
is it to hold that the sex may absolutely by the urine be discerned. As for
the sex in the womb, the same reasons which were brought against the
discerning of the conception by the urine, will here take hold also. As for the
discerning of the sex in those of riper years, the reason would seem to be
more favorable. The chief and principal reason alleged for this is, because
men are commonly of an hoter constitution then women, which is the cause that
their vrines are dyed of an higher color; and moreover, that the contents in
women's vrines, in regard of their idle and sedentarie life, do often exceed
men's in quantity. But this must not simply be considered, but as we commonly
say, caeteris paribus: that is, a man of a good and laudable constitution of
body, using diet answerable both in quantity and quality, and avoiding
idleness: a woman likewise of a colder complexion, as often they are, using
moderate diet, a sedentary and lazy life, avoiding hot diet. If, I say, one
should bring thee two such vrines, demanding to know which were the man's and
which the woman's, then without great difficulty might thou give out a right
verdict. But if one should bring unto thee two vrines, the one of a man, the
other of a woman, the one not differing from the other, and the woman's perhaps
higher in color and thinner in substance, (which may by diverse means come to
pass) thou should give wrong sentence, then being thus gulled, thou
might be made a gazing stock to thy neighbors, Some women of an hoter
constitution then men.
by reason of thy peremptory opinion. Now that some women are of an hoter
constitution of body then some men, I think who so denies, deserves rather
to have his pate purged, then to be dealt with with by any reason. I my self
have also known many a man make paler vrines, with greater quantity of
contents, then women: which may easily come to pass, by reason of great
quassing, dainty fare, and abundance of ease and idleness, the engendrers of
all manner of crudities. Have we not now adays more then a good many whose God
is their guts, Fruges consumere nati, on whose vrines thou might long look,
before thou could discern any thing material or to the purpose? As for out
women, what if their Liver and Kidneyes be hot, as I have not seldom
observed, may not this bring forth an high water? and will not obstructions
easily deprive it of contents. But especially if these women be well acquainted
with a pipe of Tobacco, a cup of good sherry Sack, Malago, or Canary, or yet a
cup of good ^appy Ale well brewed with sugar, nutmegge and ginger, may it not
now and then not only color the vrines, but make their faces flourish with
some oriental carbuncles and rubies? Besides the former reasons, will not
fasting, watching, perturbations of the mind, diet in quantity and quality,
with diverse other things more, alter the urine as well in man as in woman? It
were, perhaps, an easier matter to observe this difference in some hoter climat
then our own, to wit, in France, Spain, or Italy, where women drink more
water then with us; especially in Italy, where the women are caged up like
linnets to sing, and are not so busy with the fruit of the grape, nor with
the strong barley water as our British women. If I should instance also in our
virgins, more manlike then many men, how were any able to contradict it? But if
I should send to the cunningest pisse-prophet in this kingdom the urine of
some Hermaphrodite or man-woman, what would or could they say? and to which of
the sexes would they ascribe the urine? Now that some such are to be found,
cannot be denied. It has been holden for a truth in all ages: and of late
years a learned Physician has written a book concerning that subject,
Gaspar. Bauhinus de Hermaphroditis.
where he brings in a number of histories of ancient and later times. I have
been also credibly informed of some such who have lived here in these parts of
the country. But if the woman shall be surprised with any hot and acute
disease (as the urine is seldom sent to the Physician but in sickness) will
not these confound thy judgment? Now if the sex cannot be discerned by the
urine in persons of years, what absurdity is it to demand the knowledge
hereof in a woman with child, where the conception it self cannot be thereby
discerned? as also where there are so many rubs in the way. It is also worth
the observation, that whereas that learned Mercatus discourses of all the
signs whereby one may know whether a woman be with child of a male or female,
where he omitteth not so much as the blowing of the wind, yet speaks he not
so much as one word concerning the urine: no more do many other authors of best
note.

Iean Marinello among many more, sets down many signs to discern the sex
in the womb, yet speaks he not so much as one word of the urine. Other
authors for brevity I will pass by. I cannot but wonder what should move our
vrine-mongers to be so peremptory in this their opinion of discerning the sex
by the vrines, as though there were some specificall difference always to be
observed in these vrines: are not the humors alike, and the parts as well
femilare as organicall alike in both these sexes? But I will acquaint thee with
one history concerning the prediction of a Parson-physitian, who would
certify a Gentlewoman with child of what sex it was.

A Gentlewoman dwelling within a few miles of Northampton, History.
left with child of her late deceassed husband, Of a peremptory Parson
determining of the sex in the womb.
was very desirous to be certified of the sex if it were possible. The reason
was, because that if a son, then was he to be heir to great lands and
possessions, which otherwise were entailed to the next heirs male. This Parson
being by many reputed famous in vromancie, this Gentlewoman had recourse to his
oracle. The Parson is peremptory that she is with child of a son. The
Gentlewoman and her friends rejoice not a little. But the worst is yet behind:
the Parsons prediction proves false, and he a lying Prophet: she is brought to
bed of a daughter, and her mirth turned into mourning. If he had ever learned
his Phylosophie, he might have learned that, De futuris contingentibus non est
determinata veritas: Of future things not yet come to pass, being contingent,
no man can assuredly foretell the issue and event. But thou may here see ex
vnguibus Leonem: what manner of men these be.

The year 1622. History.
a patient of mine of good account dwelling in Northampton, Of a woman's urine
higher in color and contents then a man's.
purposing (according to his usual custom) to take some preventing Physic
in the Spring of the year, wished his urine to be sent to me. The urine which
was sent was of an high and deep dyed red color, of a mean substance, a
copius red residence. Meeting with him the same day, I asked him whether he
complained not of some heat: who replied, he fel^ no manner of distemper at
all. I wished him yet once again to send me his urine, which if it should so
continue, I doubted Phlebolomie would be requisite. The next urine was of a
pale straw colored yellow, with some whitish residents, such as sometimes
accompany crudities. Enquiring afterward into the cause of this diversity of
vrines in so short a space, his wife told me, that her urine had the first day
been sent in stead of her husbands. I required of her, whether she did not
complain of any inward distemper of heat; who replied, that she complained of
no distemper at all. But within a few days she found that distemper in such a
measure, as she was glad to admit both of Phlebotomie and other fit and
necessary remedies. The constitution of her body is hot, and her urine
answerably high colored, unless it be accidentally hindered. And this I dare
boldly affirm, that during her husbands sickness, being a long and tedious,
first Tertian, then double Tertian fever, yet never saw I his urine of so high
and intense a color as that of hers lately mentioned.

And now I hope it does plainly appear, that neither the conception, nor sex
can be by the urine only discerned. Let us now proceed to the examination and
Anatomy of the urine it self, together with the several parts of the same.

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE ANATOMY OF VRINES.
THE ARGUMENT.
IN this second book is set down a more particular survey or Anatomy of
vrines, and their several parts in particular: beginning first with the common
division of the vrines into three or four regions, with the idleness of that
supposed correspondencie thought to be betwixt them and the regions of a man's
body. Then follows the uncertainty of judgment by the substance, and
afterward by the accidents of the urine, and first of the quantity: the smell
follows, and if any be in love with the last, he may try it in the next
place. Then follow the chief colors, their several significations, and
doubtful predictions thereby. The confutation of the crown or garland is
handled in the next place, and after it in order, the bubbles, spume, fat and
froth, fume and vapor in the vrines. The great variety of other contents
challenge to themselves the next place, where we will begin with the cloud,
swim or sublimation, then proceed to the grounds or residences of vrines: where
besides variety of contents commonly called difforme, are also contained
diverse prodigious histories of several sorts of worms rejected by urine. The
obstruction and stopping of the urine, either total or in part, the several
causes of the same, and diverse predictions, as also the inuoluntarie excretion
of urine, shall not be omitted: and then a word with the Alchymists concerning
distillation of vrines. And finally shall follow the conclusion, where shall be
answered the objection concerning event and casual cures, with some instances
of this error. And for the confirmation of my opinion, I proceed on still in my
former method of reasons and authorities both of ancient and late writers,
adding here and there some of mine own observations.

CHAP. I.
That the regions of the urine are not answerable to the regions of the body of
man; as also concerning the substance of vri^es, thick and thin, their
manifold significations, and uncertainty of judgment by the same.
IT has been an inueterate opinion, Actuarius the first inuenter of these
regions, etc.
and which has taken deep root in the minds of many, and first brought in by
Actuarius, that the several regions of the urine, are answerable to the
principal regions or parts of a man's body. Of these regions in the urine some
make three, the highest part answering in proportion to the highest part of the
body, to wit, the head and such other parts as adioyne to it: the middle region
representing the middle parts of man, as the breast, the bowels, and the parts
about them: the nether region of the urine, the lowest parts from the bowels
downwards. Others again make four, appropriating the circle in the uppermost
part of the urine, called otherwise a crown or garland, to the animal parts
contained in the head: the ouermost part or superficies to the pectorall parts,
heart, lungs, etc. the middle region to the parts serving for nutrition or
nourishment, to wi^, the stomach or maw, the liver, spleen, guts, etc. the
lowest or neathermost part in the bottom of the vrinall, to the parts
appropriate to generation. Iodochus Willichius de probat. vrin. part. 4. c. 1.
But this opinion (says one) is more curious and superstitious then true.
Meaning of the four regions of the urine, etc. And yet the same Author
maintains the three regions of the urine to be answerable to the three
principal regions of the body, which I will here confute as most false and
erroneous. Hieron. Reus. schol. ad cap. praedict. prope finem.
Now to this purpose I think it will not be amiss, to set down the words of
his interpreter, which may serve sufficiently to overthrow this error: Hence
may it evidently appear, in how great an error those Physicians are inuolued,
who hold a proportion betwixt the height of the urine and of a man's body.
Hence also comes it to pass, that they affirm that the contents of the
uppermost region do declare and lay open the griefs of the head, etc. Did
those men ever see fat fall to the bottom or middle region of the vrinall?
Does not oil and any fat thing commonly and of its own accord swim upon the
top of the urine? Neither yet does it therefore necessarily follow, that the
head is principally affected; but does declare and show forth, either the
wasting of the whole body, or some diseases of the kidneyes. Let them show us
the residence called hypostasis, in the garland or uppermost part of the urine.
The like may be said concerning the bubbles which do always stay upon the top
of the urine, Aphor. 34. lib. 4.
and according to the doctrine of Hippocrates, do Prognosticate some long and
lingering disease of the kidneyes. To what end and purpose then keep they such
aprating, that the bubbles which do in order compass the whole crown or
garland about, do declare some great pain in the whole head: and if they
compass and enuiron but the half of the circle or garland, then do they argue
a pain but in one side of the head? How often are such people pained with the
wind Colicke or Hypochondriacke melancholy? In which case howsoever some wind
may ascend up into the head; yet is not this axiom always of undoubted truth.
The like judgment may we pronounce concerning other things of the like nature,
which most commonly follow the condition of their own natural inclination and
matter, and not the altitude or situation of this or that part of a man's body.
Thus far our Author. And the troubled urine so continuing, of the which shall
be spoken in the next Chapter, may serve to overthrow the supposed proportion
betwixt the regions of the urine and the body of man; this headache being
discerned by the whole body of the urine, and neither by the circle or garland,
nor yet by any bubbles, spume, or froth in the top of the same. But concerning
the uncertainty of these particulars, as also concerning the crown and
garland, hereafter when we shall speak of the contents of vrines, I purpose to
discourse at greater length. It is now time we come to the substance of vrines,
and then to all the parts of the same.

I will with the learned Mercuriall, Division of the urine.
divide the whole urine into three parts, the substance, the accidents, and the
contents. In the substance again we are to consider, whether the urine be
thick or thin, Of the substance of vrines.
and whether clear, or troubled and muddie. And this we understand of the
whole body of the urine. Thin vrines according to Vasseus have manifold
significations. Diverse significations of thin vrines.
First a failing of natural heat. Secondly, a stoppage of the Liver,
kidneyes, Johannes Vasseus Meldens. lib. de vrin. iudicijs. page 30. etc.
and the vrinarie vessels. Thirdly, weakness of nature. Fourthly, that the
attractiue power of the passage or pipes of the urine is endamaged. Fifthly,
extreme coldness joined with drought. In acute diseases it argues: First the
weakness of the concocting faculty. Secondly, the cruditie of the disease,
and of the humors contained in the veins. Thirdly, if it thus continue for a
long time, death, if nature be not able to hold out: and if strength continue,
some abscesse or Impostume in the nether parts. And in a Crisis threateneth a
relapse, as in Hermocrates 3. Epid. Hippocr. 3. Epid.
Now how shall any by the bare inspection of these vrines, be able to know
whether it has long thus continued or no, which nevertheless makes much for
a true prediction? The party seldom takes notice of it, until such time it
be sent to the Physician. The messenger employed, oftentimes has not seen the
party since the beginning of his sickness, much less his urine. Thin
vrines which afterward turn thick in an acute disease, Sauonar. lib. de
vrin. cap. 3.
says Sauonarola, without any ease or alleutation ensuing, signifies a
wasting away of the whole body, etc. But concerning thin vrines, which
afterward turn thick, something shall be further said, when we shall speak
of thick vrines. And concerning thin vrines in general, because I shall
have some further occasion to speak hereafter when I shall handle the colors,
I will not dwell so long upon this point. But now come we to the thick vrines.

The same Vasseus gives us five several significations of thick vrines in
general. Of thick vrines Idem Vasseus ibidem.
First the combat or fight betwixt nature and the humor. Secondly, abundance
of humors. Thirdly, the thickening slime and the other parts next unto it, by
reason of cold, if thin urine went before. Significations of thick vrines.
Fourthly, the beginning of concoction, such in the fit of an Ague so
continuing. Fifthly, the weakness of the strength, and no small store of
humors. The same Author again divides these thick vrines into two sorts:
Division of thick vrines.
into thick transparent, pellucide, and troubled, called by him turbida. This
first sort signifies (says he) a dissoluing or melting of glassie phlegm, as
we see in the vrines of Epilepticke persons proceeding of phlegm. If it be of
a citrine or yellowish color, Of thick troubled vrines.
it signifies choler, like the yolks of eggs. But because the other sort of
thick vrines called turbida, or troubled and muddie, is more obuious to the
eye, and easilier discerned, I will insist a little the longer upon the same.
Their several significations.
The same Author assigns three significations to such vrines. First, a great
agitation and stirring of crude and vnconcoct humors, together with no small
store of windiness. Secondly, abundance of humors, which nevertheless are by
nature expelled. Thirdly, the great trouble and encombrance nature has in the
expelling and sequestring such humors. Division of thick troubled vrines.
But these troubled thick vrines are yet divided into three several sorts.
First, some being thin at the first making, do afterward thicken: others are
made thick, and after a while settle: and finally, some are made thick, and do
so continue, being like unto horse-pisse. Such vrines (says Ranzouius) as are
made thin, Henricus Ranzonius lib. de conserannda valetud. cap. 19.
sometimes suddenly thicken and grow troubled: this in health comes often to
pass after exercise, and to others after sickness. And after I have drunk
hard (says the same Author) I make a clear urine, which in a very short time
grows thick, and so setleth to a great residence. Others hold that it
signifies, that nature now begins to set upon the humor, and to concoct it.
I have often observed such an urine, both in perfect health and before and
after sickness. Cold winter weather also often alters thin vrines into
thick. Such as are made thick at first, and after settle to a thick
residence, and become clear, signify and declare unto us, that the disease
wastes away; as declaring nature now to make a separation, after which it
expels at a place convenient. Vrines made thick at the first, and so
persisting, are generally accounted, Aph. 10. lib. 4.
and that not without cause, the worst of the three: which according to
Hippocrates, argue great headache, either present or imminent, being especially
joined with a fever. But this is not perpetual, In lib. 1. Prorrh. comment. 1.
(says Galen) for a troubled urine generally is an accident of the abundance
of raw humors, either concocted or turned into wind, and not of a frenzy;
and yet such an urine may both accompany a frenzy, and be without it, as all
other such accidents as neither are contrary to frenzy, nor yet proper
thereunto. Leo Roganus de prouid. ex vrin. lib. 3. cap. 2.
Of these vrines which do not settle (says a learned Author) but yet much more
of such as being at first made thin do afterward thicken, we can give no
certain prediction: for such vrines do sometimes only signify cruditie, and
sometimes again they are very bad. But the diligent and careful Physician may
by other signs distinguish the same. Hieron. Reusn. in cap. 6. part. 1.
Iodochi Willich. de probat. vrin.
Another Author makes vrines so persisting to be always very dangerous. Such
an urine (says he) does declare unto us, that natural heat is so weak, that
it cannoe separate the good from the bad. But yet must not this be absolutely
understood, but with a caution and limitation, common to many such other
speeches: to wit, that with strength persisting, they signify that the disease
is like to be of long continuance, and without the same to signify death. In
such thick vrines therefore (says Roganus) we must not always be afraid,
Loco nuper citato.
as some ordinary Physicians are, but must likewise observe some other signs.
In young children (says Reusner) if these vrines be exceeding thick, Loco iam
citato.
(which oftentimes comes to pass, howsoever seldom observed) besides the
headache proceeding of windiness, they do also signify the pain of the
heart, (as they call it commonly) that is, of the mouth of the stomach. Such an
urine may proceed also from the windiness of the passages. Thin vrines
afterward becoming thick and troubled, if strength decay, it is an infallible
token of death: and that by reason of the agitation and motion of the matter
within the body, and the abundance of windy vapors from thence, which nature
is not able to overcome. Consutation of an erroneous opinion of the vulgar sort
concerning the staining of the vrinall.
But before I proceed any further, I cannot pass by a common error, which many
as well in town as country do hold, to wit, that when they see such a thick
urine stain the vrinall, they are incontinent conceited all the danger of the
disease is past. But this to be most false, I have often my self observed, and
no doubt so have a many more besides my self. Reusner makes this one of his
signs to know whether the urine were thin at the first making or no: for if
it were so, then when it thickeneth, it commonly staineth the vrinall. Now when
the strength holds out, the patient may recover, and not otherwise. I will
instance in one only, in whom I observed the vanity of this opinion, and
shall serve in stead of a many to justify my assertion.

Some nine or ten years ago, History.
I was solicited to afford my presence and best counsel to a Parson,
dwelling within some four miles of the town of Northampton, surprised with a
burning fever. Having diligently enquired what remedies he had hitherto used
(for if I remember right, it was the tenth day of his disease) and by whose
prescription, I learned that no less then three at least, if not four
Parson-Physitians had administered to him, and then the most famous for
Vromancie of all the country about: howbeit since that time some others are
also crept into that society. I enquired moreover whether Phlebotomie had been
as yet used. They replied that Phlebotomie had not been so much as once
mentioned by any of them, but that they had purged him, as I think with
Diaprunum, and I remember not what else, and appointed him some cooling
drinks. His wife added moreover, that one of them thinking to purchase
himself some praise beyond his fellows, would have bribed Death with foue
pounds worth of Aurum Pot^bile, which she willingly paid for, in hope of her
husbands recovery. This Parson a chief proctor for au^um po^abile in
Northampton shire.
But this importunate suter would have no nay; but urged still the payment of
the debt he came to demand. I told them that Phlebotomie, in due and convenient
time administered, had proved a more sovereign medicine for this disease, then
all the gold of Ophir and both the Indies. I being by them much importuned to
let him blood, absolutely refused, his strength being now well nigh spent, and
some ill signs (the undoubted harbingers of death) offering themselves to my
eyes, administering only some cordials. The next morning I find all wax worse
and worse; howbeit his wife, showing me his urine, which before had been
thin, and now settled to a thick residence, a part whereof did stick to the
sides of the vrinall and stain the same, which she, believing her neighbors,
began to conceive some better hope of his recovery, and that only upon this
false ground. I assured her of the contrary, which shortly afterward proved
too true, and the same day, being Saturday I departed. The Monday after comes
one of his former Physicians (not the Parson who ministered Aurum Potabile; for
after the same he had no more arrows left in his quiver) who, if fair buttered
speeches and peremptory promises could cure diseases, he might cure more then
ever did the Apostles: who then all too late lets his patient blood, who
suruiued not long after the loss of this liquor of life, but dyed either that
night, or the next morning very early, being about the fourteenth day from the
beginning of his disease. One thing I must yet add concerning the
signification of thick vrines, which deserves reprehension: Absurd opinion of
a Physician, affirming one to be bewitched by the urine only.
to wit, That a Physician maintained, that he could know by the urine that any
were bewitched: to wit, that such a ones urine was thick and muddie, and could
not by any heat be turned, as they term it. To whom it was no less learnedly
then truly replied, Did you never read in Hippocrates of vrina confusa? I
cannot but much marvel, that any man that had ever sucked in the principles and
grounds of Physic, should be so far ouerseene, this being a peculiar
property of such vrines, that they will not be turned by any heat whatsoever.
It is then apparent, how little certainty is to be collected concerning the
judgment of diseases, by the sole inspection either of thick or thin vrines:
to wit, that after many cautions and diverse interrogations, if thou meet with
an understanding messenger, and the urine sent at a convenient time, and all
other circumstances observed (which nevertheless, seldom or never concur
altogether) and thou thy self being wise and understanding, may perhaps,
learn something concerning the state of the disease, as cruditie and
concoction; and it may be, some more circumstances, and yet the strength of the
patient (which is most material, and the vulgar never able to judge of the
same) together with many other circumstances, not to be neglected shall be
concealed from thee: many of our country people, being so ignorant that they
think their neighbor not a whit amended, unless he be able, as at other
times, to fill his belly with bag-pudding and bacon. And moreover the ordinary
sort of people are seldom able to lay open either their own or their
neighbors infirmity, they taking chiefly notice either of some accident
common to many others, Many things alter the judgment of the urine.
or else of some grief most affecting them. But besides the premises, may not
the thickness of the vrinall, the dimnesse of thy sight, the excess or defect
of light, or yet if it be brought to thee at candle light (so sottish and
absurd is the vulgar sometimes) make thee to fail in thy judgment? That I say
no thing of the time of the year, according to the which as well the substance
as the accidents do often alter in one and the same individual party. Others
add also the sex, the age and many more, which I here omitting, will hasten to
the accidents of urine.

CHAP. II.
Of the accidents of urine, the quantity, smell, etc. and that no certain and
assured truth can by them be presaged or known.
THe accidents of urine are all reduced to two general heads, Accidents of
urine twofold.
the quantity and the quality. The quantity is either great, small, or
mean, which is the best. Diverse significations of great abundance of urine in
health.
Abundance of urine in health signifies, 1. that the party has drunk store
of Rhenish or other searching wine. 2. abundance of moist meats. 3. little
euacuation by stool. 4. too liberal use of diuretickes, or such things as
provoke urine. 5. the concoction of crude and undigested food. 6. the retention
of sweat, menstruous flux, or other moisture detained within the chest or
stomach, vnburthening themselves this way. Concerning the retention of the
like humidities, it may not seem so strange that they may be turned toward
the passages of the urine, but it may seem stranger that the faecall
excrements should produce this effect; Aphor. vltimo lib 4.
and yet Hippocrates witnesses the truth hereof: and besides, Lib. 4.
degeneratione an^m cap. 4.
Aristotle relates, that in Pirinthus there was a cow, which never had the
passage for her excrements open, but that the same were converted into a
statuous or windy substance, and then into urine, In sickness.
and so expelled. In sickness this abundance is likewise diverse ways
produced. 1. By means of the excessive heat of the kidneyes, which draw
abundantly such humidities, as in the Diabeticall disease, called by some a
Pot-dropsie. 2. Great euacuation of superfluous moisture. 3. The wasting away
of the whole body, History.
which comes to pass in burning feauers, and which was observed by that
famous Physician Marcus Gatinaria in that maid of Millan about some eighteen
years of age, Mercur. lib. de vrin^ cap 6. ex Marco Gatinaria.
who voyded every day for forty days together, fifteen pounds of urine,
whereas the quantity of every days meat and drink jointly did never exceed
the weight of four pounds. 4. The ending of the disease. And in acute
diseases, the abundance of urine is procured sometimes, 1. by means of the
feauers relenting. 2. By the change thereof into an Hecticke. 3. By a
Conuulsion. And besides the premises, it may be yet procured by diverse other
means: as I remember a young woman then unmarried, who in the disease called
the mither, voyded abundance of urine, especially during the time of her fits,
being in the afternoones, and that for the space of four days together, as
hereafter shall appear when we shall speak of the colors of vrines. And
often in the crises of acute diseases the urine is multiplied. Guil. Adolph.
Scribon. devrin. inspect. page 41. 42.
A man of Sena (says Scribonius) every day did piss four or five iugs of
urine, who scarce drank half an English pint all the said space: what could a
Physician have judged by this quantity? Another.
Thus then when thou see so many causes or one and the same effect, to which
of them can thou ascribe it, unless thou be well acquainted with the
particular circumstances from the patients own mouth? Small quantity of urine
by diverse means.
Small quantity of urine is likewise procured, 1. By dry diet. 2. By the use
of tough and ^^mie meats. 3. By reason of obstructions. 4. By reason of
plentiful euacuation. 5. By means of a violent fever. 6. By some hurt of the
vrinarie vessels, as comes sometimes to pass by reason of the cold distemper
of the bladder, procuring a palsy to that part. 7. By the decay of natural
heat, as comes sometimes to pass in such as are ready to dye. 8. Because
the moisture is detained in some other part, as comes to pass in a Dropsy.
9. By reason of some impostume in the fundament, the neck of the bladder, or
in the womb, which may straiten the said passage, that the urine cannot come
away in any great quantity. 10. The abundance of crude and raw humors may be
a means of this so small a quantity. But I will yet add some more out of the
aforenamed Scribonius, Idem ibidem.
because his words are so suitable for our purpose, The like verdict may we also
give forth (says he) concerning the small quantity of urine, taking often its
original cause from the defect or scarcity of meat and drink; as also by
means of some other euacuations: such as are sweat, excretions by stool, and
such like, which carrying the matter of the urine another way, hinder the
passage thereof into the bladder, and by consequent the expulsion from thence.
For this same cause such as be troubled with any laskes or fluxes do void but
a small quantity of urine, Aphor. 83. lib. 4.
as Galen himself declares. Again a little after, he adds these words: In
the obstruction of the Liver and mesaraicke veins, experience it self does
often teach us, that a very small quantity of urine is voyded. Now if any ones
servant should bring unto thee such an urine, not acquainting thee with any
other circumstance, why would thou give sentence for an obstruction rather
then a laske? or for a laske rather then an obstruction? Besides the premises,
in the Stone, the Dropsy, and such other diseases which hinder the generation
of urine, no certain judgment can be collected from the small quantity of
the same. Another.
And that thou may yet be more ravished with admiration, Rufus Ephesus in
his book of the infirmity of the reins, makes mention of one, who (as says
Praxagozas) above the space of twelve years voyded all his urine by the
belly, and not by the ordinary passage. What then could a man have judged
concerning this man's bladder, and the other parts depending thereupon? And this
shall suffice for the quantity of vrines, with the uncertainty of the same:
now come we to the qualities obserueable in them.

The next accident of urine is the quality: and the qualities, as witnesses
Mercuriale, Mercur. lib. de vrin. cap. 6.
according to the doctrine of the Arabian Physicians, Of the smell of vrines.
are five: the smell, the taste, the sound, the touch, and the color. As for
the smell, vrines have little or no smell, or else a sweet and pleasing smell,
Vrines without smell.
or finally a stinking smell. No smell, says Mercuriall, proceeds from no
other cause then from the extinguishing of natural heat: howbeit it may
sometimes proceed from drink of a cold quality, like as we see in cold
countries, and the like complexions, Vrines smelling well.
the smell of the urine is not so much to be discerned. Vrines smell well,
either in regard of diet or drugs: but especially by means of a temperate
heat concocting well. Stinking vrines with their several significatio^s.
Stinking vrines come by four several means. 1. By means of cruditie and
indigestion of the food. 2. By reason of putrefaction. Galen witnesses, that
whatsoever thing is putrified has an evil favored smell. Galen lib. 5. de
simply. med. facult.
Wherefore in Pestilentiall feauers the vrines are most commonly of a stinking
smell. As also if the vrines pass through any place oppressed with putrid
ulcers; or yet if any purulent matter be mingled with them, they become
stinking. 3. The too long retention of urine in the bladder may make it to
stink. 4. The quality either of diet or drugs, (as has been said of the good
smell of vrines) may likewise procure unto it an evil smell. Lib. de vrin.
cap. 3. rub. 1.
Look at large what Sauonarola says of this point, if thou be disposed to see
further. But what certainty does the smell of the urine afford us? whosoever
shall think to help his uncertain conjectures by the same, should leap out
of the frying pan (as the proverb says) into the fire. In the first place it
is to be observed, that as well in sickness as in health, vrines may offer no
pleasing smell to the nose, and yet the party may be free from any danger at
al. But because healthful folks seldom send their vrines to the Physician,
we will let them pass, Loco prius citato.
and come to the sick. I will let Scribonius speak for me. Concerning the
sicks urine (says he) most do teach us that stinking vrines signify
putrefaction of humors, in so much that by the difference of the smells, they
take upon them to judge of the several humors so putrified. O wise
woodcockes! I willingly yield to them, that stink or strong smell does argue
putrefaction in such vrines: but of which parts shall this putrefaction be?
whether of the bladder only, or of the Liver also, of the chest, or other
members? Nay so far off is the stinking smell from giving us any particular
notice of the disease, that it cannot so much as afford us any certain
general knowledge of the same. For many sweet smelling simples (says
Montanus) may cause a most stinking urine. Choleric and hot complexioned men
void often very strong smelling vrines, howsoever free from any disease, as I
have often observed in my self. And by what means, I pray thee, should thou
from the stinking smell of the urine know putrefaction? or how can this
putrefaction procure this stinking smell? If this were so, then would it
necessarily follow, that whosoever were seized with a fever proceeding from
putrefaction of humors, should void stinking vrines, the which is most false.
The truth of this assumption may from hence appear, that for the most part
among an hundred sick of such feauers, scarce shall thou find one of their
vrines so to smell, nor yet their blood at the opening of a vein. And for this
cause well said Sauonarola in his treatise of Vrines, that there are other
signs also to be observed in the annoying of putrified members, if we purpose
well and orderly to examine, try and find out any skill concerning vrines.
And indeed a thousand causes there are which may alter and change their smell.
By the smell then only there can never be any certainty collected to inform
our judgments concerning any disease. But I am afraid the Reader will take it
ill, that I so long detain him among so unpleasing smells; Medici certe de hac
iudicandi ratione scribentes digni essent, qui in dies lotium potare
cogerentur. Vpuparu^ potius quam Medicorum haec tractatio erit.
and my self begin to wax weary of so unworthy a thing, and as I never
took any pleasure in the same, so here I leave it to them that like it better.
But if I should yet enter upon the taste, I fear I should be worse taxed. I can
tell no man their taste by mine own experience. Salt they have always been
counted; as the tears likewise: If any be incredulous I will not hinder him.
If our vrinemongers had no better beer allowed them, they would not so much
adore the pissepot as some of them do. Idem ibidem.
But yet if any purpose to practice this point, I wish him to go to the
Arabians, who have written so curiously concerning this point; and it may be,
in regard of their aromaticall drugs, their vrines may be of better taste then
those of our Europaeans, who feed on grosser food. As for the other two
qualities, the sound and touch, we will send them all in one ship to Arabia
with their fellows: and now we come to the colors.

CAAP. III.
Of the colors of Vrines, how deceitful they prove, and first of the color
commonly called palew or light saffron.
IF ever urine proved a strumpet, Vrina meretrix.
it is of all other parts of the urine most apparently to be seen in the
color. For as sometimes some of the most infamous stews strumpets, infected
it may be, with the pox, do most curiously deck and adorn, by curious
painting, sumptuous apparel, and such other enticing tricks, their loathsome
and filthy carcasses, to the end they may more easily deceive such as will be
caught in their snares: does it not often fare even so with the color of the
urine? For oftentimes when they make the fairest show, does not even death
knock at the door? My purpose is not here to make any phylosophicall
discourse concerning the causes of colors in general, and then to apply the
same to vrines in particular, and so to insist upon each several color: for
this might prove too tedious, and perhaps, not so pertinent to the purpose we
have in hand. And yet, notwithstanding, I will say something of each of the
chief and principal colors; by the which it may more easily be conceived,
that the like deceit may be seen in the others like unto them. Palew and light
saffron color.
Now my purpose is to begin with that color which is the best of all others,
being as it were the rule and square whereby we do discern and judge of the
failings and defects of all the rest. This color is called in Latin Subrufus,
subaureus, or subcroceus: and in English, palew, or light saffron. This color
our Physicians do generally account the best of all others, and that it best
betokens exact concoction. Neither yet must this first and best color
arguing good concoction, be simply and in it self so considered, but
restrained to flourishing age. For in old men, women and children, (whose
vrines, especially childrens, do commonly decline toward white and pale) it
does betoken that their bodies are too hot, either by reason of diet, exercise
or some other means. But if one should bring unto thee such an urine, how
could thou tell whether it were an old or a young man's, a woman's or a child's,
the messenger not acquainting thee with the particular circumstances? It may be
thou will say, the contents will make the case clear. I answer, that many
causes may deprive them of contents in part or altogether, as hereafter shall
appear in the contents: and how the substance may alter, has been said
already. The common opinion is, the higher the color is, the greater heat is
argued; which opinion to be most false and erroneous, shall hereafter in other
colors appear. Besides, may not a little extraordinary watching, fasting,
rheubarb, saffron, madder roots, or such like, color the urine without any
excess of heat? And will the several seasons of the year produce no
alteration in the urine? that I say nothing of an infinite number of other
causes, which may in like manner alter them. But one signification of such a
colored urine I cannot here pass by, which I remember I once read in an
English urine book: Called the key of unknown knowledge, or a shop of five
windows.
to wit, that a maid which makes an urine of this color, desires the
company of a man. Does not our master vrine-monger now diue into the depth of
the matter? But good man, I know what, I can assure thee that Tom and Dicke in
the country can tell as well, that Maud the dairy maid would be married, by
the reflected rays and benign aspects of her superior orbs upon their
hemisphaers, and the suffering some syllibub; and some other commodities
committed to her custody, now and then to come into their possession; by this
means hindering her mistress to further her self in her suite: as the most
cunning pisse-prophet in all the country shall do by the urine, if he had as
many eyes as ever had that watchful Argus, or his nose weighed down with
spectacles. The sanguine and best complexioned (which by consequence should
produce the best vrines) are not always the most amorous. Many as ill colored
drabs as ever any has seen, have not sometimes been behind the best
complexioned Gentlewoman in the land in such a case. And it is held by many
that such are for the most part solaces. But now let us proceed to some
instances of these outward glorious appearances of vrines of the best note,
Leuinus Lemnius de occuitis naturae mirac. lib. 2. cap. 37.
which nevertheless falsified the trust reposed in them. And first I will
instance in one taken out of a learned Germane author, History. Jacob.
Douinetus apol. lib. 1. cap. 8.
and then I will add one of mine own experience.

The judgment of diseases by the sole inspection of the urine, is hard to
attain unto, and of great difficulty: for sometimes it comes to pass that
the urine, as well in color as in all other points, does show it self of a
very laudable condition to the view of any indicious eye, when,
notwithstanding, death stands at the door: the reason of this being, that
all diseases are not easily discerned, nor yet the dangers of them perceived by
the urine alone; but such especially as have their being in the bladder,
veins, kidneyes and Liver. As it came to pass anno 1581. in a young man about
24. years of age newly married. This young man's urine being, as well in color
as contents, most like unto an healthful urine, he being neither deprived of
his accustomed appetite, either to meat or drink, neither troubled with
excessive headeach, thirst, watching, anxiety and tossing of his body too and
fro; nor yet distempered with any noisome heat which might by feeling be
discerned. The pulse notwithstanding, being weak, frequent and swift with
great inequality and feebleness, gave us some conjectures of I know not what
kind of fever, the which now and then was not without some exacerbations.
Hence was I of opinion, that the vital faculty did then by little and little
decay; the use and necessity whereof in every action of this life is, not
without great cause, thought to be of such weight and moment, that not only
does it suffice as matter for the rest, but does also stir up and perfect the
same, in cherishing them after a most kind and effectual manner, in so much
as no part of the body can enjoy the benefit of nourishment without the
influence of this vital faculty. This young man therefore, being now wholly
deprived of the said spirits, it was no marvel if nature now decaying, and
win^, by the counsel of a certain Physician, being denied him now for
certain days, he did upon the eight day make an exchange of this cottage of
clay for a far better and happier inheritance.

But to omit many other stories by my self and others observed, In the year
1617. many dangerous malign feauers.
which would yet most pregnantly prove and confirm the same, yet especially
in the year 1617. did this most manifestly and plainly appear. In the
foresaid year, being generally moist for the most part; the Winter not Winter
like, furnished with such frosts and tempestuous storms, as are not
unseasonable for that time of the year: it came to pass that besides the
small pox, measels, and diverse other diseases, there reigned not only in
Northamptonshire, but in many other places of the kingdom, a certain kind of
malign, if not pestilentiall fever, the which, by reason it sweept away the
lustiest people of either sex, we may, and that not without good reason, call
it Stoup gallant. In this disease, as comes often also to pass in others of
the like nature, the vrines of some, such as lived not long after, did appear
to the eye, both for color and contents, of as laudable a condition as the
urine of the soundest and healthfullest man in this kingdom. But among many I
will mention but one, whereof I my self was an eyewitness.

These foresaid feauers in the town of Northampton, Another.
and places adjoining, in the Spring of the year were very frequent, fierce
and furious: toward Summer they began somewhat to relent, reassuming their
former fierceness toward the Harvest quarter. In the above named year and
quarter, about the latter end of September, a married woman of good account and
reputation, living within this town of Northampton, was surprised with the
foresaid fever: of the which, because at the first it assaulted her after the
manner of an intermittent Tertian ague, she made but small reck^ning but after
the space of three or four days, fearing that which afterward came to pass,
being also hereunto persuaded by some of her friends, she used the advice of
another Physician and my self. In a few days were by us administered all such
meames, as either in reason or our daily experience we thought fittest to
expel the cause of her disease, and restore her to her former health again.
But contra vim mortis, non est medicamen in hortis. Wherefore at length
discharging that debt which all the sons of Adam owe, she was freed from the
miseries of this mortal life, and entered into the possession of a better. Two
or three days before her death, her urine might both for color and contents,
have given such satisfaction and content to the most eagle-eyed Physician, that
none by the sight of the same could ever have suspected any imminent danger. In
like manner if any one had felt her pulse, without due consideration of the
former dangerous accidents, which could not be concealed from a judicious eye,
observing withal sensibly approach the dissolution of this crasie cottage, he
would no doubt with old. Agag have concluded: 1. Sam. 15. 32.
Surely the bitterness of death is past.

CHAP. IIII.
Of red vrines, and how easily one may thereby be deceived, and of pissing
blood.
PAssing by many other colors of urine which Authors do here mention,
attributing to each of them a several signification; of all which, it were too
much this short Treatise should take upon it to discourse; considering also
that the uncertainty of the same may be partly collected from that which has
been said already, and partly by some things yet to be handled hereafter: now
I will clear this point concerning red vrines. This color of urine, howbeit
it has many degrees, some being of an higher, and some again of a lower
colored red: yet (says Galen) all are colored with a greater or smaller
portion of blood therewith mingled. Nevertheless, that this same color of
urine is procured by the mixture, more or less, not of blood alone, but also
of an high colored choler, jointly or severally according to the greater or
smaller quantity thereof, is not by a small number of learned Physicians
maintained: as also that this same color of urine is often and usually seen
in hot and acute diseases, is not unknown to the very vulgar and unlearned
sort of people. Now a many causes may bring forth this effect: this color of
urine higher or lower appearing in a many hot and acute diseases; which would
puzzle a good Physician, by the bare sight of such an urine, Dangerous to let
blood upon the bare sight of an high red colored urine.
to know what disease it were. But yet is not this rule so infallibly true,
that it admits of no exception, as is the opinion of many. And therefore
most erroneous and dangerous is the practice of such, as upon the bare sight of
an high colored urine, presently without any further deliberation or enquiry
of circumstances, both prescribe Phlebotomie, and administer all manner of
cooling medicines, to the great and inevitable danger and prejudice of the
patient: from the which error also the learned Arabian Auicenna is not free,
as our learned late writers have well observed. And as I deny not but that this
may often prove true; so on the other side, it is most certain, that the
urine may be of such a color, and yet either proceed from a cold cause, or
else from some imbecillitie and weakness, as comes sometimes to pass in
Dropsies, etc. But lest this should seem stuff of mine own brain, and
hatched at home, hear from the mouth of a worthy Author, Rhamb. Dod.
obseruat. medic. cap. 32.
something concerning the same purpose. It is not seldom observed, that the
urine, by reason of a commixtion of blood with it, does appear of a red
color: but by reason that it is either thick or clotted, it is no great
difficulty to discern the same. But that so thin a blood should bemingled
with it, that not the substance of the urine, but the color only should be
altered, is but seldom seen. Such a case befell a young man of 28. years of
age or near by.

This young man voided an urine of an high red color, History.
and thin substance for many days together, being very like to the vrines
made in hot acute feauers. The aforesaid patient had used the advice of diverse
ancient learned Physicians, who had appointed him such means as are used for
the cooling of hot Livers. At length he repaired to my self, at that time but
a young Physician. Looking on his urine, and withal seeing it of so high a red
color, as also perceiving him, who was there present, free from any fever, I
asked him whether heretofore he had complained of any: which he denied, adding
moreover, that for some months bypast he had felt a chillness and coldness,
together with a great extenuation or leanness, and shortness of breath,
joined with a general decay of strength; as also that hitherto he had found no
benefit by such means as he had used. All which having attentively heard, I
thought good to keep by me the said urine until the next day, and then to
view the residence thereof, the which was of a color like unto blood, as being
indeed nothing else but blood, the urine above it, being but very little, dyed
with a pale yellow color; showing no sign or token at all of any fever. For
the which cause I did then collect, that there was no exorbitant heat in his
Liver, but a great weakness in the kidneyes, by reason whereof the ends of
the small veins being opened and loosened, let some part of the blood pass
away. And therefore I took a new course for curing of the same, by using such
means as were fit for the corroborating and strengthening of the kidneyes and
veins, not omitting fit and convenient diet, and among other things, goats
milk. And so at length the urine came to its own natural color again, his
body also enjoying the benefit of nourishment as it was wont in former times:
and thus in a short time recovered his vigor, strength, and former perfect
health again.

Such an excretion of blood, Idem D^d. in schol.
which comes thus to pass by reason of the looseness and wideness of the
mouths of the small veins, or yet of the thinness of blood, is commonly
called Diapedesis: that is, as much as a streining through. It comes also to
pass, that some blood is voyded by urine many other ways: sometimes some
great stone fretting the passages betwixt the kidneyes and the bladder, called
Vreteres, blood does also accompany the urine, but withal it is black and
clotted. The stone continuing for some certain space in the bladder, proves
likewise sometimes the cause of this inconvenience, and that especially after
riding, or some other violent motion of the body. In women also some part of
their menstruous flux is sometimes intermingled with it. Sometimes again the
blood issuing out of the gummes, being suddenly stopped, does search for it self
a passage through the bladder. The kidneyes being wounded, first does blood
issue out by the vrines, and afterward matter mingled with it: as it befell
that woman which was stabbed in the loins with a dagger, first voyding
blouddie vrines; then afterward mingled with matter, until such time as both
the wound and the kidneyes were cured. And that this was a wound in the
kidneyes, did plainly appear, by some portion of the same taken out of the
wound. The exulceration of the kidneyes is also accompanied with bloody urine,
after the which (unless remedy be in due and convenient time procured) matter
does follow. It is likewise sometimes seen, that decrepit old men do void
vrines mingled with blood, which are of a blackish color, accompanied with
some red, the which does declare, that the vigor and power of the kidneyes is
almost quite abolished.

But I wish thee yet to lend thine ear a little to the same Author, Idem
obseruat. medicin. cap. 31.
yet again in a story or two more, which will add not a little light to this
matter.

The urine does appear of a reddish color, not only when the Liver is
surprised with a Gangrene, or the body with any hot or acute disease, such as
are Tertian agues, burning feauers, inflammation of the internal parts: but
often also in the debilitie, weakness, and coldness of the Liver or stomach,
proceeding from long and lingering diseases. The like tincture it receives now
and then in the extreme pinching Collicke passion, when as some tough and
clammie humors possessing the guts, do hinder the passage of the faecall
excrements.

A Gentleman of account (says he) voyded urine of a very high red color,
History.
howbeit free from any fever: being at the same time much tormented with the
Collicke, accompanied with a retention of the faecall excrements. After the
iniection of an anodine, or mitigating glister, the pain was much eased, and
withal the urine became of a remiss and light color, such as it was wont to
be in his former health. After a short space his urine reassumed again its
former high color, until such time as by frequent reiteration of glisters,
the urine at length persisted in that laudable state and condition once before
begun, the body also without any artificial means performed its ordinary
functions.

A Citizen of good account, Another.
about fifty years of age, being freed from a Quartane ague, Idem Ibidem.
which had held him for the space of four or five months, fell into that kind
of laske which we commonly call Lienteria. His excretions by stool were very
liquid and crude, and no remainder of the heat of the Ague to be discerned.
His vrines also were of as high a red color, as is at any time to be seen in
the most violent burning feauers, or inflammations of the inward parts. But yet
did I not build upon any so rotten a foundation, but having a more watchful
eye on other matters, I thought it necessary in the first place to have a care
of the stomach, and in the next place of the Liver, both being by means of the
former Quarterne ague, not a little weakened. For this end and purpose I
prescribed his diet in quality hot and dry, allowing him for his drink the
best and strongest wines, such as are Sack and Canarie. Physical means were
Diagalanga, Diatrion-pipereon, and such like. By continuance of which means,
this much at length was obtained, that the saecall excrements did now show
forth good concoctio^, the vrines also as in his former perfect health. After
all the premises the aforementioned patient assuring himself of perfect
health, did secretly fall again to the too liberal drinking of beer.
Immediately after this disorder, the color of his urine was again altered into
an high deep red, undoubtedly declaring unto us, that sometimes the vrines
receive an high and deep color, by reason of the cruditie and coldness of
the stomach. Urine sometimes red by reason of the cruditie of the stomach.
After that time therefore he refrained again from beer, upon the which his
urine returned to its former laudable condition, neither did he after that use
any beer, until such time as he had perfectly recovered his former health
again.

These things have I related, because of the ignorance and error of many, who
are persuaded, that the urine cannot be died with so high a color, any other
way then by heat, who whenever they see such an urine brought to them, the
patient being tormented with the Collicke, they very unadvisedly and rashly
have recourse to the cure of a fever, neglecting the cure of the Collicke,
which by these means they are so far from curing, that they do rather much
increase the pain of the same. But if these men had read Galen to Glauco, Lib.
1. cap. designis quotidianae intermitt.
they could not be ignorant y^ vrines sometimes do appear of a reddish color
in cold diseases, or at least such as are not very much distempered with heat.
For writing of the Quotidian ague, which has for material cause, crude and
raw humors, thus he writes: In Quotidian agues the vrines are either white,
or thick and muddie, or else of a red color. In comment. in praedict. locum.
Martinus Akakia in his Commentary adds, that the vrines then become of a
reddish color, when as by weakness of the Liver or the veins, the red
waterish substance issues out with the urine. Hieron. Reusner. in schol. ad
cap. 22. Ioh. Willich. de prob. vrin.
Fernelius also, lib. 6. pathol. cap. 13. writes that they are not a little
deceived, who do ascribe bloody urine, or that which is of a red windy
color, resembling the washings of raw bloody flesh, unto the imbecillitie and
weakness of the Liver: for he cannot conceive how that blood can come from any
other part of the body without some indisposition of the kidneys. But yet (by
the leave of so learned a man) many things there be which make against this
assertion. For oftentimes by experience we see many plethoricke young men,
feeding on abundance of dainty dishes, and living in ease and idleness, to
piss blood by means of a relaxation of some vein, Per (...).
who by the only means of Phlebotomie, together with the application of some
Emplasticke remedy to the region of the Liver, (about the which place they
say, they find some weight joined with some distention, reaching up to the
right shoulder) are perfectly cured. And who can here I pray thee, accuse the
kidneyes, there being no pain nor trouble at all felt in the making of his
urine?

And thus may the deceit and uncertain judgment had by the variety of these
red vrines in hot or cold diseases easily be conceived, for the which cause I
will here surceasse from insisting any more upon them: but now, because mention
has been made of some small quantity of blood issuing forth with the vrines,
we will say something of the abundant pissing of blood, illustrating it by some
authorities, as heretofore we have done.

Now as these vrines of an high and intense red color, Of pissing of blood.
do strike a terror often in the beholders, much more does this liquor of life
(the blood it self I mean) issuing out of the vrinarie pipes and passages,
cause no small amazement to the eyes of the ignorant, and sometimes of the more
judicious beholder of it. And yet does not this always portend so infallible
and undoubted danger, as by many is deemed. Sometimes indeed the danger is so
great, that not only a mean and ordinary understanding, but a more refined
judgment, may justly fear the future danger: as in the rupture of some great
vein near the Liver, or the kidneyes, after which does an ulcer often ensue,
and after a long torturing and tormenting pain, Death most commonly makes an
end of their so miserable and painful life. Sometimes again this flux
proves very safe and secure, as in critical and periodicall excretions. But
hear, I pray thee, Aretaeus Cappadox. lib. 4. cap. 3. diuturn. morb.
an ancient Author deliver his opinion concerning this point.

Some men there are, who by certain turns, and at certain times do piss
blood abundantly, being a disease not unlike to the haemorrhoides or piles. The
state and constitution of their body also is not unlike: for they are very
pale, dull, sluggish, and lumpish: they loath their food, and after this
excretion of blood, there follows a certain resolution and faintness of
their joints, their head notwithstanding becomes much lighter and better. But
if at this accustomed and wonted period of time, there shall happen a
suppression or stoppage of the aforesaid flux, they are presently surprised
with a great headache, their eyesight waxing dim, seconded with a giddiness
and swimming in the head. Upon which occasion it comes to pass, that many of
them fall into the falling sickness: some of them again being puffed up and
swollen, with their eyesight somewhat darkened, do resemble Hydropicke
persons: others are oppressed with melancholicke diseases, and some again with
Paralyticke passions. All these inconveniences do follow upon the suppression
of any former flux of blood.

Sometimes pissing of blood (says Hollerius) is critical, Holler. Schol. ad
cap. 52. lib. 1. de morb.
and comes by certain turns and set times: and with such a one was troubled
a certain Nun mentioned by Musa, who every month upon the suppression of her
monthly disease, Vde ibidem plura, vt and apud Schenck. obseruat. medicin.
lib. 3. tit. de sang. mictu.
did piss blood in abundance. Archembault the Counselor, by turns did
sometimes cast up by the mouth, and sometimes did void it downwards by stool,
and again at other times by the yard. Some at the passing away of the Spring
do piss blood; and this I find written by Archigenes, that some do by certain
turns void great store of blood by the yard, being first collected in and
about the kidneyes, and that they find themselves much eased thereby.

I am very familiarly acquainted with one Donatus Arrigonius, History.
a merchant of our town, Marcell. Donat. lib. 4. cap. 29. hist. med.
who in his journey to the fair of Bohan, which is held three or four times a
year, in his journey observed, that he was surprised with the Iaundise.
Afterward as he was upon his journey homewards to Mantua, and fast asleep in
his Inn, being accompanied with another friend, who lay in the same bed with
him, upon the sudden there issued out at his yard, of its own accord, great
store of blackish blood; in so much that his companion being all wet with the
blood wakened him, being almost half dead; and with much ado, at length
brought him home to Mantua again; but withal quite freed from his Iaundise.

A certain young man, Another.
after the eating of great store of garlic, pissed afterward great abundance
of blood; and after a little while signs of an impostume in the kidneyes might
be observed: to wit, some matter issuing forth from the same: from whence I did
collect, that the sharpness of the humor had caused an excoriation in these
parts, by means of the opening of some vein.

I did see at Mothon a man who with a fall off a ladder filled half a chamber
pot with the blood he pissed; Another.
who immediately after the taking of a little Lemnian earth did recover: the
blood came without any urine; and that, perhaps, because the contusion was not
far distant from his yard.

About some nine or ten years ago, Another.
an Inne-keeper of Northampton, a fat and corpulent man, having now and then
voyded some small quantity of blood with his urine, did, notwithstanding but
little regard the same; until such time as he fell into a total suppression
of urine; the pain whereof made him cast forth such pitiful cries and
complaints, that his sorrowful neighbors did much commiserate his distressed
estate. His wife no less perplexed then amazed, at this so sudden and
unexpected accident, at his desire sent to entreat my aid and counsel in this
his so great extremity. Some half an hour or less after the administration
of a diureticke drink inwardly, and a Cataplasme outwardly applied to his
share, he filled almost a chamber pot with blood, some small quantity of urine
being mingled with the same: whereupon followed immediately case and alleuiation
of all his former annoyance. The same night, about an hour after, he sent me a
little wooden dish almost half full of gobbets of congealed and clotted blood,
resembling the substance of the Liuerie self. The next morning again he sent
me an vrinall almost full of blood voyded at the same place, no urine to the
judgment of the eye at the first to be discerned mingled with the same I
caused him bleed oftener then once, besides other fit and convenient remedies,
as well in diet as otherwise; and yet this flux continued less or more for
some few days after. In the space of one week he lost in all above a gallon
of blood. For prevention I wished him, besides gooddiet (hard to be observed by
people of that profession) with corroboratiue and other medicines fit for that
purpose, with special regard to the Liver, not to neglect Phlehotomie, at
least every Spring and Fa^l, which he duly put in practice for the first
year: and, for anything I could ever hear, was little or nothing troubled
after that time with this infirmity. After this he lived at least three
years, and then dyed suddenly; of the cause whereof here to discourse, were
besides my present purpose. Diverse others have now and then by me been
observed, troubled with the like euacuation, without any great hurt or
hinderance to their health; whom, to avoid prolixitie and tediousness, I here
willingly pass by: only one I will touch but in two words.

A little child above five years of age, Another.
used at diverse times to piss pure blood, not keeping any certain times or
turns. This the Gentlewoman her self the child's grandmother, dwelling not
far from the town of Northampton told me; who did likewise affirm, that she
had not discerned any hurt he had sustained by the same: yet notwithstanding
for fear of some future inconvenience, and after ensuing danger, was desirous
to use some means for prevention: which being by some occasions then deferred,
the child afterward departed out of these quarters into another country,
where what since befell him I cannot tell.

But now let us proceed to some other colors of vrines; for here I think has
been found as small certainty as in the former.

CHAP. V.
Of black vrines, and that they are not always so dangerous as they are
deemed: as also of blew, ash-colored, or leaden and green colored vrines,
together with their several significations and uncertainties.
THe highest and intensest of all other colors, (...).
is the black; the which when it presents it self to the view of the eye in
any urine, it strikes no small fear and terror in the minds of most men; yea
and sometimes of those of no ordinary understanding. That this fear was not
altogether without some ground, Hippoc. prognost. lib. 2. aph. 29.
may be seen by some passages of our old father Hippocrates, who does
peremptorily affirm, that as well in men as in women, (...).
black vrines are always dangerous. And of the like opinion and judgment was
once his trusty interpreter Galen, confidently auouching that he never knew
any one recover whose urine was altogether black; Idem in coac. sect. 27. aph.
16. 1. de cris. cap. 12 and alibi.
howbeit the danger was the lesser if the residence only were black: less
again if the middle part or swim, and least of all if the cloud only were
of this color. Comm. 3. in lib. 3. epid.
Howbeit the same Galen in another place affirms, That if there be a
retention of a woman's monthly flux of melancholicke blood, there is no cause
of fear, if in such a case the urine appear black to the eye. Comm. 3. in
lib. 1 epid.
And again, in the story of that woman who being surprised with sickness the
second day after she was brought to bed, the third day she voyded thin
blackish vrines. Galen speaks of no further inconvenience to ensue upon the
same, but makes only mention of a certain commotion and agitation of the
humors of the body, joined with a a certain conflict: Of black vrines.
and yet of all sorts of black vrines this thin black is counted the best.
Black vrines may be voyded both in health and also in sickness, History.
especially by way of critical excretion. Iohann. Bell. for comm in lib de vrin.
And first in health let this ensuing history speak.

I cannot well approve of the opinion of Christophorus a Vega, who maintains
that it is altogether impossible that any living in perfect health should void
a black urine: Gal. attrib. p^ 72.
his reason is, because so great a quantity of that humor as may thus color
the urine, can hardly be collected within the veins of an healthful man. But
howsoever in a laudable and healthful constitution of body, it does not so
much abound in the veins as do the other humors, yet is it on the other side
most certain, that this humor does abound in that temperature of body which
is cold and dry, since that from thence the cold and dry constitution takes
its name. And this did I my self observe in a certain Monk of the order of
the Carmes, and Spaniard by nation, of the coldest and driest constitution of
body that ever I did yet know, who for the space of six whole years, during
his abode here with us, and that in perfect good health, made always a black
urine: and being yet further demanded of us concerning the continuance of it,
did confidently affirm unto us, that so had he done the whole course of his
life. And why not? May not a black and melancholicke blood, supplying the
place of the haemorrhoides or piles, being expelled by urine, dye the same with
the aforesaid color? As also the like excretion of urine so colored has been
observed in one Tardanellus and Italian, who did all his life time (living
notwithstanding in perfect health) continually void such an urine. Neither yet
is it without reason, that the noisome humor is so scoured away, to the end
that the state and constitution of the body, composed of, and cherished by such
an humor, may be preserved sound and in perfect health.

I did once see a Knights urine of a very black color, Another.
who notwithstanding, Guil. Adolph. ^cribon. lib. de ^rinar. inspect.
was not sick at all, and much less in danger of death. Again a little
after. There was also a young scholar, who being free from any disease, voyded
sometimes urine of so black a celour, that whosoever did see it, did suppose
it to be ink.

The story of Actuarius his servant, Actuar. lib. 2. cap. 20. de iudie. ^rin.
does also confirm, that in perfect health the urine may be died with a black
inkie color without any further danger, as it came to pass in this party,
whose urine after the drinking of a medicine against melancholy, at first was
of a blackish color like unto ink, coming afterward to a bluish, and at
last to its own natural color again.

I was my self very familiarly acquainted with a reverend and grave Divine,
Another.
who lived sometime in this town of Northampton, who did at diverse times, yet
living in perfect health, void great abundance of black urine. And yet a long
time before his death, nor yet during the time of his sickness, I never knew
him void any of that color.

That this black urine may prove a critical excretion, Black vrines
critical in diverse diseases.
not in acute diseases, but even in such as are not partakers of that violence;
as in diseases of the spleen and kidneyes, cannot be denied, Thomas a Vega
comm. ad lib. 6. Gal. de loc. affact. page 342.
etc. But I produce my authorities. We must not unadvisedly and without any
limitation, iump with the judgment of Galen in condemning of black vrines.
For howsoever he did never perhaps see any saved after the voyding of such an
urine, yet have diverse other of no small note and fame since his time seen
and observed the same: for the which cause it ought not so much to be
condemned; nay not if thou would even tie thine assertion to acute diseases:
yea though thou should yet further suppose many other bad and dangerous
signs to concur with the same. For besides Rhases, Auicenna, and Actuarius,
Hippocrates himself, in his epidemicall histories, did observe, that some with
such vrines did recover. The urine therefore may be often of that color
without any imminent danger to the patient, and that upon the taking of any
meat, drink, or medicine, of a black color, and perhaps endued with a
diureticall quality; concerning which there is a pretty story in Actuarius.
It proves also often a critical excretion in Quartane agues, in diseases of
the spleen, as also in the suppression of women's menstruous fluxes, and of the
Hemorthoides or piles in both sexes. And yet moreover according to the mind of
Auicenna, it cures sometimes feauers of long continuance, whether they take
their denomination from the day or from the night. Nocturnae (...) diurnae
febre.
And yet further, in some infirmities of the kidneyes, or yet a stone congealed
in the bladder, the urine sometimes presents it self in the foresaid habit
and color. And finally, it does sometimes presage the happy issue and event
of feauers by bleeding at the nose or sweating. Since therefore sometimes it is
a foretunner of extreme danger, to wit, when it does proceed from extreme hear
or cold, and sometimes again secure and without any danger at all, Rhases and
Auicenna do thus accord them. If the foresaid urine be voyded in a great
quantity and thin, succeeding a clear and waterish urine, as also if ease
and alleuiation do follow upon the voyding thereof, it does presage nothing but
good: and on the contrary, without the foresaid circumstances, a black urine
is very dangerous; and in the stoppage of women's monthly disease, it is an
usual and accustomed, howbeit not a perpetual and certain sign. But now I
will instance in some histories the proof of these critical euacuations.

I am very familiarly acquainted with a Church man, Another.
who ordinarily three or four times a year complains of the swelling of his
spleen to an excessive bigness, Anton. Valet exercit. 40 ad Holler. de morb.
intern.
especially toward the Spring and Fall: and upon the approaching of the
foresaid disease, then does he complain of great grief and pain in his
sides, his body becoming all over of a leaden color, and in this case daily
waxing worse and worse, until at length by voyding abundance of urine black
like unto ink, and that during the space of six or seven days, the foresaid
swelling, as also his great pain vanishing quite away, he recovered again his
wonted and accustomed health. It is now twelve, if not fifteen years since he
was first acquainted with this critical excretion by urine, having before that
time been troubled with the piles or hemorrhoides, which notwithstanding did
yield but little matter.

I have of mine own experience observed (says the learned Laurentius) such as
have been troubled with the Spleen, Another.
by means of a plentiful euacuation by black urine to have been cured. Andr.
Laurent. anat. lib. 1. quaest. 38.
Now it is also to be observed, that such vrines were black, not by
generation, by reason that such vrines in Hippocrates his Prognost. Praedict.
and Aphorism, are always deadly. For such vrines do show forth and declare,
either an extraordinary great parching heat, or else a total extinction or
overthrowing of natural heat. But these vrines were black by permixtion of a
melancholicke humor, the which the Spleen did send forth through the kidneyes
into the bladder.

Howbeit black vrines be by Hippocrates condemned as deadly (says Valeriola)
or at least very dangerous, Francise. Valor. comm. ad libr. Gal. le constit.
art. med. page 355
especially in acute diseases; yet does experience teach us, that this manner
of urine may prove critical in some diseases; as namely, in inflammations, or
inueterate obstructions of the Spleen: as I did my self observe in a young
youth called John Ruffus, Another.
son to our Apothecary Anthony Ruffus, who being once (as was supposed)
ready to yield up the ghost, by reason of an inflammation of the Spleen, did
upon the twentieth day, by way of a crisis, void above twelve wine pints of
urine as black as ink, the which I have often also observed in Quartane agues.

But now I will instance in some agues, and some other infirmities.

Upon a time I went to a Canon who lay sick of a triple Quartane ague, Another.
being troubled also with a scirrhus or hardness both of his Liver and
Spleen, Jacob Douin^^. apol. lib. 3. cap. vlt.
who nevertheless did recover of the foresaid infirmities, and that by means
of thick black urine, together with such fit and proper remedies as are
appropriated to the Spleen, exhibited and applied both outwardly and inwardly.
Syluius has seen diverse who have had every year such fluxes of urine, and
that without any grief or molestation whatsoever.

But I will instance in a Tertian ague, such vrines being more seldom observed
in this disease then in Quartanes and the like: in the which my self being the
patient, I cannot much be mistaken.

After I had continued about the space of two years in France, Another.
and living at that instant in the town of Fontenay le compte, Of a bastard
Tertian in my self.
in the Province of Poictou, about the latter end of July, I was surprised with
a bastard Tertian ague, which thus continuing for the space of three weeks,
yet without any violent accidents, I did at the first contemn. After the
foresaid pace, the enemy assaulting me more fiercely then at first, and that
by redoubling of the former fits, being now of a single Tertian become a
double, I armed my self with such weapons as were fit to encounter with so
furious an adversary. After the use of diverse fit and proper remedies for the
extirpation of the foresaid infirmity, I voyded for the space of three or
four days together great store of thick blackish urine like unto ink, at
the first sight whereof (having read something before in Hippocrates,
concerning the danger of such vrines) I was something afraid; but after more
mature deliberation I rested better satisfied. I remember I had for certain
days together drunk of an infusion wherein was some quantity of Seen leaves,
which as it seems by the attraction of the humor of that color did dye the
urine therewith. Unto this critical excretion was shortly after added another:
to wit, a violent laske, not without the mixture of some blood, which lasted at
least for the space of a full forthnight, and which did at length wast away the
mateer of the disease before the approaching of Winter; howbeit the
imbecillitie of my body was such that I recovered not my full former strength
again until the Spring following.

I gave upon a time to a patient of mine (says Crato) much troubled with the
black laundise, Another.
some Bezoar stone, Iohann. Crato consil. medicin. col. 446. aedit. Hanou. in
fol. 1612.
and after a little while he voided great store of urine as black as ink; by
which means the patient found great ease.

Rhases reports an history of a woman that came to him, who voyded black
vrines, and withal complained much of a pain in her loins, and always upon
the voyding of such an urine she found immediately ease. But after a while she
fell into a night fever accompanied with some shiuering. This woman was of a
melancholicke complexion, whom I perfectly cured by such means as provoke
urine.

The son of Angelus borne at Ancona (as relates Amatus) being but five
years of age, Another.
somewhat fat of body, being, Amatus Lusitanus centar. 5. turat. 54.
as his parents supposed, carefully looked unto both for diet and other things
called not natural; became notwithstanding full of hard scabs, accompanied
with an vlcer-like matter all over his head and neck, and for diverse days
did run great store of this putrid matter from the foresaid sores. But after
a months space, this child voyded abundance of thick black urine for the
space of three days together, not without some acrimonie and sharpness,
accompanied with a pain in his yard, yet without any fever. This child did in
a very short time after recover; neither would I suffer any thing to be applied
to his head for curing of his scabs, which did very shortly heal of it self.
Now this urine proved to be in this child critical for the remouall of this
infirmity.

It may then plainly appear, how little trust we are to repose in these vrines
more then any other, either in sickness or in health; and how easily the
Physician may be deceived, who shall give too much credit thereunto. And who
can tell by the sight of such a black urine only, whether it be critical as
we say, or symptomaticall, denouncing danger in an acute disease? This the
other circumstances, especially the sight of the patient, (whereby thou may
more easily consider of his strength then by the sight of a thousand vrines)
must bring to thy consideration. Mercur. lib. de vrin. cap. 6.
And besides all the premises. Mercuriall mentions out of Rhases and
Auicenna, that if any anoint his body with the juice of the berries of the
herb Halcana, he shall undoubtedly void black vrines. The same Author
affirms, that black urine after great travel end exercise, does
prognosticate a conuulsion, and that a glister made of the decoction only of
high colored red wine, has produced a black urine. And again, out of Rufus
Ephesius, who lived about the time of the Emperor Traian, that black urine,
voyded for a long time together in the time of health, prognosticateth the
ingendring of a stone in the kidneyes. But I proceed now to some other colors
of vrines, which by our Authors are all referred to the former color, and not
much also disagreeing in signification.

Blew vrines, Of blew vrines.
called commonly veneta and caerulea, being as it were a more remiss black,
and not dyed with so great a quantity of that humor, has also diverse
significations. For being thick withal, it signifies that black choler,
proceeding first from yellow choler very adust, does color the urine: or else
so great cold of the inward parts, that they are almost quite mortified. It
signifies moreover, extraodinarie exercise of the body by running. In such as
do recover out of any disease, it is a sign of a laudable crise, especially if
it come in any great quantity: for by this means the a dust parts are voyded
forth. In old men, if such an urine persist long, it argues that the natural
constitution of the bladder is altered and changed by bad and corrupt humors.
In such as are subject to the stone, it is a sign of the approaching of the
Strangurie. The same urine is also sometimes observed to be thin, then
signifying the melting of melancholy, which does but a little color the urine.
And sometimes also it signifies blows and stripes, howbeit not in any violent
or excessive manner, and in such a case it is a laudable and good sign.

As concerning green vrines, Of green vrines.
of them our Physicians commonly make two sorts: one properly so called, and
the other called green oily vrines. As for the first, it signifies according
to our writers, abundance of choler adust, and of a malign quality, and
almost ready to be turned into black, being daily more and more parched and
burnt up. And commonly in the best signification it signifies adustion of the
humors, long continuance and perseverance of the same. And sometimes cold in
extremest degree, as was said before of black, and then is mortal:
especially if leaden color and black follow successively at diverse times,
pulse feeble, with thirst or short breath. Sometimes again a Quotidian ague
and yellow laundise, especially with an ague. And howbeit these vrines often
prove dangerous, yet is not the case always alike: for sometimes this color
may be also seen in found and healthful bodies. 3. de rat. vict. acut.
Galen does willingly confess the same. Choleric people (says he) which
fast long, do oftentimes make green and fiery colored vrines. And that
feeding upon certain kinds of food, may produce such an urine, this ensuing
history may easily declare.

There was a certain Physician, History.
who having fed on some nourishment of that color, Guil. Adolph. Scribon. de
inspect. vrin. prope finem.
did afterward void an urine of the same color, which he sent to another
Physician, to fish out his opinion concerning the same. This other Physician
gave out his verdict concerning the great danger this urine did threaten the
owner. But the other sending him back word again, that upon the feeding on
such and such food it was no uncouth thing for him to void such an urine: and
withal advised him not to pronounce his opinion so peremptorily upon the
color of the urine only.

The other sort of green vrines is a light popiniay green, Of popiniay
green, oily urine.
called also an oily urine: that is, such whose substance is clammie and
thick, as oil or fat molten. It commonly signifies colliquation, and wasting
of the fat within man or woman, as proceeding from excessive heat. And yet
such vrines, if black vrines went before, signifies health at hand. If it
come suddenly and in a short time, it argues the colliquation or wasting of
the kidneyes only. The higher this color is, the worse they commonly hold it.
But I will dwell no longer upon this color, since the uncertainty thereof may
be collected by that which has been said already.

As for ash-colored or leaden colored vrines, Of ash-colored, or leaden
colored vrines.
they have not always one and the same signification more then the former. If
an urine of this color be thick, and green colored urine went before, it
signifies extreme heat an ^^urning: if pale colored urine went before, it
does portend extre a me cold and mortification. This kind of urine may also
proceed from the affluxe of melancholicke humors, or else by reason of great
blows or stripes: and then it may prove a good sign, the expulsive power
expelling such residence toward the bottom. In feauers an urine of this
color without any settling or residence, is a sign of death. But in a burning
fever it does portend a Strangurie. The same causes which did produce blew
vrines, do also bring forth this color, but that in this all things are more
violent. Sometimes such an urine is a sign of the black Iaundise proceeding
from melancholy. But then it portends health, especially if it be voyded in any
great quantity and thick in substance, by reason of the euacuation of such
thick humors. It is then apparent that these colors signify not always one
certain thing, but sometimes quite contrary. For the which cause it is no
marvel if a Physician who should settle his judgment solely thereupon, might
easily be deceived.

CHAP. VI.
The manifold significations of white vrines, as also the great uncertainty of
judgment by the same.
WHite vrines, Of thin white vrines.
as also all other colors, are either very thin and clear, or else thick
in substance, and accompanied often with a copious residence. Thin white
clear vrines like unto fair spring water, have diverse significations, as
witnesses the learned Rondeletius, Rondelet. lib. de vrin. cap. 15.
with whom are joined in judgment the rest of our learned Physicians. And
first of all this urine is sometimes seen in indifferent good health, Their
diverse significations.
and does now and then signify some cruditie of the stomach. Sometimes again
it signifies obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys, which must be
discerned by other signs also: to wit, such as be proper and peculiar to each
part. In old age, as also in long lingering diseases, it argues weakness of
the natural faculties. Some likewise who do void such vrines, are from their
very cradles of a weak and crasie constitution. A thin and clear urine,
made often, and in great abundance, does accompany the disease called Diabete.
In an obscure lurking or lingering fever, it signifies either the Iaundise, or
a resolution or dissolution of the strength. A thin white urine accompanied
with other good signs, does declare the decaying and decreasing of a Quotidian
ague, and if it do long persist, being deprived of any smell, especially if
strength be much decayed, it portendeth either death, or else the long
continuance of the disease. And finally with a burning fever and frenzy,
Forest. obseruat. medic. tomo. 1. lib. 2. schol. ad obseruat. 25. (...).
it is a most deadly sign, as may be seen elsewhere. As concerning the ages,
as they are accounted dangerous in many; so especially in little children, as
may be seen in several places of the works of the famous Hippocrates.
Wherefore we had need to consider many things before we proceed to deliver our
judgment concerning such vrines. If therefore such an urine were brought to
the Physician, whether would he thereby pronounce a weaenesse of the stomach,
Hippcrat. prognost. lib. 2. aph. 30
or obstruction of the Liver, Spleen or Kindneys? And why not a frenzy in a
fever? And howsoever Hippocrates pronounces this to be a most dangerous
urine; yet have I my self often observed the same without any danger to the
party, as I doubt not but so have many more besides my self.

About some eight or nine years ago, History.
there came to me a yeoman of Northamptonshire, bringing with him his urine
which well nigh filled the vrinall, being as clear as any crystal, without
any contents at all, except some few motes, such as they say are found in the
vrines of women with child. And because I did see so great ods betwixt his
complexion and his urine (he bring indifferent well colored in regard of the
urine, howbeit near siftie years of age) not suspecting this urine to be his
own, began to enquire some circumstances concerning the same, as namely the
time of continuance. At length he freely and of his own accord confessed, that
the urine was his own, and that above the space of six years bypast his
urine had not altered nor changed from that I did new see it. He added
moreover, that he felt neither grief nor trouble in his body, as being able
to go about his ordinary employments and works of his calling; that he was
now and then troubled with some wind in his stomach, and that he himself
wondered not a little at the long continuance of his urine after this manner. I
gave him directions against obstructions* and crudities, with somethings for
the strengthening of his stomach, and never since heard any more news of him.

The like urine have I often observed in many other cases, and will instance
but in one: to wit, an hystoricall passion, commonly called the mother.

Some ten years ago I had in cure a young maid, Another.
much molested with that disease which is commonly called the Mother. For four
days together, from twelve of the clock at noone till night, her fits were so
violent and tedious, and the intermissions so short, that both her father and
other friends took (as they thought^) their just leave of her. In her time of
intermission, or rather remission, when she was most sensible of her self, she
voyded almost a chamber pot full at a time of thin clear urine, like unto
spring water, without any manner of contents discernable to the sharpest
eyesight, and this commonly four or five times in an afternoon, and that
during the days of the fouresaid fits. But being afterward freed from this
infirmity, she was likewise freed from the aforementioned accident. Neither
did I ever since that time know her trouble with this disease, save once since
she was married, and yet was nothing in regard of the former extremity.

If any Argus had been there with his hundredth eyes, or yet the sharp sighted
Lynceus himself, where such vrines had been brought in two several vrinals (I
mean the man's last mentioned, and this woman's) they had never been able to
discern any difference betwixt these two vrines: much less then the ignorant
Empiricke, the peticoate or woman-physitian, or the cunningest pisse-prophet
among them all: and if thou will, put in master Parson-practiser to make better
weight. And if any had brought such an urine, so often, in so great quantity,
to any Physician, was there any reason why he should not rather have
coniectured a Diabete, or pissing evil, then any other infirmity? And this I
think may suffice to prove the uncertainty of judgment by thin white
vrines: now something of thick white vrines.

Hippocrates, Of thick white vrines.
in the late alleged place, does include very thick vrines, of whatsoever
color they be, within the same degree of danger. And Galen himself seems to
second this opinion, auerring that the thicker an urine is, the more danger
has he most commonly observed in the same. Rondeletius affirms, that white
vrines which are not transparent, but thick almost like unto milk, do
signify abundance of phlegm, and secondarily worms, the falling sickness,
headache, palsy, conuulsions, great coldness of the natural parts: and
finally, all manner of diseases proceeding from phlegm. If such an urine then
were offered to thy view and consideration, good master vrine-monger, for which
of these diseases would thou give out sentence? There being many more
phlegmatic diseases besides the last rehearsed; and many of them proceeding
from other causes, must by consequent be accompanied with other vrines: yea and
in the same cause the urine may by diverse means not be the same. And these
thick vrines sometimes accompanied with a copious residence, and sometimes
again without the same. I will now proceed to some instances of both, where it
shall appear that sometimes some such vrines are not so dangerous as they are
deemed.

I did see in the Castle of I^rum in the County of Sundoz, History.
a young man about thirty years of age, Nichol. Flerent. sermon. 3. tract. 10.
cap. 21.
who did every day make an urine in great abundance, wherein did settle a white
residence, like unto curdled milk, filling the vrinall half full, howbeit
above the same did swim a small quantity of whitish urine like unto whey. They
young man notwithstanding felt no inconvenience by the same, but still enjoyed
his perfect health.

But a woman voyding the like urine, yet was not blessed with so great a
benefit, which notwithstanding for the strangeness I thought good here to
mention.

In the year (as I remember) 1613. a woman of middle age, Another.
dwelling in the South suburb of Northampton, commonly called Cottonend, sent
me an urine, if so it might be called, which was nothing else, as one would
have judged by the eye, but thick curdled milk, which did very near fill the
vrinall, only on the top of it did swim a little liquor like unto white posset
drink, being not half an inch thick above the foresaid contents. And howbeit
I did twice or thrice see her urine afterward, yet could I never again see
these curdled contents, it being only like the aforesaid white posset drink,
howbeit she had sometimes before voyded such an urine, as I was informed. She
died about two months after: and as it seems, of a consumption and wasting
of the kidneyes and other vrinary passages, as by some signs did appear. And
what if the spermaticall parts did participate with the former? The woman had
lain long languishing, neither was I ever called to see her, and for any thing
I know, had few or no means administered unto her, being but of poor and mean
estate.

A thick and milkie urine has also by others been observed in the
exulceration of the kidneys, A Petro Sphaerorio medico referente Schenck. lib.
3. obseruat. medicin. lib de vrin.
namely in a certain Polonian in the Hospital of the holy Ghost, the which
(says the Author) I often beheld. There are yet other white vrines, the which
howsoever they are to the eye somewhat transparent, some more and some less,
some of them being of a more bright and shining color, drawing near to the
color of molten glass, and some again more dark, and not so transparent a
color, yet may they all most justly be reckoned among the number of thick
white vrines, and that in regard of their tough and slimie substance, which may
easily be both felt and seen to be such. This sort of urine does often argue
great store of crudities, and tough phlegmatic matter, with such diseases as
are engendered of the same: but most commonly diseases of the bladder, as namely
the Strangurie or the Stone, howsoever it comes sometimes otherwise to pass.

I was these years by past (says Schenckius) familiarly acquainted with a
certain Noble man, Another.
now dead, whose name was Vdalrichus, Iohann. Schenck. ibidem.
and brother to George master of the other of the Knights of Germany, called
Ioannitae, being descended of the noble family of Hohenheimes, surnamed
Bombest, who without any hinderance to his health, did oftentimes, yea during
the greatest part of his life time, void a thick muddie urine, and so tough
and ropie, that any might have drawn it an ell long, as if it had been some
glue or birdlime. He never in his life was troubled with the stone, and
himself showed me this urine, offering the same to my trial.

Another voyded by urine a certain matter like unto molten pearls being of a
sine bright color, Another.
of whom Hollerins makes mention, Holler. inter raras obseruat. number. 2.
the same party again voyding a matter of thicker substance much like unto
the white of an egg boiled.

The same Author makes mention in another place of another, Another.
who voyded by urine, Idem schol. ad cap 30 lib. 1. de morb. intern.
not without great pain and torment, little pieces of phlegm, round like
little bullets, clear like unto crystal, clear glass or sine gellie.

An ancient Gentleman and acquaintance of mine dwelling in London, Another.
being at least threescore and ten years of age, at that time 1611. had for a
long time voyded great store of such tough phlegmatic matter, most like unto
birdlime or gellie, and on the top of the same some urine was to be seen of a
dark color, not unlike to transparent horn. His pain was exceeding great,
provoking him almost every minute of an hour to this untimely excretion of his
urine. The counsels of the best Physicians were not wanting, some being of
opinion it was a stone in the bladder, others judging otherwise. My opinion
being demanded, I told him I was not of their opinion, who held that there was
a stone in the bladder, moved hereunto by some probable conjectures. But seeing
him much macerated and weakened by much Physic, exhibited both by the learned
Physician and by the ignorant Empiricke also, my advice was, that he should
abstain from all manner of laxatiue medicines, except it were now and then
some gentle glister or lenitiue to procure the benefit of nature. I appointed
him also fit and convenient diet: and all his Physic was nothing save some
certain Emulsions, as also some Iuleps composed of some syrupes and distilled
waters, most proper and convenient for his disease, and that not for a week or
a month, but for three or four months together. After two months were past
he found sensible ease and alleuiation, but yet much more the next Spring, this
being toward the beginning of Winter: and has since that time scarce ever
complained at all of this so tedious and tormenting infirmity. And this last
Spring his strength spent, and the oil in the lamp failing, being full of
days, paid that debt which admits no bail nor suretiship. This then may
appear that the urine here could give us no assured knowledge of the
certainty of the disease, whether the Stone or strangurie. And thus the
uncertainty of this color, as well as of the rest, cannot be concealed from
the judicious and understanding Reader: whose patience I must yet entreat to
give ear to some things yet to be said concerning the contents of urine:
concerning the which, howbeit here and there, and namely in this last color,
something has been said, yet was not this my principal purpose and intent;
but is as it were thrust in by head and shoulders. Now shall something be said
of set purpose, whereas I will forbear to repeat any thing which has been
said already.

CHAP. VII.
Of the circle or garland, spume and froth, bubbles, smoke or vapor, and fat in
the over most region of the urine, and what certainty from thence can be
collected.
THese contents are most commonly distinguished according to the three regions
of the urine. The ouermost urine, as it claims the first place in the
vrinall, so shall it have here the pre-eminence above the other two. Now as
concerning the circle, Of the circle, ring or garland. Not mentioned by the
ancients.
ring or garland, it has been well observed by some of our late writers, that
neither Hippocrates not yet Galen ever made any mention of them, as being in
their judgments a thing not worth the consideration. Lib* de vrin. cap. 31. de
circulo.
Rondeletius makes Auicenna and Isaac Arabian Physicians, The original of it.
the first founders thereof: howbeit (says he) some do attribute the first
invention of it to the University of Salerna, either perhaps, because since
Actuarius his time they had tried some conclusions by the same, or else did
repose, much trust and confidence in this circle or crown. It is twofold.
Two sorts of these circles or garlands find we mentioned by Actuarius, which
notwithstanding few authors that I have read do remember. The first is that
commonly so called, being nothing else but a certain circle or round line in
the ouermost part of the urine, enuironing it round about like a ring; and is
so called by reason of the roundnesse of the vrinall, the like whereof may be
likewise seen in any other liquor. The other circles or garlands are no such
round rings or circles as have been mentioned, Leo Reganus de differ. vrin.
lib. 1. cap. vlt.
but only some ouermost parts of the urine which swim in the liquor of the
same, and for the same reason, of the roundnesse of the vrinall, called crowns
or garlands. Of the former of the two do our Physicians most commonly make
mention, and many things do many men prognosticate by the same, Posteriores
eiusdem (coronae) iuditia subiecerunt veteribus non vsitata, and in quibus
iustae saepe causae desiderantur: verum vt scenae inseruiamus eadem iudicia
subdere placet.
which nevertheless some of their chief ringleaders and vpholders do in a
manner confess to be but a nouelty, not practiced by the learned ancient
Physicians: and yet lest they should seem to control the inueterate and
common received custom, they must needs say something as well as their
neighbors. Hence have we the proportion betwixt the regions of the body of
man, and the regions of the urine violently thrust upon us; and as they will
have the other parts of the urine answerable to the rest of the parts of the
body; so must the crown or garland answer proportionably to the head, or some
part of it at least. Villich. de probat vrin. part. 4. cap. 39.
And not with this content, they ascribe several colors of these circles, not
to several humors only, but to several parts of the head also; sometimes to
the right, sometimes to the left: and again sometimes to the hinder part, and
sometimes to the fore part; diuing sometimes into the very ventricles or
inward concauities thereof. And yet to discern these circles or garlands
aright, a sharp and very quick sight is very requisite. Moreover, may not
thine own sight, together with the quality or quantity of the light, the
diverse manners of situation of the vrinall, one or all of these, easily alter
the color of this thy circle, making it appear sometimes of one, sometimes of
another color? Besides, these circles or garlands are supposed to be seen in
such vrines only as are not of one color, and the ouermost part thinner then
the other. On the several significations of the supposed several colors
thereof, with their proportions to the humors of the head, if I should
particularly insist, and confute them, as some might perhaps expect, I think
it would prove but a needless and superfluous labor, the thing being so idle
in it self, and of so small account. Loco proxime citato.
The learned Rondeletius, I am sure, made but small account of them, and where
he mentions them, whatsoever he says is but the relation of the opinions of
others, most of which he does afterward confute. His manner of speech
intimates no less unto us in these words following.

Wherefore we shall pronounce that a red circle (if it signify any thing at
all) does signify abundance of blood in the whole head, etc. Another learned
author lately mentioned, Idem Reganus de prouid. ex vrinis lib. 3. cap. 8.
would also willingly have them banished out of all the Hippocraticall
commonwealth, in these words following: But perhaps in vain do I labor to
root out this so inueterate and inbred opinion (meaning concerning froth,
spume and bubbles) out of the minds of our ordinary Physicians. The like may I
say concerning the crowns or garlands in vrines, the opinion whereof has now
almost so deeply possessed every man's mind. It is most certain that Actuarius
himself never did prognosticate any such thing by this circle or line
compassing round about the ouermost part of the urine, having only brought it
in, to the end he might prognosticate by the bubbles when as they do appear in
it. And who is so blind, that does not see how ridiculous a thing it is to
prognosticate by a certain circle or roundring, which may be as well observed
in any other round vessel filled with any liquor, Idem lib. 2. de cause. vrin.
cap. 9.
as in an vrinall? As concerning that crown or garland which is the
superficies or ouermost part of the urine, which Actuarius seems to have
borrowed from Hippocrates, we have by the authorities of Galen, already
rejected. Wherefore in my opinion these crowns and garlands shall be banished
far from vrines. So far our author. It is not also unlikely, that if they
had been of such use and necessity, but Hirpocrates or Galen would have
mentioned them; together with their several uses in Physic, they both being
so curious in searching out the several significations of this sign. If any
will yet object, that our modern Physicians have added many things to former
inventions; I could reply, it is true indeed, and might well come to pass in
such things as never did present themselves to their senses, or else in such
things whereof they had no experimental knowledge: but I suppose they were as
eagle eyed in Asia and other parts, and could see as far into a millstone as
any of our late Europaean Physicians. And this shall now suffice concerning
circles or garlands, we now proceed to the rest.

Bubbles, Of bubbles, spume or froth.
spume, or froth, are all accounted to proceed from one and the same cause,
differing in some circumstances only. Now if we shall narrowly observe and
mark what can be said of them, we shall find no less uncertainty in the
predictions by them, Idem lib. 2. de cause. vrin. cap. 9.
then in the former. Actuarius (says our above named author) makes mention of
many things concerning this matter which neither Galen nor Hippocrates have
observed, and that in my opinion (says he) because they were not worth the
observing. And again a little after: Such things as Actuarius has set down
concerning the spumes and bubbles, are nothing to be regarded. For who sees
not, that as well the spume as the bubbles stay longer in the crown or garland
of the urine, and in the middle part of the superficies or ouermost part they
are sooner dissolved. For the case is not here alike as in the garland, where
the solid body of the vrinall is an occasion that they stick longer and more
firmly to the same. And this not in urine only, but in any other liquor in
like manner may easily be observed, to wit, that such froth and bubbles do
longer persist in the circle joining to the vessel then in the rest of the
ouermost part of the same, etc. This foundation then being rotten, the rest of
the building must needs fall to the ground. They tell us in the first place
that bubbles which stand round about over the garland only, and continue
without parting, if they be of the same color the urine is of, they declare
that there is great pain in all the parts of the head. But if they occupy
only the one half of the garland, then is that pain in one half of the
head. But I assure thee, such bubbles may be seen, and thou not able to
discern whether the wind be in the head or tail. And besides thou may
sometimes find a good fellow who could quickly fill a baggepipe with his bum,
and yet in his urine see neither bubble nor any other such babble. See before
in the beginning.
But concerning the uncertainty of these things, something has been said
already in another place, whereas mention was made of the regions of the urine
answering to the parts of man's body, which was proved most false. It is
granted, that sometimes these bubbles do not appear at the first in the
beginning of the disease, howbeit after a while they begin to show themselves:
and then is it an argument that nature waxes strong to concoct and overcome
the bad humors. In feauers therefore such do signify the declining or
decaying of the same. But if they have been from the beginning still so
continuing, then is the danger greater, howbeit better with a thick then with
a thin urine. Now put the case that in an urine brought to thee from afar
thou might discern some such bubble or froth, yet how shall thou be able to
discern whether any were in the urine at the beginning of the disease, or no?
The messenger for the most part can tell thee no more then the ground he goes
on: and it may be, that neither the patient nor any about him are able to
observe such nice curiosities, as often not observing matters of greater
moment. But put yet the case thou could discern some headache by the
aforesaid contents, how shall thou ever be able to discern whether (...) come,
as we say, per sympathiam, by consent from the nether parts (which is most
common) or per idiopathiam: that is, be primarily seated in the head? And if
thou know not this, thy knowledge is to small purpose, the cure differing
according to the several causes. Of this the patient will give thee better
satisfaction then a thousand vrines. If bubbles do appear in the urine (says
Reusner) together with the signs of defluxion or distillation of humors,
Schol. in cap. 30. part. 4. Iodo^^ Willich. de probat vrinar.
especially if a fever be therewith conjoined, they do portenda Pleuresie, as
also the Gout: and great store of spume or froth appearing in the urine without
the shaking of it, besides wind in general, it does presage that the wind
collicke threatens such a party. The same Reusner affirms, that Rhases
writes, that round bubbles do prognosticate bleeding at the nose; and that
such as be of a color yellow like saffron with a little whiteness, do portend
some infirmity of the Lungs. But I believe he were a cunning Physician, that
could tell or name the disease by the urine only. Comment. 3* libr^ prorrh.
Again these frothie vrines according to Galen, do signify a certain melting
or wasting away of the body, or an unequal perturbation of the same by reason
of some windiness: the first of these being dangerous, but not so the other,
but rather prognosticating the long continuance of the disease. Such frothie
vrines with some bubbles are to be seen in fevers proceeding from the
abundance of crude or raw humors. And not so only, but in the infirmities of
the kidneyes also; Hippocrates in his Aphorisms affirming, Aph. 34. sect. 7.
that such vrines do both signify infirmities of the kidneyes, and the long
continuance of the disease. Sauonarola de vrin. cap. 3. rubr. 17.
But from the froth we come to the smoke or vapor in the urine, of the which an
Italian Physician makes mention; as is forced to be beholden to the Arabians
for the same.

Smoke or vapor (says he) is sometimes to be seen in the urine, Of smoke or
vapor in the urine.
and cannot be by every one conceived. It is engendered, sometimes of a thick
adust matter; and then with the continuance of strength signifies the long
continuance of the disease: sometimes of an hot adust matter, and with the
decaying of strength prognosticateth death: sometimes also of raw phlegm
somewhat adust, and signifies the prolonging of the disease. And if it
continue all the time of the disease, it portendeth death, or raw phlegm;
which may be discerned from matter by the stinking smell. But because our sight
is not so sharp in this Island, we will leave these smokie vrines to the sharp
sighted Italians and Arabians. But if any such smokie stuff be found in any
English vrines, it must needs be best observed in our common Tobacconists,
whose vrines it is a marvel that they are not wholly converted into smoke. But
of this frothie and smokie stuff sufficient, this being likewise so idle an
opinion, that of its own accord it vanishes away into smoke: howbeit I
thought good to acquaint the Reader with all the hid mystery of the imposture,
and abuses concerning vrines. But now something concerning the fat swimming on
the top of vrines.

Such vrines have this fat swimming on the top, Of fat swimming on the top of
vrines.
sometimes in a greater, and sometimes in a smaller quantity: and sometimes
again like oil, and sometimes also covering all the ouermost part of the
urine, like a spiders web. These fat vrines also signify sometimes a wasting
of the whole body, if there be a fever joined with the same; or of the
kidneyes only, if without it. Gal. Comm. 3. in lib. 3. epid.
This fever is sometimes very speedy and swift in operation, wasting suddenly
not the fat only, but the solid substance of the body also; called therefore
by our Physicians, Febris colliquans; and such are often Pestilentiall feauers.
It is again sometimes an Hecticke, which ends in a Marasme, unless it be
first prevented. But how shall one be able by the bare sight of the urine
only, to discern all these several circumstances and differences? De prouid.
ex vrinis lib. 3. cap. 6.
But this is yet worth the observing (says Roganus) that when as these wasting
or consuming feauers have welnigh wasted away the whole body, then are no more
such wasting excretions, which he calls syntectica excrementa, either fat
vrines or faecall excrements to be seen. For the fleshie parts being hardened
and dried up, that which melts and wastes away falls now no more into the
guts or the passages of the urine, Lib. 1. meth. med. cap. vlt.
but passes away like a vapor. This Galen sets down by a very pretty and
pertinent comparison, taken from flesh broyled on a gridiron. Now if any one
should conceive some better hope by reason that this fat matter did no more
appear, should he not miss the mark, the case being now far more dangerous
then before? Guil. Adolph. Scrib. de inspect. vrinar. prope finem.
The words of Scribonius make not a little to clear this point in hand. By
these fat vrines (says he) some do teach us that we may easily discern and
know all the kinds of a fever Hecticke, by reason it signifies a wasting and
melting of the parts of the body. 3. de praesagit. ex pulls.
But whatsoever reason we render of the same, Galen notwithstanding in express
words affirms; that the urine of such as are surprised with a fever Hecticke
has no certain signification. Experience also does teach us, that some being
of a choleric constitution of body, as also such as have eaten fat meats, or
have fat kidneyes, use often to make fat vrines. What reason is there then to
pronounce either a fever Hecticke, or yet any wasting or consumption thereby?
This is not erroneous only, but full oftemeritie also. The truth of this
assertion may also in this more plainly appear, that many have dyed of such
consumption and wasting, who never, notwithstanding had any fat swim on their
vrines. Sometimes it has been also observed, that the vessel wherein the
urine has been carried to the Physician, has before contained either oil or
some other fat matter, which has by this means been communicated to the
urine. It is therefore the Physicians part diligently to enquire concerning all
the circumstances of the disease, and not by the inspection of the urine only
peremptorily to pronounce any thing. Thus far our author. Many of my friends
and patients have voyded vrines with this fat like a spiders web floting on the
top for diverse years together, and yet were never subject to any consumption
or wasting, either in the whole body or their kidneyes. And how easily one may
be deceived in these fat vrines, may by this which follows appear.

It is not yet full three years since I had under my cure in Northampton town
a country woman diseased of that infirmity which we call Lienteria, History.
or the flux of the stomach, whom one day visiting, and viewing her urine, I
perceived some fat like unto some drops of oil swim on the top of it, which
was again the next day after to be seen after the same manner: (...)
she then seeing me narrowly view the same, told me that the urine was
unadvisedly made both the days in a vessel wherein some oil had before been
contained. What then if such an urine had been brought out of the country,
either to my self, or yet to any other Physician, without any further
information? But we proceed now to the rest.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the cloud, swim or sublimation, together with diverse sorts of grounds or
residences, and the uncertainty of their significations.
IN the first place we are to observe, All vrines are not accompanied with
contents.
that all vrines are not accompanied with contents, but many deprived of them;
which may proceed from diverse causes. As namely, in case of cruditie, and the
concoction being good, yet may some obstruction hinder any contents to pass.
And may proceed from diverse causes.
The like may be by fasting procured, and want of food, which may also make the
urine of an higher color. The inflammation of any part of the body, by
drawing of the humors thither, may produce the like effect. In lasks also or
fluxes of the belly, as the urine shall be the lesser, so shall the contents
be few or none at all. Some certain constitutions also gather no setlings in
their vrines: and such as are in present health, and eat much, have a more
copious residence, and in Winter it does more abound then in Summer. Laborious
and very painful people may also have little or no contents at all in their
vrines. The time of the sickness in which this comes to pass, is also
narrowly to be observed: for in the beginning and increase of acute diseases,
then this want of contents argues great defect of natural strength and
vigor. In the declining of the disease it is not a messenger of so bad news,
yea although it were in the vigor and strength of it. And moreover that many
diseases are brought to a happy and expected issue without any contents at
all, is no uncouth thing. What certainty then can be collected, either by the
presence or yet by the absence of the contents? Now howbeit heretofore some
contents on the top of the urine have been mentioned, yet are these last
mentioned, most commonly and constantly to be seen ordinarily in vrines; and
therefore are more properly called contents, and so to be understood by that
name. Now all these three, cloud, swim, and grounds, have one and the same
material cause, and their generation is also alike, differing only in place
and situation, according to the weight of the matter and the concoction of the
disease. When the disease is yet crude and not concocted, yet in some
forwardness thereunto, then appears that which is commonly called a cloud,
The cloud.
for the proportion and analogy it seems to have with the clouds of the
air. When the disease is yet in a better forwardness, then is to be seen in
the urine, that which is commonly called the swim or sublimation, The swim.
hanging as it were betwixt the ouermost and neathermost region of the urine.
But when nature has now gotten the upper hand of the disease, The ground.
then does this which we call ground, settle to the bottom of the vrinall. My
purpose is not here to enter into a large discourse concerning the engendring
of this substance, and far less yet the controversies about the same, which
I leave to be discussed in the schools, my intent here being only to discover
the uncertainty of judgment which these contents do afford us. Now when thou
see the cloud, swim, or residence, what can thou pronounce but some
general and indefinite verdict concerning the cruditie or concoction of the
disease? but what this thy disease is, thy urine will never reveal unto thee,
nor any of the rest of the signs and circumstances to be observed in diseases.
And howsoever the material cause of all these three be one and the same,
differing only in circumstances, yet may sometimes the one be without the
other. Whersoeuer there is a swim (says Scribonius) there is also a ground or
residence, Lo^o proxime citato.
which may also be understood of a cloud: howbeit the ground may be without the
former: to wit, if it do not contain such a flatuous matter as raises the
same up, according to the testimony of Galen. Moreover, the best and most
healthful urine is accounted such as has no such cloud nor swim in it, as
witnesses the same Galen. 2. Prorrh. 1. and 2. in 6. epid. 37.
And moreover, if they be present, the judgment by them is yet uncertain. For
who can tell whether this comes to pass by way of crisis or otherwise,
unless he weigh in the balance diverse other circumstances, according to the
which critical days are accustomed to be tried. Several times to be assigned
for the settling of urine.
And besides the premises, all vrines do not suddenly settle, and they assign
us several times for the urine to settle in: some assign us half an hour,
some the sixth part of an hour, etc. But better it were when they are settled,
then to give out our judgment of them. For I have often let vrines stand by
me, and could see no settling till the next day. Now what could thou have
judged of such an urine the first day, especially if the messenger, according
to the common custom, had hyed him home? What could thou have said
concerning the same? And yet is this a case which comes not seldom to pass.
Moreover, these contents do sometimes suddenly vanish away, and that after an
hour or two after the voyding of the urine. I^ may then plainly, Et ex his
pr^inde vniuersis optime facillimeque intel^igi p^sse opin^r, ^uantu^ fucus,
^^anta deceptio, ^uanta denique malignitas, sit omnium illorum qui absque alijs
coiudicantibus vllis nude and simpliciter ex allata sibi vrina aliquas corporis
male affecti causas and originem, subiecta, adiuncta and sic deinceps, vel
exploratissime se cognoscere posse autumant. Idem. S^ribon. ibid.
by the premises, appear (says the same Author) what counterfetting iuggling
and deceit they use, and how wicked their practice is, who without any other
coiudicant signs, do by the vrines only, give out sentence concerning the
infirmities of the body of man, their causes and beginning, their subjects
adjuncts, etc. Now something concerning the several sorts of grounds or
contents in the urine, must likewise be said, that the errors and impostures
in this point, as well as in other parts of the urine, may be laid open to the
capacity of the most ignorant.

As in the colors, therefore so in the contents, we will begin with the best
of all others. That then is ^^^unted the best sediment, settling, or ground,
which is white, duly knit and stable, and that continually all the time of the
sickness: and that which declineth from the foresaid laudable conditions, is
accounted worse, and that so much the more as it does decline from them. It is
generally agreed upon among Physicians, that great store of yellow grounds
argues great store of yellow choler in the body; and the lighter colored it
be, it argues the less, the higher colored the greater excess. Now besides
that thou can not tell what particular disease proceeding from choler (there
being diverse) it may signify, Of yellow contents or grounds
as whether an Ague, or some other disease: and again, if an Ague, of what
sort or kind, continual or intermittent: so much less art thou able to tell
the time of it, which notwithstanding makes not a little to inform thy
judgment concerning the urine. For if at the first there be either small
quantity of choler, or yet none at all, and then it after increase abundantly,
which is known by changing from a white thin to a saffron colored ground) it
is a sign and token that nature does unburden it self of this heavy ballast
of choler, and so consequently that health is like shortly to ensue. But if
after a saffron color it change to a white, it is a bad sign, especially
without signs of concoction: for the which cause it will be requisite that
thou observe the several alterations of the urine, and then be well acquainted
with the state and nature of the disease of the patient. The like may be said
of red residence, Red residence.
the which in the beginning of diseases does not portend any good, and that by
reason it argues great store of cruditie, which hinders the concoction of
the blood; and such are commonly seen in bastard Tertian and Quotidian Agues.
But yet such Fevers as are incident to Plethoricall and Carechymicall
constitutions, oppressed with abundance of blood and bad humors, if they
attain to their expected issue, must needs be accompanied with such or the
like residence. The bare inspection of the urine only will never acquaint thee
with the particular. Sometimes both the aforementioned contents are to be
seen in one and the same urine, which is sometimes deadly, and sometimes
again proves a forerunner of safety and ^^^uritie: I will instance in two
examples of mine own experience, to make the truth of this appear.

About some three years ago, History.
or a little above, a young Gentleman in the country, to mine own knowledge,
voyded such an urine for a quarter of a year together, and by appearance had
so continued long before my sight of the same: and yet notwithstanding all the
euacuations were used, it continued so more or less until his dying day. His
disease was a Dropsy, and with the same was joined the yellow Iaundise, which
did outwardly show it self to the view of the eye. His Liver hot, and the
whole constitution of his body participating of the same distemper.

But in the year 1613. Another.
a woman of Northampton of good account, being with child, voyded an urine with
the like residence, and that for as long a time at least, and yet did their
diseases far differ. For besides her being with a live child (for until that
time was not my counsel craved) she was for a many weeks together never free
from a Tertian, Quotidian, or both agues conjoined: the which were accompanied
with a continual cough, proceeding from a thin salt rheum, with spitting of
blood, reaching and casting, as also a great laske, all which accidents, or the
most of them, did not forsake her till near the time of her delivery.
Phlebotomie for diverse considerations I durst not then attempt. Other
euacuations, both upwards and downwards, came in greater abundance then was
wished. It was now deeply imprinted, not in her own only, but in the
conceits of her neighbors and others also of good understanding, that (in
regard of her spitting of blood) she was now far spent in an irrecouerable
consumption. Upon the relation of others I inclined to the same opinion. But at
my first sight of her, together with the sight of the blood she spat up I
changed my opinion. And so, God adding his blessing to the means she used by
my directions, she brought forth at the time appointed, a live manchild, which
nevertheless lived not above the space of a month. The mother two or three
days after her delivery was surprised with the Measels, and afterward
recovered her health again, the which at this present day she yet enjoys.

Here was no Dropsy at all, nor yet could I ever perceive any sign of a hot
Liver, and the matter of the Iaundise was voyded both by stool and urine. It
may then plainly appear, how far the diseases may sometimes differ, the
residence being still alike in two several bodies, sexes* etc.

As concerning bloody residence, Bloody residence, and the several causes of
the same.
as was before said of bloody urine, it may come either of abundance of blood
in a plethoricall body, or else by weakness of the retentiue power, and of the
Liver; the which rightly to discern, we must be acquainted with diverse other
circumstances, which the urine can never make known. It has been likewise
already related, that sometimes great quantity of blood it self has been
voyded without any danger: and sometimes again after the voyding of a very
small quantity thereof, death has not long deferred his approaches.

In the year 1614. History.
about the beginning of January, my counsel was demanded for a Gentleman
dwelling near Northampton, about fifty years of age or upwards. In his urine
at my first coming at him, was to be seen great store of yellowish contents,
cleaving to the bottom of the vrinall, wherewith were intermingled some red
streakes of blood. And howbeit I often earnestly entreated him to admit of
Phlebotomie, as the only remedy to prevent a greater inconvenience, yet could
I not prevail, until such time as blood now issuing out in great abundance,
both upwards and downwards, his strength now decaying, and hairy irrecouerable
occasion over past, with a too late repentance, he would willingly have paid a
good fine for the renewing of the lease of his life, but all too late.

As concerning white, See somewhat in the colors heretofore.
black, leaden, or ash-colored; as also green and blew contents, the
uncertainty of these may be in some sort collected from that we have already
said of such vrines, and many other matters I willingly pass by, and hasten to
the rest: to wit, diverse other sorts of residences or strange contents, called
by some, difforme contents.

Purulent or mattery residence, Purulent or matterie residence.
does much resemble a white residence or ground, which is so much commended for
the best of all others; and therefore requires some judgment to discern the
one from the other: and yet is there a crude and unconcocted residence not
unlike this purulent matter to be seen, as well in whole as in sick bodies.
This purulent or mattery residence, again proceeds either from the kidneyes
or the bladder, as is most commonly received. But hear what the learned
Hollerius says concerning the same. Schol. ad cap. 50. lib. 1. de morb. intern.


Neither yet does this mattery stuff always proceed from the kidneys or
bladder. For it proceeds almost from every part of the upper region of the
body, by the great and admirable industry of nature, and by means of the body
every where made passable for such a purpose, does disburden it self sometimes
into the guts, and sometimes again into the bladder. History.
A certain woman voyded, not without great pain and torment, such purulent
and mattery vrines, who four months after dyed, and the dead corpse being
opened, two stones were found in her heart, with many little impostumes, the
kidneyes, together with the other vrinary passages, being free from any other
hurt.

Galen (says Ro^deletius) did see an impostume of the Lungs purged by urine,
Lib. de vrin. cap. 38.
by means of the emulgent or sucking arteries. The gibbons or back part of
the Liver, the kidneyes, bladder and yard, make use of the same passage. Now
which of these places are affected, the grief and tumor of the part gives us
notice, and not the urine only.

Now red Vetches or Fitches in the residence, Red vetches or fitches.
called therefore Hypostasis orobea, or eruarea, are recorded by our Authors,
to signify either great inflammation of the Liver, or colliquation of the
whole body, or of the kidneyes only. And so branny contents, Brannie and
sealie contents.
signify sometimes consumption of the whole body, or of the bladder only with
concoction, no Ague; and great heat wasting the substance of the Liver, and
burning the blood if it be red. So do fine branny contents signify a
collequation or wasting of the solid parts: sharp sickness, and for the most
part mortal, and some add yet that it is sometimes seen in the vrines of
women with child. And if this residence be red, they attribute it to extreme
adustion of the blood. Scales.
Scales, called Lamine, Squame, differ not much in signification.

To Hairs or small filaments in the urine, Hairs in the urine.
are attributed also diverse significations: as namely, a consumption of the
whole body, a Fever then being joined therewith, or else of the kidneyes only,
Comm. 1. ad aph. 76. sect. 4.
and then is no Fever to be seen. They are according to Galen, engendered of a
tough Phlegm, proceeding from the use of gross diet. Sometimes also they are
said to signify exulceration of the reins or bladder: and sometimes also
flux of seed from several causes. And finally, women's white flux, from the
matrixe or womb. Galen is of opinion, that such contents come never without a
thick urine. But experience has taught us the contrary, Loco proxime supra
citato.
says Hollerius.

A certain man voyded such hairy excrements, with a golden colored urine,
History.
above the space of twenty years, it not being thick, but keeping a mean:
and howbeit his constitution and state of body inclined to choler, yet was he
of a reasonable square and corpulent body. The like comes also to pass in
many others, howbeit to others a thick urine is more frequent.

If the Reader please, Schenck obseruat. medic. lib. 3. tit. de vrina.
he may yet read a strange Story in Schenckius of a great quantity of true
and natural hair, voyded by a woman with her urine for a long time, the which
the Author tried, by burning a parcel of it in the fire.

Sand or gravel in the urine affoordeth us yet no greater certainty. Sandy
or grauelly residence. Aph. 79. sect. 4.
It is recorded by that famous Hippocrates, that in whatsoever urine a grauelly
matter setleth to the bottom, it betokens a stone either in the kidneys, or
in the bladder. It is likely he had most commonly observed it so in the place
where he lived: but we find often the contrary in our climate. I have my self
often observed, both in old age and younger years, such grauelly vrines
without any stone. The wideness of the vrinary passages, as also diureticall
expelling medicines, may be a means of expelling such contents. And this
disease may sometimes be accompanied with a thin urine without any gravel at
all, as in the obstruction of the aforesaid passages. The Physician being
present, is often encombred, notwithstanding the concurrence of all the signs
together, to discern a stone from some other disease, as has heretofore
appeared: what certainty then can be expected from the sole deceitful sign
of the urine?

The Admiral Annebault (says Hollerius) being much tormented in making his
urine for the space of eight months together, History. Ibidem.
both P^ysitians and Surgeons being in doubt whether there were a stone in the
bladder or no, at length it was concluded to make incision for the stone. No
stone notwithstanding was found, but a lump of flesh grown to the neck of
the bladder, hindering the free passage of the urine, which was cured by
convenient remedies, and the patient restored to his former health again.

Some also are of opinion, Flesher.
it signifies adustion of humors, as in diseases coming of choler, such as be
burning Agues, Tertian Agues, single and compound, and sometimes in diseases of
melancholy, as Quartaine agues long continuing. Likewise the Gout, pain of
the joints and reins, Leprosy, French pox confirmed, Emeraudes,
costiuenesse, and heat of the Liver: if there be no pain nor heaviness about
the reins.

But besides all the former contents, Worms rejected by urine.
worms have sometimes been voyded by the urine, the which because it may seem
some thing strange, therefore I will walk with my guides. Rondeletius makes
it plain. Rondel. de vrinis, cap. 38.
Gilbert Griphon first of all showed me worms in the urine when I was but yet
young, who was also the chief inciter of me to this profession. The worms
might be seen to move without any motion of the urine. Montuus. Idem Rondel.
lib. de morb. cognos. cap. 17.
Again. I have seen worms in the urine as large as Gourd seeds, flat and
alive. Argenterius has seen the form of a winged Dragon come forth with the
urine. The history also annexed to the foresaid Rondeletius his Tractate of
vrines, Historia Didymi Obrechti ad finem libri Rondel. de vrinis adiecta.
of four worms voyded by urine at two several times, do plainly witness the
same. His countreyman Hollerius makes also mention of one Beaucler a
Counselor, who after great pain in the kidneys, voyded a great worm. Loco
iam supra citato.
And of another, who after the voyding of some stones and grauelly matter,
voyded two evil favored worms.

The same Author again. Ibidem.
One demanded counsel of a Spaniard by letters, and help for one that was
troubled with gravel, who having voyded some stones and much sand, did also
put forth at his yard two little worms, having pointed beckes, two horns
upon the head like a snaile, the back and belly was as it were covered with
scales, black like a Tortoise, but under the belly which was red.

I have wondered to see (says another Author) in mine own urine a great
number of worms, Hieron. Cardan. comm. in aph. 76 lib. 4.
short and little, like unto small lice. Monsieur Duret a Phyisitian has
assured me (says Ambrose Pare) that he did void at his yard, after a long and
grievous sickness, Ambros. Par. Chirurg. lib. 19. cap. 3.
a little beast alive, very strange and wonderful to behold, which was of a
reddish color. Charles Earl of Mansfield being very sick of a continual
Fever, cast forth at his yard a worm of the very form of a black Pie.

Leuinus Lemnius reports that he has seen in the vrines of diverse that
have been sick of the French pox, De occult. not. mirac. lib. 2. cap. 40.
worms like unto Antes.

One being troubled with difficulty of making water (says Schencleius) voyded
by his yard a little live Scorpion. Obseruat. medicin. l. 3. sect. 312.


And as another author affirms, Alexand. Bened. anat. lib. 2. c. 22.
in the bladder of some persons worms do breed, and little beasts like to
Cockles of the sea.

But now would I willingly demand of the cunningest pisseprophet in the
country, what would or could he presage by such a wormie urine? Putrefaction
thou will say, it may be. But of what part, I pray thee? whether in the blood
or the bladder, the stomach or maw, or in the guts? I have often administered
means both to young and old against this disease, even against all the sorts of
worms commonly recorded by our Physicians, yet could I never perceive any in
such persons vrines. And in how many young childrens vrines have they found any
such creatures? But what if such creatures were conveyed from the stomach
through the mesaraicke veins into the great porter vein, and from thence into
the great hollow vein, and so from thence distributed into the rest of the
blood, or else by the kidneyes into the bladder? Iohann* Renodaeus de mat. med.
lib. 3 cap. 33 and antidot. lib. 1. sect. 1. cap. 20. circa finem.
If thou will deny this long and tedious journey, I will again demand of
thee, how come worms into the blood, as may appear by this which follows.

In a certain citizen at Paris, the basilica or Liver vein being opened, in
mine own sight and presence came forth a worm about a spanne long. Motes in
the urine, together with their several significations.
Thus then thou see what certainty may be collected by the sight of worms
in the urine. There are yet sometimes motes to be seen in the urine, which
according to our writers signify diverse things: as namely, putrefaction, as
in the Plague and French pox, being accompanied with stinch. Again great
agitation and commotion of the humors, as in the small pox and measels. They
are said likewise to signify rhewme, the gout, diseases of the mother, and
finally conception. Let the impartial Reader judge what assurance one can
learn from such an urine, concerning the particular circumstances of the
disease.

But we must not yet omit the very dust, Of dust in the urine.
which they will have to signify diverse and sundry matters; and that
according to the several colors of the same, upon the which I will not long
dwell, but yet say something of the black, which may seem to threaten
greatest danger. Such dust falling to the bottom, either black or of a leaden
color, proceeding of melancholy, is thought to signify flux of the
Emeraudes, present, or shortly to follow: and sometimes vomiting of blood. As
also sometimes pain in the reins, loins, etc. and stopping of the Flowers,
and at other times pain and diseases of the Spleen, etc.

In the beginning of the year 1623. my counsel and personal presence was
craved for a Lady in Northamptonshire of good account. History.
In the bottom of the vrinall wherein her urine was put, for certain days
together, some such black dust might be seen; which a grave Divine there
present thought to be so dangerous, that he told me he had seldom seen them
live many days after the sight of such co^tents in their vrines. And howbeit
some strange and troublesome accidents did terrify the spectators who beheld
her with vulgar eyes, yet did her pulse put me in better hope, which was
shortly seconded by a happy and prosperous issue, the Lady recovering her
former health again. Neither heard I any complaint of such things as these
contents are said to signify.

But having now finished both colors and contents, with other things belonging
to this subject, it is perhaps now exspected I should say something of the
manner of pissing, as concerning not a little the matter in hand.

CHAP. IX.
Of the manner of pissing: the retention or stoppage of urine, total or in
part, as also of inuoluntarie pissing, both in sickness and in health.
THe manner of pissing, is either hard and uneasy, or else inuoluntarie. As
for the first, the action is interessed three manner of ways, as witnesses
Hollerius and others. First, there is a great desire to piss, but cannot be
effected without force and hard straining, and sometimes not without pain.
Secondly, there is the like desire, but the urine passes away but by drops.
Thirdly, there is a stoppage or obstruction of the urine, that it is not voyded
at all, or else so little that it is to small purpose. Painful and uneasy
pissing, Of painful and uneasy pissing.
may come to pass, either by the acrimonie and sharpness of the humor, or by
the imbecillitie or weakness of the retentiue faculty, proceeding for the
most part from cold: the which painfulnesse may in like manner be procured by
reason of some inflammation, clotted or congealed blood, Suppression of urine.
an ulcer, a stone, etc. Suppression of urine proceeds from diverse causes:
sometimes by means of the obstruction or stoppage of the guts, and sometimes
again by means of the emulgent or sucking veins: and that again two manner
of ways: to wit, either by reason of the weakness of the drawing or sucking
quality, The several causes of the same.
or else by obstruction. This suppression is likewise procured by the
obstruction or stoppage of the Kidneys and Vrine-pipes, and by means of the
weakness thereof. By reason of the obstruction of the aforesaid passages, it
comes also diverse ways to pass: as either by means of an inflammation,
knob or bunch of either of these parts, or others adjoining: or else by reason
of a stone, clotted or congealed blood, or some tough phlegm impacted and
cleaving fast to the place: as also sometimes, howbeit seldom, by reason of
some holes in the kidneyes, De internor. morb. curat tomo. 3. lib. 4. cap. 12.
and that after the voyding of some stones, as Mercatus has observed.
Suppression of urine is likewise sometimes caused by means of the bladder or
parts thereto adjoining, Suppression of urine by means of the bladder diuerie
ways procured.
it being also thereby interessed. And in the first place, by reason of the
want of the sense of feeling, the sinew descending from the loins and the
hucklebone being loosened. Secondly, by reason of the failing of the expelling
power of the bladder, etc. Thirdly, the exceeding great quantity of urine
distending and stretching out of the bladder, detained longer then is
convenient, may bring this sometimes to pass. Fourthly, the resolution or
looseness of the muscles of the nether belly, which have likewise some
interest in the furtherance of this excretion. Fifthly, by the total overthrow
of the expelling faculty: as we see sometimes come to pass in burning
Feauers, as witnesses Hippocrates. Sixthly, by the defect and fault of the
vrine-pipes, and that diverse manner of ways: for sometimes the muscle which
shuts up the bladder is clinged together by a conuu^sion: the passage is
likewise stopped, either by the means of some tough clammie humors, some
clotted blood, matter, knob or bunch, or any tumor, the outgrowing of some
piece of flesh, some wart or scarre, and finally, by reason of a stone stopping
up the passage by the neck of the bladder. Seventhly, by the consent of the
places adjoining, the bladder and the vrine-pipes are sometimes so shut up,
that they cannot freely deliver the urine, which comes often to pass in
women, by reason of the nearenesse of the womb. Eighthly, by means of a Palsy
or resolution of the bladder. The uncertainty therefore of the urine in
diseases of this nature and kind, may as evidently appear as in any of the
premises. And there being so many causes producing pain and difficulty in
making of urine, to which of them will thou ascribe it? Again, if there be a
retention of the urine, what will thou send to the Physician? And if such an
accident come to the cure of some Empiricke or unskillful Physician, his
conceit will straightway lead him to some stone, and so, according to their
ignorance in this art, exhibit strong diuretickes, or medicines provoking
urine, as I have sometimes observed: Calculus renum rare aut nun quam diuretica
huius aut illius sortis citra damnum admittit, etc.
which are so far from procuring the intended good, that they produce rather
a contrary effect. Of a suppression of urine by means of clotted blood I have
instanced already.

This last Spring a young Gentleman of Leicestershire, Market. Tome. 1. lib. 3.
par. 3. class. 3. quaest. 217.
of good worth, travailing toward London through this Town of Northampton,
History.
was suddenly surprised with a suppression of urine. Being afraid of a stone in
his bladder (howbeit he had never heretofore complained of this infirmity) yet
tried he what the art of Surgerie could do, by means of a Catheter thrust up
through his yard toward the neck of his bladder, together with some other
means, which notwithstanding took no effect. The next morning, about eight of
the clock, I was sent for to the patient, whose belly began to swell, and some
fumes to ascend into his head. By means of a gentle opening inlep, together
with a Cataplasme applied to his share, it pleased God to accomplish his
desires: howbeit a messenger had been already sent away to bring with him an
expert Surgeon to make incision. He voyded that day abundance of urine of a
laudable color, and answerable contents; so that none could find any fault in
the same, and the next day he went forward in his intended journey toward
London.

The passage of the urine in this patient was somewhat narrow, as seems, and
that by reason of some former infirmity; and perhaps some wind gathered in the
great gut might make some compression of the neck of the bladder. Now that
suppression of urine in acute diseases is dangerous, Aphor. 62. lib. 4.
Hippocrates does not deny; other Physicians also have observed it, and my
self not long since, in one who died not long ago. And because this History
for diverse reasons is worth the relating, I will entreat the courteous Reader
that he would be pleased a while to lend his eyes and ears.

This last year 1623. Another.
August the 28. an Alderman of Northampton, a man of good account in this
Corporation, near fifty years of age, subject of late years to a great
pain in his head, and sometimes my patient: riding abroad in his corne-field,
about some three miles off this Town, was suddenly surprised with a chillness
in his legs, and shortly after complained of the like in his back, bones,
and upper parts of his body: upon which occasion he hyed him home, and
imagining it to be some cold, continued ill that night, and the next day and
night following. The Satterday after, and the third day of his disease, by
persuasion of some of his friends, his urine with a letter was carried to a
Parson practiser, dwelling about a dozen of miles hence, one of our chief
Calculators of Natiuities in all the country. The Parson sent backeword, it
was a blind Ague, and withal sends him a vomit, and prescribes Phlebotomie.
The Surgeon being sent for, perceiues a Iaundise, and the patient complains of
some faintness; upon which occasion he refuses to let him blood, wishing his
friends to acquaint the Parson with these occurrents. The Parson repeales his
former sentence, and commends the Surgeon for being so sparing. And indeed he
dealt honestlier then the Parson: for he trusted none but his own eyes, and so
told his mind freely to his friend: but the Parson both saw with other men's
eyes, and heard with other men's ears; and building upon this s^ndy foundation,
sent his Oracle to the absent, which he as easily recalled again upon the
first information, and sends him another Oracle written now in a piece of
paper, and withal sends him an Electuary and Iulep for his laundise, and some
directions for a drink. But let us hear the laudable effects of this vomit.
It wrought upwards effectually, and something downwards: and while the patient
was able to take any sustenance, it returned back by the same way it went in.
And besides, after the operation of this vomit, the Iaundise appeared, a
suppression of urine and ordure, together with a troublesome and tedious
Hicket, which neither day nor night forsook our patient. To the former
accidents was shortly added a difficulty in swallowing, with an extreme
soreness in his mouth, which like a Canker spread it self over all the parts
of the same, with an ulcer (as appeared) in the Almonds or parts adjoining,
which yielded such abundance of white corrupted matter at first, and afterward
colored, as I never did observe the like in every respect. The Parson being
earnestly entreated to afford his patient his presence in this his so great
extremity, no prayers would prevail; but sent him back word, that the
Iaundise now appearing, he hoped the worst was past. The patient seeing
himself forsaken now in his greatest need, having learned by a too late
repentance, that his Parson proved not so trusty a friend as he supposed; Cum
nemini obtrudi potest iturad me. On the Thursday after, about two a clock in
the morning, and the beginning of the eight day since the beginning of his
disease, he sent for me, most earnestly entreating me that I would be pleased
to afford him my presence with what speed I could* I preferring Christian
charity and love of my old friend before any late ingratitude, repair
presently to his house, where I find him in that case I have already related.
Having acquainted his wife and friends with the extreme danger I then found
him in, yet being both by himself, his wife and all his friends earnestly
entreated to do my uttermost endeavor to help him in this extremity, and at
least to ease him of these troublesome accidents; so much by glisters and other
mild means in two days space I prevailed, that most of the aboue-named
accidents vanished quite away: his urine also came in great abundance, of a
laudable color, without any bad contents, and the other egestion observed now
a good and orderly course: the hicket came but seldom, and with small
annoyance. But the pulse played not his part so well as I wished, and the
soreness of his mouth increased so fast, that it began to get ground upon his
lips. The which I then perceiving, as likewise that he was not as yet free from
his Fever, willing to try if Phlebocomie would any thing avail, I gave way
to the using of this remedy. About six ounces of very corrupt blood were
taken from him on Saturday morning, (his nose having made some offer twice or
thrice before, and once after his Phlebotomie) not without alleuiation,
whereupon ensued reasonable good rest the night following. On Sunday morning
was little alteration to be discerned, but that he complained much of
faintness, and yet was bitter able to swallow then before: the soreness of
his mouth began likewise to amend, being duly dressed diverse times of the day:
his hicket also was no more to be heard. Not full two hours after our
departure, Death sends him new summons by some change and alteration to the
worse, which could not be concealed from the most vulgar eye. In the afternoon
visiting him, I found no further hope or encouragement to proceed, and yet
far less on Monday morning, save that I wished them still to continue the
giving of him a Cordial Inlep there in a readiness, and so left visiting him
any more, and he ere nine of the clock at night, obeying Deaths last summons,
discharged that debt which we have yet to pay.

But now Master Parson, our patient resting in peace, I would willingly
expostulate a little concerning your careless (and as I think) irregular and
ignorant proceeding in this business, which concerned no less then a man's
life: the life, I say, not of an ordinary man, but of a magistrate, whom this
corporation could not so well at this time have spared; besides the interest
his wife and children and other friends had in him. In the first place your
Oracle being asked, it answered, His disease was a blind Ague. Raro aut nunquam
eisdem accidentibus and conditionibus insignata apparet huiusmodi febris, sed
pro varietate corporei apparatus and aliarum rerum, quae corpus humanam mutare
habent, variari subinde ipsam contingit. Market. tom. 2. lib. 7. cap. 2.
Of malign Feauers I have both read, and known them possess now and then
some of my patients; but as for blind Agues, we leave them to Parsons that
cannot see. And what be the Pathognomonicke signs of a blind Ague, and what
Authors write of it? The urine told you no such matter, and I dare say, the
messenger was much amazed at so blind an Oracle. But this is no new practice of
your self and others of your cloth, lest you should seem to be ignorant of any
thing, to coin new names for diseases, whereof you are altogether ignorant.
And thus another of your double profession, some few years ago, his judgment
by a Gentleman concerning his disease being demanded, answered, It was a
disease in his spirits. The Gentleman died within a few days after of a
Fever, which took possession of the whole body; and a Physician that came
afterward to him, thought it to be a Squinancie, and that the Parson had
wronged him in deferring Phlebotomie too long, by the which he gave the patient
some ease for the present. If this Parson had ever learned the grounds of
Physic, he could have told that that Fever which we call Ephemera, Gal. 1.
de differ. febr. cap. 1.
not exceeding four and twenty hours, is properly said to be in the spirits,
being commonly free from danger: but if it exceed this term, then turns it
to some other Fever, and so loses the former name. But what remedies were by
you appointed for this patients blind Ague, as it pleases you to call it? If a
blind Ague, it had as blind a remedy, a vomit was exhibited, Phlebotomie
prescribed. As for your vomit, although I never did see it, yet I am not
ignorant of the matter and nature of it. But be what it would, that it was then
unseasonable, I think any of common sense cannot deny. For in the first place
he had not long been sick, neither yet came his sickness by any surfeit, to
induce you at first dash to prescribe him such a vomit before any other
remedy. Again, you ought not to be ignorant, that in most diseases (acute
especially) the appetite fails at first, and yet use we not always to begin
with strong stibiate vomits. But what were the effects of your vomit we have
heard, and the patient fared the worse for it. He was subject to an old pain
in his head, and with this unseasonable vomit the torrent of those sharp and
malign choleric humors wherewith his body abounded, were drawn up toward
the throat, and other parts adjoining: hence had he that exulceration in his
throat and mouth, the hicket, etc. I know your gravity would disdain the
name of an Empiricke, but pardon me good master Parson, this course was too
Empiricall. I wish both your self and some of your brethren to be more
circumspect in exhibiting your vomits. Strong stibiate vomits ordinarily used
by our Parson-practisers in most diseases, and for the most part without the
sight of their patient.
It is too well known in the country, that strong stibiate vomits are used by
many of you, almost in every disease, as some famous Panacaea or Aurum
Potabile, falsely supposed good against all diseases. The other Parson lately
mentioned, within these few years gave two vomits in one day, the one to a
woman dwelling seven miles off this town, who died presently: the other to a
woman of this town of good account, and since my patient, at that time being
big with child, and the vomit wrought with great violence from seven a clock
in the morning till four a clock in the afternoon, and hardly escaped she
the like danger, or abortion at least.

Some few years ago my presence was required for a Gentlewoman at a Knights
house within seven miles of Northampton. History.
Her disease was a Squinancie, and had been before my coming, by the advice of
a neighbor Parson (for such are in most corners of the country to be found)
at least twice Phlebotomised, howbeit without any success, and then had this
cunning Aesculapius left her a stibiat vomit, as his last anchor of hope. At my
coming I found her not able to swallow any thing at all, the drink which she
assayed to swallow coming out at her nostrils again. The Lady asking me
whether she might take the Parsons vomit or no, I replied, it was absurd both
in Si igitur vale^ter etiamnum fluxio irruat, ad contraria reuellere
studebimus: vtique si in superioribus vlcus co^sistat, per inferna purgantes:
sin autem in inferioribus sit, superiorera ventrem purgantes. Gal. Meth. med.
lib. 4.
reason and common sense, and that both in regard it could not descend into the
stomach, as also for fear of attraction of the humor toward the place
affected. In three days space, by means of attractiue glisters, which the
Parson had omitted, and some other means I used, the patient, by Gods help
recovered again her former health. But to our purpose again. The next remedy
by you prescribed was Phlebotomie. I deny not the necessity thereof,
howsoever your prescription was but by aim, as being ignorant of his strength,
wherein the messenger might easily be mistaken, as it often comes to pass.
Within these two years past, I took above fifty ounces of blood from a man
of middle age in this same town, being seized with a burning Fever,
accompanied with a strong deliration, whom his friends supposed to be so weak,
that after I had seen him, and acquainted them with the truth, scarce could I
persuade them to yield to this remedy. And this was performed in a weeks
space, the patient taking nothing in the mean while but a little drink, or
milk and water, being both then and a long time after deprived of his natural
rest, by his own unruliness, and his friends carelessness, and yet recovered
he his health. But why was not this remedy administered to our patient? Because
the Parson was informed of the appearing of the Iaundise. But did the Iaundise
cross the former indication of bleeding The (...) vel paruitate eius, aut ab
imbecillitate facultatis att^actri^^ eiusdem, aut a m^atuum ^^siructions sieve
^orum sit per quos bilis allicitur, sieve little per quos pellitur ad inces^na,
quo regurgi tat ad vena^ bil^s, and praedictu^ gignit affectum. Hepa^cus
efficitur ^cterus ab n^^atu obstruct^ne, sctrrno, iustant^ ^^tiore, aut calida
distemperie: ad qu^d etiam membrum reducitur venarum caliditas exurens, and
tetius etiam corperis sieve etiam corrumptatur in venis and (...) a corpore
sangu^ ^b earum intemperamentum citrahepatis affictum, aut a veneno assumpto,
aut eiaculato a fera, vel assumtis catharcticis non purga^t^bus, (...) duplex
existit: salutarn vnus, qui rursus sit dum (...) natura, aut in mecrborum
iudicationibus, quae septimo die art post septem, ^icbus ^iticus incidit,
a^t^gressis coctionis siguis, etc. Alter vero est (...) a moto maligns morbi
quem etiam symptomaticum dicere possumus, qui semper ante septimum incidit etc.
(...) ^e intern. morb. curat. tom^ 3. lib. 4. cap. 5.
Iaundise proceeds of diverse causes, and therefore the cure is accordingly
to be accommodated. It comes sometimes solely and of it self, without any
other disease, and sometimes proves nothing else save a symptom or accident
of some other disease, as of a Scirrhus, or inflammation of the Liver, etc. It
is also sometimes occasioned by poison, and sometimes by means of some Aliam
adhuc adlit causam Hollerius, calculum vnum, vel plures in vesica sell a saepce
ceneretes De morb. intern. lib. 1. cap. 37.
stone or stones grown within this ga^-bagge. And again, the learned are not
ignorant that it is sometimes a critical excretion: safest after the seventh
day in acute diseases, more dangerous, or at least doubtful before the same.
Our patients Iaundise appeared in an acute disease, before the seventh day.
That Phlebotomie in this Multis rationibus sanguis in hac affectione vltiliter
mitti potest, primo quidem malo incipiente retractionis gratia: ob id l'aulus
statu^t consilium esse venam in dextro cubito secare, vbi meatus vesicae bilis
vtrique sunt obstipati, vel alter duntaxat. Item si simul sanguis abundet, aut
sit praecipua obstructionis occasio: quopropter dixit Aetius duo maxima esse in
hoc affectu remedia, nimirum, venae sectionem, and purgationem, etc. and paulo
post. Si ex morbe acuto ante septimum prodeat sanguinem mittes, etc. Idem
Mercatus ibidem.
case is required, our Authors do witness, and in many other sorts of the
same: yea even when the Iaundise is but a beginning, says a learned Spaniard,
and that according to the opinion of Paulus Aegin^ta and ^ctuis, two famous
ancient Greek Physicians: especially in the abundance of blood, with a
concourse of choler, which was manifest to the eyesight in this our patient.
And this same Author approoues of it in this disease, even after it has
continued a long time, and that by means of inueterate obstructions, as also
in the suppression of any wonted euacuation. This then was no contrary
indication to dehort or hinder you from so methodicall a course. And as for
some faintness, it is not unusual in this disease, where there is neither
Fever nor danger of death. The vomit was a great deal worse then the opening
of a vein. Five days after, when by reason of hot and sharp humors toward
his throat, procured by your unseasonable vomit, this remedy brought
alleuiation, with some rest after ensuing. What then might it in probability
have procured, if at the first, and in due time administered? And why was there
no mention of a purge or glister for this Iaundise? It had been but according
to the Verum si suspitio aliqua est excrementi in ventre and primis venis
Cassiae aut Catholics j. ex sero lactis imperabis. Et quia in hoc morbo aluus
fere astricta est, vtilissimus est clyster, cuius materia sit ex ijs quae
stercus durius emolliunt, etc. Sic enim placuisse veteribus Aphrodisaeus
scriptum reliquit. Holler, loco nuper citato.
rules of reason and precepts of art. And those who attended him can testify
that one glister by me prescribed, gave him more ease then all your Physic.
But let us come to your Prognosticke: you hoped the worst was past. Upon what
ground? Because now the Iaundise came forth. Cuius contrarium verum est. The
case is quite contrary: you ought therefore to have deemed some danger. Fie
master Parson, such a Rabbi as you think your self, whom the vulgar adore
like the Acts 19. 35.
Image of Diana, which the foolish Ephesians thought came down from Jupiter.
Old Aphor. 62. lib. 4.
Hippocrates could have told you, that such a Iaundise seldom portended
security. And howsoever he and some others make mention of some who in such a
case have recovered: yet do all our Authors hold the case to be very dangerous.
Medicum arbitror operae praetium esse prouidentiam consectari praesentiens enim
atque praedicens apud aegros res praesentes, pr^teritas atque futuras, and
eitam quas ipsi agri praetermittunt explicans, existimabitur facile perceprsse
notitiam singularem rerum ad aegros pertinentium: eoque fiet vt confidentius
credant homines seipsos Medico. Medicinam autem optime faciet Medicus, si ante
praesenserit quid euenturum sti cuique affectui. Hippocr. Prognost. lib. 1.
aph. 1.
At my first coming to our patient I found apparent danger, not only by reason
of this accident, but of diverse other dangerous and deadly signs, wherewith I
at that instant acquinted his friends. And if you please to reply, that your
absence could not see so much as my presence might discover, I do not deny it:
yet was not this Iaundise concealed from you, nor that it succeeded or came
after a blind Ague, as you call it, and that before the seventh day, as has
been proved. And the messenger was an understanding young man, able to relate
some other dangerous accidents, and besides he had no small interest in our
patient. But what was wanting by information, might have been supplied by your
own presence: the which howbeit earnestly desired, yet could not be obtained,
saying, that your directions were sufficient. And yet it was told me, that
coming to his house to speak with some at the Assizes, you promised him great
kindness. Now is the time of trial: your friend in danger of his life,
requesteth and earnestly entreats your aid and best assistance, with your
personal presence: he entrusts you with his life, and yet will you not afford
him your presence? Your golden promises produce scarce leaden effects. 2. Sam.
16. 17.
Is this the kindness to your friend? Why undertook ye the cure of him, whom
you had no purpose to see if entreated? Besides, the patient was of sufficient
ability to give you satisfaction. If there be hope of a good booty, your
presence will not be wanting: witness your voyage into Leicestershire in
Summer 1623. to a patient of yours, who howbeit he died before your coming, yet
were your fees more then doubled: and yet master Parson must not be called
covetous. Now besides the Iaundise, the Singultus in sebre periculosus nisi sit
criticus and signa coctionis manifestae appareant. Avmitu quoque malum: cum
enim vomitus qui remed i^ esse debet singultum gignit, ab inflammatione cerebri
vel stomachi metuendum. Holler. lib. 1. de moreb. intern. cap. 33.
Hicket in acute diseases, even in the judgment of the vulgar and most
ignorant, but especially after so unseasonable a vomit, must needs presage some
great evil to ensue. And suppression of urine concurring with Signa saepius
memoranda and obseruanda in aegrotantibus. Nam ex continua inspectione,
exquisitam ^oru^ potestatis habemus notiatiam. Semper mente reuoluere opertet,
ac considerare quaenam signa sunt optima quae pessima, and quae in medio
confinio horum veluti gradus quosdam habentia, nonnulla quidem optimis,
nonnulla vero deterrimis proximiora, and quae quidem minus, quae vero sunt
magis proximiora vel remotiora, and quaenam exquisite media ponenda sint inter
bona and mala signa. Deinde considerandum quaenam semper mala sunt, and quae
continuo bona, etc. Gal. 1. de cris. cap 13.
other dangerous signs, makes the danger yet apparent. And yet the Parson
hops the worst is past. But how came it to pass, that all your twelve houses
in the heavens forgot you at this time, and made you become a lying Prophet?
Where were all your malign aspects? Terent. in Andr.
Luno Lucinafer opem. Will neither Mercury nor the Moon, who are nearest,
come to your aid? And where was old frostie father gray-beard (Saturn I
mean) and angry Mars? I adhere to none of your iuggling Genethliacks, and yet
besides the former signs, I could read death in our patients eyes, yea and in
some motions of his hands, etc. better then the urine and all the caelestiall
Orbs could tell you. Sexcenta licet ei^smodi proferre.
But many other such pranks are played by your self, and others that are
partakers with you in the same offense, wherewith I would be loath to enlarge
this Treatise. But master Parson, make more account of men's lives, and
discharge more conscionably that calling from which you take the denomination,
and yet busy your self too little about it. I have never heard much
commendation of your diligent preaching; not so much as in season, far less
yet out of season: And as for your care in this other profession, this our
Patients friends, and this whole Corporation have no great cause to magnify
it. But it is not much to be marvelled at, that he who sets so light by the
soul, makes as small account of the body, but for his own benefit. And how
many of yours and others such beneficed men's Q^ot Themison aegros a^tumno
occiderat vno. Iu^eu.
errors are buried in the bosom of the earth; howsoever your adherents may cry
out, Great is Diana of the Ephesians. Let the judicious Reader judge then,
whether all Physics sufficiency be covered under a Clergy man's Cassocke. But
we hope the Reverend Fathers of the Church will confine you within your own
Orbs; or at the least enforce you to resign the one wholly, and betake your
selves to the other. A Prelate of prime note of late years (as I am informed)
and yet living (and long may he live) gave one of these Pragmaticall Ministers
his choice, to which of the two he would betake himself: and he having found
in his own experience this to be true, Dat Galenus opes, being forced,
forsook his Pastoral charge, which affoorded him not above fifty pounds;
yearly coming in. But now to the maine matter in hand again.

The second branch of the manner of pissing, Of inuoluntarie pissing.
is inuoluntary pissing, which comes to pass either in sickness or in health.
And in sickness it comes to pass, by reason of the hurt, weakness, or
decay of the retenti^e faculty of the passages of the urine; as kidneyes,
bladder, etc. as comes to pass in the Palsy, It is produced by diverse
causes.
Apoplexy, and Falling sickness. And in the pissing evil, called Diabete,
this comes likewise to pass. And again, when the Muscle Sphincter shutting
the neck of the bladder or sinews helping thereto, are hurt, either by a
fall, a wound, or some such other occasion: and sometimes again in reasonable
good health, they are weakened by means of some cold distemper, or too much
moisture; as comes to pass in children, and moist constitutions. Dryness
sometimes is likewise said to produce the like effect in old age. And some
perturbations of the mind, as great and sudden fear and astonishment make men
often void, not the urine only, but other excrements also against their will.
And yet were our Pisse-Prophets never able by any such urine only to find out
the true cause of any such infirmity. Dangerous in acute diseases.
That this proves also often a dangerous, if not deadly sign in acute
diseases, I could by many instances both of my own and other men's observations
make it appear, but that now I fear I have too much abused thy patience
courteous Reader; and therefore I hasten to the conclusion, if thou will give
me leave to talk a word or two by the way with Master Alchymist.

CHAP. X.
Of the fond and foolish opinion, concerning the distillation of Vrines: of the
water of separation, together with the uncertainty of judgment by such means.
THE Aschymists well perceiving this vecertaintie affoorded us by this sign,
have set their wits a work another way. One of their great Masters, Lib. de
distillat. vrinar.
Thuenheuserus by name, to the end that Paracelsus and his Disciples might be
thought to surpass all other Physicians, devised a new way to judge of
diseases by Vrines: to wit, by dividing it into three several principles,
Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt: and so by distillation to find out that which we
demanded. Est aqua quaedam que dicitur ALKALI secretat cuius vsus ad sehres, ad
foetum mortuum and alia. Inter haec est etiam separatio succorum. Nam si tantum
vna gutta proij^iatur in vrinam aegroti, statim fieri dicitur elementerum
separatio, adeo vt praedominans elementum aperte inconspectum prodeat, and
causam mortificum manifestet. laban. in Alch. pharm^^ cap. 8. ex Penoto.
Libanius mentions a certain water of separation, which besides diverse other
effects has this also, that one only drop of it being mingled with the
Patients urine, it makes a present separation of the aforesaid Elements,
insomuch that the predominant Element shall apparently lay it self open to the
sight of the eye, and shall withal declare and lay open the cause of the
disease. Parturient montes nascetur ridiculus mus. Great cry and little wool.
Our Paraceleists would feign feed us with many such smoaky promises. Then come
they to weigh the urine, which they will ordinarily in a healthful and sound
man, not to exceed eight ounces and a half: If it exceed this weight, they
think it argues great abundance of a tartareous or terrestrious substance:
esspecially if this be to be seen after the separation; from whence they do
infer a great number of such tartareous diseases, as they call them: and yet
the wisest of them cannot tell which. But let us hear Cap. de Spa, iricorum
(...) prorsus vrinae prolat.
Reusner speak. After the separation of the aforesaid Elements (says he) the
vapors ascending stick to some part of the Still, answering in situation to
that part of the body of man in the which lies hid the very fountain and
spring of the disease, and does withal so plainly and clearly represent unto
us, both the kind and the nature of the disease, that it may easily appear to
what element and principal part it is to be referred. So far Reusner. But
let us now see whether there be any hold to be taken of these more then
hyperbolicall promises. If we shall narrowly pry into this point, I doubt we
shall find the old Proverb true, Out of the frying pan into the fire. But
hear the co^futation out of the mouth of a learned Physician, often quoted in
this Discourse. This doctrine of Thurnheusers (says Guil. Adolph. Scribon. de
in. spect. vrin. sub finem.
he) cannot by any sound argument be demonstrated. For admit that the urine be
separated into several elements, according to the several parts thereof, yet
can nothing but the elementarie qualities (as they call them) heat, cold, etc.
be discerned by the same. And by this means shall we only be able to judge of
the diseases of the solid parts; as of obstructions, exulcerations, and the
like. And is not the urine an excrement of the blood contained in the veins,
that is of one body? What utility or profit therefore can come by this
separation into several parts? Thou shall thus only observe the number of the
parts which are in the substance of the blood, and of what nature and kind it
is. Thou may perhaps perceive it either to be caused of Mercury, Sulphur,
or Salt. But will thou straight-waies maintain, that all Mercuriall diseases
are seated in the head only? etc. If this be true, then will it follow,
contrary to that which thou and Paracelsus maintain, that these three grounds
or elements are not common to all diseases. For I am of opinion, that if we
will needs use the names of these three; as well such diseases as have their
original from this Sulphurous and salt matter, as any that proceed from a
Mercuriall cause, have their root and original from the head, Absurdity of
this opinion.
etc. Thus far our Author. And may not this opinion seem so absurd in it
self, that it needs no further confutation? For if when thou had used all
thy art and cunning, a countryman should ask thine opinion concerning his
urine, and thou should tell him he were troubled with some sulphurous,
Mercuriall, or saltish and tartareous disease, would he not laugh thee to
scorn, and think, it may be, thou had been that day too well acquainted
with some pots and pipes of Tobacco? And if he should desire to know what were
his particular disease, and where or what particular part of the body it had
taken up for its abode; would it seem strange if he looked for some
extraordinary skill after so great an outward oftentation? And if he should go
home and tell his wife of a Tartareous, Sulphurous, or Mercuriall disease, who
knows but she might call him Good Man Wood-cocke for telling her such a tale
of Robin-hood? But put the case thou might yet see some Sulphurous disease
(as they term it) by means of this separation and distillation; yet amongst
many such Sulphurous diseases, upon which of them would thou fasten thy
conjecture? As if a Fever might be found out, how may the kind be known,
whether a continual or inmittent; and whether symptomaticall or dependant upon
some other disease; or else be it self a principal guest, with many more
circumstances? The like may be said of the other two principles. So that it may
evidently appear, there is greater uncertainty in this then the other way.
But if they will be so skilfoole, I wish they would distill the other excrement
also; for I am sure they may learn of both alike. But yet wish I them to take
this Prouiso with them, that the ioynings of their stils and Alembicks be well
luted with lutum moschatum, or ambarinum, that none of this fragrant smell be
carried away with the wind, and so some part of this precious liquor lost. But
it may be, when the patient had cast up his account, he would find this manner
of casting of waters, as they term it, more costly then the ordinary. But for
my part, I wish our vrine-mongers would use it: for by this means this great
abuse might the better be suppressed. But this opinion being so absurd in it
self, needs no further confutation. But fearing some infection, or at least
annoyance to my nose by such Mercuriall and Sulphurous smells, I think it is
more then time to withdraw my self out of so stinking a place. The like
liberty is allowed thee kind Reader, to whom I am afraid I have now been too
tedious; but yet I must once again entreat thy patience to hear the
conclusion, and then may thou quietly depart in peace.

CHAP. XI.
The Conclusion of this whole Discourse, where something concerning issue and
event, and casual cures.
BY the premises then, I hope, does plainly appear the absurdity of this
erroneous and inueterate opinion of magnifying the urine, and the judgment
concerning diseases which may from hence be collected. And therefore I hope the
judicious and impartial Reader will with me subscribe to the general
conclusion; to wit, that there is no certainty or assurance to be collected
for the information of the judgment, either concerning the disease it self,
together with the particular symptoms and several circumstances; and yet
far less for the cure of the same, by the bare inspection of the urine
only. And therefore I cannot see any just cause why it should not be
pronounced guilty of manslaughter at the least, if not of murder; and
therefore is not a thing so slightly to be passed over, as many may idly
imagine. Objection.
But me thinks I hear some of the vulgar sort, who think it a pretty thing
to hear one prate over an urine, object, That our censure seems too sharp,
since that daily experience does not deny, that some have from the inspection
of the urine, often attained to the knowledge of that they desired. Answer.
Now as I deny not, but that sometimes one may through hap (as we say) hit the
nail on the head: so on the other part, that this manner of casual conjecture
has ever been allowed of by the learned and more judicious, I do utterly
deny. If Christians would hold their peace, yet will the heathen plead on my
side. Careat successibus opto quisquis ab euentu facta notanda putat. Quid. in
epist.
The Poet wished them a bad success, whosoever judged of an action according
to the issue or event. Besides, that it is often a fallacy, a non causa pro
causa, making the ignorant believe, they see that in or by an urine, which
never had allowance of any learned authority. And may not any ignorant
Empiricke, a cozening Quacksaluer, or any old woman, now and then guess aright
at an urine, and by cunning interrogatories and some other shifts, learn of
the unwary messenger, as well the substance as the circumstances of the
disease, at least as far as they are able to relate? And this to be true,
has been sufficiently proved already. Besides, that oftentimes the messenger
himself cannot sufficiently inform the Physician concerning the particular
circumstances of the disease: and again, his own ocular inspection often
brings that to the eyes of his understanding, which neither the messenger nor
yet the patient himself were ever able to relate, and far less the urine
make known. What have thou then gained, when one of these insufficient persons
has told thee some truth by the urine? To wit, that then thy conceit carries
thee (howbeit most erroniously and falsely) to apprehend some extraordinary
sufficiency in that person, as being best able to free thee from thine
infirmity. Thus then we see, Vno dato absurdo mul^a sequuntur: One error
draws on another. The prosperous event sometimes seconding their bold
attempts, inuolueth the vulgar daily in this dangerous error. Arguments taken
from issue or event, not to be trusted to.
But arguments taken from event have never had allowance, where the rules of
reason might take place. And if this argument from event may take place, then
will this absurdity thereon ensue, that we shall be forced to allow of many
unlawful things. Many Witches and Wizards have sometimes performed such cures
as have often astonished some of great understanding: that I say nothing of our
Spelmongers, curing by characters, figure-casting, with a world of other
forbidden trash. Are we therefore warranted by these actions to turn our back
upon God, and make a covenant with his enemy? The devil himself no doubt, as
well in the ancient Oracles as of later days, has sometimes told truth. I
should be too tedious to instance in examples. But did not that counterfeit
Samuel, 1. Sam. 28. 18.
to wit, the devil himself, tell Saul the whole truth, both concerning the
event of the battle and his own woeful and wretched end? But who will
notwithstanding maintain the lawfulness of asking counsel at the devils
Oracles, but he who means to have his habitation with him in hell? L. H.
Howard of blind Prophets.
Far sounder was the opinion of a Noble man of this kingdom, in these words.
Examples which fall out by chance were never current where the cause is to be
justified by reason. And therefore till a man can as readily produce a certain
ground to make his guesses good, as score up a register of blind events, we may
rather commend his luck then his learning. Argumentis and rationibus oportet
quare quicquam ita sit docere non ruantis. Cicer. de divine. lib. 2.
Reasons and arguments (says a Heathen) must be produced for the confirmation
of men's courses, and not examples of events both casual and uncertain. So
far were the ancient Egyptians from maintaining this opinion, and so
careful of men's lives, rejecting this coniecturall, casual, and Empiricall
manner of curing diseases, and judging of the sufficiency of the Physician by
the event or issue of the disease; Medici ex publico victum sumant, agro^
secundum legem curant, ab antiquis medicis comprobatisque scriptoribus
traditam. Si quis normam libri sequutus infirmum sanare nequiuerit omni caret
crimine. Si praeter ea quae libris continentur, curauerit illum, morte punitur.
That at their own cost and charges they maintained many sufficient and
skillful Physicians: and moreover, set down an inviolable law and or dinance,
That if any Physician following the precepts and rules of art, recorded in the
books of the learned in that profession, yet could not attain to the height
of his hopes; the Patient through the violence of the disease yielding to
fatal necessity, he was then freed from all danger of law. On the other part,
if he recovered his Patient, yet neglecting the aforesaid rules and means, his
punishment was no less then the loss of his life. What if (says mine Author)
this wholesome law were brought in amongst us (as it were good reason it
should) where could we find so many executioners condignely to punish such
Impostors, Empiricks, Women-Physitians, busybodies, etc. Thus far our
Author. Now as concerning such remedies thus casually and unskillfully
administered, howsoever at sometimes they may either do, Lang. epist. medicin.
lib. 1. epist 80 ex Diodero Siculo.
or at least seem to do some good, which I will not deny: yet I am sure they
do often more hurt then good; and more hurt then on the sudden is perceived,
many often praising them for the Authors of their health, who have been the
instruments of their utter overthrow and ruin: for howbeit the Patient reap
some present ease, yet is his body by means of such medicines unskillfully
exhibited, left more infirm, and becomes afterward more crasie: their cure
being imperfect, accidental, uncertain, and void of rule and reason. And
howbeit I could make this small Tractate swell up into a big and voluminous
book, if I should instance in a many of these casual cures, performed by
Empiricks, and such others, which for fear of tediousness and prolixitie I am
loath to go about: yet before I make an end, I will offer to the Readers view,
two or three Stories. During my abode at Paris, one Master Robin, ouer-seer of
the Garden of Simples, related unto me this which follows. History.
A few years ago (says he) the plague of Pestilence prevailing daily more
and more in this famous City of Paris, whereof no small numbers, especially
of the meaner sort, died daily: the learned Physicians did their best endeavors
when their counsel was craved, and the ignorant Empiricks also were not idle.
Amongst the rest was a certain country Clown carried on the wings of Fame,
for his extraordinary supposed skill in curing this disease, who was said to
have cured more then some of the most expert Physicians. The Duchess of
Longueuille being acquainted with these occurrents, sends for her Physician,
desirous to know the cause of so happy successes by so mean a person
performed: which howbeit always aimed at, yet are not always attained unto by
men of greater merit. The Physician well knowing the insufficiency of this
fellow, yet not fully acquainted with the particulars, and withal knowing how
much is commonly attributed to these casual events, answered only in general
at that instant, that many things seem often otherwise then they are indeed:
and false fame makes some men famous, whose names deserve rather to be buried
in oblivion: and after some further discourse concerning that subject (all
which notwithstanding, would not satisfy her more then nice curiosity) he
takes his leave for the present. A few days after, causing carefully to watch
and observe the actions of this Aesculapius, he was observed to go to a
certain place within two little leagues of Paris, called Bois de Vincennes,
that is, Vincence wood, and there to dig up certain roots. The Physician
therewith acquainted, resorteth thither with speed, and finds that it was
nothing else but a certain kind of Spurge (whereof there grew in that place
and about no small store) whereof this Clown had at several times dug up
great store, easily discerned by the holes there round about that place, some
being but new dug. After a narrow search, he found that most of those whom
this new Aesculapius was said to have cured, either died after a certain time
of a bloody Flux, this violent medicine having procured an excoriation in
their guts* being especially exhibited, without any preparation of the ill
quality, or observation of the due dose or quantity: or else that they lived
a languishing life, worse then a speedy dispatch by a sudden death, from whose
merciless claws notwithstanding this former Purgatory was not able to free
some of them. The Physician repairing again to the Duchess, acquainteth her
Grace with these several circumstances: as also that it seemed most of those
people were able, strong, and cacochymicall bodies, who would prefer the
counsel of this Clown, before that of the learned and judicious Physician.
The issue notwithstanding did make it appear, that if any did recover, it came
not to pass through his skill or sufficiency, which as seems, was none at
all, but by the strength of nature, able to expel both the Plague and the
poison of the medicine. The learned and judicious Physicians again met for the
most part with thin and tender bodies, brought up in ease and idleness, and
for this cause aptest to receive the poisoned impressions of the pestilentiall
air, and therefore the disease proving greater then the means were able to
overcome, the patients were often forced to faint under the burden. Neither
were such dangerous, or r^ther desperate means, as this Empiricke used, in
their opinions to be administered to any, much less to persons of quality and
weak constitution. The Noble woman having heard the Physicians apology, was
afterward better pleased with her Physician, and after that time conceived a
better opinion, both of the Art and the professors of the same. I was likewise
informed during my abode at Leua in Germany, Dangerous medicines exhibited by
Paracelsists.
of many rare cures seemed to be performed by that medicine which they call the
Philosophers stone, Aurum potabile, and many other such hyperbolicall
medicines, exhibited by the Paracelsists of those parts. And yet most of them
to whom they were exhibited, before the full period of a twelve month, went to
visit their friends in another world: and little better success for the most
part had their master Paracelsus himself.

Some few years before my coming to this town of Northampton, Another.
a certain Empiricke, and Irish by nation, was accounted one of the most
famous vrine-mongers in all the country about, but especially in telling
whether women were with child or no. And yet his skill in Physic was confined
to one form of purge, composed of a certain portion of the Electuarie
Diaphoenico^, mingled with so much powder of Diagridium as he could take up
between his finger and his thomb, which were his ordinary weights and scales,
as I (...) since by our Apothecarie informed: by which his butcher like
boldness he cast many into most dangerous laskes, accompanied sometimes with
diverse other evil accidents, as I have heard since from some of themselves:
and this chiefly was then to be seen, when this medicine was exhibited to
thin and weak bodies.

Now howbeit I could instance in a number of other examples, all tending to the
same purpose, yet fearing too much to offend the Readers patience, referring
them to some opportunity, I think it is now high time to turn my sails
toward the shore, and to cast anchor for the present. And the assembling of so
many sage Senators, according to the ancient and laudable custom of this
kingdom, to apply fit salues to the festered sores of the same, puts me in
good hope of some redress, as well of the abuses here complained of, as of
diverse other disorders. I am not indeed ignorant, that affairs of high
consequence, are to be handled in this honorable assembly. And yet I hope the
life of man is not a matter of smallest moment. Job 2. 16.
Agitur de corto humano. Skin for skin, and all that a man has will he
give for his life. Let this Gangrene therefore in time be looked to, lest it
grow to a greater evil. Since therefore errors of this kind are so full of
danger, as has been both in the precedent, and now in this present discourse
plainly proved, both by a great and smaller enquest, of such persons with
whose worth the delinquents I am sure dare not compare, I wish it may not be
forgotten. Sed verbum sat sapienti. A word, yea a nod, is enough to a wise man.
And therefore I leave it to your Honorable considerations. CONSIDER THE
MATTER, CONSVLT, AND GIVE SENTENCE.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 5. line 2. for would read could. p. 13. l. 29. r. stinking urine. p.
16. marg. note l. 8. r. victu. p. 21. l. 12. r. deliration. p. 23. l. 17. r.
pot-dropsie. l. 29. r. retaining, and marg. note l. 2. r. Fors. p. 33. l. 13.
r. of a high. p. 33. marg note. l. 20. r. a vitiosa. p. 39. r. an absurdity.
p. 55. l. 29. r. four pounds. p. 70. l. 36. r. winie color. p. 77. l. 5.
diseases alone.


