A true declaration of the troublesome voyadge of M. John Haukins to the
parties of Guynea and the west Indies, in the years of our Lord 1567. and 1568.

Imprinted at London in Poules Church-yarde, by Thomas Purfoote for Lucas
Harrison, dwelling at the sign of the Crane.

Anno. 1569.

Here follows a note or declaration of the troublesome voyage, made with the
Jesus, the Mynion and four other ships to the parties of Buynea and the
weste Indies in the years 1567. and 1568. by John Haukins.
THE ships departed from Plymmouth the ii. day of October. October.
Anno 1567. and had reasonable wether until the 7. day, at which time 40.
leagues north from cape Finester there arose an extreme storm which
continued 4. days, A storm.
in such sort that ye fleet was dispersed and all our great botes lost, and
the Jesus our chieffe ship in such case as not thought able to serve ye
viage, where upon in the same storm we set our course homewarde, determining
to give over ye viadge: but ye ii. day of the same month ye wind changed with
fair wether, whereby we were animated to follow our enterprise, and so did,
directinge our course with the Islands of grand Canaries, where according to
an order before prescribed, all our ships before dispersed, met in one of
those Islands called Gomera where we took water and departed from thence the.
iiii. day of November toward the coaste of Guynea and arrived at Cape Viride
the. xviii. of November, Gomera.
Noue^ber
where we landed 150 men hoping to obtain some Negrose, where we gatt but
few, and those with great hurt and damage to our men, which cheifelye
proceaded of their enuenymed arrows: Enuenimed arrows.
and although in the beginning it seamed to be but small hurtes, yet there
hardlye escaped any that had blood drawn of them, and dyed in strange sort
with there mouths shutt some. x. days before he died, and after there wounds
were hole: where I my self had one of the greatest wounds, yet thanks be to
god escaped. From thence we past the time upon the coast of Guinea searching
with all diligence the rivers from Rio graunde unto the Searliona till the.
xii. of January in which time we had not gotten together 150 Negrose:
Dece^ber.
January.
yet notwithstanding the sickness of our men, and the late time of the year
commanded us away, and thus having nothing whereof to seek the coast of the
West Indias, was with the rest of our company in consultacion to go to the
coast of the Mine hopinge there to have obtained some gold for our wares and
thereby to have defended our charge. But even in that present instante there
came to us a Negro sent from a King oppressed of other kings his neighbors
desiring our aid, with promise yt as many negrose as by these wars might be
obtained as well of his part as of ours should be at our pleasure whereupon we
concluded to give aid, and sent 120. of our men which ye 15. of January
assalted a town of ye negrose of our Alyes adversaries which had in it 8000.
inhabitants and very strongly impaled and fenced after there manner, A town of
8000. Negrose taken.
but were so well defended that our men prevailed not but lost vi. men and
xi. hurt: so yt our men sent fourth with to me for more help, whereupon
considering that the good success of this interpris might highly further, the
comoditie of our vioadge, I went my self and with ye help of ye king of our
side assaulted ye town both by land and sea and very hardly with fire (their
houses being covered with dry palm leaves) obtained ye town, and put the
inahbitants to flight where we took 250. persons men women and children and by
our friend the King of our side there was taken 600. prisoners whereof we
hoped to have had our choice: but the Negro (in which nacio^ is seldom or
never found troth) meant nothing less, No troth in Negrose.
for that night he removed his camp and prisoners, so that we were feign to
content us with those few which we had gotten our selves.

Now had we obtained between 4 and 500. Negrose, wherewith we thought it
somewhat reaso^able to seek the coast of the West Indians, and there, for our
Negrose and other our Marchau^dies we hoped to obtain whereof to conteruaile
our charges with so^e gains, whereunto we proceaded with all diligence,
fornished our wateri^g, took fuel, and departed the coast of Guynea the. iii.
of February continuing at the sea with a passag more harder the^ Februari
before has been accustomed, till ye. xxvii. day of March, March.
which day we had sight of an Island called Dominica upon the coaste of the
West Indies in. xiiii. degres: Dominica.
from thence we coasted from place to place making our traffic with the
Spanyardes as we might, somewhat hardelye, because the king had straightly
commanded all his governors in those parts by no means to suffer any trade
to be made with us: notwithstanding we had reasonable trade and courteous
intertainemente from the I Will of Margarita unto Cartagena without any thing
greatly worth the notynge, April.
May.
sauinge at Capo Delauela in a town called Rio de la Hache from whence comes
all the pearls, the treasurer who had the charge there, would by no means
agree to any trade, or to suffer us to take water, he had fortyfyed his town
with diverse bulwarks in all places where it might be entered, and furnyshed
himself with a 100 Hargebusiers, so that he thought by famine to have
enforced us to have put a land our Negrose: of which purpose he had not
greatly failed unless we had by force entered the town: June. Rio de la Hach
taken.
which (after we could by no means obtain his favor) we were enforced to
do, and so with 200 men brake in upon there bulwarks, and entered the town
with the loss only of. ii. men of our parts, and no hurt done to the
Spanyardes because after there voley of shot discharged, they all fled.

Thus having the town with some circumstance, partly by the Spaniardes desire of
Negrose, and partly by friendship of ye treasurer, we obtained a secret trade:
whervppon the Spanyardes reforted to us by night, and bought of us to the
number of C C. Negrose, in all other places where we traded the Spainiards
inhabitaunts were glad of us and traded willingly.

At Cartagena the last town we thought to have seen in yt coast we could by
no means obtain to come with any Spanyarde the governor was so straight,
Cartagena.
and because our trade was so near finished we thought not good either to
adventure any landinge, or to detract further time* but in peace departed from
thence the. xxiiii. of July, Iulie.
hoping to have escaped the time of there storms which the^ sone after began to
reign, the which they call Furicanos, Furicanos.
but passing by the West end of Cuba, toward the coaste of Floryda there
happened to us the x.i. day of August anextreme storm which continewed by ye
space of iiii. dais, which so bet the Jesus, that we cut down all her higher
buildinges, her ruddar also was sore shaken, and with all was in so extreme a
leacke that we were rather upon the point to leave her then to keep her any
longer, yet hopinge to bring all to good pass sought the coaste of Floryda
where we found no place nor Haven for our ships because of ye shalonesse of
the coast: thus being in greater despair, and taken with a new storm which
contynewed other iii. days were enforced to take for our succor the Port
which serves the City of Mexico called Saint Ion de ly which stands in
xix. degres, Storm.
in seakinge of which Port we took in our way. iii. ships which carried
passingers to the number of C. which passingers we hoped should be a mean to
us the better to obtain vittualles for our money, and a quiet place for the
reparinge of our fleet: shortly after this the xvi. of September we entered
the Port of Saint Ion de lue, September. Saint Ion de lue. A port.
and in our entry the Spainyardes thincking us to be the fleet of Spain, ye
chief officers of the co^try came abord us, which being deceived of their
expectacion were greatly dismayed: The Spaniardes deceived
but immediatlye when they saw our demand was nothing but victualles were
recomforted. I found also in the same Port xii. ships which had in them by
report. 200000 lb. in gold and silver, all which (being in my possession,
with the Kings Island as also the Passingers before in my way thitherwarde
stayde) I set at liberty, without the taking from the^ the weight of a
grote, only because I would not be delaied of my dispatche: I stayed ii. men
of estimacion and sent post imediatlye to Mexico, which was. 200. miles from
us, to the Presidentes and Counsels there, shewinge them of our arrival there
by the force of wether, and the necessity of the repair of our ships and
victuals, which wants we required as friends to King Phillipe to be fornished
of for our money: Our requests.
and that ye Presidentes and Counsel there should with all convenient speed
take order, that at the arrival of the Spainishe fleet, which was dailye
looked for, there might no cause of quarrel rise between us and them, but for
the better mayntena^ce of amity, their commandment might be had in that
behalf, this message being sent away the. xvi. day of September at night,
being the very day of our arrival, in the next morninge which was the.
xvii. day of the same month, we saw open of the Haven xiii. great ships
and understanding them to be the flete of Spain, The flete of Spain
I sent imediatlye to advertise the general of the flete of my being there,
doyinge him to understand, that before I would suffer them to enter the Port
there might some order of conditions pass between us for our safe being
there, and maintenance of peace: now it is to be understand that this Port
is a little Island of stones not three foot above the water in the highest place,
The manner of the Port S. Ion de low.
and but a bow shote of length any way, this Island standethe from the main
lands. ii. bow shotes or more, also it is to be understood that there is not
in all this coaste any other place for ships to arrive in safety, because
the North wind has there such violence that unless the ships be very
saftly mored with there ancres fastened upon this Island, there is no remedy
for these North winds but death: North winds perilous.
also the place of the Haven was so little that of necessity the ships must
ride one aborde the other, so that we could not give place to them nor they to
us: and here I began to bewail ye which after followed, for now said I, I am
in two dangers and forced to receive the one of the^. That was, either I must
have kept out the flete from entringe the Port the which with Gods healpe I
was very well able to do, or else suffer them to enter in with their
accustomed treason which they never fail to execute where they may have
opportunity, or circumue^t it by any means, if I had kept them out, then had
there been present shipwarke of all the fleet which amounted in value to six
Millions which was in value of our money 1800000 lb. 1800. thousand pound.
which I considered I was not able to answer, fearinge the Queen's Majesty's
indignacio^ in so weighty a matter. Thus with my self reuoluinge the doubts,
thought rather better to abide the Iutt of the uncertainty, the^ ye
certeintie. The uncertain doubt I account was their treasure which by good
policy I hoped might be prevented, and therefore as chusinge the least mischife
I proceaded to conditions. Now was our first messinger come and returned from
the fleet with report of ye arrival of a vice Roy, A vice Roye.
so that he had authority, both in all this Province of Mexico (otherwise
called noua Hispania) and in the sea, who sent us word that we should send
our conditions, which of his part should for the better maintenance of
amity between ye Princes, be both fauorabli granted, and faithfullye
performed, with many fair words how passinge ye coaste of the Indies he had
understood of our honest behavior toward the inhabitants where we had to do
as well as in ye same Port, Fair words begylded
the which I let pass, thus followinge our demand we required victual for
our money, and license to sell as much ware as might fornishe our wantes,
and that there might be of either part. xii. gentlemen as hostages for the
mayntena^ce of peace and that the Island for our better safety might be in
our own possession, Our requests.
duringe our abode there, and such ordinance as was planted in the same
Island which was eleven pieces of Brass, and that no Spaynyarde might land
in the Island with any kind of wepon: these conditions at the first, he some
what misliked, chieflye the guard of the Island to be in our own keeping, The
peace concluded.
which if they had, had we had sone known our fare: for with the first
North wind they had cut our cables and our ships had gone ashore: but in
the end he concluded to our request, bringing the xii. hostages to x. which
with all speed of either part wear received, with a writing from the vice
Roye signed with his hand and sealed with his seal of all the conditions
concluded, and fourthwith a trompet blown with commandment that none of
either part should be mean to inuiolate the peace upon pain of death: and
further it was concluded that the two generals of the fleets should mete and
give faith each to other for the performaunce of the promises which was so
done. Thus at ye end of iii. days all was concluded and the fleet entride the
Port, saluting one another as the manner of the sea does require. This as I
said before thursdaye we entered ye port, frydaye we saw the fleet, and on
mondaie at night they entered the Port, then we labored ii. days placing the
English ships by the^ selves and the Spainish ships by them selves, Treson.
the captains of each part and inferior men of there parts promissing
great amytie of all sides, which even as with all fidelity was meant of our
part ye spainyardes meant nothing less of their parts, but from the main
land had fornished them selves with a supply of men to the number of. 1000
and meant the next thursdaye being ye xxiii. of September at dinner time to set
upon us of all sides, the same thursdaye in the morning the treason being at
hand, some apperance showed, as shifting of wepon from ship to ship,
plantinge and bending of ordinance from the ship to the Island where our men
warded, passing to and fro of company of men more then required for their
necessary busynes, and many other ill licklyhodes which caused us to have a
vehime^t suspicion, and there withal sent to ye vice Roy to enquire what was
me^t by it, which sent imediatly straight commandment to vnplante all things
suspicious, A vice Roy false of his Word.
and also sent word that he in ye faith of a vice Roy would be our defense
from all villayns. Yet we being not satisfied with this answer because we
suspected a great number of men to be hid in a great ship of 900 tonnes which
was mored next unto the Minion sent again to the vice Roye ye master of the
Jesus which had the Spanishe tongue and required to be satisfied if any such
thing were or not, which seeing the Vice Roye that the treason must be
discovered, The treson brake forth.
fourthwith stayed our master, blewe the trompete, and of all sides set upon
us, our men which warded a shore being stricken with soden fear, Sodden
Fear.
gave place, fled, and sought to recover succor of the ships, the
Spainyardes being before provided for the purpose landed in all places in
multitudes from their ships which they might easelye do without botes, and
slew all our men a shore without mercy, a few of them escaped aborde ye
Jesus. The great ship which had by estimacion 300 men placed in her
secretlye, immediatlye fell aborde ye minion which by Gods apointment in the
time of the suspicion we had, The Minion escaped hardlye.
which was only one half hour, the Minio^ was made ready to avoyde and so
leesinge her hedfastes, and haylinge away by the stearne fastes she was gotten
out, thus with Gods help she defended the violence of the first brunte of
these. C C C. men. The Mynion being paste out they came aborde the Jesus, The
Jesus escaped hardlye.
which also with very much a do and the loss of many of our men wear
defended and kept out. Then was there also ii. other ships that assaulted
the Jesus at the same instant, so that she had hard getting louse, but yet with
some time we had cut our head fastes and gotten out by the stearne fastes.
Now when the Jesus and the Mynion wear gotten abroad two ships length from
the Spainishe fleet, Sharp wars.
the fight began hott of all sides that with in one hour ye Admiral of the
Spainyardes was supposed to be soncke, 3. ships of the Spainyardes consumed.
their vize Admiral burned and one other of there principal ships supposed
to be soncke, so that the ships wear little able to anoye us. Then is it to
be understand that all the ordinance upon the Island was in the Spainyardes
hands, which did us so great anoyance, that it cut all the mastes and
yeardes of the Jesus, A hard case.
in such sort that there was no hope to carry her away: also yt soncke our
small ships, whereupon we determined to place ye Jesus on that side of the
Mynion that she might abide all the battery from the land, and so be a
defense for the Mynion till night, and then to take such relife of victual
and other necessaries from the Jesus as the time would suffer us, and so to
leave her: as we wear thus determininge and had placed the Minion from the
shote of the land soddenlye the Spainyardes had fired two great ships which
we are coming directlye with us, and having no means to avoid the fire,
Fyere.
it bread among our men a marvelous fear, so that some said, let us depart
with the Minion, other said let us see where the wind will carry the fire from
us, but to be short the Minions men which had always there sails in a
readiness thought to make suer work and so without either consent of the
Captain or master cut their sail, so that very hardly I was received into
the Minion. The most part of the men that were left a live in the Jesus made
shift and followed the Minion in a small bote: the rest which the little bote
was not able to receive, were enforced to abide the mercy of the Spainyards
(which I doughte was very little) so with the Minion only and Small hope to
be had of tyrants.
the Judith (a small bark of 50. tonne) we escaped which bark the same night
forsook us in our great misery, A storm
we were now removed with the Mynion from the Spanyshe ships two bow shotes
and there rode all that night: the next morning we recovered an Island a mile
from the Spainyards where there took us a north wind and being left only
with. ii. Ancres and. ii. cables (for in this conflycte we lost. iii. cables
and. ii. ancres) we thought always upon death which ever was present, but
God preserved us to a longer time. The weather waxed reasonable and ye
satterday we set sail, Small hope of lyffe.
and having a great number of me^ and little victuals our hope of life waxed
less and less: some desired to yield to ye Spaniards, some rather desired to
obtain a place wherethei might give themselves to ye Infidels, Hard choice.
and some had rather abide with a littell pittance the mercy of God at sea, so
this with many sorrowful hearts we wa^dred in a unknown sea by the space of
xiiii. days, till honger enforced us to seek the land, for hides wear
thought very good meat, myserie.
ratts, cattes, mise and dogs none escaped that might be gotten, parrates
and monkayes yt were had in great pris, were thought there very proffitable if
they served the turn one dinner: this in the end the viii. day of October
we came to the land in the botom of the same baye of Mexico in xxxiii. degres
where we hoped to have found inhabitants of the Spainyardes, October. 1568.
relife of victuales, and place for ye repair of our ships, Mannye miseries.
which was so sore beten with shoot from our ennemies and bruised with shotinge
of our own ordinance, that our weary and weke arms were scare able to defend
and keep out the water. But all things happened to the contrary for we
found neither people, victual nor haven of relife, but a place where having
fair wether with some peril we might land a boat, our people being forced
with honger desired to be set a land, where unto I concluded. And such as
were willinge to land I put them aparte, and such as were disirous to go
homewards. I put a part, so that they were indiferently parted 100. of one
side and 100. of the other side these 100. men we set a land with all
diligence in this little place before said, which being landed we determined
there to refreshe our water and so with our litell remain of victualles to
take ye sea. The next day having a land with me l. of our C. men that remained
for the spedier preparinge of our water aborde, there a rose an extreme storm
so ye in iii. days we could by no means repair our ships: the ship
also was in such peril that every hour we looked for shipwarke. The
grea(...)est mise(...)ie of all.


But yet God again had mercy on us, sent fair wether, had aborde our water,
and departed the. xvi. day of October, after which day we had fair and
prosperouse wether till the. xvi. day of October, which day God be praised we
wear clear from the coaste of the Indians and out of the channel and goulfe
of Bahana which is between the Cape of Floryda and the Islands of Cuba. (...)he
goulfe (...)f Baha(...)a.
After this groing near to the could Country, our men being oppressed with
Famine died continually, Noue^ber.
and they yt were left, grew into such weakness that we were scantlye able to
manure our ship, and the wind being always ill for us to recover England,
determined to go with Galicia, in Spain, with intent there to reliue our
company and other extreme wants. And being arrived ye last day of Dece^ber in
a place near unto Vigo called Po^tefedra, Dece^ber.
our men with excess of fresh meat grew into miserable disseases, and died
a great part of them. This matter was borne out as long as it might be, but
in the end although there was none of our men suffered to go a land, yet by
access of the spainyardes, our feebleness was known to the^* where upon they
feassed not to seek by all means to betraie us, but with all speed possible we
departed to Vigo, where we had some help of sertaine English ships and xii.
fresh me^ wherewith we repaired our wants as we might, and departed the xx. day
of Ia^uari 1568. arrived in Mounts baye in Corn wale ye xxv. of the same
mou^th praised be god therefore. Ianuari


If all the miseries and troublesome affairs of this sorowefull voyadge
should be perfectlye and throughlye written, there should need a paynfull man
with his pen, and as great a time as he had that wrote the lives and deaths
of the martyrs.

FINIS.
John Haukins.


