A LETTER WRITTEN BY A TRVE CHRISTIAN Catholic, to a Roman pretended
Catholic.

Wherein upon occasion of controversy touching the Catholic Church the
12.13. and 14. Chap. of the Revelations are briefly and truly expounded. Which
contain the true estate thereof, from the birth of Christ, to the end of the
world.

REVEL. CAP. 6. and 7 Veni, and vide, Lege, perlege, intellige, creed and viue.
Veni vt videas, Vide vt legas, Lege vt perlegas, perlege vt intelligat
Jntellige vt credas, Creed vt viuas.

JESUS CHRISTVS
ERO MO^SVS INFERNI TVVS. OSE. 13 CONFINTE VICI MV^DV^. IOA. 1^ VE^T^^ ^ORS
VICTORIA. 1 COR. ^^

Imprinted at London by John Windet dwelling in Adling street at the sign of
the white Bear, near Baynards Castle. 1586

FORTITVDINE ET PRVDENTIA


A LETTER WRITten by a true Christian Catholic, to a Roman pretended
Catholic.
AS it has pleased Almighty God in these latter days with the spirit of his
mouth to waste and consume the Kingdom of Antichrist, and to erect and
reestablishe the Church and Kingdom of Christ, delivering both to the
Magistracy the sword, and to the Ministry the word for that purpose: so
has the Devil and his adhaerents in no age been more forward or furious,
either to sustain the tottring towers of the one, or to hinder and suppress
the increase and augmentation of the other, to which end he now most carefully
armeth, as it were for the last conflict, with malice, fraud and force, his
Liuetenant general, the Bishop of Rome with his freindes and confederates the
favorites of that Babilonian strumpet, who seeing her self forsaken, her painted
shows, her deceitful, toys and trash, both desciphered and despised by all
sound judgments, stormeth like another Juno, enraged with malice and
madness, carrying

-- alta mente repostum
Iudicium Paridis, spretaeque iniuriae formae
-- Laid up in deepest thought,
The doom of Paris, and the wrong of bewty set at naught.
This her malice, that she may the more furiouslye execute against this realm
of England sometime her darling, but now her infest, she puts all means in
proof and practice, that either fraud or force may minister unto her. She
frames unto her self instruments of our own nation to wreak her wrath upon
their native country, she bewitcheth them with the sleights and sorceries of
error and superstition, and so sends them to allure and seduce others: she
makes them brokers of her beauty, extollers of her power, publishers of her
praises, and ministers of her practices. They term her the Sea of holiness,
the Catholic Church, the spouse of Christ, the mother of the faithful.
Quisquis amat ranam, ranam putat esse Dianam. Who so a frog does love, lo he
That frog Diana thinks to be.
Whereas in truth she is the chair of pestilence, the seat of Antichrist,
the forge of treasons, the receptacle of traitors, the cage of every filthy
and unclean bird, the hell of the living, and a second Babylon, as it was
well noted by Petrarch comparing her with the former in an epistle written unto
a friend Fuit illa omnium pessima, eaque tempestate foedissima: haec vero iam
non ciuitas, sed laruarum a clemurum domus est, and vt breuiter dicam, scelerum
atque omnium dedecorum sentina. Viuentium etiam infernus, tanto ante dauidico
ore notatus quam fundalus aut cognitus. Quicquid de Assiria, vel Aegiptia
Babilone, quicquid de quatuor Labyrinthis, quicquid de Averno limine, deque
Tartareis siluis, sulphureisque paludibus legisti, huic Tartaro admodum fabula
est. Hic Turrificus simul and terrificus Nimrhod, hic pharetrata Semiramis, hic
inexorabilis Minos, hic Rhadaman thus, hic Cerberus vniuersa consumens, hic
Tauro suppositae Pasiphae, mixtumque genus, (quod Maro ait) prolesque biformis,
Minotaurus inest Veneris monimenta nephandae. Hic postremo, quicquid confusum,
quicquid atrum, quicquid horribile vsquam est aut fingitur, aspicias. etc. That
was of al other the worse, and in that age the most filthy This now is not a
city, but the house of terrefiing spirits and devils, and that I may speak
breiflie, the sink of all wickedness and shameful dishonesty, the hell of the
living noted by the mouth of David so long before it was either known, or the
foundations thereof were laid. Whatsoever thou have read of the Assirian or
Egiptian Babylon, whatsoever of the four Laberinths, whatsoever of the fall of
Auernus, of the hellie woods and Brimstonie marshes is unto this Hell but (as
it were) a fable. Here that toureformer and terrifier Nimrhod, Here is the
warlike harlot Semiramis. Here is the untreatable Minos, here is Rhadamanthus,
here is Cerberus devouring all things, here is the beastly bullouer Pasiphae,
and the mixed kind (that Maro speaks of) and the biformed issue, Minotaurus
the moniment of a wicked lust, finally here thou may behold what thing soever
is loathsome, and what horrible thing soever is either found or feyned.

But this will they not see that blinded with affection, and banded into
faction labor and endeavor to blind and bewitche others, seducing the
ambitious with promises of honor, the simple and ignorant with ostentation of
learning, who conceive their hypocrisy to be piety, their superstition to be
religion, their falsehoode to be faithfulness: their reconcilement to the
Romain Church and Prelat, to be neither treachery to their prince nor treason
to their country, but a safety to their souls, quietness to their
consciences, and an uniting of themselves to the mystical body of Christ. But
in this Viridi latet anguis in herba. Within the grass that shows so green
An adder lurks that is not seen.


For in truth this their reconciliation (which they perceive not) cutteth them
off from the Church of Christ, and makes them the limbs and members of
Antichrist, unfaithful to God, disloyal to their prince, treacherous to their
country, as having vowed their obedience to the mortal enemy of all three.
It is a mystery replenished with mischief, a clowd covering many cruel
intentes, a Trojan horse full of Greekish or rather Romish and Reamish wiles,
and wickedness, a devilish and Popish practice, a Massesecreate provided for
the Massacring of England. By these means, treasons are conspired, forces are
prepared, moneys collected, evil minds united, fires kindled within our own
bowels: to the which foreign flames will soon be added to consume us: the
ministers of these mischiefs are crept unto our Dioces, they have perverted
many, they have reconciled many, and now of late in this country they have
traveled much, I know they are not unknown to you, and that either their
words or writings or both have very much prevailed with you. As a gentleman I
do favor you, as a seduced man I do pity you, as a reconciled man (if such
a one you be) I must detest you, since thereby you have abandoned the mystical
body of Christ, and have joined your self to the mischievous body of
Antichrist. In that you came of courtesy to see me, I must thank you, and am
right sorye my leisure did not serve me to have further speches with you. You
delivered unto me two Propositions, as the grounde-worke of your opinion, the
one, that the principles of your doctrine, are grounded firmly upon the
catholic Church, which antiquity, universality, and consent do plainly
make manifest unto you. The other, that the signs given of a true Church by
the^ of the reformed religion, which are the sincere preaching of the word,
the right administration of the sacraments, religious prayers and wholesome
discipline are no true signs of a true Church, but so to affirm them is an
error in Logique, for that the Church is a sign of them, and not they of the
Church. For your first proposition that the errors thereof may better appear,
I will briefly handle these 3. points.

First that neither the Catholic Church nor the doctrine, antiquity,
universality, or consent thereof can otherwise be known then by the scriptures.

Secondly, that sundry principles of your religion are not at all grounded upon
the catholic Church.

Thirdly, that the Roman Church upon the which your principles are grounded,
is neither the Catholic Church, nor a sound member of the catholic church.

For your 2. proposition, that the errors thereof may likewise be seen, I will
in few words deal with ^^^se three points.

First that of a particular Church no better judgment can be given, whether it
be sound or unsound or of two particular Churches which is the sounder, then
by the word and doctrine that they preach, by the sacraments that they
minister, by the prayers that they use, and by the discipline that they
exercise for where these are most pureliest and perfectliest done, that Church
is to be thought the purest and perfectest member of the Catholic Church.
Where these are impurest and corruptest, that Church is to be judged the
impurest and corruptest member, and where these are not at all, there is to be
accounted no visible Church to be at all. Thus to affirm is an error in Logike
but a truth in divinity:

Secondly that of the truth of the doctrine, of the right administration of the
sacraments, of the sincerity and purity of the prayers, of the godly exercise
of the discipline in any Church, the only perfect absolute and true
touchstone is the holy scripture, which ought diligently to be read of all men.

Thirdly that for the true understanding of the Scripture in those things that
are necessary, the circumstance of the place, the conference of other places,
the proportion of the doctrine, the summary of our faith, and the holy Ghost
working in our hearts do sufficiently enable and enlighten us.

The holy Catholic Church we define to be the congregation, company and
society of all those that have believed in Christ from the beginning of the
world to this present time, all that now believe in him, and all that from
henceforth shall believe in him to the end of the world. It is called Sancta
holy because it is sanctified and hallowed by the holy ghost it is called
Catholica, catholic or universal, because it conteyneth all ages, all places,
al persons that believe: it is called Ecclesia, because it is a calling out or
euocation of people out of ignorance and error unto the faith and knowledge of
God. This Church is the mystical body of Christ, who is the true and only
head of it, which governs it in omnipote^cie, and is joined unto it in
charity. Saint Augustine upon the 56. psalm, confirms this our definition
of the Church.

Corpus Christi est Ecclesia non autem ista aut illa, sed toto orb diffusa,
nec ea quae nunc est in hominibus qui praesentem vitam agunt, sed ad eam
pertinentibus etiam ijs qui fuerunt ante nos, and ijs qui futuri sunt post nos,
vsque in finem soeculi: tota enim Ecclesia constans ex omnibus fidelibus, quia
fideles omnes sunt membra Christi, habet illud caput positum in coelestibus
quod gubernat corpus suum, and si seperatum est a visione, annectitur
Charitate. The body of Christ is the church, yet not this church or that, but
that which is dispersed throughout the whole world, neither yet that alone
which is in men that live at this present, but that unto which they likewise
appertayned that have been before us, and that are to come after us unto the
worlds end. For the whole church consists of all the faithful, for all the
faithful are members of Christ, having that head placed in the heavenly
places, which governs his body, though it be separate from the sight, it is
adjoined in charity.

It is divided into two parts the militant and triumphant: the triumphant
already in bliss and glory ineffable: the militant, hoping for the like
happiness, and in the mean time under the banner of Christ Jesus, warfaring
here on earth, against the world the flesh and the Devil.

This church for antiquity so ancient, for number so great, for estate so
diverse, for situation so universal, no man's age could serve to know, no man's
knowledge were able to conceive, no man's conceit were of sufficie^cy to
comprehend, if the holy Scriptures, wherein the spirit of God has delivered
these things for our instruction, were not extant amongst us.

In them we are taught that the church began in Adam, that the first Martyr
was Abel, the first persecutor Cain, that by the Breach of Gods commandment
mankind fell into that miserable and corrupt estate that it was not able to
perform that Law of perfect obedience and righteousness, that GOD had given
and graven in the hearts and minds of men, by the accomplishment whereof, they
were to have life, and by the impeachment whereof they were to have death
eternal: and that then GOD in his infinite goodness and mercy granted a
remedy for us in the promised seed, which should restore mankind, and tread
down the serpents head which was the first preaching of the Gospel, published
by God himself, apprehended by faith and believed by Adam.

Afterward of God reiterated to the holy Patriarchs, by them embraced and
taught to their children and families, preached and foretold by the Prophets,
shadowed out in the Law written, and in the Leuitical ceremonies, performed in
Christ, testified and published by the Apostles, confirmed with signs and
miracles, believed of al nations, maligned by the Devil, persecuted by the
wicked in all ages, and yet continued to the end of the world, by Gods
especial grace and providence. These things we plainly see contained from
the first of Genesis, to the last of the Revelation, which otherwise could
never have come to our knowledge. In them we may see the beginning increasing
continuance and perpetuation of the church, the estate and condition of it in
time past, at this present, and in time to come: the doctrine delivered by the
holy Ghost to the Patriarchs, to the Prophets, to the Apostles: and the faith
embraced by the children of God in all ages, there may we observe the
antiquity that yields to no novelties, there may we see the universality,
that gives place to no schism or division, there may we find that consent
that grounded in veritye is polluted with no error or iniquity. Therefore S.
Augustine rightly judges, that the catholic church is to be sought in the
Scriptures: his words are these: contra Petiliani Donat epist.

Si autem Christi Ecclesia Canonicarum Scripturarum diuinis and certissimis
testimonijs in omnibus gentibus designata est quicquid attulerint, and
vndicunque recitauerint, qui dicunt ecce hic Christus, ecce illic: audiamus
potius si over eius sumus, vocem Pastoris nostri dicentis, Nolite credere:
Illae quippe singulae in multis gentibus, vbi ista est non inueniuntur: Haec
autem quae vbique est, etiam vbi illae sunt, inuenitur: ergo in Scripturis
sanctis eam Ecclesiam scilicet requiramus. If the church of Christ throughout
all nations be discerned by the divine and infallible testimonies of the
Canonical scriptures, whatsoever they shall bring, and whencesoeuer they will
allege which say, Lo here is Christ, Lo there is Christ. Let us hear rather
(if we be his sheep) the voice of our shepherd saying, Do not believe them,
for all those in many nations where the same is, are not found, but this same
which is every where, is also found where they are, therefore let us seek the
same church in the holy scriptures.

And in his treatise de vnitate Eccles. cap. 16. Ecclesiam in scripturis
sanctis Canonicis debemus agnoscere, non in varijs hominum rumoribus,
opinionibus, factis, dictis, and visis inquirere. We are to acknowledge the
church in the holy canonical scriptures, and not to seek it in the sundry
rumors, opinions, doings, sayings and conceits of men.

And again in his 166. epistle: In Scripturis didicimus Christum, in
Scripturis didicimus Ecclesiam, has scripturas communiter habemus, quare non in
ijs Christum and Ecclesiam communiter retineamus? In the Scriptures we have
learned Christ, in the Scripturs we have learned the church, this scripture we
have common amongst us, wherefore do we not in them likewise retain Christ
and the Church?

Hereunto also accords Chrysostom in his 49. homily upon Math: Antea multis
modis ostendebatur quae esset Ecclesia Christi, nunc autem nullo
modocognoscitur nisi per Scripturas. Before by many means was it showed which
was the church of Christ, but now by no means is it known but by the
Scriptures.

Thus by the judgment of these Fathers, and by the nature of the catholic
church it self, we see that the knowledge of it is to be derived from the
scriptures: which so being, what can be more clear then that neither prayers
for the dead, nor invocation of Saints, nor worshipping of images, nor the
Popes primacie over the church, nor his superiority over princes and kingdoms,
nor his doctrine of Purgatory, nor his power there to release souls, nor
transubstantiation, nor the half communion, nor monastical vows, nor
forbidding of marriage, nor meritorious fastes, nor works of desert and
supererogation, nor sacrificing Christ every day, nor releasing subjects of
their oaths of allegiance, nor dispencing with Princes for periuries and
incest, nor sale of pardons, nor offering unto relics, nor a thousand other
doctrines practices and ceremonies of the Papisticall religion were ever
grounded upon the catholic church. Let the whole volume of the scriptures be
perused, you shall see none of these things taught, believed, practiced used
or embraced by the catholic church, examine the faith, doctrine, writings and
documentes of the patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, Christ himself, you
shall find these things either not contained in them, or contraried by them:
Try them by antiquitye, you shall prove them far younger then the time of the
Apostles, try them by universality, you shall perceive, that neither the church
before the Law, nor the church under the Law, nor the purest churches under
grace did ever embrace them, try them by consent, you shall find that neither
the patriarchs, nor the Prophets, nor the Apostles, nor the faithful by them
taught in sundry churches, did ever agree in them, or once believe them, it
must needs be then that they are not grounded in the catholic church, but
are some later inventions, and doctrine of a particular church, from whose
errors and corruptions, they have proceeded, which particular church, is the
Church of Rome, which we will briefly show, neither to be the catholic
church, nor to have been for many years any sound member of the catholic
church.

The catholic church (as we before rehearsed) conteyneth all them that have
believed, do believe or shall hereafter believe in Christ Jesus to the end of
the world:

The church of Rome conteyneth not all those that have believed (for in the
days of many of them it had no being at all) nor all them that do believe,
nor all them that shall believe:

Therefore the church of Rome is not the catholic church.

The catholic church contains all parts both of the church triumphant and
militant.

The church of Rome conteyneth no part of the church triumphant, nor all
parts of the church militant.

Therefore the church of Rome is not the catholic church.

Revel. 12.
Within the catholic church Christ was borne, and of a blessed member of the
catholic church.

Christ was not borne in the church of Rome nor of any member of the church of
Rome:

Therefore the church of Rome, is not the catholic church.

The catholic church allows not the adoration or divine worshipping of any
creature:

The church of Rome allows the adoration and divine worshipping of creatures

Therefore the church of Rome is not the catholic church,

The mayor is the express sentence of S. Aug, in his 2. book de moribus
ecclesiae cath. cap. 30.: it is also the express doctrine of Christ in the 4.
of Matthew: (...) Him only thou shall worship. And of the Angel in the 19. of
the Reuelat. (...). Before God shall thou fall down.

The minor is proved by the Nicene council, which teaches that the image of
the Trinity and the cross are to be adored and worshipped with the same kind
of adoration and worship that the trinitye and Christ himself are to be
worshipped with: and by Thomas of Aquine an approved Doctor of the Romain
church in his third book of sentences the second distinction, and by
Nauclautus Clugiensis whose words are these: Non solum fatendum est fideles in
Ecclesia adorare coram imaginibus, vt nonnulli ad cautelam forte loquu^tur, sed
and adorare imaginem sine quo volueris scrupulo, quin and eo illa^ venerari
cultu, quo and Prototipon eius. It is not only to be yielded unto, that the
faithful in the church do worship before images, (as some happily speak for a
cautell) but also do adore the image without any kind of scruple whatsoever,
yea and do honor the same with that worship, wherewith the thing or person
thereby represented, is to be honored. And by Andradius the late defender of
the Tridentine counsel whose works are seen and allowed by the Romish
church, Non inficiamur (says he) hac nos latriae adoratione Christi
praeclarissimam crucem colere and venerari. We deny not, that we worship and
honor the most excellent cross of Christ with this adoration of greatest
honor and worship: but both the cross of Christ, and the image of the trinity
and al other images are creatures, therefore our conclusion is strong and
certain, that the church of Rome is not the catholic church. Infinite
arguments to this purpose might be drawn, and every of them in effect
demonstratiue, but the matter so clear, these few may suffice.

Let us then examine since it is not the catholic church, whether it be a
catholic church in that sense that the word catholic is imitatiuely taken, for
sound and sinceere, that is, whether it be a pure and perfect member of the
catholic church. It is very sure and certain, that sometime it has been a
very notable member, and (as it were) a right arm, an aid confort and
ornament to the rest of the parts, but the question is, what it is at this
present, and for many years has been, whether now it be a sound member of
the catholic church or no: for the deciding hereof, we can have no better
or more manifest trial, then by the doctrine that it teaches, by the
sacraments that it administreth, by the prayers that it uses, and by the
discipline that it exercises, and herein we come to the first point, that
controleth your second proposition.

As in the body of a man so long as any principal member as the arm or the
leg, has the bone vncrushed unperished, or vnwrested, the flesh and muscles
vnbrused, vninfected and unhurt, the veins sinews and arteries, neither
ouerstretched distorted, or shrunk, the skin vnannoied vnexulcerated,
vnimpeached, we term and account it a sound member. But if in any of these
points it be defective, rekon it unsound in that proportion and degree that the
nature and quality of the defect is of. So in the body of the church as long
as any member or particular church (as the Church of Rome, the Church of
Antioch, the Church of England, the Church of France) has the word of God
which resembles the bone or pith upon the which it ought to grow and
depend, unperished, vnwrested and uncorrupted, the prayers and supplications
which are (as it were) the flesh and muscles of it, wherewith it ought to be
filled and replenished unwasted, and unconsumed with atheism and security,
and vnpoysoned and vninfected with Idolatry and superstition. The holy
sacraments which represent the veins sinews and arteries, wherewith it is
both norished and united, vnma^gled, vndisordred and vnstrayned, and the
discipline which is like to the skin that enuironeth, compasses, and
defends the rest vnexulcerated and vnenflamed with the tumors of tyranny, or
cankers of covetousness, or otherwise unstained with iniquity, we are to
term and account it a sound member of the catholic church, and so much the
less sound, by how much the more it is in any of these points defective, or
evil affected.

If we cast this level over the Roman church, shall not we soon discover
how crooked and corrupt it is? and how much it has swarued from the
uprightness and sincerity wherein it was first established?

The holy Scriptures it has not only corrupted and wrested (as by infinite
examples might be showed) but also deprived of force and strength, and where it
ought to have depended of the Scriptures, it makes the scripture depend of it.
And whereas the sense of the holy ghost, is sure, certain, and immutable, it
makes it variable and alterable, according to the temporary practice of that
church. This shall you find in the epistle of Cardinal Cusanus, Cus. ep. 2.
and 7.
no less blasphemously then barbarously recorded.

The Sacrament of the Lords supper it has mangled into a half communion, and a
private Mass, disordred with the monstrous fantasy of transubstantiation, and
thereby altered the commemoration to an adoration, the Sacrament, to a
Sacrifice propiciatorye.

The sacrament of Baptism it has pestered, if not polluted with many
superstitious and superfluous ceremonies.

The names and dignitye of sacraments it has strayned and stretched to other
things contrary to their nature.

The prayers and supplications which ought only to be made unto God, and so
made unto God as the congregation may both in understanding and devotion, join
with them and say Amen: It has what with invocation of Saints, what with
worshipping of images: what with a strange and unknown language made either
impious or unprofitable.

The discipline which should keep all things in order and frame in it, is
altogether stained with ambition and covetousness: finally, it is a member so
full of corruption, so swollen with pride, and so envenomed with ambition, that
it persuades the world, that it is the body, and that all the rest of the
parts are but members of it, and that whatsoever part is not like it, is
corrupt: and carrying upon it the Roman Bishop as a most pestilent ulcer it
says, that is the head, to which all other parts must submit and subject
themselves,

And is it not then rightlye to be judged an unsound member, and an insincere?

Examine in like sort any other particular church: Do it uprightly and
sincerely, and it shall make manifest unto you whether it be a sound, or
unsound member of the catholic church: and if unsound, in what degree,
proportion and measure it is so to be judged and accounted.

These therefore are perfect and pregnant sayings which can never deceive you,
if the lamp of eternal light, Gods holy and heavenly word bear any credit
or authority with you: for by that shall you know whether the doctrine of any
church be pure, or impure, whether the Sacraments be rightly or otherwise
administered, whether the prayers be godly and religiously, or Idolatrously and
superstitiouslye made and used: and whether the discipline be sincere and
perfect, or disorderly and corrupt: and in this we fall to the second point
that answers your second proposition.

If the doctrine of any church is conformable to the doctrine of the
Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles, whose doctrine and documents the holy
scripture lays down, it is to be judged sound and sincere: and so much the
less sound, be how much it more swarueth from their faith and doctrine.

If the Sacraments in any church be ministered according to their first
institution and use, which the holy scriptures does declare, they are to be
accounted rightly and duly administered.

If prayers in any church be used according to that form, manner, purpose and
intent that the godly of all ages testified in the scriptures did use and
exercise, they are to be reckoned godly, devout and commendable.

If the discipline be according to the Law of God according to the direction of
godly Magistrates, according to the council and commandments of the Apostles,
and according to the use and practice of the purest churches: whereof the holy
scriptures are true records unto us, we justly may account it good and sincere.

Therefore has God commanded, and all good men commended the study, search,
reading and meditation of the scriptures. In the 6. of Deuteronomie we read:
Sunto verba ista in cord tuo, eaque acute ingerito filijs tuis, ac loquitor de
ijs cum seeds domi tuae, and cum ambulas per viam, cum cubas and cum surgis,
alligato ea in signum manui tuae, inscribito ea postibus domus tuae, and portis
tuis. Let these words be in thy heart, and the same diligently teach unto thy
children, and talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou
walk by the way, when thou lie down, and when thou risest up, bind them
for a sign upon thine hand, write them upon the posts of thine house, and
upon thy gate. And of the word of God it is said in the 4. of Deuteronomie
Haec est sapientia vestra ante oculos populorum: This is your wisdom before
the eyes of the people. Abraham says, Habent Mosen and Prophetas audiant eos:
They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them. Christ says Scrutamini
scripturas: search the scriptures. S. Paul says Tota Scriptura diuinitus
inspirata, vtilis est ad docendum, ad arguendum, ad corrigendum, ad erudiendum,
in iustitia vt perfectus sit homo Dei ad omne opus bonum instructus. The whole
scripture inspired of God is profitable to teach to improve, to correct and to
instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, instructed
unto every good work. Irenaeus in his third book the first chap. Euangelium
in Scripturis Apostoli nobis tradiderunt columnam and firmamentum fidei nostrae
futurum: The Apostles have delivered unto us the gospel in the scriptures, to
be the pillar and vpholder of our faith. Lib. 6. cap. 9.
Saint Augustine de Ciuitate Dei his 3 book and first chapter: Ciuitatem Dei
dicimus cuius Scriptura testis est. We call that the city of God, whereof the
Scripture is witness. Saint Ambrose upon Luke Si qua est Ecclesia quae fidem
respuat nec Apostolicae praedicationis fundamenta possideat, deserenda est. If
there be any church which rejects the faith, or possesses not the
foundation of the Apostolic preaching it is to be forsaken. Saint Chrysostom
upon the 2. to the Thessalonians the third homely, Omnia clara and plana sunt
in scripturis diuinis, quaecunque necessaria sunt, manifesta sunt. All things
are clear and plain in the holy scriptures, what things soever be
necessary, are manifest. Saint Augustine in his third epistle: Sacra Scriptura
ea quae aperta continet, quasi amicus familiaris sine fuco ad cor loquitur,
indoctorum atque doctorum: the holy scripture speaks those things which it
plainelye contains, like a familiar friend without guile to the heart both of
the learned and of the unlearned. And in his book de vnitate Ecclesiae, the
13. chapter: Vtrum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant non nisi diuinarum scripturarum
canonicis libris ostendant, quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis credere
oportere, quod in Ecclesia Christi sumus quia ipsam quam tenemus commendauit
Optatus vel Ambrosius, vel alij innumerabiles Episcopi, aut quia nostrorum
Collegarum consilijs ipsa praedicata est, aut quia tanta mirabilia fiunt, aut
quia ille somnium vidit, and ille spiritu assumptus audiuit. Whether they hold
the church let them not show, but by the canonical books of the holy
scriptures, for neither do we therefore say that we ought to be believed
because that we are in the church of Christ, because Optatus or Ambrosius or
other innumerable Bishops have commended the same which we hold, or because it
is praised in the counsel of our fellows, or because so great and strange
things are wrought, or because such a one has seen a dream, or such a one
taken up in the spirit has heard.

Saint Paul writing to the Colossians does admonish them diligently to read
the scriptures. Sermo Christi habitet in vobis copiose in omni sapientia. Let
the word of God dwell in you abundantly in all wisdom. Saint Chrysostom in
his 19. homely thereuppon, Audite quotquot estis seculares, and vxori, ac
liberis praeestis, quemadmodum and vobis det in mandatis maxim scripturas
legere, nec leuiter and negligenter, sed magno studio. Hear you as many as
are seculer, and have government over wife and children, how he gives you in
charge, chiefly to read the scriptures, not lightly and carelessly but with
great study. Jerome upon the same place Hic ostenditur verbum Christi non
sufficienter, sed abundanter etiam Laicos habere debere, and docere se inuicem,
vel monere. Here it is showed that the lay men also ought to have the word of
Christ, not sufficientlye, but abundantly, and to teach or warn one another.

Origin upon Esaias the 2. homely: Vtinam omnes faceremus illud quod scriptum
est, Scrutamini Scripturas.

Would to God we all did that is written, search the scriptures. S.
Chrysostom upon John the 13. homely, Admoneo, and maiorem in modum rogo, vt
libros comparemus: I warn, and in earnest sort request that we get books. And
in an other place upon the epistle to the Colossians the 9. homely: Audite
obsecro seculares omnes comparate vobis biblia animae pharmaca si nihil aliud
vultis vel nouum testamentum acquirite: Hear I pray you all the seculer,
provide unto your selves the bible the preservative of the soul, or the new
testament if ye will nothing else. And hom. 3. de Lazaro, Semper hortor and
hortari non desinam, vt non hic tantum attendat is ijs quae dicuntur, verum
etiam cum domi fueris, assidue divinarum scripturarum lectioni vacetis, quod
quidem qui priuatim mecum ingressi sunt, non destiti inculcare. I still exhort
and will not cease to exhort that not only you attend here unto those
things which are spoken, but also when you shall be at home, that you would
continually apply the reading of holy scriptures: which thing I have not left
to exhort those, which have professed themselves with me. And again, Ne
negligamus nobis parare libros, Let us not despise to get us books. And
further, Sum librum in manus, lege historiam omnem and quae not a sunt memoria
te nens, and quae obscura sunt, parumque manifesta frequenter percurre. Take
the book in thy hand, read all the history, and keeping in memory those
things which are evident, peruse often those that are obscure and less
evident.

Of the perfection of the scriptures, Irenaeus: Scripturae quidem perfectae
sunt, quippe a verbo Dei and spiritu eius ductae: The scripturs truly are
perfect, for as much as they are sprung out of the word of God, and of his
spirit.

Of their authority: Augustine. Mayor est Scripturae authoritas quam omnis
humani ingenij capacitas comprehendere potest, profecto inuiolabilem Sacrarum
literarum authoritatem confiteri debemus. Greater is the authority of the
Scripture then the capacity of all man's wit is able to comprehend, certainly
we ought to acknowledge the inviolable authority of the holy Scripture,

Of their authority and truth in an other place: Cedamus and consentiamus
autoritati scripturae sanctae, quae nescit falli and fallere: Let us give place
and consent to the holy scripture, which cannot be deceived, nor deceive.

Finally of the scriptures, Irenaeus: Scripturis diuinis niti, quae certa and
indubitata veritas est in firma and valida petra est do mum suam edificare, hac
vero derelicta alijs niti quibuscunque doctrinis in certam effusae arenae, vnde
facilis sit euersio est ruinam struere. For one to lean to the holy scriptures
which is the certain and undoubted truth is to build his house upon a firm
and strong rock, but this being left, and to lean unto other doctrins
whatsoever, is to an assured ruin, to build upon the quick sand, whence it
is easilye overthrown.

So that we may conclude this point with S. Ciril Necessarium nobis est
diuinas sequi literas, and in nullo ab earum praescripto discedere: It behooves
us to follow the holy scriptures, and in no point to depart from the
ordinance thereof.

It rests that we show that the true sense of the scripture is obtained by
waying the circumstaunces of the place, by conference of other places, by
observing the proportion of the doctrine, by noting how it agrees with our
Catechism, or summary of our faith, by fervent prayer, often meditation, and
the holy Ghost working in our hearts.

Lib. 1. de ^ri.
Touching the first Hillarie sometime Bishop of Proycteux gives us a good
rule. Optimus Lector est, qui dictorum intelligentiam expectat ex dictis potius
quam imponat, and retulerit magis quam attulerit, neque cogat id videri, dictis
contineri, quod ante lectione^ presumpserit intelligendum: He is the best
reader that expects the understanding of words, out of the words, rather then
puts thereto, and shall carry therefrom rather then bring thereto: neither
shall enforce that thing to seem contained in the words which before the
reading he purposed to be understood. Lib. 4
And again Intelligentia dictorum ex causis est sumenda dicendi, quia non
sermoni res, Lib. 5.
sed rei est sermo subiectus, Verba sensum enuntiant, sensus rationis motum,
rationis motus veritatem incitat, ex verbis igitur sensum sequamur, ex sensu
rationem intelligamus, and ex ratione veritatem apprehendamus: the
understanding of the words is to be taken of the causes of speaking, for the
matter is not subject to the speech, but the speech unto the matter. The
words do show forth the meaning, the meaning the motion of reason, the motion
of reason stirs up truth Therefore by the words let us follow the meaning,
by the meaning let us understand the reason, and by the reason let us apprehend
the truth. Lib. 9
And again, Dictorum intelligentia aut ex praepositis, aut ex consequentibus
expectetur: Let the understanding of the words, be looked for either be those
things that are before, or that follow after.

Lib. 8. cap. 2. in Joan.
And for the circumstances Saint Cirill very well notes: Ante omnia quando locum
Scripturae recte intelligere volumus, tria diligenter consideranda sunt, tempus
qua^do scriptum est quod dicitur, persona quae dicit, vel per qua^ vel de qua
dicitur, et res propter quam aut de qua scribitur, sic enim absque errore
sensum poterimus verum inuestigare. Before all things when we will understand
a place or the scripture aright, three things are to be considered, the time,
when that that is spoken is written, the person which speaks, or by whom or
of whom it is spoken, and the thing for the which, or of the which it is
written, for so we may without any error find out the true sense.

Conference of places we term the collation of a few with many, of the
obscure with such as are more plain and manifest, whereof great light of
knowledge and understanding does proceed. Lib. 2. de doctr. Chr. cap. 6.
For as S. Austen well observes, Magnifice and salubriter spiritus sanctus ita
scripturas modificauit, vt locis apertioribus fami occurreret, obscurioribus
autem fastidia detergeret, nihil enim fere de illis obscuritatibus eruitur,
quod non planissime distum alibi reperiatur. The holy ghost has so mightily
and helthfully tempred the scriptures, that in the plainest places he might
satisfy hunger, and in the darker places cast away lothsomnesse, for of those
obscurities, nothing almost can be brought forth, which may not be found most
plainly spoken of in some other place.

And in an other place, Sacra Scriptura inuitat omnes humili sermon quos non
solum manifesta pascat, In Epist. 3. ad volus.
sed etiam secreta exerceat veritate: hoc in proruptis quod in reconditis
habens, sed ne aperta fastidirentur eade^ rursus operta desiderantur,
desiderata quodammodo renouantur, renoua ta suauiter intimantur, hic salubriter
and praua corriguntur, and parua nutriuntur, and magna oblectantur ingenia.
Ille huic doctrinae inimicus est animus qui vel errando eam nescit esse
saluberrimam, vel odit aegrotando medicinam.

The holy scripture inuiteth all men with gentle speech whom it does not
only feed with the manifest, but also exercise with the hidden verity,
containing the self same thing in the plain, which it has in the obscure:
but least things plainelye set down should become lothesome, they again
covered are coueted, and so being coueted, are in some sort renewed, and so
renewed are delightfully intimated, that very healthfully the wits of men being
evil are corrected, being small are increased, being deep are delighted:
that mind only is enemy thereunto, which either through error, knows it
not to be most wholesome, or being sick hates medicine.

Lib. 3. de doctr. Chr. cap. 28.
And again, Per Scripturas diuinas multo tutius ambulatur quas verbis
translatis occupatas cum scrutari volumus, aut hoc inde exeat quod non habet
controuersiam, aut si habeat ex eadem scriptura vbicu^que inuentis atque
adhibitis eius testibus terminetur. By the divine Scriptures, we walk far
more safely: which when we will search forth, being used in borrowed words:
either this effect issues thereof, that it has no further controversy, or if
it has, the same may be ended by testimonies, whersoeuer gathered and
alleged out of the same scripture.

hom. 12. cap. 34.
Origin upon Exodus, Quis nostrum ita se ad diuinae legis studia conuertit?
Quis nostrum it a operam dedit? quis ta^to studio ac labor diuina quaerit
studia, quanto quaesiuit humana? Et quid conquerimur, si quod non discimus
ignoramus, aliqui vestrum vt recitari audierint quae leguntur statim discedunt,
nulla ex his quae dicta sunt inquisitio ad inuicem nulla collatio: which of us
does so addict himself to the study of the law of God: what one of us gives
such diligence? who with so great study and labor follows divine meditations
and studies, as wherewith he has sought after humane things? And why then do
we complain, sithence we remain yet ignorant of that which we will not or else
neglecte to learn. Some of you, so sone as ye hear some things recited which
are read do immediately depart: so far is it off that any inquisition and
examination is made of those things which are uttered, or any conference used
or collation.

The proportion of the doctrine, we call that uniformity and conformity that
is between the faith embraced by the Patriarchs, by the Prophets, by the
Apostles, and by the faithful of all ages, whereof the holy scriptures are
witnesses unto us, that doctrine of God, in all points absolute in nothing
contrary to it self, will soon discover any erroneous doctrine that shall be
produced, if we carry the true model of it in our minds, as in the
scriptures it is expressed and set forth. Hereof S. Jerome notably, Con. in
cap. sextum Ep. ad Gal.
ad normam omnia diriguntur and vtrum praua rectaue sint cum regula apposita
fuerit arguuntur, ita and doctrina Dei quaedam quasi norma sermonis est quae
inter iusta iudicat and. iniusta, quam qui secutus fuerit habebit pacem in
semetipso, quae superat omnem sensum, and post pacem misericordiam quae
praecipua est in Deo Israel.

All things are directed and ordered according to rule, and whether in deed
they be evil or good, crooked or straight, when the rule or line is applied
unto them, they are proved and found out: In like manner also the doctrine of
God, is as it were an exact rule and perfect square of speech which judges and
discerns between those things which are just and those which are unjust:
which whosoever truly follows and cleaves unto, he shall have peace in
himself, which surmounteth and exceeds all understanding: and consequently
after this peace of conscience, mercy which is most chief in the God of
Israel.

S. Augustine of the body of the doctrine, H. 11. de ciuit. Dei. cap. 3.
hic prius per Prophetas, deinde per seipsum postea per Apostolos quantum satis
esse Iudicauit locutus, etiam scripturam condidit quae Canonica nominatur
eminentissimae autoritatis cui fidem habemus de ijs rebus quas ignorare non
expedit, nec per nos ipsos nosce idonei sumus.

He first by his Prophets, then by himself, afterward by his Apostles
speaking so much as he knew to be sufficient, has framed and made the
Scripture which is named Canonical, being of most excellent and effectual
force and authority: unto the which we give credit concerning those things,
which it is not expedient that we be ignorant of, neither are we apt or able of
our selves to know and conceive.

The summarie of our faith, and that which faith requires we call the
Apostolic Creed the ten Commandments and the Lords prayer, wherein a
certain rule or method is delivered us, how to believe, how to live, how to
pray, this also will well lighten our understanding, that it fall not unto
indecent, uncharitable, and monstrous conceits, whereof S. Augustine very
well, Si preceptiua locutio est, aut flagitium aut facinus vetans, aut
vtilitatem and beneficentiam iubens non est figurata. De doctr. Chr. lib. 3.
cap. 16.
Si autem flagitium aut facinus videtur iubere, aut vtilitatem aut
beneficentiam vetare figurata est, nisi manducaueritis (inquit) carne^ filij
hominis and sanguinem biberitis non habebitis vitam in vobis, facinus vel
flagitium videtur Iubere, figura est ergo precipiens passioni Domini esse
communicandum and suauiter atque vtiliter recondendum in memoria quod pro nobis
caro eius crucifixa and vulnerata sit.

If it be a precept forbidding wickedness and enormitie or commanding virtue
and goodness it is no figurative speech. But if it seems to command a wicked
deed and enormitie, or to forbid goodness and virtue, it is figurative.
Except you eat (says he) the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood,
you shall not have life in you. He seems to command, a wicked enormitie, it
is figurative. Therefore commanding us to communicate to the passion of the
Lord, and profitably to call to remembrance that his flesh was crucified and
wounded for us.

Had the Romish Church observed this rule it had never fallen to that
blasphemous doctrine of transubstantiation which contrarieth the articles of
our Creed, Lib. 3. de doctr. Chri. cap. 5.
wherefore we may rightly say with S. Augustine: In principio cauendum est ne
figuratam locutionem ad literam accipias, ad hoc enim pertinet quod ait
Apostolus litera occidit, spiritus autem viuificat. Cum enim figurate dictum
sic accipitur tanquam proprie dictum sit carnaliter sapitur, neque vlla mors
animae congruentius appellatur, ea demum est miserabilis animae seruitus signa
pro rebus accipere and supra creaturam corpoream oculum mentis ad hauriendum
eternum lumen leuare non posse.

First heed is to be taken that thou shall not take a figurative speech
according to the letter. For to that pertains it which the Apostle says, the
letter kills, but the spirit gives life. For when the figurative speech is
so taken as though it were properly spoken, it tastes of the flesh: neither
can any thing be more fitly called the death of the soul. To be short, it is
a miserable bondage of the soul, to take the signs for the things signified,
and not to be able to lift up the eye of the soul above the bodily creature,
to receive the eternal light.

Of prayer and meditation we read in Origin. Supr. exodus hom. 12. cap. 34.
Ostenditur non studium solum nobis adhibendum esse ad discendas literas
sacras: Verum and supplicandum Domino, and diebus ac noctibus obsecrandum vt
veniat agnus ex tribu Judah, and ipse accipiens librum signatum dignetur aperire.

It is showed that not only study is to be used for to learn the holy
scriptures: But also we ought to pray to God, and to crave day and night, that
the lamb of the tribe of Judah will come, that he taking in hand the book
sealed, will vouchsafe to open it. And in Saint Hillarie, non ergo ex nobis est
quod intelligimus, In psalm. 125.
sed ex eo qui quae innoscibilia erant fecit intelligi. Itaque ab eo speranda
intelligentia est qui and pulsantibus aperiet, and querentibus demonstrabit,
and petentibus no^ negabit.

Therefore it is not of us, that we do understand, but of him which makes us
to comprehend those things which would not be known. Therefore of him
knowledge is to be hoped, which will open to them which knock, will show to
them that seek, and will not deny to them that crave. Hereof Saint Bernarde
writes right well: Quo spiritu scripturae factae sunt eo spiritu legi
desiderant, ipsae etiam intelligendae sunt. Nunquam ingredieris in sensum
Pauli, donec vsu bonae intentionis in lectione eius, and studio assiduae
meditationis spiritum eius imbiberis, sicque de reliquis.

By the same spirit whereby the scriptures are revealed, do they require also
to be read, by the same also they are to be understood. Thou shall never
enter into the understanding of Paul, until with a good intent thou may
suck out his spirit, by continual reading and daily meditation, and so of the
rest. And we may well say that both the root and fruit of prayer and
meditation in the word of God is the spirit of God which opens our
understanding, and leads us unto all truth. For from Gods grace these godly
exercises do proceed and by the continual use of them his grace is increased
and augmented in us, to the outward hearing of the word of God and meditation
thereof, the inward working and operation of the holy Ghost being joined and
united, which is both promised and performed to all the faithful even to all
the children of God.

We read in the 59. of Esaias, Spiritus meus qui in te est, and verba quae posui
in ore tuo and seminis tui in perpetuum non deficient. My spirit which is in
thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth and of thy seed shall not
depart for ever. Christ says in the 14. of John: Spiritus sanctus docebit vos
omnia, and suggeret vobis omnia quae dixi vobis. The holy Ghost shall teach
you all things, and minister all things which I have spoken unto you. S. John
says: John. 2.
Vnctionem habetis a sancto, and nostis omnia, vnctio docet vos de omnibus. You
have your annoynting of the holy, and know all things, the annoynting
teaches you all things.

Saint Paul says: Animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt spiritus Dei, at
spiritualis diiudicat omnia, 1. Corin. cap. 2.
Spiritus enim omnia scrutatur etiam profunditates Dei.

The carnal man perceaueth not the things which are of the spirit of God, but
the spiritual discerns all things, even the depth of God.

To conclude we learn of S. Paul that faith comes of hearing, and hearing of
the word of God, for the study and observation thereof has the working of the
holy ghost joined therewith, which produces faith, which is not of our selves,
but is the gift of God as the same Apostle teaches us, in the 2. Chapter of
his Epistle to the Ephesians, so that by the outward hearing of the word and
the inward operation of the holy ghost, faith is in us kindled, Christ
thereby apprehended, his justice and righteousness to us derived, God
reconciled, our sins pardoned, his mercy obtained, we in Christ Jesus
adopted to be the children of God, and inheritors of everlasting salvation.
Therefore the Devil our mortal enemy, that evermore labors our confusion
by his chief instrument Antichrist and his adherents and by his own false and
sly suggestions woorketh all he may to stay men from reading and hearing the
word of God, and from coming to those places where it is read and taught,
that is from public service and sermons whereby such as are skillful in the
tongues and have traveled in the study of the scripture, the circumstances of
places are laid open, the sense made manifest, the proportion of the doctrine
taught and declared, conference and collation of places used and applied, the
use and fruit thereof signified the bread of life divided and distributed for
the nourishment of our souls, our faith thereby kyndled and confirmed, lastly
the holy Ghost therewith powered and bestowed upon us for our further comfort
and enstruction.

Thus have I briefly answered your two propositions, whereby you may somewhat
be induced to the consideration of your estate, of the corruption of the church
that you follow, of the weakness of the grounds that you stand upon, of the
danger that thereby you are in, and of the means whereby you may escape it.
And that I may yet more amply satisfy you in the question of the Church, the
mistaking whereof is the root of your error, I have herewith sent you a
history of the Church of Christ from the nativity of our Savior to the end of
the world, laid down by the holy Ghost, by the pen of S. John, in the twelfth,
thirtenth, and fourtenth of the Revelation, where unto I have added such light
of interpretation as my small talent has enabled me unto, wherein I fore see I
shall be assailed by the maleuolent, with two bitter objections, the one of
curiosity, the other of presumption, it shall suffice me to shield my self
against both with that notable sentence and censure of Jesus the son of
Sirach in the 39. of Ecclesiasticus.

1 He only that applies his mind to the Law of the most high and is occupied
in the meditation thereof, seeks out the wisdom of all the ancient, and
exercises himself in the prophesies.

2 He keeps the sayings of famous men, and enters in also to the secrets of
dark sentences.

3 He seeks out the mystery of grave sentences, and exercises himself in
dark parables.

4 He shall serve among great men and appear before the Prince, he shall
travel through strange countries, for he has tried the good and the evil
among men.

5 He will give his heart to resort early unto the Lord that made him, and to
pray before the most high, and will open his mouth in prayer and pray for his
sins.

6 When the great Lord will he shall be filled with the spirit of understanding,
that he may power out wise sentences, and give thanks unto the Lord in his
prayer.

7 He shall direct his counsel and knowledge: so shall he meditate in his
secrets.

8 He shall show forth his science and learning, and rejoice in the Law and
covenant of the Lord.

9 Many shall commend his understanding and his memory shall never be put out
nor depart away: but his name shall continue from generation to generation.

10 The congregation shall declare his wisdom, and show it.

11 Though he be dead, he shall leave a greater fame, then a thousand if he
live still, he shall get the same.

The exposition upon the 12. 13. and 14. Chapters of the Revel.
CHAP. 12.
Verse 1. And there appeared a great wonder in heaven: A woman clothed with the
sun, and the Moon was under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve
stars:

2. And she was with child and cried traueling in birth, and was pained, ready
to be delivered.


HERE is first laid down unto us by the holy Apostle, a description of the
true Church of God the true spouse of Christ: the true mother of all the
faithful, which has been one and the very same even from the beginning of the
world unto this day, she is described in the form of a woman clothed with the
Sun, this sun, is the sun of righteousness Christ Jesus, the which the
church his spouse has put on, with whom only she thinks her self adorned,
and beautified, in so much that she nether seeks nor coueteth any other man's
righteousness to clothe her or deck her withal: but accompteth her self in
him and by him to have sufficient beauty, and purity, the which she knows and
acknowledges to have altogether of his mercy and goodness, and not by her
desert or merit. And the Moon was under her feet. By the moon may be
understood al worldly and earthly things, which are subject to changes and
alterations which have their diminishinges, and increasings, their waxines and
wanings, as honor, riches, power, authority, dignity, and such like: with
all the vain pleasures and delights of this world: all the which this true
church and spouse of Christ does despise, contemn, and tread under her feet.
The Moon also may put us in remembrance of the cha^ges, and alterations, which
the church is subject unto in this world: some times being in quiet, sometimes
in prosperity, sometime in adversity, sometime consisting in many, sometime in
few.

Further it gives us to understand that as the Moon receaueth all her light
and beautye from the Sun, so the church receaueth all her purity,
righteousness, and glory from Christ. Thus the Moon was under her feet, and
upon her head a crown of twelve stars,

This number of twelve, is the number of perfection or fullness, and by the
stars, shynings in the church, are meant the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the
Apostles, the Martirs, the godly ministers of al ages which shine in the church
both in life and doctrine, which all, do receive their light, of the sun of
righteousness, wherewith the church is clothed. 2 And she was with child,
and cried traveling in birthe, and was pained ready to be delivered. This
place is to be referred to those times of the church, that were before the
incarnation of Christ. When as the congregation of the faithful, that is to
say, the church did maruelously longue, and (as it were) travailed in mind, to
have that promised seed borne and brought to light: that should repair the
miserable ruin of mankind, and tread down the serpents head, the which seed
was our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, who was born within the church and of a
blessed member of the church.

3 And there appeared another wonder in heaven: and behold, a great red dragon
having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads:

4 And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to
the earth.

Having described the church, now he falls to the description of the
principal enemy of the church which is Satan: he is described in the form
of a dragon, that is to say full of venom, full of poison, wherewith he
infecteth, and corrupts the world: of a red color, to declare his bloudines,
his cruelty, his spite and malice, having seven headdes: that is to say being
full of devises, subtilties, crafts, and deceipts, to entrappe and destroy men
withal. He has also ten horns and seven crowns, his horns signify his
mighty force, power and violence: his crowns, his dignity, honor and authority
in this wicked world: whereof he is called Prince and chief potentate of this
darkness.

4 And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and cast them to
the earth.

The dragons tail are false prophets, hypocrites, and such as by a show of
holiness deceive men: teaching false doctrine, drawing men from heaven to earth,
from worshipping God in Spirit, and truth, to earthlye adorations,
Imaginations, and conceiptes. Of this tail were the Scribes and Pharisyes, and
other religious folk of the Jews: of the same also are all such as by false
doctrine have drawn any out of the firmament of Christ's church, that were
once there placed as stars by baptism, and regeneration. Hereunto the Prophet
Esaias does allude, saying the false prophet is a very tail: but such stars
were not fixed in the firmament: therefore the dragons tail had power over
them.

And the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be delivered, to
devour her child when she had brought it forth. So she brought a man child
which should rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her son was taken up
unto God, and to his throne.

This child that the church brought forth whom the Dragon sought to devour,
was Christ our Savior: against whom the Dragon stirred first Herod, then the
chief of the Jews, the Scribes, the Pharesies, the high Priests, lastly
the whole multitude, to the end to devour this man child, that the church had
brought forth to her everlasting comfort, and to the Dragons eternal ruin.

5 She brought forth a man child which should rule all nations with a rod of
iron. This was that child whom David by the spirit of prophecy speaks of
in the second Psalm. I will preach the law whereof the Lord has said unto
me, thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee: desire of me and I shall
give thee the heathen for thine inheritance and the uttermost parts of the
earth for thy possession: thou shall bruise them with a rod of iron, and
break them in pieces like a potters vessel.

And her Son was taken up unto God, and to his throne. Thus when the Dragon
had spitte all his venom, had used all the devises and subtilties of his
seven heads, all the force and violence of his ten horns, all the authority
and dignity of his seven crowns, finally when he had showed al his spite,
crueltye and malice, he prevailed no whit at all, for the child which he
persecuted Christ Jesus, ascended into heaven, was taken up unto God and to his
throne: and there sits at the right hand of the father, in most glorious and
eternal majesty.

6 And the woman fled into the wilderness where she has a place prepared of
God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and three score
days. And the woman that is to say the church, the congregation of the
faithful, fled and was dispearsed into the wilderness of the world, among the
Gentiles, in that huge and waste forest: whereof the Roman Emperor was chief
Foster, who is the beast, that in the beginning of the next chapter is
described: there remained the church in this wilderness, subject to the injuries
of the Emperors and other his under officers, yet notwithstanding fed by
Gods especial providence, in myddest of all persecution with heavenly and
spiritual food, by godly and sincere ministers.

And this state did she continue in a thousand two hundred and three score
days. That is to say two and forty months the which if we reckon after the
account of Daniel every month for a sabbath of years, it amounts just to
two hundred four score and fourteen years: the which number of years
contains the whole persecution of the Primitive church: from the first of
Herod to the last of Licinius who being overcome by that most renowned
Emperor Constantine the great, the church enjoyed thereupon after a long and
grievous storm, a sweet, blessed and happy calm. In the mean time she was
by Gods especial providence preserved and nourished: not in pompous and
glorious ostentation, but in hydlock, and as it were in the desert, not
persecuting, but persecuted, not giving, but receiving the crown of martyrdom:
not glittering with te^porall riches, but shining with spiritual virtues: not
practicing the law of arms, but preaching the law of God: not superior to all
governments, but subject to all governors: not releasing subjects of their
allegiance, but instructing them to the doctrine of obedience: not making
mercha^dize of gods mercies freely bestowed upon us, but dividing frankly, and
faithfully to the children of God the bread of life. O how well beseemed this
the church of Christ, and how contrary unto this is the church of Antichrist.

7 And there was fought a great battle in heaven, Michael and his angels
fought with the dragon, and the dragon and his angels fought. Here is described
a fight and great battle, whereof the place and parties are specially to be
considered: for the place it was in heaven, that is to say in the church, for
the congregation of believers is termed heaven: even as the company of the
unfaithful and unbelievers is called the earth: so we find in the beginning
of this chapter, that the Dragons tail, that is to say false teachers,
tyrants, persecutors, and such like drew the third part of the stars of
heaven, that is to say a great number that were accounted believers and
members of the church militant, and cast them to the earth, that is, made them
reprobates and unbelievers. The parties are Michael and his angels on the one
side, that is to say Christ and his ministers, that is godly magistrates and
instructers, according to the saying of the prophet Daniel in that time shall
Michael the great prince arise, which stands for the sins of thy people. On
the other side is the Dragon and his angels: that is Satan and his
ministers, which are tyrants, persecutors, seducers, false prophets,
hypocrytes, and such like, with death, sin, hell and damnation.

8 But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven.
Here he declares unto us the success of the battle, the victory was
Michaels, the dragon was conquered, driven out of the church, and had no place
in the hearts of the faithful. Thus Christ vanquished the Devil, death, hell
and sin, in so much that none of these have any power or authority, upon his
elect and chosen people.

9 And that great dragon was cast out, even that old serpent, which is called
the Devil, and Satan which deceaueth all the world, he was even cast into
the earth, and his Angels were cast out with him. The dragon that is to say the
Devil being driven out of heaven, out of the Church, out of the hearts of
the godly was cast into the earth, that is, into the reprobate, the
unbelievers, the wicked, whose hearts are the temples of Satan, whose senses
are gross and earthly, whose adorations and religions are terrestrial, whose
affections are altogether fixed upon earthly and worldly things. And his
Angels were cast out with him: death, sin, hell and such other the Dragons
associates, and ministers: as they have no place with the faithful, so amongst
the unbelievers and reprobates, they have their proper seat, and throne, being
together with Satan their leader cast into the earth: that is to say, among
the wicked and earthly people.

10 Then I heard a loud voice saying: now is salvation in heaven, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ for the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused the^ before our God day
and night. Here is laid before us the rejoicing of the heavenly Citizens, for
the felicity, and happiness, of the church that by Christ's death and passion
had overcome and obtained the victory over the Devil and his angels. For
Michaell overcame the Dragon, Christ vanquished the Devil, overthrew his
dominion power and authority, and now reigns only himself, in most heavenly
and triumphant sort in the hearts and minds of the faithful. So the accuser
is cast down that we may well say with S. Paul Who shall accuse the elect of
God? It is God that justifies Who is he that condemns? It is Christ which
died, yea which rose again: which is also on the right hand of GOD, which
makes intercession for us.

So the accuser of our brethren is cast down which accused them before our God
day and night. 11 But they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the
word of their testimony: and they loved not their lives unto the death. The
faithful, the chosen and elect people of God, overcame the Devil, but how?
Not by their desartes works or merits, but by the blood of the Lamb, and
word of their testimony: that is to say, by the death and passion of Christ:
and by believing in him that raised our Lord Jesus from the dead, who was
delivered to death for our sins, and is risen again for our justification:
the apprehension by faith of this incomprehensible benefit, which was the
word of their testimony, by the blood of the Lamb does overcome the Devil,
conquer the world, vanquish the flesh, overthrow sin, death hell and all
infernal powers, according to the saying of Saint John This is the victory
that overcomes the world eue^ our faith. And they loved not their lives unto
the death. That is to say, they most willingly suffered death for the truths
sake and for their testimony, in respect whereof they loved not their lives,
but after the counsel of our savior, in the fourteenth of Luke, denied
themselves, took up their cross and followed Christ, and hated their life in
this world, to the end to keep it to life everlasting.

12 Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in the^. VVoe to the
inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea, for the Devil is come down unto you,
which has great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time. Therefore
rejoice o ye congregation of the faithful, and ye that dwell in them: Woe to the
inahbitants of the earth, woe unto you earthly and wicked people woe unto you
inhabitants of the Sea, woe unto you wavering, inconstant and unsteadfast in
belief: for the Devil is come down unto you, who shall vex you with sundry
calamities, both inwardly and outwardly shall replenish you with all vices,
torment you with anguish and grief of mind, stir up hatred, dissension,
debate, war and murder amongst you, for his wrath is great, knowing he has
but a short time. For he is a roaring Lion, that knowing his end to be at
hand, is the more fierce* He is that cruel tirant, that knowing his reign to
be but short, sheadeth so much the more blood: the more his time is diminished,
the more is his malice increased: what he wants in measure, he will fill up
in weight.

13 And when the Dragon saw that he was cast into the earth, he persecuted
the woman which had brought forth the man child. When the Dragon that is to
say the Devil perceived himself to be vanquished and overcome, driven and
expulsed out of the hearts of the faithful: cast and thrown down amongst the
unbelievers, and reprobats, he persecuted the woman which had brought forth
the man child: he persecuted the church the congregation of the faithful,
which to her eternal happiness had brought forth the man child Christ
Jesus, even the Lord her righteousness, her beauty and her salvation.

14 But unto the woman were given the wings of a great eagle that she might
fly into the wilderness, into her place: where she is nourished for a time,
and times, and half a time, from the presence of the serpent. The providence of
God assisted the Church, against the malice of Satan: The Church having her
faith supported by the two testaments, as it were, by the two wings of a great
eagle in this wilderness of the world, did infinitely spread it self by the
outward preaching of the gospel, and the inward operation of the holy Ghost.
The time, times, and half a time that is to say a year, two years, and half
a year is the self same that we read before, a thousand two hundred and
threescore days, the which we there reduced to 42. months, and expounded
the months by Sabaoths of years, according to the prophecy of Daniel. It may
also signify both here and in the place before, the whole time and troubles
of the church militant from the birth of Christ, to the end of the world,
reckoning for a time, 500. years, for times 1000. years, for half a time 250.
years.

15 And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman, like a flood,
that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood: Satan that cursed
serpent abounding in malice against the church, cast out of his mouth water
after the woman: that is stirred and procured sundry people, nations and
governments (which here are comprised in the word water) to persecut and to
endeavor to extinguishe the church. Like a flood: that is to say abundantly,
violently, and ragingly.

That he might cause her to be carried away of the floode. That is to the end
that he might cause her to be destroyed by persecution: and as it were carried
away by violence from the face of the earth. 16 But the earth help the woman,
and the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the Dragon had
cast out of his mouth. The church increased by persecution daily, the
persecutors died, the earth swallowed them up in their graves: and as it were
opened her mouth dailye for them: and they daily fell in. But the church
remained, continued, and augmented every day: and the blood of the Martirs
became the seed of the church. So the earth help the woman, and swallowed up
the floode. 17 Then the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made
war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of God: and
have the testimony of Jesus Christ. The Dragon that is to say the Devil having
attempted first the head Christ Jesus. Secondly the church his body, aand
finding his labor frustrated, and his power too weak to work the destruction
of either of them, takes a third coursein executing of his malice: which is to
molest and persecute the members of the church: which are the remnant of her
seed, which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus
Christ. To the which end he has specially stirred certain devilish and
wicked instruments: whose estats, qualities, actions, and proceedings, are
very lively, pithelie, and effectually set forth in this next Chapter ensuing.
18 And I stood on the sea sand. Here the holy Apostle and Evangelist S. John,
procures in us a certain attentiveness and earneste animaduersion of the
vision following, declaring first the place wherein he stood, secondly what
he saw, which is this that follows.

CHAP. xiii.
1 And I saw a beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads and ten
horns, and about his horns were ten crowns, and upon his heads the name of
blasphemy.

2 And the beast that I saw, was like a Leopard, and his feet like a bears,
and his mouth as the mouth of a lion, and the Dragon gave him his power and his
throne, and great authority.


HERE is described unto us the Roman Empire, under the form of a beast,
most monstrous, most cruel, most strong, and most terrible Saint John herein
alludeth to the description laid down thereof by the Proph. Daniel in his
seventh Chapter. The fowrth beast (says he meaning the Romain Empire) was
grimme and horrible and marvelous strong: it has great iron teethe, Daniel. 7.
it devoured and destroyed, and stamped the residue under his feet. it was
unlike the other beasts that were before it, for it had ten horns.

Which ten horns are expounded in the 24. verse of the same chapter to be ten
kings, which shall grow out of the ruins of this empire. And therefore the
ten horns are here laid down to have upon them ten crowns, of these
kings and kingdoms we shall speak hereafter: it had also seven heads, which
are the seven hills whereon Rome stands Upon which heads was the name of
blasphemye. For so much did the Romans attribute to their prowess and
policy, their force and foresight: that they termed their city Romam
aeternam, and as it were mating the most mighty, vaunted Diuisum imperium cum
Jove Caesar habet.

Which their wickedness is well here expressed by the name of blasphemye.
Moreover it is likened to a Leopard in proportion, and show: to a Lion for the
mouth, and for the feet to a bear: whereby we understand that it not only
had the countries and countenances, the possessions and proceedings, the might
and majesty, the conditions and cruelty of the former monarchy, but also in all evil and tyranny far and much exceded them. Daniel unto this place gives
very great light, who likening the Babilonian monarchy to a Lion, the Persian
to a bear, the Macedonian to a Leopard, teaches us, that S. John in this
Roman Monarchy foresawe the mouth and foot, the pride and pase, the state
and step, the rage and ravening, of all the former to be expressed, contained
and represented. Heereunto is added that the Dragon have him his power, and his
throne and great authority:

That is to say, the Devil assigned him to be his chief instrument in
persecuting the members of the church, those that have the testimony of Jesus.
And to that end aduanceth his power throne and authority in this wicked world.

3 And I saw one of his heads (as it were) wounded to death, and his deadly
wound was healed, and all the world wondered at the beast. These heads seem
unto me to have three significations: two of them are laid down by the
Angel, in the seauentienth chapter, where they are expounded to be mountains
or hills, as heretofore we have taken them: and also kings or governors, as
hereafter we shall show them. But in this place it seems to be taken neither
for the one, nor for the other: but for a chief and principal part, of the
estat even for Room, and Italy it self. Which as well by the civil wars of
Caesar and Pompey, Augustus and Anthony: as by the loose and execrable
governments of Claudius, Tiberius, Caius, Caligula, Claudius the brother of
Germanicus, Nero the son of Domitius, and Aulus Vitellius, was as it were
wounded and that most grievously. Which in the time of Flauius, Vespasianus,
Titus, Nerua, Traiane, and the Emperors succeding it recovered: whereby the
deadlye wound was healed.

And all the world wondered at the beast. Such was the might and majesty, the
force and fortune of the Roman Empire, that all men wondered and maruailed at
it: had it in admiration, regard and reverence, as an estate most happy,
sacred, and in a manner divine.

4 And they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power unto the beast, and they
worshipped the beast, saying Who is like unto the beast? Who is able to make
war with him. By reason of the false religions and Idolatries of the Roman
Empire, the Dragon that is to say, the Devil, was worshipped. And by reason
of the might and puissance of the forsaid estate, it was of al nations feared,
and honored, insomuch as they thought that none other was like unto it: nor any
able to make war against it.

5 And there was given unto him a mouth that spoke great things and
blasphemies: and power was given unto him to do 42. months. The pride and
blasphemye of the Roman Emperors we have somewhat declared before. The time
of their persecuting power here expressed by two and forty months is the same
that in the former chapter is resolved, and a thousand two hundred and
threescore days, which gathered into sabbaoths of years, after the account of
Daniell, contains the whole time of the primitive persecution, from the first
of Herod, to the last of Licinius, the particularities of their pride and
blasphemies, as to be called Gods to have their images placed in temples, and
to have divine rites and ceremonies done there in their honor. Joseph. de bello
judah ico lib. 2. cap. 3.
The histories of their times do disclose, the sundry persecutions in great
crueltye by them and their authority executed against the professors of the
truth: the Ecclesiastical histories do mention at large: Whereby the
interpretation of this place and of the verses following is very clear and
manifest. 6 And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God to blaspheme his
name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven. The blasphemous
speeches and actions of the Roman Empire, being corrupted with all kind of
Idolatry and impiety, was bent first against the name of God, secondly against
his tabernacle, thirdly against them that dwell in heaven. Against the name of
God, that is to say against the essence, majesty, word and wisdom of God:
Whereas in stead of the creator, they honored creatures, in stead of one true
God, they served many false Idols, and adored them in corporal rites and
ceremonies: in stead of him that was to be worshipped in spirit and truth:
against his tabernacle, that is to say his church for of the church it is
spoken, behold the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them,
and they shall his people, and God himself shall be their God with them.

Against them that dwell in heaven, that is to say, against the members of the
Church: for that we are no more forrenners, and strangers, but citizens wtih
the Saints, and of the household of God. And therefore may be well termed
dwellers in heaven. For that as the Apostle says in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. In that we are members of the mystical body of Christ, we are come
to the mount Sion, and to the City of the living God: the caelestiall
Jerusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, and to the congregation
of the first borne, which are written in heaven. And to God the judge of all,
and to the Spirits of just and perfect men: and to Jesus the Mediator of the
new Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things
then that of Abel. Wherefore as in the former chapter, the Dragon, that is to
say the Devil, persecuted first the man child, that is Christ Jesus. Then
the woman clothed with the Sun, which is the Church. And lastly the remnant
of her seed which keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of
Jesus: that is to say, the members of the church. So this principal
instrument of the Devil the Roman Idolatrous Empire blasphemeth, gainsayeth
and persecuteth, first the name of God: that is his word and wisdom Christ
Jesus. Secondly his tabernacle, that is his church. Thirdly, those that dwell
in heaven: that is to say the faithful, that are the members and seed of the
church.

7 And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them:
and power was given him over every kindred, and tongue and nation. They that
before were termed dwellers in heaven, are here termed saints, against
whom this Roman Empire has made war, raised persecution, and prevailed in
all cruel torments and rigorous kinds of death, and that not in one contrie
or province alone, but throughout all the world, for the authority thereof and
power did reach in effect over every kindred and tongue and nation.

8 Therefore all that dwell upon the earth shall woorshippe him: whose names
are not written in the book of life of the lamb which was slain from the
beginning of the world. Such therefore as are not the elect of God, whose eyes
are not illumined with his heavenly light, and whose minds are not sanctified
with his holy spirit: whereby they may discern truth from falsehoode, but are
wholly led with earthly conceits, worldly considerations, and terrestrial
appetites, and therein do as it were dwell and inhabit, unwilling any way to be
weaned from it. They shall worship, obey, reverence, and follow in all
Idolatry, and naughtiness this Roman Empire: judging it to be the best way
for their saftie, benefit and advancement, although in truth it work their
ruin overthrow, and everlasting destruction.

9 If any man have an ear let him hear: if any lead into captivity, he
shall go into captivity: if any kill with a sword, he must be killed by a
sword. Here is the patience, and the faith of the Saints. With good reason it
is here required that men should be attentive: for here is declared the course
of the judgments of God, whose divine majesty not unlike to the law of
Talion, punishes men by that by the which they do offend

10 For if any lead into captivity, he shall go to captivity: If any kill
with a sword, he must be killed by a sword. Since therefore this Roman
Empire by force and fraud, by power and policy has wrought the ruin, and
overthrow of many: it is the judgment of God, that by force and fraud, by
power and policy, many shall work the ruin and overthrow of it: how
inseparable and insuperable soever it seem.

Here is the patience and the faith of the Saints.

That is that in the expectation hereof, there is matter given for the
Saints to exercise their faith and patience. For it was not a matter so
probable, but that faith was needful: nor yet so quickly accomplished, but
that patience was requisite: seeing that by little and little it was wasted and
consumed. For as the Popedom which here next is described, did by degrees
increase: so did the Empire decay by the same means: that the dignity of the
one was advanced, the authority of the other was diminished.

11 And I beheld an other beast coming up out of the earth, which had two
horns like the lamb, but he spoke like the Dragon. The former beast rose out
of the sea, that is out of the waves of worldly gouernementes, out of tumultes
and tempests of people and nations: out of the which in time was produced and
brought forth the Roman Empire. And Saint John when he saw that vision,
stood upon the sea sand: that is entered into consideration of worldly
gouernementes, estates and dominions: whose foundations are like unto the sand
of the sea, upon the which there may be no sure building: for that they are
subject to the variable tumultes of people and nations: as the sand is to the
raging waves and surges of the sea. But this other beast comes up out of the
earth: a place of more constancy of greater stabilitie, a place of
fruitfulness and fertility, which ought to yield a plentiful croppe to the
Lord of the harvest: who has prepared for the pure wheat of his elect, the
barnes of everlasting bliss. The earth here therefore signifies the church,
out of the which the second beast comes, which is the Popedom.

Which had two horns like the lamb: but he spoke like the Dragon. That the
Popes pretend the horns of the lamb, that is the power and authority of
Christ: as well touching his priesthood, as his principality, all
christendom can witness: who know right well that as Christ is in truth
the chief Prince, and chief Priest of the faithful: so for these many
years the Bishops of Rome have applied these two horns of the Lamb unto
themselves. As concerning the Popes priesthood, Durandus one of his favorites
thus writes: This is Melchisedeth whose Priesthood is not comparable Unto
others, he is the head of all Bishops: from whom they all grow, as
members grow from the head, and of whose fullness they all receive: as
touching his Princehoode, thus writes Pope Adrian to the Emperor Frederick:
My seat is in the city Rome: the Emperors seat is in Acon, in Arden (a
forest of France) what soever, the Emperor has, he has it of us: as Pope
Zacharias translated the Empire from Greece into Germany: so may we again
translate the same from the Germans to the Greeks. Behold it is in our power
to bestow the same upon who^ we list. Therefore are we appointed of God over
nations and kingdoms, to pull down, to root up, to build and to plant
again, in respect of both these authorities, Pope Boniface the eight at Rome
in a great Jubilee, as it were in the face of the world went in public
procession, one day in his priestly pontificalibus, and the next day in the
robes Imperial, with a naked sword carried before him, causing this sentence
to be proclaimed, ecce hic duo gladij behold here are the two swords. Thus
this second beast has two horns, that is to say, priesthood and princehood
like the lamb, that is like Christ: but he speaks like the Dragon: that is
like the Devil: falselye and corruptlye, subtillye and maliciouslye, proudely
and profanely: such is the speech and doctrine: wherein he resembles the
Dragon, who is a murderer and a liar from the beginning, and the father of
lies.

12 And he did all that the first beast could do before him: and he caused
the earth and them that dwell therein to worship that first beast, whose deadly
wound was healed. The might, poisons and authority of the Popedom, grew to
be such that it was equal altogether, if not superior in power and dignity
to the old Roman Empire, in so much that it could do in commanding and
governing the provinces and potentates of the world, as much and as throughlye
as ever the old Roman Empire in his greatest dignity and authority could do:
and that (...), in conspectu eius, even in the sight and presence of the
Emperors: who were brought to that weakness, and feeblenes of estate, that
they became rather beholders of the Popes greatness, then exercisers of their
own: Yea and beheld it with fear and trembling: for when the Popes were
grown to that greatness and authority, that they could depose Emperors, as
appeared in the lamentable fall of that most noble Emperor Henry the third:
and that their practice therein by the condemnation of Vecilo Archbishop of
Ments, of heresy, for holding the contrary: was by the judgment and decree
of a counsel, as a sound point of doctrine established in the minds of men:
no marvel if the tallest Ceaders of Libanus did shake for fear of the
bramble, least fire should come out from him and consume them. From this point
of doctrine that it was in the power of the Pope to depose the Emperor,
another was inferred of no less moment: that it was likewise in his power to
make the Emperor: and for that the ceremony of imposing the crown upon the
Emperors head belonged to the Pope. When they had attained their greatness they
altered this piece of service to a point of soueraignety: interpreting the
imposing of the crown, to be the disposing of the crown: Therefore
Innocentius the second, upon the coronation of Lotharius the Emperor, the
year of our Lord 1133. caused the whole solemnity thereof to be drawn in
picture within his Palace of Lateran, with these verses subscribed.

-- Rex venit ante fores, iurans prius vrbis honores,
Post homo fit Papae, sumit quo dante coronam.
The king does come before the gate:
And swears first to the Cities state.
Him then the Pope his vassal makes:
And so to him the crown betakes.
If hereunto be added the letter of Pope Adrian to Frederick the emperor,
with the practice of Boniface the eight, both before recited, it may make some
demonstration of the power and authority of the Popedom in those days.

And he caused the earth and those that dwell there to worship that first
beast whose deadly wound was healed. In the third verse of this Chapter it
was declared that one of the heads of the Roman Empire was as it were wounded
to death: But his deadlye wound was healed. We there expound that head to be
Rome and Italy it self: so that the sense of this place is, that the Popes
shall cause the inhabitants of the earth, to have in great account honor and
reputation Italy and Rome, which are that beast and head whose deadlye wound
was healed: and such estimation brought they it unto, that the simpler sort
worshipped it as the chair of Peter, as the rock and bulwark of christian
religion: and as the invincible fortress of the faith: the wiser and
discreeter feared it as a place of no less perrill then power: and as the
lions den which moved Rodolfe a very notable Emperor, living about the year
of our Lord 1282. unto such as asked him the cause why he would not into
Italy, to yield this answer that the lion upon a time had invited all kinds
of beasts to come unto him: which when they came at the hour appointed, to
the mountain where the lion dwelled: The fox wiser then the rest, finding no
tracke of anyes return, drew back alleging a reason thus recited by Horace.

-- Quia me vestigia terrent.
Omnia te aduersum spectantia, nulla retrorsum.
13 And he did great wonders so that he made fire to come down from heaven on
the earth in the sight of men. In the sight of men, that is in the opinion
Judgment and conceit of men: he made fire to come down from heaven, that is
to come out from the church, upon the earth, that is upon the wicked, upon the
obstinate, upon the accursed and reprobate, this fire was the flame, and
thunderboultes of their excommunications: which in the opinion of men was
wonderful, and terrible: and blasted them, and made them accursed upon whom it
lighted: But it was not so in deed, it only appeared so in the sight of men,
that is in the corrupt judgment of the ignorant, for the excommunications
papal, were no lawful censures of the church: but were the unlawful and
tyrannous proceedings of an usurped power: and here it is good to note in that
there is mention made of heaven and of earth: that in the course of these
prophesies, as the earth is opposite unto heaven, it is taken in the worse
part: as the earth is opposite unto the sea, it is taken in the better part,
as the earth and the sea are opposite to the heavens, both are taken in ill
part. But to return to the Papal excommunications, so wonderful were they in
operation, that by them Leo the Emperor, by Gregory the second, was cut off
both from the tribute, and from the obedience due unto him in Italy. His
subjects there were made to rebel against him: two of his exarchats were
slain, and the third had his eyes pulled out. The king of Lumbards seized
upon much of the Emperors territories: and Rome and the Roman Dukedom were
seized upon by the Pope. By this fire also Henry the third a most honorable
personage, and Emperor of very great wisdom, courage, and industry was
utterly consumed and ouerthrown by Gregory the seventh, by force of the same
flame. Alexander the third made Frederick the Emperor to come to the city of
Venice to ask him forgiveness: to kiss his feet to hold his stirope, and to
do him service, and obeisance: the sparks of this fire, were interdiction,
suspention, inhibition, relaxation of subjects from their oaths of allegiance:
dispensation with oaths and such like, the coals that were hereby kindled,
were vprores, tumultes, disloialties, conspiracies, rebellions, seditions and
turbulent commotions: For in sight of men, these appeared to be fyres from
heaven: that is to be the censures of the church, which every man thought
himself bound upon pain of damnation to yield unto and obey, whereas in
truth they proceeded from the fire brands of hell: Who by these practices
weakened, wasted, and consumed the states of Christendom, and advanced
themselves to the type of all earthly honor.

14 And deceived them that dwelt upon the earth by the signs which were
permitted him to do, in the sight of the beast: saying to them that dwell on
the earth, that they should make the Image of the beast which had the wound
of a sword and did live. These signs of their power and authority, which God
permitted them to show, even in the face and feeling of the Emperors,
deceived no doubt them that dwelt on the earth: and wrought in them this
persuasion that the power that could bring such wonderful things to pass,
was sacred, heavenly, and altogether divine: and having gained this authority,
and reputation, with the inhabitants of the earth: they willed an Image of the
beast to be made, which had the wound of a sword and did live.

The beast as is before declared, is the Empire of Rome. The Image that is made
to represent it, is the church of Rome, where in we are to consider the
dignitye, authority, religion, laws and proceedings, how proportionably they
are framed, and fashioned to the portrature and Image of the old Roman
Empire: for the first and second the principal instrument, and pencill whereby
the Popes painted this Image, was the false and forged donation of Constantine
wherein they faigne, imagine, and bear the world in hand that the Emperor
has decreed, that as his earthly power imperial, so the holy sacred Roman
Church shall reverently be honored: and that the most sacred seat of Peter
shall be gloriously exalted more then the Empire and earthly throne: yelding
unto it power and dignity of glory: and also vigor and honorificence
imperial: and again that to blessed Syluester chief Bishop and universal
Pope of the City of Rome, and to all Bishops his successors, which shall sit
to the end of the world in the seat of blessed Peter: he presently together
gives his palace of Lateran appertayninge to his Empire: and also his diadem,
that is to say the crown that belongs to his head: and his white miter
called Prigium, with the collar that comes over his shoulders and compasses
his imperial neck, and withal his purple cloak, and scarlet roabe, and all
other his imperial indumentes: yea and the dignitye of having imperial
presidentes, and masters of horse, bestowing also upon him the imperial
Scepter together with all the ensigns, bands and sundry ornaments, imperial:
and all kind of proceeding of the imperial celsitude, and glory of his
power, and that the most reverent men, they of the cleargye serving the same
holy sacred Roman church, in sundry degrees, shall enjoy the same
celsitude, and heyght of honor, in singularitye, power and excellencye, with
the glory whereof the most honorable Senate seems to be adorned: that is,
they shall be made counselors, and consulles: and shall farther be decored
with all other dignities imperial: and that as the imperial warfare is
decked, so also the clergy of the holy Roman church shall be adorned: and
that as the imperial poysance is garnished with diverse offices, of
chamberlaines, of porters, of watchmen, and garders, so the holy Roman
church shall likewise be beautified, and that the pontifical brightness may
shinne most amplye and largelye, he does ordain that the houses of the
cleargye of the holy Romayne church, shall be garnished with skarfes, and
with lawnes: that is of bright white, and that they shall so ride: And that as
the Senate does use shows, with drawynges out: that is to say, decked with
fine white lynnen, so the clergy in like sort may use: And farther decrees
that Syluester and his successors, shall use the diadem: that is to say the
Crown of most pure gold and precious stones, which from his head, he had
granted unto him. And for that the said most blessed Pope, was unwilling
upon the Crown of his Priesthood (which he wear to the glory of Saint
Peter) to use that crown of gold: he had put a miter shynynge with white
bryghtnesse, with his own hands upon his head: ordayning that every one of
the Popes successors, in particular shall use the same miter. In their
proceedinges to the imitation of the Empire, which is all one, as if he had
said, as an Image of the Empire, this I find in effect word for word, in
the Popes decrees collected certain hundred years since by Gratian: and now
lately with prefaces, and privileges, recommended to the world, by Pope
Gregory the thirtenth: and printed in Paris the year of our Lord 1582.
although this donation, be a very falsehood and forgerie, in the opinions and
judgments, of sundry wise and learned men, as Cardinal Cusanus, Hieronimus
Paulus, Otho Frisingensis, Krantzius, Platina, Laurentius Valla, Carolus
Molinaeus, Andreas Alceatus, and others. Yet is it apparent to the eye, that
since from the stamp of the Romayne cleargye, this counterfecte did proceed:
they had hereby a good desire, to make their Romayne Church, an Image, and
representation, of the old Romayne Empire, which is the beast, that had the
wound of a sword, and did live: neither did they only endeavor to resemble
it, in dignity, authority, and ceremonies of honor and majesty: but also in
form and manner of religion, which is not unknown in the old Roman Empire,
to have consisted in the multiplicitye of gods: they having a god for every
country, for every province, for every City, for every place, and for every
thing: and for these they had alters, and Idols, and sacrifices, and oblations,
and ceremonies, in their honor. This the Romayne church represented in the
multiplicitye of saints, they having a saint for every country, for every
province, for every parish, for every place and for every thing, and for
these they had churches, and Images, and offeringes, and prayers, and
kneelinges, and what soever establishes a divine adoration: Hence it was that
they turned the temple of Pantheon, to the church of all Saints: Diana, to
our Lady: Mars, into saint George, Aesculapius to S. Roche, Romulus and
Remus, to Peter and Paul, and every other god of the Romayne Empire, to some
other Saint of the Romayne church. Lastly touching the laws, and manner of
government, there is a very great representation between the one and the
other, the form of the policy of the roman empire, seemed at the first
sight to be an Arastocracie: by reason of the authority of the Senate, but in
truth was a most absolute monarchy: by reason of the supreme power of the
Emperors. The form of the policy of the Roman church, seems likewise to
be an aristocracie, by reason of the authority both of the Cardinals, and
councels: but in very deed it is a most absolute monarchy, by reason of the
most high and circumspect power of the Popes. The laws Imperial, by the which
the Roman Empire endeavored to appease the controversy, that happened
amongst men, may appear by the pandectes, collected by Tri-bonian, by the code
of Justinian: and by the books called (...). The laws Papal, by the which
the Roman church proceeded likewise to end variaunces: may be seen in the
decretall Epistles, written to the very likeness and similitude of the
Imperial rescriptes: being an Imitation, repetition rehearsal, and
representation, of the self same laws, that bare swaye in the Roman Empire,
and so confessed by the Canonistes themselves. If any will wade farther, in the
consideration hereof: let them read the collections of Johannes Berthaclinus
firmanus, called his repertorie: which treats in several great volumes, of
an infinite number of things, wherein the laws Civil and Canon do accord.
And although in his second to me there be inserted the collection of one
Gwalnanus (under the word differentia) touching the differences in diverse
points, between the Civil law and the Canon. Yet are they so few in number,
in respect of the rest: that they are nothing in comparison: and such also as
differ rather in matter of circumstance, then of substance: and some of them,
such sort of differences as may very well be, between a body and his Image: As
for example, the last difference saving one by him is noted thus: Secundum ius
Civil, in libello accusatorio ponuntur nomina Imperatoris, and consulum: and
secundum ius Canonicum, loco illorum, ponuntur nomina Papae, and Episcopi.
2.9.4. lib. and ibi no. gl. 1. per Archi.

According to the Civil law, in a libell of accusation, the names are put of
the Emperor, and of the Consuls: and according to the Canon law, in stead of
the^ the names are put of the Pope and of the bishop.

15 And it was permitted him to give a spirit unto the Image of the beast, so
that the Image of the beast should speak, and should cause that as many as
would not worship the Image of the beast should be killed. Every body
Politic, and every state that is established to continue amongst men, live
by their laws and constitutions. Insomuch that laws are rightly termed, the
life of the common wealth. And in all well ordered common wealths these laws
are made, and ordained by the assent of the most part of the inhabitants and
members of the same. For as in the natural body of living creatures, out of
an harmony, and consent of every part and member, there resulteth a certain
vital spirit and vigor, that gives life and motion to the whole body, and
so long continues the same in good health and estate, as it enjoys free and
uninterrupted passage into every part and member thereof. So in the body
politic of common wealths, and estates, out of a consent and agreement, of
the parts and members thereof: there are produced laws and ordinances, which
give life and strength unto the common wealth: and so long continue the good
estate, and prosperity thereof, as they enjoy by their thorough execution,
free and clear passage, into every part and member of the same. And as in
monarchies and absolute governments, the laws obtain no force or vigor till
they receive the same, by the royal assent of the Prince and sovereign: so
the Roman church being framed and fashioned to the Image and imitation of the
Roman Empire, and thereby a monarchy: whereof the Pope is sovereign and
chief: has no life, strength or force, in her laws and decrees, until she
receive the same by the sovereign assent of the Pope: which he yielding,
thereby gives life and spirit to the image of the beast.

So that the image of the beast can speak and cause that as many as will not
worship the Image of the beast, shall be killed. That is, the church of Rome
can by her laws and decrees, pronounce and command, that as many as will not
worship, honor, and obey her, shall be killed and destroyed with fire and
sword, from the face of the earth.

16 And he made all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to
receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheades.

17 And that none might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name
of the beast, or the number of his name.

This mark or name of the beast, or the number of his name, we find in the
next verse, to be 666. which number Ireneus in his 5. book, and 25. chapter,
notes to be contained in this word (...). For if the letters thereof be
numbered, which are all numerall: it contains perfectly that account of six
hundred sixty six.

L 30 A 1 T 300 E 5 I 10 N 50 O 70 S 200 666.

This most ancient observation of Ireneus who had both seen Policarpus, and
ben scholar unto Papias, who were both disciples unto Saint John: may give us
very great light for the understanding of this place: which signifies unto us
that in the Roman church, which is the seat and kingdom of Antichrist:
neither small, nor great, rich nor poor, free nor bond, that is no kind or
sort of people may without this mark, buy or sell: that is to say, pray unto
God, or praise God. For when we pray unto him, we do as it were buy with our
prayers, that at his hand that we would have. Hereof it is that God
councelleth the church of Laodicea, to buy of him gold tried with the fire,
that is to pray unto him for the gift of constancy and strength of faith:
which may endure the fire of adversity and persecution. But when we praise
God, we do as it were, sell unto him for his goodness, that which he would
have: therefore says David in 50. Psalm. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and
again in the person of God: who so offers me thanks and praise, he honoreth
me: but neither pray unto God, nor praise God, that is neither buy nor sell,
might they in the Roman church, of what nation soever they were, unless they
had this mark, (...): that is the latin tongue, either in their foreheade, or
in their right hand: that is either by rule, or by rote: either in their mind
or in their book, either by memory or by reading.

18 Here is wisdom, let him that has wit count the number of the beast: for
it is the number of a man, and his number is. 666. It is very clear that this
number is marvelous mystical, and therefore it requires wisdom before it can
thoroughly be searched and dissiphered. Irenaeus his observation we have above
noted, in the word (...). He also finds the same number in the word (...)
which signifies the Sun, and that how the former word agreed unto
Antichriste, we have a little before declared.

T 300 E 5 I 10 T 300 A 1 N 50 666

How this appertains unto him Gregory the ninth in his decretals does teach
us: in the title de Maioritate and Obedientia. in these words. Praeterea nosce
debueras, quod fecit Deus duo magna luminaria in firmamento coeli: luminare
maius vt praeesset diei, and luminare minus vt praeesset nocti vtrumque magnum,
sed alterum maius. Ad firmamentum igitur coeli, hoc est vniuersalis Ecclesiae
fecit Deus duo magna luminaria: id est duas instituit dignitates, quae sunt
pontificialis authoritas, and regalis potestas. Sed illa quae praeest diebus,
id est spiritualibus, mayor est: quae vero carnalibus, minor: vt quanta est
inter solemn and lunam, tanta inter Pontifices and reges differentia
cognoscatur. Hereupon the gloss says, Cum terra igitur sit septies mayor
Luna, Sol autem octies est mayor terra, restat vt Pontificalis dignitas
quadragesies septies sit mayor dignitate regali.

Haymo bishop of Alberstaten in an exposition upon the Revelation (he lived
about the year of our Lord 840.) besides the words before alleged, notes the
greek words, (...) and (...). The Gothic word Genserikos: and the latin
word Diclux, each of them containing that number of 666. I will not here
discuss how right Greek these words are: only I will lay them down as I
find them, and so particularly consider of them.

(...) says Haymo signifies in Greek Honori contrarius, and contains the
number of 666. So that whosoever is most contrary to the honor of god and honor
of princes, he is this (...). that is, honori contrarius.

A 1 N 50 T 200 E 5 40 O 70 S 200 666

But how is more contrary to the honor of God, then he that diminishes the
glory of God and he that (the scripture teaches us, the beginning of our
salvation to be from the grace of God: the substance of our salvation to
consist in the righteousness of Christ: and the end of our salvation to be
referred to the glory of God.) professes far otherwise, yielding part of
the beginning to the power of nature: part of the substance, to the merits of
man: part of the end, to the honor of creatures.

This is he that permits himself to be called DOMINVS DEVS PAPA.

That imparteth unto many the honor due unto God alone: that treads upon
the neck of Emperors, that insulteth upon kings, that disposes of Empires and
kingdoms: that judges all men, and is judged by none: That whatsoever he
does, no man may say unto him, Domine cur ita facis? That contains all laws
within the cheast of his breast, That holds for a sufficient reason of his
doings Stet pro ratione voluntas

That takes the Emperor for his steward, his bailiffe and his man: That says,
Omne ius Regum pendet a Papa. This is (...). and this is Antichrist Prince of
the whole world.

(...) says Haymo is interpreted Nego: And being accounted according to the
greek letters, being all numerall: make up the just number of six hundred
sixty and six. the account falls out even.

A 1 P 100 N 50 O 70 Y 400 40 E 9 666

But the word thus written hardly receueth that interpretation. Wherefore I
take it rather to be the three first sillabls of the word (...) which
signifies Negans The mystery whereof S. John expounds unto us in his first
epistle, the second chapter the 23. verse.

(...) Quis est mendax, nisi qui neg at Iesum esse Christum, hic est
Antichristus: Who is a liar but he that denies Jesus to be Christ, he is
Antichrist. Our Lord Jesus is termed Christ, that is to say, the anointed,
in two respects: the one, for that he is the chief prince the other, for that
he is the chief priest, and Prophet. As chief prince he sits at the right
hand of the father, till his enemies be made his footestoole: governing the
godly with his spirit, and the wicked with a rod of iron. As chief priest, he
is a priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech, having nether successor
nor coadiutor, who needs not often to offer himself as the highpreist of the
Jews, who went yeerlye to the sanctuary with other blood: for with one
oblation, has he consecrated for ever, those that are sanctified, which
sanctification we have by the oblatio^ of the body of Christ, once made which
sacrifice for sins being offered, he sits for ever at the right hand of
God. In respect of which sacrifice God promises that he will forgive us our
sins and put our iniquities out of his remembrance. Now where remission of
sins is, there is no more offering for sins: and so consequentlye no
sacrificing preisthoode: that function having been absolutelye performed by
Christ Jesus.

But the Bishop of Rome establishing a sacrificing preisthoode, and an offering
for all actual sins, by the sacrifice of the mass: denies Jesus to be that
anointed, and eternal priest, according to the order of Melchisedech, Who by
one sacrifice upon the altar of the cross has obtained such a perfect
remission of sins, as well actual, as original: that there may be no farther
or future oblation or sacrifice for sins.

Cap. 10. v. 13.
For to repeat the saying of the Apostle in his epistle to the Hebrews, the
tenth chapter. Where remission of sins is, there may be no more offering for
sin. And again, when they teach these two propositions, the one devised by
Pope Boniface, the other by Pope Sixtus. Deus assumpsit Petrum in consortium
indiuiduae trinitatis: atque ab eo tanquam a capite, dona sua omnia in corpus
transfundit. God has assumed Peter into the fellowship of the indivisible
trinity: and from him as from a head, powers all his gifts into the body:
and that Diuus Petrus habitat in Pontifice Romano: Saint Peter dwells in the
Romain bishop. By reason whereof he is that Melchisedech, for he is the head
of all bishops, whose preisthoode none other is to compare with: from whom they
all grow, Durandus
as members do grow from the head, and of whose fullness they all receive.

And moreover affirm: Ecclesiam esse vnam, non propter Christum, Roffensis
sed propter Papam, qui eam conseruat vnam. That the church is one, not in
respect of Christ but in respect of the Pope, that keeps it in one. Do they
not utterly overthrow all that in them lies, the functions of Christ's
anointing: who is both the chief priest and prince of his church. Being the
head thereof, as of a mystical body, which receaueth from him by the
influence of his grace spiritual life, and vigor. His mercy wisdom and
providence spreading themselves, both generally throughout the whole, and
particulerly into every member thereof. Whereby both the unity and felicity
thereof is wrought and established.

But they that deny unto him or attribut unto any other the functions of his
anointing: deny him to be Christ. By this therefore we may see who is (...)
Who is (...), Who is Antichrist.

Gensericos, says Haymo, signifies in the Gothicke tongue, Gentium seductor,
the seducer of the gentiles: and in eo est Antichristus, christo contrarius,
quod iste seductor ille vero dicitur gentium saluator. And in this is
antichrist contrary unto Christ: That the one is the seducer the other is the
savior of the gentiles. This word he reconeth in Greek letters, and so
makes it up the number of 666.

thus G 3 E 5 N 50 S 200 8 P 100 I 10 K 20 O 70 S 200 666

Who this seducer of the Gentiles is, we may well perceive by that which is
said before, no doubt it is he of whom the Prophet Zachary speaks, Immediately
after the passion of Christ, when as the Gentiles had received the faith, and
the sinagogue was dissolved.

Ecce ego susci^tabo Pastorem in terra, succisa non visitabit, aetate tenerum
non quaeret, and contritum non sanabit, Zach. 11.12
stantem non sustentabit, and carnem pinguis comedet, and un gulas eorum
abrumpet. Vae pastori vano derelictori pecoris, gladius super brachium eius,
and super oculum dextrum eius brachium eius arescendo arescet, and oculus
dexter eius caligando caligabit. Forlo (says the Lord) I will raise up a
shepherd in the land, which shall not look for the thing that is lost, nor
seek the tender lambs, nor heal that that is hurt, nor sustain that that
stands up: but he shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claws
in pieces: Oh idle shephearde that leaves the flock. The sword shall be upon
his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and his
right eye shall be utterly darkened: This is Gensericos, gentium seductor, the
seducer, an Idol shepherd of the Gentiles.

The Latin words DIC LVX (that is say light) as it is noted by Haymo,
contain also the same number of six hundred sixty and six, and are not void
of especial demonstration.

D 500 I 1 C 100 L 50 V 5 X 10 666

For the Pope although his kingdom and religion be nothing else then darkness
and ignorance, yet will he have men to believe and profess, that with him, and
his is the truth: and the light.

And though men see it to be darkness, yet say it to be light. Yea and that
he is the sun that shines in the firmament of the Church: and the Lamp
that gives light unto men.

Therefore Cornelius Bishop of Bitonto (well acquainted as it seameth with the
Popes humor herein) in an oration of his at the last council of Trent used
this speech.

Papa lux venit in mundum, sed dilexerunt homines tenebras, magis quam lucem.
The Pope being the light, came into the world, but men loved the darkness
better then the light. It seameth he had learned this Lesson DIC LVX: let him
learn this withal: it is 666.

The later writers do note the same number in sundry other words, both in
Hebrewe and greek, In Hebrew in the words(...)

In the Greek in the words (...) (...).

We will consider of every of these as we did of the former, that we may see
how they accord both in number and in sense.



In the Hebrewe tongue signifies a sacrafice and elevation unto God. Sanctus
Pagninus in his dictionarye called Thesaurus linguae sanctae, under the verb
(...): expounds it thus, (...) Est oblatio sic appellata quod sur sum and
deorsum moueatur and eleuetur.

400 200 6 40 5 10 5 666

It is a sacrifice so called because of the elevation and motion of it up and
down. And this it seameth he observed out of David Kimchi, one of the most
learned Rabbis of the Hebrews

This interpretation lays down before our eyes the very action of the
sacrifice of the Mass. For there is a sacrifice unto God.

For they say their oblation and sacrifice consists of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ whom they offer unto God. There is also an elevation, and a motion
sursum and deorsum up and down. So that this in the hebrewe expresses that in
the Greek which we last noted (...). The Popish mass. So that the one may
very well stand for the interpretation of the other: and both as we may see,
the one after the numerall letters of the hebrewe: the other of the Greek,
make up the just number of six hundred sixty and six.

8 40 I 10 S 200 S 200 A 1 8 P 80 A 1 P 80 I 10 K 20 8 666

The other Hebrew words (...) are to receive their account according to the
numerall letters of the Greek as the former Gothic words of Haymo likewise
did. And as the Latin words Ecclesia Italica also do*

2 E 5 N 50 8 S 200 A 1 Y 400 666

These hebrew words signify the son of Esau, who otherwise was called
Aedom, of whom came the Aedomyts, Genesis 36. and 35
so that the soon of Esau is as much to say, as a chief of the Edomits

Jacob also was called Israel, and of him it is that God often calls his
faithful and chosen, Jacob his inheritance, and his people Israel. As then
Edom hated Israel, so shall the Edomits, the Israelits, that is the reprobate
shall abhor the godly, The limbs of Antichrist, shall afflict the members of
Christ. The Papists which are the Aedomites, shall persecute the true
Christians: which are the Israelits. Now he that is the chief of the Edomits,
he is this (...) whose name contains the number of 666: Whom together with
his whole faction he shall destroy and abolish that is called faithful and
true: and judges and fights righteously, whose eyes are as a flame of fire,
and upon whose head there are many crowns, who is clothed with a garment dipped
in blood, and whose name is the word of God Out of whose mouth, goes out a
sharp sword, that with it he may smite the heathen: for he shall rule them
with a rod of iron: For he is that treads the winpresse, of the fiercenes of
the wrath of God, and upon his garment, and upon his thigh a name written,
the King of Kings, and L. of Lords.

If we will know how his garment is dipped in blood, Esvy 66.
the Prophet Esaias will tell us in his threescore and sixth chap. that it is
sprinkled with the blood of the Edomits.

Who is this that comes from Edom? With read garments from Bosra? He is
glorious in his apparel: and walks in his great strength. I speak in
righteousness, and am mighty to save. Wherefore is thine apparel read, and
thy garments like him that treads in the winepresse? I have trodden the wine
press alone, and of all people there was none with me. For I will tread them
in mine anger: and tread them under foot in my wrath, and their blood shall be
sprinkled on my garments, and I will stain all my raiment: for the day of
vengeance is in my heart, and the year of my Redeemer is come.

Thus the Prophet intimates the glorious coming of our Lord and Savior to
the last judgment: to the confusion of Edom: and comfort of Israel. But hereof
we shall note more upon the two last verses of the next chapter.

The other words that contain this number of 666. as Ecclesia Italica, the
Italian or Roman Church (...) an evil priestly or Ecclesiastical government
or power, and (...). I am God upon the earth, accomplish that account in this
sort.

TH 9 E 5 I 10 E 5 K 20 E 5 O 70 K 20 P 100 S 200 L 30 O 70 E 5 8 K 20 I 10 S
200 P 100 40 I 10 A 1 I 10 A 1 T 300 E 5 I 10 I 10 P 80 T 300 A 1 I 10 A 1 K 20
G 3 L 30 A 1 A 1 I 10 K 20 I 10 K 20 8 8 A 1 S 200 666 666 666

The interpretation hereof is nothing difficult. The first which is Ecclesia
Italica, seu Romana, signifies the Italian or Roman church. The second
expresses his government: that is, Pontifex maximus, the chief Bishop, and
Summus Sacerdos, and highest priest, qui plenitudinem obtinet potestatis, who
has obtained the fullness of power: cui in ijs quae vult, est pro ratione
voluntas, unto whom in what him list, his will, stands for reason, as his
Canonistes deliver. And the third is a mystery by them also in these words
laid open, Dominus Deus Papa, the Lord God the Pope.

Thus in this charecter of 666. we see contained, the country, the language,
the pride, the tyranny, the doctrine, the government, the function, the
impiety, and the blasphemy of Antichrist, which are every of them specially:
and all of them only appliable to the Bishops of Rome.

It rests that we further consider in what sort it is termed the number of a
man: for so it is laid down in the text.

It is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred sixty six.

For the better understanding hereof, we are to observe two things. First, the
matter handled in these three chapters, the 12. 13. and 14. Secondly the
method used and observed therein: the matter is the estate of the church of
God from the birth of Christ, to the end of the world: the birth of Christ, the
comfort that the church thereby had: Christ's conquestes, by his passion: his
glorious ascension, the malice and endeavor of Satan: first against Christ
himself, secondly against his church: thirdly against the members thereof, the
persecutions, and afflictions of the faithful: the restoration of the truth:
the decay of falshoode, and lastly the glorification of the godly, and
condemnation of the wicked, at the final judgment. The method is first a
description of the church of God, in the form of a woman: out of whose womb,
Christ is borne. Satan is described in the form of a dragon: seeking to
devour this child, which the church had brought forth. Thirdly the ascension
of Christ is declared: and the persecutions raised against the Church, after
Christ's ascension. Fourthly Gods providence is laid down, in preserving the
universal church from ruin: which was done by three means: by the general
dispersing of the church: by the two Testamentes, which preserved the truth of
the doctrine: and by the mortality of the persecutors. Fifthly Satan's
endeavors are manifested against the members of the Church: when as he saw
that he could not prevail against the whole body, that he might the more
violentlye afflicte the members, he uses principally two instruments: the
first the Roman Empire, the second the Popedom. The Roman Empire is
described in the form of a beast most vglye, and cruel. The pride and
proceedinges thereof are laid down: and also the decay, which was wrought by
another beast, that had two horns like the Lamb: but spoke like the Dragon.
Which by the just judgment of God, partly by fraud, partly by force invaded
the greatness, and authority of the former, and so brought it to ruin, which
other beast is the Popedom, whose pride and tyranny, is likewise declared: and
finally the fall thereof, which is wrought by the restoration of the purity
of the doctrine: by the word of God, and shall thoroughly be accomplished by
Christ's coming in judgment. And this is it that Saint Paul teaches us,
Paul. 2. These. 2.3.8.
that the man of sin the son of perdition, shall be consumed by the
spirit of the Lords mouth: and abolished by the brightness of his coming.
Now the next verse which is the first of the next chapter, begins to
express the restoration of the doctrine. Christ manifesting himself in his
Church in mount Sion, accompaned with those whom the former persecutions of
the Roman Empire and Popedom, had consecrated as martyrs unto him, and
sends an Angel with an everlasting Gospel, to preach unto them that dwell
upon the earth: to every nation, and kindred, and tongue and people: which
verse begins thus:

Then I looked and lo a Lamb stood on mount Sion, etc. Which intimates this
much unto us: that when that man shall come whose name shall be six hundred
sixty and six. If it be wittily accounted: that then Christ shall manifest
himself: that then the everlasting Gospel shall be preached to them that dwell
upon the earth: that then the purity of doctrine shall be restored: that then
the will, and word of God, Re. cap. 14. verse. 7.8.
shall be published: by the which Babylon shall fall, and the popedom be
wasted and consumed.

These circumstances do lead us to Paulus tertius, whose name being well
accounted, contains this number of six hundred sixty six, if we alter the
numerall letters to Arithmeticall figures, and reacon it thereafter, thus:

PAVLVS. III. 555 111.

For Paulus contains three numerall letters. vz. VLV. the first V is 5. the
L and V is 55. which laid down arithmeticallye thus 555. is five hundred fifty
and five: then III which in numerall letters signifies the thid in
arithmeticall account is one hundred and eleven. And both these numbers, hold
an equal proportion, as one, ten, a hundred, five, fifty, five hundred: which
both sums being added together, do make up a third number of the same
proportion, which is 666.

In the time of this Pope, the Gospel began to take root: in many countries
sundry learned men, both by words and writings, preaching and professing the
sincerity and truth of the doctrine. For the suppressing whereof, in this Popes
time the council of Trent was assembled, and no practice omitted by
confederacies, leagues, and complattes to withstand the progress of the truth,
and to persecute the professors thereof: but so had Gods goodness ordained
things, that now the river of Euphrates was dried up: that the way of the
kings of the East might be prepared, Euphrates the glory, and strength of
Babylon: the power and authority of Rome, was so decayed, by the evil opinion,
that many princes and potentates justly conceived of it, that the way of the
kings of the East was thereby prepared.

So that as at the birth of Christ there came wise men out of the East unto
Jerusalem to worship him: falling down before him, and presentinge unto him
their gifts, of gold, incense, and myrhe. Even so at the second birth (as it
were) of Christ by the restitution of the true doctrine, many noble, wise and
learned men (who by allusion to the former story) are termed kings of the
East: embrased the Gospel, fell down and worshipped Christ, and bestowed the
talents, of their power, learning wisdom, judgment, and industry, unto his
glory and advancement of his truth.

In this Popes time the society of the Jesuits, was constituted, and ordained:
having added to their vows of single life and poverty, the vow of obeydience
to a chief head, and principal president, cui omnes in terris tanquam Christo
parerent: cuius in verba iurarent, and cuius sibi nutum, and voluntatem, instar
diuini cuiusdam oraculi ducerent. This governor was as it were their chief
prophet: and they as the children of the prophets. To these three vows, they
joined a fourth: which is, that whether so ever the Bishop of Rome shall please
to send them: thither without any gaynesaying, without any reward, or
allowance sought toward their journey, they must immediately go. Whereupon
this Pope enlarged their societye with his priueledges, first to the number of
threescore, and afterward upon experience of their faithful service unto
him, he made it sans number.

These Jesuits are the three or threescore or many fold spirits or frogs,
that come out of the mouth of the Dragon, that is by the direction of the
devil, out of the mouth of the beast, that is by the direction of the Pope,
and out of the mouth of the false Prophet, that is by the direction of their
preposite, or president: For they are the spirits of devils, that is to say,
deuillish void of all truth and charity, which work miracles, by their
hypocrisy illusions and ostentation of learning, and go to the kings of the
earth, and of the whole world, whether soever it pleases the Pope to send
them, to gather them to the battle of the great day of god almightye: that is
to move them to the affliction, and persecution of the true christians: in the
which they shall confederate, band, and combine themselves by these men's
persuasions, but shall be destroyed, vanquished, and overthrown, in the
midst of their mischiuous enterprises, by the omnipotent power of God.

Thus having declared by these premises how this mystical number, is the
number of a man whose number is 666. we will here impose an end, to the
interpretation of this thirtenth chapter: only adding this much, that Paulus
tertius, in whose name this account, and number is contained, was a man, even
in his own time charged, with extortion and sacrilege, with adultery and
incest, with murder and parricide: with negromancie and coniuration. The
particularities whereof are plainly expressed, in the xxi. book of Sleidans
commentaries, toward the end of the year 1549. whereby he seems a man
not unmeet in whose name this mystical number and periode of Papal
prosperitye should be accomplished. As for the means of the Popedomes farther
fall, and finally of the utter subversion thereof: the next chapter which is
the fourtenth, will most manifestlye lay it open unto us.

CHAP. 14.
1 Then I looked, and lo, a lamb stood on mount Sion, and with him, an
hundredth, forty and four thousand, having his fathers name written on their
foreheads.

2 And I heard a voice from heaven, as the sound of many waters, and as the
sound of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers, harping with their
harpes.

3 And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the four
beasts, and the elders, and no man could learn that song, but the hundredth
forty and four thousand which were bought from the earth.

4 These are they, which are not defiled with women: for they are virgins:
these follow the lamb whether so ever he goes: these are bought from men,
being the first fruits unto God and unto the lamb.

5 And in their mouths was found no guyle, for they are without spot before
the throne of God.

6 Then I saw an other Angel fly in the midst of heaven, having an
everlasting Gospel, to preach unto them, that dwell on the earth, and to every
nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.

7 Saying with a loud voice fear God, and give glory to him: for the hour
of his judgments is come: and worship him that made heaven and the earth, and
the sea, and the fountains of waters.

8 And there followed an other Angel, saying it is fallen, it is fallen,
Babylon the great City: for she made all nations to drink of the wine, of the
wrath of her fornication.

9 And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice, if any man
worship the beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead or on
his hand.

10 The same shall drink, of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure
wine, which is poured into the cup of his wrath, and he shall be tormented in
fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the lamb.

11 And the smoke of their torment shall ascend evermore: and they shall have
no rest day nor night, which worship the beast and his Image, and whosoever
receaueth the print of his name.

12 Here is the patience of Saints: here are they that keep the
Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

13 Then I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, write, Blessed are the
dead, which hereafter dye in the Lord: Even so says the spirit for they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them.

14 And I looked, and behold, a white cloud, and upon the cloud, one sitting
like unto the son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand
a sharp sickle.

15 And another Angel came out of the temple crying with a loud voice, to him
that sat on the Cloud, thrust in thy sickle, and reap: for the time is come
to reap: for the harvest of the earth is ripe.

16 And he that sat on the Cloud, thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the
earth was reaped.

17 Then another Angel came out of the Temple, which is in heaven, having also
a sharp sickle.

18 And another angel came out from the altar, which had power over fire, and
cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sickle, and said, thrust in
thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vineyarde of the earth, for
her grapes are ripe.

19 And the angel thrust in his sharp sickle on the earth and cut down the
vines of the vineyard of earth and cast them into the great winepresse of the
wrath of God.

20 And the winepresse was trodden without the city and blood came out of the
winepresse, unto the horse bridles by the space of a thousand and six hundred
furlonges.


O Thou lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, thou lamb that
stand on mount Sion in the heavenly Jerusalem, the Church triumphant, with
an hundred, forty, and four thousand, twelve times twelve thousand, having thy
fathers name written in their foreheads, even with all thy faithful and elect
whom thou have taken out of the misery of this world out of error and
ignorance, and especially those whom thou have delivered out of the thraldom
and oppression of the old Roman empire, and the Image thereof the new
Roman Church, and have blessed with thy Fathers name with eternal glory and
felicitye, whom with thy precious blood thou have bought from the earth, from
sin and corruption, and have so endued with thy spirit and grace that they
were not defiled with women, with the errors and superstitions of particular
churches, but kept the virginitye of their doctrine and faith within thy
catholycke church pure and sincere, and haste advanced to everlasting bliss,
and made the first fruits unto GOD, faithful and spotless before the throne
of his Majesty, we yield thee most humble hartye, and duetifull thanks,
that it has pleased thee to send thy messengers, ministers and preachers into
the militant church, to preach and publish thy everlasting Gospel, which the
might and mistes of Babylon had long Concealed and obscured, unto them that
dwell on the earth, and to every nation and kindred, and tongue, and people,
teaching us to fear God, and give glory unto him, and not to fear the power
and might of Antichrist nor his fyerce and furious thunderboltes of curses and
excommunications, nor to glorify and magnify that man of sin and child of
perdition, but to glorifye God, the honor of whose judgment is come to
consume the kingdom of Antichrist, with the spirit of his mouth, and to
worship thy heavenly father and thee his eternal word and wisdom which have
made heaven and earth and the sea, and the fountaynes of waters, and not to
worship stocks and stones, Images and Idols the babes and abominations of
Babylon. We yield the also most humble and fervent thanks, that with this thy
heavenly doctrine and spirit of thy mouth, thou have overthrown the towers
of Babell, the might and majesty of the Romish Sinagoge, that we may
truly, and reioycinglye say, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon the great
City that made all nations drunken with Idolatrye and superstition even with
the name of her false doctrine wherein God in his wrath suffered her to solace
her self, and to commit idolatry, which is spiritual fornication. We beseech
thee good Lord more and more, to consume her, and shortly to abolish her with
thy most glorious coming, and in the mean time O Lord thunder into the
innermoste ear of the deaf papists, the threatninges of thy third Angel,
that if any man worship Antichrist, and his romish church made to the Image and
representation of the old Romayne Empire and receive his Character or doctrine
in his forehead and in his hand, that is in his faith and practice, in his
conceit and conversation to be both believed and boulstered with his counsel
and execution, the same shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, yea of
the pure wine which is powered into the Cup of his wrath, and shall be tormented
in fire and brimstone before the holy angels and before thee, and the smoke of
their torments shall ascend for evermore: That with the consideration hereof
they may be strooken in conscience, and harken unto thy voice: go out of her my
people, that you be not partakers in her sins, and that you receive not of
her plagues, and for that O Lord, a time and space is required for the utter
consuming, of this hideous body of antichrist, during the which he and his
adherentes repining at thy truth and judgments, with all rage and rancor,
malign and persecute thy chosen and faithful: Indue us O Lord with patience
in all troubles and afflictions give us grace to keep thy Commandments, and
make us fervent and fruitful in thy faith and what so ever event, thou shalt
give unto our troubles in this world, yea though it be thy will, that the
force, or fury of Antichrist prevail against the mortal bodies and worldelye
estate of our selves, or of our brethren, yet let that thy heavenly voice
still recomforte our souls: Blessed are the dead which hereafter dye in the
Lord, even so says the Spirit, for they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them. We know and acknowledge O Lamb of eternal light, that
with thee is true rest void of labor, true life void of death, true
felicity void of all trouble and misery.

We know also that our works, which through thy grace, we do according to thy
will go not before us to make our way and passage into heaven, which thy blood
and merits only have done, but that thither by thy great goodness, and favor
they follow us to receive reward at thy bounteous and liberal hand.

Lastly, for that the time of thy fynall judgment does approach, and thy
Angels are shortly to be sent to reap the harvest of the earth and to cut
down the vynes of the vyneyarde thereof, endue us O Lord, with thy grace,
instruct us in thy truth that as pure Corn we may be gathered into the
Barnes of thy everlasting bliss, and neither as tares, or wicked weeds be
thrown into the furnace of eternal fire, nor as the ungracious grapes full of
vileness, and vanytye, be cast into the Wnepresse of thy wrath, which shall be
trod without the city, that is executed without thy kingdom: for without
shall be dogs and enchanters and whoremongers, and murderers, and Idolaters,
and whosoever loves or makes lies, and the blood shall come even to the horse
bridles, the tortures and torments, shall reach from the meanest man to the
mightiest monarch, and that for the space of a 1600 furlonges, which is for
ever and ever, for rightlye may that square number of four times four
intimate unto us eternity. And sith O thou second Adam, and restorer of
mankind, thy church has since thy nativity walked here on earth now near
sixtene hundred years as it were 1600 furlongs, which is in hundreds of years
proportionable to the time, that was between the first Adam, and the flood of
Noe: strike into our hearts with thy remembering spirit, a deep impression of
thy coming, that it be not with us, as in the days before the flood, wherein
they did eat, and drink, and marry, and gave in marriage, and knew nothing
till the flould came, and took them all away: but that casting away all
carelesnes and security we may like wise and faithful servants be found
watchful, ready, and diligent in fulfilling of thy will, and doing of our
duties, earnestly praying and daily expecting for thy coming, that thou our
Lord and master so finding us, being the author and fountain of all
blessedness may truly make us blessed. Come Lord Jesus.

Let thy mighty hand and out stretched arm, O Lord be still our defense,
thy mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ the dear son our salvation, thy
true and holy word our instruction, thy grace and holy spirit our comfort and
consolation, unto the end and in the end.

Annotations.
WHereas in the tenth verse of the xiij Chapter, mention is made of a beast
rising up out of the earth having two horns like the Lamb, but speaking
like the Dragon, we expounded the earth to be the Church militant, so taking
it in the better part, as conferred and laid opposite to the sea from whence
the former beast did proceed, taking the sea for gentilisme and the earth for
Christianisme. Jf it shall better please any to take the earth in that place in
the worser part, then does it signify corruption, superstition, terrestrial
appetites, and earthly conceiptes of heavenly matters, and in whether soever
part the word be interpreted, the designation of the person there expressed is
the same and receives no alteration.

Whereas in the third verse of the xiij Chapter, there being mention made,
that one of the seven heads of the Roman Empire was as it were wounded to
death but the deadly wound thereof was healed, we there expound that head to
be Rome and Jtalie, and the wound to be civil wars, which interpretation
is justified by truth of history, yet considering the course of this prophecy
and the exposition of the Angel in the xvij chapter in these words, the
seven heads are seven hills whereon the woman sits, they are also seven
Kings, five are fallen, one is, another is not yet come, and when he comes
he shall continue but a short time, and the beast that was, and is not, is the
eight, and one of the seven.

We incline rather to this interpretation that follows, and one of his heads
was as it were wounded to death, and his deadly wound was healed. The seven
heads signified seven Kings, or sovereign governors, that have ruled, and
borne chief authority within the city of Rome. The first were Kings, the
second Consulles, the third Dictators, the fourth december viri, the fifth were
Tribunes Militare, the sixth Roman Emperors, the seventh French Emperors,
the head that had the deadly wound but was healed, was the sixth: which received
that wound in the death of Julius Caesar and which wound was twelve years
after cured by Augustus for in Julius Caesar the Emperors began: and in him
that head had like to have ended, but that the deadly wound thereof was cured
by Augustus as for the triumuirate it was no head, but a (...) having just in
the deadly wound of the sixth head, of these seven heads, when Saint John wrote
this prophecy, five were fallen, that is the Kings, Consulles, Dictators,
December viri, and Tribunes militare, one was which was the Roman Emperors, an
other was not yet come, that is the French Emperors. And when he came he was
to continue but a short time, it continued not the eight part of the time of
the former, and the beast that was, that is the Popedom, which was prefigured
in Egypt and Babylon and is not, that is had not yet attained to that power
and authority, Is the eight, that is the eight sovereign, governor of Rome,
and is one of the seven that is to say, Roman Emperor, This Pope Boniface
the eight well declared, when as in a great Jubilee at Rome, he went one day in
his pontifical attire, as Roman Bishop, and the next day in his robes
Jmperiall as Romayne Emperor in the one he showed himself as the eight, in
the other as one of the seven.

They that mislike this interpretation will affirm that there were either
fewer sovereign governors of Rome or more if they say there were fewer they
will be convinced by the ancient histories of Rome by the which we shall
prove the first five so precisely as the occasion of their beginning, the time
of their continuance, the cause of their ceasing, the particular persons that
governed in every of them shall manifestly appear. Jf farther to lesser the
number, they shall confound the sixth and seventh head, that is the Roman
and the French Emperors, they shall attribute more to the French then ever
themselves claimed or had either in power or dignity for Charles the great
first founder of that Empire, claimed but the Empire of the West, and in his
time the Roman Emperors dwelling in Constantinople and governing Rome and
Italy by an exarchant, partly by the treacherous practices of Rome and Italy,
partly by the forces and arms of the Kings of Lumburdie, was deprived first
of his tributes and after of his territories in Italy, so that the King of
Lumbardes possessing, and inuading all the Bishop of Rome for his own
benefit employed the aid of Charles the great: who accordingly came into
Italy: overthrew the Lumbardes was made Emperor of the West, and gave Rome to
the Pope, not to be saueraigne of it, but to hold it of him and his heirs in
fee.

But after the line of Charles the great was extinguished, which continued not
above a hundred years, a short time inrespect of the former, the Popes
attained the suffraintie of Rome both as Bishops and Emperors, so became
they the eight and one of the seven, as Boniface the eight manifestly
declared.

A prayer and that (...) giving for the delivery of her most excellent
Majesty, from the pernicious practices of Antichrist, and his counterfeit
Catholics.
O Eternal God and heavenly Father, whose might is ineffable, whose mercies
inestimable, we thy poor creatures and most unprofitable servants in all
humblenes of mind, do prostrate our selves before the throne of thy majesty,
yelding unto thee with most fervent hearts and faith unfeigned, the Sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving. Thy might did make us when we were nothing, our
lewdness lost us when we were made, thy mercy saved us, when we were lost,
thy grace preserves us now we are saved, thou art our God and great is thy
goodness, we are thy people, but great is our weakness, thou in thy gifts art
gracious and bountiful, Lord let thy grace make us as thankful. Thou openest
our eyes whereby we may see, thou enlightnest our minds, whereby we may judge,
thou feedest our souls, whereby we may live, thou give us peace whereby we
may rest, the light of thy gospel thou make to shine, a gracious Queen thou
give us to reign, thou rulest in her, she reigns in thee, by these things
thou comfortest our bodies and souls: Lord herein the wicked do envy our
bliss, the roaring lion would feign us devour, and Antichrist seeks to cut
off our head, that then he may tread us under his feet, but thou of thy
mercies have bridled his rage, his shame is discovered, his purpose disclosed:
this is the work of thy mighty hand, his nets are broken, and we are escaped,
preserve thine anointed O Lord of thy grace: confound thou thy foes and
comfort thy flock, let Antichrist, waste with the word of thy mouth, Illumine
men's minds that al now may see, that murder is counted religious at Rome.
Thy name be praised with hymns of our hearts, the notes of obedience most
pleasing to thee: In thoughts, words, and deeds, let us still resounde for
this thy great goodness so graciously showed. Defend O most merciful father,
thy servant our Sovereign, from all such wicked and pernicious attemptes.
Turn the Counsels of all Achitophels to foolishnes: sustain her with thy
mighty hand in her Royal estate, enrich her daily more and more, with the
treasures of thy heavenly wisdom. Indue her abundantly with thy most holy
spirit, and to thy glory and our gladness make her an old mother in
Israel. Grant these things O Lord for Jesus Christ his sake, thy only son
our only Savior: to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, three persons and one
God be all honor, glory, praise, and power, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

