THE PARLIAMENT OF CHRIST AVOVCHING AND DECLARING THE ENACted and received
truth of the presence of his body and blood in the blessed Sacrament, and of
other articles concerning the same, impugned in a wicked sermon by M. Iuell,
Collected and sethfurth by THOMAS HESKYNS Doctor of dyuinitie. Wherein the
reader shall find all the scripturs co^monlie alleged out of the new
Testament; touching the B. Sacrament, and some of the old Testament, plainly
and truly expownded by a nombre of holy learned Fathers and Doctors.

ECCLESIAST. VIII. NON te praetereat narratio seniorum, ipsi enim didicerunt a
patribus suis. Quoniam ab ipsis disces intellectum, and in tempore necessitatis
dare responsum.

Go not from the doctrine of the elders, for they have learned of their
fathers. For of them thowe shall learn understanding, so that thowe may make
answer in time of need.

AUGUST. LIB. 1. de moribus Eccle. CAP. XXV. AVDITE doctos catholicae Ecclesiae
viros tanta pace animi, and eo voto, quo ego vos audiui.

Hear ye the learned men of the catholic Church with as quiet a mind, and
with soche desire as I have heard you.

printer's device of William Silvius SCRVTAMINI



Imprinted in Antvverpe, At the golden Angel, by William Silvius prynter to
the Kings Majesty. M.D.LXVI.

With Privilege.

THE NAMES OF SOCHE AUTHORS AS BE ALLEGED IN THIS BOOK OF THE PARLIAment of
Christ, placed as yt were in two houses, that is to vvitte, soche as were
before a thousand years or very near, in the higher house, soche as were
since, in the lovver house.
Jesus Christus. Apost. and Evangelist. Ioannes. Marcus. Paulus. Mattheus.
Lucas. Andreas.
Latins of the higher house. Clemens. Alexander. Sixtus, Pius. Soter.
Tertullianus. Fabianus. Cyprianus. Siluester. Iuuencus. Hilarious. Optatus.
Ambrosius. Hieronimus. Augustinus. Primasius. Vincentius lirinen. Sedulius. Leo
primus. Hilarious PP. Cassiodorus Gregorius Isidorus.
Grecians of the higher house. Martialis. Abdias. Anacletus. Ignatius.
Dionysius Arcop. Telesphorus, Justinius. Irenaeus. Origenes. Eusebius Caesarien.
Athanasius. Eusebius emis. Basilius. Gregorius Niss. Gregorius Nazian. Efrem.
Isichius. Chrysostomus. Theophilus Alexan. Amphilochius Didymus. Proclus
Cyrillus. Euthymius Theodoretus
Latins of the lower house. Beda Haymo. Remigius Paschasius Lanfrancus Algerus
Guitmundus Anselmus. Hugo de S. vict. Rupertus Bernardus Petrus Clu.
Innocentius. 3 Thomas de Aqui. Nicolaus lyra Hugo Cardinalis Holkot. Roffensis
Titelmannus
Grecians of the lower house. Damascenus. Theophilactus. Occumenius Nicolaus
Methonen. Nicolaus Cabisila. Germanus Bessario

diagram of the Blessed Sacrament of the Catholic Church THE PARLIAMENT OF
CHRIST UPON the matter of the B. Sacrament.
1 Figured Exodus 16. 2 Prophesied. Malach. 1. 3 Promised Joan. 6 4 Jnstituted
Math. 25 5 Practiced Jac in Miss. 6 Reserved. ^in. epist ^ 7 Continued. ^. Cor.
11 8 Adore^




Priuilegium.
REgiae Maiestatis diplomate permissum est Thomae Heskins S. Theologiae
professori, vti per aliquem Typographoru^ in hisce omnibus ditionis suae
Regionibus admissorum, imprimendum curet librum, inscriptum: The Parliament of
Christ auouching and declaring, etc. Inhibitumque alijs omnibus intra eandem
ditionem, ne ante triennium proximum absque ipsius Thomae licentia imprimant,
aut alibi impressum diuendant: sub poena in eodem diplomate expressa.

Datum Bruxellae 7. Iulij. 1565. Subsign. Burgeois, and Facuwez.

TO M. IO. IVELL THOMAS HESKINS WISHES GRACE AND RESTITVcion of faith.
DETESTING your heresy, yet loving your person, and therefore wishing your
reformacio^ and correction, I have, M. Iuell co^pilled this book, wherbie as I
trust the vanity of your brag is and shall be disclosed and perceived: so do I
wish that by the same both you and soch as have erred, may be reduced from
your foul error, and all the people of my native contrie, for whose cause
especialie I have taken these labors, so stayed in faith, that by your
manifold untruths they be not seduced. You have not only enwrapped your self
in error, but also to maintein the same committed three heinouse offenses. One
is the abuse and contempt of the authority and doctrine of the holy Fathers
of the primitive and ancient Church. Those Fathers you do not only
truncatelie allege, and with crafty slight abuse and falsify: but also
although you euide^tlie see the^ impugning your doctrine and heresy, yet
without all regard of their great learning and authority, of their perpetual
consent and agreement, Leo to Eutyches: Quid iniquius, quam impia supene, and
sapientioribus doctoribusque non credere? What is more wicked then to have
ungodly opinions, and not to believe the^ that be wises and better learned:
Decet enim sequi patres nostros, nec co^mutare definitione^ eoru^ perpetud;
quorli regula^ secundum sacras scripturas esse didicimus. Yt becomes us
(says Flauianus) to follow our Fathers, and not to change their perpetual
definition, whose rule we have learned to be according to the scripturs.

But you stayed not here. Yt was not enough for you to co^te^ne or abusethe
perpetual definition of the Fathers, but you proceaded to the second offense
eue^ to mock and skorn the learned and holy Fathers of Chrysts Church not
only the^ of the later days, but soch as lived a thousand years agon, whereof
some were famous for their learning, some so constant in their faith and
perfect in life that of the universal Church they have be^ hitherto, and yet be
reputed Isidore, a man of great fame, and an holy bishop in the time of S.
Gregory. Thus have you used Innoce^tius, the third, Thomas de Aquino and
Roffensis all me^ of singular virtue, and in learning not inferior to you, I
am sure, but a great way before you, wherefore no soch as you aught to deride and
mock. As for the Bishop of Rochester, who both learnedlie and godly wrote
against both Luther and Oecola^p. his works stand yet untouched, but of your
mock, not able to be impugned by any Luthera^, Oecola^padia^ Caluinist, or
otherlike, for of which sect you be, I think you disclose not. In this your
mockrie you are the right imitatour of Porphirius the enemy of all
chrystianitie. For he (as Eusebius. and Niceph. witness) derided the Eua^gelists
and Apostles the writers Niceph.) as things of naugh to you conte^ne the
learned commentaries and writings of the Saints of God upon the scripturs, and
matters incide^t and apperteining to the scripturs, with skoffes you trauail
to reprehe^d their grave authority and godly writings. You Porphirie, as
though they were things of naught. Thus you may see, as all that be wise and
stayed by Gods grace do see, how fully herin you bear the image, and
justly follow the steps of him, that fiercely (as you do) persecuted with
deadly hatred the church and religion of Christ.

Your third offense is yet worse and more heinouse, where you have uttered so
many untruths and lies even aduersus Dominu^, and aduersus Christu^ eius,
against our Lord, and against his Christ, against his holy gospel, and
against his holy word. Is yowr matter soch (M Iuell) as yt can not be
maintained without lies? and (as the holy man Job said) Nunquid Deus indiget
vestro mendacio? Has God need of your lies? No, so little need has he of lies,
that he will destroy al the^ that speak lies, as the psalmist says. But that
I see^ not to charg you without proof, as you do other, is not one of your
chalenging articles against the presence of Chrysts body and blood in the
blessed Sacr? is not the doctrine you teach and preach in that poinct
directly contrary to the doctrine of our Savior Christ? When he says: This
is my body, This is my blood: and you auouche and teach that yt is very
bread and very wine is not this a contrary doctrine to his? is yt not plain
against his manifest word? is yt not in effect to charge him with untruth,
though you day not yet in flat words say that he lied? The crafty slight
you use in handling the scripture, where the truth of Chrysts doctrine does
appear, and your wielie suppressio^ of those words which cheiflie declare the
same truth, and open yowr untruth, do well prove your wicked meening to be
none other. For taking the words of S. Paul for the theme of your sermon,
you produced the^ truncatedlie, and passed the^ with much slight. Thus you
utter the^: I have received of the Lord that thing, which also I delivered unto
you: that is, that the lord Jesus in the night that he was betrayed took bread,
and there you end. Where, although you prete^ted to teach the first institucio^
of the Sacr. yet either of malice to suppress Christ's truth, or for fear to
disclose your own untruth, you would not or durst not rehearse the very words
of the institucio^, which I wish al me^ to note, but both in the latin and
inglish, as your faith staeth in bread, and as you would the faith of your
audience should do the like, your theme ended in This is my body, This is my
blood in the which lies all the effect of his institucio^. These words you
fly, as from a serpent, you ca^ not abide the sownd of the^, and therefore with
shamful craft, you pass the^ saing thus: Christ in the last supper ordained a
Communion, and showed no manner token of private Mass, as may plainly appear
both by the words that he spoke, and also by the order of his doings. For be
took the bread, brake yt, divided yt, and gave yt to his Disciples, and said:
Drink ye all hereof. These be yowr own words. You pretended to prove your
matter by Chrysts words and order, but when you come to the very point you
do not as much as touch his words, but skippe over the^, so well may your
prof appear by the^, and so loath are you to utter Christ words, that his
truth might appear, and your falshead be disclosed. Against your first offense
(which is your abuse of the doctors in mutilating Anacletus: in falsifieng
their meening, as you do Tertullian, and S. Cyprian: in crafty alleging two
or three words, that apparantlie may seem to make for you, leaving out the
rest that mightily makes against you, as you do saint Augustine: in
corrupting authors by putting words to their saings, which they have not, as
you Leo: wherbie evidently appears yowr contempt of their authority, whom
by so many means you labor to abuse, to shadow, and hide the truth by them
so clerelie settfurth) I come in right use, reverently alleging them, wholly
and fully producing them, truly reporting them, and their mening, justly
letting every of them plainly to testify that, which he has written, and
causing every one to speak his own words without corruption. And that you
may perceive that the catholic Church is strong, against the which the
gates of hell, the power of heresy shall not preuaill, know you, that yt is
Terribilis castorum acies ordinata, a terrible fortress in most goodly order
appoincted. Out of the which fortress in goodly order is comed a great
nombre against you, marching by cooples, each coople to show the unity of
truth and faith professed in both Churches, being one of the greek church,
and other of the latin church, and the seniours for the most part placed in
the forewarde. These have I brought forth not one alone and by piece meal so
to rume away with the matter, as you do, but in good nombres, and with their
full saings, and the same do I oftentimes conferr together, that the full and
perfect cleernesse of the

Against yowr second offense, which is the mocking of holy writers and
Saints, wherbie you seek to dishonor and deface both them and the religion
they professed, I come with due reverence and honor of them, who^ I know by
Chrysts promise to be honorable before the Father in heaven for their
constant confession of his holy name whilst they lived here upon earth.
Wherefore as being upon the earth they were not gests and strangers but the
fellows of Saints, and of the house of God, I term them as senators of the
Parliament house of Christ, as knowing the enacted and received truth of the
matters of faith perteining to that house. For this cause I regard all their
writings which the catholic Church has allowed, considering that the same
Church that has taught me that the gospel, that is the very word of God
written by the mocion and instruction of his holy Spirit, has taught me that
these men's wiritings upon the same are good

Against your third wickedness, I mien your contempt abuse and untrue
handling of the holy scripturs, I come in every place, where mention is made
of the bless. Sacrament, with the wholl process there contained. In the vi of
S. John, the xxvi. of S. Matthew the xxiiii, of S. Luke, the x. and xi. of the
first epistle to the Corinth, the v. to the Ephesians, and the xiii to the
Hebrews, somoch as the Fathers expownd to appertein to the holy Sacr. I
produce

But here the learned perchance may merueill, that I would ioin with you in
the scripturs considering the ancient counsel of Tertullian, who would not
that any catholic should enter into disputacion with an heretic Nihil
proficit congressio scripturarum cum haereticis, nisi plane vt aut stomachi
quis meat euersionem aut cerebri etc. To ioin (says he) in disputacion with
heretics with scripturs yt does nothing auaill, except a man will turn up
side down either his stomach or his brain. what shall thowe gain, thowe great
learned man in the scripturs, when if thowe defend any thing yt shall be
denied of the contrary part: if thowe deny any thing, yt shall be defended
etc. And after he concludes thus: Ergo non ad scripturas prouocandum est etc.
We may not therefore appeall to the scripturs, neither may we appoinct our
disputacion in them, in the which there is either none or vnceten victory, or
not very certain. For this cause, and for that S. Hierom says that Scripturae
non in legendo co^sistunt, sed in intelligendo the scripturs consist not in
reading but in understanding: I have travailed by diligent scarching of the
fathers from the Apostles to this our time, to try out by there common consent
how the scripturs are to be understood, and so have I (as by a line drawn
from hand to hand) descended from age to age, that the true understanding of

In this my doing I have fulfilled the counseill of Vincentius lyrinen. who for
remidies against errors among other wills, that if any error has been
committed in the old time, either by certain men, or by any one wholl city,
or by any Province, to reform that, the decrees of ancient general
Counsels must be sought, and if none soche can be found (as in these days
though they be fownd, they be not regarded) then (says he) operam dabit, vt
collatas inter se maiorum consulat, interrogetique sententias etc. He shall
gene diligence to seek and learn the judgments of the elders, and co^ferr the^
together but of those elders only, which although they were in diverse times
and places abiding: yet in the Communion and faith of one catholic Church,
were allwaies allowed as masters, or men of authority. And what soever he shall
know, what not one or two of them, but what altogether with one consent have
holden, written, and taught openly, co^monlie, and continually, let him
understand, that that is without all doubt to be believed. Thus he. As this
counseill is on my part fulfilled in that I have searched and conferred the
judgments of the fathers, and Tertullian would I should not. This, I trust,
you shall well perceive, if leaving your corruted affection apart, you will
with a clear eye and upright judgment read this work, wherein you shall see
all the Fathers that commonly have, expownding the scripturs, written of these
articles of the Sacrament, which you see, as well greeks as latins, as well
ancient, as of later time, with one common consent and agreement, so
expownding the scripturs as though they

Now I have in a general manner showed your offenses, which moved me to write
against you: in like generality I have showed how I do procead against you:
the specialitie of your offenses and of the process aunswerable to the same,
you shall find in this work, though simply without coolour, yet plainly
without craft, declared. If my trauaill herein obtein not his enre^ded effect,
namely your conversion and ame^dement, and to do you that good that you may
be stayed from running to pertual damnacion: yet staing other that by your
pestilent heresies might be brought to that woeful danger, I shall not only
do the^ that good I wish, but also help to make your da^nacio^ the easier,
which how greuouse yt shall be, he knows best, that knows how many
souls you have brought to damnacio^. If you being obdurated persist in your
impiety, yt ca^ not be avoided but you do yt of malice, having ben
advertised and admonished of your wicked errors Haereticum hominem etc. after
one or two admonicions fly the company of an heretic, knowing that soche
one is subverted, forsomoche as he is even by his own judgment condemned. In
deed being, as I said, thus admonished, and seeing with all your wicked
doctrine by the whole multitude here alleged, so plainly and clearly
condemned, yt can not be but by your own judgment you must be condemned. For
this is so euide^tlie true that you or any man can not deny yt, that no
doctrine, now holde^ of the catholic Church for a truth, and impugned by
the Sacramentaries, was ever yet at any time by the church, or by any
catholic writer, reputed as heresy or error. Again this is as true that
every doctrine holden of the Sacramentaries, and now impugned by the
catholics, has been before time of the catholic Church and wtiters reputed
and adjudged erour and heresy, a few late inuencions only excepted, which
also are now by catholics impugned, and by plain testimonies of the ancient
Church proved to be erours and heresies,

To make good the first saing, I will rehearse certain catholic propositions:
Chrysts body is verily in the blessed Sacrament. Chrysts body is ossred in
sacrifice in the Mass. The holy Sacrament is to be reserved for the communion
of the sick. The blessed Sacrament may be received under one kind. The body
of Christ in the Sacrament is to be adored. Saints in glory pray for us and
are to be prayed unto by us. The dead receive great benefitte by the sacrisice
of the Mass. Prayer and almose deeds done for the dead do auaill them. These
and soche like the catholics do hold, the heretics deny. I will not here
proclaim against you, but I will join this issue with you, that if you can
bring any catholic Counsel or catholic doctor impugning these or any of
the^, as heretical or erroneous, I will subscribe unto you and say as you
say: if you can not (as I am sure you can not) the^ will I say, as I may
well, that your doctrine is erroneous, heretical, and deuelish. Now to save
your doctrine from this foul reproache, prove by soche testimony as I have
said, that our doctrine is erroneous, or else the shame will be on your side
that teach the contrary

To make good my second assertion, I will also rehearse certain propositions
Chrysts body is not reallie in the Sacrament. The Sacrament is only a figure
of Christ and not his body. The substance of bread is not by due consecracion
changed, turned, transmuted, nor transelementated into the substance of the
body of Christ. There is no sacrifice of Christ's body offered in the Mass.
Prayer and almose deeds nothing avail the dead, neither the sacrifice of the
Mass. These and soche like do

Two things, M Iuell, I doubt not, but you know. The One, that in the primitive
and ancient church there arose no notable heresy, but yt was speedily
impugned: The Other, that of the original and progress of every soch there were
notes made and moniments for memory left. As concerning the first, yt is
certain, that eue^ in the beginning of Christ's Church Ebion and Cerinthus
sowing their heresy were straight impugded by S. John, against who^ he was
moved to write his gospel and epistles. Against the same also with other, as
Valentinus, Marcion, Cerdon, Simon Samarites Basilides, Carpocrates, and soch
like, wrote the holy Father Irenaeus not long after, who, as in his works yt
may be seen in diverse places, used for an argument against those heretics,
the presence of Chrysts body in the Sacrament, and yet the same Irenaeus
Origin his works being fownde inspersed with diverse errors, was noted for
them, but where he testifies the presence of Christ's body in the bless.
Sacrament, he was never blamed: Ciprian the holy martyr was very vehement
against Nouatus the heretic, and his sect, he diligently labored to cut of
soche weeds. Epiphanius and S. Augustine wrote books of the heresies of them
that were before and in their times, and although many besides the fore
me^cioned had spoken so plainly of the blessed Sacr. that they clearly
confessed the presence of Chrysts body in the same, as Martialis, Ignatius,
Justinius, Tertullianus, Hilarious, and many other: yet be none of all these nor
none other for that doctrine no^bred there among heretics, which undoubtedly
they should have been, if the matter had so deserved. But truly yt was never
yet red in any god writer, nor somoche as dreamed, that the confession of the
presence of Christ in the bless. Sacrament is heresy or error.

Now as touching histories witnessing the wicked beginning the miserable
progress, and open end and confusion of heresies, yt were superfluouse for me
to write, since there has been no notable heresy or heretic, which are not
recorded either by Eusebius, Teodoret, Sozomenus, Nicephorus, Aeneus Siluius,
and soche other whose books be daily in men's hands. By whom when Luther
reigned we know: how Oecolampadius followed, though an other way, we know,
how Calvin has co^troled both catholics and heretics we know, what the
doings of these and their accomplices have been and be, we know, and that they
have been and be condemned for heretics we know. To be short, there has been no
notable alteracion or molestacion in religion by heresy, but yt is committed
to memory in histories. If the^ your doctrine and faith, your religion and
profession, your notable Communion, or raither confusion, were once good and
catholic, yt can not be but of so great an alteracion as to make catholic
faith damnable heresy, or holy communion wicked division there must be some
notable mention in histories or some ancient monime^t in writing to declare
yt. If you have any soche bring them forth, and the^ have no aid of them,
but be forced therefore either to deprave their authority with mocking and
skorning, or flatly to deny their works, they are defended,

Now you understand, M. Iuell, what I have here done, to the which if either
you or any other for you shall by railing Rethorike make a pretensed answer,
I do you to wit, that I will not vouchsafe to putt my pen to the papire
for that kind of answer. For I have begone with you in an other sort, and
like a divine, railing I have left to ruffins

Read therefore, M. Iuell, and diuorcing your self from vainglorie to the which
ye have hen a long time married, let your understanding be captiuated unto the
Leo said of Eutiches: Noluit intelligere vt been ageret. Iniquitate^ meditatus
est in cubili suo. My good will was that this mi doing should have be^ in your
hands a long timeer this, for yt was finished full three years past, but
sickness, poverty, and lack of opportunity to printe yt have thus long
stayed yt. But since now at the last yt is by Gods help comed abroad, I
heseche him of his great goodness to grant that it may be to his honor, and
to the help of his people and that it may be a medicine of health to you, and
all that by your false doctrine and slight, have be^ entrapped and deceived.
You promised that you would yield to him that would bringfurth to you one
scripture, or one doctor, or one Counsel etc. as you know: This being now
doe^ by me and other I wish that you may yield your self prisoner, not in
warrelike manner to us, but in lowly manner to Christ, and his dear spouse the
catholic Church, by acknowleging their faith, and professing their religion
to save your soul, which we shall be Ante victoriam ne canas triumphum.

THE PROLOGVE TO THE GENTLE READER.
THe Phylystynes (gentle Reader) moved sore and great Haereilques move Ware
against the Church.
war against the Israelites: The heretics against the catholic Chruche of
God, from whom is comed forth a new Golyath mighty in his own conceit, with
reproachful words to reuyle the host of our living God, and to blaspheme
his holy name, to raill at his holy mysteryes and to comdemne his holy
ordinances,

He alone comes out, and prouokyng Israe^l to battaill, makes proclamation
Proclamacion of the new Goliath
thus: If any learned man of all our Adversaries, or if all the learned men
that be a live, be hable to bring any one suffycyent sentence, out of any
old catholic Doctor, or father: or out of any old general Council: or
out of the holy scriptures of God: or any one example of the primatyue
church, wherbye yt may be elerely, and plainly, proved, that there was any
pryuate mass in the wholl world at that time, for the space of syx hundredth
years after Christ etc. and a few articles recited, he proceadeth thus: or
that the people were then taught to believe, that Christ body is reallie,
substantiallye, corporallye, carnallye or naturallye in the Sacrament: or that
his body is, or may be in a thousand places, or mo, at one time: and sofurth
proceadeng to lay out his matters enombreth xv. articles, all which (four
only excepted) be against the holy Sacrament of Christ's blessed body and
blood, And for that he If any one of all our Adversaries, be able to auouche
any one of all these articles by any soch suffycient anthorytie of
Scriptures, Doctors, or Counsels, as I have required, as I said before, so
say I now again: I am content to yield unto him, and to subscrybe.

Which stout brag as some of his likes (I suppose) myslyked, and many
good catholic men (I know) thought yt arrogant: So I thynking the same, like
little David, not in faith, might, and power: not in virtue and syngular favor
of God: but as the least and youngest of my breatheren, in the house of my
ffather, not bearyng this vile reproach so arrogantlie, and shamelessly made
against the host of God, of a good zeal having sure trust in my lord God
(whose cause for my power, I would gladly defend) hanyng some stones gathered
together in my sheperdes bag, I come in

And for that his chief force is bent against that Sacrament, which is

Whereunto yet when I prepared my self, and considered one of the Articles of
his proclamacio^, where in effect he says, that never man was condemned as an
herytyke, for saying that the Sacrament was a figure, a pledge, a toke^, or a
remembrance of Christ's body: I began to be abashed, First at his craft and
subletie used in so weighty matter of faith, where all symplycitie and

For soche saiers have been condemned by eight Cou^cells all ready, as
heretykes, and their heresy so detested, hated, and abhorred of all
christians, Sacramentaries condemned hyeight Councels.
that the catholic learned men, if they had but a suspicion, of any that did
in any one title swerve from the verytie of Christ's body in the Sacrament,
they forth with addressed them selves to their pens, and with the swoorde of
Gods truth, vanquyshed, and ouerthrewe yt.

This (as yt is thought) moved Paschasius towryte in the matter of the
Sacrament. for that Bertramus had in the time of king Charles written thereof
Paschasi'. Bertramus wrote obscurclie and suspiciously of the Sacrament.
suspycyouslie, and yet in such sort, as no man could be certain what he
assuredly meant. Now that the treuth of the matter of the Sacrament, should
not be obscured with soche doubtful writing, Paschasius wrotte a book of the
presence of the very body of Christ in the Sacrament, in soche express and
plain words, as the simple man may preceaue what was the faith of the
Chruche in that tymeof that matter.

And for that, he was so plain, Gastius, one of this proclamers faction, having
syncerytie of soche men) he raced yt, he blotted yt, yea, he cut out wholl
chapiters of yt. and that done (that yt might to the woorlde appear,
Paschasius, who wrotte so long agone, wrotte yet nothing against the
Sacramentaries) he set yt furthe, so mutylated, so torn and so defaced, to be
prynted.

But to return to speak of this proclamer, consydering, as I said, the
Article wherein he says never man was condemned for an heretic, that affirmed
the Sacrame^te to be a figure, sign etc. I was so abashed at his impudecye,
that I was partelye minded not to have joined with him.

But remembryng that yt was more impudencye to deny Christ's presence in the
Sacrament, which is taught by Christ's own words delivered by saint
Paul, believed in the primytiue Church, so received of holy men, written by
an infynyte nombre of learned writers, confyrmed by Counsels, and embraced and
stayed upon, by all chrystyan nations; I corrected my self, sayng that if I
would not spare to ioyn with him in this wicked assertyon, much less should
I spare to ioyn with him in that other.

Wherefore resumynge my former purpose, I will in this also ioyn with

For the plain openyng of which mattter, yt is certain, by testymonye of many
learned me^, that though some did so co^fusedlie write in this matter,
Berengarius was the first, that did openly write and teach, denyeng (as this
proclamer does) the Bere^garius first openly impugned the sacrament.
real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament.

Which Berengarius was about the year of our lord a thousand and three
score, and So by computacion five hondreth years agon, and more, a man, as
sundry writers testyfie) neither excellent in learning, nor commendable
Bere^garius neither excellent in learning nor co^me^dable in life. Leo nonus
Platina
in life: who publyshing this doctrine by pour scholars, to whom he gave
stypende for that purpose, he spredde yt abroad in corners.

Which when yt came to the knowledge of Leo then Pope, a man (as Platina
says) of syngular sanctymonye, and holiness of life: he condemned
Berengarius in a Council.

The words of Platina, for the certain declaracion of the matter, I shall not
refuse to report. Thus he writes: Ad Leonem redeo viru^ certe pietate,
innocentia, benignitate, gratia, hospitalitate, adeo insignem, vt eius Domus
peregrinis, and pauperibus semper patuerit. Nam cum semel ante fores suas
leprosum pauperem inuenisset, cunque prae miscricordia collocari in lecto suo
ma^dasset, apertis mane foribus a ianitore, nusqua^ pauper inuentus est.
Christum pauperis nomine, eo loci recubuisse creditum. In rebus praeterea ad
religionem pertinentibus, tanta diligentia. and solertia vsus est, vt and in
Concilio Vercellensi Berengarium hereseos autorem damnauerit.

I come again to Leo, a man truly in godliness, in innoce^cye, benygnytie,
grace, and hospytalytie so notable excellent, that to strangers, and pour
people his house was allways open. For when upon a time he fownde a pour
opened of the porter, the poor man was in no place fownde. And so yt was

Besides this in matters apperteynyng to religyon he used so much dyligence
and wise cyrcumspection, that in the Council at Vercells he condemned
Bere^garius condemned in the Counsel of Vercells, at Rome, and two other
Cou^cells.
Berengarius the Author of an heresye. Thus far Platina. This conde^nacion
notwithstanding, the wicked man persysted in his impyetie, wherefore an other
Council was holden at Towers, where by diverse learned Fathers he was
conuynced, and so abiured his heresy.

And in a Council holden at Rome, where were cxiij. Bishops (as Lanfra^cus
Bere^garius recanteth and abiureth.


And yet all this notwista^ding, though this ca^kre of heresy seemed in the
outward part to be cured: yet yt fretted inwardly, and grew to an new
sore, that where before he had taught that the Sacrament was but only a figure
of the body of Christ (as this proclamer also tracheth) now he began a new
doctrine, affyrmyng that in the Sacrament was the very body of Christ: but
that there was also the Substance of bread, with the Substance of the body of
Christ. Whereupon there was an other council called under Berengarius being
convinced, did Gregorius. 7.
acknowledge his error, and by express words recanted the same.

Not only these four Counsels condemned the heresye of Berengarius against
the Sacrament but also the learned men that were in that time, peyned them
selves to write wholl books to the confutacion of the said Berengarius, and
his heresies.

For against him wrote Lanfrancus sometime Archbyshope of Cantorburye, of whom
Tritemius said: that he was vir in diuinis scripturis erudjtiss. et non minus
Lanfrancus. Tritemius.
sanctitate, quam scientia clarus a man in the dyuyne scryptures most
excellently learned, and no less in holiness, then in knoweledge notable.

Against the same also wrote Algerus, and Guitmundns. men not by my
comme^dacion only to be accepted, but by the Judgment of Erasmus also, a man
Algerus Guitmundus.
not only known to the world, but also specyallie famous in this Realm of
England, who openyng to us what these two men were, shows therwtih the
benefitt of God that comes to his church by his suffera^ce of errors, and
heresies to grow. And enombryng diverse heresies conceived Et tamen horum
omnium error in hoc profecit, vt in tanti mysterij cognitionem, magis ac magis
tum erudita, tum confirmata Sras. in epistola ad Balthasarum Episc. Hildesum.
sit ecclesia. Nulli tame^ plus debet quam Bere^gario. imo no^ Bere^gario, sed
Chrstisapie^ tiae, qui malitia^ hominu^ vertit in bonu^sponsaesuae. Quos and
qualiu^ viroru^ calamos excitauit impudens error Berengarij? Nuper exijt opus
Guitmundi, ex monacho Benedictino episcopi Auersensis. Nunc prodit Algerus ex
scholastico monachus eiusdem instituti. Guitmundus acrior est and arde^tior,
and plus habet spiritus Rethorici: hic sedatior est ac religiosior, vterque tum
Dialectices, tum reliquae philosophiae belle peritus, licet citra
oste^tationem: vterque in canonicis scripturis, ac priscis illis doctoribus,
Cypriano, Hilario, Ambrosio, Hieronimo, Augustino, Basilio, Chrisostomo (quorum
scripta plurimum adhuc reserunt spiritus Apostolici) studiose versatus: vterque
tantum habet eloquentiae, quantum requirere a theologo par est. Certe dictionis
argutiam, and collectionis acumen, nusquam in eis desideres. Agunt solidis
rationibus, nec (vt nunc quidam faciunt) bonam voluminis partem rixis, and
Christ turns the malice of Heretics to the profett of his Church.
contentionibus occupant, aut sophisticis ratiunculis rem tractant. And yet the
error of all these (says Erasmus) did prosytt in this, that in the
hnowledge of so great a mysterye, the Church should be both more and more
instructed, Berengarius, yet not to Bere^garius, but to the wysdo^ of Christ,
who turns the malice of men to the profett of his spouse* what writing, iea
and of what men has this impudent error of Berengarius stirred up? Of late
went out Erasmus calls the error of Bere^garius impudent.
Quitmundus sometime a benedyctyne Monk, and Bishop of Auergne: now comes
forth the work of Algerus of a scholar, made a monk of the same order:
Guitmundus is sharp and vehement, and has more of the rethoricall spiritte:
the other mild, and religiouse; both of them well learned both in logike and
philosophy, although without oste^tation; both of them well studied both in
the canonical scriptures and in the old doctors Cyprian, Hillarie, Ambrose,
Hierom, Augustine, Basil, and Chrysostom. Erasmus.

I have the more willingly transcribed thus much of Erasmus because the
Erasmus calls the error of Berengarius, an impudenterroure. Which so
being, forsomoch as this man is drowned in the same, and mainteineth the same,
may we not Error of the Proclamer impudent.
justly say, that he impudentlie mainteineth an impudent error? Let him
also note, how he commends these men, and what Judgment he has of their
learning both in liberal sciences, in Scriptures, and doctors. who^ he does
also no less extol, but that by their writings God has done a great benefet
to his Church. which so standing yt can not be but that the If their writing
be a benefett, then this chalengers doimgeys a detriment. Petrus Waldo skoureth
the estie heresy of Bere^garius
of the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. which scriptures
and doctors adduced by these learned men be mo then one, or one score, and yet
this Proclamer cries: bring one doc etc.

After Berengarius rose one Petrus Waldo a citizen of Lions, a man unlearned,
yet as vulearned as he was, when he had newly skoured the rustie condemned
heresy of Bere^garius (in soch rude manner as yt was) many were so folish, and
so ready to fall from faith to heresy, from life to death and damnacion,
Waldenses. Waldenses. Heretics condemned
Unto whom becomminge an Aucthor and blind guide, according to Christ's saing,
he led them so, as both fell into the ditche. This sect and heresy of this
Waldo, was not suffered to stand, but (as Guido says) was condemned

In the time of saint Bernarde Satan would move yet some more trooble to the
Church. and therefore raised one Peter de Bruis whom he taught to Petrus
Brusian. his heresy.
sell these lies to the people for trueths, that though Christ in his last
supper did in the Sacrament, give his body to his Apostles: yet no priest does
so now, by the power of his word, as yt is said that they do. For never
anione Although this heresy giving soche preeminence to Christ that, by cause
he Petrus Gluniacensis whose commendation is so much settfurth in diverse
Epistles of saynct Bernarde, that he needs not mine to commend him) wrote
Petrus Cluniacen.
a book in the matter of the Sacrament against the sect of the same Peter de
Bruys, called Petrobrusians, and other cleaving to them, called Henrycyans,
Almaricus a Sacramentarie condemned in the Counsel of lateran.
etc. alleged and brought forth. Yt is said that one Almaricus among other
heresies, did also set forth this heresy against the Sacrament, who with
this his heresy and his other, as Bernardus de Lutze^burgo says, were
condemned in the great Lateran Council.

After all these comes the famous heretic Ihon Wycleff our country man,
whom God suffered with many pestylent heresies to trouble the Church. Among
which heresies he held two or three against John wicleff our co^trie man an
heretic condemned.
the Sacrament. All whose articles being in nombre forty and five, Ioannes
Hus, besides other of his own inuencion did hold and maynteyn, auouching them
to be good and godly. And as he embraced the doctryn of VVycleff. So did
Hierom de Praga both the doctrine of Wycleff and of the said Ioannes Hus, who
being conuented for the same in the Couuncell Ioa^nes hus condemned. Horonimus
de Praga condemned.
of Constance, did first, as Berengarius did, abjure his heresies. After, to
declare what constancy was in him, he revoked his abiuracion, and avouched the
doctrine of Wicleff and Hus. All which three with their heresies were in

Luther and Oecolampadius, although repugnaunt one to the other, in this Luther
Oecolampad.
our time, they have said and done as much as this champyon can do, and
thought themselves as mighty as he. An yet they have not only be^ impugned by
writers: but also condemned as heretics in the general Council of Trydent.

Thus have ye now seen the wholl descent of this heresy against the blessed
Sacrament, even from Berengarius the first open teacher of the same, unto
Luther and Oecolampadius the new furbushers and skourers of the same: Ye
perceive that from time to time, they were ever condemned by Counsels as
heretics, that taught the blessed Sacrament to be but a figure or token of
Christ's body, and not the body yt self: ye have seen that learned me^ have
written against them, and with learning beaten them down, for that they
reputed, esteemed, and judged them as heretics, and the enemies of gods
truth, as the breakers, subuerters, and destroyers of peace, and dissoluers of
the unity of Christ's church.

May I not therefore well say, that this proclamer is an impudent man, a
shameless man, which fears not to speak so openly, to preach so boldly,
to write so shamelessly so manifest an untruth, as to say in effect, that
never man was judged an heretic, that denied the presence of Christ's body in
the Sacrament, when they were never yet otherwise judged? But to end this
part of the matter, this dare I say (for that I know I shall speak yt
truly) that to this day there was never man judged or condemned by any never,
and the other ever, has been condemned, yt is easy to judge,

To come to this our time, beside the condemnacion of the heresies of Luther
and Oecolampadius in the matter of the Sacrament, as before is said, Eue^ as
Lanfrancus, Algerus, and Guitmundus did aginst Berengarius, auouche the catho
like doctrine by their works and Boorkes set forth for the same purpose:
Even so a great nombre as well of owre contrie men, as other, have by
scriptures, Counsels, and doctors, against the said Luther and Oecolampadius,
done the like.

For to begin with our contrie men first, has not the learned, grave, and
reverend Father Ihon sometime Bishop of Rochester, encountered against
Rofensius never yet answered.
them, and with Scriptures, Cou^cells. and doctors so mightily and
inuiuciblie overthrown them, that never till this day any Philistin durst
take weapon in hand against him to help up and recover there Goliaths and
champions? And can not this Goliath see one scripture, one Council, nor one
doctor in all those his works written to that purpose? Tonstall of
Tonstallus Dunelmen Steph. wint
duresme, and Stephen of winchester, both reverend Fathers, men not one Ioa^
wynto^.
has he not collected into one book two hundereth witnesses of scriptures,
Counsels and doctors, for the verity of Christ's body in the Blessed
Sacrament?

Doctor watson Bishop of Lincoln, as heys right woorthely learned: watsonus
Lincoln.
Albanus La^gdallue.
Langdale Archdeacon of Chychestre in the confntacion of the determinacion made
by Redleye, at the disputacion holden at Cambridge for the matter of the
Sacrament, is so plentyfull in scriptures, Counsels, and doctors, and so
pythie withal, and so plainly lays them forth for that purpose, that this
Goliath with all his blasphemouse, and proud words shall never

If heresy were not by election, and election of singularity, and
singularity set not more by her own fantasy, then by most men's
judgments, Heresy is by election.
be they never so grave, never so wise, never so well learned, the judgment of
these men in the scriptures, Counsels, and docturs, which they allege as
sentences evident, and plain, certe^lie and clearly proving the real presence
of Christ's body in the Sacrament might suffice to pull down the peacockes
tail of this singular man. But in the judgment of them that be wise I

Besides all these, to speak of other that be strangers has not this man
heard of the fame of Alfonsus, who not long sense was here in England,
Alfonsus.
and wrote here part of his book, which he has written and set furthe
against al heresies, in the which he inueyeth against this new Goliath and
all like Philistines, their adherents, and accomplices, yea and against all their
Thirte^ sundry heresies against the Sacrament.
Auncetours. Where he makes rehersall of thirten sundry heresies invented by
that wicked generation against this holy and blessed Sacrament and holy
doctors and famous writers, and yet this proclamer cries: bring

The time would not serve to nombre all that have written in this matter, and
tedyousnesse would encombre the Reader, wherefore leaving many, as Gropperus,
who right learnedlie, and largely has handled and setfurthe the Gropperus.
faith of the Church in all times of the high points of the Sacrament,
auouching the same by scriptures, doctors, and Counsels: And Wernierus, who
like unto the Nycen Council, has made Collection of three hondreth Vernierus.
eighten places of scriptures, doctors, and Counsels, for the assertion of
the truth of the Sacrament: And also, Tauernerius, Eckius, Pighius,
Hoffmeisterus, Garetius, Tauernerius. Eckius. Pighius. Hosfmeister. Garetius.
with other many: I will only bring two, who be soche as, I suppose, this
man will better regard, and better like their judgments in this matter, then
of these before mentioned.

The one of them shall be, Erasmus who in his epistle above alleged writes
thus: Ex euangelio habemus, Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis tradi^ur. Ex
Paulo Erasmus ad Balthas Episcop.
habemus: Ego enim accepi a Domino quod and tradidi vobis, etc. Et qui ederit,
and biberit indigne reus erit corporis and sanguinis Domini. Hoc nobis immobile
fundamentum. Out of the Gospel we have: This is my body, which is delivered
for Erasmus his judgment of the Sacrament
shall be guilty of the body and blood of our lord. This is unto us an
vmnoueable foundation. And after a few words he says: Cum igitur tam
euidens a Christo and Paulo habeamus testimonium, quum per hos viros
euidentissime declaratum sit priscos, quibus non sine causa tantum auctoritatis
tribuit ecclesia, concorditer sensisse in Eucharistia veram esse substantiam
corporis and sanguinis Domini, quum ijs omnibus etia^ accesserit Synodoru^
consta^s autoritas, tantusque populi Christiani co^sensus, simus et nos
concordes in tam caelesti mysterio, and hic sub enigmate edamus de pane et
calice Domini, donec aliter edamus, and bibamus, in regno Dei. Vtinam autem qui
Berengarium secuti sunt errantem, sequantur and paenitentem. Seeing then we have
both of Christ and of Paul so evident testimony, seeing also by these men
(meening, Guitmundus and Algerus) yt is most evidently declared, that the old
ancient Fathers (unto whom the Church not without cause yeldeth so much
authority) have agreablie understand the very substance of the body and
blood of our Berengariut in error, would follow him also in penance. Thus
far Erasmus: Note gentle Reader, and I would the Adversary should note
also, that here is most evident testimony affirmed, done by him, that (to
conclude with Erasmus his sayng) he might follow, Berengarius in penance, as
he has followed him in error. Now to the better Decimus Articulus approbatus
est, in quo confitemur nos sentire, quod in coena Domini vere and Apologia
Confess. August.
substantialiter adsint corpus and sanguis Chrysti, and vere exhibeantur cum
illis rebus quae videntur, pane and vino, his qui sacramentum accipiunt. Hanc
sententiam constanter defenderunt concionatores nostri. Et comperimus non
tantum Romanam ecclesiam affirmare corporalem praesentiam Chrysti, sed idem and
nunc sentire, and olim sensisse Graecam ecclesia^, vt testatur canon Missae
apud Graecos. Et extant quorundam scriptorum testimonia. Nam Cyrillus in
Ioannem cap. xv. inquit Chrystu^ nobis corporaliter exhiberi in coena. Sic enim
ait: Cyrillus
Non tamen negamus recta nos fide, charitateque syncera Chrysto spiritualiter
coniungi. Sed nullam nobis coniunctionis rationem secundum carnem cum illo
esse, id profecto pernegamus, idque a scripturis diuinis omnino alienu^
dicimus. An sortasse puta^t ignota^ nobis mysticae benedictionis virtute^ esse,
quae cum in nobis fit, nonne corporaliter quoque facit co^municatione carnis
Chrysti, Chrystu^ in nobis habitare? Et paulo post: Vnde considerandu^ est, non
habitudine solum, quae per charitate^ intelligitur, Chrystu^ in nobis esse,
verumetiam participatione naturali, etc. Haec recitauimus, vt clarius
perspicerent, qui ista legent, nos defendere receptam in tota ecclesia
sententiam, quod in coena Domini, vere et substantialiter adsint corpus, The
Germans acknowledge the very presence of Christ in the Sacrament.
et sanguis Christi. The tenthe article is approved, in the which we confess
that we believe that in the supper of our Lord be verily and substantiallie
present, the body and blood of Christ, and that they be verily given with
those things that be see^, that is, with bread and wine, unto them that
receive the Sacrament. This sentence have our preachers co^stantlie defended,
And we find not only the church of Rome to affirm the corporal presence
of Christ in the Sacrament, but also the greek church both now to believe, The
greek and latin Churches, both now and in old time affirm the corporal
presence.
and of old time to have believed the same, as the Cano^ of the Mass among the
greeks does testify. And there be also extant the testimonic of certain
writers. For Cyrillus upon John in the fiuetene chapter says, that Christ is
corporally delivered unto us in the Supper. Thus he says: We do not deny
that we be spirituallie joined unto Christ by faith and sincere charity. But
Christ dwells in us corporally not only spirituallie The received doctrine
in all the Church is, that Christ is verily, and substa^tiallie present in the
Sacrament.
yt is done in us, does yt not also by the communication of Christ's flesh,
make Christ corporally to dwell in us? And a little after he says: Wherefore yt
is to be considered, that not by inward disposition only, wihiche is
understand by charity, Christ dwells in us: but also by natural
participacio^, etc. These things have we recited, that what soever they be
that shall read this, they should the more clearly perceive, that we defend
the doctrine received in all the Church, which is, that in the supper of our
Lord are verily and substanciallie present the body and blood of Christ.
Thus much the Germans in their Apology. I suppose this proclamer will now
take a better mind with him, and somewhat contracte and draw in the large
sales of his great brag, so vehemently puffed up with a mighty vain
gloriouse wind, when he sees the learned of Germany so frankly and plainly
publishing their faith, which, though yt be not in every point sownde, yet

For first they confess the very substa^ciall presence of the body and blood
of Christ in the Sacrament. Secondarely they confirm the same by the
authority

This then being a treuth, that is and has been received of all the wholl
Church of Christ, as besides these men's confession, all catholic people
through out all christendom do acknowledge yt so to be, I pray thee (good

Yt is pity that there is so much impudency, and so much arrogancy The
Proclamer is to be pitied.
mixed with untruth in him. I say pity for that he is Gods creature, and in
Baptism once professed Christ's name, in this respect charity moves me to
pity him, and the more for that he receiving the plentiful gifts of God,
does so wickedlie to the more increase of his damnacion abuse them, and
forsaking God and his truth, becomes enemy to them both, which he well
declares in that with soche violence he impugneth, and blasphemeth them both.

In this part and respect as I ca^ not ioin with him: so for my masters
cause, and the defense of my Mother the catholic Church, in whose house I
desire to co^tinewe, I co^tende with him, and conte^ne him, yea and hate him,
not the substance that God has created in him, but the wicked heresy that
Heresiemaketh man enemy to God. Psalm. 148
David we have good example. Do not I, o lord (saeth he) hate them, that hate
thee? And am not I greiued with those that rise up against thee? Yea, I hate
them right sore, even as though they were my enemies. And yet as I move my
pen against him: So shall I move my tongue to pray for him. Possible yt is
that he being in the highest of his mischief, may be stryken down as Paul
was in the highest of his rage of persecucion.

Saint Augustine when he walked in heresy, and did most stowtly contempne
the catholic profession of Christ's name: yt pleased God, sodenlie as yt
were, to give him a new mind, and caused him to reverence that, that before
he despiced.

The like happy chance I wish this man, against whom if I have been, or in
this book shall seem to be sharp, let yt be referred to the euel cause which
the man defends, and not the person himself. The doctrine is so wicked, so
directly against Gods holy word, so discrepant from the holy Counsels, so
that has been from Christ until this day, that yt is by no means tolerable.

Now Reader, I trust thowe seist, that as much as this iolie Chalenger
required, is now performed to him, let him therefore perform his promise,
and subscribe to the catholic faith, and confess Christ's real presence in
the Sacrament. If he will yet maliciously persist, and say; there is no
scripture, nor doctor, nor Council brought forth, that plainly proves yt,
the^ we must provoke to judges. If he will not believe the Germans being
Protestants, not Erasmus, who is accounted of them an vppright man, not the
Catholics of our own contrie, and of other contries, not the Counsels,
which be alleged, not Cyrills plain and manifest sentence, not the common
received faith of the wholl Church, as well of that of the old time, as that,
that is now, both of the latins, and of the greeks, not the plain words of
Christ, who plainly says: This is my body: Which words Erasmus says be
owre sure and vmmoueable fundacion: I pray thee, Reader, whom will he believe
besides himself? Who shall bring forth that one scripture, doctor, or
Council, that he will accept, as plainly proving the matter? None but he

But howesoeuer he shall take this, and the rest of my book in outward
countenance, I trust yt shall touch his conscience. And then (as Chrysostom
Small conforte where conscience is consounded.
says) Leuis erit consolatio, vbi conscientiae sentiunt se esse confusas. Yt
is but a light or small comfort, when the consciences of men perceive them
selves confownded.

God of his mercy reduce him and all, that be gone astraie, home to his fold
again, that they be not in his terrible judgment confownded before him and all
his Angels.

Now, Reader, that the order of this my rude work may be known unto Order
of the Book.
thee, understand that where the enemy of Gods truth, has in his said sermon
made his boast, that he is sure, that not one sentence ca^ be brought by the
catholiq^s to prove the Articles, there by him rehearsed, among the which,
beside the real and substa^ciall presence of Christ in the Sacrament, he
adds many other things apperteininge to the same, which he ioineth together
under one predicame^t, that is, that we have no proof for them: that he may be
perceived to be a vain and false man, I will prove yt by scriptures, doctors,
and Counsels. And incidentlie diverse other of his rehearsed matters, to this
principal apperteining, Which, allthough I ouerpasse them not in soche manner
as he does, only to say, and nothing to prove or improve the^, as they be of
him uttered: yet ye shall find the^ answered, where occasion is ministered to
speak of soche matter.

And although many profownde, and excellent learned men, whose latchettes of
their shoes I am not worthy to loose, have woorthlie written in this matter:
yet for that none of them, to my knowledge, has after this manner proceaded
orderly to expownde the scriptures, that treact of the Sacrament, of them. And
for that these scriptures be in three sundry books of the The contens, and
order of this work.
for the matter being long, I have divided this rude work into three books.
In the first book are opened soche promises, figures, and prophecies of the
old Testament, as appertein to the Sacrament. The second book gives you
understanding of the scriptures apperteininge to the same, contained in the vj.
of saint Ihon his Gospel, the xxvj of saint Matthew, and in the xxiiij. of
saint Luke. The third book expowndeth so much of the tenth, and the
eleventh chapter of the first epistle to the Corinthians, as touches that
matter, and also one sentence of the epistle to the Ephesians, and one other to
the Hebrews.

In this exposition, to the more confutacion of the Aduersaire, and
confirmacion of the catholic, I, for the most part, bringinge sundry, and
diverse doctors upon every text, do ioin a greek doctor and a latin
together, that the concord and agreement of both churches may well appear,
and fully be seen. So have I also joined the doctors that have written within

By which process, gentle Reader, thou shall, I trust, perceive, that where
the arrogante Philistine both blasphemouslie, and untruely has said of the
Catholic Church of the living God, that yt has not one scripture, one
doctor, nor one Council: yt has vndoubredly, as touching the blessed
Sacrament, and other articles apperteining to the same, not only all the holy
Scriptures that treact of that holy mysteric, but also the holy Fathers, and
Counsels, that speak of the same, both Greeks and latins, and them as well of
the ancient time before a thousand years, as the^, that were of the later
time, within the compass of a thousand years. So that the scriptures being
thus explained by the common consent of so many doctors, and all the same
also conspiring upon this one truth (as yt shall be perceived, not by a vain
brag, without proof, but by evident and plain testimony) we maic as
truly

And wishinge that this my labor might be profitable to the simple and
Catholic Church Christ's Parliament house.
unlearned, for whose help I have most specially taken yt, I have framed my
writing, as near as the matter will suffer, to their capacities. And where in
civil, and politic regiment, Laws, Acts and statutes have their force by
Counsels and Parliamentes, therefore where the verity of Christ's real presence
in the Sacrament, is a truth establissed, enacted, and received by Christ's
Parliament house (I mien the catholic Church) yt likes me oftentimes to
allude to the name, and thereto agreablie to name this book. I have Title of
the book.
not ente^ded to fall one here breadth from the faith of the catholiq^
Church. If any thing has slipped from me, I submit yt to the correction of
Christ's

THE FIRST BOOK.
THE FIRST CHAPTER UPON OCCASION THAT THIS ADVERSARY, THIS PROCLAMER, AND
CHALENger would have the scriptures red of all men (presupposing the same to be
easy to be understood) enters, as by preamble, to treact of the difficulty
of the scriptures, and to prove that they aught not of all men to be red,
without an hable interpretour or teacher.
HAVING in purpose to declare by the testimony of the noble men of Christ's
Parliament house, the enacted and received treuth, or true meening of all, or
most of soche scriptures, as treact of the blessd Sacrament of the body and
blood of our Savior Christ, there comes to my mind the doctrine of Luther,
the great Progenitour of this Adversary, who in his book. De seruo arbitrio
Luther. de seruo arbitr.


Whereunto also (the more to infatuate the people) he adds, that we be all,
Theodidacti, that is to say, taught of God, and of his Spirit, so that yt
shall not need for one man to teach an other, or for one to learn of an other.
Of which mind this Adversary seems also to be, in that he woolde the
scriptures should be common to all men. Which doctrine if yt were true, then
is my purpose here vain and superfluouse, which is to seek out the true
meening of the scriptures by the holy fathers and doctors.

Wherefore, as a preamble to this rude work, I have thought good to discuss,
and by discussion to make plain to the unlearned Reader, that the scriptures be
obscure, dark, and hard to be understood, and for that cause not of all men
indifferently to be red. Wherbie yt shall appear, that my purpose shall be
to good effect. And for the better co^pasing thereof, I mind to

And where our chief purpose is, to treact of the blessed Sacrament this 1.
Scriptures to be hard proved by seven arguments 2.
may justly be the first argument, that the controversies thereof in these
our days moved (which be to many) do make yt more then manifest, that there
be difficulties in the scriptures. If difficulties, then be they not plain.

The second: the disciples which heard Christ's own disputacion of this
mystery, proceading out of his own mouth, as out of the lively welspring,
and who, for that they were disciples, should better have disgested Cristes
words, then the people of the Jews, who groslie said: Quomodo potest hic
dare nobis carnem suam ad manducandum? how can this man give us his flesh to
eat? Yet they (the disciples I mien) in the end of the disputacion said:
Durus Joan. 6. The disciples understood not Christ's own words.
est hic sermo, quis potest eum audire? This is an hard saying, who can abide
to hear him? So that neither the people of the Jews, nor yet the very
disciples of Christ, which should much have exceaded the other, did atteign
to the true understanding of Christ's words, carnal reason prevailing
against humble and lowly submission to faith.

Upon the which words of the disciples, Chrystome says, Quid ergo est,
Durus? difficilis intellectu, and que^ capere non posset eoram imbecillitas,
plenus formidinis. Chrysostom, in 6. Joan.
What then is this word, hard? A saying not easy to be understood, and

And further if we truly say that the scriptures be easy, and plain for
every man to understand, yt should appear, that yt was no great benefet, 3.
that Christ did to his Apostles, in opening their wits, that they might
understand the scriptures. Neither was it any great matter that he Luc. 24.
did to the two disciples that went to Emaus. unto whom beginning at Moses,
and the prophettes he interpreted in all scriptures which were written Jbid.
of him.

But certenlie yt was agreat benefet, that Christ did at these two sundry
Christ's interpreting of the scripturs, and ope^nig of wits to understand
them argues the difficulty. 2. Petr. 3.
times give, in openyng their wits to understand the scriptures to the one:
and in interpreting the scriptures to the other. For without this benefet
neither the one, nor the other could have atteigned to that gift.

Of this the chamberlain of queen Candace, of whom is made mention in the
acts of the Apostles, being so well affected to the scriptures, that passing
from Jerusalem homewarde, and sitting in his chariette he was reading 4. Acto.
8.
them, and yet understood them not, had good experience. That he understood
them not yt does well appear by his own confession. For Philippe being
moved by the Spirit of God to ioin him self to his chariette, heard him read
Esaie the Prophet, and asked him saing: understand thowe, what thowe
read? and he answered and said: how can I, except I had a guide?
wherefore when Philippe was with him in his chariette, and the scripture was
red, the camberlain asked him saying: I pray thee, of whom speaks the
Prophet this? of him self, or of some other man? Philippe opened his mouth,
and began at the same scripture

This place teaches us, that not only by the saing, and doing of the
chamberlain, but also by the doing of the holy Ghost, the scriptures be
obscure Philippe sent by the holy Ghost to expownd the Scriptures to the
Eunuche.
and hard. For the holy Spirit of God does nothing in vain. wherefore when
the same Spirit mercifully beholding the good affection of this man, and
knowing the scriptures to be soche, as he could not understand them without
an interpretour, did send Philippe unto him, to open and declare that unto him,
that was obscure and dake before, yt does inuinciblie prove our purpose.
Which fact of the holy Ghost had been vainlie done, if the scriptures were
plain and easy of all men to be understood. Now if this man could not
understand them without an interpretour, no more can any other common man
do. And then what does yt auaill the scriptures to be commonly red without
an interpretour?

The Apostles them selves, when our savior Christ spoke unto them of 5. Joan.
16. The Apostles understood not Christ's lively voice,
his passion and resurrection (as yt appears in the xvj. of John) could me?
and that I go to the father? they said therefore, what is this that he

As this manner of speech being uttered by the lively voice of Christ was
dark unto the Apostles: so the same being now written in dead letters, is
yt not (trow ye) as dark to many as yt was to them, till yt be opened and
declared? if yt were not easy to them that heard Christ himself speak yt:
how should yt be easy to the unlearned, that do but read yt?

For as saint Hierom says: Habet nescio quid latentis aenergiae viua vox,
and in dures discipuli de Autoris ore transfusa, fortius sonat. Vnde and
AEschines, cum Rhodi Hieron ad Paulinum.
exularet, and legeretur illa Demosthenis oration, quam aduersus eum habuerat,
mirantibus cunctis atque laudantibus, suspirans, ait: Quid si ipsam audissetis
Bestiam sua verba resonantem: The lively voice (says saint Hierom) has I
wot not what an hidden virtue, or clerenesse of demonstration, and being
uttered from The lively voice has a more force in the ear then the dead
letter in the eye.
the mouth of the Author into the ears of the disciple, yt haith a more
force in sownde. wherefore Aeschynes, when he was a banisshed man at the
Demosthenes made against him was red, when all men did wonder at yt, and praise
yt, sithing he said: what if ye had heard the beast him self uttering his own
words? Thus much saint Hierom.

In the which saying he declares, that there is more clerenesse in a sentence
lively spoken from the mouth of the Author, and the hearers shall more
easelie preceaue yt, and sooner understand yt, then they shall only reading
the same in the dead letter. Yt may therefore be concluded, that the gospel as
yt, is written is more hard to be understood, then as yt was of the mouth of
Christ spoken. But as yt was spoken yt was hard to be understood, wherefore
being written yt is more hard to be understood.

Saint Paul enombring the gifts of the Spirit, says: To one is given 6.
1. Cor. 12.
the utterance of wisdom: to an other the utterance of knowledge: to an other
is given faith: to an other the gifts of healing: to an other power to do
miracles: to an other prophecy: to an other judgment to discern spirits: to
an other diverse tounges: to an other interpretacio^ of tou^ges. All

In the which distinction of gifts, ye perceive that the utterance of
wisdom, the utterance of knowledge, the gift of tounges, be several gifts.
And that they be not given to all men indifferently, but some to one, some to
other, as yt pleases the holy will of that blessed Spirit, that is the
Author and distributour of the same gistes. For saint Paul in the end of
the same chapter, where the former alleged words be written, says: Are all
Apostles? are all prophets? are all teachers? are all doers of miracles? have
all the gifts of healing? do all speak with tou^ges? do all interpret?
etc. which his manner of questioninge includes a negative, that every man
has not all th^se.

Then forasmuch as every man has not the giste of utterance, of knowledge,
nor the gift of prophecy, nor the gift of interpretacion etc. Every
Interpretation of Scripture not given to every man.
man has not the understanding of the scriptures, Neither then be the
scriptures easy to be understood of every man. For unto him, that has the

This also saint Paul proves very well by the order and disposition 7. 1.
Cor. 12.
prove an order in the mystical body the Church. Ye are (says he) the
body of Christ, and members one of an other. And God has also ordained in
the Congregation: First Apostles, secondarelie prophets, thirdly Teachers,
then them that do miracles, after that the gift of healinge etc. In the
which description of the order in Christ's Church, ye see that the three
chiefest, and highest states be Apostles, Prophets, and teachers. Now if the
Scriptures be easy for every man's understanding then either these states be
superfluouse, because every man understanding the Scriptures, there needs no
teacher, nor Prophet: Or else forasmoche as every man understands the
scriptures he is in this state to be a teacher, All be not Prophets, nor
teachers.
and a prophet, which is directly against saint Paul's doctrine. For he
says all be not Prophets, neither be all teachers.

Forasmoche then as Christ has appointed, as one of the chiefest states of
his Church, the state of teachers, there must be of necessity a great nombre
of inferior members, that must be hearers, and learners. And

THE SECVNDE CHAPTER TO PROVE THAT THE SCRIPTVRES BE NOT EASY, RECITES
CERtain hard and obscure places of the old testament.
ALBEIT that this, that is all ready said, is sufficient to prove the
scriptures to be hard, and not plain, ne easy to be understood: yet that ye
may see yt more manysestlie before you face,

And first shall be brought some places of the old Testament, out of the
which I might bring, not places, but wholl books, and of them not a few, as
all the Prophets, as well the greater, as the less, the Book of Job, the
book of psalms, the book of the Preacher, and Cantica canticorum, englished
the Ballett of ballettes of Solomon. All which books, certain I am, be of
soche difficulty, hardness, and obsturitie, that, as queen Candaces
Cha^amberlain said, they can not be understood with out a guide, or else
Acto. ^.
special inspiracion of god.

As for Genesis, although it be counted so easy, and so plain a book: yet
Hieron presa. in Ezech. Genesis might not be red of the Jews before thirty
years of age.
the Jews (as saint Hierome witnesses) might not read yt before they were
thirty years of age, as in which were many things very hard to be
understood, which required a stayed head, of mature, ripe, and grave
Judgment, soberlie to seek the true sense, and understanding of them, which
rash youth would sooen ouerpasse, and frame an understanding at

Out of this book, although saint Augustine, and other that have travailed
in the exposition of the same do move many and sundry doubts: Judah, Jacob
said: Judah is a lions whelpe, from the spoill, my son, thowe art comed on
high. He laid him dowen, Genesis 49.
and couched him self as a lion, and as a lioness, who will stire him up? And
after a little: He shall bind his fool to the vine, and his Asses colte to the
branch. He washed his garment in wine, and his mantle in the blood of
grapes. His eyes are reader then wine, and his teeth whiter then milk. Soche
like be the other. How easy these be for the unlearned to understand I
refer yt to thy judgment, Reader.

Exodus, and Leuiticus, with the rest of Pentateuchon, although they require
an higher sense for a Christian to understand, then the letter sowndeth (as
Origin declares) which not all the learned atteign unto, besides the
applicacion of the figures to the things figured in the new testament by
Allegories, as saint Paul does in the Epistle to the Galatians, and in his
Epistle to the Hebrews: yet they conteyn diverse obscure senses, seming almost
to have no reason in them, as this in Leuitious: Ye shall keep my ordenances.
Thowe shall not let cattle gendre with a contrary kind, neither Leuit. 19.
so we thy field with mingled seed. Neither shall thou put on any garment of
linen, and woollen.

And in Deutronomio, God thus commanded: If thowe chance upon a birds nest
by the way, in whatsoever tree yt be, or on the grownde, whether Deuteronomy. 22.
they be young or eggs, and the dame sitting upon the young, or upon the
eggs: Thowe shall not take the dame with the young but shall in any wise let
the dame go, and take the young to thee, that thowe may prosper and prolong
thy days. Thowe shall not sow thy vineyard with diverse seeds, lest the
fruicte of thy vineyard be defiled. Thowe shall not Ibid. 23.
plowe with an ox and an ass together. And again in an other place: Thowe

Shall we take these places in their grammatical sense? does the high
providence of God occupy yt self in making ordeinances for birds nestes? And
by gods ordeinance, shall a man prosper, and prolong his days that takes not
the dame with the young? does the wisdom of God ioin soche rewards, to soche
trifles? And making the ordeinance for the thressing ox, does God (as saint
Paul alleging the same asks) take thought for oxen? No. yt has an other
understanding, as there saint Paul alleging this 1. Cor. 9.
ordeinance of God, applies yt unto.

Yt were enough to make a just volume, if all the obscure places should be
recited, that be in the old Testament. But as by these yt may be perceived,
that the scriptures be not so easy, as men fancy them to be: So truly yt is
perilous that they (as the adversaries would) should be handeled commonly of
them, whose understanding atteigning to none other sense, then the grammatical
sense, and oftentimes not to that neither, do wounderfullie abuse them, to the
great dishonor of God, and plain contempt of Genesis, Leuiticus, and
Deutronomium, would he not say they were fond and trifeling things?

And where as wisdom and knowledge be the goodly gifes of God: if the Eccls. 1.
unlearned should read the book of the Preacher where yt is said: I commoned
with my own heart saying: lo, I am comed to a great state, and have

Then I turned me to consider wisdom, error, and foolishnes, for who is he
emonge men that might be compared to me the king in soche works? Jbid. 2.
and I saw that wisdom excels foolishnes, as far as light does
darkness. For a wise man has his eyes in his head: but the fool goes in
darkness. I perceived also that they both had one end. Then thought I in my
mind: If yt happen to the fool, as yt does unto me, what neadeth me the^

What may appear more vehement, to dissuade a man from wisdom? How much is
wisdom the goodly gift of God, abased to appearance in this saing? How is
the gift of God magnified to the advancement of gods honor, when in appearance
Solomon accompteth the labor for yt to be but vanity? I say to you before
God, whom I call to wittnes, that I speak truth. I heard a man of woorshippe,
of gravity, of wisdom, of godly life, and of competent learning, able to
understand, and likewise excercysed in in the scriptures, upon the reading of
this book, and conference had betwixt him and me for the same, earnestly
say, that yt was a naughty book. If he did thus, what will the rude, the
rash unlearned, and the ungodly reader do?

How little incitament of virtue appears to be in the Ballettes of Solomon?
Yea raitheir how ungodly and wanton seem they to be? raither in the outward
face teaching, and provoking wantonness, then godliness of life. In the first
chapter ye read thus: O how fair art thowe my love, Cant. 1.
beloved, how well fawoured art thowe. Owre bed is decked with flowers, the
syllinges of our house are Cedre tree. And again: O stand up my love my
beautiful and come. For lo; the winter is now past, the rain is away and
gone. The flowers are comed up in the feldes, the time of the birds singing
is comed, and the voice of the Turtle dove is heard in our land. The fig
tree brings furthe her figs, and the Vines bear blossoms, and have a good
smell. O stand up my love, my beautyfull, and come my dove out of the caves
of the Rockke, out of the holls of the walls. O let me see thy cou^tena^ce,
and hear thy voice. For sweet is thie voice, and fair is thie face, etc. Like
unto this is all that book. What can the unlearned find, or understand here?
any thing to edificacion of godly life? or rather (as is said) a provocation
to wanton life?

Yet Jesus Son of Syrac seems to have more unseemly words then
Ecclesiast. 62.
thristie, so shall she open her mouth, and drink of every next water, that
she may get. By every hedge shall she sit her down, and open her quoiuer
to every arrowe.

What trifeling, what iestyng, what pastime, I have heard and seen upon the
reading, and reherfall of this text, and what unseemly, and vnchaist words
have fallen out by occasion of the same, yt is unmeet in this place to be
rehearsed. But this I will report, for that as truly as God lives, I know yt
to be true. This text was spoken in the presence of a good vertueouse
gentlewoman, and one that feared God, and she misliking the same, yt was
avouched to her to be scripture. The book was turned, the place was red, she
exclamed, and said: that if the scripture had soche bawdie words, she would
no more believe the scripture. for yt was naught. with mo soche like words,
which now memory reteyneth not.

May not this grieve a christian heart, that the scriptures Gods holy word
should be thus blasphemed? And what is the cause of yt? verily because they
be made common to their hands, that understand them not. That this place was
not understood of them that handeled the same, as is

Now to put a conclusion to this, that is here said: little does yt awaill
them to read the scriptures, that understand not what they read. But raither
(as Origin says) they may as well take occasion of evil as of good by
reading the scriptures, and not in their true sense and meeming understand
them. whose sentence for the better declaracion thereof, I have here noted:

Opera carnis diuinorum voluminu^ historia continet, non valde eos iuuans, qui
sic eam intelligunt vt scripta est. Quis enim non docebitur scruire luxuriae,
and fornicationem habere Origin. 10. li. Strom.
pro nihilo, cum Iudam ad meretricem legerit ingredientem, and Patriarchas
multas pariter habuisse vxores? Quomodo non ad idololatrian prouocabitur, qui
sanguinem taurorum, and caeteras Leuitici victimas, non plus quam in litera
sonat, putauerit indicare? Gene. 38.
Quod autem inimicitias in aperto positus scripturae sermo, doceat, and ex hoc
loco probatur: Filia Babylonis misera, beatus qui retribuet tibi retributionem,
quam retribuisti nobis. Psalm. 136. Psalm. 100.
Beatus qui tenebit, and allidet paruulos suos ad petram. Et exillo: In
matutino interficiebam omnes peccatores terrae: et ex ijs similibus, de
contentionibus videlicet, aemulatione, ira, rixis, dissentionibus. Ad quae, si
non altius aliquid sentiamus, prouocant nos magis historiae exempla quam
prohibent. Haereses quoque magis de carnali scripturae intellectu, quam de
opera carnis nostrae (vt plurimi aestimant) substiterunt. Nec non ebrietates,
et inuidiam, per legis literam discimus. Inebriatur Noe post Diluuium, et
Patriarchae apud fratrem Joseph in AEgypto. The histories of Gods books (says
Origin) contein the works of the flessh which history does not much help
them, which dooso understand yt, as yt is written. For who shall not be
taught to serve voluptuouse pleasure, and to account fornycation for nothing,
when he shall read Judas to have taken an harlotte, and the Patriarchs to have
had many wifes at once? How shall he not be provoked to Idolatry, who shall
think the blood of Bulls, and other Leuiticall sacrifices, no more to show
unto him then the letter sowndeth? That the plain sainge of the scripture
teaches enemities, yt is proved both by this place: Daughter of Babylon, thowe
shall come to myserie thy self: yea happy shall he be that rewards thee, as
thowe hauest served us. Blessed shall he be that takes unto the which if ye
understand not some higher thing, the examples Diverse histories of Scripture
literallie taken, do more provoke sin, than forbid yt.
have been more by the carnal understanding of the scriptures, then by the
work of our flesh, as many do think. We learn also by the letter of the law
dronkennes, and envy. Noe after the flood was dronken. And the Patriarchs also
were droncken, being with their Brother Joseph in AEgypte. Thus Origin.

Now then as in this chapter ye have heard a nombre of books and places of
scripture recited, which well prove the obscurity and hardness of the same:
So in the end ye have heard Origin declaring his mind, that to understand but
the carnal sense of yt, is raither hurtful to edificacion, then profitable.
Peradventure some will grant that the old Testament is dark and hard, but
the new Testament (they will say) is easy and plain: But that this likewise,
is not easy for every man to understand, the chapter following shall declare?

THE THIRD CHAPTER TO DECLARE
THAT the new Testament is hard to be understood yt is sufficiently proved
in the frist chapter. Nevertheless that the Reader may have some experience
of that, that by Authority is said: I shall lay before him certain places,
which shall enforce him to confess, that by his own judgment to be true,
which by the scriptures he has allreadie heard taught and affirmed.

And first let him begin with the Genealogy of Christ described unto us by
two Evangelists, Matthew, and Luke. And let them be compared together, and
trial made, whether yt be esaie to concile them or no.

Matthewe begins at the elders, as at Abraham, and so descends to Christ:
Luke begins at Christ and ascends up to the elders; even unto Ada^, and
so to God. In the which Genealogy Luke says that Christ The Euange^istes
Matthew, and Luke seem to varte in the genealogy of Christ.
was the supposed son of Joseph, and that Joseph was the son of Heli:
Matthewe says that Jacob begatte Joseph the husband of Mary, of who^ was born
Jesus, which is called Christ. So that Luke says: that Iosep was the son
of Heli, and Matthew says he was the son of Jacob. Which dysagrement
Iulianus Augustus, the Apostata, as saint Hiero^ says, objected unto us.
Which objection al though it be solued by saint Hiero^: yet there remains a
great difficulty how these Genealogies should be true, and both pertain to
Christ: seeing that from Joseph, to David there is none agreement betwixt the^,
as by comparing of the Eua^gelistes together, ye shall easily perceive. Which I
say not as that there is in deed no agreement or consonant truth betwixt the^:
But that yt may the raither appear and be well known, that the truth of the
history of the Gospel lieng hid, yt is not easy for every man to find out
the same.

Chrysostom also finds an other obscure place, for thus he says: Illud
Chrysosto^. in pri. Matthew.
quoque inter occulta numeratur, quomodo Elizabeth de Leuitica existens tribu
Mariae cognata dicatur. That also is to be enombred emonge the hid things,
how

Forasmuch as the law was, that men should marry within their own tribes
yt does, appear that Elisabeth being married to Zachary, she was of the same
tribe. Likewise that Joseph being of the tribe of Judah, and marrieng Joseph,
seeing that Joseph was not the father of Christ in deed, but his putatiue or
supposed father? To this they answer, that Joseph and Mary being of one tribe,
the Genealogy comes right to Christ.

So then Mary being of the tribe of Judah, and Elisabeth of the trybe of Leui,
the doubt stands how the virgen Marie should be cousin to Elisabeth. And
yet the Evangelist saint Luke recitinge the words of the Angel, says: Et
ecce Elizabeth cognata tua, and ipsa concepit filium in senectute sua. And
behold Luc. 1.
thy cousin Elisabeth she also has conceived a son in her old age.

Also yt is not without Doubt that is said of our master Christ (as the
Evangelist saint Mark recites) where he speaking of the coming of Marc. 13.
the Son of man to the general judgment says: De die aute^ illa, and hora,
nemo nouit, neque Angeli in caelo, neque filius, nisi pater, But of that day
and hour knows Quis haec vnqua^ Chrysostom. hom. 48.
dicere potuit? Patrem filius optime nouit, and eo prorsus pacto, quo pater
filium: diem autem illum ignorant? Praeterea, Spiritus dei profunda inuestigat:
Filius vero nec tempus nouit? Sed quomodo quidem iudicare oporteat, non fugit
eum, and archana singulorum clam eo non sunt, quod autem multo vilius est, id
ignorant? Adhuc, quomodo is per quem omnia facta sunt, and sine quo factum est
nihil diem illum ignorabit? Qui enim secula fecit, is profecto creauit and
tempora, and diem produxit, quomodo igitur quae ipse produxit, ignorant? Who
could at any time (says Chrysostom) say thesethinges? The Son knows the
Father very well, and eue^ the very same way that the Father knows the
Son, and does he not know that day? Moreover the Spirit of God searches
the deep Botomes of the secrets of God, and does not the Son know the
time? But how he must Judge the world, he

Thus as many a man swimming above upon the smoothe of the water sees not the
deep botome thereof: So many a man readinge the smoothe face of the Scripture,
sees not the deep doubts of the same.

Algasia and Hedibia women both vertueouse, and studiouse by their studies
Hieron. ad Alg. qn. 1.
perceived many dark places in the scriptures, which they not taking upon
them rashly to explicate, as persuading them selves that the scriptures were
not easy and plain, sent from the fordest parts of France to saint Hierom
then being at Bethleem, the one of them twelve questions: The other eleven
questions, which all be of the new Testament, as well of the

Algasia moves this doubt: why saint John the Baptist being in prison sent
his disciples to Christ asking him this question: Art thowe he that Luc. 7.
Joan. 1.
with his fingar, saienge of him. Ecce agnus Dei, ecce qui tollit peccata mundi
Behold the la^be of god, behold him that takes away the sins of the
world.

Yt augme^teth the doubt also, that Ihon had baptized Christ, at which time
he knowing him to be Christ the very Messiah, did not only say to Christ, I
have need to be Baptized of thee, and come thowe to me? But also saw the
heavens open and the Spirit of God descending like a dove, Matthew. 3.
and lighting upon him, and heard also the voice from heaven saying: This is my
beloved Son, in who^ I am well pleased: how then does he ask this, whether
he be the Messiah that should come, or that they must look for an other? This
(as I suppose) may well appear to be a doubt to a simple reader, and not
without consultacion of learned men to be dissolved.

Hedibia moves this doubt among other in the gospel, How saint Matthew
says, Mary Magdalen with the other Mary fell down at the feet of Joan. 20.
Matthew. 28 Head. qu. 5. Hieron. ad
Christ after his resurrection, and held his feet: Saying that saint John

An other doubt much like unto this there is betwixt saint John and saint
Mark. Saint Mark says: when the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalen, Marc. 16.
and Mary Iacobi, and Salome, bought sweet odoures, that they might come and
anoint Jesus. And early in the morning the first day of the Sabbath, they came
to the Sepulcher, when the Sun was risen. Saint John says: The first day
of the Sabbath came Mary Magdalen early in Joan. 20.
the morning when yet was yet dark. Yt is not very eafie for an unlearned
reader to agree these two.

In the story of the resurrection of Christ, there be a great nombre of
apparent Matthew. 28. Joan. 20. Marc. 16.
contrarieties: as of the time of the resurrection: of the appearinge of the
Angels in the Sepulcher: of their nombre: of their place: and soche other,
which all generally to enombre yt were to long.

The same Hedibia moves also this doubt: whether that Christ breathinge on
his Apostles (as saint John says) and saying: Take ye the holy Hieron. ad
Head. q. 9. Joan. 20. Act. 1.
Ghost, gave them then the holy Ghost: Seeing that saint Luke says,
immediately before his ascension, he promised that he would send them the
holy Ghost. If he gave the^ the holy Ghost before his ascensio^, yt appears
that he would not, or neded not to send him to the^ after his ascension.

Tus yt may be see^ that there be obscure and dark places in the Gospel. To
conclude there be innumerable places having much doubt, which saint Austen
with great labor and trauaill does right learnedlie dissolve, making for that
purpose a great volume intiteled, De consensu Euangelistarum. of the consent
of the Evangelists, which had been vain and superfluouse, if the gospells were
easy and plain for every man to understand.

What neaded the commentaries of saint Hierom. and of saint Ambrose upon
the Evangelists: The homelies of Chrysostom, and saint Austen upon the same:
The expositions also of a great nombre of famous and learned men, which with
great study, labor, and trauaill have made their works, if the scriptures be
so plain and easy?

I have brought but a few places of the Gospells to make a little show,

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER Contains certain hard places of the Epistles.
TO begin with the Epistle of saint Paul to the Romans, In the epistle to
the Romans be mo obscure than plain places.
which as yt is first in the order of the epistles, so shall yt be here first
spoken of, yt is more easy there to find obscure and dark places, laden with
difficulties and doubts, then yt is to find easy and plain places. There is
disputed the matter of justification, which how hard a matter yt is, if there
were none other argument to prove yt, the controversies that be thereupon risen
in this our time, might sussice to declare yt.

And yet yt is not easy for all men, that read that same epistle, well to
understand this place of saint Paul: Arbitramur iustificari hominem per
fidem, sine Romans 3.
operibus legis. We hold that a man is justified by faith, without the
works of the law: saying saint James in his epistle says: What avails yt
my brethren, though a man say, he has faith, if he have no works, can faith
save him? After he concludes thus: Even so faith, if yt have no works, yt is
Iaco. 2.
dead in ytself.

Again saint Paul says: We say that faith was recknid to Abraham for Romans
4.
righteousness. And saint James says: Was not Abraham our Father justified
by works? Jaco. 2.


In that epistle also is set furthe the reiection of the Jews, and the
calling of the gentiles. In the discourse whereof saint Paul says thus,
alleging the Prophet Esaie for the calling of the gentiles: I am fownde of
the^ that sought me not, I am manifested unto them, that asked not after me.
But against Israel Romans 10.
he says: All day long have I stretched furthe my hands unto a people, that
believes not, but speaks against me. And yet afterward he asks thus: has
God cast away his people? He answers: God forbid: And yet he says again
in the same chapter, speaking of the Jews: If the casting away of them be
the reconciling of the world, etc. Wherbie he shows that the Jews be cast
away.

In that same chapter also he asks this question: Nunquid sic offenderunt,
vt caderent? Have they so offended or stumbled, that they should fall? He
answers: Propter incredulitatem fractisunt. Because of unbelief they were
broken of.

These matters require a clearer seight of understanding, and heads of deper
study, and judgment to decise the^, then have the common sort of readers,
which oftentimes are most busy, thinking the^ selves to see, when in deed they
see nothing at all. God give the^ grace and open their eyes to see their own
ignorance, that they may walk within their compass, and not streign above
their reach,

In the matter of predestinacion, where upon saint Paul enters depely to
dispute, there is no sentence without difficulty. So that, as where there be a
great no^bre of things a man staieth, not knowing which to take first: Even
so I, in this great multitude of difficulties, know not where to begin, or
which to take first? But at the last I take one of the least which is this:
Non Romans 9.
est volentis, neque currentis, sed miserentis Dei. Yt lies not in the will of
man, nor the runninge of man, but in the mercy of God.

This sentence besides many other, has this doubt: that saint Paul in a
Supra ca. 7
Velle adiacet mihi, perficere aute^ bonum non inuenio. Will is present with
me, but I find no means to that, which is good.

The same saint Paul says also: Deus vult omnes hommes saluos fieri, and
ad 1. Thim. 2
agnitionem veritatis venire? God will have all men to be saved, and to come to
voluntati eius quis resistet? Who can withstand his will? Why then walk so
many in the broad way to perdition? And why be Romans 9.
there so many Infidells, that come not to the knowledge of the treuth? And so
many heretics that forsake the truth? And again: if God will have all men to
be saved, how stands the truth of this scripture? Multi vocati, pauci
electi: Many be called, but few chosen. If God will have all saved, then all
must be chosen. For whom he will have saved, him he choseth.

Algasia also moves a doubt to saint Hierom in the same chapter of the
epistle of saint Paul to the Romans. What (saeth she) meeneth saint
Hieron. ad Alg. q 9. Algasia moves great doubts to saint Hierom. Sup. 8.
Paul by this saying: I have wished my self to be cursed from Christ for my
kinsmen as perteining to the flesh?

To the which saint, Hierom aunswering, opens the question and says: In
very deed yt is a great question, how the Apostle, who before had said: who
shall separate us from the love of God? shall tribulation? or anguyshe? or
persecution? or hungar? either peril? either swoorde? And again: I am sure

In the which words he opens a great doubt that saint Paul, who so
fervently loved Christ that nothing either in heaven, or in earth, could
separate him from Christ, now seems to wish for the love he bare to the
Jews to be divided from Christ. Which might be an argument, that he loved the
Jews above Christ.

As this, after the sentence of saint Hierom, is a great doubt: So is there
an other by the same Algasia moved upon the same epistle to the Romans, Hieron.
ad Alg. qu. 7.
In what sense (says she) is that to be taken, that saint Paul writes to
the Romans: Vix enim pro iusto quis moritur. Na^ pro bono forsitan quis audet
mori. For skarce will any man die for the righteouse man. Peradventure for a
good man durst a man die.

This sentence seems so plain, and the native sense thereof so easy to be Two
contrary heresies grownded upon one scripture. Marcion
yt, two horrible heresies being diverse, and unlike in sentence, but like in
impiety and wickedness, took here much occasion.

Marcion by this makes two Gods: one the just God, and creator of the Law,
and the Prophets: The other the good God, which is the God of the Gospel, and
the Apostles, whose Sonneys Christ. For the just God (says he) few or none
have died. But for the good God (which is Christ) there have been innumberable
Martyrs.

Arrius the other heretic (says saint Hierom) contrariwise, calls Christ
the just God, and for his so saying alleges scripture out of the Psalms,
Arrius.
where David prophecieng of Christ said: Give the king thy judgments (to God)
and thy righteonsnes unto the kings Son. The good God he Psalm. 71.
calls the Father of heaven, of whom (says he) Christ him self says: what
Luc. 18.
call thou me good? there is none good, but one God, the Father.

As these heretics for the obscurity of this sentence of saint Paul (for

Amandus a priest writes to saint Hierom, desiring to be resolved in four
Ama^dus.
questions. Of the which one is upon the epistle of saint Paul to the
Corinthians, where disputing of the resurrection, he comes to this place: He
must reign till he has put al his enemies under his feet. The last enemy that
1. Cor. 15.
shall be destroyed is death. For he has put all things under his feet. But
when he says all things are put under him, yt is manifest that he is
excepted, which did put all things under him. When all things are subdued
under him, then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him, that put all

Besides many doubts, which may be moved upon this scripture, this is one
very notable for the mainteining of the Arrians heresy, where he says that
when all things be subdued, then shall the Son himself also be subject unto
him, as though the Son of God in Godhead, were subject to God the Father.
Which manner of saing, for somoche as the holy catholic faith confesses
that he is equal to the Father, is to be taken Hila. li. 11. de Trinita.
detestable heriticall. This proposition is learnedlie handeled, and treacted
of by saint Hillarie in his eleventh book against the Arrians, and this
doubt there dissolved. Yt were to tediouse, and all most impossible for me to
rehearse all the dark places of the epistles. Therefore one, or two mo, and so
an end.

To the Collosians Saint Paul writes thus: Now joy I in my suffringes
Colloss. 1.
for you, and fulfill that, which is behind of the passions of Christ in

To the Hebrews he has this sentence: For yt can not be, that they, which
Hebr. 6.
were once lightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were become
Ibid. 1^.
looking for judgment, and violent fire which shall devour the Adversaries.

These two sentences, if they had no fauourablier interpretacion, the^ they
seem to bear in their grammatical sense, all Chrystendome might wail and
mourn, For the former sentence seems to teach, that if a Christian fall in
to mortal sin, after that he is christened, and has received the gifts of
God thereunto appertaining, that he can not be reconciled by penance, and so
were all hope of mercy for the remission of sins clean taken away. Which
thing one Nouatus by occasion of this scripture understanding yt in the Nouatus
sense, that yt seems in the first face to have, taught very stoutelie, and
so Athanasius wrote an epistle to Serapio, where he declares that the same
saint Paul received the incestiouse Corinthian, and also the Galathians,
that had erred Athanas.
in faith, to whom he said. O insensati Galatae, quis vos fascinauit, non
obedire veritati? O insensate Galathians, who has bewitched you, that ye
should not obey the treuth? And yet afterward he said: Filioli mei, quos
iterum pariurio, donec Galat. 3. Ibid. 4.
formetur in vobis Chrystus. O my little children, of whom I trauaill again in
birth until Christ be fashyoned in you.

The second sentence also seems utterly to deny all means to atteign to gods
mercy, after we have wilfully fallen to sin, which sentence if yt should
be understood as it sowndeth, desperacio^ should reign, and hope should be
abandoned.

What shall I say for the understanding of the scripturs by the common people
unlearned, when not only many other learned men through their evil or wrong
understanding of them, have swarued, and fallen into sundry and diverse
heresies: But also saincteHierom, and saint Augustine, two lights Galat. 2.
was comed to Antioche, I withstoode him openly, because he was wourthie to be
blamed. In the which their disagrement there was nothing committed, that either
charity betwixt the^ was empaired, or yet any heresy obstinately defended:
but raither the truth learnedlie enquired and searched.

Wherefore, Reader, I say unto thee: Noli altu^ sapere, sed time. Be not high
minded but fear For arroga^cie is mother of error. Put on therefore an humble
spirit, and in reading of the scriptures submit thy self to the teaching of
thy Romans 11. Arroga^cie mother of error.
Mother the church. For the loulie bowing man may easelie go without harm,
where the stowte high looker shall break his browe. Be humble therefore and
fear to trust thine own judgment in the exposition of the scriptures, and so
will the Spirit of God rest upon thee. For upon whom (says he) Esaias. 66.
shall my Spirit rest, but upon him that is humble, and fearing my words?

THE FIFTH CHAPITRE DECLARING THE Minds
YT needs not to trauaill any more in this matter, when (as I suppose) the
Reader is by this that is allreadie said, so persuaded, that he will with hand
and foot (as they say) go with me, and ioin with me in one sentence, and
mind. Yet that the arrogancy of the stout ignorant and unlearned, and the
untruth of the learned may be confownded, and suffer their wourthie shame:
the Reader shall hear the judgment of the famous learned Fathers, and
doctors, as touching the difficulty, and obscurity of the scriptures.
Wherbie the impudency of soche arrogant persons may clerlie and manifestly
be perceived, and they, if they have not (as the Prophet Hieremie in the voice
of God says of the people of Israel) gotten an whoores forehead, and will
not be ashamed, may then in deed be ashamed. Hierem 3.


Origin, a man both ancient, and famous in learning handeling this place of
saint Paul to the Galathians: Vos in libertate^ vocati estis fratres.
Brethren ye Galat. 5. Orig. 19. li. Storm.
are called unto liberty, says thus: Difficilis locus est et ita a nobis
disserendus videtur. An hard place this is, and thus unto me yt seems to be
expownded. And after along discourse in the exposition of the same text, he
says thus: Quamobrem spiritum scripturae, fructusque quaeramus, qui non
dicuntur esse manifesti. Multo quippe labor, et sudore, et digno cultu in
scripturis fructus spiritus inuenitur. Vnde arbitror Paulum, diligenter, et
caute de scripturae sensibus dixisse carnalibus: Manifesta sunt opera carnis.
De spiritualibus vero, non vt ibi posuisse; Manifestus est fructus, Sed ita:
Fructus autcm spiritus est charitas, gaudium, pax etc. Wherefore let us seek the
Spirit of the scripture, and the fruicts of the same, which are not said to
be manifest. For truly the fruicte of the Spirit is fownde in the scriptures
with much labor, and swette, and wourthie trauaill. Wherefore I Scripture must
be studied with much labor.
think Paul diligently and warelie of the carnal senses of the scriptures
to have said; the works of the flesh are manifest. But of the spiritual
senses not to have put as in the other, The fruicte of the Spirit is
manifest; Origin.

In the which saing, first by express and plain words, ye perceive him to
say of that place of saint Paul there alleged, that yt is an hard place.
And asterwarde he concludes of the wholl scripture, that the spiritual
senses, and understandings thereof are not manifest, but are to be sought with
much labor, swette, and wourthie trauaill. Which he proves by saint Paul.

Now things that be easy, and plain are acquired and gotten with much
facility without Labor, or with very easy labor: hard things be not so
gotten but contrary wise. Wherefore by Origin yt may be concluded that
forasmoche as the right senses, which he calls the spiritual sense, or
understanding of the scripture, are to be gotten with much labor, swette and
wourthie trauaill, they be not easy, but raither hard.

Saint Hierom exhorting Paulinus to the study of the scriptures as well by
the examples of Ethnickes and Philosophers, as Plato, Pithagoras, Apollonius,
is therein. To the which purpose he says: Aperiebantur coeli Ezechieli, qui
populo peccatori clausi erant. Reuela (inquit David) oculos meos, et
considerabo mirabilia Hieron. ad Paulinu^.
de lege tua. Lex enim spiritualis est, et reuelatione opus est vt
intelligatur, ac reuelata facie gloriam Dei contemplemur. Liber in Apocalypsi
septem sigillis signatus ostenditur, quem si dederis homini scienti literas vt
legate, respondebit tibi; Non possum. Signatus est enim. Quanti hodie putant se
nosce literas, et tenent signatum libru^, nec aperire possunt, nisi ille
reserauerit, qui habet clauem David, qui aperit, et nemo claudite claudit, et
nemo aperit? In Actis Apostolorum sanctus Eunuchus, imo vir (sic enim eum
scriptura cognominat) cum legeret Esaiam, interrogatus a Philippo; Putasne
intelligis quae legis? Respondit; Quomodo possum, nisi aliquis me docuerit? Ego
(vt de me loquar interim) nec sanctior sum hoc Eunucho, nec studiosior, qui de
Aethiopia, id est, de extremis mundi finibus venit ad templu^, reliquit aulam,
et tantus amator legis diuinaeque scientiae fuit, vt etiam in vehiculo sacras
literas legeret, et tamen cum librum teneret, et verbum Domini cogitatione
conciperet, lingua volueret, labijs personaret, ignorabat eum, quem in libro
nesciens venerabatur. Venit Philippus, ostendit ei Iesum, qui clausus latebat
in litera. O mira doctoris virtus, eadem hora credit Eunuchus, baptisatur, et
sanctus factus est. The heavens were open to Ezechiel, Many now a days hold
the book of scripture scaled.
them selves learned? and do hold the book sealed, neither yet can open it,
except he onlocke it, which shetteth, and noman opens, opens, and no man
shetteth. In the Acts of the Apostles the holy Eunuche, yea raither a man
(for so the scripture does call him) when he did read Esaie the Prophet, being
asked of Philippe; Think thou, thou understand, what thou read? he
answered: how can I, except some body shall teach me? As for me (that I may
speak something of my self) I am neither more holy, then this Eunuch, nor more
studiouse, which came from Aethiope, that is from the furthest coasts of the
world, unto the Temple. He left the Court, and was so great a lover of the
law, and godly Science, that he would

In whose sentence mark well how many scriptures this holy doctor has
brought forth to declare, and prove, that the scriptures be obscure, and
therefore of necessity require to have some exercised and learned in them, to
open and declare them, as saint Hierom declaring the cause why, alleges
these scriptures, which ye have heard, and immediately adds and says: Haec
a me breuiter perstricta sunt, vt intelligeres te in scripturis sanctis sine
praeuio, et monstrante semitam non posse ingredi. These things are breiflie
touched

Not much unlike to this, declaring the obscurity and hardness of the old
Testament he writes in his epistle to Algasia: Quaestiunculaetuae de Euangelio
Hieron. ad Algasia^
tantum, and de Apostolo propositae, indicant, te veterem scripturam aut non
satis legere, aut non satis intelligere, quae tantis obscuritatibus, and
suturorum typis obu^luta est, vt omnis interpretatione egeat. Thy questions
propownded only out of the gospel and the Apostle, do declare, that either
thowe hauest not sufficiently red the old scripture, or else do not
sufficiently understand yt. which is enwrapped with so many obscurities, and
figures of things to come, that every part of yt had need of interpretacon.
Thus much saint Hierom.

Saint Basil teaches that all the scriptures are not to be published, and
made common, for that some part of them seems to require a scilence or
closeness for their obscurity. Wherefore he divides the scriptures into two
sorts, or partis saying: Aliud est Dogma, aliud Praedicatio. Dogmata silentur:
Basil. li. de Sp. S. ca. 27
Praedicationes vero publicantur. Silentij autem species est and obscuritas,
qua vtitur scriptura, ita dogmatum sententiam construens, vt aegre assequi
possis. The points of learning be one thing, and moral instruction is an
other. Points of learning,

Saint Ambrose also in a few words says much to this matter, calling Lib
7. epist 44.
the scripture of God the great sea, having in yt a depenesse without Botome
of deep senses and vndersta^dinges into the which many flouddes do enter.

Chrysostom also upon this text: Vae vobis qui clauditis regnum caelorum, Woe be
Math. 23. Chrysostom. oinel. 44. in Matthew.
to you which shett up the kingdom of heaven: says thus: Regnum est
beatitudo caelestis. Ianua autem eius est scriptura, per quam intratur ad eam.
Clauicularij autem sunt sacerdotes, quibus creditum est verbum docendi, et
interpretandi scripturas. Clauis autem est verbum scientiae scripturarum, per
quam aperitur homimbus ianua veritatis. Adapertio autem est interpretatio vera.
Videte, quia non dixit: Vae vobis qui non aperitis regnum caelorum, sed qui
clauditis. Ergo non sunt scripturae clausae, sed obscurae quidem, vt cum labor
inueniantur, non autem clausae vt nullo modo mueniantur. Propterea dicit Petrus
in epistola sua de scripturarum obscuritate, quia non sicut voluit homo,
locutus est spiritus: sed sicut voluit spiritus, ita locutus est homo. Ratio
autem obscuritatis multiplex est: tamen satisfactionis causa dicimus duas.
Obscurata est notitia veritatis, ne non tam vtilis inueniatur, quam
contemptibilis. Contemptibilis enim est, si ab illis intelligatur, a quibus nec
amatur, nec custoditur. The kingdom is the heavenly bless. The gates of yt is
the scripture, by the which we enter into yt. The keibearers Preistes are the
keiebearers of the scriptures.
are the preistes, unto whom the word is committed, to teach and interpret
the scriptures. The keie is the word of the knowledge of the scriptures, by
the which the gate of truth is opened unto men. The opening is the true
interpretacion. Mark ye that he did not say: Woe be unto you, that do not
open the kingdom of heaven: but to you which do shette yt. Therefore the
scriptures be not shett up, but obscure, that with labor they may be fownd,
but not shette up, that by no means they may be fownd. Therefore Peter says
in his epistle of the obscurity of the scriptures: Not as man would, has the
Spirit spoken, but as the Spirit would, so spoke man. There be many causes of
the obscurity of yt. But to

Who also gives an other cause of the obscurity of the scriptures, which

Magnae vtilitatis est ipsa obscuritas eloquiorum Dei, quia exercet sensum, vt
fatigatione Gregorius super Ezech. hom. 9.
dilatetur, and exercitatus capiat, quod capere non potest ociosus. Habet
quoque adhuc maius aliud, quia siscripturae sacrae intelligentia in cunclis
esset aperta, vilesceret, quae in quibusdam locis obscurioribus tanta maiore
dulcedine, inuenta reficit, quanto maiore labor fatigat animum, quaesita. The
obscurity of the words of God (says saint Gregory) is of great profit.
For yt does exercise the understanding, that by weariness yt may be
stretched out, and being exercised yt may take that, that yt could not take
being idle. Yt has yet an other greater thing. For if the understanding of the
scriptures were in all things open and plain, yt should wax vile. The which
understanding in certain obsture places being fownde, does with so much the
more pleasure or sweetness delight, as with the more labor, being sought yt
wearyeth the mind. Thus much Saint Gregory.

I might even to weariness load the Reader, with saienges of the Fathers,
testifieng the obscurity of the scriptures. But for that I have entered into
this matter to use yt but as a preparatiue to that, that is here principapallie
intended to betreacted of, I will not tarry upon yt, but hear the testimony
Hieron ad Paulin. Few do well understand the epistles of Peter James, Iohum
etc.
of saint Hierom, as concerning the lesser epistles, called canonical, I
mien the epistles of James, Peter, John, and Jude, of the which he says
thus: Iacobus, Petrus, Ioannes, and Judas Apostoli septem epistolas aediderunt,
tam mysticas quam succinctas, and breues pariter et longas. Breues in verbis,
longas in sententijs, vt rarus sit qui in eorum lectione non caecutiat. The
Apostles, James, Peter, John, and Jude, made seven epistles, as mystical, as
succincte, and both short and long. Short in words, but long in Sentences.
So as he is a rare man, that in the reading of them does not want seight of
understanding. Thus much saint Hierom.

Ye have now heard the censure and judgment of diverse famous Fathers, as
touching the difficulty, and obscurytie of the scriptures, the contrary
Heresy through arrogancy has almost ouerrunne Christendom.
phansic moved them, using the scriptures as simple children do the bells,
phatasing them to sownd, even as their fancy conceaueth, according to the
common saying: As the child does sing: So does the bell ring. By the which
arrogant presumption heresy has at this day onerrunne, yea almost
overwhelmed a great part of christendom. Which how lamentable yt is, the
charitable christian heart feleth and perceyueth.

But now consider with me (gentle Reader) two things. First their
arrogancy, and after their blindness. Their arrogancy is to manifest, that
where the scriptures them selves (as yehaue heard) do testify, that they are
obscure and hard: And saint Peter by most plain words teaches, that the
epistles of saint Paul be hard to be understood: the common consent and
judgment of the noblest learned men of Christ's Church be church, which
have risen upon the ohscuritie of scriptures (as Isidore says)

As touching their blindness, the ignorant, that through ignorance can nothing
say, does not more open his blindness then these men do theirs, in sainge
that the scriptures be esaie and plain. For as learning, wit and knowledge,
move question, Scruple, and doubt: So ignorante blindness

The learned medleth with the scriptures, with fear, diligence and painful
Ignorance as bold, as blind.
study: The ignorant with boldness necligence and slackenesse. wherbie yt
comes to pass, that is commonly said: who is bolder then blind biarde?

As then Origin, Hierom, Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom, and Gregory through
knowledge and learning helped with grace did find perceive, and see the
scriptures respersed with many difficulties and doubts: So Luther and his
offspring, through blind arrogancy destitute and void of grace see no other
but that the scriptures be easy and plain for every man to read and
understand, and finds neither Scruple, ne doubt.

Wherefore, Reader, I wissh thee to be advertised raiher to follow Origin
Hierom, and the other holy Fathers, and with them to perceive that the
scriptures be hard, and so with circumspection, and instruction of the learned
to read, or else contenting thy self to hear, to forbear reading, raither then
to follow the blind, and so without mistrust walk in rough places,





Although Chrysostom exhorts you to read, yet he makes you no warrantise of
the easiness of the scriptures, that ye may understand, interpret, and
expownd them, and frame to your self a doctrine, soch one as shall like your
fantasy. But (as all ready ye have heard) he teaches that the scriptures be
hard and obscure. But there be two causes why Chrysostom came to him, which he
would expo^de unto them. An other that they shoude Chrysostom. in psalm. 90.
the remembrance also, that they be full of difficulties, and therefore
circumspectly to be red, it were tolerable they should be red. But otherwise
to follow their fantasies, to be doctors and framers of a faith and doctrine
to them selves, with the contempt of them, whom God has called and placed to
be teachers, that Chrysostom wills not as in the next chapter following, ye
shall hear him say.

As for answer to Erasmus there neadeth no better to be made, the^ Alfonsus
Alfonsus
makes. And yet first to say to Erasmus, yt is merueilouse that he,
confessing the scripture to be hard, as he does in the argument of the epistle
of saint hierom to Paulinus, and in the argument of the epistle of saint
Paul to the Romans, where he does with soche manner of words set forth the
difficulty of that epistle (and yet truly) that it would raither discourage a
man from the reading of it, then otherwise move or provoke him to read: yt is
merueilouse (I say,) that he would the common, rude and unlearned people
should read that, that he teaches to be so hard. In the which for Luther
falsely teaches) yt might seem consonante to reason that the people might
meddle with them, for that, that for the easynesse thereof they might wade
through them.

Alfonsus answers thus: that although sayncte Chrysostom would the the
people should read the scriptures, as in that time, yt is no good collection,
that it aught to be so at this time. For oftentimes yt is seen, that an order
or a law taken and reputed to be good for the manners of the people, and
condition of the time, at one time, is left and not put in execution at an
other time. As in old time yt was used to keep night watches at the monume^tes
of holy Martyrs, the name whereof (which we call Vigills) yet remaneth. Unto
the hwich all manner of ages, men, women, bachelors, maidens, Vigilantius
depraved yt, saint Hierom wrote very sharply against him for yt. And yet
afterward (the manners of of the people so requiring) these Vigills were left.
Why then does not Erasmus as well seek to have these Vigills revived and
restored, seeing they were used in the time of saint Hierom, and of Chrysostom
as well as the other was?

In the time of saint Augustine, children were communicated: but now yt is not
in use.

The Apostles made an ordinance at Jerusalem that strangled and blood,
should be forborne, and not eaten of, but yet yt is not now in use, for that
the condicon of the time, and of the people is otherwise,

Discipline and public penance were in use in the old days in the church,
but we be loath now to have yt again in use.

So, true yt is that the people in the time of Chrysostom did read the
scriptures, of orders and laws, as yt seems to the rulars expedient. Yt is
the office

THE SYXTE CHAPTER DECLARING HOW the people shall come to the understanding
of the scriptures.
Almighty God, who in most goodly wise disposith all things, and ordeineth
nothing in vain, has thus appointed that the law should be in the mouth of
there priest, and that the people should learn yt of him, as yt is written: If
there rise a matter Deuteron. 17 Matters of doubt must be refered to the
preistes.
to hard for thee in judgment between blood and blood, betwe^ plee, and
plee, betwe^ plague, and plague, and the matters come to strife within thy
gates: The^ shall thou rise, and get thee up unto the place, which the He
that will not hear the priest shall die.
they show thee, neither to the right hand neither to the left. And that man
that will do presumptuouslie, and will not harken to the priest that stands
there before the Lord thy God to ministre, or unto the judge, that man shall
die, and thowe shall put away evil from Israel. And all the people shall
hear, and fear, and shall do no more presumptuouslie.

Accordingly to this also almighty God says by his prophet Malachie.
Malac. 2.
Labia sacerdotis custodient scientiam, et legem requirent ex ore eius, quia
Angelus domini exercituum est. The lips of the priest shall keep knowledge,
and they shall require the law at his mouth. For he is the messenger of the
Lord of hosts.

And forsomoche as yt is so, God willed the prophet Aggaeus, to ask the Aggae.
2.
the preistes the law, saying: Interroga sacerdotes lege^, Ask the preistes
the law. Upon the which text says saint Hierome: Considera sacerdotu^
esse officij, de Hieron. in 2. Agg. Office of preistes is to know, and expownd
the scripture.
lege interroganti respondere. Si sacerdos est, sciat legem Domini: si ignorant
legem, ipse se arguit non esse Domini sacerdotem. Sacerdotis est enim scire
legem, and ad interrogatione^ respondere de lege. Consider (says saint
Hiero^) that yt is the office of a priest, to au^sweer him, that asks of the
Law. If he be a priest, let him know the law of God: if he be ignoraunte he
argues himself that he is not the priest of God. For yt is appertaining to a
priest to know the law, and to answer unto a question, out of the law.
Thus much saint Hierome.

This order thus appoincted in the old law, so far was yt from the mind
Authority is to be obied where corruption of life reigns.
of our Savior Christ to break yt in the new law, that although the
preistes were of corrupt manners, and wicked life: Yet he willed their
authority

Which thing also saint Hierom by express words teaches to be continewed
in Hieron. in Hggaei. c. 2
the new law, and that by saint Paul's order to Timothee, and Titus, saing.
Et ne forsitan in veteri solum instrumento haec praecepta videa^tur, loquitur
and Apostolus ad Timotheu^: Episcopu^ non solum irreprehensibile^ esse debere,
and vnius vxoris 1. Tim. 3.
viru^, and sapiente^, and pudicu^, et ornatu^, et hospitale^: sed etia^
doctore^. Et ne casu hoc dixisse videatur, ad Titum quoque super presbyteris
(quos et Episcopos intelligi vult) ordinandis, eade^ cautela seruatur. Propter
hoc reliqui te Cretae, vt quae residua erant corrigeres, et ordinares per
civitates presbyteros, sicut ego praecepi tibi: Si quis est irreprehensibilis,
vnius vxoris Tit. 1.
vir, filios habens fideles, non in accusatione luxuriae, vel insubiectos.
Oportet enim Episcopu^ irreprehensibile^ esse, sicut Dei dispensatore^, non
procace^, non iracundu^, no^ vinolentu^, no^ percussore^, non turpis lucri
cupidu^, sed hospitale^, benignu^, iustum, sanctu^, co^tinente^, habente^ in
doctrina sermone^ fidele^, vt possit cohortari in doctrina sana, et eos qui
contradicunt arguere. Sunt enim multi non subiecti, vaniloqui, et seductores,
maxim qui de circumcisione sunt: qui bus oportet imponere silentiu^. Haec
prolixius posui, vt tam ex veteri, quam ex nouo Testame^ to, sacerdotum esse
officiu^ nouerimus, scire lege^ Dei, et respondere ad quae fuerint interrogati.

And lest peradventure (says saint Hierom) these things may seem to be
commanded only in the old Testament, the Apostle also speaks to Bishops
and preistes described.
of one wife, and wise, sobre, discrete, and a keeper of hospitality: But also
a teacher. And lest peradventure he should seem to have spoken this by hap
or chance, the same cautele is observed unto Tite, for the ordring of
preistes, whom also he will to be understood Bishops. For this cause have I
left thee at Crete, that thowe should refourme the things, that are
imperfect, and should ordein preistes in every city, as I have commanded
thee. If any be blameless, the husband of one wife, having faithful
children, which are not slaundered of riotte, neither are dissobedient. For a
Bishop must be blameless, as the Steward of God, not stobbourne, not
angry, not given to much wine, no fighter, not given to filthy lucre, but a
keeper of hospitality, one that loves goodness, sobre, righteouse, godly,
temperate, and soche as has the true word of doctrine, that he may be able
also to exhort by wholesome learning, and to reprove them, that say against yt.
For there are many unruly, and talkers of vanity, and deceiuours of minds,
specially they that are of the circumcision, whose mouths must be stopped.

To this also may be added, that saint Paul says to the Corinthians, that
god has so ordered his Church, that he has appointed some Apostles, 1. Cor.
12. Gods order in his Church.
some prophets, some doctors and teachers.

All that is hitherto alleged, as well of the scriptures, as of saint
Hierome teaches and includes three things. The first is the duty, and
office of a priest: The second that the scriptures have doubts, and
difficulties. The third that the people must be taught them, and learn of the
preistes.

As touching the first, the duty of a priest is to be learned in the law of
god, and godly life also, To both which saint Paul moves Titus in one
sentence, ioininge them together, even as they anght to be jointly Duty and
office of preistes.
in him that is a priest. In all things (says he) show thy self an ensample
of good works, in the doctrine with honesty and gravity, and with the
wholesome Tit. 2.
may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of you.

As for the office of a priest, saint Paul declares yt to Timothee: I
testify (says he) before God, and before our Lord Jesus Christ, preach 2.
Tim. 4.


As here the office and duty of a priest is breiflie and truly declared: So
wisshe I that they may as breiflie and truly be planted, and take good root
in all that bear that office. For I write this with the grief of my heart
before God that yt greueth me to see the great lack of these two parts in
those that take the office upon them, of the which many lack both good
living and good learning. God take mercy upon his people, and send them
faithful pastors, which may feed his sheep with the holsom food of true
doctrine, and example of godly living, that God both in his pastors and
people may be glorified.

As concerning the second, that the scriptures have doubts and difficulties:
Scriptures full of doubres.
Yt appears by the express word of God, when he says: If there rise a
matter to hard for thee in judgment, etc. Thou shall get thee up to the
preistes Doubts in the law of God must be dissolved by the preistes.
opened in the scriptures alleged, that I shall not need to make any further
declaracio^ thereof: forasmuch as yt is plainly there said, that the doubts
of the people in the law of God must be dissolved by the preistes, to whose
sentence and judgment they must in any wise stand, and not decline from yt
neither on the right hand, nor on the left, and that on the pain of death.

In the which saing of God yt is evident, how much God would that the
determinacio^ of his church in the doubts of his law should be esteemed and
reuere^ced, and his preistes in that respect obeid. Which how much yt is
now disdained and conte^ned, and gods order and commandment neclected, his
holy faith and religion infringed and violated, yt is more with Sithes and
tears to be lamented, then being so manifest as yt is, needful to be opened

Of whose mouth the people should learn the law, AlmightieGod by his prophet
Malachie tells. Likewise that of the preistes the people should ask People
must learn of the preistes.
the law, God by the Prophet Aggaeus commands. Who should teach the
people, the new Testament he also prescribes, Appointing some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Doctors or teachers, who to these offices are appointed to
rule and instruct the people, In ijs quae ad Deu^ pertine^t, in those things
that appertein to God. But now all this order is inuerted in many places. The
people teach the preistes, and not the preistes the people. The people
dissolve the doubts of the law, the preistes not being asked for. The people
God his order inuerted.
speak, the preistes hold their peace. The people make laws in religion, the
preistes are compelled to obeie. The people take in hand the things that
appertain to God, the preistes are put to scilence.

A much like state we find in the time of Moses emo^ge the children of Israel
in the time when Moses was in the mount with God. For they perceiving him to
be long absent, and thinking that he would no more come, they

When the people saw (says the book of Exodus) that yt was long er Exodus 32.
unto Aaron, and said unto him: Up make us Gods to go before us. For of this
Moises the fellow, that brought us out of the land of Aegypte, we wot not
what is become.

Hereby may yt be perceived, what religion shall be, when the order that God
appointed being broken, they will teach and command, which in matters to
godwarde, should be taught and commanded.

But with all yt is to be remembered, that for this wickedness the wrath of God
waxed hot against the people, and notwithstanding that there was immediately
Plaguesfor breaking Gods appoincted order in religion and mynisterie.
a great slaughter of the people, about the no^bre of three thousand, and
that Moses made intercession to God for the people: Yet almighty God in the
end said: Never the latter in the day when I viset, I will viset their sin
upon them, and the Lord plagued the people because of the calfe which Aaron
made.

Wherefore saying that the much like trangression is committed emonge

The plague, I fear me, will be sore upon Corah, Dathan, and Abiron, and upon
the capitanes of the multitude, which be the great and famous me^ in the Number.
16.
congregation, which have gathered the^ selves together against Moses, and
Aaron, and ca^ not content the^ selves with soche order, as God has put in his
Church, and which by his pleasure has so long continued: But yet they come to
Moses, and Aaron, and say, ye make much to do, seeing all the multitude are
holy, every one of them, and the Lord is emonge them. Whieheaue ye your
selves up above the Congregation of the Lord.

I must stay my hand, I shall else be to tediouse to the reader in this
matter, in the which I thought not to have written the fourth part of that
that is written, and for expedicion leave unto him to read the strory in the
book of Nombres, and so further to consider yt.

And where there be many stories declaring the displeasures of God to have
Samuel, his beloved and holy Prophet to be the ruler of the people, they being
a stiffnecked and disobedient people, to gods 1. Reg. 8.
order so long before) used, all the elders gathered themselves together, and
came to Samuel, and said unto him: Behold thowe art old, and thy Sons
walk not in thy ways, Now therefore make us a king to judge us, as al other
nations have.

See their fantastical providence, and therewith their disobedience. They take
in hand to provide for their common wealth, as though God could not provide
them as good a ruler after Samuel, as he did in providing of Samuel. And
therefore (the ruler which God appointed rejected) make us, say they, a king.
But what said Almighty God to Samuel? Hear the voice of the people, for they
have not cast thee away, but me, that I should not reign over them. 1. Reg.
12.


And after that they had a king, Samuel, to cause them to understand, that is
great, which ye have done in thee seight of the Lord, in asking you

As these people offended for that they abidde not in the order that God
appointed the^: So our people now a days following the inuentio^s of their
heads, and castinge away their rulers, which God has appointed, and taking
soche as God has not appointed, reiectinge also the holy religion and faith
of God universally received, and framinge themselves a faith and Religion
newly inverted, and but privately used, have not only offended, but (as
saint Augustine says) they have showed their great madness. Si quid diuinae
Aug. ad. Ianuar. Epla. 118.
scripturae praescribit autoritas, non est dubitandu^, quin ita facere
debeamus, vt legimus. Simi liter etiam si quid per orbem frequentat Ecclesia.
Nam hoc quin ita saciendum sit disputare, insolentissimae insaniae est. If the
authority of the scripture of God does prescribe any thing, yt is not to be
doubted but that we aught to do as we read. Likewise what so ever the Church
through the world does observe for to dispute but that this aught so to be
done, yt is most arrogant or foolish

As, I say, our people have offended with the children of Israel in these
and other before mentioned: So God grant the^ to be co^tended with Gods
order, and to repent with the children of Israel and say: peccauimus, we have
offended, and so their eyes through mekenes opened, theymaie mekelie se their
igno raunce, and acknowledging the same, may judge themselves more mete to
hear then to speak, to learn then to teach, to obie then to rule, as the
authority and examples of the most famous fathers and men of Christ's
Churchemaie move. Of which some shall be showed in the next chapter.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER DECLARING THE same by examples of the Fathers and
autorities of the Doctors of the Church.
Moses, when his death drew nere, willing that the great wou^ders that God
had wrought should not by obliuio^, be wiped out of memory, not only to
the children of Israel that the^ lived, but to al their posterity, as well
their spiritual, as carnal children, he gave this rule: Interroga patrem tuum,
and annunciabit tibi, maiores tuos and dicent tibi. Ask thy father and he will
show thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee. Deuteronomy. 32.


Although Moses had written five books, wherein he had most excelle^tlye
declared the mighty works, and wounderful miracles of God: Yet he did not
send all the people only thither to learn, but he willed the^ to learn of
Scripture must be learned of the Fathers. The Fathers learned of their elders.
The Apostles learned of Christ. Prayer required to understand the scriptures.
their Elders, what were the great works of God: Eue^ so now a days all me^
may not be sent to the scriptures to learn, but they must learn of their
fathers, what be the goodly works of God contained in the Scriptures.

If ye ask all the holy ancient Fathers of whom they learned, they will
answer, of their teachers, Fathers, and Elders.

The Apostles learned of our master Christ, who were not in a soddein
absolutely, and perfectly learned, but were three years and more in
learning, although they learned of so noble a Schoolmaster, whom yt pleased so
to use his Scholars the holy Apostles, as thereby to insinuate unto the^, that
the knowledge of the scriptures is not rashly to be had, either with a days
hearing, or with a years studieng, but yt is (as Origin says) withgreate
study Non studin^ solu^ nobis adhibendu^ est, ad discendas sacras literas,
verum and supplicandu^ Domino, and diebus ac noctibus obsecrandu^, vt veniat
Agnus ex tribu Judah, and ipse accipie^s libru^ signatu^, dignetur aperire. Not
only study (says Origin) is to be applied to learn the holy scriptures,
but supplicacion must be made unto our Lord, and prayer used days and
nights, that the La^be of the Origin.

After this manner the holy disciples and fathers did learn of their Seniours
as Fathers of the Church learned of their Elders.
the histories do declare. So did Mark, Clemens, Linus, and Cletus learn of
saint Peter. So did Titus, Timothius, Lucas, and Dionysius of saint Paul.
Ignatius, Policarpus, and Papias of saint Ihon. Of Papias, Tertulian. Of
Pantenus Origin. Of Origin, Dionysius Alexandrinus. Of Tertulian, Cyprian. Of
Dydimus and Gregory Nazianzen, saint Hiero^. Of Theophilus, saint Cyrill.
Of saint Ambrose, saint Augustine. Of saint Augustine, Primasius, and
Orosius. And so agreat no^bre of other, which did not only with holy life,
and devout prayer apply their great and plainfull study: but also travailed
many and diverse co^tries to seek famous and holy learned me^, of whom they
might be instructed in the Scriptures.

The Ecclesiastical history declares that two notable learned holy Fathers
Eccles. hist. li. 11. ca. 9. Saint Basil and Grego Nazia^. how they learned
the scriptures.
Basil, and Gregory Nazianzen lay thirtene years in a Monastery, in the
study Gregorius cum se totum dei seruitio mancipasset, tantum de collegae
amore praesumpsit, vt sedente^ Basiliu^ de doctoris cathedra deponeret, ac
secu^ ad Monasteriu^ manu iniecta perduceret, ibique per annos (vt aiunt)
tredecim, omnibus Graecoru^ saeculariu^ libris remotis, solis diuinae
scripturae voluminibus opera^ daba^t, eorumque intelligentia^, non ex propria
praesum ptione, sed ex maioru^ scriptis, and autoritate sequebantur, quos and
ipsos ex apostolica successione intelligendiregula^ suscepisse, constabat.
Gregory, when he had given and bound himself wholly to the service of God,
presumed so much upon the love of his fellow, that he put Basille sitting,
from the chair of a doctor or teacher, and taking him by the hand led him
with him to the Monastery, and there by the space of thirtene years (as yt is
reported) all profane or secular books of the Grecians removed, they applied
their diligence and labor to the only books of Gods Scripture, and
poursewed the understanding of the same, not of their own presumption, but by
the writings and authority

Saint Hierome of himself says: Nobis curaefuit, cum eruditissimis
Hebraeorum hunc labore^ subire, vt circumiremus Prouincia^, quam vniuersae
ecclesiae Christi sona^t. Fateor Hier. ad Domnion, et Rogatia^ Saint Hierom
how he learned the scriptures.
enim mi Domnion and Rogatiane charissimi, nunquam me in diuinis voluminibus
proprijs viribus credidisse, nec habuisse opinione^ mea^, sed ea etia^, de
quibus scire me arbitrabar, inter rogare me solitu^. Quantomagis de ijs, de
quibus anceps eram? This care had I, that with the best learned of the Hebrews
I would go rownde about the Province, which all the churches of Christ do
speak of. For I acknowledge (my dearest beloved Domnion, and Rogatian) that I
never trusted much to my own judgment in the study of gods books, neither
have I had my own opinion, but I have used to ask of other, yea even those
things, which I thought I did understand, how much more those things of
the which I was doubtful. Thus much saint Hierom.

By the which saienge, how may they bashe and be ashamed who having Rasshe
readers, and arrogant teachers may be abashed.
skant any taste of learning, take upon the^ not only to read the
scriptures, in matters, that he did think himself to understand, but he would
co^sult, and

Although in the time of Saint Hierom many did study the scriptures, which
if the people could now reverently and mekelie use, taking no more upon the^,
then becomes them, and as to their calling apperteineth, Many presume to
teach before they learn. Hieron. ad Prulinum.
might be tolerated, but the arrogant abuse, then beginning emo^ge the people,
which now has invaded and troubled a great part of the Church; that is,
that every man would be a teacher before he haith learned saint Hierom
could not contain, but complain and exclame upon yt sainge: Ad minores arts
veniam, and quae non tam lingua, quam manu administrantur. Agricolae,
ceme^tarij, fabri metallorum, lignorumue caesores, lanarij quoque and fullones,
and ceteri, qui variam supellectilem, and vilia opuscula fabricant, absque
doctore non possunt esse quod cupiunt. Quod medicorum est, promittunt medici,
tractant fabrilia fabri. Sola scripturarum ars est, quam sibi passim omnes
ve^dicant. Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim. Hanc garrula anus, hanc
delirus senex, hancsophista verbosus, hanc vniuersi praesumunt, lacera^t,
docent antequam discant. Alij adducto supercilio grandia verba trutinantes,
inter mulierculas de sacris literis philosophantur. I will come to the lower
sciences, and soche as are excercised, not so much with tongue as with hand.
Plowme^, Masons, metal Smiths, Carpenters, Wollmen, fullers, and other which
do make diverse things of household, and vile works, without a teacher they
cannot be that they would be. Physicians promise what to Physicians
apperteineth, Crafts men handle things to crastes men apperteininge. Yt is
only Presumptuouse teachers.
the science of the scripture, which all men every where challenge, and take
upon them. Learned and unlearned, we write Poets works every (...) This
science of the scripture, the chatering old wief, this science the old^
^otinge man, this science the bablinge Sophistre, this science all men presume
on, they tear yt, they teach yt before rhey can learn yt. Some with high
look and great pride weighing grave words, utter there wisdom out of the
scriptures amongst women. Thus much saint Hierome. Whose words if a man
will apply to this our time, he shall perceive them, in every part to be
true And by these words the Reader may well perceive

Note further (which is the thing that is intended here to be spoken of) No
man may be his own teacher in the scriptures.
that willinge no man should be his own master and teacher in the
understanding of the scriptures, he brings forth for an example mechanical
arts, or handy crastes, which (he says) be not perfectly learned without
a teacher, as though he should therbie conclude, that the scriptures can much
less be learned, except the reader have a teacher. He proves the same also by
the sciences liberal, for the obteininge of which, many philosophers have
travailed diverse and many far contries to hear famous men teach the
same. Jbidm.


Likewise in the same epistle when he had by diverse scriptures proved Haec a
me breuiter per stricta sunt, vt intelligeres te in scripturis sanctis, sine
praeuio and monstrante semitam non posse ingredi. These things (says he)
are of me breifli touched, that thowe should understand, that without a
foreleader and a shewer, thowe can

Now where this Proclamer would, that yt should be proved by some ancient
writers, that the lay people were forbidden to read the word of God in
their own tongue, as though the Church had now forbidden them, and would
therbie bring the Church in hatred with the people: I let him understand that
I never knew any soche prohibicion given to the lay people universally. For
if there had been any soche, there should not have been so many learned lay men,
both in this Realm, and in other, Proclamer charge the Church with an
untruth.
as there have been, and be, which have both red, and written of the scriptures
in their native tounges, and set their doings abroad to the common reading of
all people, as well before these days, as now, and were not reprehended for
their so doing, if yt were well done, I mien according to the catholic
faith. Wherefore I say that he charge the Church in this point with an
vntreuth,

But this I say that the Church has feared the abuse of the scriptures,
Mysunderstading makes heresy Hilarious.
heresy condemnacon. De intelligentia enim haeresis, non de scriptura est,
says Hillarye. Heresy rises upon the understanding of the scripture, not
upon the scripture yt self.

Seeing then, as yt is proved, and yet more shall, that the scriptures be full
of obscurities, full of difficulties, and heardnes; seeing also the scriptures
have Scripture is full of hardness and diverse senscis.
many senses, and in some places require Tropes and figures, in some none, in
some place they bear one sense, in some other place they will not bear the
same: And the vnframed capacity of the unlearned, can not thereunto atteign:
shall yt not be better for them, to learn the true understanding of the
scriptures by hearing, then by reading to fall into misunderstanding?

Maruaill not, Reader, at this that I say. For the learned, if they be rassh
Arrians, the Macedonians, the Nestorians, the Eutichians, the Pelagians, the
Lutherans, the Oecolampadians (of the which sect this proclamer is) were
learned men, and yet following their own arrogaunt fantasy fell in to the
misunderstandind of the scriptures, and by misunderstanding into heresy. Much
sooner the unlearned may thus fall. knowledge of mysteries not common to all.
Hiero^. prafa. in Ezech.


Yt has been used among most people of sundry sorts, not to make the
knowledge of their high things common of all to be handeled.

The Jews were forbidden to read Genesis and the Balletts of Salamon, before
they were thirty years of age. Among the Romans, the Books of the Sibells
were red but of certain selected, and special choosen men. Among the
Philosophers, Moral philosophy, and specially Metaphisick, was not to be
handeled of all men, but of soche as were thought mete for that study. How
much more then is the scripture of God, with reverence and fear to be handeled
of the chrystians: not that I would yt should not be known of all, as yt aught
to be known, but that yt should not be of the Church, to see the shaunder of
this proclamer against yt, and with all to understand that the scriptures be
hard. Which meenyng is not to

Primum, quia voluit Deus alios esse doctores, alios discipulos. Si autem omnes
omnia scirent, doctor necessarius non erat, and ideo esset rerum ordo confusus.
Nam ad eos quide^, Chrystomel 44. in Matthew. Esaias. 40. Deutr. 32.
quos voluit esse doctores, sic Deus dicit per Esaiam prophetam: Loquimini
sacerdotes in cordibus populi. Ad eos autem, quos voluit discendo cognoscere
mysteria veritatis, sic dicit in Cantico: Interroga patrem tuum and dicet tibi,
presbyteros tuos, and annunciabunt tibi. Et sicut sacerdotes, ne si omnem
veritatem manifestauerint in populo, dabunt rationem in die Iudicij, sicut
dicit Dominus ad Ezechielem: Ecce speculatorem te posui domni Israel, si non
dixeris impio vt a vijs suis prauis discedat, ipse quidem in peccatis suis
morietur, animam autem eius de manu tua requiram: sic and populus nisi a
sacerdotibus didicerit, and cognouerit veritatem, dabit rationem in die
Iudicij. Sic enim dicit Sapientia ad populum: Et extendebam sermones meos, and
non audiebatis. Ideo and ego in vestra perditione ridebo. Sicut enim
paterfamilias cellarium aut vestiarium suu^ non habet cunctis expositum, sed
alios habet in domo qui dant, alios autem qui accipiunt: sic and in domo Dei
alij sunt qui docent, alij qui discunt. First because God would some should
why God would the scriptures to be obscure.
be teachers, some learners. If all men should know all things, a teacher
were not necessary, and therefore should the order of things be confownded.
For unto them, whom he would should be doctors or teachers, God says thus
by Esaye the Prophet: Speak ye preistes in the hearts of the people. But
unto them whom he would to have knowledge of the mysteries of truth by
learning of other, he says thus in the Canticle: Ask thy father and he shall
tell thee, thy elders, and they shall show thee. And even as the preistes,
except they open all treuth to the people, they The storehouse of God not common
to all.
the people: I did set forth my words, and ye did not hear. Therefore shall I
also laugh in your perdicion. As the householder does not make his storehouse
or his wardrobbe common to all men, but he has in his house some that deliver,
some that receive: So in the house of God, there be some that teach, some that
learn. Thus much Chrysostom.

Whose saying I need not to expownde yt is so plain of yt self. Ye perceive
that he teaches you, that God has set this order, that the preistes
should be teachers, and the people learners, and that for this cause God has
willed the scriptures should be obscure. Which in the end of his saing he
commends unto us to be remembered by a goodly Similitude Scripture the
storehouse of God.
all but certain do deliver, and other do receive, no more the^ is delivered.

The Storehouse is the scripture, where in for the feading and clothing of man's
soul, is reposed great plenty of knowledge, which yet God has not made
common to all men, to take at their own pleasures. But he

As all men have not discrecion to use plenty well, but some will wast yt,
some will abuse yt, and turn yt to other uses then yt was made or appointed
for and therefore they have not access unto yt: So all men having not grace,
and discrecion to use the plenty of Gods knowledge in the scriptures well,
they wast yt, that is they set little by yt, they do but babble and talk of yt,
yt runs about their lips, as the meat does about the childs mouth,
bosom, and clothes, and is wasted, but yt enters not into their stomachs, I
mien into their solues, there to feed them, and make them lusty and fat, that
yt may appear in their faces, in their outward conversation, and godly
living. These be the very wasters in deed, not wourthie to have access to
treasure houses, storehouses and places of plenty.

Some other likewise lacking grace and discrecion abuse things of plenty. As
the father leaving to the Son great treasure for the mainteina^ce of his
living, and the merciful releiuing of soche as have need, the son abuses

Valdo, a man altogether unlearned having a desire to come into this
storehouse of God, caused certain books of the scripture to be translated,
Valdo
which he reading without understanding, fell into diverse heresies, and
became an Author of heresy, having many foloweing, as his Sect, which
Valdenses, sieve Pauperes de Lugduno.
were called after his name Valdenses. and by an other name Pauperes de
Lugduno, the poor men or people of Lions.

Out of the same fountain of ignorance (says Alfonsus) sprang an other sort
of Heretics called Begradi Turelupini men plainly ignorante, and clear
Begardi Turelupini
without all learning. All which men's errors proceaded of a perverse sense,
and wrong understanding of the scriptures, which they through ignorance mixed
with malice, framed to them selves according to their phansies?

Now Reader, having heard the minds of the great learned and holy Fathers of
the Church, as touching the difficulty of the scriptures, the Luther and
zui^g. their strange doctrines Luther. in Assertion.
reading also, and understanding of the same, of whom also and at whose hands
ye must learn the understanding of them: what truth is to be Luther, and
Zuinglius, which so plainly to the contrary, arrogantlie affirm the
scriptures to be easy and plain for all men to understand make yt free for all
men to read and expowde them, teach that not only

O Lord how manifestly repugnante be these pestiferouse assertions unto the
scriptures? how much confownding and breaking the orde of the catholic
Church? how far dissenting from all the holy Fathers? Luther contrary to
himself.
yea and in some of these how much does Luther dissent from him self.

In one book he teaches (as is said before) that there is no difficulty in
lib. de seruo arbitrio. Luthers prowdbragges and lies
the scriptures, and boasting himself to be ignorant in no part of them
provokes all men to bring him any one place that he can not expownde. This is
one mete to be an Heresiarch in Satan's Sinagog, that to get him credit with
his disciples extolleth him self with Luciferane pride accompanied with
falsehood and lieng, even unto the heavens.

But saint Augustine endewed with an other Spirit and depressing and making
himself low, says of himself thus: Fateor me in scripturis Dei, plura
nescire quam scire. I acknowledge miself, not to know mo things in the
scriptures of God, then to know. Thus says saint Augustine. And yt is easy
for all men to judge, that betwixt these two their is no comparison, whether
ye have respect to excellency of learning, or sanctimony of lief.

But what truth is in this saying of Luther, his own words in an Luther, in
praefatione super psalmos.
other place shall be judge, thus he says: Quocirca ingenue me confiteri
oportet, me ignorare, an legitimam habeam psalmorum intelligentiam. wherefore I
must frankly confess, that I am ygnorant whether I have the lawful
understanding of the psalms or no. And a little after that he says again:
Scio impudentissimae temeritatis eum esse, qui audeat profiteri vnum librum
scripturae, a se in omnibus partibus intellectum. I know him to be (says
Luther) of most impudent Luther speaks diuerselie, as though he were not one,
but two diverse me^.
rashness or foolish blodnesse, that dare say that he understands any one

Nevertheless how wicked so ever his Spirit and doctrine is. there have been,
and yet be to many, that embrace and follow the same. For have not The peoples
arrogante irreuere^cia to diuiue matters.
the people, upon this persuasion of the easiness of the scriptures, taken a
great boldness, to read and dispute of the highest and hardest matters of all
the scriptures? Will they not dispute, and determine in predestinacon? Is yt not
a common matter almost at every meting, that man has no free will? Do not the
Tauerns sownde of iustificacion? Are not Barbre Shopps Schools, teaching God
to be cause of Sin? do not Innes and Alehouses swarm with disputers of the
Sacraments, How many there be, what is Blasphemy, against this blessed
Sacrament and the ministracon of the same in streets, high ways and feldes?
Ah Lord is this the reverence that aught Perfectorum Hebr. 5.
est solidus cibus, eorum, qui pro ipsa consuetudine exercitatos habent sensus
ad discretionem boni et mali. Strong meat belongs to them that be perfect,
even those, which by reason of use, have their wits exercised to discern
both good and enell.

Agreablie to Saint Paul, says Gregory Nazianzen. Non cuiusuis Christiani
est, Grego. Nazian lib. 1. Theolog.
de Deo disserere, non adeo res hec est vilis: neque eorum, qui humi serpents
terrenis studijs occupantur. Quoniam eorum tantum est, qui habito delectu, ad
tantum munus videntur idonei, quique contemplandi acumine caeteros antecellunt,
qui iam ante corpus et animam ab affectu purgarunt. Yt is not apperteining to
every christian to reason and dispute of God. This is not so vile a matter:
nether is yt apperteyning Every christian may not reason and dispute of God.
to them, which creping upon the grownde, are occupied in earthly

In which sentence ye may percceaue what difference in Judgment there is
between these destroiers of religion and order, and this holy ancient Father,
for the meddling with matters apperteining to God. Yet the wicked confownders
have not only wrought this mischief, but they have Lay me^ have usurped the
office both of preaching and ministering of Sacraments.
also brought the people to soche contempt, that lay men have in diverse
famous places, openly preached, and not only soche as have followed study,
but plain Artificers, Bricklaiers Shoomakers, Tanners, Stacionars, Grossers,
and soche like men all void of learning, but filled with pride and arrogancy.
Yet Luther desirous to have all order broken, and nothing to be done in order,
he gives liberty also to women to preach. do ye not see a wonderful
confusion? And yet there is more. For yt is known that diverse lay men have
ministered Sacraments, as well Baptism as

O Reader does yt not loathe thee to read these things, as yt greiueth me to
write them? Time will not suffer me to go so far in the rehersall of these
abhominaco^ns, as grief would enforce me. And yet see how far grief has
drawn me, and as yt were by force and violence thrust me on, when I would have
stayed.

But God open there eyes to see in the scriptures, which they be so desierouse
Paral. 26. Luc. 6. ibid. 10. Act. 14. 1. Tim. 4. etc. 5. None may exercise the
office of a priest but he that is called.
to read, the plagues that God has sent upon them, that have usurped the
preistes office, being not called thereunto, as these do, and that they may
behold the order that our Savior Christ began in choosing his Apostles, and
disciples, and giving them authority to execute their office: to behold also
the imitation of the same in saint Paul in the institution of Bishopps and
preistes with his own hand, and the order prescribed to other to be
circumspect before they did lay on their hands: And then shall they perceive,
that not every man for his own fantasy may intrude him self, but only
soche as be called.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER EXHORTS MEN
SIt omnis homo (says saint James) velox ad audiendum, tardus autem ad
loquendum, et tardus ad iram. Let every man be swifte to hear, but slow to
speak, and slow to wrath. This counsel truly is very good and Jacob. 1.
profitable. For as in the man of many words there lacks not of fence: So
the (fool as the wise man says) if he hold his peace, he shall be Prou. 10.
Ibid. 17. Jbid. 17.
reputed wise, and to have understanding, when he shetteth his lips. And why,
for he has the property of a wise man. For as Solomon says he is wise and
discreet that tempereth his words.

As by scilence, is showed wisdom: So by hearing wisdom is gotten. For (as
Solomon says) Audiens sapiens, sapie^tior erit, and intellige^s gubernacula
possidebit. Jbidem, Sup. 1.
By hearing the wise man shall come by more wisdom, and having understanding
shall atteign to government. Upon the which place saint Hierom Quod aute^
ait, sapientem cum audierit verbum, sapientiore^ effici: ostendit neminem in
hac vita ita sapientem fieri posse, cuius sapientia nequeat augeri, semperque
moris esse sapientum, vt dictis maiorum, aliquando etiam minorum auscultent,
Hieron. in ca. prim. Prou.
and quicquid in illis vtilitatis audierint, ad se replicent, suoque in cord
recondant. Denique audiuit sapiens minor maiorem, regina Saba Salomonem, and
sapie^tior redijt. Audiuit Moises socerum, multo inferiorem sublimior, et
sapientior redditus est. Audierunt discipuli Christum, and spiritum sapientiae
percipere meruerunt. Audiuit Nicodemus, audiuit Gamaliel, audiuit discipulus
eius, tunc Saulus, nunc Apostolus Paulus, sapientes vtique verbum Euangelij,
and sapientiores sunt facti. Qui etiam Paulus cum ad tertium calum raptus
audiuisset ea, quae non licet hominibus verba loqui, nihilominus ad terram
reuersus aiebat: Quia ex part cognoscimus, and ex part prophetamus.

Whereas he says the wise man to be made wiser, when he hears the word, he
shows that no man in this life can be made so wise, whose wisdom The wiseman
by hearing may be wiser.
may not be encreaced, And further he shows yt to be alwaie the manner of
wisemen, to take heed to the sainges of their betters, and sometime also of
their inferiors, that what profitt so ever they find in them; they may
reply

In the which sentence two things may among other be noted: the one is, that
be ye never so wise, yet ye may be wiser. Wherefore disdain not to learn either
by hearing, or by reading. The other that all these, which S. Hierom brings
in for example, contented them selves to hear, and by hearing came to more
wisdom. Let not then the proud or arrogant, be singular in

If the^ we should hear and learn of al me^, much more should we hear and
learn of them, whom God has appointed in his Church, to be pastors and Ne
despicias narratione^ presbyteroru^ sapientiu^, and in prouerbijs eoru^
conuersare. Ab ipsis enim disces sapientia^ and doctrina^intellectus, etc.
Despise not the sermons of soche Eccles. 8.
elders, as have understanding, but acqueint thy self with the wise sentences
of the^. For of them shall thou learn wisdom, and the doctrine of understanding.

But for as much as men may appoincte to the^ selves soche elders, as they 2.
Tim. 4.
fantasy, as saint Paul prophecieng both of soche masters and disciples
says: The time shall come, when they shall not suffer wholesome doctrine, but
after their own lusts shall they, whose ears do ytche, get them an heap
of teachers, and shall withdraw their ears from the truth, and shall be
turned to fables: yt is expedient that we learn of the wise what elders we shall
follow.

Jesus Syrach teaches us to learn of soche elders, as had learned of their Ne
te praetereat narratio seniorum, ipsi enim didiceru^t a patribus suis, quonia^
ab ipsis disces intellectum, and in te^pore necessitatis dare responsum. Go not
from the doctrine Ibid. ^.
of the elders, for they have learned yt of their fathers. For of them thowe
shall learn understanding, so that thou may make au^swer in the time of need
In this godly counsel ye perceive the cause given, why ye should learn of
your elders, because (says he) they have learned of their Fathers. As who
Elders that are to be followed.
might say, the learning that is learned of the Fathers, is no new inverted
doctrine, yt is no strange doctrine unknown to the congregation, of the which
S. Paul gives you admonition, saying. Doctrinis varijs, et peregrinis nolite
abduci. Optimu^ est enim gratia stabilire cor. Be not carried away with diverse
and strange doctrines, for yt is a good thing that the heart be established
with grace: But Strange doctrines are not to be followed.
yt is a doctrine tried and continued from succession to sucessio^, a doctrine
that is permanent, through all ages.

Elders that are not to be followed
Therefore go not from that doctrine, neither chose you any other elders to learn
of, but soche as have learned of their fathers. Therefore chose not soche elders,
as be inue^tours of their own doctrine, as the Luthera^s chose Luther,
Mulieres in ecclesiis taceant, non enin permittitur eis loqui, etc. 1. Cor. 14.
Let your women keep scilence in the congregation, for yt is not permitted unto
them to speak, but to be under obedience, as says the law. If they will
learn any thing let the^ ask their husbands at home. For yt is a shame for
women to speak in the ^ongregacion.

Luthers strange doctrine.
Luther taught that co^tritio^ makes a man a more sinner. In assert. art. 6.
And that the righteouse man does in every good work, that he does,
mortallie offend. Luther also taught that every christian man is a priest for
the common ministry. Ibid. ar. 31
These be strange doctrines, both to the scriptures, and to our elders, and
therefore we may not learn of him, for he has not learned of the Fathers.

Zuinglius strange doctrine
Zuinglius taught that original offense is no sin. In libell. de Baptismo.
Yet David in the psalm hu^blie confesses. Psalm. 50.
Ecce in iniquitatibus conceptus sum, et in peccatis concepit me matter mea.
Behold (says he) I was conceived in iniquity, and in sin has my mother
conceived me. And saint Paul says: Natura sumus filij irae. of nature we
be the children of wrath or damnacion. Zuinglius taught also, In articulis in
fine.
that the children Joan. 3.
Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua et spiritu sancto, non potest introire in
regnum Dei. Except a man be born again of the water, and the holy ghost, he
can not enter into the kingdom of God.

Luthers lucifero use pride.
Of this man therefore may ye not learn, neither do ye hear him, for

O deuelish and wicked saing. This is a second Paul. The first Paul says
speaking of the gospel. Neque ab homine accepi illud, neque didici, sed per
reuelationem Jesus Christi. Nether have I received yt of man, nether learned yt,
but by the In lib. co^^. Canon.
revelation of Jesus Christ. The second Paul says that he will not learn of
man, but of God. But as there is a first Adam, and a second, the one earthly,
the other heavenly: And as in the first Adam all do die, and in the second
1. Cor. 15.
all be revived. So our first Paul is heavenly: this second earthly that
first leads to salvation; This second to damnacion.

Zuinglius wrote de claritate verbi Dei, of the clerenesse of the word of
God, an whole book, to the intent to make you suppose hard things to be
Zuinglius wrote a book of the clerenesse of scripture
easy, and so to pass through the^ not as the truth would lead you, which

What should I troble thee, Reader, with rehersall of the false doctrine of
Heretics disse^t among them selves but conspire al against the Church
Heretics what Fathers they follow.
Oecola^padius of Bullingerus, of Caluinus, of Bucer and of soche like? Who
although they dissent among themselves in many things: yet in many they
agree, and specialle in this, that they be all mortal enemies to the
catholic Church.

Of these fathers has this our Aduersaire learned his doctrine, of the which
he is a stowte mainteiner as ye have partly heard. But may we hope to drink
sweet water, out of a stinking puddle? May we gather (as our Savior Christ
says) grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? May we hope to learn the
wholesome truth of him, who has sucked the lothsom poison of Heresy, of Luther
and Zuinglius, of whose detestable doctrines ye have Math. 7.


He that follows soche doctors and builds upon soche sands, forsakes the
strong rock: he also leaves the fountain of the water of life, and puddleth
Heretics why they are not to be follow.
in the foul puddles which they have dug, which can not hold water.
Wherefore as they be not to be followed, no more is this Adversary, being certain,
that none of the^ all have taught the doctrine that they learned of holy
catholic Fathers, but of soche fathers as be of the no^bre of the elders, and
teachers that faincte Peter spoke of, which should come among us. Fuerunt in
populo Pseudoprophetae, sicut and in vobis erunt magistri mendaces, qui
introducent sectas perditionis, etc. There were false Prophets in the people,
as among you there shall be false teachers or lieng masters, which shall bring in
damnable sects even denieng the Lord, that has bought the^, and shall bring
upon the^ selfs swifte damnation. Wherefore count the^ not as elders mete to
learn of, leest ye be of the no^bre of the^, that saint Peter immediately
speaks of: And many (says he) shall follow their damnable ways, by who^ the
way of truth shall be blasphemed

Of these folowers there be some, that solowing the arrogancy of their
masters, Corner teachers.
will assemble companies in corners, and being rude and illiterate, not brought
up in the study of science, but only in trade of worldly crafts will take
upon the^ to teach before they learn as S. Hiero^ says.

And this among other is lamentable, that me^ will set so little by the faith

But be not so light (o Brethren) be not so light, have a more stay in you, be
not so easily carried away from your Lord God, to your destruction. If ye have
committed your selfs to soche light masters, open now your eyes, and be hold
how ye have been deceived. And to exhort you with saint Paul's words, from
hencefurth be no more babes, wavering, and carried about Ephesians. 4.
with every wind of doctrine, by the wiliness of me^, through craftiness,
wherewith they lay in wait for you, to deceive you. But follow the truth in
charity, and in all things grow in him which is the head, even Christ.

And this shall you the better do if ye will well regard the counsel of
Solomon, who says thus to every one of you: Audi fili mi disciplinam patris
tui, Teachers meet to be believed. Prou. 1.
et ne dimittas legem matris tuae. My Son hear thy fathers doctrine, and
forsake not the law of thy Mother. Upon the which text saint Hierom says
Notandum, quod ita nos disciplinam patris audire praecipit, vt legem quoque
matris nullo modo dimittamus, quia non sufficit vt quis se Deum diligere, and
eius praeceptis obtem Hier. ibid.
perare dicat, si vnitatem Ecclesiae fraterna charitate no^ sequatur. Yt is to
be noted, that he commands us so to hear the doctrine of the father, that
we also by no means forsake the law of the Mother. For yt suffices not that
any man shall say that he loves God, and obeys his commandments, if
with brotherly charity he follow not the unity of the Church.

Note well, Reader, this note of saint Hierom, and by this learn to know
both when your teacherys good, and when his learning is good, How to know
good teachers.
if your teacher remain in the unity of the Church, and his learning swerve
not from the same, nor teach dissension from that, that in yt is taught, then
is your teacher, and his learning soche, as ye may without danger accept.
If otherwise, slay yt, as from a serpent.

And if ye would learn or being learned would be resolved in doubts (as is
before said) seek not only soche as be only learned, but seek soche as
being best learned, have learned of their Fathers, and abiding in the same
Strange doctrines
these few years, where was yt taught in all the Christian world, that
Christ's body is not in the Sacrament? that yt is not to be offered for the
quick and the dead? that yt ought not to be reserved for the commodity of the
sick? that yt aught not to be honored? that souls departed are not to be
prayed for? that we may not make requests to Saints to pray for us? and
many soche other.

Teachers not meet to be believed.
Seeing the^ he forsakes the law of his mother, though he pretend to have
learned of the Fathers: yet is he not to be followed, because he has not both
these two, that is, both the learning of his father, and also the law of his
mother. For they only are to be followed, that have both these. Thus shall ye
find the holy Fathers to have done, as first for example saint Hiero^,
great learning neither seking obscure teachers, but most famous, reports Non
ab adolesce^tia aut legere vnquam; aut doctos viros ea, quae nescieba^, Hieron
in Prohemio Epist. ad Ephesians. ad Paul. and Eusto. Saint Hierom how he learned
the scriptures.
interrogare cessaui, and meipsum ta^tum (vt plerique) habui magistru^. Denique
nuper ob ha^c vel maxim causam, Alexa^dria^ perrexi; vt videre^ Didymu^, and
ab eo in scripturis ommbus, quae habeba^ dubia, sciscitarer. I have not from my
youth ceased at any time, either to read, or else to ask of learned men,
soche things as I knew not. Nether have I had or used my self (as many do)
as master to my self. But of late eue^ specially for this cause I went to
Alexandria, that I might se Didymus, and that I might ask of him, soche
doubts as I had in all the scriptures. Thus saint Hierom.

In the which report ye do hear (how cleresoeuer Luther and Zuinglius make
the scriptures) that saint Hiero^ fownde doubts therein, and for dissolution
of the^ travailed to Alexandria to Didymus. In which fact also yt may be
learned that if saint Hiero^ so notable a man, sought a famous man to learn
him, yt may well beseme other so to do. Did not Damasus being Bishop of
Rome send to saint Hiero^ to be answered in certain doubts, and disdeined
Damasus learned of S. Hierom. S. Augustine of S. Amb. Many learned of S. Aug.
not to learn of him? Did not saint Augustine go to Millen to saint

Saint Clement in his fiste epistle writes thus: Relatu^ est nobis, quod
quida^ in Clemens epist. 5.
vestris partibus co^morantes, aduersantur sanis doctrinis, and prout eis
videtur, and non secu^ du^ traditiones patru^, sed secundu^ suu^ sensum docere
videntur. Multas enim quida^ (vt audiuimus) vestraru^ partium, secundum
ingeniu^ hominu^, ex ijs quae legunt verisimilitudines capiunt. Et ideo
diligenter obseruandu^ est, vt lex Dei cum legitur, non secundum propria^
intelli gentia^legatur, vel doceatur. Sunt enim multa verba in diuinis
scripturis, quae possunt trahi ad eum sensum, quem sibi vnusquisque sponte
praesumpsit. Sed fieri non oportet. Non enim sensu^, que^ extrinsecus
adulteretis, alienu^ and extraneu^ debetis quaerere, aut quoquo modo it su^ ex
scripturaru^ autoritate consirmare, sed ex ipsis scripturis sensum capere
veritatis. Et ideo oportet ab eo intelligentia^ discere scripturarum, qui a
maioribus secundum veritatem sibi traditam seruauit, vt and ipse possit ea,
quae recte suscepit, competenter asserere.

Yt is reported unto us, that some duelling in your parts, are aduersaires to
wholesome doctrines, and are perceived to teach eue^ as yt likes themselves,
and not according to the traditions of the Fathers, but according to their own
understanding. Some of your countries (as we have heard) take many likelihoodes
of those things, that they do read, according to the wit of men. And
therefore yt is diligently to be looked unto, that the law of God when yt is
red, be not red or taught according to men's own understanding. For there be
many words in the scriptures of God, which may be drawn to that
understanding, that every man at his own pleasure has chosen. But it may not
Scripture may be drawn to diverse senses.
so be done. For ye ought not to seek an understanding diverse and strange,
which ye may adulterate, or by any manner of means by authority of the
scripturs in the outward face to confirm, but of the scriptures themselves to
take the true understanding. And therefore ye must learn the understanding of

To take and embrace this order, I mien, to mistrust our own judgments,

As for the epistles of saint Paul, yt is proved by the invincible
testimony of saint Peter, that they be hard, and be depraved of many to
their own damnacio^. And that this might fully appear to thee I have at large
opened and proved the same, not only by the saing and judgments of the best
and most ancient fathers of Christ's Church, as of sancte Clement, Hierom,

The difficulty of the scriptures thus proved, contrary to the sainges of
Luther and Zuinlius, I have proceaded to declare by the scriptures first, and
after by the famous learned Fathers, how we shall come to the understanding
thereof. Where yt is made manifest that we must atteign thereunto by the teaching
of the preistes, which God has appointed to be pastors and teachers, and
Fathers of the people, to feed the^, to teach the^, and to bring the^ up in
God. And yet may we not learn of every one that takes upon him the Teachers
meet to be followed.
name of a pastor, teacher or Father, but of soche as teach the law of our
heaue^lie Father, and there withal forgets not the law of our mother the
holy church. These two propreties he must have jointly, for the one
without the other suffices not in a teacher, as by saint Hierom yt is
declared. Who also (as saint Clement teaches) must be soche one as teaches
the understanding of the scriptures according to the truth that he has
received and learned of his elders.

According to which counsel I minding to search the understanding of certain
scriptures which be in controversy, I will repair to them that be the elders
of Christ's Church, which I term his Parliament house, and to learn of them
the true understanding of those scriptures. I wish therefore the reader, to
submit his judgment unto them, as I will do, and all affection set aparte,
to learn of them, we ought to learn of, who, I doubt not, will so well and
clearly open to us the truth of that matter, that we seek, that except we will
not see, we shall perceive yt.

The holy spirit of God give us the gift of understanding, and an humble and
docible heart to receive and embrace his truth.

THE NINGHT CHAPTER DECLARING that our redemption was prenunciated by
promises, figures, and prophecies, and what the promises be, and to whom
they were made.
Almighty God beholding the miserable ruin of man, and mercifully entending
the repair of the same, by his provident wisdom, Sap. 8.
quae disponit omnia suauiter, which disposes all things lovingly, according
to his foreknowledge, which was from ever, declared unto man the mean, how by
whom, and when his laps or fall should be restored, assuring him of his
redemption, even Misericordiam et iudicui cantabo tibi Domine. Mercy and
judgment will I sing to thee, o Lord. Psalm. 102.
For Misericors Dominus et iustus. Our Lord is merciful and righteouse.

Thus I say Man having in practice that God is a God of justice, lest he
Assurance of mercy promised to man before full sentence of justice was
pronounced.
should be overwhelmed and depressed with desperacion for lack of mercy,
Before the full sentence of Gods justice was pronounced, assurance of mercy was
made, that man being now pressed with the one, should be releiued with the
other. Inimicitias ponam inter te, et inter mulierem, et seme^ tuu^ and seme^
illius: ipsa conteret caput tuum. I will put enemitie (said almighty God to
the Serpent) between thee, and the woman, between thie seed and her seed, the
same shall

And as our righteouse, and never the less our merciful Lord God had
signified this glad tidinges of Redemption to our first Parents, that they
might understand the mercy of God, and thereby conceive and have hope and
comforth: Even so likewise did he to our Fathers the holy Patriarchs, and
other our elders notify the same by diverse means, as by promises, figures,
and prophecies. Of the which three I shall by Gods help severally speak.
And first as the order leads, I will treacte of promises.

To our Father Abraham God declared the glad tidinges of our Redemption by
promise, saing thus: In semine tuo benedicentur omnes nationes terrae. Genesis 22.
In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. Who was this
seed, Promise made to Abraham.
unto yt, saint Paul to the Galathians by the teaching of the holy Ghost,
declares saie^g: To Abraham and his seed were the promises made. He says
not, in thie seeds, as to many: but in thy seed as of one which is Christ.

As saint Paul here by the instruction of the holy Ghost, expowndeth this
promise to be made of Christ: So doubt ye not but the same holy Galat. 3.
Spiritie, had breathed the like breath into the holy Patriarch Abraham,
wherbie he understood, that Christ after the flesh should descend from him,
and that this blessing should by him happen to all nations. For all nations
shall atteign to this blessing, that believe with faithful Abraham (as saint
Paul declares in the same chapter: The scripture (says he) seeing before
hand that God would justify the heathen through faith, showed before hand
glad tidinges to Ahraham, saing: In thee shall all nations be blessed. So Ibid.
3.
then they which be of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham.

In the which declaracion we may learn, that the promise was made to
Abraham: the fullfillinge of the said promise should be done by Christ,

To king David also he opened the same by promise saienge: De fructu ventris
tui ponam super sedem tuam. Of the frnicte of thy body, shall I seetevppe upon
thy seat. which words of the psalm, are a rehersall of the promise 1 Reg.
7.
stablish his kingdom, he shall build an house for my name, and I will
stablish the seat of his kingdom for ever.

Which promise although the Ieues would have to be understood and
performed in Salamon: yet yt can not so be, for that these words I will
stablish the seat of his kingdom for ever can not be veryfied in Solomon, whose
worldly kingdom is finished, and utterly extingnisshed, and was so before the
coming of Christ, according to the prophecy of the holy Patriarch Jacob, who
prophesied thus: Non auferetur sceptrum de Judah, and dux de femore eius, Genesis
49.
donec veniat qui mittendus est: and ipse erit expectatio gentium. The scepter
shall not be taken from Judah, and the lawegeuer from betwixt his feet, until
he comme that shall be sent, and he yt shall be, whom the gentiles shall look
for.

By which prophecy yt is manifest, that at the coming of Christ, the Christ
is the seed Promised to David and not Salemon. Romans 1.
promise of God made to David, tends not to Salomo^ and his Succession,
whose kingdom must have an end, as the prophecy of Jacob signified: But yt
respects Christ, who lineallie descended from David. Qui factus ost ei ex
semine David secundum carnem, which was borne to him of the seed of David
after the flesh as saint Paul says, whose kingdom is everlasting according
to the prophecy: Super solium David, et super regnum eius sedebit, vt
confirmet et corroboret illud in iudicio et iustitia, amodo et vsque in
sempiternu^. He shall sit upon the seat of David, and in his kingdom to set
up the same, and to establish yt with equity and righteonsuesse from hence
forth for Esaias. 9.
evermore.

That this is to be understood only of Christ, the rest of the sentence
goinge immediately before does make yt so plain, that all men of judgment
must needs confess, that yt can not admit any other understanding. For thus
the prophet orders the woll sentence: Unto us a child is born, and unto us
a Son is given, upon his shoulder does the kingdom lie, and

Who is he that is a child born to us, that is or may be called the mighty
God, and the everlasting Father, but our Messiah, our Savior Christ, God and
man? who is the Son given to us, that shall sit upon the seat of David, for
ever more, making no end to increase his kingdom, and stablishe yt with
equity and righteousness for ever more, but Jesus Christ, our very
Messiah, the very natural Son of our heanenlie Father, which 1. Cor. 1.
is given to us to be our Redemption, iustificacion, and sanctification? Who
giving his commission to the Apostles, to preach his Gospel appointed them no
terms, limittes or bowndes, neither did he make any difference of creatures
or people, but Ite, (said he) in vniuersum mundum, et Mar. vlt.
praedicate Euangelium omni creaturae. Go ye through out all the world, and
In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum, et in fines orbis terrae verba eorum. Their
found is gone Psalm. 18.
into all lands, and their words into the ends of the world.

His kingdom is wounderfullie encreaced, so that the prophecy of Malachie is
fullfilled: Ab ortu solit vsque ad occasum magnum est nomen meum in gentitibus,
et in omni loco sacrificatur, et offertur nomini meo oblatio munda. From the
rising Malac. 1.
of the Sun unto the goinge down of the same my name is great emo^ge the
gentiles, yea in every place is there sacrifice done, and a clean meat offing
offered up unto my name.

Yt is to be noted that the Prophet says: To the name of God in every place
shall sacrifice be done, which manner of doing of sacrifice, being me^t of the
Sacrifice of Christ's Church so to be doe^ eueriewher, well declares the great
encreace of Christ's kingdom. Which must needs so be, For Dominabitur a mari
vsque ad mare, et a flumine vsque ad terminos orbis terrarum. His dominion
shall be from the one sea to the other, and from the flood unto the Psalm. ^1.
woorldes end. They that dwell in the wilderness shall knele before him, his
enemies shall lick the dust. The kings of Tharses, and of the Isles shall give
presenttes, and the kings of Arabie and Saba shall bring gifts. All kings
shall fall down before him, all nations shall do him service.

Here Iacobus de valentia expounding the dominion of Christ, which shall
Iacobus de Valentia.
be from one sea to an other, says that yt is from the Sea Mediterranian unto
both he Ocean Seas, and unto the Southe, and so yt comprehends all Affrike,
and unto the north Sea, and so yt comprehends all Europe: And he shall have
dominion from the flood Nilus and Tanays, unto the ends of the world that be
toward the East, which comprehends all Asia, and so his dominion is over
all the world. For being over these three parts, all which three received
Christ's faith, and submitted them selves to his holy religion, in to the
which three parts the wholl world is divided, yt may well be said, that
his dominion, is over all the world.

Christ then alone and no pure earthly king is he, that is promised to
David, to sit upon his seat for ever, and to dilate his kingdom, so that there
Christ, not Solomon promised to David. Act. 13.
shall be none end of the encreace of yt

That in this promise made unto David was meant Christ, saint Paul, also in
the Acts of the Apostles declares. Inueni David filium Iesse virum secundum
cor meum, qui faciet omnes voluntates meas. Huius ex semine Deus secundum
promissionem eduxit Israeli saluatorem Iesum. I have fownde (says almighty
God) David the Son of Iesse, a man after my own heart, which shall fulfill
all my will. Of this man's seed (says saint Paul) has God, according as he
had promised brought forth to Israel a Savior Jesus. By which words saint
Paul teaches plainly that Jesus our Savior, was promised to comne of David.

And for that the promise was made both to Abraham and to David (as yt is
declared) that Messiah should descend from them both: Therefore the Evangelist
saint Matthew describing the Genealogy of our Savior Christ after the
flesh, begins the same at Abraham and David, calling Christ the Son of
David and Abraham, saing: Liber generationis Jesus Christi, filij David, filij
Abraham. The book of the generation of Jesus Christ the Son of David, the
Son of Abraham.

And to conclude, two prophets of the new Testament, namely the most
excellent Prophetisse the virgen Marie, the mother of that promised Suscepit
Israel puerum suum, etc. He has helped his seruannt Israel in remembrance of
his mercy, even as he promised to owre Fathers, Luc. 1.
Abraham and his seed for ever. The other says: Et erexit corna salutis
nobis, in domo David etc. And he has raised up an horn of salvation to us in
the house of his seruannt David, Even as he promised by the mouth of his holy
Prophets, which were sense the world began.

In the which prophecies we may perceive, that the holy Ghost did strike an
uniform sownde in these two instruments fownding that the promises made to
Abraham and David, and spoken by the Prophets sense the world began, were
now fullfilled in that, that Christ the Savior of the world was conceived
and incarnate in the womb of the immaculate virgen Mary, by whom the blessing
promissed, should come to all the nations of the earth, as now we have seen
profourmed.

THE TENTH CHAPTER TOVCHETH THE FIgures of Christ's Incarnation, passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension.
AS unto these two noble Fathers before spoken of, God by manifest promise
opened the joyful coming of our Savior

Unto the wife of Manoah, the Angel of God appeared and said: Ecce sterilis
es, concipies, and paries filium. Behold as yet thou art barren, or have
Iudic. 13. Figures of Chrysts in carnation.
had no child before. Thowe shall conceive, and bring forth a Son. This was
a figure of the Salutaco^ of the Angel to the virge^ the mother of Christ
Ecce (said the Angel to the virgen) concipies and paries filium. Behold
thowe shall conceive and bring forth a Son.

Observe and note the conformity, and likeness of both messages. Wherein note
by whom the messages were done, to whom they were done, and what manner of
persons they were done, unto by vhom the thing promised should be performed,
of what force value and wourthinesse the things promised be, And then shall ye
perceive, how lively the figure (for that Figures be not in every point
co^parable to the things figurated.


Note also that I say, that a figure for that part that yt is a figure, does
paint and set forth the thing figurated, For every story containing a figure,
is not a figure for the wholl story, neither the persons of the figure, are in all poinctes to be likened, compared, or assembled to the thing figurated. As
for example.

Joseph being sold of his brethren for money, was a figure of Christ Genesis
38. Joseph and Christ compared together.
sold by Judas to the Jews for moneie. In the which figure application may
not so be made, that the person, who is the figure, shall express or answer
the thing figured in all points and every condition: or that the person, who
is the figure, shall counteruaill the wourthinesse of the person figured. For
Joseph the person in this figure was a pure man: Christ the person figured God
and man. Joseph subject unto sin: Christ free from sin. Joseph sold not
to die, but to be saved from death: Christ sold not to be saved from death,
but to die. wherefore Joseph in these parts and Judas with the phariseies
conspired against him. Joseph was sold of his Vocabis nomen eius Iesum: ipse
enim saluum faciet populum suum a peccatis Math. 1.
eorum, Thowe shall call his name Jesus, says the Angel. For he shall save
his people from their sins. In these poinctes Joseph is a figure of Christ.

So the Mother of Sampson, and Sampson himself being the persons of the figure,
may not answer the persons figured in all parts. For the mother of Sampson
conceived by man: The mother of Christ without man. Sampson a sinful man:
Christ void of sin. Therefore let us consider the figure in that part that yt
is a figure: and first by whom the message of the conception of those
childeren was done.

The conception of Sampson was declared by an Angel: The conceptio^ of Christ
likewise by an Angel. The Angel said to the mother of Sampsom: Sampsons
conception and Christ's compared to gether.
Ecce concipies and paries filium. Behold thou shall conceive, and bring Ecce
concipies and paries filium. Behoholde thou shall conceive, and bring forth a
Son. The Mother of Sampson was alone when the Angel appeared to her: The
mother of Christ was alone, when the Angel saluted her.

Secondly, consider what manner of persons they were, to whom these messages
were sent. Yt is to be supposed that the mother of Sampson was in Mother of
Sampson compared with the mother of Christ. Bernardus epist. 174.
Gods favor, to whom he did vouchesaif to send his Angel with a message
much desiered: Yt is to be believed that the mother of Christ was certenlie in
Gods favor, who sanctified her in her mothers womb, and appoincted her to be
the mother of his own Son, and certifiied her there of by the Angel. The
mother of Sampson had never child before: The mother of Christ had never
child before.

Now thirdly. Let us consider by whom the things promised, that is the
conception of these children should be performed. The mother of Sa^pson
being barren, where the order of nature could not cause her to conceive,
conceived by Gods disposition helping nature: The mother of Christ being a
virgen, and not knowing man, could not by the course of nature Spiritus
sanctus superueniet in te, and virtus altissimi obumbrabit tibi. The holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall ouershadow thee.
Luc. 1.


Fourthlie and last, let us search of what wourthinesse these childeren
Sa^pson and Christ compared. together.
promised were. Sampson was an a Nazarite unto God from his youth: Christ most
acceptable to God from his youth. Sampson began to deliver the children of
Israel out of the hands of the Philistines tirannouslie reigning over them:
Christ began to deliver the people out of the hands of the Deuell
tirannoustie reigninge over them. Thus beholding and weighing, how goodly the
order of the conception of Christ answers the order and manner of the
conception of Sampson, we may well perceive the one did prefigurate the other.

As the conception of our Savior Christ was thus prefigurated: So was his
passion and death also. Abraham having but his only begotten Son Genesis 22.
Father, who having but his only begotten, and beloved Son Jesus Christ,
was willing that he should suffer death and be offered for us.

Isaac bearing the woodde to the place of Sacrifice, and obedient to his
fathers will, thereto be slain and offered, was a figure of Christ bearing the
Isaac a figure of Christ Philip. 2.
woodde of his cross to the place where he should suffer, and being obedient
to his Fathers will did suffer death, even the death upon the cross. In
which fact he did not only fulfill the Scriptures, but also answers the
figures, which prefigurated that this his death should be the salvation of
them, that should believe in him. Which figure is the setting up of Nu^. 21.
ca. Joan. 3.
the Brazen Serpent mentioned in the book of Nombres. Of the which figure he
himself makes mention in the Gospel, applieng yt to him self, saing: Sicut
Moises exaltauit serpentem in deserto, ita exaltari oporiet filium hominis, vt
omnis qui credit in ipsum, non pereat, sed habeat vitam aeternam, As Moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness: Even so must the Son of man be
lifted up, that whosoever believes in him may not perish but have eternal
life.

As God opened the mystery of our redemption by these and soche other like
figures to the Fathers in their owe^ persons: So did he the like by sundry
Hebr. 9.
therein contained in a brief manner, of which he says, he can not speak
particularly.

And after that he had in a like compendiouse sort, touched the manner of
sacrifices done as well in the first Tabernacle, as in the second, into the
which the high priest alone entered once every year, and that not without

But Christ (says he) being an high priest of good things to come, came by a
greater, and a more persect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say,
not of this buildinge, neither by the blood of goats, and calves, but by his
own blood he entered once into the holy place, and fownde eternal redemption.
In the which saying yt is worthy to be noted, how wounderfullie well he
adapted the things figurated to the figures, and therewith declares the
excellency of them, above these.

In which applicacion this we may learn, that the high priest of the law
figured Christ our high priest. The tabernacle by which he entered into the
holy place, figured the tabernacle of Christ's body, by which he entered into
the holy place. The blood wherewith the priest entered, figured the Chrysostom. in
9. ad Heb.
blood of Christ. The entering and sacrificing of the high priest once in the
year, figured the sacrificing of Christ, and his entringe into the holy place
of heaven once for all. The cleinsing and purifieng of the people by virtue of
the sacrifice of the high priest which (as saint Paul says) purified the
unclean as touching the purifieng of the flesh, figured the clensing and Lauit
nos a peccatis nostris in sanguine suo. he has washed us Apoca. 1.
from our sins in his blood (says saint Ihon)

As the death and blood shedding of kiddes and calves, and soche other, and the
sacrifices done by the^, did figure the passion, and bloodshedding of Christ
and the holy sacrifice offered by him (for he was sacerdos and victima, both
priest and sacrifice) by the which the believing people in Christ to come, were
instructed, that the Savior of the woorlde should die for the sins of the
same: So by figures also were they taught, that he should rise again the third
day: As by that figure which Christ applies to him self for that purpose in
the Gospel: Sicut enim Jonas suit in ventre ceti tribus diebus, and tribus
noctibus: sic erit filius hominis in cord terrae, etc. As Jonas (says he)
was three days and three nights in the whalls belly: So shall the Son of
man be three days, and three Matthew. 12
nights in the heart of the earth.

Which figure lively declares not only that Christ should be three

As his buryall, and abode in the grave, and his resurrection was figured by
Jonas: So was his Ascension by the taking up of Elias in a chariett of fire
into heaven. Elias went to heaven by the power of God: Christ ascended into
heaven by the power of his Godhead.

Tediousnes that should much offend the Reader, moves me to stay to bring
in any mo figures of Christ, at this present to this purpose. Wherefore I
will cease at this time any farther to procead therein, and treact of the like
matter by prophecies, which is the third way, by which God used in sundry
times and ages, to reueill the mystery of our redemption.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER DECLARES by the Prophets of what line Messiah should
come, with his conception, birth, passion, and death.
IN the showing and opening of the prophecies I will observe this order before
used. First, to set furthe of what line Messiah shall come. Secondly, of his
conception and birth, Thirdly, of his passion and death. Fourthlie, of his
resurrection, and last of his asce^sio^. As concerning the first: As God
promised that the same Messiah, Savior of Prophecy of the line and stock of
Christ.
the world should be of the seed of Abraham, and of the fruict of the body
of David: So long after their times, by his prophet Esaie did he manifestly
speak the same Egredietur virga de radice Iesse, et flos de radice eius
asce^det. There shall come a rod out of the kindred of Iesse, and a blossom, or
flower shall flowrish out of his root. Who is the root, the rod, and the
flower, S. Ambrose expounds, Esaias. 11.
saing. Radix, familia Iudaeoru^: virga, Maria: flos Mariae Christus est, qui
foetore^ mun Ambr. de Benedict Patriach. ca. 4.
danae colluuionis aboleuit, et odore^ vitae aeternae infudit. The root is the
family, of the Jews: The rod is Marie. The flower of Marie is Christ, who
has taken away the stink, and has powered in, the odoure of everlasting life.

That Christ is that flower, that the Prophet speaks of, the scriptures
also, that do there immediately follow, do evidently prove. Which to avoid
may easelie peruse, supposing yt sufficient to show how Gods words and his

Now therefore let us procead to weigh other prophecies, how they will
Prophecy of the co^ceptio^ of Christ Esaias. 7.
answer the figures. And first the prophecy of the conception. What the
figure was ye have heard. The Prophet Esaie being taught of God thus said:
Ecce virgo co^cipiet, and pariet filiu^. Behold a virge^ shall conceive, and
bear a Son. As the person of the figure, for that, that nature failed,
conceived and brought forth a child by Gods power: So a virgen, where nature
has not her order to conceive, has besides nature, and against the order of
nature, conceived by Gods power.

And this prophecy of Esaie does well open and declare the former prophecy. He
said a Rod shall come forth of the kindred of Iesse, and a flower shall flourish
out of his root. Virga virgo est. The rod is the virge^, the flourishing
flower is the Son of the virge^. What manner of Son yt is, the Prophet
immediately Et vocabitur nome^ eius Emanuel. And his name shall be called
Emanuel. Matthew. 1.
What Emanuel is the Evangelist declares: Quod interpretatur nobiscum Deus,
which, if a man interpret, is as much to say, as God with us. Which
interpretacio^ gives us to understand, that the Son of this wirge^ is the
very Messiah God and man, who was God with us: For In terris visus est, and
cum hominibus Baruch. 3.
co^uersatus est. He was seen in the earth and was co^uersaunt with me^, or
dwelt with men. So the^ where the prophet said. A rod shall bring forth a
flower, now by plain words he says: A virgen shall bring forth a Son
called Emanuel.

And that this was fulfilled as yt was prefigured and prophesied, the
Evangelist testifies: Cum esset despo^sata matter Jesus Maria Joseph, antequam
co^uenire^t, inuenta Math. 1.
est in vtero habe^s de spiritu sancto. When Marie the mother of Jesus was
married to Joseph, before they came to dwell together, she was found with child
by the holy Ghost.

That she conceived by the holy Ghost, the Angel testified to Joseph: Joseph
fili David, noli timere accipere Maria^ coniuge^ tua^. Quod enim in eanatu^
est, de spiritu sancto est: Ibidem.
Hoc aute^ totu^ factu^ est, vt adimpleretur quod dictu^ est a Domino per
Propheta^ dicente^: Ecce virgo co^cipiet, and pariet filiu^, and voca bu^t
nome^ eius Emanuel. All this was doe^ that yt might be fulfilled which wasspoke^
Esaias. 7.
of our Lord by the Prophet: saying: Behold a maid shall be with child, and
shall bring forth a son, And they shall call his name Emanuel. In this process
yt is easy to be perceived, how the prophecy au^swereth the figure, and the
Evangelist au^swereth both figure, and prophecy, certifieng us that to be
fulfilled and doe^ in fact, that they promised, the one in figure the other
inwoord Christ's passion and all notable parts thereof conferred to the
prophecies. Joan. 3. Esaie. 53. Prophecy of Christ's passion.
We have heard of Christ's coming into flesh by his co^ception and birth: Now
let us procead to speak of the third, which is his passion and death. And for
e^trie theru^to, first let us search by the prophecies wherefore he ca^ into
flesh Christ himself says: Venit filius hominis quaerere, et saluu^ facere
quod perierat. The Son of man came to seek, and save that, that had perished.
But by what means was yt his pleasure to save that, that had perished? The
Prophet declares, Ipse aute^ vulneratus est propter iniquitates nostras,
attritus est propter scelera nostra. Disciplina pacis nostra super eu^, et
linore eius sanati sumus. He was wounded for our offenses, and smitte^ for our
wickedness. For the chaisteseme^t of our peace was laid upon him, and with his
stripes are we healed. By what means did he come to his passion? and how came
he into the hands of his enemies? By the treason of one of his Apostles, who
(as by the figure was prefigurated) sold

But that prolixitie may be avoided, and yet so notable a matter not omitted,
as wherbie the faithful may take occasion to rejoice in the sowndenesse of
their faith, and therein glorify God, I will by the help of God, pass through
the story of the Passion, as yt is written of the Evangelists, comparinge
every notable part of yt with the prophecies, whereby shall appear, that the
faith of the chrystians, believing Christ to have died for the sins of the
woorlde, and by that death to have wrought the redemption of the same, is a
sure, substancial, and a grownded faith, fownded upon the immovable truth of
Gods word.

As yt was by his foreknowledge, by his holy prophets lively and plainly
spoken, how, and by what means Messiah should work the salvation of man:
Eue^ so plainly and lively has our Messiah wrought and done the same in
fact, that was before spoken in word, as by this brief comparison ensewing
yt shall appear.

And to begin, the hour of the passion of our Lord drawing nere, which he
right well knew: Sciens Jesus quia venit hora eius, vt transeat ex hoc mundo ad
Patrem, Jesus knowing that his hour was co^med, that he should depart out of
this world to the father, he prepared him, and willingly went to Jerusalem.
Appropinquante hora passionis, appropinquare voluit loco passionis. The hour
of Joan. 13.
his passion drawing nere, he would also draw nere to the place of his
passion. And therefore (as S. Matthew says) he going up to Jerusalem, took
the xii. disciples aside in the way, and said to them. Behold we go up to
Gregor.
Jerusalem, and the Son of man shall be betrayed unto the chief preistes,
and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death and shall deliver
him to the gentiles to be mocked, to be scourged, and to be crucified, and
Matthew. 20
the third day he shall rise again.

By the which his saying and doing yt appears, that he willingly went to
suffer his passion. Which yet at the instant of the same, when Judas with his
company came to the garden, where he and his disciples were, he did more Sciens
Jesus omnia quae ventura erant, processit, et dixit eis. Jesus knowing all
things that should come on him, went forth and said, whom seek ye? They
said: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus Joan. 18.
says to them: I am he. As soen as he said unto them: I am he, they went
backward and fell to the grownd. Wherbie yt is manifest both in that, that he
came to mete them, and also in that, at his meting with the^, with his only
word he threw the^ on the grownd, that he with like power might have
eschaped Ibid. Zach. 26.
their hands, if yt had not ben his will to have suffered. In further argument
whereof also, when Peter drew his sword, and cut of the ear of Malchus,
Jesus said unto him: Put up thy sword into the sheath. Shall I not drink
of the cup which my Father has given me? And (as S. Matthew testifies)
said further to Peter: Think thowe that I can not now pray to my Father,
and he shall give me by and by more then twelve legio^s of Angels? But how
then shall the scriptures be fulfilled? for thus must yt be.

By all which process, yt does most evidently appear, that willingly
Oblatus est, quia voluit. He was offered up because he would.

Judas betrayed him with a kiss: Judah, osculo filium hominis tradis? Judas be
Esaias. 53.
traiest thowe the Son of man with a kiss? The prophecy said long before
that yt should so be. Homo pacis mea in quo sperani, qui edebat panes meos,
magnificauit super me supplantationem, My own familiar friend, whom I trusted,
which did also eat of my bread, has laid great wait for me. Psalm. 40.


That this prophecy was spoken of Judas, Christ him self is witness, who
speakinge of Judas in the Gospel alleges this same scripture: Qui manducat
mecum panem, leuabit co^tra me caleaneum suum. He that eats bread with Joan.
13.
me, shall lift up his hele against me.

To procead in the story of the passion, when the Jews laid hands upon him,
and apprehended him, Discipuli omnes relicto co fugerunt. All his disciples
Matthew. 26
fled and forsook him. Which thing almighty God had spoken by his Prophet
Zachary, that so yt should come to pass: Percutiam pastorem, and disper
gentur oues gregis. I will smite the sheaperd, and the sheep of the flock
shall be scatered. That this prophecy is thus to be understood. Christ is
witness, Zach. 14.
who in the Gospel of saint Mark, applies yt to the same purpose.

In the house of Caiphas they entreacted our Savior very evil. For amongst
other things: Expuerunt in faciem eius. They did spitte in his face. Of Mat.
h. 26 Esaias. 50.
person: Faciem non auerti ab increpantibus and conspuentibus in me. I turned
not my face from shame and spitting on me.

That in the morninge the chief preistes and the elders of the people had a
council against Jesus to put him to death, yt was not ouerpassed without
prophecy. For the Prophet David speaks thus of yt in the person Mat. 21.
of Christ: Circumdederunt me can^s multi, concilium malignantium obsedit me.
Many dogs compased me rownde about, the council of the wicked laid siege
Psalm. 21.
against me.

When Judas (as yt follows in the story) seeing Christ condemned, brought the
moncie again, sainge: I have offended betrayeng an innocent Mat. 27
blood, and that the chief preistes would not put these silver plates into
the treasury, because yt was the price of blood, but took counsel, and
bought with them a potters field to bury strangers: the Evangelist himself
affirms the prophecy thereby to be fulfilled, saing. Then was that fulfilled,

These words be not fownde in Hieremie after the translation of the Bibles
that now be commonly used: yet this prophecy may well be alleged out of
Hieremie. For saint Hierom says, that he has red a book of Hieremie in
the Hebrew tongue, in the which this sentence is contained word for word.

But emo^ge the prophets that we have in use now, Zachary has yt most
plainly, where we read yt thus: If ye think yt good bring hither my price:
Zachar. 11
If no, then leave. So they weighed down thirty silver pieces, the value that
I was priced at. And the Lord said unto me: Castyt unto the potter, a goodly
price for me to be valued at of them. And I took the thirty silver pieces
Matt. 27
and cast them unto the potter. Thus much Zachary.

In whose words ye perceive the price of him that was sold, which was
thirty silver plates, for the which sum our savior was sold. Ye perceive
further more what was done with those thirty plates. In the prophecy ye se
how agreeable things done in the Gospel, be with the prophecy, and

Pilate hearing that Jesus was a man of Galilie, which belonged to the
jurisdiction of Herod, he sent him to Herod, before whom the high preistes
and Scribes accused him straightly. But Herod with his men of war, when they
had despised him, they sent him again clothed in a white garment, unto Pilate,
Whereby the prophecy was fulfilled which said. Quare fremuerunt ge^tes, and
populi meditati sunt inania? Astiterunt reges terrae, and principes conuenerunt
in Psalm. 2.
vnum, aduersus Dominum, et aduersus Christum eius. Why do the heathen so
furiously rage together, and why does the people ymagen vain things? The
kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel together against
the Lord, and against his enointed.

That this prophecy of David was herefullfilled, the holy Ghost by the holy
multitude testifies in the acts of the Apostles, which in their prayer to God
prayed thus: Domine, tu es qui fecisti caelum et terram, etc. Lord thou art
God, which have made heaven and earth, the Sea and all that in the^ is. Which
Act. 4.


To procead in the story. When Christ was before Herod, who questioned with
him many words, he answered nothing, as S. Luke testifies: Luc. 23. Matthew.
27.
So being before Pilate, when he was accused of the chief preistes and elders,
as S. Matthew wittnesseth, he answered nothing, And when Pilate also said to
him, do thowe not hear how many witnesses they lay against thee? And he
answered him never one word, insomoche as the deputy merueiled greatly.
Wherbie was fulfilled the prophecy which says. Tanquam ouis Esaias. 53.
ad occisione^ ducetur, et tanquam agnus cora^ tondente se obmutescet, et non
aperiet os suu^. He shall be led as a sheep to be slain, yet shall he be as
still as a lamb, before the sherer, and not open his mouth.

This is the prophecy which the Cha^berlain of queen Candace, did read Act. 4.
sitting in his chariet, retourning from Jerusalem. To whose chariett the
Spirit of God commanded Philippe to ioin himself, who hearing him reading this
place, asked him: understand thou what thowe read? etc. And Philippe went
yppe into the chariette, and began at the same scripture, and preached unto him
Jesus. By the which yt is manifest that this scripture or prophecy is to be
understood of our Savior Christ Jesus.

When Pilate (as yt follows in the story) sat in judgment, and asked the
people, what he should do with Jesus, which was called Christ, They all
Math. 27.
said: Let him be crucified. When Pilate said: what has he done? They cried
the more, let him be crucified. When Pilate called for water, and washed his
hands, saying: I am innocent, of the blood of this just person, their
fierceness, and cruelty was so great, that they cried: His blood be upon us,
and on Aperueru^t super me os suu^ sicut leorapie^s et rugie^s. They have
opened their mouth upon me, as yt were a ra^ping, and roringe Lion.

When Pilate saw their importunity, he willing to co^te^t the people, let
Barrabas Corpus meu^ dedi percutientibus, et genas meas Esaias. 50.
vellentibus. I offered my back to the smiters, and my chekes to the nippers.

Which prophecy does not only declare the scourginges that Christ should
sustein in his body, but also the buffettes and blows, that he suffered on the
face in the house of the high priest, and of other ministres, as the Evangelist
does declare.

Then Judas seeing that Christ was condemned, he hanged him self, fullfilling
Matthew. 26. Mar. 15. Luc. 22.
the prophecy which says: Fiant dies eius pauci, et episcopatum eius
accipiat alter. Let his days be few, and let an other take his office.

That this was prophesied of Judas saint Peter does testify, saing: Ye men
and brethren, this scripture must needs have been fullfilled, which the holy
Ghost through the mouth of David spoke before of Judas, which was Acto. 1.
guide of them that took Jesus, etc. And when he was hanged he brust in
sundre, and his bowels gusshed out. For yt is written in the book of psalms.
Fiat Commoratio, etc.

After all these persecutions, when Christ was delivered to the soldiers to be
crucified, they led him into the common haul, where they entreacted him like a
most vile man, putting on him a purple Robe, and plectinge a Crown of thorns
upon his head, and a read in his hand, and they on their knees, saing: Haill
king of Jews.

Wherein was verified the prophecy of Esaie, spoken in the person of the Jews:
We have recknid him so vile, that we have turned our faces from him: yea Esaias.
53.
he was despised, and therefore we regarded him not. So that our Savior might
very well say, at that same time, with his own mouth, that the Prophet
David spoke before by the spirit of prophecy in the person of Christ: Ego sum
vermis, et non homo, opprobriu^ hominu^, et abiectio plebis. I am a woorme and
no Psalm. 21.
man, a very scorn of men, and the outcast of the people.

Those cruel handlinges of him done, yet most cruelly to his unspeakable
pain, percinge his most blessed, and sweet hands and feet, they crucified
him, in this also fulfilling the scripture prophecieng that yt should so be,
Foderunt manus meas, Ibid.
and pedes meos, and dinumerauerunt omnia ossa mea. They perced my hands, and
my feet. I may tell al my bones. What prophecies could more lively express
this part of Christ's passion, then this does?

But I shall haste me to other speaking as plainly as this. And to follow the
order after the narration of saint Luke, they crucified with him two evil
doers, one on his right hand, the other on his left, fulfilling the prophecy
which says: Et cum iniquis reputatus est. And he was reputed with the wicked.
Esaias. 53. Marc. 15.
Which prophecy S. Mark applies to this purpose, sainge yt here to be
fullfilled.

When he was thus crucified, they parted his garment, and cast lottes for yt.
The prophecy agreablie says: Diuiserunt sibi vestimenta mea, et super vestem
Psalm. 21. Math. 27.
meam miserunt sortem. They parted my garments among them, and upon my ve sture
they cast lottes. That this prophecy is fulfilled by this fact, S. Matthew is
witness, who says: They parted his garments, and cast lottes, that yt
might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, etc.

When this was done they passed by, reuiling him, and wagging their heads.
Accordingly was yt prophesied and spoken in the person of Christ. Omnes
videntes me deriserunt me, locuti sunt labijs, et mouerunt caput. All that
Psalm. 21.
did see me, laughed me to skorne, they spoke with their lips, and wagged

Likewise the high priests with the Scribes and the elders mocked him, and
said: He saved other, himself he can not save. He trusted in God, let Math. 27.
him deliver him now if he will have him. Now behold if the prophecy have
not almost even the same words: Sperauit in Domino, eripiat eum, saluu^
Psalm. 21.
faciat eum, quoniam vult eum. He trusted in God that he would deliver him. let
him deliver him, if he will have him.

All these their wicked mockes, and cruel torments not with standinge,
hanging upon the cross he prayed for them to his Father, sainge: Pater dimitte
Luc. 23.
illis, non enim sciunt quid faciunt. Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do. Herin also he fullfilled the prophecy, which said of him, Pro
transgressoribus Esaias. 53.
orauit, He made intercession for misdoers. And when the sixth hour was commed,
darkness arose over all the earth until the ningth hour (as saint Mark
writes) Jesus cried with a loud voice saing: Eloy Eloy Lamasabathani, which
is if one interpret. My God my God, why Mar. 15.
Deus, Deus meus respice in me, quare me dereliquisti? My God, my God, look
upon me, why hauest thou forsaken me? When he Psalm. 21. Mar. 15.
had thus cried, one ran, and filled a sponge with vineagre, and put yt upon
a Reed, and gave him to drink. Saint Matthew says, that they gave him
vineagre mingled with gall, which fully answers the prophecy Math. 27.
which says: Dederunt in escam meam fell, and in siti mea potauerunt me aceto.
They gave me gall to eat, and when I was thirsty, they gave me vineagre to
Psalm. 68.
drink. Saint Iohu^ concludinge here the wholl story of the passion says
thus. Postea sciens Jesus quia omnia consummata etc. After these things Jesus
knowing, Joan. 19.
that all things were now performed, that the scripture might be fullfilled
he said: I thirst. There stood a vessel by full of vineagre. Therefore they
filled a sponge with vineagre, and wound yt about with Isope and put yt to
his mouth. As sooen as Jesus received the vineagre he said: Yt is finished:
and bowed down his head, and gave up the Ghost:

In this word, Consummatum est, yt is finished, Christ, who said, that all
Joan. 19. Luc. 24.


THE TVVELVETH CHAPTER BRIEFLY TOVcheth a prophecy or two of Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension.
Now (gentle Reader) thowe hauest heard the goodly story of the passion of
our Savior Jesus Christ, not according to the worthiness of soche a matter
treacted of, and handled, weigh well, how the one answers the other, yt
will occasion you (as

Now to perform my promise, I will bring forth a prophecy or two of his
Resurrection, and ascension, and so end this matter.

As the story of the Gospel has sufficiently wittnessed that Christ our
Savior gave up the ghost upon the cross, and there (to declare himself a
Prophecy of Christ's resurrect. and asce^sio^
mortal man) died: So does yt testify unto us, that he was buried, and that
the third day he rose again, and that (as saint Paul says) according to
the Scriptures. And for asmoche as the Gospel was not perchance then written,
or received as of authority to prove that article to unbelieving men: 1. Cor. 15.
yt is to be supposed, that saint Paul meant the Scriptures of the Prophets,
which did prophecy the resurrection of Christ. of the which matter we read
thus in the psalm: I have set God allwais before me, for he is Psalm. 15.
on my right hand. therefore I shall not fall. wherefore my heart was glad,

That this prophecy speaks of the resurrection of Christ, saint Peter in
the first sermon that he made, after he had received the holy Ghost, which
was even the same day of Pentecost, does allege the same scripture by the
teaching of the same holy Spirit to prove the resurrection of Christ, where he
says thus: Ye men of Israel hear these words. Jesus of Nazareth Acto. 2.
a man approved of God among you with miracles, wonders, and signs, which God
did by him in the midst of you (as ye your selves know) him have ye taken
by the hands of unrighteous persons, after he was delivered by the
determinate counseill, and foreknowledge of God, and have crucified and slain
him, whom God has raised up, and loosed the sorrows of death, because yt was
impossible that he should be holden of yt. For David speaks of him before
hand: I saw God allwais before me etc. as is before alleged.

And proceading in this matter, notes the special poinctes of this Prophecy,

In the which wholl sentence and saying of saint Peter two things are to
this purpose to be noted. First, that before the allegacion of the prophet
David he says thus, speaking of Christ: whom God has raised up, and
loosed the sorrows of death. If ye ask the holy Apostle, the cause why God
has raised him from death, he answers: Because yt was impossible that he
should be holden of yt. If ye procead to ask him why yt was impossible. he
answers: For David speaks of him. Wherein he notes the immutabilitie of
God, and the certentie of his word. As who should The second thing to be
noted in the Apostle is, that he notes, as yt were

This sentence is yt, that plainly proves the resurrection. Wherefore the
Apostle, to confer the fullfilling of the prophecy to the prophecy yt self,
concludes the sentence thus: This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we all
are witnesses. Albeit the learned Fathers allege other places also: yet for
so much as I haste to the matter principally intended, I will stay my hand
in this matter, Mindinge with like expedicion to finish the rest that remains
to be done by my promise, that is only to declare the ascension of Christ by
prophecy, as I have done by figure.

Of the Ascension of our Savior Christ the Prophet David also in the Psalm.
67. Prophecy of the Asce^sion.
psalm does Prophecy thus: Ascendisti in altum, cepisti captiuitatem,
accepisti dona in hominibus. Thou art gone up on high, thowe hauest led
captivity captive, and received gistes for men. That the Prophet did in this
sentence speak and prophecy of the ascension of Christ, saint Paul is
witness, who alleging this prophecy proceadeth upon yt thus Vnicuique
nostru^ data est gratia secundum mensuram donationis Christi. Propter quod
dicit: Ascende^s in altum, Ephesians. 4.
captiuam duxit captiuitatem, dedit dona hominibus, etc. unto every one of us
is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. wherefore he
says: when he went up on high, he led captivity captive and gave gifts
unto men. That he ascended, what meeneth yt, but that he also descended first
into the lowest parts of the earth? He that descended is even the same also
that ascended up above all heavens, to fulfill all things.

By the which words, that saint Paul takes the sainge of David to be a
prophecy of Christ's Ascencion, yt is more manifest, then yt neadeth any
further probacion of me or any other man.

But this scruple perchance may move a diligente reader, that the Psalm
Accepisti dona in hominibus: And the Apostle says: Dedit dona hominibus. He
has given gifts to men. betwixt geuinge and receiving there is a great
difference.

This doubt does saint Augustine dissolve, writting in this wise: Sed Aug.
l. 15 de Trinit.
cum Propheta dixerit, Accepisti dona in hominibus: Apostolus maluit dicere,
Dedit dona hominibus, vt ex vtroque scilicet verbo, vno Phrophetico, Apostolico
altero, (quia in vtroque est diuini sermonis autorites) sensus plenissimus
redderetur. Veru^que enim verum est, and quia dedit hominibus, et quia accepit
in hominibus. Dedit hominibus, tanqua^ caput membris suis: accepit in
hominibus, idem ipse vtique in membris suis, propter quae membra sua clamauit
de coelo, Saul, Saul, quid me persequeris? But when the Prophet has said:
Thowe hauest received gifts in men, or among men: the Apostle has chosen to
say: Thou hauest given gifts to men, that out of both sainges, the one of
the Prophet, the other of the Apostle (by cause that in both is the authority
of Gods word) a most full and perfect sense might be given. For both be true,
both that he gave gifts unto men, and me? Thus much saint Augustine.

Albeit the Scriptures be copiouse and plentiful of Prophecies as well of this
matter as of other, all teachinge us one truth, though they be vtterred by
diverse organs, or instruments of the holy Ghost, forbicause the holy Ghost
the Schoolmaster of all truth is but one: Yet I will not molest the Reader
with the rehersall of any mo, well knowing, that the truth is as Holy Ghost
schoolmaster of all truth.
perfect, as sure, and as substa^cial in one sentence of the holy Ghost, as in
twe^ti: Nevertheless he that is desierouse to read mo prophecies of this
matter I refer him to the xlvj. psame, to the lxiij. chapter of Easy, and
to the second of Micheas, as the holy learned fathers have taught me.

Thus (praise be to God) I have through his help profourmed that, that I
intended: namely, declared that the mysteries of our Redemption were by diverse
means, that is to say, by promises, figures, and prophecies reueiled unto
the Fathers by Almighty God, and that in diverse ages, and times, as in the
time of the law of Nature, in the time of the law of Moses, All which
promises, figures, and prophecies, promised, figured and prophesied soche
things, as by our Savior Christ, were fullfilled, acco^plisshed, Etenim quae
de me scripta sunt, finem habent. For the things, which are written of me,
have an end. Luc. 22.


THE THIRTENE CHAPTER HOW THAT MELCHIsedech was a figure of Christ both in
preisthood, and sacrifice.
Now to approach to the matter in this first book principally intended:
Whereas Almighty God, did paint, open, and show the mystery of our
Redemption, by promises, figures, and prophecies in the old testament to the
great comforth of the^, that lived in that testament, which Redemption is
alredie wrought, done and perfected: Even so has he by figures, and
prophecies, shadowed, and spoken before of things that shall be done in the new
Testament, as a perpetual memorial of the same redemption, to the great and
spiritual comforth of them that live under the new testament. which
memorial Hic sanguis Testamenti, quod mandauit ad vos Deus. This is the blood
of the Testament, which God has made with you: But a new everlasting
Testament, according Exodus 24. Hebr. 9. Hebr. 13. Aeternum Testame^tu^
as saint Paul says.

This everlasting Testament has accordingly an everlasting priest, and an
everlasting sacrifice. The everlasting priest is our Savior Christ, as
wittnesseth saint Paul: Nec Christus semetipsum glorificauit, vt pontifex
sieret, sed qui dixit ad eum: Filius meus es tu, ego hodie genui te.
Quemadmodum and in alio loco dicit. Tu es sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem
Melchisedech. Neither did Christ glorify him self, to be made the high
priest, but he that said unto him: Hebr. 5.
Thowe art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, As he says also in an
other place: Thowe art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech.

The everlasting sacrifice is the very body and blood of the same our
Christ's body and blood an everlasting sacrifice. Luc. 22.
Hoc facite in meam co^memoratione^. This do ye in the remembrance of me.

The continuance of the doing of this thing in the remembrance of him, saint
Paul declares saing: Donec veniat. until he come, understand to the general
judgment. wherbie yt does appear that this sacrifice, and preisthood, 1. Cor.
11.
shall continewe unto the worlds end.

These be the things, which I said before, that God had sheued, by figures,
and prophecies. Which figures and prophecies, being done and past, and meant of
these things, must as necessarelie be fullfilled, as the other before
mentioned figures, and prophecies were fullfiled of the Author, and
Institutour of them.

The figures and prophecies before mentioned were of things, which

But the new Testament, wherein the virtue, efficacy, and merits of these
factes be continued, and applied, is begone and confirmed in Christ's A new
law a new preisthood Heb. 7.
blood. The preisthood also of the same, which he ordained in that new law
or Testament. For a new law must needs have a new preisthood, and a new
preisthood most have a new law, as saint Paul makes this argument of
necessity, that Translato sacerdotio, necesse est vt legis translatiox fiat.
The preisthood being taken away, the law must needs be taken away. A new
preisthood a new sacrifice.
For law and preisthood go together. And with a new preisthood comes a new
sacrifice. For the diversity of preisthood stands in the diversity of
sacrifice. These three shall endure, and remain, as the figures and prophecies
of the same shall manifestly declare, and prove.

Of these things there be figures in the law of nature, and in the law of
Moses. In the law of nature, albeit that Seth, Noe, and other holy men,
Apoca. 13.
the Cross after the manner of Aaron. For the which cause saint John says,
he is Agnus, qui occisus est ab origin mundi. the Lamb that was slain from
the beginning of the world, Both for that he was figured in the sacrifices
done to God from the beginnig of the world, and also that he gave virtue to
all soche sacrifices.

But the first that figureth both the preisthood and sacrifice of the new
law, is Melchisedech, of whom we read thus: And Melchisedech, king of Salem
brought forth bread and wine (for he was the priest of the most high God) and
blessed him saying: Blessed be Abraham unto the high God, possessour of heaven
and earth. And blessed be the high God which has delivered thine enemies into
thy hands. And Ahraham gave him tithes of all. Heb. 6. and. 7. Christ and
Melchisedech compared togethe


To prove this Melchisedech to be the very figure of Christ, we can have no
better argument, then the applicacion which S. Paul makes by the holy Ghost,
in the epistle to the Hebrews, where in the end of the sixte chapter he says
thus: Where the forerenner is for us entered, even Jesus, that is made an high
priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedech. And then yt follows
Melchisedech king of Sale^, who being priest of the most high God, met
Abraham, as he returned again from the slaughter of the kings, and blessed
him, to whom also Abraham gave tithes of all things, first is called by
interpretation king of righteousness, after king of Salem, that is to say,
king of peace, without Father, without mother without kindred, And has neither
beginning of days, neither end of life, but is likened to the Son of God,
and continues a priest for ever.

In the which sentence saint Paul first recites the story, and after does
interpret the words, and apply the same to Christ, as the figure to the
thing figured.

First (says he) is he called the king of righteousness, where in saint Paul
does interpret the name of Melchisedech For as the learned in the tounges
say, Melec, does signify king, and Sedech righteousness, and so saint
Paul by the name of Melchisedech calls him king of righteousness. After,
king of Salem. Salem by interpretation is peace. And therefore saint

Yet there was a City in deed called Salem, of the which Melchisedech (as the
Hebrews do say) being the eldest Son of Noe, whom the scripture otherwise
calls Sem, was the very king. In the which (as saint Hierom Hierom. in
Esaias. 41.
does testify) there remain the ruins of his palace, which does testify what
a goodly thing yt was.

Which Melchisedech notwithstanding that he was a king, he was also a priest.
For (as saint Hierom does also say) the eldest or first born sons in the
law of nature were preistes. And therefore yt does appear that he was an
eldest Son.

Saint Paul goes on, and says, that he was without father, and with out
mother: By the which, saint Paul meeneth not, that he had no father, nor
mother, but that the Scripture makes no mencio^ of his father, nor mother.

Likewise is that to be understood which follows, where he says:
Melchisedech was without kin, having neither beginning of days nor yet
endinge. In deed he had both, but the Scripture makes no mention of them. But
all these things does saint Paul infer to declare how lively
Melchisedech as a figure of Christ, does express him.

As First, where Melchisedech is called king of righteousness, he figureth
Christ very well. For Christ is that righteouse king, who according to the
saying of the Prophet Esaie: Non secundum visionem oculoru^ iudicabit, neque
Esaias. 11.
secundum auditum aurium arguet, sed iudicabit in iustitia pauperes etc. He
shall not give sentence after the thing, that shall be brought before his eyes,
neither reprove a matter at the first hearing, but with righteousness shall he
judge the poor. And again the Prophet says: He shall sit upon the seat of
David, and in his kingdom, to set up the same, and to establish yt with Id.
9.
equity and righteousness, for the which cause (as the Prophet says)
vocabunt eum, Dominus iustus noster. They shall call his name, owre righteouse
Lord.

And wourthilie is he so called. For daily does he righteouslie, for that
Joan. 5.
that Pater omne iudicium dedit Filio. The Father has given all judgment to
Omnes nos manifestari oportet, vt referat vnusquisque 2. Cor. 5.
prout gessit in corpore, sieve bonum, sieve malum. We must all appear, that
enery man may receive the works of his body, according to that he has done,
be yt good or evil. At the which time: Procedent, qui bona fecerunt, in
resurrectionem vitae, qui vero mala egerunt, in resurrectione^ iudicij. They
shall come forth Joan. 5.
that have don good, unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done
evil unto the resurrection of damnacion.

Thus may ye perceive that Melchisedech being called the king of
righteousness, figureth well Christ our righteouse king.

He is called also, Rex Salem, king of peace, wherein he does wonderons well
figure Christ, who of the Prophet is called: Princeps pacis, Esaias. 9.
cuius regnum multiplicabitur, and pacis non erit finis. The prince of peace,
whose kingdom shall be multiplied, and there shall be no end of peace.
Wherefore the Angels at his birth sange: Et in terra pax hominibus bonae
voluntatis. And in earth peace unto men of a good will. For (as saint Paul
Luc. 2.
says) Annunciauit pacem ijs, qui long erant, and pacem ijs qui prope. He
preached peace to those that were a far of, and to them that were nigh. For
Ephesians. 2.
why? Ipse est pax nostra, he is our peace.

In this then how well Melchisedech figureth Christ, though no admonicion
Melchisedech.

In this also that he says. Mechisedech to be without father and without
mother, he is also a right figure of Christ. For as Melchisedech is not fownde
in the Scriptures to have any natural father in the earth: No More has
Christ in very deed any natural father in the earth. And as Melchisedech
Mariechristes mother by nature and above nature.
has no mother, So Christ proprelie has no natural mother, calling a
natural mother, a woman that conceaueth by natural course and order. For a
woman that conceaueth above nature, and brings forth a child above nature, is
also a mother above nature. And being a mother above nature, properly is no
mother natural. Eor that is natural that is contained within theco^passe of
nature. And thus in this respect he had no natural mother. Yet may she be
called a natural mother, for that she imparted to him her natural flesh, and
her natural blood to the work of his incarnacion. Whereby also he in that
respect that he had natural flesh, and natural blood of man,

Melchisedech also (says saint Paul) was without kynred: wherein he is also
likened to Christ, who although as touching his flesh, he has a genealogy, as
Matthew and Luke declare, Yet as concerning his Godhead the Prophet Esaias. 53.
says: Generationem eius quis enarrabit? Who can declare, or nombre his
generation? As who should say, No man can declare, how God the Father
begatte God the Son. Yt is inexplicable. And after this manner Christ truly
answers his figure Melchisedech, for that in the Godhead he has no kin.

Melchisedech, has neither beginning of days, nor end of life: So Christ,
Apoc. 21.
as God, has neither beginning nor endinge. For he says: Ego sum alpha and
omega, primus and nouissimus, principium and finis. I am alpha and omega, the
first and the last, the beginning an the endinge. And saint Paul: Jesus
Christus heri Heb. 13
et hodie, ipse et in secula. Jesus Christ is yesterdaie, and to day, and the
same continues for ever.

When saint Paul had enombred all these things to declare therbie that
Mechisedech was a figure of Christ, he says: Assimulatus est filio Dei.
Jbidem. 6.


Of the which matter saint Augustine speaks upon the same place: Locus
diligenti consideratione dignissimus. Cum enim per Melchisedech, in Augu. de
Genesis ad literam.
quo huius rei futurae figura praecesser^t, discerneret sacerdotium Christi, a
sacerdotio Leui, vi dete ergo (inquit) qualis hic est, cui and decimam partem
Abraham dedit de primitijs, Patriarcha. A place most worthy diligent
consideracion. For when by Melchisedech, in whom the figure of the thing to
come went before, he would discern the preisthood of Christ, from the
preisthoode of Leui, See therefore (says he) what manner of man this is, unto
whom Abraham the Patriarch gave the tithes of his first fruits.

But forsomoche as here is no controversy, but that Melchisedech is a figure
of Christ, and of Chrysts preisthood, I will not trauaill here, nor hinder the
reader with allegacion of many doctors, until we come to the handling of the
Prophecy, which shall answer the figure according to the order, which I have
used in other figures heretofore brought furthe, for the declaracion and
setting furthe of other mysteries of Christ. But I shall go on to bring in an
other figure of the law of nature.

THE FOVRTENE CHAPTER DECLARES, after the mind of Chrysostom, that Job was a
figure of Christ, for the desire his servants had to eat his flesh.
IN Job we do read, that the men of his own household should say: Quis det
de carnibus eius, vt saturemur? Who shall give us of his flesh, that we may be
filled or satisfied? or as the common translation is, Who shall let us have our
bellies full of his flesh?

As they that were of the household of Job, for the great love they bare Job.
31. Desire of the eating of the flesh of Job applied to the desire to eat
Christ's flesh.
unto him, would even have eaten of his flesh: So they that be of the houholde
of Christ, for the love they bear to him, would eat of his flesh.

The desire of the eating of the flesh of Christ, Chrysostom applies to the
desire of those that were of the household of Job, which desired to eat the
flesh of Job, as a thing figuringe or signifienge the eatinge of Christ's
flesh, thus says he: Vt autem non solum per dilectionem, sed reipsa in carnem
illam conuertamur, per cibum id efficitur, quem nobis largitus est. Cum enim
suum in nos amorem Chryso. in 6 Joan. omel. 45.
indicare vellet, per corpus suum se nobis commiscuit, and in vnum nobiscum
redegit, vt corpus cum capite vniretur. Hoc enim amantium maxim est. Hoc Job
significabat de seruis, a quibus maxim amabatur, qui suum amorem
praeseferentes dicebant: Quis daret nobis, vt eius carnibus impleremur? Quod
Christus fecit, vt maiori nos charitate astringeret, and vt suum in nos
ostenderet desiderium, non se tantum videri permittens desiderantibus, sed and
tangi, et manducari, et dentes carni suae infigi, et desiderio sui omnes
impleri. Ab illa igitur mensa tanquam leones ignem spirantes surgamus, Diabolo
formidolosi, et caput nostrum intelligamus, et quam in nos prae se tulit
charitatem. Parents saepenumero liberos suos alijs alendos dederunt: ego autem
mea carne alo, me ijs exhibeo, omnibus faueo, omnibus optimam de futuris spem
praebeo. Qui in hac vitaita se nobis exhibet, multo magis in futura. Vester ego
frater esse volui, et communicani carnem propter vos, et sanguinem, et per quae
vobis coniunctus sum, ea rursum vobis exhibui.

That we should be turned into that flesh (speaking of the flesh of Christ)
not by love only, but in very deed, yt is done by the meat which Christ and
we joined two manner of ways.
he has granted us. For when he would show his love to us. he mixed himself
Who will give us of his flesh that we may be filled: The which thing Christ
Christ gives himself to be toched, and eaten in the Sacrament.
only suffer him self to be seen of these that desire him, but also to be
touched, and eaten, and their teeth to be fastened in his flesh, and them all to
be filled with the desire of him. Let us therefore rise from that table as lions
breathing out fire, being fearful to the Deuell, and let us consider our
head, and what charity he has declared unto us. Parents oftentimes have
delivered their children unto other to be fed. But I do feade with my own
flesh. Unto these I exhibit and give my self. I love and favor all, I give a
good hope to all of things to come. He that thus exhibiteth and gives himself
to us in this life, much more he will give himself to us in the life to come.
I would be your brother, And I took flesh and blood with you, for your
sakes. And by what things I was joined to you, the same again I give to you.
Thus much Chrysostom.

In the which sentence, that things worthy of note be not with to much
negligence ouerpassed, yt is to be observed, that this learned Father his very
flesh to eat, to the intent we should be turned into yt, as the servants of
Job, who for there great love unto him, desired to eat his flesh, that they
might be all one with him, which very well signified the mutual love of
Christ and his servants, He for love giving his flesh to be eaten, and they
desiering through love to eat the same) in the beginning of the sentence also
says, that to the intent we should be joined to Christ, not only by love,
but by the thing yt self in very deed, that is hrought to pass by the meat
which he has we be joined to Christ. two ways.
granted us.

In the which words yt is very evident that we are joined to Christ two
manner of ways, that is by love, and by the thing yt self. Which in other Our
flesh is turned into the flesh of Christ by receipt of the Sacrament.
terms is called spirituallie, and reallie. Spirituallie we are joined to
Christ by charity and faith, and thereby incorporated to his mystical body:
Reallie or substanciallie we are joined to him, when by eating the substance of
our flesh is turned into the substance of his flesh, and thereby so joined to
him, as we are made one flesh with him, of the which we will speak more at
large, when we shall come to the sentence of S. Hilary.

Here by the way note that Christ's flesh is not disgested in our bodies after
the manner of natural disgestion of otheir meats, and so passes Christ's
flesh is not digested in us as other meats.
through the body accordingly, as the Stercoranites of our time have
blasphemed. But as the meat is celestial, and yet substanciall, and not now
proprelie terrestrial, being a glorified body and flesh: So yt draws us
vppewarde to yt, converting and turning us into yt, according to the nature of
a celestial thing, and not terrestriallie depressing us to the Stercoranites
of our time.
earthward.

But principally to the chief intent and purpose of the thing that this part
of the sentence moves us to note, Mark that, where the Sacramentaries of our
time would have none other receiving of Ghrystes body, but only a spiritual
receiving: this holy Father teaches us, the faith of Christ's Church in his
time, which was before any controversy or heresy not only spirituallie by
love (which may be and is done without the receipt reipsa, that is, by the
thing yt self, or in very deed, by the receipt of a certain meat. And therefore
he says: Id efficitur per cibum, quem nobis largitus est, This ioining of us
to Christ in very deed, is brought to pass by the meat, which he has
granted us.

What the meat is he opens mediatelie when he says: that he might declare
his love toward us. Per corpus suum se nobis commiscuit. He has myngled
Christ is joined to us corporally by our receipt of his body in the Sacrament
him self to, or with us by his body. So his body then is the meat, wherbie,
when we receive yt, we are in very deed joined to Christ.

That this was his mind he lively declares, applieng the story of Job, as a
thing signifieng this matter, in the which the servants of Job desiered in
very deed, to eat his very flesh, reallie, and substanciallie, and not
spirituallie only.

Which thing yet more manifestly he opens in the end of the sentence,
speaking in the person of Christ and sainge: I would be your brother, Christ
gives us the same flesh by which he was joined to us.
and for your sakes, I did take flesh and blood with you, And the same
things (that is to say flesh and blood) by the which I was joined to you, I
gave to you again.

Note that Christ gives us those things in the sacrament by the which he was
joined to us. He was joined to us by very substancial flesh and blood,
wherefore he gives us very substanciall flesh and blood. If he should give
him self to us only spirituallie, then he should not give us those things,
by the which he was joined to us. For Christ's flesh and blood spirituallie,
and his flesh and blood substanciallie or reallie, be as far different as
flesh and spirit.

Albeit this Author has declared that, that was spoken by me as concerning
the eating of the flesh of Christ figured by Job, and thereto added other
sentences most evidently declaring the verity of Christ's body and blood in
the Sacrament: Yet, that ye may perceive in him both constancy, and
consonancie, in uttering the substa^ciall poinctes of our faith, I shall bring
in one other place of the same, where he handeleth the same place of Job to the
purpose before mentioned. Medio draconis ventre rupto atque discerpto, ex
adytis clarissimus euasit, and radios non ad hoc vsque coelum, sed ad ipsum
supernum thronum Chrysostom. in 101. Cor. omel. 24.
dimisit. Illuc namque ipsum extulit, quod nobis etiam exhibuit, and vt
teneremus, et man ducaremus, quod maximum dilectionis signum est. Quos enim
amamus, nonnunquam etiam morsu petimus. Quare Job, vt seruoru^ in se amore^
ostenderet, dicebat illos nimio in se amore dixisse: Quis det de carnibus eius
vt saturemur? Ita and Christus suam carne^ dedit nobis, vt ea saturemur. Quo
nos in plurimum sui amorem allexit. The beallie of the dragon being brast, and
torn in the middle, from the dark place he came forth most bright and clear,
and sent out his beams, not unto this heaven, but unto the very high Throne.
Thither has he carried up that, which also he has given unto us, that we
should hold and eat yt, which is the greatest token of love. For whom we
love, oftentimes we desire to byte. Therefore Job, that he might declare the love
of his servants toward him, said, that they for the exceading love, that
they bare toward him, have oftentimes said: Who will give us of his flesh,
that we may be filled? Even so Christ has given us his flesh, that we might
be filled withal, wherbie he has allured us unto his great love.

In the which sentence (gentle Reader) thou seist and perceauest first, how
Chrysostom reherseth the story of Job, and secondly, how he applies yt unto
Christ, saing: Even so Christ has given us his flesh to hold, and to eat.
The Christ has given us his very substanciall flesh to be eaten.

Thus am I not only moved to understand Chrysosto^ for the cause now
mentioned: But I am thereunto compelled by that, that in him immediately
follows: Ad eum igitur cum feruore accedamus, and dilectione quam
vehementissima, ne grauius subeamus supplicium. Quanto enim maius beneficium
accepimus, tanto magis puniemur, quando eo indigni apparebimus. Let us therefore
come unto him with fervent Chrysostom. ibi.
desire, and most vehement love, lest we suffer more greuouse punishment. For
the more great benefet we have received, the more shall we be punished, if we
be fownde unworthy of yt. And he adds: Hoc corpus in praesepi reueriti sunt
Magi, etc. This body did the wise men reverence or honor in the maunger.
Whereby he declares what body of Christ he moves us to

THE FIFTENE CHAPTER DECLARES BY scripturs, that the eating of the Paschall
lamb was a figure of the eating of Christ our Paschall Lamb.
Now that I have spoken of soche scriptures, as declare soche things to have been done in the law of nature, which by other scriptures, and holy Fathers,
are applied and taken, as figures of Christ's preisthood and mystery: I will
go forward to the figures Four figures of the Sacrament to be treacted of.
in the time of the law of Moses, of the which I will speak and treact of
four, which be figures of this mystery. Which be: The Paschall Lamb, Manna,
The Shewbread, and the Stone flowing out water.

Of the first, that is of the Paschall La^be we read thus: In the tenth day of
Exodus 12.
this month every man shall take unto him a lamb, according to their houses
and families, etc. And let the lamb of yours be without blemish, a male of a
year old, which ye shall take out from emonge the Sheep, and ye shall keep
him until the xiiij. day of the same month. And every man of the multitude
of the children of Israel shall kill him at even. And they shall take the
blood, and strike yt on the two side posts, and on the upper doer post, even
in the houses where they shall eat him. And they shall eat the flesh that same
night roasted with fire, and with unleavened bread, and with sour herbs they
shall eat yt. See that ye eat not thereof raw, nor sodde^ in water, but
roasted with fire, the head, feet and purtenau^ce thereof.

In this declaracion of the manner, of eating the Paschall Lamb, there be Two
notable things in the old Paschall la^ be.
two principal parts. The one is of the killinge of yt: The other of the
eatinge of yt.

The condition and manner of the lamb, and the killing of the same, figureth
the condition of Christ, and the crucifyeng of him. And albeit that other
beasts being taken to be sacrificed, as ox, cow, calf, and kilde, did figure
the passion of Christ: Yet none of these does so lively, Christ and the
Paschall la^be compared together.
blemish: Christ was without sin. The lamb was taken from emonge the
sheep: Christ from emonge his Apostles. By the offringe of that lamb, the
people of Israel were delivered from the seruitute of Aegypte: By the offringe
of Christ the people are delivered from the servitude of the deuell and sin.
Their daile sacrifice was a lamb: Owre daile sacrifice is Christ. And for
this consideracion Christ is more oftentimes Christ more often called a La^be
then by name of any other beast
called a lamb in the scripture, then by the name of other beasts, which were
sacrificed, and figured Christ the everlasting sacrifice.

Wherefore saint Ihon the Baptist applieng the figure of the lamb, as a thing
most specially and fully figuring Christ, pointed him, with his fyngar,
sainge. Ecce Agnus Dei, ecce qui tollit peccata mundi. Behold the Lamb of
God, behold him that takes away the sins of the Joan. 1.
woorlde.

The Prophet also calls him a lamb: Tanquam ouis ad occisionem ducetur, and
tanquam agnus coram tondente se obmutescit. He shall be led away Esai. 53.
like a sheep to be slain, and as a lamb before the sherer shall he hold his
peace?

For like consideracion saint Ihon being instructed by the reuelacion of the
holy Ghost, does so call him after he had fulfilled the figure by suffering of
his passion. I beheld (says he) and lo, a great multitude, which no man
could nombre of all nations, people, and tounges stood Apoca. 7.
before the seat, and before the Lamb, clothed in long white garments, and
palms in their hands. And they cried with a Loud voice, sainge: Salvation be
asscribed unto him, that sits on the Seat of our lord God, and unto the
lamb which Lamb is Christ.

Of whom again he says by plain words: I beheld and lo, in the midst of
the seat, and of the four beasts, and in the midst of the elders Apocal 5.
stood a lamb, as though he had been killed. And when he had taken the
book, the four beasts, and the xxiiij. elders fell down before the la^be,
and with instruments sang a new song, saing: Thou art worthy to take the

But forasmoche as this part of the figure, namely the passion of Christ, is
allreadie treacted of, and of this there is no controversy: I shall divert me
to speak of the other part of the figure, which is of the eatinge of the
lamb. Which figureth the eatinge of our Paschall lamb, in the institucion of
the new passover. And of yt also, now so frequented and used in the church
of the same Lamb our Savior Christ, and that by his commandment, whereupon
stands now the controversy.

In this matter to make a comparison: As the lamb killed, was a figure of
Christ verelie killed: So the same lamb being verily eaten, is a figure of
Christ verily eaten. As the Lamb was eaten reallie and substanciallie. So is
Christ eaten reallie and substanciallie.

That the eating of this lamb was a figure of the eating of Christ our lamb
in his last Supper, Christ himself does witness, who speaking of the
Desiderio desideraui hoc Pascha manducare vobiscum antequam patiar I have
Inwardly desiderd to eat this Pasouer with you Luc. 22.
before that I suffer.

This was not spoken of the old pasouer, which he had eaten with

Therefore saint Paul considering both the principal parts of the figure
the lamb, that he must be both offered in sacrifice, and also eaten, applies
them both unto Christ, and ioineth the^ together, sainge: Pascha nostru^
immolatus est Christus, itaque epulemur. Christ our pasouer is offered up
for us (behold here the sacrifice) Therefore let us eat (note here the eating
of Christ) For as the lamb that was offered for the passover, was also eaten:
So Christ (as saint Paul says) was also offered up for our passover,
therefore let us eat. The same lamb that was offered for the figure was eaten:
The same Christ that was offered to answer the figure, was and is eaten.

And for further probacion of his matter, note that in good things, the thing
figured is better, then the thing, that is the figure. And contrary wise
August in Psalm 77. Figures in good things not so god, as the things figured:
Figures in evil things not so evil.
the figure in evil things is better, then the thing figured. Or more
proprelie

King Pharao tirannouslie reigning over the children of Israel. is a figure of
the Deuell tirannouslie reigninge over sinful men, and with holdinge them from
the due service of God. The servitude, that the childeren of Israel were in,
is a figure of the servitude of sin that man was in.

The brethren of Joseph conspiring the sale of him, were a figure of Judas,
and the Jews conspiring the like matter against Christ.

In the which, as in other of like sort, ye may note and preceaue, that
Pharo being the figure of the deuell, and the servitude of Egipte, being the
figure of the feruitude of sin, And the brethren of Joseph being the figure
of Judas and the Jews, the things figured are worse, then the figures. For
the Deuell the thing figured, is worse, then Pharao the figure. The servitude
of sin being the thing figured, is worse then the servitude of Egipte being
the figure. Judas and the Jews conspiring against our Savior Christ being
the things figured, are worse, then the brethren of Joseph

But as for goodthinges, the thing figured is better, then the thing that is
the figure. As for example: Abraham is a figure of God the Father, Isaac a
figure of Christ Gods son: God the Father and Christ his son, the things
figured, are without comparison better, then the things that be the figures.

The rod of Aaron, and the blossomme of the same, are figures of the virgen
Marie, and Christ the blossom of the same. The Brazen Serpent upon the pole is
a figure of Christ upon the cross. Jonas in the beallie of the whall, a
figure of Christ in the heart of the earth: In every of these, the things
figured be better, then the thing that is the figure, as by comparison Passover
of the Christians more excellent then the Passover of the Jews.
ye may perceive.

Now then to the purpose: As the Paschall Lamb beind offered was a figure of
Christ offered: So the lamb eaten, is a figure of Christ by is eaten. Wherefore
as Christ offered being the thing figured, is better then the lamb offered
being the figure: So of consequence must the passover figured being eaten, be
better then the passover, the figure which was eaten. If the passover, which
is now eaten, be but a piece of bread, a bare sign, or

But that the Reader, that has been seduced and drawn from the catholic
faith, conceive no sinistre opinion of me, and think that I go about to
deceive him with rules of mine own inuencion, as things feigned besides the
Scriptures: Let the same understand, that this rule: that things figured be
better, then the figures, as is above declared, is not the dream Argument of
S: Paul's epistle to the Hebr.
of mine own head, but a substanciall truth grownded upon the sure foundation
of Gods word. I mien upon the chief argument of Saint Paul's epistle to the
Hebrews. For what does saint Paul in that epistle trauaill to prove more,
than that Christ, and the new Testament, and all things Melchisedech,
Moises, and the old Testament, and all the ceremonies and sacrifices of the
same.

As first, in the first chapter he declares the excellency of the new
Testament above the old, for that yt was given by Christ the Son Heb. 1.
of God, by whom God spoke to us, who excels Angels, Fathers, and
Prophets, by the which God spoke in the old Testament as there he proves.

The^ after he declares Christ to be a priest, after the order of
Melchisedech. But he proves him to be far more excellent, then Melchisedech.
Jbid. 7.


This done he descends to the priest of the old law, and comparinge Jbid. 8.
the officie of Christ to the office of the priest of the law, and teaching
yt to be imperfect, proves the office of Christ by all means to be
preferred.

Then he makes mention in a brief rehersall of the religion, and high Ibid. 9.
service of Ghost among the Jews, teaching, that they had a fore Tabernacle,
and what things there were within contained. And also a second Tabernacle,
Sanctum sanctoru^, and what was therein contained, with their Ceremonies,
services, and Sacrifices done in each of those.

Which doe^, he co^pareth the high priest to the high priest, Tabernacle to
tabernacle, Sacrifice to Sacrifice, blood to blood, effect of blood to effect
of blood, clensing and purifieng, to clensing, and purifieng holy place, to
holy place, and allwaies according to his principal intent, and argument,
proves all the figured things of the new Testament, to be far better then
their figures in the old Testament. And finalie, to conclude and knitte up
all the wholl disputacion of the old Testament with one word, he says:
Vmbram Heb. 10. The old law had but the shadows: the new law has the
very: things
habens Lexfuturorum bonorum, non ipsam imaginem rerum etc. The Law has but
a shadow of good things to come, and not the very fashion of the things
them selves.

In the which words, as yt were in a brief, he describes the condition and
state of both laws, which is, that the old law has the figures of good
things, and the new law has the good things them selves.

By the which process yt is not only evident, and proved, that the does
term the^) and the very things of the figures and shadows, which have gone
before in the old Testament,

Wherbie also I may conclude that the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood
(being according to Christ's institution consecrated to be offered and received
in the memorial of Christ's passion and death: being also as Dionysius Dionys.
Eccle. Hierarch. Part. 3.
Areopagita in his ecclesia sticall Hierarchy says, Omnium sacramentorum
consummatissimum and augustissimum, of all Sacraments most perfect, and
noblest, without the which no ministracion almost should de done, but that
this divine Sacrament should end yt) is not a bare figure, as the Paschall
la^be, being the figure of this, was: but is the very good thing in deed, that
is, the very body and blood of owre immaculate Paschall La^be of the new
Testament figured by that Paschall Lamb of the old Testament. For else the
figure should not be a figure of a good thing (as saint Paul says) but
the figure should be the figure of a bare figure, which is inconvenient, and
against saint Paul, and against the worthiness of the new Testamente, and
the excellency of the same, which in a great part consists in the
Sacraments, which have the very things, and truth of the

And albeit, I have (as yt seems to me, and so, I trust, yt appears to any
right christian reader) sufficiently proved by the Scriptures, that the
Paschall Lamb eaten, was a figure of owre Paschall Lamb Christ eaten in the
Sacrament: yet lest any man malicioustie may cauille, saing that I have used
the Scriptures at my own pleasure, and wrested them to my own fantasy, and
perchance that some weak man may be better satisfied, I will resort to the
Parliament house of Christ's Church, and learn of them which is the very
truth determined and enacted, approved, and received there.

THE SIXTENE CHAPTER TEACHES THIS matter by Tertullian and Isychius.
ANd first for the applicacion of the figure of the Pafchall Lamb

This man being a noble man of Christ's Parliament house, can certify us, what
was enacted and received as a truth through out all the house of Christ in
his time. Therefore we will hear what he says in this matter. Tertu. li. 4
cont. Marcion.
He did write against one Marcion an heretic, and in that book he says
thus: Professus itaque se concupiscentia concupiscere edere Pascha vt suum
(indignu^ enim vt quid alienum concupisceret Deus) acceptum panem, and
distributum discipulis, corpus suu^ illum fecit. Therefore when he had openly
said, that with desire he had desiered to eat the passover as his own
passover (for yt was unmeet that God should desire any straung thing) he made
that bread, that he did take and distribute his body.

Remember (gentle Reader) what is before said, that the Paschall La^be of the
old law, as touching that, that he was offered, was a figure of the oblacion
of our Lamb Christ, which is without all controversy: But

In the which his saing if you have noted, you may preceaue, that he makes
mencio^ of two passouers: One that was not proprelie his, which he did not so
earnestly desire to eat: An other that was proprelie his own, which he did
earnestly desire to eat. Wherbie he touches the the figurative Passover, and
the true passover. What the true Passover is, he plainly declares when he
says: The bread that he did take, and distribute to his disciples, he made
his body.

I can not contein but to break, out to declare, that I do not a little wonder
to see the obstinate blindness of the enemies of Gods truth, that Heretics
barck against the truth as dogs do against the Moon.
hearing and seeing so manifest, so plain, and so clear a sentence, spoken and
uttered without any confuse, or obscure terms, breiflie knitte, and
compacte, without any long am bages, hearing will not hear, and seeing will
Veritas Domini manet in aeternum. The truth of our Lord abides for ever. To
the which God give them grace to turn.

But let the true Christian hear and mark what enacted and received Psalm 116
truth was in the parliament house of Christ's Church, now opened and
testified by the Ancient elder of the same, which is that Christ made the
bread, which he did take, and distribute to his disciples, his body.
Heretics build tehir faith upon reason and senses.
which was, and is the true Pascall Lamb, figured by the old Paschall lamb.
And by this let him comfort him self, in the true faith that the has
received, and confirm him self to be mighty against all the assauts of
heresy, how much so ever their sainges shall delight, or please reason, or
the know ledge of our senses, wherpon they do so build their faith, that they
would have no poincte ne part thereof directly repugnant to reason, or
Judgment

Whose very words for the trial, I will asscribe. Thus shall ye there
Cranmers sensual sentence Li. 2.
read: But to conclude in few words, the Papists shall never be able to
show one article of our faith, so directly contrary to our senses, that all
our senses by daile experience shall affirm a thing to be, And yet our faith
shall teach us the contrary thereunto. Thus he.

In which saing (gentle Reader) you may perceive that these sensual men
were so much captive to sensual knowledge, that not content to have faith a
knowledge above, or at least equal with reason, which in deed surmounteth,
Faith surmounteth reason, or senses.
and passes all reason, would abase her to be an hand maiden to the knowledge
of our senses, as one that should teach no article contrary to them, which
yet teaches all above the knowledge of senses, and much directly contrary.
As for example.

Owre senses by daily experience teach us that men do die. And that some of
their bodies being burned, there is nothing left but Ashes blowe^ abroad Faith
teaches many things contrary to the senses.
with the wind. And some consumed of the fowls of the air: Some of the
fishes of the sea: Some utterly do putrify in the earth, as things that
should never be the same flesh, the same substance, the same man again. And
yet faith teaches us directly contrary. that is, that the thing which

The senses taught none other but that the wounds which Christ had in his
body after the resurrection, and specially the wound of his side, into the
which he willed Thomas to pute his hand, were very fore and painful: and yet
faith says directly contrary. For a glorified body yt not passible.

Thus these men building there faith upon their senses, when their senses
perished, their sensual faith preished with all, Wherefore cleave not to soche a
faith which neadeth to be maintained with untruth, and false sensual
knowledge. But embrace that faith, which is grownded upon Christ, and lined
out, and tried by the sure and straight pillar of truth the Catholic
Church.

But perchance the Adversary will say, that although the sentence of
Objection out of Tertull.
Tertullian for so much as I have brought in, sowndeth plainly to my
purpose: yet if I had brought in the wholle sentence, yt would have
overthrown the same. Wherefore I deal not sincerely, but use craft. To this
I say, that this, that is alleged out of Tertullia^, is his very saing,
and neadeth no dependence to make yt perfect, but is of yt self a perfect
proposition, and therefore has in yt self a truth, or falsehood, and may then
well be alleged to confirm my purpose.

And yet I have not so omitted yt, as though I would not see yt, but I have
reserved yt to be handled, where we shall seek the exposition of his text: Hoc
est corpus meum.

But that we may perceive in the mea^ while, that Tertullian in his place
minded no other wise, then these his words alleged pourporte (I mien that
Christ's body is made present in the Sacrament, and in the same given, and
dipensed) I shall bring himself to witness in an other place, where he
testifies, that the slesh, that is to say, the natural man eats the body
of Christ: Caro (inquit) abluitur, vt anima emaculetur. Caro vngitur, vt anima
consecretur. Caro signatur, Note that the flesh eats the body and blood of
Christ.
vt anima muniatur. Caro corpore and sanguine vescitur, vt anima de Deo
saginetur. The flesh (says Tertullian) is washed, that the Soul may be
pourged. The flesh is enoynted, that the soul may be consecrated. The flesh
is signed, that the soul may be defended: The flesh eats the body and
blood of Christ, that the soul may be made fat, or lusty in God. Thus
Tertullian.

In the which words he teaches, that as verilic, as we be washed with very
water, and enointed with very oil, and signed with the very sign of the
cross, and not with the figures of these: So be we fed with the very body
and blood of our Savior Christ, and not with the figures of them. Teflesh
(says he) eats the body, and blood of Christ, and not the spirit only.
Now then that you have heard one of the one side of the parliament house,
you shall hear one of the other side.

Iyschius an aunciente author, Disciple to the great learned father Gregory
Naziancen. says thus: Non oportet eos, qui Pascha euangelicum celebrant, quod
nobis tradidit Ecclesia, legale Pascha peragere, quod bouem, and ouem,
legislator dicens, significauit, Jsychius in Le. lib. 6. cap. 22.
quia haec praecepit Moises in die Paschae, quod traditum est Iudaeis immolare.
They, that do celebrate the evangelical Passover, which the Church has
delivered us, may not celebrate the legal Passour, which the lawegeuer
commanding, has declared to be an ox and a sheep. For Moises has

And a little after follows: Non ergo oportere nos, habentes in manibus, and
consummantes verum mysterium, sequi figuras, quae praedicta sunt, demonstrant.
Neque enim est eiusdem temporis, Sed aliud quidem pertinere ad figuram, aliud
autem ad veritatem, qui vtraque sanciuit, praecepit. Propter quod and Christus
primum celebrauit figuratum Pascha. Post caenam autem intelligibilem tradit,
and angustante eam tempore, pro die hora^ immutauit, vel magis etiam diem. Sic
enim ad vesperam quartae decimae diei caenae Iudaicae Paschalis festiuitatis
celebratur. Post hoc aute^ Christus propriam tradidit caenam. The thin ges
therefore, which are before said, do declare, that we, having present, and
doing the true mystery, may not follow figures. Neither is yt apperteining
to the same time. But he that ordained both, commanded one time to appertein
to the figure, an other time to the verity. Wherefore Crist also did first
celebrate the figurative passover, but after supper he delivered the
intelligible Supper, and the time straicting the same, he changed an hour for
a day, or raither also the day. For so in the evening of the fourtenth day,
Christ delivered his own Supper. Thus far Isychius.

In whose words yt may be perceived: first, what was the Jewish Paschall
offering, which was an ox or ashepe, which were a figure of Christ our
Paschall oblation.

Secondly, he teaches, that we now having the true mystery, may not follow
figures. In which words note (gentle Reader) that he says that we now have
the true mystery, whereby we are taught, that we have in our Paschall
solemnity, the very or true presence of Christ. For he putteh here this
term (true mystery) to answer the figurative presence in the figure. Paschal
la^be and christ compared.
The figure has but the shadow of the thing, but that, that is figured, has
the thing yt self. The Paschall Lamb of the Jews eaten in their Passover, was
a figure of Christ our Paschall lamb eaten in our Passover. Where for, as the
Jews had a very earthly lamb, the figure, in their supper: So we have the
very heavenly Lamb Christ, the truth of that figure in our

Which thing this Author in the words folowinge does plainly declre. For
(says he) one time serves not for the figure, and the thing figured: Very
Christ in our Passover.
but there is one time for the figure, an other time for the verity. Note then
again that he calls the thing figured the verity. what is the verity, but
the very thing in deed, that the figure did perfigurate? The lamb the figure
did perfigurate Christ: Wherefore very Christ is in our passover.

This is not fallen from this Author as a thing unwittingly spoken, but
proceading advisedly in the matter, and applieng the thing figurated, and
declaring the accomplishing of the thing by Christ, he says: Wherefore Christ
also did first celebrate the figurative Passover. But after supper he delivered
the intelligible Supper.

What is mea^t by the intelligible Supper, ye shall better perceive by other
places of this Author, where he uses this word, which he does almost in
every leaf. As in his same chapter, showing whereof Aegipte is a figure, he
says: Etenim AEgyptus intelligiblis, praesens mundus, quia AEgyptus
co^tenebratio inter Isych. Ibid.
pretatur. The intelligible Aegipt is this present world, For Aegipt, by
interpretacion, is called a darkning.

Likewise upon this text of Leuiticus, where Almighty God said to the
children of Israel by Moses: When ye shall come into the land, Iebitic. 23.
shall bring a sheife of the first fructs of your harvest unto the priest, who
shall wave the sheife before the Lord, to be accepted for you. First teaching
who were figured by the sheiues he says: Illi enim sunt and Jsic. li. 6. ca.
23. Matthew. 9.
messores, et intelligibiles segetes, ad quos Dominus dicebat: Messis quidem
multa, operarij aute^ pauci, etc. They be both the reapers, and the
intelligible sheiues, to whom our lord said: The harvest truly is great, but
the woorkmen, or reapers are few.

And likewise opening, who was figured by the priest, that should make their
oblacion accepted of God for them, he says: Manipulum autem primitiarum
intelligibilis sacerdos Christus, corpus proprium offerebat. The intelligible
priest Christ did offer his own body a sheif of first fruicts.

Again in the same chapter upon this text: And ye shall offer that day when
ye wave the sheife an he lamb without blemish, of a year old, for a burnt
offering unto the Lord, he says: Volens nos in die, qua celebramus Domini
resurrectionem, et manipuli intelligibilem oblationem celebramus, non obliuisci
dominici sacrificij, ex quo nobis est oblatio manipuli: sed caedere agnum
immaculatum, anniculum, in holocaustum Domino, intelligibilem agnum, Domini
traditionem immolantes mystice, et offerentes, ipsius autem, vt sacrificium
caedentes, memoriamfecit. Owre Lord willing us, in the day, wherein we do
celebrate the resurrection of him, and do celebrate the intelligible oblacion
of the sheif, not to forgett our Lords sacrifice, of the which we have the
oblacion of the sheif, but to offer up a lamb without spotte of one year
old, for a burnt sacrifice to our Lord, mystically sacrificing, and offering
the intelligible lamb, being the tradicion of our Lord, in the doing of this
sacrifice, he has made his memorial.

In an other place also, where almighty God said: A man that has sinned
Isich. li. 7. ca. 5.
through ignorance, and has done against the, law, and knows himself
guilty, shall offer an unspotted Ram unto the priest: Recte intelligibilis
aries Christus, huius peccatum, in sacrificio pro eo oblatus, diluit. Even
very well Christ the intelligible ram, being offered for him in sacrifice,
wipeth away the sin of this man.

In all these places, these words, the intelligible Egypt, the intelligible
sheiues, the intelligible priest, the intelligible oblacion, the intelligible
lamb, the intelligible Ram, what do these else signify, but the very
things shadowed, and signified by the figures? Whereby we may conclude by this
author, that the legal Supper, and the lamb therein eaten, were the figures
of Christ's Supper, and the lamb therein eaten being the very things in
deed, that is Christ's own Supper, and his own blessed body, which is the
intelligible lamb, that was and is therein eaten.

And that this shall be so plain, that the Adversary shall not against say
Leuit. 24.
yt, hear this Author clerelie opening the matter. Expownding how Aaron, and
his children, were touched with the blood of the Ram, Isich in Leuit. li. 2.
ca. 8.
that was sacrificed for them, and applieng yt to that, that yt was a figure
of, he says: Sed tamen primus sacerdos sanguine, and post eum filij eius
secundum legem vngebantur: quia ipse Dominus primus in coena mystica
intelligibilem accepit sanguinem, atque deinde calicem Apostolis dedit. Sed
ecce legislator hic post vnctionem Aaron and filiorum subdidit: De sanguine
reliquum fudit super altari per circuitum. Quod et Christum fecisse inuenimus.
Bibens enim ipse, et Apostolis bibere dans, tunc intelligibilem sanguinem super
altar, videlicet suum corpus effudit. Corpus autem Christi, Ecclesia est, et
omnis plebs eius. Quod specialiter dicentem Marcum inuenimus: Et sumens,
gratias agens, dediteis, et biberunt ex eo omnes, et dixit eis: Hic est sanguis
meus noui testamenti, qui pro multis effusus est. But first the priest, and
after him his Sons were according to the law anoincted with blood. For our
Lord him self also first in the mystical Supper, did take the intelligible
blood, and then gave the cup to his Apostles. But yet lo, this lawgeuer after
the enoincting of Aaron, and his sons, says: The rest of the blood he
powered rownde about upon the Altar. Which thing also we find Christ to have
done. For he drinking and giving his Apostles to drink, then he powered the
intelligible blood upon the altar, that is to say, upon his body. The body
of Christ is the Church, and all his people. Which thing we find Christ
dra^ke his own blood, and gave yt to his Apostles.
Mark specially sainge. And he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave yt
to them, and they all drank of yt, and he said unto them: This is my blood of
the new Testament, which is shed for many. Thus much Isychius.

I shall not need to note any thing in this place of this Author, where Why
Christ first drank his own blood.
Christ gave unto the Apostles his blood, which he calls, as before is
declared, the intelligible blood. Which is as much to say, as the blood of
Christ figured by the blood of the lamb, and also of the Ram offered for
Aaron ad his Sons. Which blood (as Chrysosto^ also together with this
Author witness) Christ himself, because his Apostles believing yt verily,
according to the word of their master, to be blood, should not therefore
loathe to drink of yt, drank first unto them, and then drank all they. If
Christ drank his own blood, he drank yt either spirituallie or corporally.
Spirituallie he could not, wherefore he drank yt corporally.

As touching this wittnes of Chrysostom, more shall be said in the second
book. And although this place conuinceth the Proclamer, who says, Li. 2. ca.
55
that we can not bring any one old catholic Doctor or Father: Yet in the
third book (shall be brought out of this father diverse and many places,
more plainly teaching Gods truth, then this does. Wherefore leaving him with
his joint fellow, who have plainly testified Christ's very presence

THE SEVENTENE CHAPTER PROCEADETH in the same matter by saint Cyprian, and
Euthymius.
Saint Cyprian martyr, Bishop of Carthage, a man in learning, and
virtuous conversation most excellent, and in propinquitie of time to Christ,
right aunciente, as Eusebius does testify, whom saint S. Cyprian his
comme^dacion. Lab. 7. eccl. li. Hist. c. 2 Cypria^. de coena.
Augustine in his works does much reverence, who lived about 256. years
after Christ, whom I make to follow among the latins, Tertullian, for that
he so much esteemed and loved him, as is before said, In this matter he
speaks after this sort.

Coena itaque disposita inter sacramentales epulas, obuiarunt sibi instituta
noua, and antiqua, and consumpto agno, quem antiqua traditio proponebat,
inconsumptibilem cibum magister apponit discipulis. Nec iam ad elaborata
impensis, et art conuiuia populi inuitantur, sed immortalitatis alimonia
datur, a communibus cibis differens, corporalis substantiae retinens speciem,
sed virtutis Diuinae inuisibili efficientia probans adesse praesentiam. The
Supper therefore being ordered, emonge the sacramental meats, their met
together the old ordeinances and the new. And when the lamb was consumed or
eaten, which the old tradition did set forth, the master did put before his
disciples, the inconsumptible meat. Neither now be the people bidden to
feasts prepared with conninge, and charges, but here is given the food of
immortality, differing from common meats, reteining the form of corporal
substance, but prouinge by the invisible efficiencie, the presence of Gods
power to be therein. Thus saint Cyprian. Christ gave his disciples
inconsumptible meat: Sacramentaries give there disciples ccnsumptile meat.


In the which words of this holy Father, ye perceive, first, the comparison
of the two passouers. Which he calls the old ordeinaunce, and the new, that
met together among the sacramental meats. Secondarelie, ye may perceive
the difference of the^ both. For the old Passover was a la^be, which was
consumed. Which he teaches when he says. Et consumpto agno, (meening
Christ) did put before his disciples inconsumptible meat.

Now note how different the Sacramentaries be from this holy elder
Sacramentaries gloss upon S. Cyprian overthrown.
of Christ's church. They say there is put, or set before us but bread, which
is consumptible, as the paschall lamb was: but this Father says: The master
put before his disciples inconsumptible meat.

Neither may they here use their feigned glosing, sainge that we do receive
inconsumptible meat in the Supper of the Lord, for we receive Christ
spirituallie, that is, the merit and grace of his passion. For neither these
Meat of Christ's supper differs from common meats.
words will bear that gloss, neither the words that follow. For these
words say, that the master did put before them inconsumptible meat. He
did not put the merit of his passion before them. For yt is not a thing of
that nature, that yt may be taken by hand, and laid before men in seight, H.
3. Bread of the heretical communion differs not from common bread. Christ's
meat reteining the form of corporal substance cannot be the spiritual meat
of the Sacramentaries.


And the words that do follow, do yet more clearlie show the matter, and
wype away their gloss, for yt follows that this meat, which Christ put
before his disciples, did differ from common meats, and yet yt retained the
form of natural substance. If yt did differ from common meats, then yt can
not be taken for the bread used in the Sacrament. For that bread (as Cranmer,
or the Author of that book says) differs not from other meats. For yt is
yerie pure material bread, having no more holiness, then other creatures
have, for that, that dome creatures are no partakers of holiness.

And further this meat (as Ciprian says) differing from other meats,
reteineth the form of corporal substance. If this meat also does retein the
form of corporal substance, then is yt not that spiritual meat, which they
call the merit of Christ's passion, or the belief that Christ has suffered for
us, for that meat reteineth not the form of corporal substance.

So that this new ordeinaunce that was instituted by our Savior Christ, to
mete, and to answer the old ordeinaunce of the Paschall Lamb, was no bare
bread, for that neither differs from other meats, neither yt is meat
inconsumptible, neither is yt the spiritual meat of the merit of D. Tho.
Aquin.
sings: Sumit vnus, sumunt mill, tantum isti, quantum ille, nec sumptus
absumitur. One does eat, and a thousand do eat, as much do these eat as
he, and yet received, he is not absumed.

This also is that food of immortality that Ciprian speaks of, which cannot
be bare material bread, but yt is the bread of life, even the flesh of
Christ, which is the medicine of immortality, as says holy Ignatius,
disciple of saint Ihon the Evangelist, who exhorting the Ephesians, whom he
wrote unto, speaks very aptly to the matter here now entreated. Be ye
Ignatius in epistola ad Ephesians.
taught (says he) of the comforter, obedience to the Bishop, and the priest
with vnswaruing, or stable mind, breakinge the bread, which is the medicine
of immortality, the perseruatiue of not dieng, but of living by Jesus
Christ. Thus Ignatius.

Note now that he calls the bread that is broken in the Sacrament, The bread
broken in the blessed Sacrament is the medicine of immortality.
the medicine of immortality, the preservative from death. Which effects can
not be attributed to the sacramental bread of the Sacramentaries, but to the
heavenly bread of the Catholics, which is the body of Christ.

This inconsumptible meat, this food of immortality, reteineth the form of
corporal substance. For the body of Christ in the Sacrament reteineth and is
covered with the forms of the corporal substances of bread and wine. Which
meat is not so prepared to us, and for us (says Ciprian) by the conning of
man, but by the invisible woorking of God, whereby being made a meat of soche
excellency, and singular prerogative, yt proves the presence of Gods power to
be there, which presence is not, that his general presence, whereby he is every
where, but yt is aspeciall manner of presence, as yt was Luc. 1.
with the virgen, when the Angel said: Et virtus Altissimi obumbrabit tibi.
And the power of the highest shall ouershadowe thee.

Wheigh now with me (christian Reader) what manner of thing this new Honorable
and worthy titles of the Sacrament
meat is, which Christ has set in the place of the old meat, I mien, of
the Paschall lamb: Yt is an inconsumptible meat yt is a food of
immortality, yt is wrought by the invisible woorkinge of God, yt has a
special presence of gods power. All which declare yt a thing much more
honorable, much more excellent, then the Paschall lamb, which excellent
terms can be verified in no one thing of this Sacrament, but in him only
that said: Caro mea vere est cibus. My flesh is verily meat. Wherefore this
excellent meat is his very flesh, which Joan. 6.
is our very Paschall Lamb of the new Testament, not only verily offered,
but also verily eaten to answer the figure, which was both offered, and eaten.

And that the Adversary shall not say, that I feign and make soche an
exposition of S. Cyprians words, as likes me, or make him to mien as
pleases Cyprian. eodem. sermon. de Cana.
me, he shall perceive the same Cyprian himself, with one short sentence of
the same sermon, in the which the former sentence is contained, to expownde yt,
as I have done, which is this: Panis iste, quem Dominus discipulis porrigebat,
non effigy, sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia Verbi factus est caro. Et sicut
in persona Christi humanitas videbatur, and latebat diuinitas: ita sacramento
visibili ineffabiliter se diuina infudit essentia. This bread, which our Lord
gave to his disciples, changed, not in outward shape, but in nature, by the
allmightinesse of the word is made flesh And as in the person of Christ the
humanity was seen, The bread i^ the blessed Sacrament by the omnipotency of
the word is made flesh.
and puts yt self in the visible Sacrament. Thus much Saint Cyprian.

In the former sentence he speaks of a meat, given to the disciples in the
last Supper: Here he speaks of the same meat, given at that same time to the
disciples. There he said, that that meat is an inconsumptible meat, meat of
immortality, diffring from other meats, but yet reteining the form of
corporal substance: Here he says, that being changed in nature, but not in
outward form, by the omnipote^cie of the word yt is made flesh. There he
said, that theprese^ce of the divine power was proved to be present: Here he
says, that the divine nature vnspeakablie puts yt selfin the visible
Sacrament, So that, that he called before indeterminatelie inco^sumptible meat:
Here he calls yt determinatelie flesh, into the which the nature of bread is
turned. Before indeterminatelie he said, that the meat reteineth the form of
corporal substance: Here he determinatelie says, that the bread which is
made flesh, now being flesh, reteineth the outward form still. In the other
sentence he said, that the feast is not prepared with art and charges of man:
In this he says determinatelie, by what mean yt is prepared, By the
omnipontencie of the word (says he) yt is made flesh.

Note further what Similitude he uses for the declaracion of Christ's in
uisible being in the Sacrament: As in the person of Christ, the humanity S.
Cyprian his similitude to declare Christ's presence in the Sacrament.
was seen, and the Godhead was hidden: Even so the divine nature (which is
Christ very God) vnspeakablie puts yt self in the visible Sacrament. Where
by he teaches, that as the Godheade was hidden under the humanity: So Christ
is hidden under the visible Sacrament, that is, under the forms of bread and
wine, which are seen.

And where the Adversaries being sore pressed with this manifest, and most plain
sentence, have gone about to elude yt with a gloss upon this word,
Sacrame^taries gloss upon S. Cyprian overthrown.
nature, saying that nature is here taken for the property of nature, and not
for the substance of nature: that gloss is overthrown by these words there
immediately following: Factus est caro, was made flesh.

Now ye have heard holy Cyprians faith in this matter, so plainly uttered,
that his testimony alone were sufficient to make the adversary to rub his
forehead for shame, if any shame be in him, and to call in his proclamacio^,
for asmoche as he hears the matter so clerelie, and so manifestly spoken,
and uttered, as neither he, ne any of his likes can well fasten any dark, or
blind gloss to take away the clearness of this sentence. But trusting that
the thing yt self confowndeth sufficiently the arrogancy of the Adversaries: I
will procead and bring forth one of the other side of Christ's Parliament
house, who shall be Euthymius, a man so ancient, and so famed among learned
men, that I need not here to stand much in his commendacion.

As touching this matter he says thus, speaking of our Savior Christ's doing
in his last Supper. Egit gratias, and nunc ante pane^, and postmodu^ ante
poculum, Euthym in Matthew. 26
docens quod gratias agere oportet ante huiusmodi mysterium, quod perfectum est
ad praestandum naturae nostrae beneficium. Si enim agni figuratiui immolatio ab
interfectione liberationem, and a seruitute libertatem Iudaeis praestitit,
quanto maiora praestabit Christianis very agni immolatio? Simul etiam
ostendens, quod vltroneus ad passionem veniret, and praeterea docens nos
gratias agere in omnibus quae patimur. Sicut autem pictores in vna tabula, and
lineas supponunt, and picturas adumbrant, et colores superinducunt, ac formant:
ita quoque Christus in eadem mensa et figuratiuum ac vmbratile Pascha
subscripsit, et verum, ac perfectum apposuit. He gave thanks, both now
before the bread, and afterward before the the true, and perfect passover.
Hitherto Euthymius.

In whose sentence ye may first perceive, that he teaches that the lamb
eaten of the Jews, was the figure and shadow of the true paschall lamb, that
Christ gave to his Apostles. Secondarelie, that yt is to be considered, that he
calls Christ's Passover, in respect of the Jews passover,

Now the Adversaries teach, that the good Jews eating their Paschall
Sacramentaries opinions.
Lamb received Christ Spirituallie: And they say likewise, that the good
Chrystians, eating the sacramental bread (as they term yt) receive Christ
also but Spirituallie, They say also that the Jews received Christ in a
sign, or figure: They say that the Christians likewise, receive Christ but
in sign, or figure. How then rises this difference, that their Paschall
feast is called but a shadow, or figure, and owre is called the true, and
perfect paschall feast? And yet, according to the Adversaries doctrine, there
is no more in the one, then in other, but both be figures, both be signs, and
Christ but spirituallie received in both.

Where is then the truth, that makes our paschall feast, a true feast? And
where is the perfection, that makes yt perfect, as this author tearmenth yt?

Yt can not be, but that in Christ's Supper there must be the trneth, and very
thing of that, that was figured in the judicial Supper. And that perfect
Christ in the judicial feast imperfectlie in our feast perfectie.
thing, in perfect manner, which in the Jews Supper was vnperfectlie, as ye
have heard, that that lamb, and Supper was a figure of Christ our lamb,
and our Supper. Wherefore then yt must needs follow, that as Christ was in that
Supper but in a figure, and therefore vnperfectlie: So must he be present in our
Supper, more then in a figure, even by very true, and real presence, and so
perfectly.

And that this Author (as I have declared) meant of soche a perfectereall
presence of Christ in the sacrament, not only his own words allreadie
rehearsed do well prove, but this his saying also in the same chapter: Sicut
vetus Testamentum hostias et sanguinem habebat: Ita sane et nouu^, corpus
videlicet, et sanguinem Domini. Even as the old Testament had sacrifices and
blood: So truly has the new also, that is to wit, the body and blood of
our lord, Thus Euthymius.

Is not this saying plain enough? can the Proclamer find any tropes, or A
plain place for master Juel
dark figures, to say that this is not a plain sentence, declaring the very
real presence of Christ's blessed body, and blood in the Sacrament,
forasmoche as he says not only that the new Testament has the body

Neither may the Proclamer draw this saing and pinche yt to mien the This is
my body, And teaches, that not only signs of Christ's body and blood be
there, But his very body and blood, as in the second book, where we shall
have a more apt, and couenient place to speak of these words, more at large
out of this Author Yt shall be declared.

And for this place, supposing enoughe to be said as concerning the mind of
these two Authors, for the applicacion of the figure of the Paschall La^be to
Christ our Paschall Lamb, and how the one is but the figure, the other the
verity, And that therefore the thing in deed, that was figured, which is
Christ's very body is otherwise present, then in a figure: I will leave
these, and call other two of Christ's Parliament house, to hear there
testimony also, what the enacted truth of this matter is.

THE EIGHTENE CHAPTER TREACTETH OF
Among the elders of the latin church, which remain I will first hear
saint Hierom, a man in fame so excellent, in learning so deape, and
profownde, in living so holy, in time so ancient, as being born the year of
our Lord 331. of diverse holy men so highly commended, of all true
Chtistians so well accepted, and received, that his testimony in this matter
can not be refused. Thus says he: Postquam typicum Pascha fuerat impletum,
and agni carnes cum Apostolis comedisset, assumit pane^, qui confortat cor
hominis, and ad verum Paschae transgreditur Hieron. in 26. Matthew.
sacramentum, vt quomodo in praefiguratione illius Melchisedech, summi Dei
sacerdos, panem and vinum offerens, fecerat, ipse quoque veritatem sui
corporis, and sanguinis repraesentaret. After that the figurative Passover was
fulfilled, and he had eaten the flesh of the lamb with his Apostles, he takes
bread, which comforts the heart of man, and goes to the true Sacrament of
the Passover, that as Melchisedech the priest of the high God, in offringe
bread and wine, did in the prefiguracion of the same, he also might represent
the verity of

I need not here to note the applicacion of the old Paschall Lamb to the
new, as of the figure to the thing figured. For this Author speaks yt so
plainly, that yt need not be noted to him, that will see, perceive, and
understand. But forasmoch as the weightiest part of the controversy
consists in the thing figured, what yt should be, whether yt be bread, the
figure of Christ's body, or Christ's very body and blood in deed, and
truth, verily present, and reallie, in the Sacrament: therefore I will weigh
the sainge of this Author, where he speaks of yt.

He says, that as Melchisedech did offer bread and wine, Christ also would
represent the truth of his body and blood. The adversaries perchance
Objection of the Adversaries out of S. Hierom.
will triumph, and say, that Saint Hiero^ is here on their side, for that
he says not plainly, that Christ did give his very body, but that he did
represe^t his very body. And representing (say they) is a showing of a thing
by sign, or figure, and not by the thing yt self. Wherefore Christ by the bread

To answer this objection, I would learn of them, if among learned me^ this
verb be so striected, as oneli to signify, to show a thing by figure or
sign. And whether this be the propre significacio^ of the word or no. And

But because their trauaill shall be eased, I will show them, how they shall
find yt in two sundry editions of Calepine. In the first thus: Repraesento
Represent what yt signifies.
praesentem sisto. that is, I represent, I set, or make present. In the which
signification Collumella also uses this verb Repraesento, as by his saing
there alleged, yt is manifest. For thus he says: Itaque villicus curabit vt
iusta redda^tur. Istaque non aegre consequetur, si semper se repraesentauerit.
Therefore shall the bailif see, that duties be paid. And these shall he
easily atteign, if he allwaies represent himself. Thus he. Where yt is evident,
that Repraesentarit in the latin, or represent in the english, signifies not
a figurative representing, but a very real and personal representing of the
bailiff in his own very person. And in much like signification, the same
Calepine in an other place has yt thus: Repraesento, id est praesens assero. I
presently bring. Which signification Repraesentare rei precium, and
repraesentare mercedem.

In the english Dictionarie Repraesento is to represent, to render, to bring in
presence, to present a thing, to lay before one, to show or declare. By all
these places yt is manifest, that Repraesento signifies not only to show a
thing by figure sign, or token, but by the very thing yt self present. And
thus by their Grammar, their argument of representation is not only
answered, and they of ignorance reprehended, that would frame yt to confirm
their wicked assertion: but also the true meening of the word, Repraesento,
much opened to the better understanding of this Author here alleged.

Wherefore, gentle Reader, understand, that when saint Hierom had declared, that
the figurative Paschall Lamb was afigure of the true Paschall Christ, in in
the law presented in figure: in the Gospelin verity.
Lamb Christ, who in the same was presented, as in a sign: And likewise had
said of the bread, which Melchisedech offered in the prefiguration of Christ,
whereby also Christ was once presented, as in his figure: Now he says, Christ
would in verity present himself again, in which Melchisedech in bread, and
wine did figuratiuelie present the body and blood of Christ, but Christ has
presented again verily, and truly his body, and blood.

To this understanding, the word, verity in saint Hierom enforces us. For
if he had meant, that Christ had set or laid before his Apostles, but a
sign, he might have said: Ipse quoque corpus, and sanguinem suum
repraesentaret. He also might represent his body and blood. But when he
says: Ipse quoque veritatem coporis, and sanguinis sui repraesentaret. He
would represent the verity of his body and blood, this word, verity,
bannisheth signs and figures, and gives us to understand a very and real
presence which Christ, according to the significacion of the word, would
show or declare to this Apostles.

And for the further declaracion that this is the meening of saint Hierom:
Note that when he first spoke of the lamb, he calls yt Typicum Pascha the
figurative passover. When he speaks of the figured passover, he verum
Pascha. the true Passover. So likewise when he did speak of bread and wine,
which Melchisedech offered, he says, he did yt in praefiguratione, in the
prefiguration. When he speaks of Christ's doing, he says, he did

This may appear also by the Scripture which saint Hierom there alleges,
sainge: Assumit panem, qui confortat cor hominis. He takes the bread, that
comfort the heart of man. To what purpose? To celebrate the Sacrament of
the true Passover. What is the true passover? The body and blood of Christ.
Which is the very right bread, that comfort the heart of man in very
deed, with that spiritual and heavenly comfort, that is permanent, which is
the right and true comfort.

Forasmoche as yt is most manifest, that this sentence of the Psalm is to be
understood of Christ, that excellent bread of life, for that the Prophet
David in that Psalm does speak of the great providence of God, in ordering,
and disposing all things in heaven, in earth, and in the Seas, signifieng
thereby in the spirit of prophecy, the goodly disposition of things in the
Church of Christ, beautified, adorned, and confirmed with Sacraments, Vt
educas panem de terra, and vinum laetificet cor hominis, and panis cor hominis
confirmet. That thou may bring furthe food Psalm. 103
out of the earth, and wine, that makes glad the heart of man, and bread to
strenghthen man's heart: yt shall suffice for this present to declare the same
by the words alleged of saint Hierom. For he, there declaring the ceassing
of the old Paschall lamb, and the beginning of the new, which he calls
the true Passover, in the beginning of the same, says thus: Assumit panem,
qui confortat cor hominis, He takes bread, which comforteh the heart of man.

Yt was most certain (as saint Ciprian says) that Manducauerunt de eodem
pane secundum formam visibilem. They had eaten of the same bread after a
visible manner. But to that bread so eaten, saint Hierome would not apply the

Thus the placing, and applicacon of that Scripture well considered, and
weighed of the reader, shall cause him well to perceive, how the same is to be
understood, as is by me before said.

And now, altough saint Hierom has sufficiently declared his faith in this
matter of the verity enacted, and received throughout all the house of Christ
in his time: Yet for the satisfieng of them, that thirst for the truth, I will
bring in saint Hierom in an other place, speaking so plain words, Hieron.
ad Heliodoru^ cpistola. 1. Christ's body is consecrated of the priest.
as neither the enemy can withsta^de so evident a truth, nor other men take
occasion of doubt. Absit (says he) vt de ijs quicquam sinistru^ loquar, qui
apostolico gradui succedentes, Christi corpus sacro ore conficiunt. God
forbid, that I should consecrate the body of Christ.

In the which sainge ye may perceive that saint Hieroms faith was (being so
taught of the churhe wherein he lived) that he priest does consecrate the body
of Christ. whereby also then yt is most manifest, that Christ's very body

And this also is not to be ouerpassed, that the he says, the preistes do
Amb. de saor. lib. 4. cas. Eusebius. Emise ho^. pasch. Chry. de prod. Hom. 30.
with their holy mouth consecrate the same body of Christ: For hereby is
rejected that foolish heresy, void as well of reason, as of authority, which
taught that the faith of the receauer made the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament. for yt is as S. Ambrose, Eusebius, and Chrysostom say, the holy
word of Christ spoken, as sancte Hierom here says, by the mouth of the
priest, that consecrateth the body of Christ. And thus also, if by the mouth
of the priest the body of Christ be consecrated, then is that body verily
present.

And further yt may be learned of this great learned, and holy father, that
the order of preisthoode is not to be contemned, but reverenced, who Preistes
aught to be reuere^ced. for their order and office.
with a manner of speech of vehemency, says: God forbid, that I should
speak any evil of them etc. By which manner of speech he notes yt to be a
great crime to speak evil of them. The causes why he would not speak evil
of them be: that they succeade the Apostles in office, which consecrate the
body of Christ.

And now that this noble man has so plainly opened the treuthe enacted
Chrysostom his worthiness of learning, holiness, constancy, and auncientie.
and received of the one side of Christ's Parliament house: we will also hear
what one of the other side will say. Which shall be golden mouthed
Chrysostom, who is wourthie so to be called for the golden sentences that
proceade out of his mouth. Who also is woorhie to be believed, not only for
his holiness, and great learning: But also for his constancy of faith, and
auncientie in time. Who being in the time of the heresy of the Arria^s, about
the year of Christ 350 and therefore about 1200 years a gone, gave no place
to yt, neither for Princes, neither for the loss of his Bishopperick, neither
for banishment, neither for any persecucion, that did come to him for his
constancy in faith, but stood immovable, inflexible, and straight upright by
the right pillar of truth Wherefore we may conceive a good opinion of him that
he will do and has done the like in teachinge

Sed per hoc etiam aliud maius beneficium monstrabatur, quod ille agnus futuri
agni fuit typus, and ille sanguis dominici sanguinis monstrabat aduentum, and
ouis illa spiritalis ouis Omel. de prodi. Juda.
fuit exemplu^. Ille agnus vmbra fuit: Hic veritas. Sed postquam sol iusticia
radiauit, vmbra soluitur luce. and ideo in ipsa mensa vtru^que Pascha, and
typi, and veritatis celebratu est. Na^ sicut pictores pingendam tabulam
vestigijs quibusdam adumbrare solent, et sic coloru^ varietate perficere: ita
and Christus fecit in mensa, and typu^ Paschae descripsit, et Pascha veritatis
ostendit. Vbi vis paremus tibi comedere Pascha? Iudaicum Pascha erat, sed
vmbralumini cedat, aduectata imago veritate superetur. But by that also an
other great benefitte was showed, that that lamb was a figure of the lamb to
come, and that blood declared the cominge of our Lords blood, and that sheep
was an example of the spiritual sheep. That la^be was a shadow: This la^be
the truth. But after that the Su^ne of righteousness showed forth his beams,
the The old Paschal lamb a shaddowe, our lamb the truth.
shadow is put away with the light. And therefore in that tablebothe the
passeouers, both of the figure, and of the truth, were celebrated. For as the
painters are wont to shaddowe the table, that is to be paincted, with certain
signs and lineamentes, and so with variety of colors to make yt perfect:
make ready for thee to eat the passover? That was the Judicial Passover.

What neadeth me here to trauaill to open the Authors mening, where he himself
uses so plain speech, that he neadeth no interpretour? He has not only made
a just comparison between the old Paschall lamb and our Paschall lamb, but
also by terms applied to them, he has declared the contents of the^, and
what they be. That lamb (says he) was, a shadow: This lamb the truth.
That lamb a figurative passover, this the true Passover.

I would to God all that have romed astraie in the matter of this blessed
Sacrament, would open their eyes and clerelie behold, how by these words
(true, and truth) which Chrisostom in this sentence so often has used, the
true faith, and the truth of the faith of the Church, the pillar of truth,
is taught, maintened, and advanced, and the falsed of the false prophets, and
preachers weakened, and convinced. These preachers teach

But to make an evasion from this argument, they will say that Christ is our
true Paschall la^be, and is truly eaten in the receipte of the Sacrament.
Heretics evasion from Chrysosto^.
And therefore we say with Chrisostom, we have the truth, and the very true
Paschall lamb is received of the faithful, even the very body of Christ.
But if you procead to demand of them, if the very body of Christ be
consecrated on the Altar, and delivered by the priest to the hand or mouth of
the faithful, and so received: here they starte back, and can not abide this
voice, that yt should be on the Altar, but only in the heart of the godly
receauer.

But Chrysostom says, that his true Passover (wherbye he meneth the body
of Christ) was on the table, where the old passover was. In that

And that none occasion of misunderstanding or wresting of his words
Figurative passover and true Passover both in one table.
should be taken, he speaks the same sentence after ward in more plain
words saing: Christ in the table did both describe the figure of the
Passover, and showed also the true Passover.

Note then, both that Christ did show the true Passover, And that he did
show yt in the table. which both do importe a real presence, For to show
the true thing is to show the very thing yt self: to show the very thing yt
self, is to show the real presence of the thing. To show yt in or upon the
table imports a substanciall manner of being far differente from their
spiritual manner of being, which is only in the heart. For yt is
outwardly upon the table, and therefore neadeth a presence real.

And here somwat more to press the Proclamer, yt would be learned of him, why
S. Hierom, and S. Chrisostom call not the judicial Passover the our Sacrament
no better then theirs.

But understand (Reader) that they so saing speak lies, and deceive thee.

And that ye may the better perceive that Chrisostom meneth, as here is
declared: ye shall hear him in an other place uttering his mind and faith, yea
the faith of the Church in his time, in more plain and express words. Thus
he writes: Ipsa namque mensa animae nostrae vis est, nerui mentis, fiduciae
vinculum, fundamentum, spes, salus, lux, vita nostra. Si hinc hocsacrificio
muniti migrabimus, Homeli. in 10. 1. Corin.
maxima cum fiducia sanctum ascendemus vestibulum, tanquam aureis quibusdam
vestibus contecti. Et quid futura commemoro? Nam dum in hac vita sumus, vt
terra nobis coelum sit, facit hoc mysteriu^ Ascend ad coeli portas, and
diligenter attend, imo non coeli, sed coeli coelorum, and tunc quod dicimus
intueberis. Etenim quod summo honor dignum est, id tibi in terra ostendam. Nam
quemadmodum in regijs, non parietes, non tectum aureum, sed regium corpus in
throno sedens omniu^ est praestantissimu^: ita quoque in coelis regium corpus,
quod nunc in terra videndum tibi proponitur. Neque Angelos, neque Archangelos,
non coelos, non coelos coelorum, sed ipsum horum tibi omnium Dominum ostendo.
Animaduertis quonam pacto quod omnium maximu^ est, atque praecipuum, in terra
non conspicaris tantum, sed tangis: neque tangis solum, sed comedis, and co
accepto domu^ redis. Absterge igitur ab omni sorde anima^ tua^, praepara mente^
tua^ ad horu^ mysterioru^ susceptionem. Etenim si puerreguis purpura, and
diademate ornatus tibi fere^dus traderetur, nonne omnibus humi abiectis cum
susciperes? Verum nunc, cum no^ hominis regiu^ pueru^, sed vnigenitu^ Dei
filium accipias, dic quaeso, non horrescis, and omnium secularium reru^amore^
abiicis?

That table is the strenght of our soul, the Sinnewes of the mind, the band
of trust, the fundacion, hope, health, light, and our life. If we being
defended with this sacrisice shall depart hence, with most great trust we
shall, as covered with certain golden garments, ascend to the holy place. But
what do I rehearse things that be to come? For while we be in this life, this
mystery causes that the earth is an heaven unto us. Go up therefore unto the
gates of heaven, but not of heaven, but of the heaven of heavens, and
diligently mark, And then thowe shall behold what we say. For The thing
worthy of most honor is in the Sacrament
truly that, that is worthy of most highest honor, that shall I show thee
in earth. For as in Kings howses, not the walls, not the golden Rooffe, but
the Kings body sitting in Throne is most chief and woorthiest of all: Even so
also do I show thee, neither Angels, nor Archangells, not heavens, nor the
heaven of heavens, but the Kings body which is in heaven, which now is
setfurth before thee in earth to be seen, the lord of all these do I show
thee. Do thowe mark how thowe do not only behold in earth that, that
is greatest and chiefest of all things, But thowe do touch The very body
of Christ is. set forth before us in earth.
yt, neither do thowe only touch yt, but thowe do eat yt, And that
received thowe go home? Wipe therefore and make clean thy soul from all
filthiness, prepare thy mind to the receipt of these mysteries. For if the
Kings child, being decked in purple, and Diadeame, were delivered to thee to
be carried, would thowe not cast all down upon the grownde, and take him? But
now when thowe take, not the child of a king being a man, but the only
begotten Son of God, Say (I beseech thee) art thowe not The only begotten
Son of God received in the Sacrament.
afraied? And do thowe not cast away the love of all worldelie things?

Among so many goodly notes, as this sentence does contein, let me (gentle
Reader) with thy patience note two or three, which be verilic worthy of note
and consideracion.

The first shall be, that we observe the notable titles that he gives to the
table: This note has two parts. For first he calls ytlife etc. after in
the sentence next adioined he calls yt a sacrifice. Wherefore we shall first
speak of the titles in the first sentence, and then of the title in the next
sentence.

In the first sentence he calls yt the strength of our soul, our fundacion,
hope, Honorable and worthy titles of the Sacrament.
health, light, and life. Which things for that they can not be attributed to
the material table, yt is easy for every man to perceive that the Author
meneth them of the thing, that is, of the meat or food upon the table, after
the manner of our common speech, which says: Soche a man keeps a good
table, wherbie is meant the good fare on the table.

Now then if the thing on the table be a thing of soche worthiness, that yt
may be called our strenght, health, hope, light, and life: yt can not be a
piece of bread, but he that is so in very deed, Jesus Christ our Savior God
and man. Yt is he that is our stre^ght, according to the Psalmist. Dominus
fortitudo plebis suae. Owre Lord is the strenght of his people. He is our
health and Psalm. 27. Matthew. 1. Joan. 1.
Ipse saluum faciet populum suum a peccatis eorum. He shall save his people
from there sins. He is our light. For he is Lux vera, quae illuminat omnem
hominem venientem in hunc mundum. The very light that lightneth every Jbid. 14.
man coming into this world. He is ourlife, For he is Via, veritas, and vita
the way, the truth, and the life.

Wherefore seeing that these titles appropriated only to Christ, are by this
Christ yt verily upon the Altar.
ancient father declared to be applied to the thing upon the Altar or table,
yt must of necessity be concluded, that the thing upon the Altar or table is
verily Christ.

The further proof whereof appears in the sentence immediately following,
which is the second of the notes before mentioned, where he says thus If we
shall depart hence being defended with this sacrifice, we shall with most
great trust go up to the holy place. In the which sainge, what he before
called the table, he calls yt now the sacrifice. Wherbie is declared the
first part of the note that he meant not the material table, but the thing
upon the table. Secondarelie calling yt a sacrifice by the which with great
trust we go up to the holy place, he plainly teaches Heb. 9.


The second note is, that he says: Truly that, that is wourthie of most
high honor, that will I she we thee in earth. What thing is that, that is
worthy of most high, honor, but that, that saint Paul speaks of when he
says: Regi seculorum 1 Timothy 1. Honor due to God alone called Latria, wherein
yt consists.
immortali, inuisibili, soli Deo honor and gloria, Unto God king everlasting,
immortal, invisible, be only honor and praise for ever? What is the most
high honor, but that honor which the learned call Latriam, the honor due
to God alone? which honor consists in faith, beleuinge that he is the
creator, and conseruatour of all things: in hoope, trusting by him to be
saved: in Charity, louinge him above all things created, yea even above our
own selves, through the which love we are ready lovingly to obey his most
holy commandments: in Sacrifice, as wherbie we exhibitte and testify
outwardly our service to our only Romans 12.
or any other thing appoincted of God, is (as saint Paul testifies) called
our reasonable serving of God.

If the^ that, that is showed in earth, be worthy of this most high honor,
The thing worthy most high honor is in the Sacrament.
and the showing thereof is in the table, of the which Chrysostom spoke in the
beginning of the this fentence, what else does he mien, or what else can yt be,
but Christ God and man verily present in the Sacrament, who is wourthie of
this honor.

But what neadeth me to trauaill to expownde Chryfostome, and to declare what
the thing is, that he would show in earth, seeing that he himself so clerelie
expowndeth him self in his own words that do follow? For as in kings howses
(says he) not the walls, not the golden Rooffe, but the Kings body sitting
in the Throne is the chiefest and woorthist of all: Even so also the Kings
body which is in heaven, which is now set forth before thee to be seen in
earth, not Angels, nor Archangells, not heavens, nor the heavens of heavens,
but the very Lord of all these do I show thee.

In which words ye may clerelie perceive, that the thing, which he says
is to be showed in earth, is the kings body, which is in heaven, the very
lord of Angels, and Archangells, the Lord of heavens, and of the very
Christ, very God, and very man, that he so being with us in mystery here in
earth, makes the same earth (says Chrysostom) to be an heaven unto us,
which could not so be, but by the presence of him, who is Lord of heavens,
whose graciouse presence makes heaven where yt pleases the same graciously to
be.

If this place of Chrysostom, with the notes of the same, be diligently
weighed, yt shall easelie appear to the reader, how vain the gloss of
Cantorburie Cra^mer his gloss upon Chrysostom. Li. 4. ca. 8.
upon this and all the like saings of Chrysostom, is, wherein of his absolute
authority without proof, he says, that where Chrysostom says, that we see
Christ with our eyes, we touch him with our hands, we receive him with our
mouths, be not to be understood of the very flesh and blood of Christ, but
of the bread and wine, which be the signs of them. But for that this gloss
confowndeth the text yt is to be rejected for the words of Chrysostom can
not bear yt. For he says not that

If we should ask of Chrysostom, what we do see in the Sacrament here upon
earth, he answers, the kings body. If ye ask again which kings What is
seen in the Sacrament
body? He answers the Kings body which is in heaven. If ye proceade
asking, where do we see yt? he answers, before thee. So that he makes no
mention of bread or wine. Wherefore I would know, what warrant this Cra^mer
gloseth without warrant.
man had, to give soche a gloss to Chrysostom. If Chrysostom meant as this man
gloseth, strange yt is, that he would speak so plain contrary to his mening,
as to say, yt is the kings body and meant yt was not.

If the Adversary say, the body of Christ cannot be see^: No more (say I)
ca^ the substance of man be seen. And yet wesaie we see soche a man, when we
see but the outward accidents of man, we say we see the king. when we see no
Objection. Answer.
part of him, but the garment that he has upon him, and so of other thinks,
when we see there outward forms, and consider there substance, we say, Cap.
62. Anignora^t objection of the Adversaries.
and that truly, we see the thing. But I will speak of this, more in the
second

But here the Adversary will further obiecte and say: If that thing be in the
Sacrament, that is worthy of most high honor (as Chrysostom

This objection conuinceth the obiectour of ignorance of the faith of the
church, or else of malice against the received faith of the same. For if he had
The answer.
either red what S. Augustine writes in this matter, or if he have red yt, he
would not arrogantly and maliciously contemn the same, he would either not
thus obiecte, or sooen be by saint Augustine satisfied. To answer this thus
says he: Christus vnus manet cum illo, cui offert, and vnum se facit cum
illis, pro Li. 4. de trini ca. 14
quibus ipse se offert, and vnus est cum illis, qui offerunt, and vnum cum
illo, quod offertur. Christ (says he) abides one with him to whom he
offreth, and he makes him self one with them, for whom he does offer, and he
is one with them which do offer, and one with that, that is offered. Thus S.
Augustine.

Weighe with me) gentle Reader) each part of this sentence. First he says,
Christ does both offer and is offered unto.
that Christ abides one with him, to whom he offreth. In which sainge note
that Christ does both offer, and is also he to whom he offreth. For Cbryste,
as man, offreth his own body in sacrifice to him self as God. Et tamen Deus
and homo vnus est Christus (as says Athanasius) And yet God and man is one
Christ.

Whereby is answered in few words the objection of the Adversary. In Simbolo
For Christ is both he to whom the sacrifice is made, And he him self also
is the Sacrifice yt self, that is made, as the latter part of saint
Augustines sainge does show. Et vnum est cum illo, quod offertur. He is one
withyt, that is offered. In the which saing you may perceive, that Christ is
the priest that offreth, he is the Sacrifice that is offered, and he is he, to
whom the sacrifice is offered.





But that this was spoken of the Sacrifice offered in the Mass, the self same
sentence of saint Augustine, shall declare and prove. For first, yt is manifest
that no man did offer Christ upon the Cross in consideracion of a sacrifice,
but he himself. But here saint Augustine speaks not only of the sacrifice
of Christ by him self, but by other also, as yt is evident when he says. Et
vnus est cum illis qui offerunt. And he is one with them that do offer.

Now ioining the whole se^te^ce together, and not taking yt tru^catelie, or by
piece is offered, Christ is one, but in the Sacrifice of the Mass, in the which
the Christ is offered of his Church and the Church of Christ.
when the Church does offer that sacrifice, Christ as one with yt offreth
also. And so by this wonderful connection of the head and the body yt comes
to pass, that both the Church is offered by Christ, and Christ by the
Church, as saint Augustine does say, Sacerdos ipse est, ipse offerens, ipse
oblatio. Cuius rei sacramentum, quotidianum voluit esse Ecclesiae sacrificium,
cum ipsius corporis ipse sit caput, and ipsius capitis ipsa sit corpus, tam
ipsa per ipsum, quam ipse per ipsam consuetus De ciuit. Dei. li. 10. cap. 20.
offerri. He is the priest, he is the offerer, and the oblacio^. The sacrament
of the which thing, he willed the daily Sacrifice of the Church to be,
forasmoche as of that body he is the head, and of that head, she is the body,
being used or accustomed, as well she by him, as he by her to be offered. Thus
saint Augustine. Christ's body the daily Sacrifice of the Church


Now you see, not only their invented objections soluted, but also the
truth taught, and confirmed by ancient Authority, that is, that Christ's
body, which is in heaven, is also in earth in the Sacrament, as Chrysosto^
teaches) which the daily Sacrifice of the Church, not a sacrifice of man's
invention, invented to the derogacion of Christ's blessed sacrifice upon the
Cross (as the Adversaries blaspheme) but a Sacrifice that Christ him self
would have daily frequented in the Church, as saint Augustine teaches as a
sacrament of that blessed Sacrifice past and done.

Although, christian Reader, the plentifullnesse of this matter, and the
delectacion of the same, and the earnest desire that I have, that all men would
be obedient to Gods truth, and bring their imaginacions into captivity, to
the obedience of Christ, and specially my brethren, and contriemen after the
flesh, for whom I would wish my self accursed that they 2. Cor. 10.
might be saved, does carry me away, making me to forgett my self in long
Roin. 9.
tarieng upon this one Author yet now I will stay my self, and breiflie note
the third note of Chrysostom, and then procead to other.

The third note is the similitude which Chrysostom uses in exhortacion to
move us to the worthy receiving of so gloriouse a thing. If the

Note then that ye receive not in the Sacrament a bare piece of bread, but ye
receive the only begotten son of God, Jesus Christ, God and man. At whose
What we receive in the Sacrament.
presence we aught to tremble and fear, lest any filthiness should remain
in our consciences, wherewith the eyes of his majesty should be offended.

In the receipt of a piece of bread we need not to tremble, or quake, neither
in the receipt of the merit of Christ's passion, which is the spiritual
receiving of Christ. For in receiving of that, we receive great comforth with all, Trembling at the receipt of the Sacr. proves the presence of Christ.
and no fear, but raither we should fear if we receive yt not. For then are
we destitute of our salvation which comes to us by the passion of Christ.

But Chrysostom asks if we tremble not, when we receive the only begotten
Son of God, which must needs be at the presence of so high a majesty for
consideracion above said, as Peter did upon the contemplacion of the power of
Christ, in wourking the miracle of the taking of the great nombre Luc. 5.
of fishes, who fell down at his feet and said: Exi a me Domine, quia homo
peccator sum. Lord go from me, for I am a sinful man. And Centurio likewise:
Matthew. 8.
Domine, non sum dignus, vt intres sub tectum meum. I am not wourthie o Lord,
that thou should enter into my house.

Mary Magdalen, though in the presence of Christ she humbled her self, Luc. 7.
having (no doubt) both fear and sorrow for her sins committed: Yet, I dare
say, she tre^bled never a whitte at this ioifull voice: Remittuntur tibi
peccata tua. Thy sins be forgeuen thee, but she reioiced, and was glad in
God. So undoubtedly a man being certified by the Spirit of God, that he is a
partaker of the merittes of Christ's passion, and thereby through the receiving
of the Sacraments is made a lively membre of Christ, can not at the receipt
of so high a benefit tremble and quake, but joy, and be glad, and praise God
with many other that received benefits at Christ's hand, of whom the Gospel
makes mention. Wherefore yt is evident, that yt is the the very real presence
of Christ's body, that we aught to tremble at, and fear when

THE NINGTENE CHAPTER CONTINVETH the proof of the same matter by S. Augustine,
and S. Cyrill.
IN the chapter before ye heard two famous Fathers, not dissenting, but
consenting, but consenting, not infirming but confirming the sainges of the
other ancient elders before brought forth: Now will we likewise hear other
two, which will plainly declare, what was enacted and received in the house
of God, for the very truth of this matter.

The first shall be saint Augustine, a miracle of chrystendom, passing S.
Augustine co^mendded by this Author.
without controversy all writers, that have written, both Greeks, and Latins
in profownde learning, and in nombre of books, a man so famous, that every
child almost in christendom has saint Augustine in his mouth. Manicheis, the
Donatistes, and the Pelagians. And with all he is so ancient, being born
about the year of our lord 354. that he is without suspicion of corruption
in this matter, of our controversy.

To declare what the truth of this matter is, he says thus: Aliudest
Paschal, Co^t. literas Petiliani
quod adhuc Iudaei celebrant de oue: Aliud autem, quod nos in corpore and
sanguine Domini celebramus Yt is an other Passover, that the Jews do yet
celebrate with a sheep: an other that we do celebrate in the body and blood
of Christ.

In the which sainge, ye do first perceive, that he does first declare a
difference of the Judicial Passover, and the Chrystian Passover, yet
comparing them together, as the figure to the thing figured, and by express
words shows what they be. The Judicial Passover was a sheep: our
Passover is the body and blood of Christ.

What more plain words would the Proclamer wish to be spoken for the Au
objection.
determinacion of this controversy? And yet yt may be that the enemy will
here delude the simple, and hold in the arrogant with one of his common An
objection.
aunswers, that Christ spirituallie is our spiritual Paschall Lamb,

But to answer this, although the place yt self does sufficiently The answer.
teach the very real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament:
Yet by openinge of the difference of the old Passover, and our new
Passover, and by comparyson, of them each to other, yt shall be more plain and
easy to perceive the same. For as Christ verily and corporally dienge, did
answer the dienge of the lamb: So he being verily and corporally eaten, as
our true Paschall Lamb, does answer the eating of the Iewesh Passover,
which was both for the dienge, and eatinge, the very figure of Christ.

But to ioin nearer with the Adversary, if Christ spirituallie received If
wereceiue Christ but spirituallie, as the Iues did our Passeouers be all one.
only, is our Paschall Lamb, And the Jews also (as before is said) did
even so receive Christ spirituallie in their Paschall feast, How stands that
difference which saint Augustine here makes between our Paschall the very
body of Christ in deed. Christ's real body our Passover.


And although this might suffice for answer to the Adversary: Yet yt shall
be by an other se^te^ce of the same S. Augustine made so plain, that he shall not
be able to deny, but that S. Augustine taught a real presence in the Sacrament.
His sentence is this. Hebraei autem in victimis pecorum, quas offerebant Deo
multis et varijs modis, sicut re tanta dignum erat, prophetiam celebrabant
futurae victimae, Cot. Faust. Man. Li. 20. ca. 18.
quam Christus obtulit. Vnde iam Christiani, peracti eiusdem sacrificij
memoriam celebrant sacrosancta oblatione, et participatione corporis et
sanguinis Christi. The Hebrews in the sacrifices of beasts, which they did
offer unto God many Sacrifice the Christians in oblacio and participacion.
and diverse ways, as for so great a thing yt was meet, did openly declare a
by the holy oblacion, and participacion of the body and blood of Christ:
Thus much saint Augustine.

If this word participacion had been alone in this sencence, he should have
had (spirituallie) on the back of him immediately, and so by violence have been wrested to sownde to the evil tuned notes of the Adversaries. But praised
be the holy Spirit of God, the Spirit of consent, and agreement, who so kaied
this word, participacion, with the word, oblacion, that yt can not be
wrested to sownde any other sound, then the real presence of Christ's blessed
body in the Sacrament. Which body the Chrystians (says S. Augustine) do
offer in sacrifice in the remembrance of the Sacrifice of Christ don upon the
Cross.

By which manner of sainge of saint Augustine, all the objections of the
adversaries, which are made against the Sacrifice of the Mass, are clean
wiped away, as more at large in the third book, by the help of Gods grace,

Yt is well known to all men both true Chrystians, and Pseudochrystians,

Ye have now heard saint Augustine reporting soche truth, as was enacted and
received in Christ's Parliament house. Now will we hear an other of the other
side of the same house report the same truth, which Cyrillus come^ded of the
Author.
shall be the holy Father Cyrill, a man profowdlie seen in the statutes of the
house of Christ. Who for his excellent wourthinesse in holiness, gravity,
and learning, was president in the great Council Ephesine, which was one of
the four principal Counsels of the which saint Gregory speaks so much
praise, wherein the herefie of Nestorius was confownded, and condemned.

Which Cyrill also through constancy in faith wrote against the Arrians both
learnedlie and godly, as his works do testify, he lived about the year of
our lord 420. And therefore for his auncientie worthy to be believed,

This man says after this sort: Nec putet ex tarditate mentis suae Iudaeus,
inaudita nobis li. 4. in. 6. Joan. cap. 14.
ex cogitata esse mysteria. Videbit enim, si attentius quaerat, hoc ipsum a
Moisis temporibus factitatum fuisse. Quid enim maiores eorum a morte, and
pernitie Aegyptiaca liberauit, quando mors in primogenita Aegypti desaeuiebat?
Nonne omnibus palam est, quia diuina institutione perdocti, agni carnes
manducauerunt, ac posts, et superliminaria agni sanguine perunxerunt,
propterea mortem ab eis diuertisse? Pernities namque, id est, mors huius
carnis, aduersus humanum genus, propter primi hominis transgressionem furebat.
Terra enim es, and in terram reuerteris, propter peccatum audiuimus. Verum
quoniam per carnem suam Christus atrocem hunc euersurus erat Tyrannum,
propterea id mysterio apud priscos obumbratur, and ouinis carnibus, and
sanguine sancti ficati, Deo ita volente, pernitiem effugiebant. Quid igitur,
Iudaee, turbaris, praefiguratam iam diu veritatem videns? Cur, inquam,
turbaris, si Christus dicit: Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis and
biberitis eius sanguine^, non habebitis vita^ in vobis, quum oporteret te
Mosaicis legibus institutum, and priscis vmbris ad credendum perdoctu^, ad
intelligenda haec mysteria paratissimum esse? Vmbram, and figuram nosti, disce
ergo ipsam rei veritatem. Caro (inquit) mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus
vere est potus. Except ye cate the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, ye shall have no life in you: seeing yt behooves thee being instructed
in Moises laws, and taught, by the old shadows to believe, to be most ready
to understand these mysteries. Thowe haest known the shaddowe and the figure:
Learn therefore the verity of the thing.

Whom ye have heard at lenght declaring the figurative Paschall la^be, and
the benefit that the Jews had by the same. Likewise ye have heard him
declaring the true Paschall Lamb, and the benefit that comes to us therbie.
And when he has applied the figure to the thing figured, which is the truth
of the figure as a matter sufficie^tlie taught there, to be believed of the
Jews: He falls into a wonder at the incredulity of the^, and reprouinge
them all in the person of one, says: Why art thowe (o Jew) troubled, seeing
now the very verity long before this prefigurated? Yt behooved thee being
instructed by Moises Laws, and very well taught by the old shadows to
believe, to be most ready to understand these mysteries.

If Cyrill did so earnestly reprove the Jews for their incredulity, being
taught but by Moses, and the figures, how would he reprove our men False
Christians worthily reproved for saking their faith.
how much more be our false Chrystians to be reproved, which, the faith that
they were brought up in, that they once embraced and received that they
earnestly believed: now have maliciously not only contemned, but also
Reviled, detested and abiected?

God that is the very light, lighten their hearts, that they may see into
how deep damnacion they have dejected and cast them selves, by their forsaking
of the catholic faith, being now bare, and void of all excuse, forsomoche as
they did once know the truth, which now deuelishlie they blaspheme. Si non
venissem, and locutus eis fuissem, peccatum non haberent, nu^c autem
excusationem non habent de peccato suo. If I had not commed (said Christ) Joan
15.
and spoken to them, they should not have had sin: but now they have

God, I say, therefore have mercy upon them, whilst time of mercy for them
endures, and give them grace daily with the Prophett David to cry and say:
Respice, and exaudi me Domine Deus meus. Illumina oculos meos ne vnquam
obdormiam in morte, ne quando dicat inimicus meus, praeualui aduersus eum.
Consider Psalm. 12.
and hear me, o Lord, my God lighten mine eyes that I sheape not in death,
lest mine enemis say, I have prevailed against him.

What a preie and Spoill is yt to our gostlie enemy, and how much does he
rejoice, when he deceaueth one that has been in the true faith, and be^ieueth
him of the same, and so drives him from God? No doubt he counts yt a great
Spoill, and reioiceth much at yt, as the verse of the same psalm immediately
following does say: Qui tribulant me exultabunt, si motus fuero. They that
trouble me, will rejoice at yt, if I becast down. Return therefore in time, and
cleave hard to the straight and strong pillar of truth. For if ye be cast
down ye shall fall very low, and sink deep.

Christ sending his Apostles to preach, taught them thus: Into what Math. 10.
till ye go thence, and whosoever shall not receive you, nor will hear you
preachinge, when ye depart out of that house or city, shake of the

Consider therefore and heavy hand of God upon Sodom, and gomorre, which in
soche terrible sort being sonke, and destroyed, with fire and Brimstone from
heaven, argues a more terrible damnacion to ensewe, and follow, and yet yt
shall be more easy to them in the day of Judgment, then to soche as will not
receive faith: How much more greuouse then shall yt be to them which forsake
that faith, that not only they them selves have received, but the wholl
Church of Christ throughoute all Chrystendom, which faith, although yt has
diverse times ben impugned (as now in these days yt is) Yet, God be praised,
yt was never ouerthowen, nor never shall be, and will cleave to an heresy,
which has been not only sundry and diverse times ympugned, but overthrown,
condemned, cursed, and extincted? Surely as their reproach is much in this
world, for their

But I will retourn from whence I have digressed, and touch one note more of
Cyrill and so pass to other. After he had thus rebuked the Jews, for their
hardness of believe, he said: Vmbram and figuram nosti, disce ergo ipsam rei
veritatem. Thou hauest known the Shadow and the figure, learn therefore the
very thing.

Note here again, as before in Chrysostom is noted, that the old Paschall
lamb was a figure, and owre Paschall Lamb the very thing. Then yt is not a
piece of bread, a bare sign or figure of Christ, for then these sainges of the
learned Fathers were not true, which say plainly, that yt is the very
thing.

And this Father, when he had willed the Jews to learn the very thing, he
declared furthwith what the very thing is: Caro mea vere est cibus, and
sanguis meus vere est potus. My flesh (says Christ) is verily meat, and my
blood is verily drink. This (says Cyrill) is the very thing of the figure
the very flesh and blood of Christ which be verily meat and verily drink.

How this text, and other apperteining to the same matter in the sixte of S.
John, have been wrested and wried, and violentliie drawn by the enemies of gods
truth from their native and true sense, yt shall be showed more at large in
the second book.

But now that the Adversary is pressed so sore, he is driven to his common
refuge, of the word, Spirituallie, and will peradventure, say that the bread
in the Sacrament is not the very thing that answers the figure of the
Paschall lamb, but the flesh and blood of Christ (as Cyrill here alleges)
Spirituallie received.

But how far this their common gloss dissenteth from the truth, yt shall by
Gods help straight way evidently appear.

First, this is most certain, that the faithful people of the old Testament,
1. Cor. 10.
which through faith in Christ to come, were the children of faithful
Abraham, did eat the flesh and drink the blood of Christ spirituallie, as
Omnes candem escam spirituale^ manducauerunt, and omnes eundem potum
spiritualem biberunt, bibebant autem de spirituali consequente eos petra. Petra
autem erat Christus. All our Fathers did eat of one spiritual meat, and and
did all drink of one manner of spiritual drink. For they drancke of

If Christ was then spirituallie eaten and dronken of the fathers, the
Spiritual receiving of Christ was not sigured by the Pasechall la^be.
spiritual eatinge and drinknige of Christ, or Christ spirituallie eaten and
dronken was not figured by the Paschall la^be, neither can the Pascall La^be be
applied to Christ spirituallie eaten as the propre figure to the thing
figured. And this shall be proved: For all the Sacraments and Ceremonies of
the old Law were figures of things to come, and to be done, and fullfilled
in the new law. And if Christ were received spirituallie of the Fathers in
the old law, then was the Paschall lamb no figure of Christ to be
spirituallie received in the new law.

That the Sacrifices and Ceremonies of the law were figures of things to come,
S. Paul testifies: Vmbram habens lex futurorum bonorum etc. The law having
the shaddowe of good things to come, and not the very fashion Hebr. 10.
of the things them selves etc.

And saint Augustine also (as before is alleged) says that the sacrifices
of the Hebrews were prophecies of the sacrifices to come, which Christ

Whereunto Christ him self, who came to fulfill the law, having regard,
said: Iota vnum, aut vnus apex non praeteribit a lege, donec omnia fiant. One
iotte Math. 5.
or one title of the law shall not escape, till all be fullfilled. Which manner
of speech should not need: if the things that were figured, were done
allreadie. Wherefore seeing the spiritual receiving of Christ was not a thing to
comme, but was in use even with the figuts in the time of the law: And also
forsomoche as the Sacramental bread (as they do term yt) which is but a sign
or a figure of Christ, is not the thing that is figured, For the thing that is
figured must needs be Christ, and as yt is now proved yt can not be Christ
spirituallie: therefore of necessity yt must be very Christ reallie. And
therefore to conclude, when Cirill said in the end of his sentence: Thowe
hauest known the figure, learn therefore the very thing: And alleges this
Scripture: My flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink Both he
and the Scripture mien the very thing, which is the real and substanciall
slesh of Christ and his very blood, and not the spiritual flesh and blood
Joan. 6.


THE TWENTETH CHAPTER IOINETH saint Gregory, and Damascen to confirm the
same matter.
YE have all ready heard certain cooples of the two sides of the higher house
of Parliament, which how they agree within them selves, and how Justly and
truly they report the enacted verity of the same, and therewith how
mightily they overthrow the pestilent sects of the wicked, I trust the
gentle Reader does well perceive.

Now though this great master of heresy will not accept the Authors that
have written within the compass of these nime hondreth years, which
therefore I divide from the other that did write within six hondreth years
after Christ calling them of the lower house, and these of the higher house:
yet for asmoche as I write as well for the comforth of the true believing other
of the lower house, that the truth reported of many, may the more

This Author whom I called the last of the higher house is saint Gregory,
Saint Gregory his co^me^dacio^.
who sometime was chief head under Christ of the house, a man both learned, and
virtuous, as appears not onclie by him that sets out his life in story,
but also by his own works, sauouring as well of virtue and holiness, as of
learning and faithful truth.

This holy learned Father in a Paschall homely, comparing the old Paschall
Lamb to the new says thus: Quae videlices cuncta magnam nobis
aedisicationem Omil. 22. Pascha.
pariunt, si fuerint mystica interpretatione discussa. Quid namque sit sanguis
agni, non iam audiendo, sed bibendo didicistis. Qui sanguis super vtrunque
postem ponitur, qua^do non solum ore corporis, sed etiam ore cordis hauritur.
Nam qui sic redemptoris sui sangume^ sumit, vt imitari passionem eius necdum
velit, in vno post sanguinem posuit. All which things do bring forth to us
great edificacion, if they shall be with a mystical interpretacion discussed.
What the blood of the la^be is, ye have not only by hearing, but by drinking
learned. Which blood is put upon both the posts, when not only with the
mouth of the body, but also with the mouth of the heart yt is received. For
he that does so receive the blood of his redemer, that he would not yet follow
his passion, he has put the blood but upon one post. Thus much saint
Gregory.

As in this saing he has made mention of the blood of Christ, So proceadinge
upon the same matter in the same homely, he speaks of the Christ's body and
blood received with mouth of body and soul both.
eating of the old Paschall Lamb, and of the eating of Christ's body our
true Paschall lamb. In nocte quippe (inquit) agnum comedimus, quia in
sacramento modo Dominicum corpus accipimus, quando adhucinuicem nostras
conscientias non videmus. In the night (says he) do we eat the lamb,
forsomoche as we do now receive our lords body in the Sacrament, when as yet
we do not see one an others conscience:

In this his sainge, is not only perceived the applicacion of the figurative
Paschall Lamb, to the very true Paschall Lamb, but to the full agreement
with other holy Fathers before alleged, he does most plainly testify the
real presence, both by his words, terming yt the blood of our Redemer and
the body of our lord, and also by the manner of the receauinge of yt. In the
which note that he teaches that the body and blood of Christ is received by
two distincted and diverse manners of receauinge. One manner is with the mouth
of the body, which argues the real presence: The other manner is with the
mouth of the heart, and that is the spiritual manner of receiving.

So that the learned men in Christ's faith, do teach the good Chrystian man
to receive Christ's body both corporally, and spirituallie. But the
maliciouse learned man against Christ's faith, teaches that the good Chrystian
saint Gregory as yt was also by other before alleged, with whom he well

To this saint Gregory shall be yoined Damascen one of the other side of the
Parliament house of Christ, that is, of the greek church, and of the low
house, but one of the first and chief in that place, as is before said, a man
so excellently will seen in the statutes of Christ's Parliament house, that is
to say in the knowledge of the received truth of Christ's faith, that he did
write four books of the same both learnedlie and godly, and in the fourth
book of his works, among other explicacions of matters of faith, he declares
also the faith of the Church in this matter of the Sacrament at large, where
as touching the same matter he says thus:

Natiuitas nobis per spiritum donata est, per sanctum dico baptismum. Cibus
vero ipse Li. 4. de orthod. sid. c. 14.
panis vitae Dominus noster Jesus Christus, qui de coelo descendit. Nam
suscepturus voluntariam pro nobis mortem, in nocte qua seipsum obtulit,
testamentum nouum disposuit sanctis Discipulis and Apostolis, and per ipsos
omnibus alijs in ipsum credentibus. In coenaculo sanctae and gloriosae Sion
antiquum Pascha cum Discipulis manducans, et implens instrume^tum antiquum,
lauit pedes Discipulorum, signum sancti baptismatis praebens. Deinde frangens
panem dedit illis dicens: Accipite, and comedite, Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro
vobis tradetur in remissionem peccatorum. Similiter accipiens calicem ex vino
and aqua, tradidit illis dicens: Bibite ex eo omnes, hic est sanguis meus noui
testamenti, qui pro vobis effunditur in remissionem peccatorum. Hoc facite in
meam co^memorationem. Quotiescunque enim manducabitis panem hunc, and calicem
bibetis, mortem filij hominis annunciatis, and resurrectionem eius co^fitemini
donec veniat. Si igitur verbum dei viuens est and efficax, and omnia quaecunque
voluit Deus, fecit: Si dixit, Fiat lux, and facta est lux: Fiat firmamentum,
and factum est: Si verbo Dei coeli firmati sunt, and spiritu oris eius omnis
virtus eorum: Si coelum, terra, aqua, ignis, and aer, and omnis ornatus eorum
verbo Dei perfecta sunt, and homo ipse vbique diuulgatum animal: Si volens ipse
Deus Verbum, factus est homo, etc. Non potest panem suum ipsius corpus facere,
and vinum cum aqua sanguinem? Dixit in principio Deus: Producat terra herbam
virentem, and vsque nunc pluuia facta producit germina, diuino coadiuta and
vigorata praecepto. Dixit Deus: Hoc est corpus meum, and hic est sanguis meus,
and hoc facite in meam commemoratione^, and omnipotentieius praecepto donec
veniat, efficitur.

A new birth is given to us, by the Spirit and the water, I say, by holy the
meat is the very bread of life our lord Jesus Christ, who descended from
heaven. For willing to take for us a willing death, in the night, in the which
he offered up him self, he disposed a new testament to his holy Disciples
and Apostles, and by them to all other believing in him. In the parlour Christ's
cup contained wine and Water.
therefore of holy gloriouse Sion, eating the old Passover with his
disciples, and fulfilling the old law, he washed the feet of his disciples,
giving a sign of holy Baptism. Afterward breaking bread he gave yt to the^
saing: Take eat, This is my body, which shall be delivered for you in the
remission of sins. Likewise taking the cup of wine and water, he delivered
yt unto them saing: Drink ye all of this. This is my blood of the new
Testament, which shall be shed for you in the remission of Sins, This do
ye in my remembrance. For as often times as ye shall eat this bread, and
drink this cup, ye show forth the death of the Son of man, and acknowledge
his resurrection until he come. If then the word of God be living, and
mighty in operacio^, and al things, whatsoever he has willed he has doe^,
If he said, The light be made, and the light was made: The firmament be water,
fire and the Air, and all the furniture of them, by the word of God Can not
he make bread his own body? and wine and water his blood? God said at the
beginning: Let the earth bring forth green herb, And until this day, being
helped and made strong with Gods commandment, the rain coming, Effect of
Christ's words of consecracio^
yt brings forth fruicts. God said: This is my body, and this is my blood
and this do ye in the remembrance of me: And by his almighty commandment yt
is so made and brought to effect until he come. Thus far Damascen.

Whose saing is long, but as pithie and weighty as yt is long. In the which he
has not only declared his faith, but the faith of Christ received in his
Church, which is the wholl matter, and only argument of his work, as the
title of the same does purporte.

And to the matter, which we have in hand, he gives worthy testimony,
declaring the accomplishment of the old law, in eating the old Paschall
Lamb, and the beginning of the new testament, with the new Paschall mening
Christ) and brake yt, and gave yt to his disciples saing: Take, eat, This is
my body.

And that he might leave no place to the enemies to misconstrue him, and to
wrest him to their purpose, he adds the probacion of yt by the power of God
in other of his works, which is also a most plain declaracion of his faith,
That as God by his word made heaven, and earth and all things in Christ
turned the bread into his body, and the wine and water into his blood.
them contained: So by his word saing: This is my body, yt is even so made
in deed, as yt is said. For can not he (says Damascen) make the bread his
body? and the wine and water his blood? Which words being so plain need no
in terpretacio^. For he affirms that God by his word, and almighty power
does make the bread his body, and the wine and water his blood.

And where the Adversary has against this, said: that he doubts not of the
power of God, but that he is able to do yt, if he will, or if yt be his
pleasure: that the body of Christ should be consecrated by the poower of
God, and by the priest as his mynister. For God) says Damascen) Christ
commanded his body to be consecrated.
said at the beginning: Let the earth bring forth grene herb, and until this
time the earth being helped with Gods commandment does bring forth fruict.
God said: This is my body, this is my blood, this do ye in remembrance of
me, And by his almighty commandment, yt is so made.

Note then, that when Christ by his power had of bread made his body, for he
said yt was his body, and his saing is making, Then he gave commandment to
his mynistres saing: Hoc facite. This do ye, by the which almighty
commandment (says Damascen) yt is done.

But now when the scripture is produced and laid before their face, having
How the question of the faithless au^swered
prove ye that Christ by these words, commanded the consecracion.

THE ONE AND TWENTETH CHAPTER Concludes
THe nombre is great, that might be called out of this lower house, which for
that yt would make this rude work to grow into to great a volume, I will
content my self and stay, after I have brought forth one coople mo, and so
leave this figure.

The first of these shall be Haymo, for that he is the elder, being about the
year of Christ 734. and so above eight hundredth years agon, before the time
of Berengarius, who was the first open and notable Aduersaire of this
Sacrament, that labored to take away the real presence of Christ. Therefore
this learned Father may well be co^sulted with all, who being before this
controversy was moved, is to be thought to speak vpprightlie, and not
parciallie. In his exposition therefore upon S. Matthew, he says thus:
Coenantibus Haymo in 26. Matt.
autem eis, accepit Jesus panem, etc. Expletis solemnijs veteris Paschae,
transit Dominus ad sacramenta noui Paschae demonstranda. Postquam coenauit,
dedit eis panem et vinum, in mysterio videlicet corporis et sanguinis sui. Quia
enim panis cor hominis confirmat, vinum auget sanguinem in homine, merito idem
panis in carnem Domini mutatur, et idem vinum in sanguinem Domini transfertur,
non per figuram, neque per vmbram, sed per veritatem. Credimus enim quia in
veritate caro est Christi, similiter et sanguis. As they were eating at Supper,
Jesus took bread, etc. When the Solemnities of the old Passover Bread and
wine changed into the body and blood of Christ, not in figure, but in truth.
were fullfilled, our Lord goes to show furthe the Sacrament of the new
Passover. After he had Supped he gave them bread and wine, in mystery of his
body and blood. For because bread does strenghten the heart of man, and wine
increases the blood in man, the same bread is woorthilie changed into the
flesh of our Lord, and that same wine transferred into the blood of our
Lord, not by figure, nor by shaddowe, but by the very truth. For we believe
that in truth yt is the flesh of Cbryst, and likewise his blood. Thus far
Haymo.

The two principal points here enquired, this holy Father has agreablie
both to the elders of the higher house, and also to them of the lower house,
declared. First, his comparing of the old Passover to the new Heretics how
they allege the Fathers.


Which manner of doing (Reader) is their common practice. For where they in
their works allege the holy Fathers, they allege the^ in doubtful places,
where they use the common terms of Sacrament, mystery, and soch other, which,
when controversy and contencion is raised by wicked men, may Sacrame^taries
can not bring one Father teaching the Sacrament to be only a figure.
be drawn to either part, Albeit the Authors intended and meant, but the
only one true way, of Christ's truth and faith, as this Author now
alleged did.

But, gentle reader, if thou perusest their books, and find that they bring
any allowed Author saing by express words, and plain sentence, that the
Sacrament is but a figure or a sign, or by plain denial shall say that
Christ's body is not in the Sacrament reallie or in very deed, we shall

But on our side, that is on the part of the catholic faith of Christ's
Church, ye shall hear a nombre that by express words shall affirm the
very presence of Christ's body, of which no^bre ye have allreadie heardsome,
And by like express words shall deny that yt is but a figure, as this
Author does. The contrary where of this Proclamer, and other Sacramentaries
are not ashamed to teach, although they be (if there were any shame in them)
ouercharged with no^bre of witnesses, so that they may be ashamed of their
heresy.

This Author (God be praised) when he had said, that Christ gave his Apostles
bread and wine in mystery of his body and blood: leest this mystery should
be made a mystery of nothing (as the Sacramentaries make yt) he declares yt
to be a mystery of somewhat. And says that the bread and wine be changed
into the body and blood of our lord. And yet that none of the common
heretical gloses should take place, he says Bread and wine changed not in
figure but in truth.


Would to God that they that be yet detained in this naughty heresy, would
well note, weigh, and remember this sainge, and look whether they have any
soche plain, manifest, and express sentence, of any Author Autenticall to
maintein their heresy, as this is for the truth.

And yet to knitte up the matter that this is no singular opinion, or
whispered invention, but a sure and undoubted faith commonly, and generally
received, he concludes, not in his own person, but in the person of the
believing Church, and says: Credimus, etc. We believe that yt is in truth and
in very deed the flesh of Christ, and likewise his blood.

As this Author has testified not only his own faith but the faith of the
Church: So would I that the Adversary should regard not his Heretics have
no faith but opinions.
private opinion (which he calls a faith, and is none in deed) But the faith
of the Church, which is a sure faith in deed, builded upon a sure rock.

Now to make up the coople we pourposed here to induce, we will hear this
Authors iocke fellow in faith, Cabasila, one of the same lower house of
Parliament, but of the other side thereof, that is, of the greek church, a man
of singular learning. Who expowndinge the Mass of the Greeks used in their
churches, declares why Christ willed his memory to be had, and the Mass to
be done in remembrance of him. Thus he says: Huius autem conseruundae
memoriae homines multas rations excogitarunt, sepulchra, Nicolaus. Cabasila.
ca. 9.
statuas, columnas, diesfestos and celebres, certamina, quorum omnium vnum est
institutum, non sinere vt viri praeclari and praestanti virtute obliuioni
mandentur. Tale est etiam quod dicit Seruator: Alij quidem alia obliuionis
quaerunt remedia, vt recordentur eorum, qui ipsos beneficio affecerunt, vos
autem in meam recordationem hoc facite. Et quemadmodum civitates, fortium
virorum, per quos victoriam assecuti sunt, vel qui eis salutem attulerunt, aut
res eorum recte gesserunt, columnis inscribunt: ita etiam in ijs donis nos
mortem Domini asscribimus, in qua vniuersa sita fuit aduersus malignum victoria
Et per statuas quidem civitates solum habent figuram corporis benefactorum: Nos
autem ab hac oblatione non habenius figuram corporis, sed ipsum corpus eius,
qui se gessit fortissime. Hoc ipsum etiam antiquis constituit, vt in figura
facerent id, quod nunc est in rerum veritate. Id enim erat Bascha, and agni
occisio, quae memoriam reuocat caedis illius ouis and sanguinis, qui seruauit
Hebraeis in Aegypto primogenita.

To conserve this memory, men have devised many ways or means, as Tumbes,
images, pillars, feastfull and Solemn days, exercises, of all which there is
one purpose, not to suffer, that noble men of excellent virtue should be
forgotten. Soche manner of thing yt is, that our Savior says: Some seek
other remedies against oblivion, that they may remember them, that have done
them good: But in the remembrance of me, this do ye. And as cities do write in
pillars the noble acts of mighty men, by whom they have gotten victory, or
that have saved them, or have done their affairs or business well: Eue^ so
also do we in these gifts imprinte the death of our Lord, in the which was all
the victory against the wicked one had or gotten. Now the cities have by their
images but the only figure of the body of their benefactours: but we in this
oblacion have not the figure of the body, but the body yt self of We have the
very body in the Sacrament, not the figure.
him, even that same that is now in verity of thing. For that was the
Passover, and the killing of the lamb which does call again the memory of
that sheep and blood, which saved the first born of the Hebrews. Hither to
Cabasila.

Of whom as we have learned the faith of the greek church, as yt was in
Chrysostom, Cyrill, Isychius, Damascen, Euthymius, and soche other, as touching
the presence of Christ's blessed body in the Sacrament: Even so do we learn of
him the same faith, and none other newly invented, but even the same
continued, ever approved unto his time in all the greek church.

This author allthough minding to set forth a cause why the memorial
Monumentes and memories of holy, and worthy men defaced.
of Christ's death should be retained and kept among us, by the bringing in
examples of our elders, which by diverse means continued the memory of noble,
vertueouse, or other wourthie men, he does therein give good occasion to rebuke
the insolency of many of this our time, which defacing howses, spoiling
churches, overthrowing monumentes, disparsing the bones and relics of holy
saints, and soche other a great sort like, do most earnestly labor to
extinguish and clean put out of all memory the noble acts, the holy deeds,
the godly lives of many vertueouse, and wourthie men, which to Gods honor, to
their praise, and to owre example of virtue, should and ought to have
remained: Yet minding not to take every soche occasion, I will

As heretofore I have done: So also will I now both declare that the Paschall
Lamb was a figure of Christ, and also that the verity or very thing by that
lamb figured, is the body of Christ reallie and substanciallie in the
Sacrament.

As for the first, this Author says, that God appoincted with the old Old
law had the figure: the new law has the thing in truth.
fathers, that they should have a figure of Christ. And that (says he) was
the Passover, and the killing of the lamb. In which his sainge he nothing
dissenteth, but much and wholly agrees as well with the greeks, as the
latins before alleged, and declared.

As for the second part, that yt is a figure of Christ reallie in the
Sacrament, this Author also very plainly teaches. Mark therefore well his
words, thus he says: Hoc ipsum and antiquis constituit vt in figura
facerent id, quod nunc est in rerum veritate. The same thing God appoincted the
old Fathers to do in a figure, which thing is now in truth or very deed.

Note I pray you that he appoints the figure of Christ to the Fathers

But the serpent is a wily beast, and sekinge some little holle or crannie

These be gaie gloriouse words. But take head, reader, there is a snake
Cra^mer his gloriouse words, to cloak evil meening. lib. 4. John frith his
heresy.
under these fair flowers. Look diligently upon them, and ask him how we
have him, that was born of the virgen etc. And thowe shall see him by and by
betraie him self, and run to his old and common shift, and say that he is
there sacramentallie. Which manner of being or presence (as John Frith our
contrie man, and many other masters of that heresy do teach) is as much as
is the presence of the wine in the Iuie garlande at the tauern door, or the
love of the husband in the ringe, which he gives to his wife: Which manner
of presence is next door to nothing, for all their gloriouse words.

If ye porcead, and urge him, saing, that after this sort he was in all the
figures of the law, that were figures of him: But this Author appointing that
manner of presence to the law: says, that his presence with us is in very
deed. which is a manner of presence other, and more then they under the law
had.

Now he must to his chiefest refuge, and say that we have him spirituallie.
heretiquet refuges in reasoning.
Here to mete with him again, ye may say, and that truly as before is said,
and proved in the xix capiter of this book, that so the Jews in the law
received him and had him spirituallie in their Paschall lamb, so that by this
manner of presence, there is no perrogatiue, nor difference, of our Sacrament and
the presence of Christ there in above theirs, nor from theirs. The contrary
whereof all chatholique Fathers dooteache.

Now is he commed to his last refuge, that is that the Jews received him
spirituallie, as yet to come, but we receive him spirituallie as already comed.

If this be all, what neadeth this difference of speech, that this Author
uses, saing: God appointed the Fathers of the law to do that thing in a
figure,

Thus I suppose, yt is easy to be perceived, that the Adversaries faith is
soche, that when he has spoken the best of yt, yt will not, nor can ioin with
the faith of the learned men of Christ's Parliament house: But is as far
distant from them and their faith, as falsehood from truth. Whereof ye shall
have yet better experience, and further prooff by an other part of this
Authors sentence, when yt is noted to you, and the adversaries doctrine
conferred with yt.

That other part is this: Cities (says he) by the images of soche as have
done them good, have only but their figures: we have by this oblacion, not
the figure of Christ's body, but the body yt self, which most stoutly
handled yt self.

Note well this conference: The cities had but the figures of soche wourthie

Remember, I pray you, what the latin Author before alleged said, that
this man being of the greek church, and conferred with him, yt may Not the
figure, but very body of Christ is in the Sacrament.
appear what agreement in doctrine and faith in this matter, there is in both
the churches.

The latin Author said thus: The bread is changed into the flesh of our
Lord, and the wine into his blood not by a figure, or in a shaddowe, but in
very deed: This greek Author says, that we have not the figure of Christ,
but his very body, even that which so mightily fought for us.

See ye not a consonant agreement between these two? do thiey not both teach
the very presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament? and there with by a plain
negative deny the figure? May not our Proclamer, our new Goliath well see,
and truly say, that here be two plain sentences against him? Let them be
conferred, and yt will planlie appear.

These Authors say that the Sacrament contains not a figure only:
Doctrine of the Sacrame^taries conferred with the Fathers.
The Adversary says, that yt has no more but a figure. These say that the
Sacrament contains the very body of Christ: The Adversary says that yt
is Iewesh so to think and that they be gross Capharnaites, that say that the
body of Christ is substanciallie in the Sacrament.

In this conference ye may see the stowte repugnance of the Adversary against
catholic writers. In the same ye see the said writers by express words
deny the doctrine of the Adversary, that where he says, yt is a figure, they
say, yt is not a figure.

And here will I yoin an issue with the Proclamer that if he ca^ bring any
Issue joined with the Proclamer touching the presence.
Scripture, any catholic Council, or any one approved doctor, that by
express and plain words does deny the real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, as these writers do deny his figure, or figurative presence, then
will I give over, and subscribe to him.

But where he untruly has said, that he was sure that we could bring furthe
no one approved Author to testify the real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament: I will say truly, that I am sure that neither he, nor all the
Adversaries can bring any one, teaching by express words the contrary.



Sacramentaries make two manner of presences of Christ.
two manner of beinges of Christ, the one is in the Sacrament, where he says
Christ is as in a sign, token, or figure, but not in verity. The other manner
of being is not in the Sacrament, but in the receauer of yt, in whom he says
Christ is spirituallie.

As for this second manner of being every good Chrystian will grant, that
every wourthie receauer of the Sacrament, receaueth Christ spirituallie, but
not only spirituallie, as the Adversary teaches, but he also receaueth
Christ's very real and substa^cial body. So that in this second manner, he
dissenteth in part from the catholic faith: But in the first manner of being
he dissenteth wholly. for there he denies Christ's body to be verily

Now (gentle reader) thowe hauest heard, this figure of the Paschall Lamb,
both by great ancient Authors that were above a thousand yeyears agon, or
within the compass of six hundredth years after Christ,

THE TWO AND TWENTETH CHAPTER Begins the applicacion of the show bread to
the Sacrament, as of the figure to the verity by saint Hierom, and Damascen.
Now there remains three other figures to be treacted of, which be Manna, the
water flowing out of the Rock, and the show bread. But for somoche as saint
Paul makes mention of two of them, that is of Manna, and of the water, and I
would not gladly grieve the reader with reading of one matter twice,

Wherefore now I will pass them over, and treacte here of the figure of the
show bread. Of this show bread we first read thus: Thowe shall set upon the
table show bread before me allwaie. These words Almighty God spoke unto
Moses, after he had told him the manner and Exodus 25.
fashion of the table, how yt should be made and granished, upon the which
table this show breades should allway be set.

But of the making of the breads, and the order of them we read in Leuit. 24.
Leuiticus thus: And thowe shall take fine flower, and bake twelve wassells
thereof, two tenth deals shall be in one wassell. And thowe shall set them in
two rows, that they may be bread of remembrance, and an offering unto thy Lord
God every Sabbath. He shall put them in rows before thy Load God evermore. Of
the children of Israel shall they be offered for an everlasting couenante. And
they shall be Aarons and his Sons, which shall eat them in the holy place.
For they are most holy unto him, of the offringes of the Lord by a perpetual
statute.

In the which saing of God, ye first perceive the place of these breades,
which is upon the table in the tabernacle. Ye understand also the continuance
of them, which is that they must be before the Lord

Further, this bread was made of fine flower, and yt was the bread of
remembrance, and an offering unto the Lord. Yt was no common bread, but an holy
bread, whereof the preistes only might eat, and no defiled person.

Wherefore when David and his men were very hungry, and came to Abimelech the
priest, and desired him to give them some bread, he 2. Reg. 21.
answered him, that he hadd no common bread under his hand, but hallowed
bread, nevertheless he considering their necessity, asked David if the men
had kept them selves from vnclaen things especially from women: And when
David had answered that they werie clean from women about three days, the
priest gave them of the bread.

Now all the Ceremonialls of the law of Moses, were figures of Christ, and
his Church, as by saint Augustine before is declared. And for so much as the
Show bread was a sollemne offering in the old law: Yt must needs be a figure
of some thing in the new law. For no iotte nor

There is therefore something in the new law, that answers and fulfilleth
this figure of the old law. And that is undoubtedly, that most blessed Show
bread a figure of the Sacrament.
and heavenly bread of life, the very body of our Savior Christ in the
Sacrament, under the form of bread. Which blessed bread answers the figure
the Show bread very aptelie and iustilie, as by comparison in discourse and
applicacion of them we shall perceive.

The Show bread was placed upon the table in the tabernacle: This bread is
placed on the Altar in the Church. That bread never failed, Show bread applied
to the Sacrament.
but was allwaies reserved: This bread allwaies remains and is reserved. That
bread was a bread of remembrance: This bread is a bread of remembrance, both
of Christ's death, and of the great benefett pourchased by the same death. That
bread was an offringe to God:

This bread is a most holy oblacion and sacrifice to God. That bread Quicunque
manducauerit panem Domini, and biberit calicem indigne, reus erit corporis, and
sanguinis Domini, etc. he that eats the bread of our Lord, and drinks of
his cup vnwourthilie, shall be guilty of the body of our Lord. 1. Cor. 11.
Therefore let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup says saint Paul.

Thus ye see how well the thing figured answers the figure. And albeit that
no man can bring any other thing in the new testament, that is figured by the
Show bread, but our heaue^lie bread before said: Yet, for that I will not
challenge to me any soche credit or Authority, that by cause I say yt is so,
therefore yt is so (as many of our Pheudochrystians do) I shall repair to the
holy elders of Christ's parliament house, and teach by them what was the
enacted and received truth in his matter.

And first, I will hear what saint Hierom says: Siautem Laicis imperatur,
vt propter orationem abstineant se ab vxorum coitu, quid de Episcopo sentiendum
Hieron. ca. ^. ad Titu^.
est, qui quotidie pro suis populique peccatis, illibatas oblaturus est
victimas? Relegamus Regum libros, and inueniemus sacerdotem Abimelech de
panibus propositionis noluisse dare David, and pueris suis, nisi interrogaret
vtrum mundi essent pueri a muliere, non vtique aliena, sed coniuge. Et nisi
audisset eos ab heri and nudiustertius vacasse ab opere coniugali, nequaquam
panes, quos prius negauerat concessisset. Tantum interest inter propositionis
panes, and corpus Christi, quantum inter, vmbram and corpora, inter imaginem,
and veritatem, inter exemplaria futurorum, and ea ipsa, quae per exemplaria
praefigurabantur. Quomodo itaque mansuetudo, patientia, sobrietas, moderatio,
abstinentia lucri, hospitalitas quoque and benignitas praecipue esse debent in
Episcopo, and inter cunctos laicos eminentia: sic and castitas propria, and (vt
ita dicam) pudicitia sacerdotalis, vt non solum se ab immundo opere abstineat,
sed etiam a iactu oculi, and cogitationis errore men's Christi corpus confectura
sit libera.

If the lay men (says saint Hierom be commanded that for prayer they Lay
men commanded for prayer times to abstein from their wieues.
abstein from the co^panieng with their wives, what is to be thought of the
Bishop, which daily for his own sins, and the peoples, shall offer unto
God undefiled sacrifices? Let us read the books of the kings and we shall
find that Abimelech the priest would not give to David and his servants the
show bread, besore he asked, wether the servants were clea^, not from a
strange woman, but from their viues. And except he had heard, that from
yesteraie, and There is as great Difference betwixt the Show bread and the body
of Christ.
difference between the Show bread, and the body of Christ, as is between
the Shadow and the bodies, between the image and the truth: between the
exemplars of the things to come, and the things themselves, that were
perfigurated by the exemplars. Therefore as meekness, patience, sobriety,
moderacion, abstinence from lucre, hospitality also and benignity should be
chiefly in a Bishop, and among all lay men a surmou^ting emine^cie: So also
a propre or peculiar chaistitie, Chastity required in a priest.
and (as I might say) a preistlie shamefestnes, that not only he should
whith hold himself from the unclean work, but also that the mind which
shall consecrate the body of Christ may from the casting of the eye, and
from wandering of thought be free. Hither to saint Hierom.

In which words concerning the thing which is now principally sought, where
as he says, there is as great difference between the Show bread and the body
of Christ, as betwe^ the shadow and the bodies, between the image and the
truth, What else does he give us to understand, but that the Show

Wherefore contrary wise let every man perceive, that (as this holy learned
man in the statutes of Christ's enacted faith, does teach) as the Show bread
was the shaddowe, So is the body of Christ in the Sacrament a very body, and
as the Show bread was the image: So is the thing represented the very tueth.



of life, that was required to the eating of the Show bread in the

And forsomoche as the office of a Bishop about the Sacrament, Preistes must
consecrate, offer, and receive
stands in three points, that is, in consecracion, oblacion, and reauing, he
frames an exhortacio^ to this purpose thus, that seeing they in the old law
which should eat of the Show bread, must have soche purity, that they might
not for a time know their one, vieues, much more they that consecrate, offer,
and receive the body of Christ, which as far excels the Show bread, as
the body does he shaddowe, must excel them of the old law in purity and
cleanness of life. Now then, when saint Hierom speaks of the body of
Christ that is consecrated by the Bishop, and so offered in sacrifice and
received, does he not mien of the body of Christ in the Sacrament? And when
he speaks of the body consecrated, does he not mien the very body of
Christ, reallie in the Sacrament, as the holy Church does teach and believe?

In this sentence also saint Hierom does not only impugn the heresy of the
Sacrame^taries, in that he teaches the verity of Christ's body in the Wanton
lusts of Bishops and preistes reproved.
Sacrament: but he also reproves the fleshly wantto^nesse of our Bishops
and preistes in these days, who against all law and order being preistes take
wieues (as they term the^) and under the countenance of pretensed matrimony
continewe their vnchaist, and viciouse life, who should excel all the people
in purity and cleanness of life, to the intent they might consecrate the body
of Christ, and daily offer pure sacrifice to God for the^ selves and for
Co^secracio^ and sacrifice put away for to keep women.
the people, as saint Hiero^ says they should. But because these high
fu^ctio^s, and the keeping of women ca^ notioin together, raither the^ they will
put away there women, they have devised to put away the co^secracion of the
body of Christ, and the sacrifice also which they should offer. Of which
matter, for that yt is impertinente to my purpose, I will not speak, but
ouerpasse yt, and not meddle withal.

Now have ye here heard one witness of the one side of the higher house of
Parliament, reporting the truth of this matter: We will hear one of the Hunc
panem, panes figurabant propositionis. This Li. 4. c. 14. de orthodox. sid.
bread (mening the body of Christ in the Sacrament) did the Show bread figure.
That he speak of the body of Christ, the learned reader shall sooen perceive,
if he will peruse this place in Damascen, where he shall find, that after he
most plainly had affirmed the very real presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, by the words of our Savior Christ in the vj. of John, and in the
other Evangelists: he comes to exhortacion for the wourthie receiving of the
same, saing thus: Proinde cum omni timore, and conscientia pura, and
indubitabili fide accedamus, and veneremur ipsum omni puritate animi and
corporis. Accedamus ei desiderio ardenti, manus in modum crucis formantes,
crucifixi corpus suscipiamus? Therefore let us comme to yt with all fear, Dam.
ibi.
and pure conscience, and with a sure faith, and let us woorshippe him whith
all purity of mind and body. Let us go to him whith burning desire,
fashioning our hands in manner of a cross, let us receive the body of him that
was crucified.

And after a few scriptures alleged, he speaks the words which I before
recited, that the Show bread did figure this bread. Whereby yt is evident, that
he meneth that he Show bread was a figure, not of a figure, but of Christ him
self, who promised that the bread, that he would give, Joan. 6.


THE THREE AND TWENTHETH CHAPIT. ceadeth in the proof of the same by S.
Augustine and Isychius.
ALthough the Authors alleged might suffice for the declaracion and proof of
this matter now entreacted of: yet for the full contentacion of the reader,
some mo shall be brought to make the thing more plain, and the truth more
certain.

The first of these shall be saint Augustine, who said thus: Dicit cessisse
pani pecus, tanquam nesciens, and tunc in Domini mensa panes Propositionis poni
solere, et nunc Ad Casulanum epist. ^6.
se de agni immaculati corpore partem accipere. Dicit cessisse poculo sanguine
non cogitans et nuncse accipere in poculo sanguine^. Quanto ergo melius et
congruentius vetera transisse, et noua in Christo facta esse sic diceret, vt
cederet altar altari, gladius gladio, ignis igni, panis pani, pecus pecori,
sanguis sanguini? Videmus in ijs omnibus carnalem vetustatem spiritali cedere
nouitati. He says that the beast has given place to the bread, as and that
now he does take part of the body of that undefiled lamb. He said that
blood has given place to the cup, not remembering that he also now does
receive blood in the cup. How much better therefore, and more agreablie
should he say, that the old are goen, and new be made in Christ, so as the
Altar gave place to the Altar, the sword to the swoorde, fire to fire, bread
to bread, beast to beast, blood to blood? We do see in all these, the
carnal oldenesse to give place, to the spiritual newenesse. Thus far S.
Augustine.

In these words S. Augustine correcting the evil saing of one that said,
that in the coming of the new Testament, the Sacrifices of the old law,
which were done in beasts, as sheep, la^bes, kiddes, heckfers, oxe^, and
soche other did give place to bread (meening the Sacrament) does declare,
that these proprelie did not give place to yt. As though he should say, that
these beasts were not figures of the Sacrament, but of the blooddie Sacrifice
of Christ offered upon the cross, after the manner of Aaron. But he says the
show breads

And therefore S. Augustine teaching this man, to make due applicacion of each
figure to the thing figured, says: that he should better have said, that the
Altar gave place to the Altar, signifieng that the Altar of the Jews, was a
figure of the Altar of the Chrystians: and that bread gave place to bread,
signifieng that the Show bread was a figure of our blessed bread.

out of S. Augustine.
But here perchance the Adversary will say, that saint Augustine calls the
Sacrament but bread, mening that the Show bread was a figure of the
Sacramental bread. I would to God the Adversary (who being adversary to
Gods truth, is most adversary to as he does for some one word to make some
apparent show to maintein



But mark saint Augustine well, and ye shall have need of no expositour to
know his faith, and mening in this saing. For in the beginning: he says that
the beast has given place to the bread, as though he knew not, that the show
breades were wount to be set upon the table of our Lord, and that now he
does take part of the body of the undefiled lamb to which body and not to
sacramental bread, the Show bread gave place.

Note well saint Augustine therefore here, that speaking what thing he does
receive, does say, not sacramental bread, but the body of the undefiled
lamb, which is the lamb that took away the sins of the world. So that
which he first called bread, now he calls yt the body of the vnde filed
lamb, who is the bread of life.

And that the Adversary should not have any place to put in his glosing
word (spirituallie) and to say that he receaueth the body of the undefiled
lamb spirituallie: S. Augustine makes a stop in the words that follow,
saing: he does say (mening vibicus) that blood has given place to the cup,
not remembering that he also now does receive blood in the cup. Which saing
of saint Augustine opens the true faith of the catholic Church, and
wipeth out the false faith of the malignant Church.

For they well understand, that to receive the blood of Christ in the cup
teaches a real presence of the same. And as yt is manifest by S. Augustine,
that the blood is received reallie: So is the flesh of the body of the
immaculate lamb received reallie. For as the one is received, so is the other.

Thus ye have heard saint Augustine his witness of the truth of this
matter: Now shall be joined to him Isychius, who bears full testimony of
the same truth. This man (as the learned know) applieng the leuiticall
Sacrifices, and Ceremonies, to the things, which they figured in the
evangelical law, does at large expownd this place, and figure of the Show
breads.

And that the wholl matter may be known to the Reader, I will allege and
bring the wholl text of the scripture, as this Author has yt, and then putto
his exposition, whereby yt shall be seen how every part of the text is applied.
Thus alleges he the text: Accipies quoque similam, and coques ex ea duodecim
panes, qui singuli habebunt duas Decimas, quorum senos altrinsecus super mensam
purissimam coram Domino statues, and pones super eos thus lucidissimum, vt sit
Isychius li. 7. ca. 24.
panis in monimentum oblationis Domini. Per singula Sabbata mutabuntur coram
Domino, suscepti a filijs Israel foedere sempiterno. Eruntque Aaron et filiorum
eius, vt comedant eos in loco sancto, quia Sanctum Sanctorum est de sacrificio
Domini iure perpetuo. And thowe shall take fine flower and bake twelve loaves
thereof, two tenth deals shall be in one loaff. And thowe shallt set them in
two rows, six on a row upon the pure table of thy Lord. And them in rows
before thy Lord for evermore. Of the children of Israel

Upon this text thus writes Isychius: Vocat ad contemplationem mandati nos
ipse panum numeras, sed and propositio, and quia non and ipsos, quemadmodum ea
quae su^t de sartagine, and craticula, and clibano, holocaustum fieri
praecipit, sed poni quidem in mensa altrinsecus, and solis eos licere
sacerdotibus, non and Leuitis edere, vt tamen and ab ipsis in loco sancto
comedantur. Sed and quia Sanctu^ sanctorum appellati sunt (intellige quae
dicuntur, dabit enim tibi Dominus intellectum) memento mysticae mensae, de qua
nulli praesumere praeceptum est, excepto intelligibili Aaron, id est, Christo
(Ipse enim eam primus initiauit) sed and filijs eius, qui ab eo facti sunt
Christi, and induti sunt eo, quam tamen comedere in loco sancto iussi sunt. Est
vero et Sanctum sanctorum, vt sanctificationem habeant praecipuam et
indespicabilem. Illi panes ex duabus decimis (Dei enim et hominis sunt, eiusdem
in vtroque perfecti) ponuntur seni altrinsecus. Mystica mensa ponitur quidem
hic, ponitur etiam in futuro scculo. Sex autem panes propositio vna, quiae
perfectus numerus, sicut and mysterium ipsum perfectum est, and perfectos facit
eos, qui hoc fruuntur. In sex autem diebus haec visibilis facta est creatura:
sextaque die homo productus est, propter quem Christus mysticam praeparauit
mensam. Veruntamen and omnes simul recte duodecim panes sunt, quia primi
dominicam coenauerunt Apostoli, qui erant duodecim numero.

The very nombre of the loaves does call us to the contemplacion or deligent
beholding of the commandment. So does also the setting furthe of them, and
that he does not command them to be made a burnt sacrifice, as those things
which be of the frieng pan, of the gridiron, and furnace, but that they
shall be put upon the table on the one part, and to be laufull to the preistes
alone, and not to the Levites to eat them, and yet they may not be eaten of
them, but in the holy place. But also because they be called most holy,
understand these things that be said, Owre Lord shall give thee
understanding. Remember the mystical table of which yt is commanded no man
to eat, except the intelligible Aaron, that is to say Christ, he first began
this table, except also his children, which of him were made Isychius.

Of whom we learn a full applicacion of the figure to the thing: of the Show
bread to Christ. For beginning to open the figure, and to set furthe Shewbread
applied to the Sacrament.
the thing figured by the Show bread, he says: Meme^to mysticae mensae
Remember the mystical table. Wherbie he meeneth the blessed bread of the table
of Christ which after he opens with very plain words, when he says: The
Show breades were made of two te^ths deals: Christ the very bread is made of

If this applicacion were not plain enough I would tarry longer upon yt.
Athanasius says) Sicut In Symbolo
anima rationalis and caro vnus est homo: ita Deus and homo vnus est Christus.
As the reasonable Soul, and the flesh is one man: Even so God and man is one
Christ.

Now this loaf made of these two tenth deals, of the Godhead, and of the
manhead, where is yt, but in mystica mensa, in the mystical table? So that here
is taught, more plainly then can be denied, that which the rude heretic with
wonder sometime asks, saing: What? is Christ God and man in the Sacrament,
under the forms of so little a piece of bread? Which rude man if he would leave
reasoning and questioning (which make him doutfullie to wonder at the works of
God) and would subdue his understanding to the faith of Christ and harken to
this Father and soche other of the Parliament house of Christ as teach his
enacted and received faith, he should soon by the help of Gods grace cease
with incredulity to wonder,

And that ye may the sooner so do, note yet more, how this ancient Father
expowndeth this figure: The loaves made of two tenth deals were set in two
sondrie rows: The blessed loaf Christ, that is of two tenth deals of his
Godhead and of his manhead is set in two sondrie rows, as this Author
applies yt: Seni ponuntur altrinsecus: Mystica mensa ponitur quidem hic,
ponitur and in futuro seculo. The breades are put six in a row. The
mystical table is set here, and is set in the woorld to come.

In which Applicacion note that as the Show bread was set in sondrie rows:
So Christ figured by the same bread, is set both here and in heaven. And that
the Adversary shall not delude thee by his common gloss, saing: that Christ by
his godhead is here in the world, but not by Godhead and manhead in Gloss of
the Sacramentaries for Christ's presence.
the Sacrament Remember the wholl applicacion of the figure, that yt is for the
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, as yt does well appear by that that
follows immediately.

In six days (says he) this visible creature was made, and in the sixth day
man was created, for whom Christ prepared this mystical table. And yet all
these breades together are very well twelve. For the Apostles which first
supped at our Lords Supper were twelve. So that this figure is co^tinuallie
applied to the Sacrament.

Wherein to prove the presence of Christ, if ye desire more plain and evident
The table of Christ pourgeth, etc.
testimony, note this that he says immediately: Haec munda est primum
quidem sicut mundans: deinde sicut nihil mendacij, nec infectionis, qualia sunt
in mysterijs Paganorum, habens. This table is clean, Firist, as clensing or
making clean: secondly as having no lie or untruth nor infection, as the
mysteries of the Pagans have.

In which sainge note well, that he says, that this table is a table, that
pourgeth cleanses, or makes clean. What does yt make clean but the soul? What
is yt to make the soul clean, but to remitte and wipe away sins, which be
the uncleanness, and filthiness of the soul? Who remitteth and takes away
sin, but God, our Savior and Redemer Christ Jesus? For (as the Jews Quis
potest peccata remittere nisi solus Deus? who can remitte sin but God alone?
Luc. 5.


Seeing then in this table is that, that cleanses us, and takes away our
sins, we may boldly point with our fingar to this blessed table, where Ecce
agnus Dei, ecce qui tollit peccata mundi. Behold the Lamb of God, behold
him, that takes away the sins of Joan. 1.
the woorlde. And humbling our selves before him there present, with meke
supplicacion of the catholic Church, pray God, and say. O Lamb of God
that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us. This may we
boldly do, for (as yt follows in this Author) in this table is no lie or
untruth, as in the mysteries of the Pagans, but here is in very deed Christ,
God and man, verily and truly, as is before by this Author testified.

In my judgment this verity of the blessed Sacrament is by this Author
already both pithilie and plainly testified: and the figure well and iustilie
applied. But will ye yet see in the end of the applicacion, a more plain
sentence? Thus he says: Insuper eleuans eius gloriam, and mysterij dignitatem
efferens in sublime, addit: Sanctum sanctorum est de sacrificio Domini iure
perpetuo. Ergo sancta est oration, sancta scripturae diuinae lectio, and
interpretationis auditio, sancta sunt (vt breuiter dicam) omnia quae in
ecclesiis Deisecundum legem eius dicuntur, and aguntur. Sancta autem sanctorum
de sacrificio Domini, de omnibus videlicet quae offeruntur, and aguntur ad eius
gloriam, mensa est, quam de sacrificio suo Christus proponit. Moreover exalting
the glory of yt, and extolling the dignity of the mystery unto the Table of
the Sacrifice most holy thing in the church
height he adds: Yt is the most holy of the Sacrifice of the Lord, by a
perpetual statute. Now prayer is holy, the reading of Gods scripture is
holy, and the hearing of the interpretacion of the scripture is holy, and
(briefly to say) All things that according to his law, are either said, or
done in the churches of God are holy. But of all things, which be either
offered or doe^ to his glory, the most holy of all is the table, which
Christ has set forth of his sacrifice. Hitherto Isychius.

Do ye not here see, which is the holiest thing in all the church of God,
above prayer, above the reading of the scriptures, above the hearing of the
interpretacion of the scriptures, yea generally above all things that be done
or offered to the glory of God? The blessed Show bread, the body of Christ,
which is the bread of life is the holiest of all.

Thus, Reader, thowe may see, how yt has pleased God by the figure, to
extol and magnify the thing figured, that is the blessed body of Christ in
the Sacrament, with these great words, caling yt, the most holy of the
offringes of God. A greablie whereunto ye see this Author so much esteem and
repute the woorthines and holiness of the Sacrament, that he declares yt to
Sourmounte and excel all the holy things, what soever they be, that be done
to the glory of God in his Church.

Judge then what else can atteign to soche holiness in the Sacrament, but the
body of Christ. For the bread and wine (as the adversaries say) being dumme
creatures are not able to take holiness. Conclude then with this Author, that
the Show bread was a figure of the blessed Sacrament, which for that yt is
holiest of all other, yt proves yt well to be the very body of Christ.

This Author by plain words conuinceth the wicked opinion of Oecolampadius,
Oecola^pad convinced by thautoritie of Isychius.
who in his book of the Supper of our lord says, that the Sacrament is Haec
vero creatura panis ita sanctissimo vsui seruiens, vt and corpus Christi, quod
repraesentat, appelletur, vtentesque sanctificat non suae quidem natura, sed
vtentium sanctimonia, hoc est, fide, and affectu sancto. Non minus enim vere
hoc quis de Eucharistia affirmat, quam de precibus, quae vsu suo hominem
sanctificant. This creature of bread is so sanctified, serving to a most holy
use, that yt may also be called the body of Christ, which yt does
represent. And yt does sanctify them that use yt, not of the own nature: But
by the sanctimonie of the users, that is, by faith, and holy affection. Thus
he.

In whose words is plain contradiction. For sirst he says that the bread is
sanctified, And yet he says again, yt has no holiness in yt. Again he
says, Oecolamp. his contradiction.
yt sanctifies the receauers: And after he says, yt does not, but their own
sanctimonie sanctifies them. Thirdly he says, yt sanctifies as prayers do:
and prayers, if theye be devout, pourchase sanctificacion but sanctify not of
them selves: but the body of Christ sanctifies of yt self.

Now if he mien this of the bread as yt is handled now a days of men of this
sect, I think he says truth. For nether is that holy of yt self, nether
Comunion bread of the Sacramentaries sanctifies not
does yt sanctify the receauers. For they by their corrupted faith, are
rather defiled. But if he speak of the Sacrament, as yt is used among the
catholic Oecolampadius, yt is holier then prayer, or any other thing in the
church of God.

Now when we see this man, and Cantorburie and soch other so plainly
repugnante to the old ancient Fathers, what should we else do but reject
them, and utterly detest them as men framing them selfs a faith upon their
heretical election, and not upon the faith of Christ declared by the Ancient
Fathers of the catholic Church.

Although Isychius be right plain in this place alleged: yet shall you hear
him hereafter speak more plainly.

THE FOUR AND TWENTETH CHAPTER APplieng the continual reserving of the Show
bread to the reseruacion of the Sacrament, proves the same reseruacion by the
old Fathers, and by the perpetual
YT is out of all doubt by the testimony of the Fathers before alleged,
that the Show bread was a figure of the holy Sacrament: Plain yt is that the
same Show bread was set forth because yt should be continually reserved in
the temple, and to no use more was yt appointed, then to be reserved. Wherefore
God commanded that every Sabbath, day hott bread should be set forth upon
the table, and that Aaron and his Sons the preistes should eat the stale
bread. Show bread appoincted for three things.


Now the figure must be answered by the thing figured, specially in that
part, that is the chief and principal part of the figure. The principal
part of the Show bread and the chief cause of the appoinctement of yt was for
three things. The first (as the text alleged declares) that yt should be
alwais remaining in the temple upon the table: The second, vt sit panis in
monimentu^ oblationis Domini, that yt should be abread of remembrance of the
offering of the Lord: The third, that yt should be eaten only of Aaron, and
his Sons.

Seeing then the Sacrament is the thing figured yt must answer the figure in
these poinctes, which be the principal part of the figure. So then as the
Show bread was reserved, So likewise may the Sacrament Show bread applied to
the Sacrament.
the oblacio^ or offering of the Lord: So is the Sacrament the bread of
remembrance of the offering of Christ our lord. As the Shwe bread was to be
eaten only of Aron and his Sons: So is the Sacrament of none to be received
but of our spiritual Aron and his Sons, which follow their father in holy
faith, and like conversation.

This goodly agreement, and just answering of the thing figured to the figure
thereof, does very well prove the thing so to be.

The Adversary can not deny, but that the Show bread was a figure of the
Sacrament. For that is testified by the holy Fahers. And the reseruacio^ of
the Show bread being a figure of some thing in the new Testament (For all the
Leuiticall sacrifices, and Ceremonies, were figures of things of the new
Testament) whereof can yt be a figure, but of the reseruacion of the Sacrament,
as the bread yt self was a figure of the Sacrament yt self?

Let the adversary bring forth the thing figured by the reseruacio^ of the
Show bread if he ca^, if he can not (as certain yt is that he ca^ not) for
somoche God appointed no vain figure. Math. 5.
iota vnu^, aut vnus apex non praeteribit a lege, donec omnia fia^t. one iotte
or one title shall not escape till all be fullfilled: maugre of the Adversaries
heart, this part of the figure is answered by the reseruacion of this
blessed Sacrament, for the memorial of the offering of Christ upon the cross,
and to be eaten of his good faithful children.

Now where one of the members of the proclamacio^ of this Adversary is against
the reseruacion of the blessed Sacrament: ye may see that was made, One member
of master Juells proclamacion against Reseruacio^ in^ proved.
more by self will then by law, for the law is against him, as by that, that
is said, yt does well appear.

But to this further confusion, I shall declare and prove that this matter
has been put in execucion in sundry and diverse ages, from the beginning of
Christ's Church. And for that this Adversary alleges the epistle of saint
Clement, written to saint James called the brother of Christ: therefore shall I
also alleadg the same epistle, and beginning with yt, descend to our days.

Saint Clement the disciple of saint Peter the Apostle, and an holy martyr
Phill. 4. Clemens Epist. 2.
of Christ, of whom saint Paul makes mention, declaring the order about
the blessed Sacrament used in his time, says thus: Tribus gradibus co^missa
sunt sacramenta diuinorum secretorum: presbytero, Diacono, and ministro. Qui
cum timore, and tremore reliquias corporis Domini debent custodire
fragmentorum, ne qua putredo in sacrario inueniatur, ne cum negligenter agitur,
portioni corporis Domini grauis inferatur iniuria. The Sacraments of the
divine secrettes are committed to three degrees: to the Priest, to the Deacon,
and to the ministre. which aught with fear and trembling to keep the leauinges
of the pieces of the body of our Lord, leest any corruption be fownde in the
holy place, leest when any thing is necligentlie done, great wrong be done to
the portion of our Lords body. Thus saint Clement.

In which saing we have not only to consider, that this is the bare saing of
saint Clement but that yt is soche learning as he had learned of his mastre,
and of the Apostles, and was both in their times, and after, and is

And secondarelie, we have to note, that he calls the Sacrament that is left,
the procion of owre Lords body.

Thirdly, he does not only by so calling yt, teach us that yt is the body
of Christ, but also by the fact, that is, by the commandment of the reverent
with fear and tremblinge, which fear and trembling imports the presence of
an other manner of thing then of a piece of bread.

Fourtlie, ye perceive, that the Sacrament was appointed to be kept, and that
not for an hour or a day, but for a longer time, or else they should
Reservation of the Sacrament in the Apostles time.
not be advertised to be circu^specte, that no corruption should be fownde in
the holy place, or any wrong thorough neclige^ce, should be doe^ to the
porcio^ of Christ's body. So that by this yt is manifestly taught, that the
Sacrament is not only the body of Christ: but also that in the time of the
Apostles yt was reserved and kept with great reverence, diligence, and
circu^spectio^

But here perchance the adversary will obiecte, and say that saint Clement
immediately makes against me. For he says: Ta^ta in altario holocausta
Objection out of. S. Clement.
offera^tur, qua^ta populo sufficere debe^t. Quod si rema^serint, in crastmu^
no^ reserue^tur, sed cu^ timore and tremore clericorum diligentia consumantur.
Let there be so many hosts offered on the Altar, as may fussice the people: And
if any of them remain

I grant that this is in the epistle of saint Clement, and that within a
few lines after the former sainge by me alleged. But the adversary can not
reprove me of false allegacion. For certain I am, that yt is even in that
epistle, as I have alleged.

But to answer the Adversary, thinks he that saint Clement was a fool, or
so forgettfull, that within six lines he would against say that he had Answer
before said? Yt can not be dinied, but that in the beginning of the Epistle
he gives an order for the reverent keeping of the Sacrament. Yt may not then
be thought that he would give a contrary order within so few lines, as is
said. But giving first an order for the reverend kepinge of that, that is
reserved: in the second sentence he gives order, that S. Clement his saing
opened.
in the daily Sacrifice reseruacio^ should not be made. For so there should
be more the^ neaded to be reserved, which were not meet. As ever in the
catholic Church, where sufficient is appointed for reseruacio^, the ministres
The church at this day has in use that which S Clement commanded.
when time requires, they receive that, that was reserved, and put other in
place

So that yt appears to me that the catholic church at this day has that
in use, that saint Clement in his epistle commanded, both for the
reseruacio^, and order of daily Sacrifice without reseruacion.

That saint Clement did not absolutely forbid reseruacion, but raither
willed yt to be in use, the practice of the primitive church does very
welproue. For where there was a variety of obseruacio^ of Easter, and fast,
betwixt Victor excommunicated the churches os Asia.
the latin church and the greek church, neither would the greeks conform
the^ selves to the manner received in the latin church: Victor the^ Pope being
the xiij. after Peter, not bearing the co^tumacie of the^, being so often and
long called on, to come to co^formitie, and ever resisting, did excommunicate
the churches of Asia.

Which thing as yt was misliked of many Bishopps: So was yt for fear
Ecclesiast. hist. li. 5. c. 14.
of the loss of so many churches misliked of Irenaeus. who therewith moved
Eusebius wittnesseth) Irenaeus reporting how Anicetus, Pius, Higinus,
Telesphorus, and Xistus did bear with them, although they did not receive that
order, and Nunquam tamen ob hoc repulsi sunt ab Ecclesiae societate, aut
venientes ab illis partibus non sunt suscepti: imo potius and omnes presbyteri,
qui fuerunt ante te, omnibus semper, qui non ita obseruabant, presbyteris
ecclesiarum Eucharistiam solemniter transmittebant. Never for all that were
they for this repulsed from the fellowship of the Church, or else coming from
those parties were not received, but raither all Bishopps, that were before
thee, to all Bishopps of the churches, which did not so observe, they did
allwaies solemnly send the Sacrament.

By this sentence yt does appear (as of the learned yt is noted) that the
Bishops of Rome accustometh, that if any Bishops came thither, that were
catholic, they would in toke^ of christian unity, send the Sacrament to
them, that they might communicate together, for that they were of one
Communion. Whereby yt is evident, that the Sacrament was allwais reserved, to be
ready for soche pourposes.

Tertullia^ writing (as some think) to his own wife, declares the manner An
arbitrare (o vxor) ita gesturam te, vt clam viro sint, quae facis? Non sciet
ille quid Lib. 2.
secreto ante omnem cibum gustes? et si sciuerit, non panem illum credit esse,
qui dicitur. Do thowe think (o wife) so to handle thy self that those
things, Tertullian with, one saing overthrows three assertions of the
Sacramentaties.
that thowe do, shall be unknown to thy housbande? Shall not he know, what
before all meats thou do secretly receive? And if he shall know yt, he
believes not yt to be that bread, that yt is said to be. Hitherto Tertul.
Whose little sentence, although yt does overthrow three or four assertions of
the Auersaries in this matter of the Sacrament: Yet we shall here touch but
two, that be to the purpose here.

The first is, that good devout godly people had the Sacrament reserved in
their houses, often to receive, as their devotion to God moved the^, secretly
by them selfs. For at that time the church was not so settled, nor had The
Sacrament reserved in private houses in the Primitive church.
soche peace, that the christen people might frelie come together, and receive
openly. Wherefore for the excercising of their faith and deuocio^, and doing of
their duty to God, they had the Sacrament home to their houses Shall not thy
housband know what thowe secret he do receive, before all meat?

For the better understanding of which saing, you must suppose and know that
Tertulian writes to this woman, as though she had an insidell to her
housbande, and she a Chrystian. Unto whom she would not have her doings known
in this behalf, Now to cover this matter from soche an ynfidel, good people
would secretly by the^ selves receive that they for soche purpose reserved,
and so yt appears, that for soche cause reseruacion of the Sacrament might be
and was much used in the primitive church.

The second note is for the presence, which is where he says: And if he
knows yt yet he believes not yt to be the bread, that yt yssaid to be. Whereby
Joan. De lapsis sermon. 5. A miracle wrought in the Sacrament reserved.
we are taught, that yt is an other manner of bread, then yt appears. For yt
appears to be but earthly bread, but in deed yt is heavenly bread the bread
of life, even that bread yt self that said: The bread which I will give, is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

But to return to the matter of reseruacion, we have plain testimony there os
in saint Cyprian, who reports thus: Cum quaedam arcam suam, in qua Domini
Sanctum erat, manibus indignis tentasset aperire, igne inde surgente deterrita
est, ne auderet contingere. When a certain woman did attempt with vnwourthie
the holy thing of our Lord, there arose thence a fire, and so feared her, that
she durst not touch yt. Thus saint Ciprian.

Do ye not hear that this woman had the Sacrament kept in her coafer? Perceive
ye not the great power of yt, that where she would but open the coafer with
vnclea^ hands, she was feared away with a fire that rose from thence? Is there
any mean for the Adversary, to avoid this?

Perchance he will cauille and say, that Ciprian speaks not of the
Sacrament, but of some other thing, which he calls, the holy thing of our
Lord. But if he would so seek to avoid, he should show him self to vain.
For Ciprian speaks there altogether of the Sacrament, in somoche as he
reports four miracles together, which God had wrought about the Sacrament.

And albeit in this sentence, he does not by express words call yt the
body of our Lord, as he does in many other places, yet he so terms yt,
Oecolamp. and Cranmers doctrine reproved by S. Cipr. Vide sup. cap. 23.
as he reproves the doctrine of Oecolampadius, and Cranmer, and very likly of
this Proclamer also, For he calls yt the holy thing of our Lord: and they
say there is no holiness in yt. For yt is a dumme creature. Thus though in
words they pretend tofolowe the old Fathers: yet in very deed they slatlie
against say them.

But to proceade in the prooff of reseruacio^, yt makes much for yt, that
saint Ambrose reports of his bother Satyrus, who, as he says, being a
singular man in godliness, and affia^nce toward God, and being in da^nger upon
the Ambr. in oratione funebr, de obi tu sratris sui.
sea yet not fearing death, but desierouse not to be destitute of that blessed
Sacrament (if yt should so please God to call him) went to the christians that
were there in the ship and desired to have that Godly Sacrament of the faith
full, not that he would please his curiouse eyes in loking upon soche a
mystery, Satyr. had part of the Sacrament reserved in the ship and was saved
there by from drowning.
but that by soche a Sacrament, he might obtein the help of his faith. Which
when yt was given him, he caused yt to bownde in a stole, and so hanged yt
about his neck, and when shippwracke happened, he sought not for a loose
boorde

In which his report yt is more the^ manifest, that the Sacrament was
reserved, and as yt may be supposed for a good time. If yt may be reserved
three or four days, why may yt not be reserved longer?

As the wholl report (for that yt is made by so holy, and worthy a man) is
worthy to be remembered: So be two or three things wourthie of special note.

The first is, that this good man, the Brother of saint Ambrose went to the
chrystians in the ship and obtained of the^, to have, and to carry the
Sacrament with him. If to reserve the Sacrament had been so heinouse a matter,
as this Proclamer, and his accomplices make yt, would they (trow ye) have
committed soche an offense as to have yt reserved in the ship, and to deliver
yt Sacrament reserved in the ship.
had been against the order of the church, would Saint Ambrose to the praise
of his Brother report yt as a thing well and Godly done? No truly, yt is not
to be thought in so godly and so learned a father: but raither yt is

Therefore saint Ambrose, to his Bothers praise, and to the example of S.
Ambrose co^me^ded the doing of his brothe Satyr.
the posterity to do soche like virtuous works, did write this matter, and
made a book to remain to keep the thing in memory. By this then yt may
appear, that the reseruacion of the Sacrament was in use in the church in
those days.

An other thing worthy of note in this report of saint Ambrose is, that he
with co^me^dacio^ declares the affia^ce that his brother had in the Sacrament.
Which was soche that seeing immine^t peril, and remembering what he had about
him, did not seek earthly or worldly help, but reposing his trust in the
Sacrament that he had about him, he persuaded him self to have help enough,
and nothing distrusting rested only upon that help, and in that hope
committed him self to the fearful, and terrible vaiues of the sea. I pray
thee (good Reader) weigh this well, and judge whether this good man Matthew. 14
ship: be of good trust, yt is I, be not afraied, said to him: if yt be
thowe lord command me to come to thee upon the waters. And he went out of
the ship and walked upon the sea toward Christ: Even so this man by faith
knowing his master Christ to be at hand with him presently in the sacrament,
he committed him self with Peter to the sea, and was the first that was saved.

Add unto this, that which is an other thing to be noted, that saint Ambrose
commending this brother for the great faith, trust, and affiance that he had in
the Sacrament, well declares also his own faith, that he also believed the
very presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Holy men comme^de not the misbeleif
of me^ to the world, no not by mouth, much less by books, which must
remain.

For that then that saint Ambrose has written this, no dowbte as well to our
Imitacio^, as to the co^mendacio^ of his brother: both the faith of the
Church believing Christ's presence in the Sacrament, is to be approved, and the
reseruacion of the same Sacrament, for the comforth of us, being seek or wholl,
is not to be dissalowed.

And yet is there a more evident testimony of this matter of reseruacion in an
epistle of Chrisostom to Innocentius, wherein he makes complainte of the
calamity that happened in his church of Constantinople by wicked Soldiers,
and among other things reports thus: Ipso magno Sabbato Chrysostom. epist. ad
Jnnocent.
collecta manus militum, ad vesperam diei in ecclesias ingressa, clerum omnem,
qui nobiscum erat, vi eiecit, and armis gradum vndique muniuit. Mulieres quoque
quae per illud te^pus se exuerant vt baptisarentur, metu grauiorum insidiarum
nudae aufugerunt: neque enim concedebatur vt se velarent, sicut mulieres
honestas decet, multae etiam acceptis vulneribus eijciebanttur, and sanguine
implebantur natatoria, and sancto cruore rubescebant sluenta. Neque hic rerum
finis erat. Nam and sanctuaria ingressi sunt milites, quorum aliquos scimus
nullis initiatos mysteris, and viderunt omnia, quae intus erant, quin and
sanctissimus Christi sanguis, sicut in tali tumultu contingit, in praedictorum
militum vestes effusus est. Even upon the great Sabbath day (meaning Easter
day) at the euentide, an Army of Soldiers entered the church, and by violence
cast out all soche as were with us of the clergy. And kept with stre^ght the
entry. The women also, which at that time had put of their clothes to be
baptized, for fear of more danger, fled naked away. Nether were they suffered
to cover the^ selves, as becomes honest women, many of them also being
wounded were cast out, and the fontes prepared to baptize them in, were full
of blood, and the waters of the fontes were made red with blood. But this was
not the end of the business. For the Soldiers also went into the holy
places, of the which, Christ's blood in the Sacr. shed upon the soldiers.
clothes.
we know, some to have received no part of the chrystian religion, and the
most holy blood of Christ (as yt does happen in soche tumulte) was shed
upon the garments of the Soldiers. Thus facre Chrisostom.

In this complaint, first note when these wicked soldiers entered upon the
church, they entered in the evening. At which time they entering into the
Sanctuary, Ye perceive they fownde the Sacrament there, for he says that yt
was shed upon the clothes of the Soldiars. In the time of Chrisosto^ yt was
not in use to consecrate the Sacrament in the after noone, but only in the
morning. This then being kept in the Sanctuary, and shed upon the garment of
the Soldiers in the evening, yt proves inuinciblie, and most plainly that the
Sacrament was reserved. Presence of Christ's blood in the Sacra. and
reservation avouched by Chrysostom.


If ye will also know what the Sacrament was, whether yt was a figure only or
the thing yt self, Christostom by as plain words teaches us that yt was the
blood of Christ, And that we should perceive yt was so in deed, he contented
not him felf only to call yt the blood of Christ, but the most holy blood of
Christ. By Chrisostom then, the reseruacion of the the most holy blood of
Christ, whereby the vureuerent and spiteful railing and raiging of the
blasphemer is reproved and rebuked.

But let us yet proceade further, may we not find the reseruacion of the
Sacrament in S. Hieromes time? Yes verily. For he wittnesseth yt Reseruatio^
in S. Hieroms time.
him self declaring to one Rusticus, the godly life and great liberty of
Exuperius Bishop of Tolosse, and signifieng the great contempt of worldelie
things the same had, and his great pleasure in heavenly things, writes thus.
Nihil illo ditius, qui corpus Domini in canistro vimineo, sanguinem portat in
vitro. There is no man richer then he, who bears the body of our Lord in a
wicker basket, and his blood in a glass. As who might say: So little
regards this good Bisshoppe Exuperius the riches of the world, that giving
away all his substance, and bearing about him the body of our Lord but in a
little wicker baskett, and the blood of our Lord in a glass, Hiero. ad Rusticum.


In these words saint Hiero^ is a double help to us, for he does not
only testify that this holy Bishop, reserved and carried the Sacrament in
soche vessel, but also testifies what yt is, and that by as plain words
Master Juell has here a double blow.
the body and blood of our lord. Whereby the Proclamer has a double blow.
both for the reseruacion, and also for the presence.

The Proclamer would have plain words, if these be not plain enough, to call
yt the body and the blood of our lord. I can not tell what plainness he A
clear and plain sentence for Master Juell.
would have.

But as touching reseruacion, and the use thereof, we read also in the
Ecclesiastical History, a practice which well proves them, where we find yt
written thus of one Serapion, that he lieng in extreamis and wishing to die
said: Quousque me detinetis? Quaeso vos, cito aliquis Presbyterum roget, vt
possim aliquando dimitti, et cum haec dixisset, rursum sine voce permansit.
Abijt Eusebius. li. 6. cap. 34.
cursu puer ad presbyterum noclis tempore, infirmabatur presbyter, venire non
potuit. Parum Eucharistiae puero, qui ad se venerat, dedit, quod infusum iussit
sent praeberi. How long will you detein me? I beseech you let one quickly
desire the priest, that I may be let depart. And when he had spoken these The
Sacrament reserved sent to a sick man.


Consider now reader, that the Messenger came to the priest in the night time,
considre also that the priest was sick, and could not come, so that for
vnsemelinesse of time, and specially for sickness he could not then
celebrate that holy ministracion, and yet he sent of the Sacrament to the old
sick man. Is yt not plain enough by this history, that the Sacrament was
reserved, which in the night time was so ready to be sent?

As for the manner of the place where yt was reserved I stand not in yt, as the
Master Iuells trifling of a Canopie.
Proclamer in his trifling manner, disdainfully for so weighty a matter
says: that yt can not be proved, that yt should be hanged up under a
canopie. The manner of the place is diverse, as he himself knows, in the
contries where he has travailed. But the substance of the matter, which is the
reseruacion of the Simia semper simia. An ape is allwais an ape. An heretical
contemner of blessed mysteries will allwaies so be, and show him self allwais
like himself, when he will trifle in the utterance of soche matters, for the
which so lamentable a division is in the Church. If he say he trifeleth not,
the^ I say he seems either to grant the reseruacion, or else covertly to
impugn yt, as fearing openly to do yt, for that he knows he could not so
stand in yt, but soen be overthrown.

But let the matter go on, and let us see more of the use of the reseruacion of
the Sacrament. As yt may be gathered, Satan the great enemy of the
Reseruacio^ spoken against in S. Cirills time, but refuted of hi^ as a mad
doctrine.
peace of Christ's Church, as a roaring lion seking whom he might devour, at
last fownde some, that did not, as strong men in faith, resist him. Who^ yet
he durst not in that time of virtue, when so much godliness, and so much
reverence to the Sacrament floorished, incite and move to speak directly
against the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, as the does in this time, but
perceive. Thus he writes: Audio quod dicunt illi mysticam benedictionem, si ex
ea Cyrill. ad Calosirium
remanserint in sequentem diem reliquiae ad sanctificationem inutilem esse. Sed
insaniunt haec dicentes, non enim alius sit Christus, neque sanctum eius corpus
mutabitur, sed benedictionis virtus and viuifica gratia perpetuo manent in
illo. I do hear, that they say, that the mystical benediction, if the
leauinges thereof remain until the next day following, is unprofitable to
sanctificacion. But they are mad saing these things. For there is not made an
other Christ, nether shall his holy body be changed, but the power or virtue
of the benediction and the lively grace do perpetually abide in yt. Thus
Cyrille.

As yt may be thought, to make away reseruacion of the Sacrament from the
Church, whereby the honor of God, and of our Savior Christ was much caused
to be in the hearts of people, and whereby also sick people had much
comfort, and many were won from the Deuell, and their souls sent to God,
which else perchance had perished, the Deuell, as I said, not bearing this
did invent this heresy against reseruacion of the Sacrament, and breathed yt
into some vessels of perdicion.

But this doctrine was so reasonable, and so agreeable to the word of

But holy Cyrill teaches us the wholesome and sobre doctrine of the Church,
and says, if the Sacrament be reserved until the next day, yt is of like
force, power, and virtue as yt was when yt was consecrated.

This sentence of Cyrill does also presuppose, that reseruacion of the
Sacrament Reseruacio^ in use before S. Cirills time.
was in use befooe he wrote, or else why should these naughty men, of whom he
makes mention, speak against yt? Men use not to impugn a thing that is not.
Wherefore yt must needs be, that reseruacion being impugned, was then in use. Yt
does also teach that reseruacion is not unlawful, and a thing that may not
be done, but raither, saing the thing continues of like force, power and
virtue, teaches that reseruacion is to be used.

Ye have now heard of the practice and use of the reseruacion of the
Sacrament, A plain place for Master Juell.
more to say for reseruacion.

THE FIVE AND TWENTETH CHAP. Proves the same by Counsels that have been nearer
to our time.
FOrasmoche as the Proclamer more arrogantlie then semely, charge, The church
arrogantlie charged with error.
the Church with error these nine hondreth years and above, and chalengeth
to him and his likes the restauring of the truth, which during all these
years has been lacking, as though Christ were false of his promise, who
promised to lead his Church into all treuth, and takes upon him to reiecte all
Fathers, to conte^ne all Cou^cells, and breiflie to say, to frustrate and
adnihilate all that has been written, decreed,

Among the which I find alleged Justinian the Emperor, who having a good
zeal to godly religion made a constitucion, that monasteries of virgens
Justinian. constable. 123. de Nouuel.
shoule have liberty to choose a priest, who should bring unto them the holy
communion.

This constitucion appoints not the priest, that should be chosen by these
virgens, to celebrate the holy mystery, but that he should bring them the
holy communion, when they were disposed to communicate. And if yt were
brought, yt argues for the time a reseruacion.

In the decrees also is alleged the Council of worms, which was De cons. did
2. cap. Presbyter. The priest must allwaies have the Sacrament ready for the
sick
Presbyter Eucharistiam semper habeat paratam, vt si quis infirmatus fuerit,
statim eum communicet, ne sine communione moriatur. Let the priest allwaies
have the Sacrament in a readiness, that if any man be sick he may furthwith
receive the Sacrament, that he die not without the communion.

I need not to make here any note to the reader for his better understanding,
for the decree is plain enough for the confutacion of the Adversary.

But the Adversary that estemeth not the general Counsels, perchance will
with much more contempt reiecte this Council, saing that yt was but a
provincial Council. Yt was but a provincial Council in deed, and although a
provincial Council has not authority to bind the wholl Church by their
private decrees: yet yt has authority to set forth a truth. And that this
decree was not against the order received in the wholl

There was never provincial Council that decreed any thing contrary to
Heretical Counsels allwaies suppressed.
the general received faith, but yt was noted, and by some general Council
confuted.

The Arrians called many Counsels, besides that which they kept in Nicaea
Thraciae, but they could never take place nor authority, neither did the
Church suffer them to be published, but suppressed, impugned, confuted, and
convinced them.

The second Ephesine Council, although there was there a great assembly: yet
yt was overthrown by the general Council of Calcedon.

What shall I need to protracte this matter with mo examples? Certain yt is,
that if this Council had decreed any thing against the truth of the
catholic faith, or against the received order of the Church in matters of
Religion, yt should have been impugned many years, er this Adversary these
reasons and consideracions yt can not be but that the Decree of the

And if all this weigh not in the conceat of the Adversary: yet he can not
deny, but that reseruacion was then in use, which well appears also by the
Council called Concilium Remense, as yt is alleged in the same decrees,
Council. Remen.
and same distinction. Which for the reverence of the Sacrament, straictlie
forbids the priest to deliver the same to anielaie man or woman, to carry yt
to any sick person, but straictlie commands that the priest go himself, and
minister to the sick.

After these Counsels was the general Council of Lateran, which was a
notable and a great Counsel, wherein were present besides a great no^bre of
Bishops, the four Patriarchs, as some writers testify, and many grecians
as well as latins. This Council was celebrated under Innocentius the third,
Council. Lateran.
the year of our lord M. CC. XV. and so CCC. XLVI. years agone. In which
great Council this I find there Decreed: Statuimus in cunctis ecclesijs, vt
Chrysma and Eucharistia, sub fideli custodia conseruentur. We do ordein Canon
20.
that in all Churches, the holy oil, and the Sacrament be kept under
faithful custody. Here ye see how the reseruacion being in use in the
beginning, is in this Council appointed to be continued, and that not in some
Churches, but in all.

How so ever yt shall like the Proclamer to accept or to reject this
Council: yet the sobre chrystian considering how great a Council yt was, and
that of the learned men as well of the greek Church as of the latin Church,
which could, and did know as well as the Proclamer, and see what is to be
done as well as he does: And considering also that yt was holden more then
three hondreth years agon, at which present time (althoug before and after)
their was no public or open controversy in that point: and also that yt is
an ordinance agreeable to the use of the primitive Church, will regard yt,
and with humble manner obeie yt, or at the leest wish yt to be obeyed.

After this Council in the time of Leo the tenth, Martyr Luther, a new
Heresiarke, or inuentour of heresy, rose up, who affirming the presence
Luther his fond opinion of the presence.
of Christ in the Sacrament but very fondly without all authority of
Scripture, Doctor, or Council, taught that the presence of Christ was in the
Sacrament if yt were received: If not, there was no presence. And upon this
reseruacion of the Sacrament was of him denied.

Out of this Luther sprang first Corolstadins, who impugned his masters
doctrine, and taught, as our Proclamer teaches, that there is no presence of
Carolstad.
Christ in the Sacrament. With whom shortly joined Oecolampadius, and
Zuinglius. Which first among all other wrote and set out their books
Oecolamp. Zuinglius.
against the Sacrament and denieng the wholl (as of consequence yt must be)
they denied the part also.

And for that the Lutherans, and the named Sacramentaries did pietifullie
disturb, rent, tear and divide those contries of Saxony, and Heluetia, with
other in Getmanie with these rehearsed heresies, and an infinite nombre mo,
which daily grew up to the great endammaginge of many christen Souls:
Paul the third then Bishop of Rome, to repress

Consuetudo asseruandi in sacrario sanctam Eucharistiam, adeo antiqua est, vt
eam Conci Trident.
seculum etiam Niceni Concilij agnouerit. Porro deferri ipsam sacram
Eucharistiam ad infirmos, and in hunc vsum diligenter in ecclesijs conseruari,
praeterquam quod cum summa aequitate and ratione coniunctum est, tum multis in
Concilijs praeceptum inuenitur, and vetustissimo catholicae Ecclesiae more
obseruatum. Quare haec sancta Synodus retinendum omnino salutarem hunc, and
necessarium morem statuit. The custom to keep the holy Sacrament in the holy
place is of soche antiquity, that the world Nyce^ Counsel did agnise
Reseruacion.
in time of the Nicen Council did agnise yt. Moreover that the Sacrament
should be carried to them that are sick, and for this purpose to be
diligently kept in Churches, be side that yt is agreeable to equity and
reason, yt is also fownde to be commended in many Counsels, and in the most
ancient manner of the catholic Church observed. Wherefore this holy Synod
has commanded this holsom and necessary manner to be retained and kept still.
Thus much the Council.

I wish that the reader taking these words as the words and saing of a
Council, and as the agreeable saing of a great nombre of learned men, would
mark and learn there in, first, that the use of the reseruacion

If a Parliament of a Realm give soche authority to the Acts and Statutes
there made, that the private talk of rebelliouse, and disobedient persons, If a
Parliament be of force to bind, why not a Council.
though they be many, can not dissolve them: Why is not the like preeminence
given to the Parliament of Christ's catholic Church. Where

But not minding to enter into the disputacion of so large a matter, and there
by to make, to long digression from my purpose, I will stay and yet wish the
reader to consider what follows in the same Council decreed against soche as
shall contemptuously speak against this matter of reseruacion. Soche a Canon
there I find. Si quis dixerit non licere sacram Eucharistiam Canon 7.
in sacrario reseruari, sed statim post consecrationem astantibus necessario
distribuendam: aut non licere vt illa ad infirmos honorifice deferatur:
Anathema sit. If Deniers of reseruacion accursed.
any man shall say that yt is not laufull to reserve the holy Sacrament but
that straight way after the consecracion yt is of necessity to be distributed
to them that be present, and that yt is not laufull reverently to carry yt to
them that be sick, accursed be he.

Although (I know) the Adversary contemns this heavy sentence, forsamoche
as he vilipe^deth and derideth the Counsels: Yet (I thank God Qui non Math.
18.
audiuerit Ecclesiam, sit tibi sicut Ethnicus, and publicanus. He that willnot
hear the Church, let him be to thee, as an ethnicke and publicane. And again.
Qui Luc. 10.
vos spernit, me spernit: et qui me spernit, spernit eu^ qui me misit. Hethat
despises you despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me.

This being spoken and meant of the Apostles and their successors, the
spiritual rulars of the Church, the Proclamer and his likes so doing, what
do they else, but, as Christ says, contemn him and his Father? if they say
they contemn not the rulars of the Church, but obeie them: let them answer
me. Whom did their great fathers Luther, Carolstadius, Oecolampadius, Obedience
of the new Churches how yt stands.
Zuinglius, Bullinger, etc. obey in the Church? if ye will say they could
obey none of all the wholl Church that was then and before, for yt was no
Church: well let this your false answer stand. If then your Church began
with Luther, he being sole head, why did Carolstadius, Oecolampadius, and the
rest disobeie him? If all they were the Church, why did Thomas Monetarius, and
Swe^ckfeldius disobey them, and not hear them: But to be short, good Reader,
they obey none, neither will they hear any, but only soche as say as they
say. And this is propre to every secre of them, so that the Oecolampadians
will not hear the Lutheraus, the Anabaptists, will not hear the
Oecolampadians, the Swenckfeldians will hear none of all these.

Yet every of these sects say, they be the Church, and every of them Every
sect of Protesta^tes challenge to the^ the word of God, and the name of the
Church.
say, they have the very word os God, and thereupon, they say, they build.
And yet the word of God as yt is one, so has yt one truth, which every one
of these for saking, do miserably adulterate that holy and blesset word of
God, and instead of truth sell unto the people their heretical lies, under
the pretense of Gods word and his truth.

I am loathe to enter any further in the opening of the rebelliouse divisions,
sects, and factions that be emonge them. And they be so many as would require
a just volume to set them forth, soch is the consent, agreement and obedience
among them selves. wiche is even the just plague of God. For as man falling
from the obedience of God, fownde by Gods permission, a merueillouse rebellion
in his own body and members: So these men falling from the obedience of God
in his Church, fall to continual disobedience, and implacable rebellion among
them selves.

But there was a Church before Luther began his malignant Church. Berengarius,
(as before is said) began B^re^garius Wicleff. Hus.
to be disobedient, but he humbled him self and desired to be restored again.
Wiclefand Husse also rebelled, and moved war, but they could not preuaill.
And allthough for our sins God suffered the Philystines now to make war
against Israel, as he did against the carnal Israel: yet nothing mistrusting
his mercy, and having sure affiance in his promise that Portae inferi non
Math. 16.
praeualebunt aduersus ea^, the gates of hell shall not preuaill against his
Church, I doubt not but he will at his merciful pleasure look upon yt, and
send peace to yt.

And now to return to that from which, I have a little digressed: I say, I do
regard the sentence of the Church for yt is terrible to be cut of from that
mystical body of Christ, and to be made a dead membre, like unto a rotten or
dead stick meit for no purpose but to be cast in the fire and

Perchance the adversary will say, he fears not to dissent from the
Church, where the Church dissenteth from the Scripture, as yt does in this
Jssue joined with the proclamer touching reseruacion.
matter of reseruacion.

Year will I again ioin issue with the proclamer, that if he can bring any
plain scripture, catholic Doctor, or Council, that by express words
Pythagoras (ipse dixit, he said yt) a sufficient warrant for us? Shall we so
lightly cast away the orders, rites, Ancient and godly customs, are not to
be left for the bare saing of a Protestant.
customs, and manners of so long time received, used, and through all the
Church frequented for soche men's bare word? If he find any thing amiss let
him reform yt by scriptures, Doctors, or Counsels, and we shall hear:
otherwise yt shall be more easey for the Church, to repel his objections,
then yt shall be for him to prove them.

And methinke, nay I do not only thynk yt, but I say yt is a shame for him
to enterprise soche prohibition, and to cry out upon the Church as though

THE SIX AND TWENTETH CHApit. answers the cheis objection of the
adversaries.
IF any thing may be objected against reseruacion of the Sacrament this is
yt, which is Achilles with them, and even there common argument as well against
reseruacion, as other rites, and orders of the Church in the ministration of
the Sacraments. In the institution of the Sacrament

Will ye see the great force of this argument: There is no mention made
Protestants argument es of negatiues eluded.
of prayer in the institution of the Sacrament of Baptism, when Christ was
baptized, Ergo, there aught to be no prayer made in the ministration of yt now.
Again there is no mention made of the Baptising of children in the institucio^
of Baptism, Ergo, children aught not to be chrystened. There were no witnesses
as godfathers, or godmothers to Christ, Ergo, there aught none to be in the
ministracion of Baptism to children. There is no mention made of this term,
Sacrament, as calling Babtisme or the Supper of our lord a Sacrament, Ergo
they ought not so to be called. Likewise, there is no mention made of prayers in
the institucion of the Supper of our lord, Ergo, there aught none to be said at
the ministracion there of. There is no mention made that any women were at
Christ's Supper, Ergo there aught no women to come to the communion. There is no
mention made in the institucion of the The proclaemer uses the same manner of
disputacio^. he denies all and proves nothing.


And yet this is a common and invincible manner of argument with these people.
For in other matters they use yt thus: There is no mention of purgatory in the
scripture, Ergo, there is none. There is no mention in the scripture to pray for
the dead, Ergo they are not to be prayed for. There is no mention

But to join with the^ in the solucio^ of their argument. There be three manner
Three manner of doings as touching the Scripture.
of doings as concerning the Scripture: One is to do so much as the Scriture
bids. An other to do against that the Scripture bids. The third is to do
something besides that the Scripture bids.

Hoc facite: This day, and so eat yt and drink, yt in the remembrance of
Christ's passion and death: this man has done as much as the scripture
bids him, and therefore is he blameless in this respect.

An other manner of doing is when a man does contrary to the scripture, 11.
as when men will not use soche matter as Christ appointed of which sort there
have been diverse.

The Manyches having wicked opinions, among which one was that all August. li.
de haresib.
our food is unclean, and thereupon taking common bread to be unclean, they
used slower in the Sacrament, mingled with water and other lothsom matter. And
so did contrary to the scripture, not using pure bread, but other matter then
Christ appointed.

Other there were, that for a singular sobriety which they seemed to profess,
would not use wine in the ministracion of the Sacrament, but only water,
which therefore saint Augustine calls Aquarios, watrie men. Against Jbid.
ca. 64
these men did saint Cyprian write, and Chrysostom also, and diverse other.

The sixte general Council holden at Constantinople condemns the Council
Constant. 6. ca.
Armenians, which did use wine alone in the ministracion with out water.

Both these then, not using soche matter, as Christ did use in the Sacrament,
are reproved and condemned, as doing contrary to the institucion of Christ.
For to celebrate either with wine alone, or with water alone, is a plain
conrrarie doing to the institucio^ of Christ. For as Alexander the sixte
Alexand. primus. Not wine alone, not water alone in our lords cup. Master
Juellcalleth for examples of the primitive Church for Doctors, and Counsels
but he will believe, and follow none.
Bishop of Rome after Peter, says: Non debet (vt a patribus accepimus, and
ipsa ratio docet) in calice Domini aut vinu^ solum, aut aqua sola offerri, sed
vtrumque permixtu^, quia vtrumque ex latere eius in passione sua profluxisse
legitur. As we have received of our Fathers, and very reason also teaches,
there aught not to be offered in the cup of our lord either wine alone, or
water alone, but both mixed together. For yt is read, that in his passion both
ran out of his side. Thus Alexander.

Note here that this Father says, that he received yt of his Fathers. Then he
being the sixte, and as some account the fifte from Peter, who were his

Now this Proclamer calls for examples of the primitive Church, for
Doctors and Counsels and all these be against him and his accomplices for that
they use but wine alone, and yet obstinately they perfist in there error

I remembe the Somer before I wrote this rude work, I was nere unto this man
(whom I term the Proclamer) within whose jurisdiction one of his Ale given in
stead of wine at a Communion.
ministres ministering the communion to a woman, gave her to drink a cup of
ale in stead of wine. Which when this man understood, no entreatie, no
desire, no letters of me^ of woorshippe of the Same contrie might appease his
displeasure, nor obtein pardon for the offender, but open penance must he do in
diverse places. And certain I am that he was so inioined, and did part er I
departed the contrie. I mislike not that an offender was punished, but I much
mislike that they so straictlie punish the breach of their disordre, and they
them selves break the order of the catholic Church. When I heard of this
correction, there came to my mind the strange conscience Math. 25.
again to them which they gave him to betraie his master, here their
consciences were spiced, and they said, those pence might not be cast in the
Threasurie, by cause yt is the price of blood. Their consciences suffered them
to make away Christ, which was incomparably a more heinouse offense, and
yet their consciences grudged that those plates should be put in to the
treasury, which was but a small matter.

So to impugn the truth of Christ, to take away his body and blood from us
in the Sacrament, and as yt were, to make Christ away, to transgress
Sacramentaries take away the fatt and sweet of the Sacrament. Mat. 23. They
sto^ble at a straw and leap over a block
the order of the holy institucion of Christ, conte^ptuouslie to leave the
order of the catholic Church, yt is easy enough to their consciences. But
when they have taken the fat and sweet of the Sacrament away, and

Thus ye streign out a guatte, and swallowe (as Christ said) a Cammell. And
as the proverb is, ye stomble at a straw, and leap over a block. Ye are
curiouse in tithing minte, anise, and commin, but ye omit the weightier
matters of the law: ye are busy in bread and wine and leave out the body
and blood of Christ, the weightier matters of the law of the Gospel. Ye cast
away the kernel, and fight for the shale. And thus ye transgress the Jbid.
15.
commandment of God for your traditions. And ye do not only transgress the
commandment and order of Christ, as is said, but also inexcusablie ye
transgress the order of our Seniours and elders of the primitive Church, in
that ye use wine alone in the ministracion of the Sacrament. And therefore
leaving you among them, that be of this second sort of doers mentioned in
our distinction, I shall divert me to speak of the third manner of doing,
which is to do something beside the Scripture.

This manner of doing, for the readers better understanding, may be diverse 111.
ways. One is when the substauce of the institucion is done according to the
scriptures, but the manner of the doing is varied and altered. An other is when,
the institucion being accordingly done, some thing is added for the more
devout; and semelie doing of the same.

As touching the first way, yt is certain that the substance of the
institucion The Substance of a Sacrament must be observed the manner of
ministering may be altered. Mat. 28.
of a Sacrament being observed, there is none offense committed by the Church to
alter the manner of the ministracion thereof. As for example.

Christ in the institucion of Baptism was baptized in the River Iordain, and
giving commission to his Apostles to baptize, the matter of Baptism now
presupposed, which is the one part of the Substance of the Sacrament, he
taught them the form, which is the other part of the Substance of the
Sacrament saing: Euntes, Baptisate eos, In nomine Patris, and Filij, et
Spiritus sancti. Go ye and christen them in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the holy Ghost. The one part of Baptism then is water, the
other is the word: I baptize thee in the name of the Father and of the Son
etc. These two things being the Substance of the Sacrament must neades be
done. But the manner of the doing of these may be altered, as the practice of
the primitive Church, as well as of the Church ever since weary well proves.

For the manner of the institucion was to baptize in a River, and that in the

The Church also now and of long time has used no river, but semelie vessels
with water, and so baptize them that are to be baptized. If we should be
streict obseruers of the manner, and there in follow our Master Christ, the
Author of the Sacrament, then for that he was then a perfect man, and thirty
years of age, none should be baptized until they were of the same age.

Even so the institucio^ of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, as
yt had by him a Substance apoincted, as is before said: So he used also about
yt soche manner as pleased him for that time to use. This manner Chrysts manner in
ministering the blessed Sacrament has no commandment.
as yt had no commandment for the obseruacion of yt from Christ: So

Christ's manner in the institucion of the Sacrament was, that he did distribute
yt to twelve. This manner binds not, that yt must allwais be imparted to
twelve, and to none other nombre. These twelve also were Apostles: this
likewise binds not, that the disciples and other chrystians of inferioure
sort should not communicate. So to come to the purpose, Christ distributed
his body and blood to his Apostles, and reserved nothing of that, that was
consecrated: This also being a part of the manner, and not of the Substance of
the Sacrament, binds no more then these that follow. Christ ministered his
body and blood at night: yt binds not us to do the like. For the Church
uses yt in the day. The Sacrament was ministered when they had supped with the
Paschall lamb, the Church even from the beginning has and does yt fasting.

And notwitstanding that yt was used certain years after Christ to be Placuit
enim Spiritui sancto, vt in honorem tanti Sacramenti in os christiani Ad Janua.
epist. 118.
prius Dominicum corpus intraret quam exteri cibi. Yt has pleased the holy
Ghost (says he) that into the mouth of a Christen man, first should enter
the body of owre lord, then other outward meats.

Seeing then all these manners of the ministracion be altered, and the receiving
of the Sacrament immediately upon the consecracion, is not of the substance of
the Sacrament, but of the manner of yt, why may yt not without peril be
altered, as well as the other be?

Saint Augustine giving a cause of that manner of receiving declares that the
order of receiving was left to the Apostles to dispose. Saluator quo
veheme^tius commendaret mysterij altitudinem, vltimum hoc voluit infigere
cordibus, and memoriae Aug. ibi.
Discipulorum, a quibus ad passionem digressurus erat. Et ideo non praecepit
quo deinceps ordine sumeretur, vt Apostolis, per quos erat eclcesias
dispositurus, seruaret bunc locum. Owre Savior, wherbie he might the more
vehemently comme^dethe Christ left the manner of ministracion of the Sacrament
to be disposed by his Apostles.
great excellency of the mystery, would last of all fix this in the hearts
and memory of his disciples, from whom he was about to depart to his
passion. And therefore he did not g^ue commandment in, or after what order yt
should be after ward received, for that unto his Apostles, by whom he would
set his Church in order he would reserve that place. Thus saiucte Augustine.

In which sentence we are first taught, that Christ did not give his body and
blood to his Apostles after Supper, because yt should so be done still,
nether because yt was streigt way received after he consecrated yt, that yt
should be so still: but both these were done than, because they should be his
last factes before his passion, doe^ to his disciples, that the mystery might
thereby better remain in their memories.

Note again that saint Augustine says: That he gave no commandment, in
what manner yt should afterward be received, So that the manner that Christ
Christ's manner in ministering the blessed Sacrament has no commandment.
used then was not as a commandment to bind us to every thing preciselie and
annswerablie as he did yt. But the substanciall part being observed, the manner
was left to the disposition of his Church.

Wherefore we may conclude, that, notwithstanding the argument of the
Adversary, that reseruacion is not mentioned in the Scripture, therefore yt
aught not to be used, we may celebrate the blessed mystery in the morning,

And here will I ioin again with the Proclamer in this point, that if he Issue
joined with the Proclamer touching reseruacion. Reseruacio^ is not against the
institucion of Christ.
can upon the institucion of the Sacrament prove, that we may not as well
reserve the same after yt is consecrate, as we may alter the time of
ministracion and receiving thereof, I will give place to him in this
controversy.

And so in the mean time I dare conclude this, that to reserve the Sacrament is
not a thing against the institucion of the same. Wherefore leauinge this as
sufficiently spoken of for this time, I will speak breislie of the other
part of this division.

The second part was, that some things be added to the ministracio^, not
altering, or changing the Substance of yt, but to cause and provoke deuocio^
and semely behavior toward so worthy an institucion. As for example: In the
Baptism of Christ, there were neither exorcismes, neither prayers, neither Act.
2.


Likewise in the last supper, we find not manny Ceremonies. This we read
that: Surgit a coena and ponit vestimenta sua, and cum accepisset lin theum
praecinxit se. Joan. 13.
He rose from supper, and laid a side his garments, and when he had taken

Soche is our grossness, that where we see no difference in externe and
outward cowntenance, we judge the things internlie, or inwardly to be of
like condition, or at the leest not much better the one then the other.
Liquide apparet, quando primum acceperunt Discipuli corpus and sanguinem
Domini, non eos accepisse ieiunos. Nunquid tamen proptered Ad Ian
calumniandum est vniuersae Ecclesiae, quod a ieiunis semper accipitur? Yt does
plainly appear that when the Apostles did first receive the body and blood
of Christ, they did not receive the^ fasting. Is therefore the universal Church
to be reproved because the same body and blod of Christ is now received
fasting?

If the Church, by the judgment of saint Austen, is not to be reproved,
though yt altered the manner of the receiving of the body and blood of Christ:
how much less is yt to be reproved for the adding or putting to of certain
godly Ceremonies for the better, and more devout manner of

Seeing then the universal Church has, put to the ministracion of the
Sacraments as well of Baptism as of the body and blood of Christ, certain
prayers, and garments, for the admonicio^ of the people, that heaue^lie
things be in doing, and so to stir up their deuocio^, and not therbie
altering the substance of the Sacraments: they be without all doubt to be
accepted, regarded, and reverenced, and the Church therefore not to be reproved.

THE SEVEN AND TWENTETH CHAP. AVNSWEring other arguments, and objections of
the Proclamer.
I Have, as me seems, satisfied the request of the Proclamer. For in this
matter I have produced the examples of the primitive Church, the sainges of
diverse of the ancient Fathers: the decrees of sondrie Counsels: Which be
not obscure, or

And now that we have proved the doings of the Church in this behalf to be
laufull, and weldoe^: let us now hear what proof he brings against the
Church.

In his sermon, among other things contained in the exclamacio^ there, he
said says thus: If any learned man of all our Adversaries, or if all the
learned men that be a live, be hable to bring any one sufficient sentence,
out of any catholic doctor, or out of any old general Council, or out
of the holy scriptures of God, or any one example of the primitive church,
wherbie yt may be clerelie and plainly proved, that the Sacrament was then,
or now aught to be hanged up under a Canopie, I promised then that I would
give over, and subscribe unto him.

The office and calling of him that spoke these words, the place they were
spoken in the weight of the matter, that was spoken of, will not suffer the man
(as I suppose) to favor reseruacion covertly, and with a gibing mock only
to inweigh against the manner of reseruacion. I never knew any of his opinion,
and doctrine, denieng the presence, but he made clean work, and denied all the
rest, that apperteineth to the Sacrament. Yt is then to be thought that this
article of the proclamacion impugneth as well reseruacion yt self, as the manner
of yt.

But this Proclamacion including a law, that no soche reseruacion should be
in the Church, what prof, what grownde has yt annexed? Yt is no small matter
to improve the order of the wholl Church observed nine hundret

I never saw a man dispossessed, that had been in possession time out of
mind, but he should, show good matter that would dispossess him, and the The
Proclamer impugned Reseruacio^ without reason or authority.
other only to stand to his possession, and not be driven to show his
evidence. What shows this proclamer? truly nothing. what no scripture? no
doctor? no Council? that the Church should break this order? None at all,
but his bare proclamacion, and yet therewith drives the Church to show. An
imperiouse manner. After this manner he may break mo good ordres in one day,
the^ he will make while he lives. Well, by cause yt is to shameful to break
ancient orders of the Church, without some proof: I will apply one of his
great proves made in his sermon to one purpose, to serve this also.

In his said sermon to improve private Mass (as he list to term yt) he
alleges this saing of Christ, Hoc facite. Do this: whereunto he adds his
Fol. 34.
exposition saing: that is to say, practice this, that I have here done, and
that in soche form and sort, as ye have seen me do yt. Thus much this
Proclamer.

As by this his exposition, if yt were aught wourth, he may seem to prove,
that forasmoche as Christ did not receive alone, but gave also to the Apostles,
the ministre may not receive alone, but must also give to other: So likewise
yt proves as well, that forasmoche as Christ reserved no part of the
Sacrament, no more should the Church now.

Yt is a great liberty that this man takes unto him self, to make soche
expositions as likes him self, and upon his own exposition to grownd an
argument to condemn the practice of the wholl Church, as though yt were Locus
Topycus, a sure grownded argument, when yt is fownded but upon his own
authority. I have not read this manner of exposition in any catholic
Author, ancient, or of the later days, that these words of Christ (do
this) should be a charge and commandment to celebrate the memorial of
Christ's death in the same sort and manner, that Christ did: but raither that
his body and blood should be received in the Sacrament, as the Substance This
is his saing: Ideo hoc Saluator tradidit Sacramentum, vt per hoc semper
commemoremus, quia pro nobis est mortuus. Nam and ideo cum accipimus, a
sacerdotibus commonemur In 11. cap. 1. Cor.
quia corpus and sanguis est Christi, vt beneficijs eius non existamus ingrati.
Therefore our Savior delivered this Sacrament, that by this we should allwaies
remember that he died for us. For therefore also, when we receive, we are put
in mind by the preistes that yt is the body and blood of Christ, that we
should not be unthankful for the benefittes received. Thus saint Hierom.

Chrysostom also dissenteth not from this manner of exposition. For thus he
says: Deinde de coena illa referens, praesentia his, quae tunc fuerant,
copulat, vt quemadmodum in illa ipsa vespera, and mensa dispositi, ab ipso
Christo hoc acceperunt Jn 11. 1. Co.
sacrificium: it a and nunc disponerentur, and inquit: Quotiescunque
comederitis panem hunc, and sanguinem hunc biberitis, mortem Domini
annunciabitis donec veniat. Quemadmodum Christus and in pane, and in calice, in
commemorationem hoc facite, dixit, causam nobis aperiens, quare mysterium
daret, cum alijs hanc esse dicens sufficientem no^s ad pietatem. Nam cum
intelliges, quid propter te Dominus passus est, sapientior efficieris. Ita and
ipse iterum inquit: Quotiescunque manducaueritis, mortem eius annunciabitis. Et
haec illa Coena est. Afterward speaking of that supper he coopleth things
present, to those that then were, that as in the same euentide and table, they
being disposed did receive of Christ him self this sacrifice: even so now
also they should be disposed, and said. As often as ye shall drink this
blood, ye shall declare the death of our Lord until he come. For as Christ
both at the bread, and at the cup said: Do this in my remembrance, opening a
cause why he would give the mystery among other, said this to be sufficient
to godliness. For when thowe shall understand what our Lord has suffered for
thee, thowe shall be made the wiser: Even so he also says again: As often as
ye shall eat, ye shall declare his death, and this is even the same Supper.
Thus far Chrysostom.

In whose words, as well as in saint Hieroms, we see this commandment of
Christ ( Hocfacite, do this) to be referred to the Substance, that Christ's
words, This do ye, etc. Be referred to the substance, not to the manner.
is, to the body and blood of Christ to be received for his memorial,

And by the way (gentle reader) note and bear away these words of saint
Hierom, that he says, that when we receive, we are admonished of the preistes
that yt is the body and blood of Christ, whereby we are taught both whereunto
tends the commandment of Christ, and also what we receive in that holy
and honorable Sacrament.

I wish also that Chrysostom might be noted, how he utters the words of
saint Paul. Saint Paul says thus: As often as ye shall eat What S.
Paul calls the cup Chrysostom. calls yt to blood
this bread, and drink this cup: Chrysostom thus: As often as ye shall eat
this bread, and drink this blood: not reporting every where the very words
of saint Paul, but raither the sense, and understanding. So where saint
Paul calls yt the cup of our Lord, this man expownding S. Paul calls
yt the blood of Christ, whereby we are taught, what is in the cup of our
Lord, eue^ the blood of Christ, and not bare wine, if yt be so in that part
of the Sacrament, the^ in the other is the body of Christ, and not bare bread.

But to return to our purpose: Euthymius also expowndinge the said words of
Christ, understands them not of the manner, but of the Substance These be his
words: Ait autem Lucas hoc quoque dixisse Christum: Hoc Euth. in 26 Matthew.
sacite in mei recordationem, hoc, inquit, nouum mysterium, and non illud vetus
illud mysterium in recordationem inductum est salutis Hebraeorum primogenitorum
in Aegypto, ac libertatis Hebraeorum: hoc autem in recordatiouem Domini. Per
tale enim sacrificium reminiscimur, quod corpus suum in mortem tradiderit, and
sanguinem suum effuderit, ac ita continuitate, memoriam renouamus. Luke says
that our Lord also said: Do ye this in my remembrance. This new mystery
(says he) and not that old. For truly that old mystery was instituted in
the remembrance of the saving of the first born of the Hebrews, and of the
deliverance of the Hebrews. But this is in the remembrance of our Lord. By
soche a sacrifice we remember that he delivered his body to death, and shed
forth his blood, and so by continuance we renew memory. Thus much
Euthymius. Who as the other Fathers above alleged, understands Christ's
commandment of the substance of the Sacrament no mention made of the manner.

After these to see some of the later writers, how they understood these
words, yt shall not be amiss, that having the minds of men of diverse ages,
what the true understanding is, yt may the better appear.

Saint Thomas, among learned and holy men, that have been with in these four
hundredth years, a man right famous says thus: Hoc facite etc. Iniungit vsum
huius Sacramenti, dicens: Hoc facite, quotiescunque sumetis in meam Tho. Aqui.
in 11. 1. Co.
commemorationem, id est, in memoriam meae passionis. Do this etc. He
commands

And again he says: Mortem Domini annunciabitis repraesentando eam, per hoc
Sacramentum. Ye shall show forth the death of our Lord, representing yt by
this Sacrament.

Having no regard of the contempt of the Adversary contemning the learned men
of the later age, I will among many that may be brought, for the avoiding of
tediousness, and yet to show the conformity of doctrine in this age, with
the ancient age, bring the exposition of one named Hugo, whose saing is this.
Dixerat quod sumerent corpus Domini, and sanguinem in commemorationem eius, hic
determinat in quam: quia in Dominicae passionis. Hugo Car. in 11. 1. Co.
He had said, that they should receive the body and blood of our Lord in
the remembrance of him. Here he determines in what remembrance.

Now ye have heard diverse expownding these words, Hoc sacite (do this) all
agreing that they are to be refered, and understood to and of the substance
and use of the Sacrament, that is, that yt should be received in the
remembrance of Christ's passion and death. But that we are by those words
commanded to observe that manner and form, that our Savior observed in his
ministracion, otherwise then is said both in the The Proclamer uses his own
authority in expounding the scriptures for he has none other.
last chapter, and in this also, there is no one title in these Authors.

By this then yt may well be thought and supposed, that this man using his
absolute authority, for lack of other help, had iuuented and framed soche an
exposition upon this scripture, as was not known to the ancient expositours,
nor yet to them of the later time, and so very like never seen written, or
heard spoken hefore this time. And yet with a pretense of simplicity and
synceritie, yt is commended to the people, as the true sincere word of God,
when yt has neither Gods word, nor aid of holy Fathers to bear yt, but is
a plain inuencion of his own,

Thus much being done by authority, I shall also by good reason prove The
Proclamer his exposition im pugned by reason.
his exposition false. For he him self grants that for five or six hundredth
years after Christ, the Church used the institucion of Christ purelie and
well, without the breach of Christ's word or commandment.

That the primitive and ancient Church used an other form and manner in the
ministracion of the Sacrament, then Christ did in the institucion of the Masses
in the primitive church varied fre^ the form and manner of Christ's institucion.
same, the Mass of saint James, of the which this man makes mention, the
Mass of saint Basil, the Mass of Chrysostom, the Mass used in Millan by
saint Ambrose, with the wholl practice as well of the Apostles, as of other
does most manifestly testisie. And these Masses used in the primitive and
ancient Church did all agree in the Substance of the Sacrament: But in the
form, manner, and sort of ministracion, there was great diversity, one much
varieng from an other, and every one of them varieng from the manner that
Christ used, and yet every one godly and good. We may then

We may also impugn this exposition, by this man's own practice, who
Proclamer his reason impugned by his own practice.
being soche a precise reformer of the abuses of the Church (as he terms yt)
will not in his doings commit any notoriouse abuse, how so ever he does in
his words. Yt is notoriouse that he ministers in other sort and form then
Christ did. Wherefore if there be no abuse in his doing, there is abuse in his
sainge. For his saing, and doing in this matter be plainly contrary. He says
we must practice in soche sort and form as Christ did, but his doings be not
in soche sort and form as Christ did. That his form is not soche as Christ
used, yt is more manifest then I neade to make rehersall.

For Christ ministered when the Apostles had eaten: this man when the people be
fasting. Christ in the evening: this man in the morning. Christ I am not
certain but J^udge the best.
with usual vuleauened bread: this man with wafer cakes. Christ without any
other straung garment then his own usually worn: this man in other garments
appoincted to that purpose. Christ did sit with the twelve: this man
stands with an uncertain nombre, with many other like.

And here if this expositour will have his exposition streictly laid to all
the form and sort of Christ's doing in his supper: I would learn of him,
whether I knowing a man to be far unworthy to receive the blessed Sacrament,
shall admit him to the table, and ministre unto him notwithstanding his
unworthiness, because that Christ did know Judas to be unworthy and yet
ministered to him.

But to return, ye may perceive that the form and sort, which this man uses
in his communion, is much in many things discrepant from the doings of
Christ in his supper. And yet I suppose, that he thinks Christ's manner in
ministracio^ of the Sacrament never since used.
well of him self in his so doing. If then his doing be good: then is his
exposition naught.

And to conclude, seeing the Apostles, the Fathers of the primitive Church, the
ancient doctors that were within three, four, and five hundredth years of
Christ, observed not the form and sort that Christ used in the ministracion
of his Supper, nor any other age since that time, neither this

This argument then being, as I trust, fully solued, I find nothing in his
sermon, that he obiecteth against this matter of reseruacion directly. But I
find a pretty slight that he uses, as thereby to make his audience believe,
that to reserve the Sacrament is an abuse, which slight when I have opened to
the reader, he shall I trust perceive, that under the pretense and cowntenance
of synceritie, and simplicity, he iugleth with craft and subtletie.

For the better perceiving of this slight, if ye do not remember what is
alleged out of Tertullian, and saint Ciprian in the xxiiij. chapter of
this

A sleight of the Proclamer to abuse Tertul. and S. Cyprian.
In the time of Tertullian and saint Cyprian, which was a thousand and
four hundredth years agon, women commonly took the Sacrament home with them
in their napkins, and laid yt in their chestes, and received a portion of yt
in the morning before other meats.

See ye not how by this slight, he would dasell the eyes and judgment of the
reader, that when he should hap to read these places, he should repute and
esteem the^, not as good examples, but as abuses, and so shaddowe the matter of
reseruacion which they prove. But does he find this spoken

As for saint Ciprian the Adversary perhappe would gloss yt a little, and
prove yt an abuse, because the woman, when she opened her coafer, where the
holy Sacrament lay, there sprang out a fire that feared her, that she durst
not touch yt. But let the Proclamer veiue that place of saint Cyprian well,
and he shall find none other abuse mentioned there of him, but that the woman
would have presumed to touch the holy thing of our Lord (as he terms yt)
with unworthy hands. This is the abuse that S. Cyprian reherseth there. But
that she reserved yt, he accompteth yt no abuse. For there is no soche word in
saint Cyprian. Wherefore Reader, be ware of soche sleightes, and by this
perceive, that all is not truth, that this man so gloriously sets forth.

And if he account yt an abuse, because they carried yt home, what will he say
to the use of the Church in the time of Justinius Martyr? was not then the
Sacrament carried home to soche as were absent? This holy man so testifies
saing thus: Cum autem is qui praeest gratias egerit, and totus populus Just. in
Apologia.
approbauerit, hi, qui vocantur apud nos Diaconi, distribuunt vnicuique
praesentium, vt participent de pane, in quo gratiae actae sunt, et de vino et
aqua, et ijs qui non sunt praessentes deferu^t domu^. When he that is chief
has given thanks, and all the people has consented to yt, these, that with
us be called Deacons, do distribute of the consecrated The Sacrament carried
home to the^ that were absent.
bread, and of the wine and water, to every one that is present to receive, and
to those that be absent they carry yt home. Thus Justinius.

Saint Basil also wittnesseth that holy men living in wilderness did
reserve the Sacrament in their Cells, and as devotion moved them, received yt.
Thus he says: Epist. ad Caesariam Patriciam.
Omnes in eremis solitariam vitam agentes, vbi non est sacerdos Co^munionem
domi servants, a seipsis communicant, All that lead solitary lives in the
wilderness, where there is no priest, keeping the Sacrament in their houses,
receive yt by them selves. Thus saint Basil.

The Sacr. reserved in Rome. in S. Hieroms time.
Saint Hierom also in his Apology against Iouinian, testifies that the
people of Rome in his time used to keep the Sacrament in their houses, and
received yt by them selves.

Now if the Sacrament were carried to the houses of soche as were absent (as
appareth by Justinius) and of diverse kept to be received as devotion served

And here, Reader, beside that good use to carry the Sacrament to soche as
neaded yt, is there not in Iustine a good argument for reseruacion? was not the
Sacrament, when all the Communion was done in the Church, reserved to be
carried to them that were absent? Now if yt may be reserved but so long time,
why may yt not be kept a longer time? If not a longer time, let the Proclamer
bring furthe the just prescript time out of the Scriptures, the Doctors, or
Counsels, and we shall regard the prescription, if he can not (as I am sure
that he can not) let him cease with these his vain inverted

And where the Churchc keeps and reserved the Sacrament on the altar, or else
where, let him know by saint Basil, and saint Hierom, that so yt The
church now reserving the Sacr. and sending yt to the sick offends not
was in their time, and from the beginning likewise reserved and kept, so that
the Church neither in sending the Sacrament to sick folks, or other absent
in their necessity, neither in keeping yt in the church, does other wise then
was done in the primitive Church.

Wherefore I wish thee (gentle Reader) to stay thy self, and not to suffer thy
self to be carried away with soche vain, diverse, and strange Doctrines, but
consider well the practice of the Church declared unto thee in this matter.

For two things by the doctrine of saint Augustine must we observe: the one
is what so ever is taught us of the Scripture: the other, what we Ianuarius: Si
quid diuinae scripturae praescribit autoritas, non est dubitandum, quin ita
facere Ad Ianua. Epist. 118. What soever the Church uses throughout the
world yt is to be observed.
debeamus vt legimus. Similiter etiam si quid per orbem frequentat Ecclesia.
Nam hoc quin ita faciendum sit, disputare, insolentissimae insaniae est. What
soever the authority of the divine scripture prescribes unto us, there is no
doubt but we aught even so to do as we read, likewise what soever the Church
uses throughoute the world. For to dispute whether this should be so done or
no, yt is a most presumptuouse madness. Thus saint Augustine,

Seeing then reseruacion is and has been used through out all the Church: And
yet now this Proclamer without any authority makes his proclamacion
against yt, is not he convinced by the sentence of saint Augustine, to be a
presumtuouse mad man, or presumptuouslie mad? For although the scripture
gives no commandment for reseruacion, as yt does not also for receiving in
the morning, and before meat, yet the use and custom of the people of God,
and the commandment of the elders are to be In his rebus, Ad Casulanum Epist.
86. Oordinaunces of the elders to be holden for laws, where scripture
prescribes not.
de quibus nihil certi statuit scriptura diuina, mos populi Dei, vel instituta
maiorum prolege tenenda sunt. Et sicut praeuaricatores Diuinarnm legum: ita
contemptores ecclesiasticarum consuetudinum coercendi sunt. Si quis autem
videtur contentiosus esse, nos talem consuetudinem non habemus, neque Ecclesia
Dei. In these things of the which the scripture of God has determined
nothing certain, the custom of the people of God, or the ordinances of the
elders, are to be holden for a law. And as the breakers of the law of God: so
the contemners of the ecclesiastical ordinances, or customs of the Church,
are to be punished. But if any man seem to be contenciouse, we have no soche
custom, nor yet the Church of God.

Thus ye see, what be saint Augustines rules in soche matters, as be not
expressedlie determined by the scriptures. Ye hear how the decrees,
commandments, and the customs of the people of God (how soever yt likes
this new reformer to mock and skorn them) by the mind of saint

These matters with me seem to have weight, but with soche as can swallowe a
Camel, and choke with a gnatte, perchance they seem light enough. But yet
how a private person may break a common order, vniuersalie received, which
is not against the scriptures, I know not. But of this matter for answer to
this Proclamer, I trust there is sufficiently said. Wherefore leaving yt, I
will proceade further in the order of my matter chiefly pourposed and intended.

THE EIGHT AND TWENTETH CHAP. BEGINS to speak of the prophecies, and first
of the prophecy of the preisthead of Christ after the order of Melchisedech.
of Melchisedech, answerablie to which the Prophet David prophesied thus:
Iurauit Dominus, and non poenitebit eum, tu es sacerdos in aeternum secundum
ordinem Melchisedech. Owre lord has sworn, and yt shall not forthinke him.
Thowe Psalm. 109.
art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech.

That this prophecy is spoken of Christ, he himself proves in the Gospel,
where we read that the Phariseis being gathered to gether, Christ asks them a
quiestion, saing: Quid vobis videtur de Christo? Cuius filius est? Dicunt ei
Mat. 22.
David. Quomodo ergo David in spiritu vocat eum Dominum, dicens: Dixit Dominus
Domino meo, sede a dextris meis, etc. Si ergo David in spiritu vocat eum
Dominum, quomodo filius eius est? What think ye of Christ? Whose Son is he?
They said unto him: The Son of David. How then does David in spirit call
him Lord, sainge: The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thowe on my right hand,
etc. If then David in spirit call him Lord how is he then his Son?

By which allegacion of our savior Christ yt is manifest, that this psalm is
to be understood of him, which also has some proof of the Phariseis so to
be. For when they heard Christ allege this psalm, and Rabbi Ionathas a man
of great authority among them, an Rabbi Barachias being writers both do
expownd this Psalm of Christ.

But what neadeth me seek for proof so far of, seeing that saint Peter in
the Acts, and saint Paul in his first epistle to the Corinthians, and to
the Hebrews may suffice to prove this matter.

Saint Peter in the Acts does allege the same psalm understanding Act. 2.
yt of Christ. Saint Paul to the Corinthians applies the same psalm to
Christ saing. Oportes illum regnare, donec ponat omnes inimicos sub pedibus
eius. 1. Cor. 15.
He must reign, till he has put all his enemies under his feet.

But to the Hebrews he most fully and plainly teaches the same, proving
first thereby the excellency of Christ above the Angels, and says: Ad quem
autem Angelorum dixit aliquando: Sede a dextris meis, donec ponam inimicos
Hebr. 1.
tuos scabellum pedum tuorum? Unto which of the Angels has he said at any
time, Sit thowe on my right hand, till I make thy enemies thy footestoole? All
these alleged do well prove this psalm to be a prophecy of Christ.

But yet saint Paul proceading, comes somewhat nearer to the purpose, and
applies the verse of this psalm first above alleged, unto Christ in mo
places then one, prouinge thereby the ceassing of the legal preisthead, for
that Christ was now commed the preiste after the order of Mechisedech. And
first declaring that Christ did not usurp his preistheade, Sic and Christus
non semetipsum glorificauit vt Pontifex fieret, sed qui locutus est ad eum,
etc. Tu es sacerdos Hebr. 5.
in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Even so Christ also glorified not
him self to be made the high pteist, but he that said unto him, etc. Thowe art
a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech.

And declaring the great benefitte, that came by him being the high priest Et
consummatus factus est omnibus obtemperantibus sibi causa salutis aeternae,
appellatus a Deo Pontifex iuxta ordinem Melchisedech. And Ibid.
he being perfight, was the cause of eternal salvation unto all them that
obeyed him, and is called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedech.

Likewise he calls him in the VI. chapter. And the wholl VII. chap. he
occupies in applieng Melchisedech to Christ, proving by this prophecy, the
abrogacion of the preisthead of the law, and so conseque^tlie of the law yt
self. Wherefore he said. If now therefore perfection came by the preistheade
Hebr. 7.
of the Levites (for under that preisthead the people received the law) what
neadeth further, that an other priest should rise to be called after the order
of Melchisedech, and not after the order of Aaron? For if the preisthead be
translated, then of necessity must the law be translated also, etc. For after
this manner does he testify, Thowe art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech. Then the commandment that went before is disanulled, because of
weakness and unprofitableness.

And further declaring the excellency of Christ's preisthead above the
preisthead of Aaron, he says: For these preistes were made without an oath,
but this priest with an oath, by him that said to him: The Lord swear and
will not repent him. Thowe art a priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedech.

Thus as the law of nature has in Melchisedech figured Christ, And the law
of Moses by prophecy forespoken yt: So has the law of the Gospel (as ye
have now learned by saint Paul) fullfilled the same, and most plainly and
evidently proved yt so to be.

If then Christ be a priest after the order of Melchisedech, we must seek what
the order of the preistheade of Melchisedech is, and wherein yt consists, And
therbie shall we know the preistheade of Christ, and wherein yt consists.

Saint Paul generally declares the order of a priest when he says: Omnis
namque Pontifex ex hominibus assumptus, pro hominibus constituitur in ijs,
Hebr. 5.
quae sunt ad Deum, vt offerat dona and sacrificia pro peccatis. Every high
priest, that is taken from among men, is ordained for men in things
perteining to God, to offer gifts and Sacrifices for sin.

By which description of saint Paul yt does appear, that the order of
preisthead stands in two parts: The first he teaches when he says: Order
of preisthead stands in two parts.
Pro hominibus constituitur in ijs, quae sunt ad Deum. He is ordained for men
in things perteining to God. Whereby is meant, the preaching to the people, and
teaching them the laws of God, and ministering the Sacraments to them, as yt
was said unto Moses: Esto tu populo in ijs quae ad Exodus 18.
Deum pertinent, vt referas quae dicuntur ad eum, ostendasque populo ceremonias
and ritum colendi, viam per quam ingredi debeant, and opus facere. Be thowe
unto the people to Godward, that thowe may bring the causes unto God. And
thowe shall teach them ordinances and laws, and show them the way, wherein
they must walk and the work that they, must do.

The second part of the order of preistheade stands in offering gifts,

Then they that be called of God, as was Aaron, and do preach and teach one
faith of God unto the people, and offer unto God one manner of sacrifice, they
be one order of preistheade. So that these two must concur, or else yt is not
a perfight order. For Elias the prophet of God, and the 3. Reg. 18.
preistes of Baall did offer one manner of thing in sacrifice (for they both
offered

Melchisedech and Aaron taught one God, and were both preistes of Genesis 14.
Leuit. 8. Heb, 5.
God. For Melchisedech was the priest of the most high God, as the book of
Genesis wittnesseth, and Aaron was called of God, as the book of Leuiticus,
and saint Paul to the Hebrews testify. And yet they were not of one order
of preisthead, because their sacrifices were not of one manner.

By this then yt may be taken for a truth, that Christ, not being a priest
after the order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchidech (which two orders
differed not in faith, but in manner of sacrifice) is so called a priest after
the order of Melchisedech for the manner of the sacrifice. For he must agree
with Melchisedech in that thing, that makes the difference betwixt the order
of Aaron, and the order of Melchisedech, and that was and

But here the Adversary will say, that Christ is not likened to Melchisedech
for any sacrifice by all the process of saint Paul. But for Objection.
that Melchisedech was Rex Salem, king of Salem, and withal the priest of
God, and for that he was with out Father, without Mother, having neither
beginning of days nor ending, in these points he is the figure of Christ,
who is both king and priest, having no Father in earth, nor mother in heaven,
neither as concerning his Godhead any beginning, and as touching his Godhead
and Manhead no endinge. And so is he a priest for ever.

To this I say, that the thing that saint Paul principally intended, is to
be considered. And then yt shall easily be perceived, why he did not
Principal intent of S. Paul in his epist. to the Hebrews.
make rehersall of the manner of the sacrifice of Melchisedech, nor mention of
the doing of the same in Christ.

The principal intent of saint Paul in this place was to prove and Why S.
Paul spoke nothing of she sacrifice of Melchisedech in his epist. to the Heb.
of the sacrifice, and choose to speak of that, that most manifestly, and
also inuinciblie proved the excellency of Christ and his preistheade above the
priest and preisthead of the law. And therefore among other points. declaring
the excellency of Christ, as that he was made a priest with an oath, other
without an oath, last as the chiefest he reherseth his eternity saing: Among
them (meening the preistes of Aaron) many were made preistes because they were
not suffered to endure by reason of death: But this man because he endures
ever, he has an everlasting preistheade. Wherefore he is able also ever Heb. 7.
to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him. Seeing he ever lives
to make intercession for us. Thus now ye may perceive that the objection of
the Adversary is answered, when saint Paul's principal entente is once
known.

If by the sacrifice of Melchisedech, the excellency of Christ might as well
have appeared to the Hebrews (who as yet were soche, as Quibus lacte opus erat
non solido cibo, which had neade of milk, not strong meat, and could not
bear the mysteries of our faith) as by his eternity, be you well assured,
Saint Paul would not have omitted yt. But because in the conceit of the
Hebrews, their sacrifices appeared to them more gloriouse, and more excellent
then the sacrifice of Melchisedech: therefore saint Paul did not speak of yt.

But yet the Adversary, who can not cease to impugn the truth, when he
sees that he can not preuaill with his first objection, he has invented an
other which is soche one as men ouercommed with fury and malice do make.
Whose reason and knowledge being obscured do speak they cannot tell what, and
in that rage utter as soen a falsehood as a truth, and having no sownde
Judgment, say good is evil, and evil is good, darkness light, and light
darkness. Their objection is this.

Melchisedech (say they) did not offer bread and wine in sacrifice, but he
Objection of the Adversaries.
met with Abraham retourning from the slaugter of the Kings, and brought
forth bread and wine, as yt were to welcome Abraham homewarde from the
battaill. For the scripture (say they) has not in that place of Genesis the
word offerre, to offer but proferre, to bring forth. For the text is: At vero
Melchisedech Rex Salem proferens panem and vinum. And Melchisedech king of
Salem brought forth bread and wine, and blessed him.

This objection is so vain that yt is raither worthy to be exploded, then
Thanswere
with pen to be remembered, raither to be laughed and hissed at, of the
children in the schools, then to be answered and solued. Notwithstanding that
the vanity of the same may the better appear to the reader, and that he also
may be satisfied, yt shall be answered both by Scriptures, and also by the
eldest and noblest learned men of Christ's Parliament house.

Yt is manifest by that, that is above said, that one of the parts of the For
he was the priest of the most high God, what dependence is there of this one
part of this scripture to the other, or why should this that he was the
priest of the most high God be added, as the cause why he brought forth bread
and wine, but that he as the priest of God, had sacrificed that, that he
brought forth? What direct cause is yt, that Melchisedech, because he was the
priest of the most high God, should bring forth bread and wine? Yt is nothing
perteigning to the preistheade to bring forth bread and wine, in the absolute
or bare respect of bread Yt perteined not to Melchisedech his preisthead to
bringfurth: but to offer bread and ctine.
and wine, but in the respect that bread and wine were the things, that he
did use in sacrifice, which he had at that time offered to God for a thanks
giving for the victory of Abraham, so yt apperteineth to the preisthead. And
this part of the text (for he was the priest of the most hig God) may very
well be added as the cause, as in very deed yt is. Otherwise the bringing
forth of bread and wine is not apperteining

This understanding the very connection of the scripture and depende^ce of the
same, enfortceth us to take, and none other can be admitted. And thus

Now for somoche as Melchisedech did sacrifice in bread and wine, and to
sacrifice is one of the essential and necessary parts of preisthead, and
Christ is a priest after the order of Melchisedech, of necessirie he must then
do sacrifice with bread and wine. This necessity saint Paul affirms to
the Hebrews. Omnis namque Pontifex ad offerenda munera and hostias
constituitur, vnde necesse est and hunc habere, quod offerat. Every high priest
(says he) is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices, wherefore yt is of
necessity, that this man also have somewhat to offer.

Christ then being a priest after the order of Melchisedech, must needs have
somewhat to offer after the manner of that order. But we never read Christ
executed his preisthead after the order of Aaron upon the Cross, but after the
order of Melchisedech in his Last supper.
when he offered his own body to be slain, and that oblation was after the
manner of Aaron. The other in his last supper, where we must needs confess
(except we will say, that Christ altogether neclected the preisthead appointed
him of God, which is not to be said) that he did execute the office of his
preisthead after the order of Melchisedech, when taking bread and wine, he said
to his Apostles: Take eat, this is my body: Take and drink this is my
blood. If not then: let the Adversary show, when and where Christ did
sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech. If he did never sacrifice after that
order, then is yt not true that he was a priest after that order, for somoche
as one chief part and office of preisthead standith in sacrificing. But
undoubtedly he a was priest after that order, and in his last supper he showed
him self so to be. When under the forms of bread and wine he offered his own
body and blood, an unbloody sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech. And
thus much for the proof of this matter by the Scripture.

THE NINE AND THIRTITH CHAP. PROCEAdeth to prove the same by saint Ciprian and
Isychius.
THat Christ did Sacrifice at his last supper after the order of Melchisedech:
and thereby was as well likened to Melchisedech, as by the eternity of his
preisthead: and that Melchisedech him self offered bread and wine in sacrifice
(which three things the Adversaries deny) yt shall be, by the great famous
elders, that were nere to Christ, and which lived in the time, that the
Church had most perfight knowledge of gods treuth, and therefore knew the
enacted and received truth in the Parliament house of Christ, made so plain
and cuident, that the enemies shall be confounded, and the Reader, if he will
see, shall perceive that the Adversaries have spoken against a most manifest

And first we will hear the testimony of the holy Martyr Saint Cyprian. Who
says thus: Significata olim a tempore Melchisedech prodeunt Sermon. de Coena
Domini.
Sacramenta, and silijs Abrahae facientibus opera eius, summus sacerdos panem
profert and vinum, Hoc est, inquit, corpus meum. Manducauerant, and biberant de
eodem pane secundum formam visibilem, sed ante verba illa cibus ille communis
tantum nutriendo corpori commodus erat. Sed ex quo a Domino dictum est, Hoc
facite in meam commemoratione^, Haec est caro, and hic est sanguis meus.
Quotiescunque his verbis, and hac fide actum est, panis ille substantialis, and
calix benedictione solemni consecratus, ad totius hominis vi tam salutemque
proficit, simul medicamentum and holocaustum ad sanandas infirmitates and
purgandas iniquitates existens. Manifestata est etiam spiritualis, et
corporalis cibi dista^ tia: Aliud fuisse quod prius est appositum, aliud quod a
magistro datum est, et distributum. The Sacraments signified long agon from
the time of Melchisedech now do come abroad. And the high priest to the
children of Abraham doing his works, does bring forth bread and wine: This
(says he) is my body. Co^secracio^ and sacrifice plainly avouched by S. Cyp.
They had eaten and dronken of the same bread after the visible form. But
before those words, that common meat was only meat profitable to nourish
the body, but after the time that yt was said of owre lord: This do ye in the
remembrance of me, This is my flesh, this is my blood. As often as yt is done
with these words, and this faith, that substanciall bread and cup
consecrated by the Solemn benediction does profitt and auaill to the health
and life of the wholl man, being both a medicen and Sacrifice, to heal
infirmities and to pourge iniquities. There is also declared, the difference of
the spiritual, and corporal meat. Yt was one thing that first was set
before them and consumed, and an other thing that was given of our Master and
distributed. Thus far S. Cyprian.

Ye see here a clear testimony, both of the thing that is in this place
specially inquired, that is, of the applicacion of the bread and wine, which
Melchisedech offered in figure, to the bread and wine which Christ offered in
verity: and also of the thing that generally is inquired through out the
wholl book, which is of the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament.

Of the first there neadeth no note to be made, for he says manifestly, Bread
and wine offered by Melchisedech were figures of that, which Christ offered in
his last supper.
that the Sacraments signified from the time of Melchisedech in the last
Supper of Christ came abroad. What they were he opens saing: And the high
priest (meening Christ) bringing forth bread and wine, etc. Whereby yt must
neades follow, that the bread and wine which Melchisedech used, was the figure
of the bread and wine with Christ occupied. And thus where the Aducrsaries

Now of the Real presence also, saint Cyprian speaks very plainly. As
touching the which although there might be taken here diverse notes: Two notes
out of S. Cipria^ for the presece of Chrysts body in the Sacrament.
yet I will at this present take but two. The one is that he says, that
before those words (meening the words of Christ This his my body, which
be a little before spoken) that bread was only meat to nourish the body. But
after yt was said of Christ. This do ye in remembrane of me: and, This is my
flesh, And this is my blood: that substanciall bread consecrated by the
Solc^ne benediction is profitable to the health and life of the wholl man, that
is, both of body, and of soul whcih both together make an wholl man. And how
yt does profit he declares. Yt is (says he) both a medice^ and a sacrifice,
to heal infirmities and to pourge iniquities.

Note well that he does not here in this place say, that the faith only to
believe that Christ has suffered for us, or the benefittes and merittes of
Christ's passion, and death, which is spiritual receiving, is both a medicin
to heal infirmities, and a sacrifice to pourge iniquities Lauit nos a peccatis
nostris in sanguine suo. He has washed us from our sins in his blood. For
neither Apoc al. 1. The thing that the bread is consecrated into, is the
sacrifice that pourgeth our iniquities.
our faith in Christ crucisied, neither the merit of his passion is that
sacrifice, for the one is the mean to atteign to be partaker of that sacrifice,
the other the effect of the same sacrifice, So that neither of them is the
sacrifice yt self: But the thing that the substanciall bread is consecrate
into, is the sacrifice that pourgeth iniquities. There is nothing that is or can
be that sacrifice, but the body of Christ. Wherefore the thing into the which
the bread is consecrated is the body of Christ.

And for the confirmacion of this, take also the second note which is Aliud
in the neutre gendre signifies a real difference in things.
where he says: Aliud est, quod prius est appositum et consumptum: Aliud quod
a magistro datum, and distributum. Yt is one thing that was first set before
them and

Yt is well known to learned men, that this word (aliud) in the neutre
gendre imports a difference substanciall, from the thing that yt is compared
to, and so the two things that be compared together, be of two different
substances. And therefore for somoche as the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost be three distincted persons, the catholic faith teaches us to say:
Alius est Pater, alius Filius, alius Spiritus sanctus. The Father is one, the
Son is an other, and the holy Ghost is an other. But formoche as they be not
distincted in substance we may not say: Aliud est Pater, aliud Filius, aliud
Spiritus sanctus. The Father is one thing, the Son an other thing and the
holy Ghost an other thing. But contrary wise because these three be one in
substance, the Scripture teaches us thus: Tres sunt qui testimonium dant in
coelo, Pater, Verbum, and Spiritus sanctus, and hi tres vnum sunt. There be
three that bear witness Joan. 5. Vnum in the neutre ge^dre signifies unity
of substance. Joan. 10.
in heaven, the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost, and these three be (Vnum)
that is one thing or substance not (Vnus) one person. So we read in the
Gospel: Ego and Pater vnum sumus. I and the Father be one, that is in
substance. Aliud est quod appositum, etc. Yt is one thing that was set before
them and consumed, and an other thing that the master did give and distribute:
he shows that these two things were things substanciallie distincted. For
before yt was the substance of bread, of the which he spoke in the beginning
of the sentence when he said: Manducauera^t de eodem pane secundum formam
visibilem. They had eaten of the same bread after a visible form.

But now after the solemn benediction yt is an other substance, that is, the
substance of Christ, which (as before is said) is the medicin to heal our
infirmities, and the sacrifice to pourge our iniquities. If there were the same
substance of bread still remaining after the consecracion by the solemn
blessinge, as was before, so as there were none other change but an accidental
change, that is (as the Adversaries say) that the bread before the words of
Christ spoken over yt (For they abhor to use the word, consecracion, as
saint Cyprian does, and other holy Fathers) is but common bread, but after
the words be spoken yt is Aliud est yt is an other thing. Which latin word
(Aliud) respects the difference of the substance (as is before said) and is
as much to say, as an other thing in substance, or an other substance.

Wherefore to conclude, this holy Martyr of Christ teaches us here, The
bread, that before consecracio^ serves to nourish the body only, after
co^secracio^ is an other thing, which nourishes the soul.
that the bread consecrated by the Solemn benediction, where before yt was
bread only to nourish the body, yt is now after the consecracion a thing
profitable for the health and life of the wholl man, that is, both of the
body and of the soul, being a medicin to beale infirmities, and a sacrifice
to pourge iniquities. Which thing is an other thing from the thing that yt was
before, differing from that in substance. We must needs therefore affir me and
profess that yt is the very body of Christ substanciall and Real.

But that this may appear unto you to be the very mind of saint Cyprian,
and not a sense of mine own wresting, as the Adversaries for the more part
will say, when else they could say nothing, being put to scile^ce by force
of the truth, ye shall hear an other place of the same Author. At
Melchisedech Rex Salem protulit panem and vinum (fuit enim sacerdos Li. 2. Epi.
3. ad Cicil.
Dei summi) and benedixit Abraham. Quod autem Melchisedech typum Christi
portaret, declarat Spiritus sanctus in psalmis ex persona Patris ad Filium,
dicens: Ante luciferum genui te. Iurauit Dominus, and non poenitebit eum, tu es
sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Qui ordo vtique hic est de
sacrificio illo veniens, and inde descendens, quod Melchisedech sacerdos Dei
summi fuit, quod panem and vinum obtulit, quod Abraham benedixit. Nam qui magis
sacerdos Dei summi quam Christus Jesus Dominus noster, qui sacrisicium Deo
Patri obtulit, and obtulit hoc idem, quod Melchisedech obtulerat, id est, panem
and vinum, suum scilicet corpus and sanguinem. And a little after yt follows:
Vt ergo in Genesiper Melchisedech Sacerdotem benedictio circa Abraham possit
rite celebrari, praecedit ante imago sacrificij in pane and vino scilicet
constituta. Quam rem perficiens, and adimplens Dominus, panem and calicem
mixtum vino obtulit, and qui est plenitudo veritatem praefiguratae imaginis
adimpleuit.

And Melchisedech King of Salem (says holy Cyprian) brought furthe bread and
wine (For he was the priest of the most high God) and he blessed Abraham. And
that Melchisedech did bear the figure of Christ, Before the day star have
I begotten thee, Owre Lord has The order of Melchisedech came to Christ, not
only in that he was the high priest, but in that he offered bread and wine the
like sacrifice.
sworn, and yt shall not repent him, Thowe art a priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech. Which order also is this cominge from that Sacrifice,
and from thence descendinge, that Melchisedech was the priest of the most high
God, that he offered bread and wine, that he Blessed Abraham. For who is more
the priest of the most high God, then our Lord Jesus Christ, who did offer
sacrifice to God the Father. And offered the very same that Melchisedech had
offered, that is to say, bread and wine, even his body and blood. And after a
few words, he proceadeth thus: That therefore the blessinge about Abraham
might laufullie be celebrated by Melchisedech the priest in Genesis, the image
of the sacrifice goes before, appointed in bread and wine. Which thing owre
Lord perfecting and fullfillinge, has offered the bread and the cup mixed
with wine. And he that is the fulness, has fulfilled the truth of the
prefigurated image. Thus far saint Cyprian.

What neadeth me here to say any thing where every part of the sentence was
the figure of Christ? Do ye not perceive that he also

Where (gentle reader) let me note by the way for the satisfieng of my
promise, that where the objection of the Adversary is, that S. Ciprian by
express words says Melchisedech offered.
Melchisedech did not offer in sacrifice bread and wine, and for his proof he
said that the text in Genesis, had not obtulit, he offered, but Protulit, he
brought forth: Now note if this Father uses not this word, obtulit, he
offered, saing that Christ offered the very same that Melchisedech did offer. And
what he did offer, he also declares saing: that yt was

What impudency then is there in the Adversaries to improve that, that so
ancient and so famous a learned holy Martyr so plainly teaches, and not he
alone, but all the holy company of the writers, of the which the testimony
of some mo shall be heard herafter.

As you see that Melchisedech did offer bread and wine, which was the Christ
offered bread and wine, in verity, that is, his body and blood.
figure: So did our Savior Christ (says Cyprian) offer bread and wine in
verity, that is, his body and blood.

And that the Adversaries shall not cauille, and say: Where Cyprian says,
Christ offered his body and blood, yt is not to be understood of any
sacrifice offered in the last Supper, but of the sacrifice of his body and
blood offered upon the cross: The same saint Cyprian stops the mouth of
the wicked in the other sentence before alleged where he says: The image of
the Sacrifice went before appointed in bread and wine, which things our Lord
perfecting and fulfilling offered bread and the cup mixed with wine. And that
we should not take occasion to stomble with the Adversaries, taking And he
that is the fullness has fulfilled the verity of the prefigurated image.

Do ye not hear that Christ offered the sacrifice in his last supper, of the
which the image went before in bread and wine? And do ye not hear that he
offering bread and wine, did offer in that sort, that he fulfilled the verity
of the prefigurated image? Which verity was (as saint Cyprian said be fore)
that he offered bread and wine, that is, his body and blood:

Learn then (thou Reader) of this substanciall pillar, the substa^ciall faith
of Chrysts catholic Church. And suffer not thy self to be carried away with
the Adversaries painted reasons, and gloses, having a show of truth, and
godliness above, but under there lurketh falshead and Hypocrisy. But abhor
them as saint Paul does advertise. For as the fish is deceived by the
fair bait, which outwardly shows to be a thing of commodity, but
inwardly is destruction and death, when she takes yt: Even so the reasons of
the Pseudochristians may appear to thee most godly and true, and thowe
shifte thy self of from that bait, whilst thowe art yet in the wauing

Now that we have heard this noble learned Father of the one side of Christ's
Parliament house, we will hear an other of the other side, which shall be
Isychius, who upon Leuiticus touches this matter and says: Et quod hoc est
sacrificium? Duae decimae similae conspersae oleo. Oportet enim scire persectam
humanitatem, and perfectam diuinitatem contemperare, id est, in vnum conuenire
in oleo, id est, In Leuitie. li. 6. ca. 23.
per eam, quam circa nos habet, compassionem. Sic enim sacrificium odor
suauitatis Domino inuenitur, sapientibus nobis de eo, quae digna sunt. In
quibus autem sacrificium, and per quos agitur, quomodo celebratur intelligiblis
agni oblatio, quod sequitur ostendit. Neque enim in sanguine, neque per
irrationabilia animalia sacrificium a nobis Deus suscipit, secundum quod
sequentia demonstrant. Ait enim: Liba quoque vini quarta pars hyn, panem and
polentam. Quia dubium futurum erat forsan, a quibus mysterium sacrificij, quod
per Christum est, quod superius diximus, celebratur: habes ecce intelligibilis
Melchisedech oblationem, quae in pane and vino perficitur, in qua quarta pars
hyn in libis vini offertur, vt per quartam Euangelij traditionem, quae in
libris quatuor est, per libationem vero Dominicum sermonem significaret, quum
ait: Hic est meus sanguis, qui pro vobis fundetur: sine imminutione enim
significare legislatori visum est Christi mysterium. And what is this
sacrifice? Two tenth deals of fine flower sprinkled with oil. For we must
know to contemper the perfect manhead, and perfect godhead, that is to come
together into one in oil, that is, by that compassion, which he has toward
us. For so the sacrifice is fownde a sweet sauoure to our Lord, when we
understand of him things that be worthy. In what things this sacrifice,
which is the oblacion of the intelligible lamb, is, and by whom yt is done,
how yt is celebrated, that that follows, declares. For neither by
unreasonable beasts does God receive sacrifice of us, acording as the words
that follow de plainly show. For he says: And the drink offringe thereof
shall be of wine even the fourte part of an hyn, bread, and perched corn.
Because perchance yt might have comed in doubt hereafter Christ sacrificing
in bread and wine was ^ the intelligible sacrifice.
of whom the mystery of the sacrifice which is by Christ, which we have
spoken of above, is celebrated, behold thowe hauest the sacrifice of the
intelligible Melchisedech, which is full done in bread and wine, in This is my
blood, which shall be shed you for. And so yt pleased the Law geuer that
yt should fully signify the mystery of Christ Thus far Isycbius.

In the which sainge ye have the wholl matter testisied that we seek for. For
where in Leuiticus God commanded an he lamb to be offered, and that the meat
offering thereof should be two tenth deals of fine flower mengled with oil to
make bread, and the drink offering should be the fourth deal of an hyn of
wine which thing this Author seking to Apply to the new Testament, Thowe
hauest (says he) the Melchisedech sacrificing in bread and wine was the
figure of Christ,
oblacion or sacrifice of Christ in the intelligle Melchisedech aunswering
this, which sacrifice was fully and perfectly done in bread and wine Whereby
he does not only teach us, that Melchisedech was a figure of Christ
absolutely: that is to say, he whom Melchisedech so doing did prefigurate.

In these few words then we may first learn these two things, which

But that none occasion should be given, either to the Adversaries to say
that Christ gave but bare bread and wine, or to the Reader to take scruple
because he says, that Christ did sacrifice in bread and wine, he opens
immediately what bread and wine yt was, saing: by the drink offering which
was in wine, he would signify that of which Christ said: This is my blood,
which Isychius acknowled geth the presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacra.
shall be shed for you. Whereby he delivers us from that doubt, and
teaches plainly the presence of Christ's blood in the Sacrament. Where if we
acknowledge that, and that this Author so meneth that soche presence is there,
we may also confess the presence of his body in the other kind, for so the
Author also entendeth, as not only in that, that is above said yt does
appear, but in that also, that follows yt is manifest and evident.

For thus he says: Oblatio enim praesentium donorum, quam esse mysterium
Vnigeniti ostendimus, reconc^liauit nos Deo, and cibum nobis nouae polentae
praestitit. The oblacion of these present gifts, which oblacion we have
declared to be the mystery of the only begotten son of God, has
reconciled us to God, and has given us meat, of new dried corn.

This oblacion that Isychius speaks of here, is yt (as he says) which
reconciled us to God, which oblacion is not an other from that he spoke of
before, but yt is the same. The oblacion that he spoke of before was the
oblacion after the order of Melchisedech. Wherefore in the oblacion after the or
dre of Melchisedech, was Christ offered, who by his death reconciled us to God.

Christ then being sacrificed, and therefore present, is now also sacrificed,
and therefore present. For the table of Christ that now is (as Chrysostom
says) being in no poincte inferior to that, but being all one, As Christ was
there in his sacrifice verily present: So is he here verily present.

Thus Although Melchisedech (as the Adversaries affirm) was a figure of

THE THIRTITH CHAP. TREATS OF THE same matter by saint Hierom and Theodorete.
Saint Hiero^ handeling the prophecy of David speaking of the preisthead of
Christ after the order of Melchisedech, gives us a notable and most clear
testimony in this matter and says: Superfluu^ est nos de isto versiculo
velle interpretari, cum sanctus, Apostolus ad Hebraeos plenissime disputauit.
Ipse enim ait: Iste est Melchisedech, sine patre, sine matre, sine generatione.
Et ab omnibus ecclesiasticis dictum est, quoniam sine patre dicitur secundum
carnem, sine matre dicitur secundum Deum. Hoc solum ergo interpretemur: Tues
Hieron. in Psalm. 110.
sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Hoc solum dicamus, quare
dixerit, Secundum ordinem. Secundum ordinem: Nequaque sacerdos eris secundum
victimas Iudaicas, sed eris sacerdos secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Quomodo
enim Melchisedech Rex Salem obtulit panem and vinum: sic and tu offeres corpus
tuum, and sanguinem, verum panem, and verum vinum: Iste Melchisedech ista
mysteria, quae habemus, dedit nobis. Ipse est, qui dixit: Qui manducauerit
carnem, and biberit sanguinem meum etc. Secundum ordinem Melchisedech, tradidit
nobis sacramentum suum. Yt is superfluouse for us to go about to expownde this
verse, seeing the holy Apostle has fully unto the Hebrews treacted of the
same. For he says: This is Melchisedech without father, without mother,
without generacio^. And of all men of the church yt is said, that he is
without father as concerning the flesh: and without mother as concerning
his godhead. This only therefore let us interpret: Thowe art a priest for
ever after the order of Melchisedech. Let us only say, wherefore he says:
after the order, After the order. that is: Thowe shall not be apreist according
to the sacrifices of the Jews: but thowe shall be a priest after the order of
Melchisedech, For as Melchisedech king of Salem did offer bread and wine: So
thowe also shall offer thy body and blood, the true bread and true wine.
This Melchisedech gave us these mysteries, which we have. Yt is he that has
said: He that shall eat my flesh, and drink my blood Meichisedech has
delivered unto us his Sacrame^te. Thus far saint Hierom.

Now where the Adversaries being sore pinched with this figure of Melchisedech
labor with might and main to cast mistes before the eyes of me^, to make the^
believe that they see in Melchisedech but only the figure of the eternity of
Christ, and not the figure of his preisthood and sacrifice, and for that
purpose allege saint Paul, treacting of the same to the Hebrews, and say,
that he does there only so apply it: I wish you would well note saint
Hierom, how as concerning the matter of the eternity of Christ he says,
that yt is supperfluouse to speak of yt, because saint Paul even to the
full has clerly opened that matter to be Hebrews.

But what then? Does saint Hierom say nothing to the explicacion and
applicacion of this figure? Yes, notwithstanding that full, and plain
explicacion of saint Paul, he adds also an exposition, not of that saint
Paul had expownded, but of that, that saint Paul had left vnexpownded. And
therefore he saeth: Hoc solum interpretemur. Tu es sacerdos etc. Let us only
expowde S. Paul tree acts fully of the eternity of Chrysts priest head but
not of the order after Melchisedech.


Wherefore note that in this little werse, two things being contained: the one
that Christ is a priest for ever, the other that he is of the order of
Melchisedech: The first is at large expownded by saint Paul: but the other,
that is, the order of Melchisedech is not expownded by saint Paul. Wherefore
saint Hierom says immediately: Hoc solum dicamus, quare dixcrit secundum
ordinem. Let us only declare this: Why he says after the order. As who
might say, Saint Paul has plentifully said of the eter nitie of the
priestgood of Christ. Wherefore yt were vain for me to speak of that: But I
will only speak of the order of the preisthood of Christ. for that has not
saint Paul spoken of.

And entering to show of what order of presthoode Christ is, he speaks in the
person of God the Father and says: Thowe shall not be a priest after the or
dre of offerings of the Jews sacrifices, but thowe shall be a priest after the
order of Melchisedech And how he should do sacrifice after that order, he
furtwith declares. For as Melchisedech (says he) king of Salem did offer
bread and wine: So shall thowe also offer thy body and blood, the true bread
and true wine. A brief exposition,

Now as saint Paul to the hebrews has oponed the first part for the
eternity of the prestheade of Christ: So here saint Hierom has as touching
this order, and sacrifice opened the second part. wherein reader, first note,
that where the Adversaries (as is before said in the last chapter) to deny the
sacrifice of Christ after the order of Melchisedech, do first deny that
Melchisedech him self did offer bread and wine, saing, that in Genesis yt is
not readd of Melchisedech: Obtulit panem and vinum: he offered bread and wine,
but protulit panem, and vinum he brought forth bread and wine: Yet Melchisedech
offered bread and wine after S. Hierom.
saint Hierom knowinge the old Testament, and well understanding the hebrew
tongue says that Melchisedech did offer bread and wine, and uses the latin
word, obtulit, he offered, and not, protulit, he brought forth. whereby we are
taught that this is the true mening, and understanding of the place.

Further also, as we are taught that Melchisedech did offer bread and wine: So
also are we taught (which is in the se co^d part to be noted) both that

Which for somoche as yt is so plainly spoken, I shall not neade either to
bring in any other saing of the same saint Hierom to declare his mind more
plainly in this: or I my self to tarry any longer in opening of this his
sainge, being all ready so plain, that yt can be made or spoken no plainer.

Only this I shall desire thee (gentle Reader) to call to thy memory the end
of the saing of saint Ciprian last alleged in the chapter before, and
compare yt to the end of this saing, and I think verily, yt will
wonderfully delight thee, to see the truth not only so painlie, but also
with so goodly consonannt agreement uttered and spoken. Saint Ciprian said:
who is more proprelie the priest of the most high God, tha^ our Lord Jesus
Christ, Who offered a sacrifice to God the Father, and offered the same that
Melchisedech offered, that is, bread and wine, even his body, and blood?
Saint Hierom says: As Melchisedech Aplain place for master Iuell.
offered bread and wine: So shall thowe offer thy body and blood, the true
bread, and true wine. what goodly consent is this? what plain manner of speech
is this? what more neadeth to be said in this matter? Is yt not co^sessed that
Christ offered in his last Supper his body, and blood? I trust the proclamer
himself will grant yt, and say yt is most plain. ffor who can doubt that
these words be spoken of the sacrifice in the Supper, saint Hierom saing,
that this Melchisedech (meening Christ) delivered us these mysteries etc.

Wherefore leaving further explicacion of this Author we will hear Theodorete,
one of the other side of Christ's parliament house, who as breiflie as plainly
opens the truth of the matter which we seek, as yt shall appear in this
his sainge: Antiquam genealogiam conscribens diuinus Moses, docuit nos, quod
Adam, cum tot annos natus esset genuit Seth. Ei cum tot annis vixisset, finem
vitae accepit. Ita etiam dixit de Seth and Enos, and alijs. Melchisedech et
generationis Theodoretus Dial 2.
initium, et vitae finem silentio praeterijt: Ergo si historia spectetur, nec
initium dicrum, nec vitae finem habet. Reuera autem Dei filius nec esse coepit,
nec finem accipiet. In ijs ergo maximis, et vere diuinis fuit Melchisedech
figura Christi Domini. In sacerdotio autem, quod hominibus magis quam Deo
conuenit, Dominus Christus Pontifex fuit secundu^ ordinem Melchisedech.
Melchisedech enim fuit gentium Pontifex. Et Dominus Christus pro omnibus
hominibus sactum et salutiferum sacrificium obtulit. The godly Moses writing
the old genealogy, has taught us, that Adam when he was thus many years
old, he begatte Seth, And when he had lived so many years he made an end of
his life. Even so also he says of Seth, and Enos, with other. As for the
beginning of the generation of Melchisedeh, and the end of his life he
ouerpasseth yt with scilence. Wherefore if the history be looked on, he has
neither beginning of days, nor the end of life. So in very deed the Son of
God neither has beginning of his being, neither shall have ending. In these
great things then very divine, was Melchisedech a figure of our Lord Christ.
In the preisthead also, which is more mete or agreeable for men then for God,
our lord Christ was an high priest after the order of Melchisedech. For
Melchisedech was the high priest of the gentiles. And our lord Christ offered
for all men an holy and holsom sacrifice. Thus much Theodorete.

Whom ye do perceive to testify not only that Melchisedech was a sigure of
Christ as concerning his eternity, but also as concerning his Christ's of
fring of sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech overthrows the heresy of
Eutiches.
preisthead, and Sacrifice, which did appertein to him as man. By which
Applicacion he conuinceth the Eutichians, who forsaking the catholic faith,
which teaches that in Christ be two natures, that is to say, the perfect
nature of God, and the perfect nature of man, and so confesses Christ to be
very God, and very Man, followed their master Eutiches, and taught (as in the
Chalcedon Council yt is testified) that Christ before the adunacion, was of
two natures, but after the adunacion he was but of one nature, which was God,
and therefore denieng Christ to be man, confessed him only to be God. Wherefore
following Appollinaris, Valentinus, and Macedonius, they would not receive this
common article of ourfaith: Which was conceauedby the holy Ghost, born of the
virgen Mary.

Now as these confessed Christ to be God: So this Theodorete laboring to
prove him also to be man, brings in this figure of Melchisedech,

If then the Adversaries shall deny Melchisedech to be a figure of Christ,
Adversaries expositions maintein the heresy of Eutiches.
as touching his preisthead and sacrifice, they shall take away the argument
of this learned man, and helping the part of the heretics, shall weaken the
part of the catholics. And so where by the full and true applicacion of the
figure, Christ is proved to be both God and man, by the only applicacion of
the eternity (which the Adversaries would have) he shall be proved only God.

Now not only the argument of the matter proves that this Author brought
in this figure chiefly to prove the manhead of Christ, which was the thing to
be proved against Eutiches, and that by the preisthead of Melchisedech: But
also his very plain words do prove the same. For when In sacerdotio, quod
hominibus magis quam Deo conuenit, Dominus Christus secundum ordinem
Melchisedech Pontifex fuit. In the preisthead which more agrees to me^, the^
to God our Lord, Christ was an gigh priest after the order

What is yt to be apreist, but to do the office of a priest? What is the office
of a priest? the office of a priest is to offer Sacrifice to God for sins (as
Office of a priest.
saint Paul wittnesseth, which also this author alleging for his purpose
brings in thus: Si est ergo sacerdotum proprium offerre munera, Christus
autem, quod ad humanitatem attinet, sacerdos appellatus est, non aliam hostia^,
quam suum corpus obtulit. If then yt be solie apperteining to preistes to offer
sacrifice, and Dial. 1.
Christ as co^cerninge his humanity, was called a priest, he offered no other
sacrifice but his own body.

Then may we also conclude, that Christ being a priest after the order of
Melchisedech, and the office of a priest after the order of Melchisedech is Qui
manducat Joan. 6.
hunc panem viuet in aeternum. He that eats this bread, shall live forever.

What neadeth me any more to say here, seeing that both saint Hierom, and
Theodorete do thus plainly and agreablie (as ye have heard) declare, that
Melchisehech was a figure, as well of the preisthead and sacrifice of Christ,
in that he offered sacrifice to God in bread and wine: as of his eternity, for
he is accounted without ffather, without mother, without beginning, or ending.

But Reader, when thowe see them so manifestly, err, and so maliciously

THE ONE AND THIRTITH CHAPTER Concludes this matter of Melchisedech by
saint Augustine and Damascen.
AS ye have allredie heard some ancient men of Christ's Parliament house
agreablie testifieng the truth of the figure of Melchisedech, even as yt has been enacted, and received from the beginning of the same house: So shall ye
hear one coople more of them doing the like, and so shall we end the
explicacion Erant sacrificia antea Iudaeorum secundum ordinem Aaron in victimis
pecorum, and hoc in Iu Psa. 33.
mysterio. Nondum erat sacrificium corporis and sanguinis Domini, quod fideles
norunt, and qui Euangelium legerunt, quod sacrificiu^ nunc diffusum est toto
orb. Proponite ergo vobis ante oculos duo sacrificia: and illud secundum
ordinem Aaron, et hoc secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Scriptum est enim, turauit
Dominus, et non poenitebit eum, Tu es sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem
Melchisedech. De quo dicitur, Tu es sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem
Melchisedech? De Domino nostro Jesus Christo. Quis enim erat Melchisedeh? Rex
Salem. Saleni autem fuit Ciuitas illa, quae postea (sicut docti prodiderunt)
Jerusalem dicta est. Ergo antequam ibi regnarent Iudaei, ibi erat ille
sacerdos Melchisedech, qui scribitur in Genesi, sacerdos Dei excelsi. Ipse
occurrit Abrahae, quando liberauit Loath de manu persequentium, et prostrauit
illos, a quibus tenebatur, et liberauit fratrem. Et post liberationem fratris
occurrit et Melchisedech, (Tantus erat Melchisedech a quo benediceretur
Abraham) protulit pane^ et vinum, et benedixit Abraham, et dedit ei decimas
Abraham. Videte quid protulit, et quem benedixit, et dictum est postea: Tu es
sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech. David hoc in spiritu dixit,
long post Abraham. Temporibus autem Abrahae fuit Melchisedech. De quo alio
loco dicit: Tu es sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech, nisi de
illo cuius nostis sacrisicium?

There were before, the sacrifices of the Jews after the order of Aaron in The
Sacrifice of the body and blood Sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech is
now diffused troughout the world.
of our Lord, the which the faithful, and they that have red the gospel
know, was not yet. Which Sacrifice is now diffused throughoute all the
woorlde. Set before your eyes therefore the two sacrifices, both that after
the order of Aaron, and this after the order of Melchisedech. For yt is
written: The Lord has sworn, and yt shall not repent him. Thowe art a
priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Of whom is yt said: Thowe
art a priest after the order of Melchisedech? Of our Lord Jesus Christ. who
was this Melchisedech? King of Salem. Salem was before time, that same City,
which as the learned have declared, was afterward called Jerusalem. Therefore
before the Jews reigned there, the priest Melchisedech, who is written in
Genesis the priest of the high God, was there. He met with Abraham when he had
delivered Loath from the hand of them, that did persecute him, and he ouerthrewe
them, of whom he was holden, and delivered his brother. And after the
deliverance of his brother, Melchisedech met him (So great a man was
Melchisedech of who^ Abraham was blessed) he brought forth bread and wine, and
blessed Abraham, Thowe art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech.
David spoke this in spirit long after Abraham. Melchisedech was in the time of
Abraham. Of whom in an other place says he, Thowe art a priest For ever
after the order of Melchisedech, But of him whose sacrisice ye know? Thus
far saint Augustine.

Ye have here heard the distinction of the two orders of preisthead, of Aaron,
and of Melchisedech. Ye have heard also the distinction of the two sacrifices.
the one according to the order of Aaron, the other after the order of
Melchisedech. What this sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech is, saint
Augustine has declared where he said: The sacrifice of the body and Sacrifice
avouched.
blood of our Lord was not yet, which sacrifice is now diffused throughoute
all the world.

What he meeneth when he says: as yet the sacrifice of the body and blood
of our Lord was not, and also whether this sacrifice be after the order of
Melchisedech, Sublatum est sacrificium Aaron, and caepit esse sacrificium,
secundum ordinem Melchisedech The sacrifice of Aaron was taken away. And the
sacrifice after the order of Melchisedcch began. By the which sentence yt is
manifest, that while the sacrifice of Aaron endured, this sacrifice was not
used. But when,

Likewise he has taught also that the sacrifice of the body and blood of
Christ is the sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech. For where before
Sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacr. is after the order of
Melchisedech.
he said that the body and blood of our Lord was not yet, And now he says,
that the sacrifice of Melchisedech began, when Aarons sacrifice was taken
away: What does he else fignifie, but that they be all one thing? that is,
that the body and blood of Christ be the sacrifice after the order of
Melchisedech. And so conuertiblie that the sacrifice after the order of
Melchisedech, is the body and blood of Christ. Which body and blood be no
where else offered in sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech, but in the
sacrifice of the Altar, where bread and wine be turned into the same body and
blood. For the body of Christ upon the cross was a bloody sacrifice,
perfected with bloodshedding after the manner of Aaron. Therefore the holy
sacrifice of the Altar, which (as saint Austen says) is now diffused and
spredde through all the world is the very body and blood of Christ.

Although this, that is alleged out of saint Augustine, is so plain, that the
Adversaries can not but see the truth, and so strong, that they can not
against say yt: Yet that they may see all this that is spoken confirmed, and
made more plain, and that so being confownded by the evident truth, they may
give over their error, and yield unto truth, we will hear the sentence of
the same saint Augustine, treating of this same matter in an other place.
Thus yt is. Coram regno patris sui mutauit vultum suum, and dimisit eum, et
abijt, quia erat ibi sacrificium secundum ordinem Aaron, et postea ipse corpore
et sanguine suo instituit sacrificium secundum ordinem Melchisedech. Mutauit
ergo vultum suum in In Psalm. 33. Co^cion. 3.
sacerdotio, et dimisit gentem Iudaeorum, et venit ad gentes. Before the
kingdom of his Father he has changed his cowntennce, and left him and went
away. because there was there the sacrifice after the order of Aaron. And after
ward of his body and blood he instituted the sacrifice after the order of
Melchisedech. He changed therefore his contenaunce in preisthead, and left the
people of the Jews, and came to the Gentiles. Thus saint Augustine.

Dooye mark what is here said? If ye do, ye must needs understand that
Christ did institute a sacrifice of his body and blood after the order of
Melchisedech? By this brief sentence many things be answered: First, where
the Adversaries most slaunderouslie have said, to bring the thing in hatred
emongethe people, that the Pope made the holy Sacrament a sacrifice to obscure
the glory of Christ, and to diminish the worthiness and merit of Christ's
sacrifices upon the cross, and therwithall to bring the people into beleiff,
that the Sacrifice of Christ upon the cross was not sufficient without this:
And that without authority (as this Proclamer says) we offer up Christ
unto his Father: And thus with a nombre of like lies, The Pope and the Papists
were made Authors and founders of this sacrifice. Not the Pope nor the
Papists made the sacrament a sacrifice but Christ himself after S. Augustine.
But basshe and be ashamed thowe slaunderouse man, thowe Enemy of the truth,
and open thine eyes to see, and thine ears to hear what saint Augustine
that holy Father, and learned doctor here teaches, that is, that Christ did
of his own body and blood institute a sacrifice after the order of
Melchisedech. So that Christ, even by this bolie Fathers testimony, is the
institutour and

Secondarelie, where the Aduersaties have said that Christ did not offer his
body in sacrifice in his last Supper, this sentence also confuteth them. Yt
must of necessity be granted that Christ did sacrifice in his last supper.


Thirdly, for so much as Christ did institute this sacrifice in his body and
blood, yt must necessarily follow that Christ's body and blood be present in
the Sacrament. And as Christ did verily make his body and blood present in
that sacrifice in his last Supper instituted and offered: So does he verily
make his body and blood present in the sacrifice of the Altar, and that as
often as the same is duly excuted and done. For as he did in that Supper: So
does he in every ministracion of the blessed Sacrament duly

Non sunt haec humanae virtutis opera, quae tunc in illa coena confecit ipse
quoque Chrysostom. in 26 Matthew.
nunc operatur, ipse perficit. Ministrorum nos ordinem tenemus, qui vero haec
sanctificat and transmutat, ipse est. Cum Discipulis (inquit) meis, facio
Pascha. Haec enim illa non alia mensa est: haec nulla re minor, quam illa est.
Non enim illam Christus, hanc homo quispiam facit, sed vtramque ipse. These
works be not of Christ and not man does consecrate.
man's power, which he then did in that Supper, he does now also work, he
does perfect yt. we hold the order of ministres, but yt is he, that does
sanctify, tra^smute or change these things. With my disciples (says he) do
I keep the Passover. This is even the same, not an other table. This is in
nothing lesser the^ that. For Christ makes not that table, and some other man
this, but Christ both. Thus Chrisostom.

Whereby we are taught, that as much as was done by Christ in his last Supper,
so much is done now. So much as the Apostles received, somoche Sacrifice
avouched.
realie present.

But somewhat to say of that, that may be gathered of this saing of
Chrysostom: If nothing were given to the Apostles (as the Adversaries teach)
but a piece of Sacramental bread, a figure of Christ's body: what nead all
these comparisons betwixt table, and table. For if the doctrine of the
adversaries be true, we can have no less, except we should eat course bread,
whereas the Apostles eat fine bread. we can have nolesse I say, then they had.
A piece of bread each of the^ had: a piece of bread each of us has. If that
bread were a figure, this bread is a figure. What thing now then moved
Chrysostom to trauaill so much to set forth the equality a cup of wine? Be
you well assured, Chrysostom saw much

And in deed soch an heresy did the Petrobrusians, and the Henricians
Petrobrusians and Henricia^s their heresies. Petr. Cluniacen.
hold (as Petrus Cluniacensis testifies, who in the beginning of his book
written against them, reherseth the sainges of those heretics in this wise:
Nolite, o populi, Episcopis and presbyteris ceu Clero vos seducenti credere,
qui sicut in multis, sic in altaris sacrificio vos decipiunt, vbi corpus
Christi se conficere, and vobis ad vestrarum animarum salutem se tradere
mentiuntur: Mentiuntur plane. Corpus Christi semel tantum ab ipso Christo in
coena ante passionem factum est, and semel, hoc est, tunc tantum Discipulis
datum est. Exinde neque confectum ab aliquo, neque alicui datum est. Believe

Now ye may see, that the holy Ghost did not without cause move his holy
organs to speak soche things before hand, as whereby the Succession of the
catholic Church, should find the heresy answered, before the said
heresy were set forth abroad (The holy Ghost well knowing that soche evil
wedes should spring in the vineyarde of Christ) And yet this may ye mark
that heresy the further yt goes, yt is allwaie the worse as saint Paul
comparing yt to a Canker does very well express the Heresy further yt goes
the worse yt is. 2. Tim. 2.
condition of yt, and by plain words shows the progress of yt thus:
Prophana autem and vaniloquia deuita. Multum enim proficient ad impietatem, and
sermo eorum vt cancer serpit. As for ungodly and vain talks, avoid them. For
they will increase to further ungodliness. And their words shall crepe even as
does the disease of a Canker.

For the Petrobrusians being badde enough, yet they upon the consideracion of
Christ's presence in the last Supper, granted that he then made his body, and
that the Apostles received his body. But never after was yt given to any.

This was a very evil cankre, but yt has increased since to so much
ungodliness, and has Cankrelike fretted so sore, that now in our time men
have denied the body of Christ to be consecrated and given, either by the
preistes or ministres of the church, or yet by Christ him self in the last
Supper. For he gave (say they) but the figure of his body to his Apostles, as
the ministres do now to the people.

But as Chrysostom in his sentence has answered the Petrobrusians: So
Oecolampadians, Caluinistes, and the rest of the vypers that brake out of
Luthers beallie (of the which generation this chalenger is one) who like vipers
in deed, which gnawe and frette their dames beallie christ does sanctisie and
transmute the bread and wine.
Qui vero haec sanctificat and transmutat ipse est. Yt is even he (says
Chrysostom meening Christ) that does sanctisie and transmute these things?

Owre heresiarke of England, Cranmer says in his book, that the creatures
of bread and wine can not be sanctified. But by Chrysostomes sentence they be
sanctified in to some other thing. Which is so in deed, and therefore
Transubstanciacio^ avouched.
he adds, and transmutat, and does transmute or change them. For Christ
sanctifieng does change the substance of the creatures of bread and wine,
into the substance of his body and blood.

For (as Origin says) the bread is made in to an holier body. Nos conditori
rerum morem gerent^es, pro eius in nos collatis beneficijs vbi and gratias
diximus oblatis Orig. cont. Cells. li. 8. The bread is turned into an holier
body.
panibus vescimur, qui vtique ex oratione and precibus in sanctius quoddam
corpus conslantur, quod sane sanctiores hos reddit, qui mente integriore hoc
ipso vtuntur. We obeing (says Origin) the creator of things, when we for
the benefittes which he has given us, have given him thanks, we eat the
breades that are made into a certain holier body, which makes them holier,
which with an wholl mind do use the same. Thus Origin.

Do ye not hear that the breades that be offered be made into a certain holier
body? And what a body is yt? Soche a body as makes those holier, which
receive yt with a pure and godly mind. What body is yt, that we receive
having power to make us holier, but the holy body of him, who is owre
sanctificacion, iustificacion, and redemption?

Now here is no place for the Adversaries common gloss, to say, that we
receive the body of Christ spiritually, which makes us holier that receive
yt, and thereby to seclude the receiving of Christ's body reallie. For he
says that the breades, which be offered, be made into an holier body. And
Li. 4. de S^cramentis.
that body that is made of the bread (I use saint Ambrose his phrase, Depane
fit corpus Christi) makes them holier, which receive yt with a good and godly
mind. Which body being soche that the bread is turned or made into yt, must
needs be the real and substanciall body of Christ.

Understand me not here, that I reiecte the spiritual receiving of Christ in
the Sacrament. But I wish both the receauinges to go together. He can not
receive Christ spirituallie, which believes not that he receaueth him reallie
For as the receiving of Christ reallie profits not without the receiving of
him spirituallie: So he can not receive him spirituallie, that believes not him
to be received reallie. And therefore when opportunity serves, as I wish both
the receauinges to go together, so must they in deed go together, if the
receauer will take and have any profitte therbie.

Albeit these might sussice, that be hertofore alleged to testify unto us,
what is the enacted and received truth of Christ's Parliament house as
concerning the preisthead and sacrifice of Christ after the order of
Melchisedech: Li. 4. de de thod. side. Melchisedech and his sacrifice a sigure
of Christ and his sacrifice
yet that S. Augustine may have one of the other side of the house, that is of
the greek church, joined with him, I will bring you Damascen, who in few
words says thus: Pane and vino suscepit Melchisedech Abraham excaede
alienigenarum reuertente^, qui erat sacerdos Dei altissimi. Illa mensa hanc
mysticam praefigurabat mensam, veluti and sacerdos ille Christi very sacerdotis
figura^ praeferebat, and imaginc^. Tu es (inquit) sacerdos in aeternu^ secundum
ordine^ Melchisedech. With bread and wine did Melchisedech receive Abraham
returning from the slaughter of the strangers. That table did prefigurate this
mystical table, as also that priest did bear the figure and image of Christ
the very priest. Thowe art

In which sentence ye see the comparison and applicacion of table to table,
Table signisieth sacrifice as in S. Paul. 1. Cor. 10.
of priest to priest, Damascen teaching the one to be figure of the other. Where
I would that the Adversary did note that the table of Melchisedech, which all
men of learning do know, is taken for the sacrifice, as in saint Paul, ye
can not be partakers of the table of God, and the table of Deuells also. In
which saing what else meant saint Paul, but that the Corinthians could not
be partakers of that, that was offered to God in sacrifice, and of that, that
was offered in sacrifice to Deuells also? The table of Melchisedech (I say)
which is the sacrifice of Melchisedech, did prefigurate the table, that is,
the sacrifice of Christ. The sacrifice (I say) which he offered after the
order of Melchisedech.

Now see (o thowe Adversary) the concord and plain testimony of these right
ancient elders, and famous learned Fathers of Christ's Parliament

Therefore where thowe erring from the true faith, hauest taught that
Melchisedech did not offer bread and wine in sacrisice, behold that these
Fathers by express words auouche the contrary. Where thowe hauest also
defended, that Melchisedech was not a figure of Christ as concerning his
sacrifice, see how constantly and vniformlie thowe art impugned, all these
Aug. co^t. Iudaeos. The priest head of Christ shall not be changed.
of Melchisedech, and shall be to the woorldes end. Iurauit Dominus, and non
poenitebit eum. Our Lord has sworn, and yt shall not repent him. Quid est
(inquit Augustinus) iurauit Dominus, nisi inconcussa veritate firmauit? Et quid
est non poenitebit eum, nisi hoc sacerdotium nulla ratione mutabitur? What is
yt (says saint Augustine) that our Lord has Sworn, but that with a most
certain truth he has made yt sure? And what is that: Yt shall not repent him,
but that this Preisthead by no means shall be changed? If then (as saint
Augustine says) this preisthead shall not be changed, how shall yt be
continued?

Theophilacte one as yt were of the other side of Christ's parliament house,
being one of the greek Church, ioineth with saint Augustine and Theophila.
in Epistola^ ad Hebr. Christ is daily offered by his ministers and shall be so
continued for ever.
In aeternum dicit, quia quotidie offertur, vel in perpetuum offertur per Dei
ministros oblatio, Christum Dominum and Pontificem habens and sacrificium, qui
seipsum nostri ob gratiam sanctificat, frangit, and tribuit. He says for
ever: because he is daily offered, or because by the ministres of God, is for
ever or continually offered the oblation having Christ our lord, being both
the high priest, and the sacrifice, who does for our sake continually
sanctify, break, and give him self.

Cease therefore to revile and blaspheme this blessed mystery. For heaven and
earth shall pass away, but the word of God abides for ever. Which word
of God says that this preisthead and sacrifice shall continue for ever. And
therefore though you bark against yt, as do the dogs against the moon: Yet
as the moon notwithstanding abides in her heaven, and goes her course, and
shall continewe: So shall this blessed mystery abide in his state, and shall
go forward and co^tinewe until the world end, what so ever ye say or do,
yt shall not be impared. But ye shall for your

I would bring certain of the lower house (I mien of them that were after six
hondreth years after Christ) to give their testimony in this matter, but
that yt would make this rude work grow to a greatter volume, then I would
wish. Therefore for this place I will omit them, and end this matter of the
prophecy of Christ's preistheade after the order of Melchisedech, which has
answered the figure that did prefigurate the same. And proceade to speak of
the prophecy that answers the next figure.

THE TWO AND THIRTITH CHAPTER TO prove the sacrifice of our Show bread to be
a continual sacrifice, as the old show bread was, alleges the prophecy of
Daniel and rejects the false expositions of the Adversaries.
THe figure that followed next after the figure of Melchisedech, was the figure
of the Paschall lamb, the accomplissing of the which was done (as yt was
declared) in the last Supper, the which last Supper being done after the order
of Melchisedech, the prophecy, that answered the figure thereto apperteining,
answers also the figure of the Paschall Lamb, forsomoche as the body of
Christ sacrificed after the order of Melchisedech, and eaten in that Supper,
answers also the eating of the Paschall Lamb in the old testament, and is
our very Paschall Lamb in the new Testament.

And therefore being loathe to trooble the Reader, with the reading of that, of
the which much is allreadie spoken, and (as I trust) fufficiently both in the
handling of the figure of the Paschall Lamb, and also of the sacrifice of
Christ after the order of Melchisedech: Therefore I shall go to the next figure,
which is the Show bread, and thereunto apply soche prophecies, as seem to
answer the same, and maie-wel beioined to yt, as I have doe^ in the setting
forth of the preisthead of Christ, after the order of Melchisedech,

The Show bread (if ye remember what is before said) was a bread, that was
both offered in sacrifice, and eaten, but so that none might eat of yt, but 1
Reg. 21. Show bread continually upon the table of the Tabernacle applied to
the Sacrament.
yt did appear. Which bread was not seldom offered, but as sooen as the old
was taken away, new were offered, and put in their place, so that the table
might not be without show bread: but yt was allwaies reserved, and their
remained. Now as the reseruacion of that bread, was a figure of the
reseruacion of our blessed bread (as there yt was declared) So that bread being
offered in sacrifice, was a figure of our bread offered in sacrifice. And as that
bread was appointed to be a perpetual sacrifice, allwaies to continewe: So
this sacrifice is appointed to be perpetual, and to co^tinewe until Christ's
coming. Of the which Sacrifice, and of the continuance of yt, not only the
Prophet Daniell, but also the Prophet Malachie has prophesied.

Daniell (as the holy Fathers do expownde) speaking of the wickedness of the
time of Antichriste, among other euells that then shall be wrought, he said
that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away. At which time what daily
sacrifice shall there be to be taken away, but the sacrifice of

For (as Petrus Cluniacensis says) there be in the world four principal
sects: that is, of the Jews, the Sarazens, the paganes, and the Chrystians.
Petrus Cluniacen. co^tra Petrobr. Four principal sects of religion in the
world.
The Jews perseuering in the carnal obseruacion of their carnal law, for
somoch as yt is among them received that only in Jerusalem they must honor
God, do sacrifice there, and no where else. And now for somoche as they are
dispersed among nations, and had no temple this fiften hondreth years, and for
that God has not, sense the deuastacion and subversion of Jerusalem, suffered
them yett there to dwell, therefore they use no sacrifice. wherein also is
fullfilled the prophecy of Daniel, which says, that after a certain time
after Christ is slain, sacrifice and meat offering shall cease among the
Jews. And what soever was after done in the temple (as saint Daniel. 9.
Hierom says) Non suit sacrificium Dei, sed cultus Diaboli. yt was not the
sacrifice of God, but the woourshipping of the Deuell. And this desolacion
(says Hieron in Daniel. cap. 9.
Daniell) shall continewe to the end. Whereby is meant, that the abolishing

The Sarazens being deluded by the shameful imposture and deceit of Mahomete,
have a certain mingled religion, using circumcision, and certain lotions of the
Jews. And so use a part of Moises law. They also confess that Christ was
born of a virgen, and that he lived holilie, and preached truly, and wrought
many miracles: But external and special sacrifice, wherbie their religion
should be discerned from other, they use none, but that certain hours on the
night, and certain hours on the day, they give them selves to prayer, and
specially after meat.

The Pagans being a rude, gross, and barbarouse people, almost unknown to the
world, and neither knowing God, neither almost them selfs, dwelling far of
in the furthest part of the north, and not knowing the names of the Idols of
other Idolaters, nor religion, what thing so ever they first mete in the
morning, be yt horse, hog, Cow, or calf, that same for that day do they
take, and honor for their God. So that they have Pagans have day Gods, and
hour Gods, and no certain God.
not Deos perpetuos, but Deos Diarios vel horarios. Gods for ever continual,
but

The christians being called to the knowledge of the true living God, and of his
son Jesus Christ, instructed in his laws, and taught the true manner

Call to mind all the Fathers in the beginning, the Patriarchs, the Prophets,
and all other holy men knowing God, and ye shall perceive that all they
besides lawdes, praises prayers and other, did also testify their service to
God, by their external sacrificing of some of the fruictes of the earth. So
did Abel, so did Noe, so did Job, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and many other,
as the books of the old Testament do testify.

And Christ him self did not only offer his blessed body a bloody Sacrifice
Christ offered sacrifice in his supper, and commanded yt to be continued.
upon the Cross to God his Father, which all that do but taste the name of
Irenaeus says) he taught the new oblacion of the new Testament.

Now then seeing that no sect in the world uses any daily sacrifice, but we
Chrystians: If we also had no daily sacrifice (as the enemies of ^od have
traueiled to compass) how then should the prophecy of Daniel be fullfilled,
that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away? if there be none, none can be
taken away. But the Prophet says, that one shall be taken away. wherefore
there must needs be a daily sacrifice, which for the fullsilling of the
prophecy, must be taken away.

Of this prophecy is saint Hierom an expownder, who being more busied to
refell the wicked expositions of Prophyrius, and breiflie to open the Et a
tempore quo ablatum fuerit judge sacrificium, and posita fuerit abominatio in
desolationem, dies mill ducenti nonaginta. And from the time that the daily
Daniel 12.
or continual Sacrifice shall be taken away or put down, and the abominable
desolacion set up, there shall be a thousand days two hundredth and nintie.

Upon this text Hierom says thus: Ho^ mill ducentos nonaginta dies
Prophyrius Hieron in Danielem.
in tempore Antiochi and in desolatione templ^, d^oit completos, quam and
Josephus, and Machabaeorum (^ut diximus) liber tribus tantum annis fuisse
commemorant. Ex quo perspicuum est tres istos and semis annos de Antichristi
dici temporibus, qui tribus and semis annis, hoc est mill ducentis nonaginta
diebus sanctos persecuturus est, et postea corruiturus in monte inclyto et
sancto. A tempore igitur quod nos interpretati sumus judge Sacrificium, quando
Antichristus orbem obtinens, Dei cultuns interdixetit, vsque ad internitionem
ciustres et semis anni, id est, mill ducenti nonaginta dies complehuntur.
These thousand two hundredth and ninety days, Porphyrius says, they were
fullfilled in the time of Antiochus, and in the desolation of the temple,
which both Josephus, Antichryst shall cause the daily sacrifice to cease.
three years only, Wherbie yt is plain, these three years and a half to be
spoken of the times of Antichryste, who by the space of three years and a half,
that is, a thousand two hundredth and ninety days, shall persecute the holy
and faithful chrystians, and after shall fall down in the famous and holy
hill. From the time therefore that we have interpreted the daily sacrifice,
when Antichryste shall for bid the service of God, unto his destruction there
shall be fullfilled three years and a half, that is to say, a thousand two
hundredth and ninety days. Thus much S. Hierom.

Who if we mark, interprets the greek word, and calls yt the daily
sacrifice, and there with remember that (as before by him is said in the
exposition of the prophecy of the preisthead of Christ after the order of
Melchisedech) Christ our Melchisedech offered his body and blood, the very
The daily sacrifice is the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ.
true bread, and true wine, and delivered unto us these mysteries that we have
to use in the remembrance of him until he come to judgment. Whereto Daniel
that in the time of Antichrist the service of God shall be by him forbodden,
what shall we else understand by the daily sacrisice, but the sacrifice of our
Melchisedech, left with us to be used as our most high service to God.

Which thing Lyra by very plain words does declare expownding this text of
Daniell thus: Hic Angelus instruit Danielem de termino a quo incipiendi sunt
praedicti tres anni cum dimidio, dicens: A tempore cum ablatum fuerit judge
sacrificium, id est, a tempore quo sacrificium altaris cessabit celebrari
solemniter. Here the Angel teaches Daniell the time from the which the
three-years and a half shall begin, saing: from the time when the daily
Sacrifice shall be taken away, that is, from the time in the which the
sacrifice of the Altar shall cease solemnly to be celebrated, Thus Lyra.

As by the exposition of these Fathers yt does appear that the daily
Sacrifice is the sacrifice of the Altar, the Sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood, So herunto reason also agrees, and by yt we are also forced thus to
understand the prophet. For he can not be understood of the sacrifice Per
ipsum offeramus hostia^ laudis semper Deo; id est, fructum labiorum
confitentium nomini eius. By him (mening Hebr. 13.
Christ) let us offer sacrifice of lawde allwais to God, that is to say, the
fruicte of our lips confessing his name. Of the which sacrifice the prophet
David speaks, saing: Immola Deo sacrificium laudis. Ofer up unto God Psalm.
49.
the sacrifice of lawde.

Neither can yt be understand of the sacrifice of the mortificacion or
affliction of our bodies, to the which S. Paul exhorts us, saing: Obsecro
vos per misericordiam Dei, vt exhibeatis corpora vestrae hostiam viuentem,
sanctam, De^ placentem. I beseech you by the mercy of God, that ye give up
your bodies as a lively and holy sacrifice unto God, and pleasing to him,

Neither can yt be understood of the sacrifice of a contrite heart, of the
which David speaks: Sacrificium Deo spiritus contribulatus, A troobled
spirit is a sacrifice unto God. For all these sacrifices shall be in use in
the time of Psalm. 50.
Antichrist even in the heat of his persecution. For the Angel said:
Eligentur, and dealbabuntur, and quasi ignis probabuntur multi. Many shall be
chosen, Daniel. 12
and purified, and shall be tried as yt were fire. In soche men there is no
doubt but they will continually with their humble prayers praise God, and
confessing his faith, magnify his holy name, and fo offer unto God the
sacrifice of lawde and praise as the fruictes of their lips. They will also
Psalm. 105.
his ministres will with Daniell confess their sins, and the sins of the
people, and humbly with David say: Peccauimus cum patribus nostris, unjust
egimus, iniquitatem fecimus. We have sinned with our Fathers, we have don
unjustly, we have committed iniquity.

Seeing then that Antichrist neither shall nor can put down or take away these
sacrifices, but that they shall be used under his swoorde, and in the midst
of his flammes and other torments: yt is most evident, that none of these be
that daily sacrifice, that shall be put down. For these sacrifices shall be
openly offered, and that daily.

Yt remains then that of necessity this prophecy must be understand of the
daily sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, which although Antichrist
shall put down the daily sacrifice of the Altar.
Lyra says) vt shall for three years and a half cease openly and solemnly to
be celebrated.

And further of congruence yt may be reasoned, if the Fathers that have been in
all ages before Christ, did know that yt was a thing acceptable and pleasing
to God to offer extern sacrifice to him: should not the Chrystia^ know more,
who lives in the clear light, where they lived in the shaddowe? If those
sacrifices were a sweet savor to God (as no doubt but they were so for his
sake whom they figured) how much sweter then is our sacrifice unto him,
offringe (as we do) Christ him self in sacrifice? If they gave to God not only
the sacrifices of lawdes and thanks, but also an extern sacrifice of thanks,
as yt were of an higher thank for soche befittes as they received: shall not
the chrystian, who has received greater benefittes, incomparably passing
there is, give at the leest as great thanks as they? If we shall offer no other
sacrifice, then the sacrifice of praise and thanks giving and sochelike, the
fathers did so as well as we, and over and besides that they offered an extern
sacrifice of thanks: What ingratitude may yt well

O lord what obcecate, and blind enemies of God were these, that could
Chrystians using no external sacrifice are less tha^kfull then the Fathers of
the law.
not see these things, but would that we Chrystians having clerer knowledge
then other, should less do their duty then other, and receiving mo
benesittes, should be less thankful? And thus God should be robbed of his
honor, and the Chrystians withdrawed from doing of there due services. And
then would yt shortly come to us, as yt came to them, who knowing God, have
not glorified him as God, neither were thankful, but waxed full of vanities in
their ymaginacions, and their foolish heart was blinded, when they cownted
them selves wise, they became fools.

THE THREE AND THIRTITH CHAP. OPENS the prophecy of Malachie.
NOt only the Prophet Daniel (as before is said) does prophecy that there
shall be a sacrifice: but also Malachie, who plainly declares the rejecting
of the sacrifice of the Jews, and the placing of a common used sacrifice: Non
est mibi voluntas in vobis, dicit Dominus Malac. 1
exercituum, and munus non suscipiam de manu vestra. Ab ortu enim solis vsque
ad occasum magnum est nomen meum in gentibus, and in omni loco sacrificatur,
and offertur nomini meo oblatio munda, quia magnum est nomen meum in gentibus,
dicit Dominus exercituum. I have no pleasure in you, says the Lord of
hosts, And as for meat offering, I will not accept yt as your hands. For from
the rising up of the sun unto the going down of the same, my name is great
among the gentiles. yea in every place shall there be sacrifice done, and a
clean meat offering offered up unto my name. For my name is great among the
Gentiles, saeth the Lord of hosts.

This prophecy has much tormented the Adversaries, and therefore all
Protestants tormented with the prophet (...) how ^ey wrest yt.
their ingines, hooks, and all their fetches have be set upon this place to
draw yt to their sense and purpose, but yt will not be, all will not serve
that they can do. for truth will show yt self, and preuaill. This prophecy
in deed inuinciblie proves the Sacrifice of Christ's Church, as hereafter
shall be showed. But first let us see, how the Adversaries would wrest this
place, and let us make yt plain to the reader, that the sense which they would
have the scripture understood in, is not the right and full sense, but a
distorted sense, a wrong sense, and soche a sense, as the place can not bear,
a sense disagreing from the expositions of all the holy Fathers both of the
latin church, and of the greek church.

Occolampadius in a book that he did write of the Mass unto the Senate of
Basille, says that by this prophecy of the Prophet Malachie, was Prophesied,
Occolamp.
that the ministres of the new testament should make a faithful people out
of all nations, as a pure and an holy oblacion and sacrifice to God. And this
(says he) is the mind of the Prophet.

Martin Bucer not much differing from him, in his answer that he made
Latomus, saieh that hy this Prophecy is cheiflie promised the preaching of the
Gospel, by the which God shall be every whear acknowleged, and Bucer.
the fruicte also of the same preaching, that is faith, and the confessing of
the same faith. And he says also that by the incense and oblacion are to be
understood the sacrifices of christen men, which be (says he) the praising
and calling on the name of God, whereunto is allwaies annexed the giving up of
our selves to the will of God, and the declaracion of our tha^kefull mind
toward God, by the doing, and showing of love and mercy to the poor. And
thus does he expownde the Prophet.

Bullinger an other of the same sect and sort, says that the lawde and
praise of God his name is the pure sacrifice that the Prophet speaks of.
Bullinger, Vrbanus Rhegius.


But Vrbanus Rhegius writing against Eckius his master in his firstbooke says
thus: The sacrifice that Malachias prophesied of, is the mortificacion of the
flesh, and the calling on the name of God, with godly prayer. And this was his
fantasy, which so I term as I might the rest, for that each of the^ has
understood the prophecy as him lists, and not as the full mening bearers
of that wicked army, that has so maliciously fowght against Gods

But let us now examine, and weigh their expositions. If ye mark they do all
agree in this, that this prophecy is to be understood of the sacrifice of
praise and thanks giving, which they call the pure sacrifice. Yt is to be
considered here that Almighty God by his Prophet declaring, that the
sacrifice of the Jews, which was only done in Jerusalem should be
rejected, abolished, and left, signified also, that an other sacrifice should
be substituted in the place of the same, which should be a pure and clean
sacrifice, which should not be done only in Jerusalem, as the other was,
But in every place.

Now as for the sacrifice of a contrite heart, of lawde, praise, and thanks
giving, who doubteh but that they were used and offered of diverse holy Psalm.
50.
and virtuous men in the old law, and well accepted? which thing David was
not ignorant of, when he said: Sacrificium Deo spiritus contribulatus, Psalm.
49.
cor contritum and humiliatum, Deus, non despicies. A troobled spirit is a
sacrifice to Immola Deo sacrificium laudis. Offer to God the sacrifie of lawde
etc. praise. And in the same Psalm: Sacrificium laudis honorificabit me. Who so
offreth me thanks and praise, he honors me. The heretical expositions of
the prophecy of Malachie cannot stand.


Therefore where the Adversary would, that these kind of Sacrifices should be
they, of the which the prophet Malachie spoke, that should come into the
place of the sacrifice of the Jews, which God would abolisshe, their
exposition can not stand. For these can not now be placed as new sacrifices,
which were placed and used from the beginning of the first good man, that
offered sacrifice to God, Abel, who with the sacrifice of the fruictes of the
earth, which he offered, offered also praise and thanks giving to God, These
sacrifices then be not new placed, but being of old time used, God would have
them so continued.

Neither do I mien that these be separated from that sacrifice, that God would
place in stead of the sacrifice of the Jews. For their is no extern sacrifice
Sacrifice of laud separated from the extern sacrifice.
but if yt be rightly, and duly offered, yt brings with yt the sacrifice

Why, were not theirs pure sacrifices before in the old law? Was there not a
sacrifice of expiacion, and a day of expiacion assigned, in the which the
clensing sacrifice should be offered? Read the xvi chapter of Leuiticus, and
there shall ye find that Almighty God saeth thus: In hac die expiatio vestri
erit Leuit. 16.
atque mundatio. ab omnibus peccatis vestris coram Domino mundabimini. In this
day shall be your expiacion and cle^sing, and ye shall be made clean from all
your sins before the Lord.

Was not this then a pure sacrifice, that purified, and cleansed the people from
all their sins before God? Is yt not a pure sacrifice that is a sweet sauoure
scripture does so call them. But as Christ says, Nemo bonus, nisi solus
Deus. Bonus homo de bono thesauro prosert bona. The good Man out of good
treasure brings Luc. 18. Matthew. 12 God good by nature man by participacion.
forth good things: So though God alone of him self, and of his divine nature
be only good: yet men be good also, not of them selves, nor of their own
natures, but by participacion of the goonesse of God. So there is one sacrifice
which only is pure, for that yt is pure of yt self, which sacrifice is the
body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ. Other sacrifices that be called
pure and clensing sacrifices, they be so called by participacion, that they do
please God, and purify men by the virtue and merit, of that pure Sacrifice
Jesus Christ, who is the lamb, that was slain from the beginning of the
world, giving virtue to all sacrifices that were yet offered from the
beginning of the world. And therefore when the Prophett puts Apoc 13.
this difference to this sacrifice, that shall succead the sacrifices of the
Jews, that yt shall be a pure sacrifice: If yt were pure but by virtue of
other, as the sacrifices of the Jews were, then were this word, pure, no
word

Neither may this now be drawn to that most blessed Sacrifice of the body
and blood of Christ upon the Cross. For that Sacrifice in that manner was
offered in one place only, that was, upon the mount Caluarie: But this
Sacrifice (says God by the Prophet) is offered in every place. Wherefore of
necessity this must be understood of the pure Sacrifice of Christ's body
and blood offered on the Altar, which is offered, not in Jerusalem, not on
Sacrifice of the cross and of the altar, al one in substance, but diverse in
manner.
Caluery, but in every place, where Christ is known and received. Which
sacrifice although in manner of offering, yt differs from that offered upon the
Cross: yet in substance yt is all one.

Now ye may perceive, that the expositions of the sta^derd bearers of the
wicked army of the enemies of gods truth, is but a violent or a wrested
exposition,

THE FOUR AND THIRTITH CHAP. EXPOwndeth the Prophecy of Malachie by
Martialis, and Irenaeus.
THat the Adversaries shall not say that I am judge in mine own cause,
although I am certain that I build upon the rock: Yet to the better
contentacion of the Reader, and more manifest confutacion of these Adversaries,
I will report the Judgment of the right ancient Elders of Christ's Parliament
house, as touching the enacted truth of this matter by their own words.

Sanctus Martialis a great ancient in Christ's house as being one of Christ's
disciples, and after the death of his and our master almost continually in the
Company of the Apostle Peter, is a notable witness of this truth, and
wourthie to be credited. This holy man makes mencio^ of this prophecy of
Malachie after this manner. S. Martialis Martyr epist. ad Burdegale^. cap. 3.


Sacrificium Deo creatori offertur in ara, non homini, neque Angelo. Nec solum
in ara sanctificata, sed vbique offertur Deo oblatio munda, sicut restatus est,
cuius corpus and sanguinem in vitam aternam offerimus, dicentes: Spiritus est
Deus, and eos qui adorant eu^, in spiritu and veritate oportet adorare. Ipse
enim corpus habens immaculatum, and sine peccato (quia conceptus est de Spiritu
sancto, natus ex Maria virgin) ipsum in ara crucis permisit immolari. Quod
autem Iudaei per inuidiam immolauerunt, putantes se nomen eius a terra abolere,
nos causa salutis nostrae in ara sanctificata proponimus, scientes hoc solo
remedio nobis vitam praestandam, and mortem effugandam. The sacrifice is
Christ's body and blood is offered every where, a pure oblacion to everlasting
life.
offered unto God our creator on the altar, not unto men, nor unto Angel, nor
only on hallowed altar, but every where is offered to God a pure oblacion, as he
has wittnessed, whose body and blood we offer to everlasting life, sainge:
God is a spirit, and they that adore him, must adore him in spiritte and
truth. For he having an immaculate body, and without Sin (for he was
conceived by the holy Ghost, born of the virgen Mary) he suffered that same
body to be sacrificed on the altar of the Cross. And that, that the Jews did
sacrifice by envy, thinking to abolishe his name from the earth, we for cause
of our health do set forth in the sanctified altar, knowing that by this
only remedy life is to be given, and death to be driven away. Thus much
this holy Martyr Martialis.

What a notable sentence is this? Do ye not see that he makes mention of the
saing of the Prophet Malachie saing: Every where is offered the pure oblacion or
sacrifice? And perceive ye not that immediately he says, that we offer the
body and blood of Christ unto everlasting life? And that this his mening
should not be wrested, nor mystaken, he declares what body of Christ we
offer, and what body we offer, in what place and to what effect
where. The body of Christ which we do offer, is that body, that the Jews
offered by envy: The place that we offer yt on, is the hallowed altar. The
effect that the Jews sought by the offering of Christ's body, was to take
life from him, and thereby to abolish his name from the earth: The effect that
we chrystians seek by the sacrificing of his body on the altar is to magnify
his name, and by that sacrifice, as by the only remedy, to get us life, and
to drive away death.

Note well that this holy Martyr and ancient Father teaches that pure
doctrine, that the primitive church of the Apostles did profess, and teach.
And judge if the church that now is, which the Adversaries have so vilely
reviled, and so maliciously railed on, has taught any other doctrine, then
this holy disciple of Christ has taught. The Church has taught, and which
the Jews crucified, we set forth upon the holowed altar. The Jews crucified
the real body of Christ, Wherefore we set forth or sacrifice Christ's real
body. The church now teaches that we offer the real body of Christ on the
altar: This holy man teaches, that we offer the body and blood of Christ unto
everlasting life. And that we should know that this is a sure doctrine
grownded Christ commanded his body and blood to be offered
upon a sure fundacion he ends his sentence thus: Hoc enim ipse Dominus Jesus
iussit nos agere in sui commemorationem. This (says he) has our Lord Jesus
commanded us to do in the commemoracion or remembrance of him.

Weigh this saing with me, I beseech thee, gentle Reader. Many of the wicked
teachers have wounderfullie deceived the simple people with this sentence A
fond objection of the Adversaries, answered by the holy Martyr Martialis.
of Christ, which this Father here alleges, saing that Christ instituted
this Sacrament for a memorial or a remembrance of him. But a

If he were, what neadeth any other memorial, but his presence? A more full
answer shall be made to this, by the help of Gods grace, in the Cap. 41.
holiness, and auncientie is soche, that they that flee not from gods grace,
to their own singular affection, and opinion, shall perceive that in yt is
soche pith and substance, that they may well stay them selves upon the same.
For when the holy Father had declared the real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, and that he is offered in sacrifice, then he added, that our Lord
Jesus commanded us so to do. Whereby what else does he mien, but that as our
Lord Jesus did consecrate, and sacrifice his own body, and gave the same also
to his Apostles to eat in his last Supper, as is allreadie declared: So do we
now consecrate and offer the same body, and receive yt according to his
commandment and that in the remembrancece of his death?

This I say may serve and suffice for an answer to a man that is not
contenciouse, nor lists to make every part of his faith a doubt, and call
yt Let master Iuell confer this with his private gloss upon the same text in
his sermon fol. 34.
into question. This man I say, his auncientie in the Parliament house of
Lutherus, Oecolampadius, Zuinglius, Caluimus or our own contrie men Cranmer,
Ridley, Latimer, or there accomplices dead or living, whose saings having no
grownde of ancient truth, and so of congruence none authority, yet have they
ben (the more is the pity) to rashly believed, to the casting away of many a
soul, and to then crease of the damnacion of the speakers.

But further to proceade to learn the enacted truth of this matter, I mien the
true understanding of the Prophet Malachie: we have an other ancient elder of
the same house, Irenaeus the disciple of Polycarpus, which Polycarpus was
disciple of S. John the Evangelist, as Eusebius wittnesseth in the
ecclesiastical history. And therefore is this ancient Father not to be
suspected of his truth, nor distredited. Thus he writes: Sed et suis
Discipulis dans consilium primitias Deo offerre ex suis creaturis, non quasi
indigenti, sed vt ipsi nec infructuosi, nec ingratisint: eum, qui ex creatura
panis est, accepit, and gratias egit, dicens, Hoc est corpus meum. Et Li. 5.
ca. 5. Irenaeus. Li 4. c. 32.
calicem similiter, qui est ex ea creatura, quae est secundum nos, suum
sanguinem confessus est, and noui testamenti, nouam docuit oblationem, quam
Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo offert Deo, ei, qui alimenta
nobis praestat, primitias suorum munerum in nouo testamento, de quo in duodecim
Prophetis Malachias sic praesignauit: Non est mihi voluntas in vobis dicit
Dominus omnipotens, and sacrificium non accipiam de manibus vestris, etc. But
also giving instruction to his disciples, to offer the first fruits of the
creatures to God, not as to one having need, but that they should neither be
vnfruictfull, nor unthankful, he took that bread which is a creature, and
gave thanks, saing: This is my body: And the cup likewise which is a
creature as we, he confessed to be his blood. And of the new testament he
taught the new oblacion, the which the church receiving of the Apostles,
Christ taught the new sacrifice of the new Testament, the Church received yt
of the Apostles.
offreth to God in all the woorlde, even unto him, who gives us food, being
the first fruictes of his sacrifices in the new testament. Of the which among
the twelve Prophets Malachie did this speak before hand: I have no pleasure
in you, says the Lord omnipotent, and I will take no sacrifice of your
hands. And so forth he reherseth the wholl sentence of the Prophet.

In the saing of this holy Elder of Christ's house, ye se a goodly agreement,
with the other Elder before recited. For this Elder teaches that Christ of the
creatures of bread and wine made his body and blood, and therewith all
instituted and taught the new sacrifice of the new testament, the which
sacrifice the Church receiving of the Apostles, does offer throughoute all the

Make now then comparison between Martialis and Irenaeus. Martialis teaches
the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament: Irenaeus teaches the S.
Martialis and Irenaeus compared together in their doctrine of the Sacrament.
same, saing that Christ confessed the bread and cup to be his body and
blood. The other said that the body and blood of Christ were offered in
sacrifice: This man says that Christ confessing his body and blood to be
present, taught a new oblacion of the new testament. The other said that
Christ commanded us so to do: This man says that Christ taught the new
sacrifice of the new testament to the Apostles and that the Church receiving
the same of the Apostes does offer yt to God troughoute all the world. The
other alleging Malachie, treacteth of the sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood: This man treating of the body and blood of Christ, the new sacrifice
of the new testament offered of the Church throughout all the world,
alleges Malachie, saing, that he spoke of the same.

Above these goodly notes of agreement betwe^ these two great ancient Two
notable documentes out of Iren. whereby the gloses of the Adversaries are
reproved and overthrown.
Irenaeus specially to be observed, that in saing that Christ taught the new
oblacion of the new Testament, he gives us two goodly documentes for the
mainteinaunce of the treuth of the catholic faith, and the repression of the
false errors of the Adversaries, and maliciouse reproaches.

And first, where he says, that Christ taught a new oblacion, yt confowndeth
all the expositions of the Adversaries so plainly, that any child may see
that they are confownded. For where they say that by the pure sacrifice that
Malachie speaks of, is understood the sacrifice of praise and thanks
giving, mercy to the poor, obedience to gods will and soche other, this Author
sainge, that Christ taught a new oblacion, of the which Malachie did speak,
does clean overthrow them. For these sacrifices of the which the Adversaries
make mention, be not new, but soche as have been used of godly men from the
beginning, as is before touched. But Christ taught a new oblacion that was
aunswerable to the new testament, of the which

The second document is, where he says that Christ taught a new oblacion of
the new testament. Wherein he does deliver us from the maliouse slanders of
the Adversaries, which say that yt is an Idol, a mere inuencion of the
papists, to make merchandies to empty poour men's purseis, and soche like
railing slanders. But now, reader, judge thowe whether yt be so or no, now
that thou hauest heard the sainges of these ancient holy Fathers, who say
that this new sacrifice of the new testament was of the doctrine of Christ,
was commanded by him to be don, was received by the Church at the hands of
the Apostles, and by and in the same Church is offered throughout the wholl
world.

THE FIVE AND THIRTITH CHAP. PROceadeth
YE have heard one cople of the ancient Fathers of Christ's Parliament house,
reporting what the true understanding of the Prophecy of Malachie is: Yt shall
not be, I trust, without profett to hear the report of an other coople, to
the entente the reader may see some plenty of good matter to be satisfied
withal, forsomoche as the Adversaries have powered out about this prophecy,
so much false and naughty matter to deceive him withal.

And therefore me will procead to set out the truth, and hear saint
Augustine what he says therein. Dominus omnipotens dicit: Non est mihi
voluntas in vobis, and sacrificium non suscipiam de manibus vestris. Certe hoc
negare non Augustine li. aduersus Iudaeos.
potestis, o Iudaei, non solum non sacrificium non accipere de manibus vestris,
locus enim vnus est loco Domini constitutus, vbi manibus vestris sacrificia
iussit offerri, praeter quem locum omnino prohibnit. Hunc ergo locum quoniam
pro meritis vestris amisistis, etiam sacrificium, quod ibi tantum licebat
offerri, in locis offerre alijs non audetis. Et impletum est omnino, quod ait
Propheta: Et sacrificium non accipiam de manibus vestris. Nam si in terrena
Jerusalem maneret vobis templum and altar, possetis dicere in eis hoc esse
completum, quorum iniquorum inter vos constitutorum sacrificia Dominus non
acceptat. Aliorum vero ex vobis, atque in vobis acceptare sacrificia, qui Dei
praecepta custodiunt, hoc non est cur possit dici, vbi nullus omnino vestrum
est, qui secundum legem, quae de monte Synai processit, manibus suis
sacrificium posset offerre. Neque hoc itae praedictum, and impletum est, vt vos
prophetica sententia respondere permittat, quiae manibus non offerimus carnem,
cord and ore offerimus laudem, secundum illud in psalmo: Immola Deo
sacrificium laudis, etiam hinc contradicit vobis, qui dicit: Non est mihi
voluntas in vobis, etc. Deinde ne existimetis, non offerentibus vobis, nec illo
accipiente de manibus vestris, Deo sacrificium non offerri, quo quidem ille non
eget, qui bonorum nostrorum nullius indiget, tamen quia sine sacrificio non
est, quod non illi sed nobis vtile est, adiungit, and dicit: Quia ab orient
sole vsque in occidentem nomen meum clarum factum est in omnibus gentibus, and
in omni loco sacrificium offertur nomini meo, sacrificium mundum, quoniam
magnum nomen meum in gentibus, dicit Dominus omnipotens. Quid ad haec
respondetis? Aperite oculos tandem aliquando, and videte ab orient sole, vsque
in occidentem non in vno, sicut in vobis erat constitutum, sed in omni loco
offerri sacrificium Christianorum, non cuilibet Deo, sed ei, qui ista
praedixit, Deo Israel. Vnde and alibi dicit Ecclesiae suae: Et qui eruit te,
ipse Deus Israel vniuersae terrae vocabitur. Scrutamini scripturas in quibus
putatis vos vitam habere aeternam, and profecto haberetis, si Christum in eis
intelligeretis and teneretis. Sed perscrutamini eas, and ipsae testimonium
perhibent de hoc sacrificio mundo, quod offertur Deo Israel: non ab vna gente
vestra, de cuius manibus non se suscepturum praedixit, sed ab omnibus gentibus,
quae dicunt: Venite, ascendamus in montem Domini, nec in vno loco, sicut
praeceptum erat in terrena Jerusalem, sed in omni loco vsque in ipsam
Jerusalem, nec secundum ordinem Aaron, sed secundum ordinem Melchisedech. I
have no pleasure in you says the Almighty Lord, And sacrifice I will none
accept at you hands, Certainly this ye can not deny, o you Jews, that not
This place therefore for somoche as for your deserts ye have lost, that which
because he is not without sacrifice, the which is profitable to us, and not
to him, he adds and says: from the rising of the sun to the going down
of the same my name is made honorable among the gentiles. And in every place
is offered sacrifice unto my name, which is a pure or clean sacrifice. For my
name is great among the gentiles says the lord Almighty. What do ye
awnswer to these? Open yowr eyes once at the last, and see from the rising of
the Sun to the going down of the same, not in one place, as to you yt was
appointed, but in every place the sacrifice of the Chrystians is offered, not to
every God, but to him that spoke these things before hand, even the God of
Israel? Wherefore in an other place he says to his Church: And he that has
delivered thee, that same God of Israel shall be called the God of the whole
earth. Search ye the scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life.
And truly ye should have yt, if in them ye would understand Christ, and hold
him. But search they do bear witness of this pure Sacrifice, which is
offered to the God of Israel, not of your own nation, of whose hands he has
said before that he will take no sacrifice, but of all nations which do say:
Come and let us go up to the hill of our Lord neither in one place, as yt was
commanded in the earthly Jerusalem: But in every place, even in Jerusalem
yt self. Neither after the order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchisedech,
Thus much S. Augustine.

Whose sainge although yt be long: yet I thought yt good wholly to asscribe
yt, both because yt is a goodly, lively, and pleasant exposition of the place
of the Prophet Malachie, and also that the dependence of the sentence might be
seen, whereby great light is given to the understanding of the matter that yt us
alleged for.

Of the which long exposition to make a brief collection of things
apperteining to the declaracion of the matter which we have in hand, this is
to be observed, that saint Augustine very strongly, and pithilie who needs
not our goods: but for our own utility and profitte. And proving The
sacrifice of the chrystians is a peculiar and special Sacrifice.
the Chrystians, which Sacrifice of the Chrystians he wills the Jews to open
their eyes, and see yt done, from the rising of the Sun to the going down of
the same. Which manner of sacrifice when he calls yt the sacrifice of the
Chrystians, he does plainly show that he meneth a special manner of sacrifice,
peculiar and propre to the Chrystians, where with the Jews be not acquainted.

For if he had here meant the sacrifice of lawde and thanks giving, or soche
like, the Jews might have said that those be their sacrifices, but when he
said the sacrifice of the Chrystians, he meant undoubtedly their peculiar
sacrifice, as when yt is said: the Sacrifice of the Jews did cease at the
coming of Christ, what else is meant but these sacrifices, which were peculiar
to the Jews, then ceased. But as for the spiritual sacrifices, as the
sacrifice of a contrite heart, of a believing heart ceasseth not. But as they
were used of the faithful Jews believing Messiah to come, so may they be

But this scruple saint Augustine does yet more plainly dissolve, and so
plainly that the Adversaries can not say against yt, neither the true
catholic, any further doubt in yt. For S. Augustine says to the Jew.
Search the scriptures through, which do bear witness of this pure
sacrisice, which (says he) is offered not in one place of Jerusalem, but in
every place not of one nation of the Jews, but of all nations. And at last
touching the very pithe: not (says he) after the order of Aaron, but after
the order of Melchisedech. Note then the sacrifice which he first called the
sacrifice of the Chrystians, and after the pure sacrifice, now he calls yt
the sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech.

Now then, Reader, thowe may perceive what sacrifice yt is, that God spoke
of by his Prophet Malachie, that should be the pure sacrifice, which should
succead the sacrifice of the Jews, and be the sacrifice of the Chrystians. Yt
is (says S. Augustine) the Sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech.

How then stands the expositions of the Adversaries? How much does their
maliciouse falshead appear, who by their voluntary gloses labored to take
away from the mind of the Prophet, that, that was principally by him
intended and spoken of, and only to place that was presupposed, and as yt
were annexed. For those spiritual sacrifices before touched, with other like
be presupposed as necessarily required to concur with extern sacrifice, if
yt be duly and acceptablie offered.

As notable a sainge as this has saint Augusten in an other place also. Who
so lists to read, shall there find that, that shall not repent him of Li. 1.
cont. Aduersarium leg. and Proph.
the reading.

Now must we have an other witness of the other side of the Parliament house
agreeable to saint Augustine. This shall be Eusebius a great learned man, and
an awncient of the house of God, who says thus: Mosaicis reiectis
sacrificijs, quod futurum erat, nostrum ipsorum institutum diuinitus nunciat
dicens: Quoniam ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum, nomen meum glorificatu^ est in
gentibus, Li. 1. Eua^gel Demo^st. cato.
and in omni loco incensum offertur nomini meo, and hostia munda. Sacrificamus
igitur Deo altissimo sacrificium laudis, Sacrificamus Deo plenum, and horrorem
adferens, and sacrosanctum sacrificium. Sacrificamus nouo modo, secundum nouum
testamentum hostiam mundam etc. The Mosaicall sacrifices being rejected, he
does by the reuelacio^ of God show our ordeinaunce that was to come, saing:
From the rising of the Sun, to the going down of the same, my name is
glorified among the gentiles, and in every place incense is offered unto my
name, and a pure Sacrifice of the Christians a full Sacrifice. and most holy.
sacrifice. We do sacrifice therefore unto the high God, the sacrifice of
lawde. We do sacrifice to God a full and most holy sacrifice bringing
horroure. We do sacrifice a pure sacrifice in a new manner, after the new
testament. Thus Eusebius.

Do ye not see this ancient Father how he expowndeth the Prophet, and
declares that we sacrifice to God a pure sacrifice in a new manner after the
new testament? And declaring what sacrifice yt is, he says, yt is a full and
most holy sacrifice bringing horroure. What sacrifice is that, that is a full
sacrifice, but the sacrifice of Christ's body? that is a full sacrifice in yt
self. All other sacrifices, that ever were or shall be, are not full, but all
they must take their fullness of this. And what sacrifice is most holy but
this, which makes all other holy? In so much as holy Dionyse the disciple
of S. Paul, who was a man full of the spirit of God saeth Neque enim ferme
fasest sacerdotalis muneris mysteriu^ aliquod peragi, nisi diuinum istud
Eucharistiae augustissimumque sacramentum complete. Dionys. Ecclesias. Hierar.
part. 1 ca. 3.
Neither is yt almost lawful for any mystery of the preistlie office to be
done, except this divine and most noble Sacrament of Christ do fulfill or
end yt.

And what sacrifice is yt that brings horroure with yt, but the Sacrifice
that contains the high Majesty of Christ, which is to be feared of all Li.
6. de Sacerdocio.
men? of the which speaks Chrysostom, saing: Quando autem ille and Spiritu^
sanctum inuocauerit, sacrificiumque illud horrore, and reuerentia plenissimum
perfecerit, communi omnium Domino a^sidue manibus pertractato, Quaero ex te,
quorum illum in ordine collocabimus? When he has called upon the holy Ghost
(says Cbrisostom, speaking of the priest that consecrateth) and has
perfected that Sacrifice most full of horroure and reverence, the commune or
universal Lord of all things being felt Sacrifice full of horror because
the Lord of all is there handled.
with hands: I ask of thee, in the order of whom shall we place him? Thus
Chrysostom.

Ye see here that he calls the sacrifice of the Altar, the sacrifice most
full of horroure and. Reverence, and why he does so, he gives cause, for
that the universal Lord being in the Sacrifice, is so present, that he is
handeled with hands.

Who is this Lord in this sacrifice, in an other place he does expressedlie
declare: Ad sanctum and terribile sacrificium properas, erubesce oblationis
arcana. De prodition. Iudae. homil. 30.
occisus propositus Christus est. Thowe come (says Chrisostom) unto an
holy and terrible sacrifice: Basshe at the secret thing of the oblacio^.
Christ that was slain is set forth.

Mark (reader) that in both sainges he calls yt a sacrifice: but in the
first sainge, a sacrifice full of horror and reverence, in the second, an
holy and a terrible sacrifice. The cause why yt is full of horror and
reverence is Eusebius did call yt a sacrifice bringing horroure, where the
majesty of Christ is (as Chrisostom has wittnessed)

In that he said, we sacrifice, after the new manner of the new Testament
what does he say, but as Irenaeus said: that Christ taught yt, that we do
sacrifice, to be the new sacrifice of the new Testament. And the sacrifice of
the new testament is, that the high priest of the new testament, being a
priest after the order of Melchisedech does set forth, after that same order.
Which sacrifice is (as S. Hierom says) his body and blood, the very true
bread, and true wine.

Thus have ye heard the witness of S. Augustine and Eusebius co^sonna^t and
agreeing both the one to the other, and also to those that were before them
alleged and brought for the declaracio^ of the true meening of the prophecy
of Malachie.

THE SIXTH AND THIRTITH CHAP. ENDS the exposition of Malachie by saint
Hierom and Damascen.
TO end this process in the exposition of the prophecy of Malachie

S. Hierom upon the Prophet Malachie says thus: Proprie nunc ad sacerdotes
Hieron. in Malach.
Iudeorum sermo sit Domini, qui offerunt caecum and claudum, and languidum ad
immolandum, vt sciant carnalibus victimis spirituales victimas successuras: Et
nequaquam taurorum hircorumque sanguinem thyn. iama, hoc est, sanctorum
orationes Domino offerendas, and non in vna orbis Prouincia Iudaea, nec in vna
Iudeae vrbe Jerusalem, sed in omni loco offerri oblationem nequaqnam immandam,
vt a populo Israel, sed mundam vt in ceremonus Christianorum. Now the word
of our Lord is proprely spoken to the preistes of the Jews, which bring the
blind, the lame, and the sick to be offered in sacrifice, that they should
know that spiritual sacrifices shall follow their carnal sacrifices, and
that not the blood of bulls and of goattes, but but in every place shall be
offered, not an unclean sacrifice, as of the people of Israel, but a clean
oblacion as in the Ceremonies of the Chrystians. Thus much of saint Hierom
in the exposition of the Prophecy of Malachie now in hand. In the which
prophecy ye may perceive two things that shall be offered unto God in every
place, that is incense, and the meat offering.

Incense (says S. Hierom) is the prayers of the holy, which shall not be
offered to God in Jerusalem alone, but in every place shall the faithful offer
that sacrifice as the sacrifice of thanks, lawdes, and praise. So that kind
of sacrifice by S. Hierom is contained under this woordo incense.

The other that is meat offering, which is the pure and clean sacrifice, shall
be do^ (as S. Hierom says) in the Ceremonies of the Chrystians. Which
Ceremonies Sacrifice of the christians Christ's body and blood.
contain the rites and sacrifices of the Chrystians. Among these Ceremonies
said) is a pure sacrifice in yt self, and of yt self, and is able to purify
all other.

That the body and blood of Christ be a sacrifice among the chrystians,
Offertis (inquit) super altar meum panem pollutum. Polluimus panem, id est,
corpus Christi, quando indigni accedimus ad altar, and sordidi mundum
sanguinem bibimus. Ye offer (says Almighty God) defiled bread upon mine
Altar. We defile the bread, that is, the body of Christ (says S. Hierom)
when we being vnwourthie come to the Altar, and being filthy drink the clean
blood of Christ. In this exposition of S. Hierom is given us to understand not
S. Hierom expowndeth the scriptures contrary to the Sacrvme^tries.
only that the body and blood of Christ be the sacrifice of us that be
chrystians, which we offer upon the Altar: but also we are taught an other
manner of exposition then the Adversaries teach: yea even a clean contrary.
For they, where in the scriptures or doctors they read these words, the
body of Christ, they expownde yt to be bread a figure of the body of Christ:
contrary S. Hierom declaring how we offer defiled bread, and how we defile
yt, expowndeth the bread to be the body of Christ.

Neither can the Adversary shifte him self from this saing of S. Hierom, with
the invented gloss of his own head, that we defile and do injury to the
body of Christ, when we take the Sacrament of his body unworthily. For he
does not only say that by the bread is understood the body of Christ: but
he also by most plain words says, that we drink his blood. He does not
say that we defile the blood of Christ, when we drink the Sacramental
wine: but he says we defile the blood of Christ, when we being defiled do
drink the same. So that by saint Hiero^, we do not take one thing, and do
injury to an other, but receiving a pure thing when we be defiled, we do
injury to the same. Wherefore receiving the bread that is the body of Christ,
we do injury to the same, receiving yt vnwourthilie, and drinking the pure
blood of Christ, we do injury to the same, if we receive yt, being vnpure our
unclean our selves,

If there were not the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, would S.
Hierom, who in this place takes upon him to be an expositour, which is

Damascen also breflie comes to the point, and affirms all that is said by
S. Hierom. For he speaking of the very real presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, and teaching that yt is the sacrifice that Malachie spoke of, says
thus: Haec est pura illa hostia, and incruenta, quam ab ortu solis vsque
Damasc. li. 4. ca. 14.
ad occasum ipsi offerri per propheta^ Dominus loquitur, corpus videlicet and
sanguis Christi, in stabilimentum animae nostrae and corporis, inconsumptu^,
and incorruptum, non in secessum abiens (absit enim huiusmodi imaginatio) sed
in nostram sustentationem and conseruatione^ omnimodo nocumenti reparatio,
sordis omnis purgatio. This is that pure sacrifice and unbloody, that our
Lord speaks by the Prophet, to be offered to him from the rising of the
sun, to the going down of the same, that is to say, the body and blood of
Christ, unto the inconsumed, and incorrupted stablishment of our body and
Soul, not going into secesse (God forbid that any soche imaginacion should
be) but yt is a purgacion of all manner of filth, and a reparation of all manner
of hurt, unto our sustentacion and conseruacion. Thus Damascen this saing need
no exposition yt is so plain that every child may perceive, that the pure
sacrifice, that the Prophet speaks of, is the body and blood of Christ,
which may not be wrested to be said, that the sacramental Sacrame^taries
gloses overthrown by Damascen.
bread (as the Adversaries term yt) is figuratively the body of Christ. For
this Author excludes all soche interpretacions, when he says, that the
body and blood, he speaks of, goes not into secesse, which can not be
verified of their bread, which they say and confess that yt goes into
secesse. Wherbie ye may perceive that this Authoure, who is an ancient that
Christ's body and blood be reallie in the Sacrament, and that that body and
blood is also the sacrifice, that was prphecied of the Prophet Malachie, to be
the Sacrifice that should succeade the sacrifice of the Jews, and to be offered
unto the God of the Chrystians, whereby his blessed name should be glorified
among them.

And thus this Author agreing which the rest alleged for the declaracion of
this matter, which other be of the most ancient and famous men of Christ's
Church, men of holy life, of great learning, and without corruption of
judgment: methinke men should raither appoint them selves to follow their
judgments, then the light and rash sainges of soche, as neither integrity of
life, neither incorruption of judgment, nor auncientie of time does commend:
but raither the contraries of these do them discommend.

Now as ye have heard this prophecy: So have ye heard other Prophecies and
figures, that did prophecy and figurate this blessed Sacrament of

Wherefore, gentle Reader, now being by me advertised after soche sort as yt
has pleased my lord God to imparte his grace unto me, if thowe hauest not
erred rejoice in God, and be confirmed: If thowe hauest erred repent before
God, and be reduced. And thus much of the scriptures of the

THE SEVEN AND THIRTITH CHAP. MAKES
ALthough I am not ignorante (gentle Reader) that in the Psalms be diverse
other prophecies, which according to the mind of saint Hierom do speak of
this blessed Sacrament and sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, that should
be offered in the Church of Christ, and of the which the poour in spiritte
should eat and be satisfied, as in the xxi. xxij. lxxj. cx. psalms: Yet for
that the figures of this Sacrament be allreadie answered by prophecies to them
aunswerable: And these that be left may by just occasion be spoken of
hereafter, I shall for the Readers ease, disauauntage my self of the allegacion
of them to the setting forth of the matter here taken in hand by me to be
defended, and so conclude this book with a brief recapitulacion of some
thinghes bfore said to the intent they may be applied to answer some one or
mo me^bres of the

I did of purpose omit to apply that is said, as answer to that part of
his wicked proclamacion which yt does fully confute, by cause I would not to
much trouble my process, but thought yt best to reserve yt to this place, as
in other matters I have also done the like in this book.

Wherefore that yt may well be perceived, that this that is said does clean
overthrow this man's doctrine, understand first what is his doctrine, Thus in
his proclamacion he cries.

If any one of all our Adversaries be able plainly and clearly to prove by
soch authority of the scriptures, the old Doctors, and Counsels (as is
before said) that the priest had then authority to offer up Christ unto his
Father, etc. In which his proclamacio^ he denies the Sacrifice of the Churhe,
which is the body and blood of our savior Christ which (he says) the
Church has none authority to offer to God in sacrifice.

Against this his false doctrine, call to mind what is in this book said
specially in the setting furthe of the prophecies of the preisthood of Christ
The deuell has bewitched the Proclamer


S. Ciprian (as yt is alleged) says, that our Lord Jesus offered the same
Cyprian.
that Melchisedech offered, that is bread and wine, that is to say (says he)
his body and blood.

Isychius says, that we have the sacrifice of Christ the intelligible
Melchisedech, Isychius
which sacrifice was perfectly done in bread and wine, when Christ said:
This is my blood, that shall be shedd for you.

S. Hierom says, that as Melchisedech offered bread and wine: so shall Christ
Hieron.
offered his body and blood the true bread, and true wine.

S. Augustine says, Christ did institute the sacrifice of his body and
Melchisedech to succeade the sacrifice after Augustine.
the order of Aaron.

Where note that he says, Christ did institute the sacrifice of his body and
blood after the order of Melchisedech If he did institute the sacrifice, then
is there authority by the same institution given to the Church to offer Origin
which follows in this process.

We (says Origin) being obedient to the Creator of things, when we Origin.
have given thanks, we receive the breades that were offered. which be turned
into a certain holier body, which body truly makes them holier, that with
a sownde and pure mind use yt.

Note then that our obedience stands not only to eat the bread, but to eat
the bread that is offered, and therforre we must both offer and eat, The church
must both offer and eat.
if we will be obedient. If yt be our obedience to offer, then there is
commandment given to offer. If commandment be given, then Authority also.

Theophilact says, that the oblacion containing Christ our Lord, Bishop,
and Sacrifice, is continually offered by the ministres of God. Seeing that
Christ is offered Theophila.
(as Theophilact says) by the ministres of God, yt is evident that yt is done
with authority. For without authority can none offer him.

Martialis one of the disciples of Christ, says, that we for our health
offer that upon the holy Altar, that the Jews did offer upon the Cross for
envy. And if ye S. Martia. We offer ou the altar, that the Jews offered on the
cross. Irenaeus.
require by what authority we do it, he says that our Lord commanded us so
to do, in the remembrance of him.

And if ye will understand how the authority comes ordrely to us, to offer
the body of Christ to God the Father. Irenaeus will teach you. For he
says, that Christ giving instructions to his Apostles to offer sacrifice to
God, took the creature of bread and gave thanks, and said: this is my body.
And the cup also he took, and confessed yt to be his blood, and so of the
new Testament taught the new oblacion, which the Church taking of the
Apostles, offreth yt in all the world to God according to the prophecy of
Malachie.

Can not now this Proclamer, or raither Blasphemer, see or perceive what
authority the priest has to offer Christ to God the Father? Yt is derived
from Christ to the Apostles, from the Apostles to the Church, and so used
through out all the world. S. Augustine says, that the pure and clean
sacrifice that Malachie speaks of, that shall be offered in every place, is
the sacrifice after Augustine
the order of Melchisedech. What the sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech
is, by the mind of S. Augustine yt is above declared, where he says that
Christ did institute the sacrifice of his body and blood after the order of
Melchisedech. Eusebius says, that the Mosaicall sacrifices being rejected,
Eusebius Caesarien.
the Prophet Malachie by the reuelacion of God, shows what is our ordeinaunce
that was to come. And therefore we sacrifice now to the most high God the
sacrifice of lawde, We sacrifice to God a full and a most holy sacrifice
bringing horror. We sacrifice a pure sacrifice, in a new manner after the new
Testament.

What this most holy sacrifice is bringing horror with yt, yt is declred by
Chrysostom saing: Thowe come to the holy and terrible sacrifice, Bashe at
the Chrysostom.
secret thing of the sacrifice, For Christ that was slain is there setfurthe.

The cause then why this sacrifice is called the most holy sacrifice, Why yt
is called terrible, Why yt is said to be full of horror, is, because Christ
that was slain, is in the sacrifice set forth before us. Christ then being
settfurth in our sacrifice. Yt is to be said after the mind of these holy
Fathers, that Christ is offered in our Sacrifice.

Last of all to make the conclusion, Damascen says that the body and blood
Damasce^.
of Christ is that pure and unbloody sacrifice that our Lord speaks of by
the Prophet to be offered from the east to the west. If our Lord spoke yt, mete
yt is that yt be

Now Reader do thou not see the great brag of this young Goliath
overthrown. See you not plain scriptures, and doctors, and those the grauest
and eldest, with their plain and weighty sentences press and crushe this his
puffed bladder, and thrust out in his seight the vanity therein contained?
Perceive you not by these holy Fathers that the priest has authority to
offer up the body of Christ to God the Father? which thing this Proclamer
in his stowt manner flattering him self, seemed percase to many of his auditorie
by his Proclamacion to have overthrown: But what so ever he or any other
with him phantasied, both he and they may perceive that this blast was not
against a reed wauing and bowing with the wind: but yt was against the sure
and substancial pillar, and grownded faith of Christ's Church, and against
that sure builded house the catholic Church builded upon the Rock, and
therefore shakes yt not, neither with the waves of the trooblesome sea: nor yet
with soche blastes as this

Thus ye perceive, here is good matter showed for that, that the catholic The
Proclamer has none authority to disprove the Sacrifice but his bare
Proclamacion.
Church teaches: What brings he for that which he so stowtlie blowstereth?
Yt is with good authority now proved, that Christ is offered in the holy
sacrifice: What proof has he that Christ is not so offered now but his bare
Proclamacio^? A meruailouse matter. He requires scriptures, Doctors, and
Counsels, for that, that the catholic Church teaches, and for that he
teaches and would have received, he brings not one title And therein he does
but as he may do. For certain I am that he ca^ bring none

And here will I again ioin with him, that if he can bring any one sufficient
authority, that shall directly say that the Church may not Issue joined
with the Proclamer for the Sacrifice.
offer the body of Christ in soche sort as yt does, I will give him the
victory. He requires plain proof that the priest offreth Christ: his request
is satified: the plain proof by express words is made: Let him do the like
for his doctrine if he can.

But let him not trust to prove yt by the wresting of saint Paul to the
Hebrews, following Calvin, and other of his Fathers: For that will not serve
his turn.

As for Doctors, there is not one that will favor him and his Cranmer in his
siste book has not one doctor nor Council to make any show for him.
doctrine in this poinct. For if there had been any, his predecessor Cranmer,
or he that was the author of that book, would in the fifte book, where he
treacteth of the sacrifice, have alleged some one. But I say, he had not one
Doctor or Father, nor Council by whom he impugneth the doctrine of the
catholic Church that Christ is offered in his Church. He would fayn Father
his doctrine upon saint Paul's epistle to the Hebrews, but that scripture
accepts yt not as a laufull child, but as a Bastard begotten by some wicked
parents, and therefore refuses yt. He is much encombred laboring to deliver
himself from Chrysostom and other, but all in vain.

Wherefore as this man, who sparing not stirs and moves (as the prouer be
says) every stone to get some help or find some shifte for the
mainteinau^ce Lo^bardus, and Nycen Counsel: yet he durst not so allege the^
as that he would stand thoroughly with them: So I believe verily, that this
Proclamer can no more do but (leuing the holy Fathers) sing a little

By this then thus much may be said, that to say that Christ is not offered
in and of the Church, and the ministres thereof, is no catholic doctrine, for
that yt is not taught of any catholic Father. But that the contrary is a
catholic doctrine, yt does well appear by a nombre of catholic Fathers
before alleged, and shall more appear to you by those that shall be yet
alleged. For God be praised this truth is not so slender that yt lacks good
witnesses, nor yet so barren that nothing can be said of yt, but what I can
invent. But yt is so full that to say all yt would fill an wholl volume.
Wherefore in this place I shall of many produce but four or five to be added in
this recapitulacion, and so end this book. Justinius Martyr of the Sacrifice of
the Chrystians says thus. Deus ipse Dialog. a duersus iudaeo.
ait: In omni loco in gentibus hostias acceptas gratasque immolari. Neque vero
a quoqua^ hostias Deus accipit, nisi a suis sacerdotibus. Itaque omnia
sacrificia, quae suo nomine facie^da Jesus Christus tradidit, it est, in
Eucharistia panis and poculi, quae in omni loco a Christianis fiunt,
praeoccupatione vsus Deus sibi grata esse testatur. God him self says, that
of the gentills acceptable and pleasant Sacrifices in every place shall be
offered. Christ instituted the Sacrifice of the Church.
Neither truly does God accept Sacrifices, but of his own preistes. Wherefore
all the sacrifices which Jesus Christ has delivered to be done in his name,
that is to say, in the Sacrament of bread and the cup, which sacrifices
are done of the Christians in every place, God using preoccupacion wittnesseth
the^ to be acceptable unto him. Thus Justinius, of whom we may learn, that the
Sacrifices of the Sacrament are delivered to us by Jesus Christ. So that the
authority of this manner of sacrificing comes from him, and is not of our
selves S. Hierom over and above that, that is allreadie alleged of him, says
thus: Quod autem ait, Tu es sacerdos in aeternum secundum ordinem Melchisedech:
mysterium in Li. quest. Hebraic.
verbo ordinis significatur, nequaquam per Aaron irrationabilibus victimis
immolandis, sed oblato pane and vino, id est, corpore and sanguine Domini Jesus.
Whereas he says, Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech:
our mystery in the word of order is signified, not by Aaron in offering
brutish sacrifices: But in offering bread and wine, that is to say, the body
and blood of our Lord

Of Justinius we learned, that the sacrifices of the Chrystians were delivered
unto us by Jesus Christ.

Of S. Hierom we learn, that these sacrifices be the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus. So by these two, in most manifest and plain words we be taught,
that Jesus Christ delivered unto us the authority to offer in sacrifice his
body and blood.

S. Ambrose also teaches us the same lesson saing thus: Ego enim, Domine,
memor In prima oratione prepar. ad Missam.
venerandae passionis tuae accedo ad altar tuum, licet peccator, vt offera^
tibi sacrificium, quod tu instituisti, and offerri praecepisti in
commemoratione^ tui pro salute nostra. For I, o Lord, being mindful of thy
passion, come unto thine Altar, although I be a sinner, that I may offer unto
thee, the sacrifice that thowe did institute, and command Christ
instituted and commanded the Sacrifice of the Church.
to be offered in the remembrance of thee for our health.

Thus holy Ambrose, who makes the matter out of all controversy, that a
priest has authority to offer Christ in sacrifice. And to declare what
sacrifice, he says the same sacrifice, that Christ did institute. And him. As
this may well instruct the reader, what is the plain and very

But yet let us descend a degree lower toward our time, and see what was then
taught. Isidorus, who lived above nine hundredth years agon in Isydorus li. 1.
de off. ca. 18.
this matter gives this testimony: Sacrificium quod a Christianis offertur
Deo primum Christus Dominus noster and magister instituit, quando commendauit
Apostolis corpus and sanguinem suum priusquam traderetur, sicut legitur in
Euangelio: Accepit Jesus panem and calicem and benedicens dedit eis. The
sacrifice that is offered of the Chrystians unto God, first our Lord and master
Jesus Christ did institute, When he gave his body and blood to his Apostles
before he was betrayed, as yt is readde in the Gospel: Jesus took bread and
the cup, and blessing them gave the same unto them.

In these few words of this Author we may learn that Christ did institute
the sacrifice of the christians. We may learn that the thing that is offered in
sacrifice is the body and blood of Christ. We may learn to who^ yt is
offered, that is unto God. We may also learn what time yt was instituted:

A Consonante testimony have we also of Haymo, who as he is of good
auncientie: So is he accounted a learned Author. This man expownding Haymo in
5. ad Heb.
the epistle of saint Paul to the Hebrews, and declaring Christ to be a
priest after the order of Melchisedech, says thus: In cuius ordine sacerdotij
Christus factus est sacerdos, non temporalis, sed aeternus, nec offerens
victimas legales, sed instar illius panem and vinum, carnem videlicet and
sanguinem suum, de quibus ipse dixir: Caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus
vere est potus. Ista quoque duo munera, panem videlicet and vinum commisit
Ecclesiae suae in memoriam sui offerenda. Vnde patet sacrificium pecudum,
perijsse quod fuit ordinis Aaron, and illud manner potius, quod fuit ordinis
Melchisedech, quia and Christus illud corroborauit, and Ecclesiae suae tenendum
reliquit. In the order of (meening Melchisedech) bread and wine, that is to
say, his body and his blood, of the which he says: My flesh is verily
meat, and my blood is verily drink. These two gifts, that is to say, bread
and wine he has committed to this Church to be offered in the remembrance of
him. Thus Haimo.

Whereby yt yt manifest that the Sacr^ of beasts is vanished away, which was
of the order of Aaron, and tha^ ^at raither remains, which is of the order of
Melchisedech, because Christ also has confirmed yt, and left yt to his Church
to be kept and used. From whence the authority comet that the Church offreth
the sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech, this Author, like as the other
before alleged has declared that yt comes from Christ. And opening what
the Church does offer, he says that Christ did offer bread and wine, that is
(says he) his body and blood, which bread and wine he committetd to the
Church to be offered in the remenbrance of him. Plain sentences for master
Juell.


Eycept that the calling of a man, a man: or an ox, an ox, be no speaking as
plain as any of these, which is Nicolaus Cabasila, who although Nich.
Cabasila c. 27
as before of long time yt has been. This author showing how the blessed
Sacrament is consecrated, sacrificed, and ministered there, says thus: Cum
venerandam illam coenam narrauit, and quomodo ante passionem ipsam dedit
sanctis suis Discipulis, and quod accepit calicem, and quod accepit panem, and
actis gratiis sanctificauit, and quod dixit ea per quae significauit mysterium,
and cum ea ipsa verba dixit, deinde procidit, and orat, and supplicat, diuinas
illas voces ipsius vnigeniti seruatoris nostri etiam in donis propositis
applicans, vt suscepto eius sanctissimo and omnipotente Spiritu conuertatur
quidem panis in ipsum preciosum and sanctum eius corpus: vinum autem in ipsum
immaculatum, and sanctum eius sanguinem. Haec cum orauit and dixit, vniuersum
sacrificium peractum and perfectum est, and dona sunt sanctificata, and hostia
integra and perfecta effecta est, and magna hostia and victima, quae pro mundo
mactata est, supra sacram mensam sita cernitur. Panis enim non amplius figura
Dominici corporis, neque donum ferens imaginem very doni, neque ferens aliquam
descriptionem ipsius seruatoris passionum tanquam in tabula: sed ipsum verum
donum, ipsum sanctissimum corpus Domini, quod omnia illa vere suscepit probra,
contumelias, vibices, quod crucifixum, quod interfectum, quod sub Pontio Pilato
pulchrum testimonium confessum est, quod colaphis appetitum, quod contumelijs
affectum, sputa passum est, and felgustauit. Similiter and vinum ipse sanguis,
qui exilijt occiso corpore, hoc corpus et sanguis qui ex Spititu sancto
constitutus est, natus ex Maria virgin, qui sepultus est, qui resurrexit
tertio die, qui ascendit in coelos, and sedet ad dextera^ Patris. When he has
declared that honorable Supper, and how he gave yt before his passion to his
holy disciples, and that he took the bread, and took the cup, and giving
thanks sanctified them, and said those words by the which he declared the
mystery. And when he has spoken those words, then he falls down and
prays, and makes humble request, applieng those sainges of God the only
begotten Son our Savior, to the gifts The bread of the Sacrament is turned
into the very body of Christ, and wine into his blood, and is no figure of
them.
set forth, that his Almighty and most holy Spirit being received, the bread
may be turned into the self same preciouse and holy body of him, and the
wine into the self same immaculate and holy blood of him. When he has prayed
and said these things, all the whole sacrifice is thoroughly doe^ and
perfected, and the gifts And the great host and sacrifice which was ssain for
the world is seen set upon the holy table. For the bread is no more a figure
of our Lords body, neither is yt the gift bearing the image of the true
gift, neither as in a table, but the very gift yt self, the very most holy
body of our Lord, which verily suffered reproaches, contume lies, beatinges,
which was slain, which confessed a goodly testimony under Ponce Pilate,
which being buffited and with contumelies affected, suffered spitting and tasted
gall. Likewise the wine is the self same blood that gusht out of the ssain
body. This is the body and blood that was made by the holy Ghost, borne of
the virgen Marie, which was buried, which rose again the third day, which
ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father. Thus
much this Author, who as he has very plainly and fully testified the
sacrificing of Christ's body in the holy table, So does he immediately in the
next chapter declare the commandment of Christ unto the Apostles Id^ca. 28.
and the Church to do the same, and says thus: Ipse dixit, Hoc est corpus
meum, hic est sanguis meus. Ipse etiam inssit Apostolis, and per Apostolos
vniuersae Ecclesiae hoc facere. Hoc enim (inquit) facite in meam recordationem.
Non iussisset autem facere, nisi esset potestatem daturus vt possent hoc
facere. He said, this is my body, this is my blood. He also commanded his
Apostles, and by his Apostles the universal Church this to do. For do ye
this (says he) in my remembrance. But he had not commanded them to do yt,
except he would give the^ power that they might Dominus autem videtur, and
contrectatur per veneranda, and sacra mysteria, vt qui naturant nostram and
susceperit, and ferat in aeternum. Haec est sacerdotij potestas: hic est
sacerdos. Etenim qui seip sum semel obtulit, and sacrificauit, a sacerdotio non
cessauit, sed perpetuum hoc sacrificij munus nobis obit: per quod etiam est
aduocatus pro nobis ad Deum in aeternum. Owre Lord is seen and felt by the
honorable and holy mysteries, as he who has both taken our Nature upon
him, and will bear yt for ever. This is the power of the preisthead: This is
the priest. For be that has once offered and sacrificed himself Christ ceasseth
not to execute his perpetual priest hood and Sacrifice.
cease not from his preisthead, but he does execute the perpetual office of
sacrifice in us, by the which also he is Advocate for us to God for ever.

Now this Author (as other before have don) has taught us both that Christ's
body is sacrificed, and also that he has commanded his Apostles, and by the
Apostles all the Church, to do even the same. And thereto he has also given
power to his Church to offer Christ. For (as this Author says) except he had
given power to do yt, he would never have commanded yt to be done. And that
the very body and blood be sacrificed, and not only a piece of bread eaten
in the remembrance of Christ, this Author so plainly teaches that this
Proclamer can not avoid him: but as his Father Luther did answer saint James
epistle in the matter of iustificacion rejecting the same epistle.

For first, to avoid the figures, tropes, and signs, which the Adversaries
comonlie cast upon this matter, this Author says, that by the Almighty
power of the Spirit of God, the bread is turned into the very body of Christ,
and not into an image of Christ: And the wine into his immaculate blood.

Secondarely, to avoid their figures, by express words he says: that Note
this master Juel and see your heretical doctrine directly impugned.
after the consecracion the bread is no more a figure of our Lords body,
neither is yt an image of the very thing: neither an only description of
Christ as a thing might be described in a table: but yt is the thing yt self,
even the very same body that was crucified, and the self same blood that
yshued out the same crucified body. What can we have more? What more plainness
can be desiered? Ye see that the body of Christ is offered in sacrifice: ye see
that power,

And now I doubt not, but the reader sees good, plain, and sufficient matter
to approve the doing of the holy catholic Church, in this matter. And will,
I trust, judge this Proclamer sufficiently answered by the best learned
Fathers, as well of the greek church, as of the latin, and will therefore think
yt right, that where this Proclamer required but one plain sentence, having now
a nombre, that he do perform his promise, and submit him self to the
truth, and subscribe to the catholic Church, and become her child again,
which God of his mercy bring to pass in him.

For truly the gifts that God has placed in him considered, I cannot but
love him, and praise God in him, and wish that I might ioin with him: But when
I remember his great fall into this wickedness, I piety him, and utterly
divide my self from him, as my bownden duty before four me^bres for the
Proclamocion answers.
God is.

In this book then as occasion has served, I have answered four pieces or
members of his proclamacion: The first, for the having of the scriptures in the
vulgar tongue: The second, for Reseruacion of the Sacrament: The third, for the
authority of the offering of Christ to his Father. The fourth, for the presence
of Christ's body and blood in

In the other books, by the help of God, shall be likewise answered some
other parts of the same proclamacion as like occasion shall be ministered,
which God grant may be to his everlasting praise and honor. Amen.

THE SECOND BOOK.
THE FIRST CHAPTER DECLARES THE OFFICES OF THE OLD LAW, AND THE BENEFITTES
OF the new Law, with an exhortation to submit our understanding to the
knowledge of faith, and therewith to the belief of the Sacrament.
LEX per Moysen data est, gratia and veritas per Iesum Christum facta est. The
Law (says saint John) was given by Moises but grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ.

The Law (as saint Paul declares) had two offices, for the Joan. 1. The
law has two of fices. Romans 3. Ibid. 7.
which yt was given of God, by Moises to the people. The one was to give them
knowledge of finne, and to restreign them from yt.

The first part of this office S. Paul speaks of to the Romans, saying: Per
legem cognitio peccati. By the law comes the knowledge of sin. For (says
he in an other place) Peccatum non cognoui nisi per legem. Nam concupiscentiam
nescieba^, nisi lex diceret: Non concupisces. I knew not sin but by the
law. For I had not known what lust had meant, except the law had said: Thowe
shall not lust.

The second part he speaks of to the Galathians, where, when he had proved
that the promise of the blessing came not by the law, but by faith, as being
made four hundredth and thirty years before the law was given, he moves this
question: Quid igitur lex? wherefore then serves the Law? As who Galat. 3.
should say, if the law were not given, that by yt men should atteign to
justification, whereto then serves yt? what then is the office of yt? He
answers: Propter trangressionem posita est. yt was added for transgression,
that transgressors taking with the law the spirit of servitude in fear,
might be witholden from the trangression of the same Law, although the
outward obseruacion of yt, conferred not that iustificacio^ to the obseruers
thereof, that avails before God.

The other office of the Law was by liniamentes of figures and shadows to
lead the people to Christ, as S. Paul says: Lex poedagogus fuit in Christo.
Jbid.
The Law was our schoolmaster to Christ. Wherefore our Savior Christ
willed the Jews, who were not willinge to receive him as the Messiah, being
yet by the Law taught to know him, that they should repair to Joan. 5.
the scriptures of the Law, as to their schoolmaster saying: Scrutamini
scripturas, in quibus putatis vos vitam habere aeternam, and illae sunt, quae
testimonium perhibent de me. Search the scriptures, in the which ye think to
have eternal life, and they are they, which testify of me. Which Law
undoubtedly did so teach them Christ by promises, figures, and prophecies,
that they could not pretend ignorance, but they must needs be fownde
offenders of malice, whereof the chief ruler of the school Moses would accuse
them, as Christ says to them: Nolite putare quod ego accusaturus sum vos
apud patrem Jbid. 5.
meum, est qui accusat vos Moses, in quo speratis, Si enim crederetis Moysi,
crederetis forsitan and mihi. De me etenim ille scripsit. Do not think that I
will accuse you to

Of this office of the Law, that is of the school mastershippe of yt, How yt
promised Christ: How yt painted, and deschribed him by figures

Now mindinge to seek the truth of the same matter in the new Testament, I
am much comforted and delighted, trusting with much more facility and ease
to atteign the same. And yet as not without pleasure mixed with trauaill, I
have done the like in the first book, passinge through the thikkes (as yt
were) and obscure places of the Law, not all unlike unto an Hu^ter, who
painfully beating the busshes, and traueling through the Thickes, yet not
without pleasure seking his game, and coming to the goodly fair Lawnde,
seems to be much eased, and as yt were, releiued of a great grief, and then
with more delight and pleasure follows the same: Eue^ so now that I am comed
to the beautiful Lawnd of the new Testament, where, for the sharp priking
busshes of the seuitute and bondage of sin under the Law, and for the
obscure and dark thickes of figures, and shadows of

The Law had two offices not void of inco^modities: The Gospel has The
Gospel has two commodities.
two benefittes, enriched with great commodities. The Law gave knowledge of
sin: The Gospel gives grace for remission of sins. the Law had figures:
the Gospel has the verity.

He then by whom came this grace and verity, Jesus Christ, who is the Joan.
1.
light of the world and lightneth every man, that comes into the same, give
the bright and clear beams of his knowledge unto us, both the writer, and the
reader, that being led by his grace, we may come persightlie to his truth
and verity, and cominge to the same, we may with all humility and meekness
subdue our understanding to the service of faith. And so learning not to be
wise in our own conceiptes, we may embrace the truth of yt, earnestly and
vnfeignedlie beleuinge the same truth, and by believing also understand yt. for
Nisi credideritis non intelligetis, says the Prophet, Esaias. 7.
Author of grace, and geuer of faith with the Apostles and say: Domine
adauge nobis sidem. Lord increase our faith, and I doubt not, but if he see
that Luc. 17.
we come to him, he will have compassion upon us, and run and mete with us,
and fall one our necks, and kiss us, and so receauinge us with much Luc. 15.
joy and gladness, walk with us on the way, and interpret the Scriptures
unto us, and so open our eyes which were holden before, that we shall Ibid.
24.
know him in breaking of the bread.

And here be advertised (Reader) that if thowe be not with Christ in the
breaking of bread thy eyes shall never be opened to know Christ. For saint
Augustine showing that the eyes of the two disciples that went in Emaus were
holden from the knowledge of Christ, until the breaking of bread says Non
enim inco^gruenter accipimus hoc impedimentu^ in oculis eoru^ a Satana fuisse,
ne agnosceretur Jesus, sed tantum a Christo, propter eorum sidem ambiguam facta
Agust. de. consensu Evangelist.
est permissio vsque ad sacramentum panis, vt vnitate corporis eius
participata, remoueri intelligatur impedimentum inimici, vt Christus posset
agnosci. We do not take yt incongruentlie, (mening the two disciples that went
to Emaus) was of Satan, that Jesus should not be known. But only yt Luc. 24.
was permitted of Christ for their doubtful faith sake, until they came to
that the unity of Christ's dodie being participated, yt might be perceived,
that the impediment of the Enemy was removed, that Christ might be known.

Agreablie to this also says Theophilact upon Luke Insinuatur and aliud
quiddam, Theop. in Luc. ca. 24
nempe quod oculi eorum, qui benedictum pane^ assumunt, aperiuntur, vt
agnoscant illum. Magnam enim and indicibilem vim habet CARO DOMINI. An other
thing also is here insinuated, that is, that the eyes of them which do take
the blessed bread, are opened that they may know him (mening Christ) For
the slesh of our Lord has a great and unspeakable power or strenght. Thus
much Theophilacte.

Thus although the two disciples were in the company of Christ, and heard
him interpret the scriptures unto them: yet he was a stranger unto Soche as
have not a sowndfaith in the verity of the Sacrament are strangers to Christ.
them, for they knew him not. And very well. For as they for lake of perfect
and full faith in him, were strangers to him: So he agreablie as a stranger
appeared unto them. And even so though many have heard the interpretacion of
scriptures, yea and can them selves interpret and understand

For note well this (Reader) that whosoever he be, that erreth in the matter
Who erreth in the Sacrament, erreth in many other matters of faith.
of the Sacrament, he erreth in many mo. So did Luther the Raiser, and stirrer
up of heresies in our time. So did Oecolampadius, Zwinglius, Bullingerus,
Bucerus, and Petrus Martyr. So did our contrie men, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer,
and Taler. So does this Chalenger, as his own confession in his sermon well
prouethe. So do soche as yet live conuertlie, cloaking, and dissemblinge their
heresies. So that though some other heresy may be alone in a man: yet be well
assured, the heresy against the blessed Sacrament is never alone in any man,
but accompanied with so many other heresies, as he that has them becomes a
stranger to Christ, and for lack of a sownde faith

Come therefore, and ioin with Christ in the breaking of the bread, be
partaker of the unity of Christ's body, that (as saint Augustine says)
the impediment of the Enemy, which lets thee to know Christ, may be
removed, and taken away. For the flesh of Christ ( as Theophilacte saiethe)
has an unspeakable power or strenght, soche power or strenght that after the
receipt The ffesh of Christ in the Sacrament has an unspeakable power
of yt in due manner of faith, and sincere devotion, yt will open thine eyes,
that thowe shall know him truly, which now, phantasieng that thowe do
know him, know him but fantastical. Seeing then this blessed Sacrament is
of soche great, and unspeakable virtue and gives so great a benefitt, let us
hear the Author of verity, and of the Sacrament also, commending to us the
verity of the same.

THE SECOND CHAPTER EXPOVNDETH THE
THe holy gospel teaches us, that the Author of this blessed Sacrament made
two notable mencions thereof at two sondrie Two notable mencio^s made by Christ
of the Sacrament.
times. The one was the promise of the institution of yt, with a declaracion
of the befitte, that should ensewe to men therbie, which is set surth and
declared in the sixth chapter of saint John. The other was the plain and
certain institution of yt in the last supper, accomplishing the promise before
made. Of these two by the help of the Author of them, with thassistance, and
direction of that his Spirit of truth, which he has promised should lead
us into all truth, this book shall tell the very truth.

And forasmoch as by order the promise goes before the accomplishment of the
promise, although saint John, who is the writer of yt, did write yt many
years after the other Eua^gelistes had written the last supper,

Our Savior Christ being God and man, and knowinge (for that nothing was
hidden to him) all things, as well the present secret things and thoughts
of man, as also the order and succession of things to come, foreseeing that
the people would resort unto him, and that mete occasion should be given, and
that the time would very well serve for the preparinge of the minds of soche
as would believe in him, to speak of the high mystery of the receiving of his
body and blood: he began with the great miracle of the multiplieng of five
batlie loaves and two fishes. By the which miracle they being moved to
consider his great power, might the more easily be induced to the belief of
the great miracle of the giving of his blessed body and blood in the
Sacrament, as Chrysostom says: Propterea id prius fecit miraculum, vt per
illud non essent amplius increduli his, quae postmodum diceret, Therefore
Chrysostom. hom. 45 in Joan.
(says Chrysostom) did he work this miracle first, that by yt they should
be no more unbelieving in those things, which he would afterward Ex eo, and
haec credere oportuit ei facilia factu esse. By that miracle yt behooved them to
believe, that these things also were easy for him to do. Ibidem.


This miracle then being done as a preparatiue or induction to the belief of
that great miracle, that afterward he would tell them that he would do: many
people did follow him, though drawn by diverse Spirittes: Some by the
heavenly Spiritte mouinge the mind: Some by the fleshly Spiritte, moved of
the belly. which our Savior Christ did note when he said: Sequimmi me, non
quia vidistis signa, sed quia manducastis ex panibus, and saturati estis. Joan.
6.
Ye follow me not because ye have feen the miracles, but because ye have eaten
of the loaves, and were filled. And so proceeding nearer to enter into the
matter, which he chiefly intended, said unto them: Operamini non cibu^ qui
perit, sed qui permanet in vitam aeternam, quem filius hominis daturus est
vobis. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but for that which endures
into everlasting life, which meat the Son of man shall give unto you.

The Jews now by this advertised, perceived that they were moved to great a
multitude with so feweloaues, for the which then they could say: This is the
very Prophet, which should come into the world, and would Quod ergo facis
signum, vt videamus, and credamus tibi etc. What sign show thowe now, that
we may see and believe thee? What do thowe work? Our fathers did eat
Manna in the desert (as yt is written) he gave them bread from heaven to eat:
Here our Savior Three sundry breades mentioned by Christ. Joan. 6.
Christ having just occasion, enters into a large disputation with the^
which continues to the chapiters end. In the which he makes mention of
three sundry breades: that is, of the bread Manna, of the bread the Son of
God, and of the bread the flesh of Christ. Which three breades, as they be
distincted in nature: So does the Evangelist, distinct them, by the
distinction of their times in the which they were given.

Manna, which was given long before, he does distinct yt by the time that is
past, saying: Patres vestri manducauerunt Manna Ibid. 6.
in deserto. yowre fathers have eaten Manna in the wilderness. By which saing
is declared not only a distinction and difference of the thing yt self, being
Manna, but also of the time and place that yt was eaten of their

Non Moses dedit vobis panem de caelo, sed Pater meus dat vobis panem de celo
verum. Moses gave you not that bread from heaven: but my Father gives you
the true bread from heaven,

Where note that Christ says: that his Father gives the true bread. He did
not say, that he did give, or will give: but presently, gives. And who is
this bread he declares, saying: Ego sum panis vitae. I am the bread of life.
And whether this be spoken of his manhead, or of his god head, he immediately
opens: Qui venit ad me non esuriet, and qui credit in me, non sitiet in
aeternum. He that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me
shall never Belief is directed to God alone.
thirst. Belief is directed to none, as to believe in them, but to God alone. We
believe in Jesus Christ God and man, not by the consideracion of his manheade
alone do we believe in him, but in that his Godhead and

Et panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est, quam dabo pro mundi vita. And the bread
which, I will give is my flesh. which I will give for the life of the world.
In the which words he teaches a manifest diversity of this bread here
spoken of, from the other spoken of before. For here by express words he
names the bread his flesh. which yet more plainly he teaches to be his
very real and substanciall flesh, when he says: that he will give them that
same flesh, which he will give for the life of the world. He gave not his
flesh spirituallie to suffer death for the life of the world, But the very
real flesh of his very body.

Where now note, that where I said before, that in this chapter (besides the
bread which our savior Christ fed the people then with, miraculouslie)
therwere three breades spoken of by Christ: These three breades be

As for Manna, that yt was a diverse substance from either of the other

And here note that speaking of the bread of his Godhead he moves the Christ
moved the Jews to believe in his Godhead, and to eat the flesh of hisma^head
Jews more then once to believe in him. But speaking of this other bread he
never moved the Jews to believe in yt, but allwais to eat yt. There he said:
Ego sum panis vitae. I am the bread of life. Here (as yt were disseueringe his
flesh, as being one of the substa^ciall parts of his person, from the wholl)
he says, Panis etc. The bread which I will give is my flesh, which is a
different Substance from the substance of the Godhead of Christ although both
these Substances in Christ, be but one person.

As touching the difference of time in the giving of these two breades: The
first is given presently, and therefore Christ said: Panis enim Dei est, qui
de coelo descendit, and dat vitam mundo. For the bread of God is he, which
comes

Now speaking of the third bread, he spaketh of the time not present, but of
the time to come, saing: The bread which I will give. So that as there is two
plain differences of time, that is the time present, and the time to come: So
be the two breades, two different Substances, the one being expressed as the
cheifer part to be believed on, the other as the inferior part, by the name
of flesh to be eaten on.

This I dare auouche to be the very native sense, and the true understanding
of this scripture, as ye may perceive the very scripture yt self enforces us
to take this sense, according to the letter.

Never the less that ye may perceive, that I will not arrogate to my self
soche authority to expownde this scripture, as the Adversaries have done, who
have so impudentlie upon their own head and authority taught, that Christ
here spoke no one word of his body and blood in the Sacrament,

THE THIRD CHAPTER PROVES BY THE
ANd first let us see the distinction of breades. As for the bread which our
Savior Christ multiplied and the bread Manna, which be manifestly distincted
in all men's knowledges, and of the which there is no Controversy, I shall not
need to speak any more.

Of the other two breades, where our Savior Christ began to enter disputacion
of them, and in the beginning of the same said: Ego sum panis vitae: Joan. 6.
Chrysostom. homil. 44. in Joan.
There Chrysostom in expownding the same text, says: Iam in mysteriorum
traditionem deue^turus est, et primum de diuinitate sua sic disputat: Ego sum
panis vitae. Neque enim de corpore, hoc dictum est, de quo circa finem inquit,
Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est: Sed adhucde diuinitate. Etenim ille propter
Deum Verbu^ panis est, quemadmodum hic panis, propter aduenientem ei Spiritu^,
panis caelestis efficitur. Now will he (meening Christ) come to the setting
forth of the mysteries, and first of his Godhead, he says thus: I am the
bread of life. For this was not spoken of his body of the The bread which I
will give, is my slesh: But as yet of his Godhead. For as that is bread for God
the Son: So is thie bread made heavenly bread, for the Spirit coming to yt.
Thus much Chrysostom Christ's Godhead and manhead distincted as two breades.
Is not this a cler testimony? Do ye not see here, a plain distinction of
breads? This (says he) I am the bread of life, is spoken of the Godhead, and
continues disputacion of yt, till he come to this text: The bread that I will
give is my slesh. And this (says he) is spoken of his body. And does not
now the sixth of S. John speak of the body of Christ in the Sacrament?

Note further that he says, as the Godhead is bread for God the Son
(meening that the Godhead in Chrystys God the Son) So (says he) this bread
(meening the slesh of Christ) is made the heavenly bread for the spirit
coming to yt.

But I will not trooble thee (Reader) with many words in so plain a matter. I
will raither produce some other one of the other side of Christ's Parliament
house, to see if their testimony be agreeable, and whether they be taught of
one Spirit, one true exposition of Christ's Gospel.

S. Augusten expownding the same text (that Chrysosto^ says Christ spoke of
his body) writes thus: Determinat consequenter Dominus quomodo se pane^
dicat, non tantum secundum diuinitate^, quae pascit omnia, sed etia^ secu^dum
humana^ natural, quae est assumpta a Verbo Dei, cum subdit: Et panis que^ ego
dabo caro mea est. Owr Lord (says S. Augustine) determines consequently how
he calls him self bread, not only after his Godhead, which fedeth all
things, but also after his humane nature, which is assumpted of the Son of
God, when he said afterward: And the bread which I will give is my flesh,
etc. Does not here S. Augustine agreablie with Chrysostom, teach a plain
difference of the bread of the Godhead of Christ, and the bread of his Ma^head?
does not he say that Christ in this text. The bread which I will give, is my
flesh, does speak of his humane nature? Consider then (Reader) the authority
and auncientie of these two great and famous Fathers of Christ's Church, and
accept their judgments before these newfangled Inuentours, in the exposition
of the scriptures.

And now that ye have heard these two of the higher house agreablie reporting
how the Church in their times understood the sixth chap. of S. Ihon Theophilacte
the follower of Chrysostom in many things, whether he follow him in this also
or no. Thus he writes upon the same text.

Manifest autem nobis hoc loco, de communione corporis dicit. Nam panis
(inquit) quem Theophilact. in 6. Joan.
ego dabo, caro mea est, quam ego dabo pro mundi vita. Porro potestatem suam
indicans, quod non vt seruus, and minor patre crucifigendus, sed voluntary,
inquit, Ego dabo carnem meam pro mundi vita. Manifestly does Christ speak
unto us of the mystical communion of his body. For the bread (says he)
which I will give you, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. And showing his power, that he should be crucified not as a servant,
and less then the Father, but willingly he says: I will give my flesh for
the life of the world.

Note here that Theophilacte does not only follow, and agree with
Chrysostom: but also he seems to signify, that yt was a clear matter, a
plain matter, a matter received of all men of Christ's Church in his time
without controversy, when he saeth, that Christ in that text spoke manifestly
of the communion of his body.

A merueilouse matter, that, that Christ did speak so manifestly, and of
these Fathers was conceived so clerly: should now a days be taken of these
Sap. 5.
they shall say, and lamentably confess, as in the book of wisdom is said
in the persons of soch: Errauimus a via veritatis, et iustitiae lume^ no^
illuxit nobis, etc. We have erred from the way of truth, and the light of
righteousness has not shined to us, and the Sun of understanding rose not
up upon us. We have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness, and
destruction. Tediouse ways have we goen, but as for the way of the Lord we
have not known. Which manner of lamentacion God auerte from them, and give
them grace in time to repent, that the Sun of understanding may rise upon
theme.

To procead, and thereby to try whether soch as have written of late years, I
mean, which were within these three hundredth years or there about (which have been so vilie esteemed of these singular phantasied men of our time) did dissent
from these elders in the exposition of this scripture: And whether the Church
these two or three hundredth years last past, did otherwise

And to speak here what I think, verily I think the subtle and crafty
conueighance of the Adversaries, and this Proclamer also, was and is to
contemn and despise these late authors, first, because they were (as they
say) not cloquent, and therefore Erasmus much inueigheth against Lyra. Then
these are not ancient, and therefore not to be alleged. Last they open
themselves a little more, and say these authors are not, to be alleged, but
rejected because their doctrine is not sownd, but corrupted. And they have
corrupted (say they) and perverted, and destroyed Gods word with the
inuentio^s of me^. And by this were all the learned writers, which were within
these six or seven hundredth years defaced and rejected as. S. Tho. Aquinas, S.
Bonauentura, Petrus Lombardus, Dionysius Carthusianus, Hugo Cardinalis, Holcot,
and N. Lyra, Fathers in old time spoke of the mysteries covertly.
with a great no^bre mo of that age, which are not esteemed, nor accepted as of
authority, nor none that have written within the compass of these thousand
years can be allowed by some of the Adversaries. And why was this?

As for other Fathers, that were before a thousand years, though many of them
did writ very plain, as occasion did serve, when they did write Perfectoru^
est solidus cibus, strong meat is for them that be perfect, and Paruulis in
Christo lac dandum. To ^onglinges in Christ milk is to be given: therefore
they oftentimes (as yt was necessary, that the mysteries of our faith,
should not be uttered to them that could not bear them) did speak of the
same covertly and closely, and therefore they were fain oftentimes to knitte
up there talk of the Sacrament, with this or like saying: Norunt fideles, the
faithful do know. And by like occasion did in many places write obscurelie in
this matter, and did not so manifestly and plainly utter yt, because there was
no occasion given them by heresy in that matter, but all were of one mind in
yt, having most godly peace and quietness in the same.

And therefore the Adversary more delighted with obscure places, which he
thinks better to draw to his sense, then the plain places, which will
Heretics* how they allege the fathers.
not suffer them selves to be drawn, has labored to reiecte soche as did
Berengarius, which upon occasion of heresy were enforced to write plainly in
this matter. But God be praised the eldest and auncientest Fathers, have yet in
diverse places written so much in plain manner, that yt is able to convince and
overthrow the heresies of the Adversaries, as partly ye have heard allreadie.

And yet for all the pretensed auncientie they sought, refusing these learned
men, that were within a thousand years, yet one of them would allege Like to
lik. Zuinglius slain in a rebellion bego^ by himself.
an other, as Bullinger alleged Zuinglius in his exposition upon saint Paul's
epistles, which, Zuinglius was so holy and so ancient a father, that he was
slain in a sedicion raised by him and his disciples, against the magistrates of
his contrie. And this is as good a chaung, as the heretics made in the
beginning of this wicked time of heresy, when they put the holy saint and
Polycarp. put out of the Kale^der
Martyr Policarpus, that was saint John the Evangelists disciple, out of
the

Now notwithstanding their crafty iniquity in rejecting these good
catholic authors, I will use plain simplicity in the accepting of them,
that the truth which they profess being ancient though the authors be of
late days, and the consonancie of these with the most ancient authors in
teaching and uttering the same truth; may be perceived.

For if these of late years agree with them of the old time in the truerh,
Thautoritie of late writers approved by good reasons.
and teach the same truth that the other do, what should let us to hear
them, and accept them? If none should be received but soche as were a
thousand years since, and soche also as be of this our time, shall be refused,
the^ preachers must cease. For of what more authority or credit is he of,
that teaches in the pulpet by speaking, then he that teaches by open writing?
If ye will not believe me writing, ye will not believe me preaching. If ye will
believe me preaching, for that I speak the truth by the scriptures, and
ancient fathers: Believe me also writing the truth by the scriptures and
ancient be perceived to be one throughout all, and that they being joined with
the

And now therefore to Theophilacte the Grecian, I shall ioin the learned
doctor Nicolaus de Lyra a latin Author who writing upon the sixth of S. John
comes to this text: Et panis, quem ego dabo, caro mea est. And the bread,
which I will give is my flesh: and expowndeth yt thus: Postquam egit de pane
spirituali, qui est Verbum, hic consequenter agit de pane spirituali, qui est
Sacramentum. After he has don (says this Author, of Christ) with the
spiritual bread, which is Nico. Lira in. 6. Joan.
the word: here consequently he treacted of the spiritual bread, which is
the Sacrament. What does this author dissent from the Fathers? does he not
signify that Christ before the sentence so often alleged, did speak of the
spiritual bread his Godhead, which he calls the word? And does he not now
say, that in yt that follows Christ speaks of the Sacrament?

These be sufficient to declare the true understanding of our Savior Christ's
process, and order in the sixte of S. John. And for that ye perceive the same,
as well after the mind of Christ, the very text so leading us to understand
yt, as also after the mind of diverse learned authors, I will now procead to
see the understanding of diverse textes of the rest of this chapter, that
treacte of the blessed Sacrament.

THE FOVRTH CHAPTER BEGINS A
THis distinction of these two breades last before mentioned perceived, and
being withal remembered, that at this text (The bread, which I shall give, is
my ^esh, which I will give for the life of the world) Christ began to speak
of the Sacrament, and continues the disputation thereof to the end of the
chapter: to prove the same more manifestly to the Reader, and withal to make
yt clear, that that process is not of a figurative flesh, but of Christ's
very propre flesh and body I will begin at the same text, and so descending
to the last by a nombre of the most ancient Fathers of Christ's Parliament
house, open both the one and the other, I trust, to the full contentacion of
the godly Reader.

The first that shall show his mind of this matter shall be the holy Martyr
Cyprian, who says thus: Panis vitae Christus est, and panis hic omnium non
est, sed noster est. Et quomodo dicimus, Pater noster, quia intelligentium, and
credentium pater est: sic and pane^ nostru^ vocamus, quia Christus noster, qui
eius corpus co^tingimus, panis est. Hunc autem pane^ dari nobis quotidie
postulamus, ne qui in Christo sumus, and Eucharistiam quotidie ad cibu^ salutis
accipimus, intercedente grauiore aliquo delicto, dum abstenti, and no^
co^municantes, a caelesti pane prohibemur, a Christi corpore separemur, ipso
praedicante, and monente: Ego sum panis vitae, qui de caelo descendi. Si quis
ederit de hoc pane viuet in aeternum. Panis qute^ quem ego dedero, caro mea
est, pro seculi vita. The bread of life is Our Father, because he is the
father of all that do believe and understand: Even so also, our bread, call
we, which touch his body, because owre Christ is bread. This bread we
daily desire to be given us, least we, which be in Christ, and take the
Sacrament daily to our meat of health, some greuouse offense coming between,
while we being excommunicated, and not receiving be forbidden from the
heavenly bread, may be separated from the body of Christ, he himself openly
saing and teaching: I am the bread of life, which descended from heaven.
Whosoever shall eat of this bread shall live for ever. The bread, which I will
give, is my flesh for the life of the world. Thus much S. Cypria^

In this sentence, I doubt not but ye perceive, that this holy Martyr applies
the sentences of the sixth of S. John to the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood. According to which understanding he calls Christ our bread, S.
Cyprian aplieth the sixth of. S. John to the Sacrament
whom he so calls, not only because of his Godhead, but also because he
feadeth us in the Sacrament with his body. For (says he) we being in
Christ, do receive the Sacrament daily to the meat of health. But if by
sin we forbear to the meat of health, the heavenly bread, and the body: we
are taught that in the Sacrament is the very presence of that body, to the
which proprelie these goodly titles may be wourthilie applied. Which body
can be none other but the body of Christ God an man.

But forasmoch as the faith of this famous Father and holy Martyr Cyprian in
this poinct has been notably and manifestly declared in sentences before
alleged in the first book, and more herafter shall be spoken, I will not now
trooble the reader, with any longer declaracion of the same, but will ioin with
Cyprian one of the other side of Christ's Parliament house, even Euthymius a
grecian, whose sentence, Reader yt shall not repent thee to hear, if thowe
desire to know the truth. Upon the text of S. John before treacted of he
makes this exposition.

Duobus modis dicitur Christus esse panis, secundum diuinitatem scilicet, and
humanitatatem. Euthymins in 6. Joan.
Postquam ergo docuit de modo qui secundum diuinitatem est, nunc etiam docet de
modo, qui est secundum humanitatem. Non autem dixit, quem do, sed quem dabo.
Daturus namque erat in vltima coena, quando sumptum panem, actis gratijs
fregit, deditque Discipulis, and ait, Accipitt, and comedite: Hoc est corpus
meum. Christ is said to be bread two ways: that is, after his Godhead, and
after his manhead. Therefore when he had taught the manner which is after his
Godhead: Now does he also teach the manner which is after his manhead. For
he did not say, which I do give, but which I will give. For he would give yt
in the last Supper, when thanks being given, he brake the bread which he had
taken, and gave yt to the disciples and said: Take, eat, this is my body.

What can the Adversaries say against so manifest, and so plain a sentence? Do
not their chekes wa^e red for shame? Is not blind ignorance, or deuelish malice
to be laid unto these men, that either do not know the learning of so many
great clerlees, or else, if they know, do so maliciously, so deuelish which
is, that Christ did treact of, and promise in sixth of John, the Sacrament of
his body and blood.

Now (gentle Reader) wilt thou believe them in their matters, when they be
deprehended in soche notable falshead, as all the Church does reprehende them
for. And yet their falshead shall more appear by other mo herafter. Whereby yt
shall most clearly be perceived, that they have attempted against all truth,
to wrest the sixth chapter of saint John, from the Sacrament. And so shall
thowe se how far they have swarued, and do swerve from the treuth.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER PROCEADETH UPON the same text, by saint Augustine and
Chrysostom.
THat ye may see more of the understanding of this text, an other coople shall
be produced to show you how this place of Iho^ is understood. The first of
them shall be famous Augustine, who says thus: Mensa sponsi tui panem habet
integrum, and poculum sanctu^, quem pane^, etsi fractu^, comminutumque vidimus,
integre tamen cum August. de cultura agri Dominici.
ipso suo Patre manet in caelis. De quo pane dicit: Panis quem ego daho, caro
mea est pro mun di vita. The table of thy spouse has perfect or pure bread,
and an holy cup. Which bread although we have seen broken, and bruysed on
the cross: yet yt abides with that his Father wholl in heaven. Of the which
bread he says: The bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for
the life of the world.

S. Augustine speaking here to the spouse of Christ, says, that the table of
her Spouse or husband has a perfect bread, The bread on the table of Christ,
what is yt but the Sacrament? Of this bread which is the Sacrament in the
table of Christ, the same Christ (says S. Augustine) says: The bread
which I will give is my flesh. By which words yt is ineuitablie manifest
that that sentence of S. John is spoken of the Sacrament.

But now whether yt be spoken of the Sacrament, as of a bare sign, which
sign (as the Adversaries allege) as other signs likewise, does but take the
name of the thing, that yt is the sign of, or no, let us search by saint
Augustine All one body that was broken on the Cross, is with the Father in
heaven, and on the altar.
be, and to have been in three sundry places, that is, on the table, on the
cross, and in heaven with his Father. The Sacrament, that is, the externe
sign, was neither on the cross, neither is in heaven. Wherefore yt is the
very body of Christ which was upon the cross, and is with the Father in
heaven, that is now on the table of Christ. For note the saing well, and ye
shall find, that he speaks but of one bread. For when he had spoken of yt,
as being on the table, he speaks again of the same by the relative, saing:
which bread although we have seen broken on the cross.

A relative (as the grammarian knows) makes rehersall of a thing spoken of
before. Then when he said, which, he speaks of the bread on the table. So
that by S. Augustine, that same bread, that is on the table, is yt which was
broken on the cross. And that that was broken on the cross, is yt, that is
wholle sitting in heaven with the Father. Wherbie yt is consequent, that yt is
the same, and very body has pithilie touched that, that we here seek,
namely that this place of the sixth chapter of saint John speaks of the
Sacrament, and yet not of the The Bread which I will give, is my flesh: So I
breiflie have touched and noted the same to you, hasting to hear the sainges,
and expositions of Chrysostom upon the same text.

Chrysostom, after he had in his learned manner declared in his 44 home lie,
that Christ spoke this text of S. John, which we treact of now, of his
body, when he comes to the same in his own place, after he had reprehe^ded
the Jews for their incredulity, and slacknes in the belief of Christ's
words, says that they therefore took no profitte of them. Illi tunc
temporis Chrysostom. hom. 45. in Joan.
nihil ex ijs dictis, nos illius beneficij vtilitatem cepimus. Quare necessario
dicendum quam admiranda misteria, and cur data sint, and quae eorum vtilitas.
They at that time took nothing by those words, we have taken the profitt of
the benefitte, wherefore necessarily yt is to be said, how wonderful the
mysteries be, and wherefore they be given, and what is the profitt of them.
These words The bread which I will give, is my flesh. In the which words
forsomuche as Christ said he would give his flesh, Chrysostom says, they be
wonderful mysteries, And therefore he would search the cause why he gave them,
and what profitt comes to us by them.

And immediately as a cause why Christ gave unto us this mystery, the bread
which is his flesh: the said Chrysostom adioineth this sentence of saint
Paul: Vnum corpus sumus and membra ex carne and ossibus eius. We are one body
and members of his flesh and of his bones. And that he would not be mistaken,
but that these words be spoken of the receipt of that bread that Christ
gave, which is his flesh, he more plainly utters his mening, expownding the
former words thus: Vt aute^ non solum per dilectione^, sed reipsa in illam
carnem conuertamur, per cibum id efficitur, quem nobis largitus est. That we
should not only by love, but in very deed be turned into that flesh, that
is brought to pass by the meat which he has granted us. Thus Chrysostom.
Christ's flesh turns us into yt.


And what meat did he grant us? even that, that he frelie promised to give
us, a bread which is his flesh. which flesh being our heavenly and
spiritual meat contrary to the order of carnal food, which received is
turned into us, and not we into yt, turns us into the flesh of Christ, as yt
was said to saint Augustine: Nec tu me mutabis in te, sicut cibum carnis
tuae, sed tu mutaberis in me. Neither shall thowe change me into thee as the
meat of thy flesh: but thowe shall be changed into me. And this is one cause
why Christ gave us this wonderful mystery as Chrysostom right godly
terms yt.

He adds also an other cause of the giving of this great mystery unto us,
which is this: Cum enim suum in nos amorem indicare vellet, per corpus suum se
The same flesh and blood that Christ took of ourna ture, he gives vt again.
nobis commiscuit, and in vnum nobiscum redegit, vt corpus cum capite vniretur.
When he would show forth his love toward us, by his body he mingled him
self with us, and brought him self into one with us, that the body might be
united with the head, Thus much Chrysostom. Mark his words, that Christ By
his body has mingled himself with us. which body is not a fantastical
body, but his very real body, as the same Chrysostom after goodly
examples godly setting forth the matter, speaks in the person of Christ.
Vester ego frater esse volui, and communicaui carnem propter vos and sanguinem,
and per quae vobis coiunctus sum, ea rursus vobis exhibui. I would be yowr
brother, and for by what things I was conioined to you, those things again I
have given unto you.

Weigh this golden sentence with me (gentle Reader) I beseech thee, weigh yt
well, and see whether we receive but a piece of bread in the holy Sacrament or
not. Yt is most certain, that Christ took not a fantastical body. as the
Maniches here toforesaied, but a very true body, of very flesh and very
blood, and was in all things fownde a very man, save only that he lacked
sin, and having soche flesh, and soche blood, he must needs A plain place
of Chrysostom. for the Proclamer
beioined to us as one of our nature and kind, a very man as we be. If the^
he gave unto us those things, by the which he was conioined to us, he was
conioined to us by very substanciall flesh and blood, wherefore he gave unto
us his very substanciall flesh and blood. If he gave (as the adversary
says) unto us his flesh but only in a sign, then he gave not his very
flesh in deed: But he was not conioined to us by flesh and blood in a sign
only. Wherefore he gives us not his flesh and blood in a sign only.

And again (as some other do say) he gives us his flesh and blood, that is
the benefitte, the merit and grace of his flesh and blood, and not his very
real flesh and blood. I deny not but he gives us the merit of his passion,
fuffred in his flesh, and shedinge of his most preciouse blood, but that is
not imparted and given to us only in the Sacrament of his blessed body and
blood: but also in other sacraments. As in Baptism we have remission of
sins, both original and actual, from the which we be washed in his blood:
Lauit nos a peccatis nostris in sanguine suo. He has washed us from Apocal. 1
Receipt of Christ's merits not propre to one but common to all sacraments
our sins in his blood: So have we also in the sacrament of penance, where
also we have remission of sins by the merit of Christ's passion, And brief
lie all the sacraments have their efficacy, power and strenght of the merits
of Christ's passion. So that to have the meritie of Christ's passion is not the
propre benefitt that comes to us by the receipt of this Sacrament of the body
and blood of Christ, but is a benefitt given to us in the ministracion and
due receiving of all other sacraments. But the propre benefit of this
sacrament, is to receive the very body of Christ, as a singular Cyrill
says) is viuifica, that is, giving life or making to live everlastingly,
according to his own promise: Qui manducat me, viaet propter me, he that
eats me shall live by means of me.

These be the benefittes propre unto this Sacrament (as Chrysostom has
rehearsed) who also proceading declares the great and wonderful excellency of
this Sacrament, and a nombre of other benefittes ensewing to us by the receipt
of the same. Whose process although yt be somewhat long^ yet for that yt
declares most manifestly the truth of Christ's presence in the Sacrament,
and most godly commending the same, teaches us not only to reverence yt in
our hearts, and also by mouth reverently to shall not be tedious to the
Reader in readinge. And therefore shall I more

When Chrysostom had spoken much of the flesh of Christ, of which some part
ye have now heard. He comes to speak of his blood, of the which ye shall
now hear. Thus he writes: Hic sanguis sacit, vt imago in nobis regia
storeat. Hic sanguis pulchritudinem, atque nobilitatem animae, quam semper
irrigat Chrisost. ibid.
and nutrit, languescere non sinit. Sanguis enim a eibo non fit^ repent, sed
prius aliud quiddam. Hic quam primum irrigat animam, eamque vi quadam magna
r^buit. Hic mysticus sanguis Daemones procul pellit, Angelos and Angelorum
Dominum ad nos allicit. Daemones enim cum Dominicum sanguinem in nobis vident,
in fugam vertuntur, Angeli aute^ procurrunt. Hic sanguis effusus vniuersum
ablu^e orbem terrarum, de quo multa Paulus ad Hebraeos prosecutus est. Hic
sanguis abdita, and sancta sanctorum purgabat. Quod si eius figura tantam
habuit vim in templo Hebraeorum, in medio Aegypto limmibus aspersus, long
magis veritas. Hic sanguis aureum altar significauit. Sine hoc Princeps
sacerdotum in penetralia ingredi non audebat. Hic sanguis sacerdotes faciebat.
Hic sanguis in figura peccata purgabat, in qua si tantam habuit vim, si vmbram
ita mors horruit, quantopere quaeso, ipsam formidabit veritatem? Hic animarum
nostrarum salus est, hoc lauatur, hoc ornatur, hoc incenditur. Hic igne
clariorem nostram mentem reddit, and auro sple^ didiorem. Huius sanguinis
effusio coelum peruium fecit. Admiranda sane Ecclesiae mysteria, admirabile
sacrarium. Ex Paradiso fons scaturiit, a quo sensibiles stuuij emanarent. A
me^sa hac prodiit, fons, qui flunios spirituales diffundit. This blood makes
that the kings The great excellency of the blood of Christ in the Sacrament.
image does flourish in us. This blood does never suffer the beauty and
nobility of the soul, which it does allwais water, and nourishe, to fade or
wax fainte. Blood is not made of meat forth with, but first yt is some other
thing. This blood at the first do the water the soul, and indewe yt with a
certain great strenght. This blood drives Deuells a far of, and allureth
unto us Angels, and the Lord of Angels. When the Deuells see the blood of
our Lord in us, they are turned to fleight, but the Angels run forth to us.
This blood bing shed, did wash all the wholl world, of the which Paul
has made a great process to the Hebrews. This blood did pourge the secret
places, and the most holy place of all. If then the figure of yt had so great
power in the temple of the Hebrews, and in Aegipte, Truly the mysteries of the
Church are wonderful, the holy treasour house is wonderful. From The
mysteries of the Church be wonderful.
Paradise a spring did run, from thence sensible waters did flow: from this
table comes out a spring which diffundeth and powers out spiritual
floudes. Hither to Chrysostom.

In the which process ye may perceive how much this holic man esteemed the
blessed Sacrament. Even so much did he esteem yt, so much did he regard yt,
so much he reverenced it, that after so much praise and Admiranda Ecclesiae
mysteria. wonderful be the mysteries of the Church.



Blood of Christ on the cross and in the Sacrament all one.
For I understand the blood of Christ in the Sacrament, to be the same, and
none other, that did flow out of Christ's side upon the Cross. For as in the
Sacrament is the veraie same body in substance, that was crucified upon the
Cross: so is there the self same blood in substance that was shed upon the
Cross. But in manner diverse. There the body and blood of a man mortal: Here
of Christ immortal. There passible here impassible: There visible: here
invisible There sensibly perceived: Here faithfully believed. Nevertheless I
say that Chrysostom spoke all these praises of the blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, the praise of which is the praise of the other, for that

But that my bare saing shall not be sufficient authority to answer the
vntreu saing of the Adversary, and that I seek raither to satisfy then to
contend: Chrysostom him self shall sufficiently answer this, by his
authority. And that both by that, that is alleged of him allreadie, and also
by that, that follows the same. Call therefore to remembrance the sentence of
Chrysosto^ To prove that he spoke of the Sacrament
immediately preceading this long saing now last alleged, and let them be
joined together, and then by the dependence of the one to the other, ye shall
perceive whether all this praise was directed. The sentence going before was
this: I would be yowre brother, and for yowr sakes I took flesh and blood
with you. And by what things I was conioined to you; those same again have I
exhibited, And the^ enters into this long praise, whereby when he speaking of
the giving to us of his flesh and blood (of the which also he made a long
disputacion before, and of the which the wholl homely treacted) joined this
saing to it: whereof should he speak, but of that blood in this sentence, that
he spoke of before in the other, and in the wholl homely?

And also when he had so greatly and highly magnified the blood of Christ:
Yet he declares whereto he looked when he exclamed and said: Admiranda
Ecclesiae mysteria. The mysteries of the Church are wonderful. and then
proceading declares him self manifestly to speak of the Sacrament, by a
similitude saing: From Paridise runs a spring, from the which flows
sensible rivers: from this table goes out a wellspring, which diffundeth
spiritual rivers. all which words do clearly show, that all this his
process, tends to the blood of Christ, as being in the Sacrament.

And although this above said does sufficiently prove this to be spoken of
the Sacrament: yet this that follows does more prove yt, and makes it so
clear, that yt can not be against said. Vt enim homo seruos suos emit, and
ornat: ita nos sangume suo Christus. Qui huius sanguinis sunt participei, cum
Angelis, and Archa^gelis, and supernis virtutibus commorantur, ipsam regiam
stolam Christi induti, spiritualibus armis muniti. Sed nihil dixi, ipsum induti
sunt regem. Sed sunt purum est, and admirabile, ita si pure accesseris, ad
salutem accessisti, sieve praua conscientia, ad poenam and supplicium. Partakers
of the blood of Christ dwell with Angels.
Qui enim manducat, and bibit indigne SANGVINEM Domini, indicium sibi manducat
and bibit. As a man (says Chrysostom) does both buie his servants, and
deck them: even so does Christ us with his blood. They that be partakers of
this blood, they dwell with Angels and Archaungells, and with the powers
above, being clothed with the kingly garment of Christ, are defended with
spiritual armor. But I have said nothing. They have Note here, that he
speaks of the Sacrament
so if thowe come to it purelie, thowe hauest comed to health or salvation: But
if with an evil conscience, thowe hauest commed to pain and punishment. For he
that eats, and drinked the blood of our Lord vnwourthelie, eats and
drinks his own damnation. Thus Chrysostom.

What can the enemy now say? has not now Chrysostom opened him self? and
fully, and plainly certified us, that all this his communicacion was of the
blessed Sacrament? Does not his allegacion of saint Paul invinciblie prove
yt? if saint Paul in the place alleged spoke of the Sacrament, then
Chrysostom that alleged him spoke of the Sacrament. and undoubtedly he did so.

Wherefore (chrystian Reader) observe here and note that Chrysostom does not
only understand the text of saint John of the Sacrament: But also that
therewith, both by plain opening of the words of S. Paul by most goodly and
high praise, he teaches us that in the same Sacrament is Christ's body and
blood. And in his so doing teaches God plagueth us for abuse of the Sacrament
also all good chrystian men highly to esteem, and greatly to reverence and
magnify this wonderful mystery of Christ's blessed body and blood,
considering, and by faith perceauing very Christ God and man there to be
present. And not so lightly, so irreuerentlie, so vndeuoutlie to use it, as
heretofore, even before the time of heresy, yt was used or raither abused. For
the which abuse, I assure you, I earnestly believe, that as in yt we did sore
offend: So by it God has sore plagued us. Let us therefore be admonished, and
learn to amend our selves.

And the like I would wish the Adversary to do, that where he in this wicked
time has forsaken his faith, and with defiled mouth has railed in
blaspheming this most holy Sacrament, and has called the faitfull Chrystians,
Idolaters, and robbers of God, robbing him of his honor, and giving yt to a
piece of bread, he would now learn that he has gone astraie. and that not the
Catholic Chrystians, but he and soche like have been Idolaters, and robbers of
God his honor, not honoring him where he was present,

Would this famous and noble clerk holy Chrysostom have so extolled
Honorable titles, and great effects of the Sacrament prove the presence of
Christ therein.
and magnified this Sacrament, so oftentimes calling it blood, and atributing
to yt gods power in fearing and driving away of Deuells, in wasshing our
sowles, in giving remission of sins, in putting death to flight, in being our
health, and salvation, with a nombre of soche effects, as ye have heard, if it
were but wine? Can a cup of wine work soche wonderful works and effects?
is yt of soch force and strength? if yt so be, the chamberlain of king Darius
that took upon him to prove, that forte est vinum, wine is strong, would not
have omitted so great praises of yt in his oracion, for it would have made
much for his purpose. But surely this is spoken by Chrysostom of the very
blood of Christ, which in deed has this great might and power, or else this
great Father would never so have magnified yt,

And now thou that wast once in Christ's faith, and hauest run astraic,
Venit nox, quando nemo potest operari. The night will come, when no man can
work. Therefore I do advertise thee with saint Cum metu et tremore salute^
^nam operare, with fear and trembling woork thy salvation. Return, and say
with the Prophet David: Erraui sicut ouis quae Philip. 2. Psalm. 118.
periit, quaere seruum tuum Domine. I have erred like the sheep that has
perished: seek thy seruannt o Lord.

And now although I have a little digressed from the right line of the proof
of the sixth chapter of saint John, to be understood of the Sacrament: Yet
I have not digressed from charity, nether from the principal purpose of this
book, which is to labor to reduce them, that have erred, to the truth, and
to confirm and comforth them that be in yt.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER PROCEADETH IN THE opening of the understanding of the same
text of saint John by Beda and Cyrillus,
THe truth of this matter is soch, that ytys testifieda^d avouched by many mo
fathers, of the which we will hear first Beda, and Beda in 6. Joan.
Cirille. Beda expowndeth the forsaid text of S. John thus. Hunc pane^ Dominus
dedit, qua^do mysteriu^ corporis et sa^guinis suis Discipulis tradidit et
qua^do semetipsum Deo patriobtulit in ara crucis. Quod vero dicit, pro mu^di
vita, no^ debemus intelligere pro eleme^tis, sed pro hominibus qui mu^di nomine
designa^tur. This bread (says Beda) our lord gave, when he delivered the
mystery of his body and blood to his disciples, and when he offered him self
on the Altar of the Cross to God the Father. And where he says: for the life
of the world, we may not understand it for the Eleme^tes, but for me^, which
by the name of the world are signified. Thus have ye Bedes exposition, which
al thoug yt be brief and short yet it is plain and clear. As he text saeth
that Christ would give twice a bread that should be his flesh: So Bid
declares two sundry manners, and times for the giving of the same. First, where
Christ said, the bread which I shall give, that (said Bid) our Lord gave,
when he delivered unto his Disciples the mystery of his body and blood. The
second, where Christ said, which I shall give for the life of the world, that
bread (says Bid) did our Lord give when he offered himself to God the Father
on the

I need not here to note that Bid expowndeth this text of the Sacrament, where
the words are so plain. But this I note that he calls the flesh of Christ's
body upon the cross called bread.
Christ offered upon the Cross, bread, as well as the same flesh delivered to
the disciples in the last supper. Whereby it appears, that where the
Adversary, when he finds the Sacrament called bread, do the take occasion to
maintein his error, and say that it is but bread, yt is no good argument.
Neither does it any more conclude, that the Sacrament is but bread, because it
is called bread, then that Christ's body on the cross is but bread because it
is called bread. Christ calls himself being wholly God and man (as Cirill
says) bread. And therefore both the godhead and the manhead of Christ may be
called bread, and be of Christ him self in the sixth of S. John so called. But
yet therefore yt is no good consequent that the body of Christ should be but
material bread. So likewise is yt no good consequent, that the manhead of
Christ should be but material bread. If then these two in the person of
Christ be called bread, and yet be not the same, that as the flesh of Christ
upon the cross is called bread, and

As ye have hitherto heard diverse, which be of good authority, and high
estimacion in Christ's Church, which all have expownded this text of S. John,
to be spoken of Christ's body in the Sacrament, not as in sign, but by real
presence: So God ayding, ye shall hear some other lively and agreablie
expownding the same, Therefore now shall Cyrill also, a Father of the Greek
Church, give his testimony. This man like himself, learnedly and godly
expownding the sixth chapter of S. John says thus: Antiquus ille panis
figura, Cyrill. in 6. Joan.
imago, vmbraque solummodo fuit nec quicquam praeter quam quod corruptibile
nutrimentum, ad modicum tempus exibebat. Ego vero sum ille panis viuus, ac
viuificans in aternum. Et panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est, quam ego dabo pro
mundi vita. Vides vt paulatim magis magisque se aperiat, and explicet mirificum
hoc mysterium. Dixit se pauem viuum, et viuificantem, qui se manducantes
faceret corruptionis expertes, and donaret immortalitate. Nunc dicit panem
illum carne^ suam esse, quam daturus erat pro mundi vita, and per quam nos
illam participantes viuificaturus. Siquidem verbi viuificans natura illi
ineffabili illo vnionis modo coniuncta, viuificantem eandem effecit, and
propterea participantes viuificat ista caro, eijcit ab eis mortem, and
interitum penitus expellit. That old bread was only a figure, an image, a
shadow, neither did yt geuevnto the corruptible body any thing else, but a
corruptible nutrime^te for a little time. But I (says Christ) am that living
and quickening bread for ever. And the bread that I will give is my flesh, which
I will give for the life of the world. Thou seiest, how by Christ's flesh in
the Sacrament gives life to the receauers.
little and little, he more and more opens himself, and does declare
thiswo^derful mystery. He has said that he is the living, and quickening
bread, which should make the partakers of yt without corruption, and give
the^ immortality. Now he says his flesh is that bread, which he would give
for the life of the woorld. And by the which he would give life to us that do
receive the same. For truly that quickening nature of the Son of God conioined
to that flesh, by that unspeakable manner of union, has made that flesh
quickening, and therefore does this flesh quicken the partakers of yt. For yt
does cast out death from them, and utterly expels destruction.

I think yt not obscure to you to perceive that Cyrill in this saing does
both expownde this sentence of Christ so often already spoken of, of the flesh
of Christ in the Sacrament: And also that he does here, as he does all most
every where in this chapter, teach the very presence of Christ in the same.
For after he had alleged the saying of Christ, note that he does advertise
us, how Christ does open him self, and does plainly set forth this wonder
full mystery. For where before he said that he himself was the bread, Now he
does more open himself, and say that bys stesh is bread. And that he speaks
of the flesh of Christ in the Sacrament he declares by that, that he says,
that yt gives life to them that be partakers of yt. For the propre partakinge
of Christ's flesh is in the receiving of this holy Sacrament.

This being plainly declared by Cyril who draws by the line concord with the
rest of the ancient fathers, as ye do perceive, yt may be known that on both
sides of the Parliament house, God has ever remained with one received

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER ENDS THE exposition of this text by Theophilacte, and
Lyra.
FOrasmoche as there remains more matter to prosequute in the expounding of
the rest of this sixth chapter of saint John, for the proof of the verity of
Christ's real presence in the blessed Sacrament: I shall add only two mo
witnesses to give there testimony of this text now in hand, and so ending
the exposition thereof, proceade in my matter and purpose intended by like
exposition of other mo textes in the same chapter.

The first of these shall be Theophilactus, who expownding this text gives
Theophilact. in sextam Joan.
a plain testimony of the truth. Attend (says he) quod panis, qui a nobis
in myste rijs manducatur, non est tantum figuratio quaedam corpo is Domini, sed
ipsa caro Domini. Non enim dixit: Panis quem ego dabo, figura est carnis meae,
sed caro mea est. Transsormatur enim arcanis verbis panis ille per mysticam
benedictionem, and accessionem sancti Spiritus in carnem Domini. Et ne quem
conturbet, quod credendus sit panis caro, etenim in carne ambulante Domino, and
ex pane alimonia^ admittente, panis ille qui ma^ducabatur in corpus eius
mutabatur, and similis fiebat sanctae eius carni, and in augmentum and
sustentationem conferebat, iuxta humanum morem. Igitur and nunc panis in carne^
Domini mutatur. Et quomodo (inquit) non apparet nobis caro, sect panis? Vt non
abhorreamus ab eius esu. Nam si qui them caro apparuisset, insuauiter affecti
fuissemus erga communionem. Nanc autem condes^e^de^te domino nostrae
infirmitati, talis apparet nobis mysticus cibus, qualibus aliquando asue
Christ's very flesh in the Sacrament, not the figure.
ti sumus. Take heed, that the bread which is eaten of us in the mysteries, is
not only a certain figuring of the body of our Lord, but the very flesh of
our Lord. For he did not say: The bread which I will give is a figure of my
flesh but, yt is my flesh. For the bread is tranfoarmed, by the secret words
of the my sticall benedictio^, and coming of the holy Ghost, into the slesh of
our Lord. And let yt not trooble any man that the bread is to be believed flesh.
For our Lord walking in the flesh, and receiving food of bread, that bread
which was eaten, was changed into his body, and was made like to his holy
flesh and yt went to the augmentacio^, and suste^tacio^ of him according to the
manner of man. How the bread is turned into sl^sh, and why flesh is not seen in
the Sacrament.
Therefore also now the bread is changed into the flesh of our Lord And how
(says he) does yt not appear flesh, but bread* that we should not abhor
from eating of yt. For if yt had appeared flesh we should not have been well
affected toward Theophilacte.

By whom yt is most manifest, that this text of S. John yet in hand is
understood of the blessed Sacrament. And further he most plainly avouches
the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, when he says, that the
bread by the work of the holy ghost is transfourmed into the flesh of Christ,
whereby ye are not only taught without all obscurity and darkness of
speech that the very flesh of Christ, is verily and reallie present in the
Sacrament: Transubstanciacio^ avouched.
But ye are also taught the manner how the flesh is made present that is by
transubstanciation. which although he utter by an other word, yet in effect
yt is all one. For where as he says yt is transformed, and every creature has
two forms, an outward form, and an inward, and he affirms, and declares
that the outward form remains, when he says: yt Form nature, essence
substance all one.
appears bread, which also our senses judge and perceive, then yt must needs
be, that this transformacion must be of the inward form. which forma,
natura, essentia, and substantia be all one, is the nature and substance of the
thing: which form, nature, or substance being changed, that change may
as well

And that he meant of the change of the very substance of the bread into Bread
in the Sacra. changed into flesh, aplain sai^g for the Proclamer.
the flesh of Christ, he declares by that he says: that as when our Savior
walked here upon the earth, and being a natural man, did for his natural
sustentacion eat hread, which bread was changed into the substance of his
flesh, a^nd was so changed that yt was made like to his holy flesh, as
Theophilactes words be: Eue^ so now (says he) the bread is changed into
his flesh. By which similitude he most plainly teaches, that as the substance
of the bread which Christ did eat, by natural disposition was substa^ciallie
changed, into the substance of Christ's flesh: So is now the substance of
bread by the operacio^ of the holy Ghost changed into the substance of
Christ's flesh. And to prove this he uses the words of scripture noting to
us that Christ did not say: The bread which I will give is a figure of my
flesh: but my slesh. If then yt be not the figure of Christ's flesh, and yet is
flesh, yt must needs be his very natural

Neither is this to be ouerpassed, and left unnoted to the reader, that this
Oecolampadius falsifieth Theophilacte.
author by a plain negative, denies the false affirmative of the Adversary.
For where the Adversary says yt is but a figure, This author says, yt is
not only a figure: And yet this word (only) did Oecola^padius put to of his
own, in the tra^slating. For the greek has not that word, as the learned in
that tongue have noted. And where the Adversary says by the negative, yt is
not flesh: This author boldly using the word and truth of his master
Christ says the affirmative, that yt is flesh. And thus (reader) thowe may
perceive the great impudency and shamelessnes of these Professors of heresy,
that what the holy writers, and ancient authors do expressedly affirm, that
do they deny, and that, that the ancient Fathers do manifestly deny, that
do they affirm, what now is to be judged of these I leave to thee Reader.

The other whose testimony shall finish the exposition of this text, shall be
Lyra, one of the other side of Chrysts Parliament house, who albeit in time he
be not ancient, yet in treuth he is ancient, in the which he co^cordeth and
agrees even with the most ancient, as yt shall appear. Upon this same text
Nico Lyra in 6. Ioa^
of S John so often repeated, without all manner of high speech, he writes
thus plainly: Sciendum quod in sacramento Eucharistiae continetur ipsum Verbum
incarnatum. Et ideo ostendens qualitate huius sacramenti, quatuor tangit:
Primum est illud, quod est ibi sacramentu^tantum, scilicet species panis, cum
dicit: Et panis, etc. Secundum est, author huius sacramenti, qui est ipse
Christus summus sacerdos. Sacerdos aute^, qui est minister huius sacramenti
tantu^modo profert verba, non in propria persona, sed in persona Christi. In
aliis autem sacramentis vtitur minister verbis suis, vel verbis Ecclesiae,
quibus exprimitur actus quem facit, vt in Baptismo, cum dicitur: Ego baptisote,
etc. Sed in Sacramento refert solum verba Christi, cum dicit: Qui pridie quam
pateretur etc. et sequu^tur postea verba Christi co^secratione^ efficientia,
and hoc notatur cum dicitur: Ego dabo, etc. Tertium est, res significata, and
co^tenta, scilicet verum Christi corpus, cum dicitur: Caro mea est. Quartu^
est, res signata, sed non contenta, scilicet corpus Christi mysticum, quod
coniungitur capiti per charitatem. Hoc autem sacramentum dicitur sacramentum
amoris. Thus much Lyra. who although he speaks plainly (as is said) yet
fully and truly, so fully and to lurk under, and by a wicked gloss to draw
to his sense and purpose.

Yt is to be known (says Lyra (that in the Sacrament of thanks giving, is
contained the very Son of God incarnate. And therefore showing the quality of
the Sacrament, he touches four things: The first, that there is one thing,
which is a Sacrament only, and that is the form of bread, when he says:
And the bread, etc. The secondeys the Author of this Sacrament, which is
Christ himself the high priest. The priest which is the mynistre of this
Sacrament, does only speak the words, not in his own person, but in the
person of Christ. In other sacraments the mynistre does use his own words,
or the words of the Church, by the which the act that he does is
expressed, as yt does appear in Baptism, where yt is said: I Baptize thee.
But in the Sacrament he does only rehearse the words of Christ, when he
says. Who before the day he suffered, etc. And after follow the words of
Christ working the consecracion. And this is noted when yt is said: which I
shall give to you. The third is the thing signified, and contained, that is
the very body of Christ, noted when yt is said: yt is my flesh. The fourth
is the thing signified, and not contained, and that is the mystical body

This is the exposition of Lyra. In the which that he does understand this
text of the Sacrament yt is more manifest then I need to note yt to you, That
he also in the same Sacrament teaches to be the very real presence of
Christ's body. For in the first entry he affirms that the very Son of
God incarnate is in the Sacrament. Which in the third note he groundeth upon
this Very Son of God incarnate in the Sacra.
word of Christ (yt is my stesh) which flesh of Christ) says he) is the
thing signified, and contained. Yt is signified by the Sacrament, that is, a
sign of an holy thing, which is the forms of bread, and wine, And is
contained being reallie present, as the very substance under the same forms.
In these two parts this Author dissenteth not from other, that have been
hitherto alleged. For they all teach one doctrine. One thing in deed he
teaches here which the other alleged for the exposition of this text have
not taught, which is that he notes in this text, that Christ does account
himself which I will give etc. By which words Christ signifies unto us,
that he himself is the doer, the woorker, and the geuer of this Sacrament which
thing this author more at large opening says: Christ is the author of this
Sacrament, For he is the heigh priest. The priest that is the minister does but
only speak the words, and use his ministry.

By the which words the vain saing of vain me^, which do deceive the simple,
and have not passed to Blaspheme this holy mystery, and shamefullie to
slander the Church of Christ, are made openly to be known in their own
sort as they be. For where to draw the simple from Christ's holy sacrament,
and bring the same most excellent mystery in contempt to be derided of boys
and Girlles, they would say: do thou believe that God is in Priests make
God, Cavil of the Adversaries opened
the Sacrament? why? then the priest does make him. And beleuest thou that the
priest can make God? What? God made all the world, and he is made of none.
With these and soche like the simple astoined and not seeing what to

THE EIGHT CHAPTER DECLARES BY whose authority and power the Sacrament is
consecrate and Christ's
But that ye may perceive, that to say the priest makes God, is the Priest
makes God, the doctrine of the Deuell.
doctrine of the Deuel and his disciples, who have invented soche lies, and
slanders to dishonor God, and his holy Sacrament, and to snare and entrappe
the simple in heresy, and so finally to cast the^ headlong into perpetual
da^nacion: I shall open, and declare unto you, what is the very true doctrine
of Chrysts Church in this matter.

The doctrine of Christ's Church was declared unto us by the author last
alleged in the chapter before. Who says that Christ is the high priest and
that he is the author and woorker of this Sacrament. This was the doctrine
taught now in the latter days, which undoubtedly was also taught in the
ancient Church, as yt shall appear to you by the Fathers which shall be
alleged, which lived in diverse ages.

Damascen an holy father and of good antiquity, as touching this matter
Damasce. de orth. sid. lib. 4 ca. 14
says thus: Quemadmodum omnia quae fecit Deus, Spiritu sancto cooperante
fecit: sic and nunc Spiritus sancti operatione haec supra naturam operatur,
quae non potest cognoscere, nisi sola fides. Quomodo fiet istud, dixit sancta
virgo, quoniam virum non cognosco? Respondit Gabriel Archangelus: Spiritus
sanctus superueniet in te, and virtus Altissimi obum brabit tibi. Itaque si and
nunc interrogas: Quomodo panis fit corpus Christi, vinum and aqua sanguis
Christi: Respondeo and ego tibi, Spiritus sanctus obumbrat, and haec supra
sermonem and intelligentiam operatur. Panis autem and vinum Transsumuntur. As
all things that How the bread is made the body of Christ.
God has made, he has made them by the holy Ghost woorking with him: Even so
now he woorketh these things above nature, by the operacion of the holy
Ghost. Which things no man can know but only faith. How shall this thing
be done (says the holy virgen) seeing I know not a man? The Archangell
Gabriell answered: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the
most highest shall ouershadow thee. Therefore if thowe al so ask now, how
the bread is made the body of Christ, and the wine and water his blood, I
also answer thee. The holy Ghost ouershadoweth, and woorketh these things
above speech and understanding. The bread and the wine be transsumed. Thus
much

In the which saying also ye perceive how reverently he frames himself
toward the work of God in this blessed and wonderful mystery. And certifieth
us, that if ye ask him how the bread and wine, be made the body and blood of
Christ: he will answer that the holy Ghost above speech and understanding
woorketh these things. In the which words we are not only admonished by
his example to speak reverently of the mysteries of Christ's Church, but we
are also taught that yt is not man, that woorketh this wonderful work, or to
use the manner of speech that the Deuell teaches his disciples, yt is not the
priest that makes God, but yt is the holy Ghost, who above that, that man can
speak or conceive woorketh this wonderful A plain place for the presence and
tra^substanciation.
work.

And though this be the principal thing, that in this author is at this of
the holy Ghost is brought to pass. For the bread and wine be transsumed (says
he) that is, turned, transmuted, changed, transelementated (as the fathers

Chrysostom (who lived long before Damascen, writes also of this matter
Chrysostom. homil. 2. in 2. Tim.
thus: Velo quiddam adijcere plane mirabile, and nolite mirari, neque turbemim.
Quid vero est istud? Sacra ipsa oblatio, sieve illam Petrus, sieve illam Paulus,
sieve cujusuis meriti sacerdos offerat, eadem est, quam dedit Christus ipse
Discipulis, quamque saccrdotes modo conficiunt. Nihil habet ista, quam illa
minus. Cur id? quia non hanc sanctificant homines, sed Christus, quiante illam
sacrauerat. Quemadmodum enim verba, quae locutus est Christus, eadem sunt, quae
sacerdotes nunc quoque pronunciant: ita and oblatio. I will add hereunto a
certain thing plainly wonderful, and meruail ye not, neither be troubled. And
what is that? The holy oblacion, whether Peter, or Paul, or a priest of any
Sacrifice of the Mass what priest soever offer yt, is al one with that, which
Christ did
manner of life do offer yt, yt is even the same that Christ gave unto his
disciples, and that the preistes do now consecrate: This has nothing less
then that, why so? Because men do not sanctify this, but Christ, who did
consecrate that other Even as the words that Christ spoke, are the same
which the preistes do now pronounce: So also is the oblacion. Thus much
Chrysostom. Whom ye have heard not only teaching that Christ does sanctify
the table now, who did hallowe the table in the last Super: but also with a
plain negative denieng that men do sanctisie yt.

Which Chrysostom also in an other place speaks more plainly to this matter.
The words there may be an exposition of these words here, and be after the
phrase of speech that is used now a days. And therefore I think yt
expedient, to asscribe them. Nunc ille praesto est, Christus, qui illam ornauit
mensam, ipse istam quoque consecrat: Non enim homo est, qui proposita de
consecratione mensae Domini corpus facit and sanguinem, sed ille qui pro
Chrysostom. homil. 30. de predu.
nobis crucifixus est Christus. Sacerdotis ore verba proferuntur, sed Dei
virtute consecrantur and gratia. Hoc est, ait, corpus meum, hoc verbo proposita
consecrantur. The same Christ is now present, which did beautify that
table, he also does consecrate this. For yt is not man which with the
consecracion Not man but Christ hiself does consecrate.
makes the things of the table, that be set forth, the body and blood of
our Lord, but he that was crucified for us, even Christ. The words are
spoken by the mouth of the priest, but they be consecrated by the power of God
and grace. This is (says he) my body, with this word the things set
forth are consecrated. Thus Chrysostom.

Do ye not see the doctrine of the Church yet every where like? Do ye not hear
Chrysosto^ by direct words, answer these slaunderouse heretics, saing that
yt is not man that does make the body of our Lord, and blood, but he that was
crucified for us, even Christ. Of whose words also, as before of Damasce^,
learn not only who does consecrate, but also what is doe^ and consecrated.
This is done (says Chrysostom) that Christ makes the bread A plain place
for the Procl.
and wine, which be the things set forth, to be his body and blood. Here is
no mention of any figure or sign, but plain speech they be made his body and
blood, which thing all catholic fathers do teach.

And that as well of the Latin Church, as of the Greek Church, we may see the
truth with full consent and agreement testified, S. Ambrose shall also be
brought forth as a witness in this matter. Who treacting of the blessings
Quis igitur dives, nisi vbi altitudo diutiarum est sapientiae and scientiae?
Hic ergo dives est, thesaurus huius pinguis panis, quem qui manducauerit,
esurire non poterit. Hunc panem dedit Apostolis vt diuiderent populo
credentium. Hodieque dat nobis eum, Amb de Bened. Patriarch. c. 9
quem ipse quotidie sacerdos consecrat suis verbis. Hic ergo panis factus est
esca sanctorum. Who is then rich, but he in whom is the great deapth of of
wisdom and knowledge? This rich man then is the treasure of this fat bread,
which who shall eat, he can not hungar. This bread he gave to his Apostles,
that they should divide yt to the believing people. Christ does daily
consecrat with his own words.
And now he gives the same to us, which he being the preist^, does daily
with his own words consecrate. This bread then is made the meat of the
holy. In these words saint Ambrose says that the priest does consecrate,
but what priest is yt? the priest in whom is the deapt of the riches of
wisdom, and knowledge, of whom saint Paul speaks to the Collossians,
which is Christ. For there is none that can consecrate, with his own words
but Christ. And with his words the consecracion is done, as saint Ambrose
says in an other place: Hoc igitur astruamus, quomodo potest, qui panis est,
corpus esse Christi? Consecratione. Consecratio Li. 4. de Sacra. cap. 4.
igitur quibus verbis est, et cuius sermonibus? Domini Jesus. Nam reliqua omnia,
quae dicu^tur, laus Deo defertur, oratione petitur pro populo, pro regibus, pro
caeteris. Vbi venitur vt co^siciatur venerabile Sacrame^tu^, ia^ non suis
sermonibus vtitur sacerdos, sed vtitur sermonibus Christi. Ergo sermo Christi
hoc conficit Sacramentum. Let us then teach this. How Co^secracio^ how yt is
done:
ca^ that, that is bread be the body of Christ? By consecracio^ By what, and
whose words is the consecracion? Of our Lord Jesus For all the other things
that be said laud is given to God, peticio^ is made in prayer for the people,
for kings and other. When the time is comed that the honorable Sacrament shall
be made, then the priest uses not his own words, but the words of
Christ. Therefore Yt is the word of Christ that makes this Sacrament. A
plain place of S. Amb. for master Iuell.


Thus much S. Ambrose whose words are so plain that I need not by notes unto
you declare the same, and his testimony so co^sonaunt and agreeable with the
Fathers before alleged for this matter her handled, that ye may euide^tlie
perceive how one truth and the self same doctrine, has be^ constantly taught
in the diverse ages in the which these Fathers lived.

And to ascend a little higher and nearer to the Apostles time, we will,
Eusebius Emis. in homil. pasch. Christ does consecrate his own body by turning
the substance of bread etc.
the testimony of Eusebius Emissenus an ancient Father in Christ's church,
who says thus: Inuisibilis sacerdos visibiles creaturas, in substantiam
corporis and sanguinis, verbo suo, secreta potestate conuertit. The invisible
priest, with his word, by a secret power, turns the visible creatures into
the substance of his body and blood. Thus Eusebius. Whom hear you here
tomake the body of Christ? does not the invisible priest, which is our
Savior Jesus Christ, and not the priest, who is but the ministre? as the
Auersaries maliciously blaspheme.

But leaving to thee (gentle reader) to weigh and consider, what manner of
people they are, that have feigned soche abominable untruths, as to say to
deceive with all, that the priest made God, and to judge what credit aught to
be given to soche, as with lies, slanders, and blashemies go about to
maintein their detestable heresies, I will ioin one more of like auncientie to
this Eusebius, and then, I trust, this may satisfy thee in this matter.
Cyprian that holy martyr, who speaking of evil receauers, Cypr. decoena Dom.
says thus: Melius erat illis mola asinaria collo alligata mergi in pelagus,
quam illota conscientia de manu Domini accipere, qui vsque hodie hoc
veracissimu^ and sanctissimu^ corpus suu^ creat, and sanctificat, et benedicit,
and pie sumentibus diuidit. Yt were better for the^, a millstone tied to their
necks to be drowned Christ does create, sanctisie, and bless his own body a
plain saig of S. Cyp.
in the sea, then with an vnwasshed conscience to take the morsel at the hand
of our Lord, who until this day, does create, and sanctify, and bless, and
to the godly receauers divide, this his most true and most holy body. Thus
Cipr.

Do ye not see, and learn by this holy martyr, who does make the body of
Christ in the Sacrament? Our Lord (says he) does even till this tune
create, sanctify, and bless this his most holy body.

Note also against these sign makers, and figure feigners, that he says not,
he creates a body: But his body, Corpus suum. and not an imaginatiue body:
but veracissimu^, and sanctissimu^ corpus suu^, his most true, and most holy
body. And he did not only so do in his last supper (as the Petrobrusia^s
said) sed vsque hodie creat. until this day he does create, sanctisie and
bless this his most true and most holy body. Wherbie is taught that Christ
and none other does co^tinuallie create in that holy ministracio^, and make
his body.

Now ye have heard, from the latter days until the time of this holy martyr
Cipria^ and Eusebius before alleged, who were nere to the primitive church,
Supra. li. 1. cap. 31.
as well in the Greek Church, as in the Latin Church, which is, that Christ
himself does work this wonderful work of consecracion, to make present in
this blessed sacrament his very body and blood, and not the priest, who (as
Chrysostom has taught) speaks the words, but the power and grace of God
does consecrate the things.

Wherefore (Reader) take heed of this wicked sort of people, who (as ye may
perceive) have not only, for the setting furthe of their wicked heresies
wickedlie slaundered the wholle Church, and the holy ministry of the same.
But also most impude^tlie have spoken the contrary of that, that the famous
learned holy Fathers have taught. What truth may be thought to be in the^ in
other matters, by this ye may conjecture. But now leaving this matter as
sufficiently declared and proved against them: I will resume my intended
purpose to expownde the sixth of saint John, whereof ye have heard one text,
and the testimony of diverse Fathers auouching the same to be understood of
the blessed Sacrament, and of the real

THE NINTH CHAPTER EXPOVNDETH THE next text that follows in saint John.
THe next text following in the sixth chapter of saint John is this:
Litigabant ergo Iudaei adinuicem dicentes: Quomodo potest hic nobis carnem suam
dare ad manducandum? The Jews strove among them Joan. 6.
selves, sainge: How can this fellow give us his flesh to eat? The Jews unto
whom (as saint Paul says) vsque in hodiernum diem, cum legitur Moses,
velamen positum est super cor eorum. Until this day, when 2. Cor. 3.
Moses is red, the veill is putt upon their hearts, their understandings
being carnal, and covered with so gross a veill, that they could not
perceive the spiritual talk of Christ, they strove together, and asked how
he could give them his flesh to eat. They lacked Esaias 7.
For Nisi credideritis, non intelligetis. Unless ye believe, ye shall not
vnderstaud They did not understand yt, because they did not believe yt. No more
shall Cum autem conuersi fuerint ad Dominum, auferetnr velame^ de cord eoru^.
Nevertheless when they turn to our Lord, the veil shall be taken away from
their heart. And then shall they not use this word of incredulity, and
doubtfullnesse, which never passith from man, but in the want of faith, as
says Chrysostom upon this text: Quando subit quaestio, quomodo aliquid fiat,
simul subit and incredulitas. Itaque and Nicodemus perturbatus est inquiens,
Chrysostom. homil. 45. in Joan.
Quomodo potest homo in ve^tre^ matris suae iterato introire et renasci? Itide^
and hi nunc: Quomodo potest hic nobis dare carne^ sua^ ad manducandu^? Nam si
hic inquiris, cur non idem in quinque panum miraculo dixisti, quomodo eos in
tantum auxit? Quiae tunc tantum saturari curabant, inquies, non considerare
nuraculum. Sed res ipsa tunc docuit. Ergo ex eo and haec credere oportuit ei
facilia factu esse. When the question, how, comes, there comes also
incredulity. Eue^ so Nichodemus was troubled saing: How can a man enter into
his mothers womb again, Even so these now, how can this man give us his flesh
to eat, For if thowe inquire this, why do thowe not say the like in the
miracle of the five loaves, how he increased (ye will say) they did only
care to be filled with meat, not to consider the miracle, but then the thing yt
self taught them, that the bread was multiplied. Therefore by that then yt
behooved to have believed these things to have been easy to him to do. Thus
much Chrysostom.

In deed (as this author says) the Jews having experience of Christ's power
by that miracle wrought in bread for their bodily sustenau^ce, might very
well have believed, that by the like power he might work this miracle also in
bread, to turn the substance thereof into the substance of his body, in a
manner convenient to be received for their spiritual sustenau^ce but Animalis
homo no^ percipit ea quae sunt Dei. The natural or carnal man does not
perceive 1. Cor. 2. False Chrystia^s worse then Jews with their questioning
how.
the things of God. No more do our Pseudochrystians, who be worse the^ the
Jews, for that they once believed, and yet now be led away by diverse and
strange doctrines, the contrary whereof saint Paul cou^seileth the^ in his
epistle to the Hebrews. And for that they would not remain and continue in How
can the body of Christ be in the Sacrament, under so little a piece of bread?
And how can we receive the body of Christ in at our mouths? And how can
Christ be in the Sacrament, that is at the right hand of the Father? And how
can the body of Christ, being but one, be at once in so many Altars? All
which questions do plainly declare a lack The miraculouse work of the
Sacrament promissed by Christ.
of faith to and of Gods works and power, that he is able to do and does these
things. For unto all these questions the aunswerys: that they be doe^ by the
power, and miraculouse work of God. If ye do proceade to ask, where find you
that God did say, that he would work soche a miraculouse work by his divine
power? Ye heard yt even now, that Christ said: The bread which I will give
is my flesh, not a fantastical flesh, not a Mathematical, or a siguratiue
flesh (as Theophilacte expowndeth that text) but that same flesh, that I will
(says Christ) give for the life of the world, I will give you that same
flesh to eat, that I will give to be crucified upon the cross, for the
redemption of the world, and none other but even

Soche as believed God, emonge the children of Israel, that they should
possess the land of Canaan, when God had, said they shoude so do, and not

Wherefore saying Christ has said, that he would give us that same flesh, Gods
power is not to be measured by man's reason.
which he would gue for the life of the world, let us not measure his power
by ours, to think that because we can not do yt, nor comprehend yt, or
because yt misliketh our natural reason, therefore he can not do yt. But hu^blie
let us understand yt by faith, and not ask how ca^ he give us his flesh to
eat? but by faith confess yt: Quia omnia possibilia sunt crede^ti, and quae
sunt impossibilia apud homines, possibilia sunt apud Deu^. Quia no^ est
impossible apud Deu^ omne verbu^. All things Marc. 9. Luc. 18. Jbid. 1.
are possible to the beleuer. And soche things as are impossible with me^, are
possible with God. For with God nothing is impossible. And so leaving to be a
curiouse searchers of gods wonderful works, praise God and say: Tu es Deus,
qui facis mirabilia. Thowe art God that woourkest meruailouse things. But for
so much as this text declares the incredulity of the Jews only in this
mystery, and teaches not the faith of a christen man necessarily to be had
about the same, Therefore I have decreed breiflie to ouerpasse yt, and by
occasion thereof some what to say to the Adversaries.

THE TENTH CHAPTER PROVING AGAINST
OCcasion being here given by the doubtful how of the Jews asking, How can
this man give us this slesh to eat? to make mention also of the doubtful how
of faithelesse Chrystians, asking, how Christ, who is at the right hand of the
Father, can be in the Sacrament: And how the body of Christ being one, can be
at one time on many Altars: I have thought good here a little to stay, by
faith theological to answer, not the faith, but the doctrine Philosophical,
both of the Proclamer, and also of his Accomplices. For this is a membre of his
proclamacion: whether the body of Christ is, or may be in a thousand places
or mo at one time. Which albeit in sense yt be coincident to the other before
mentioned: yet in utterance yt shows a more doubtful countenance. For asking
whether Christ's body can be in a thousand places at once, he does both by the
word, thousand, much declare his incredulity to the mysteries of God, and
by the same persuadeth to his hearers an impossibility, And for that this
manner of questioninge is a question on incredulity, as the Jews was, and
spring both out of unbelief, I have thought good to ioin

And to them both to say: As the Jew remaining with in the compass of his
carnal understanding, could not atteign to the understanding of this matter,
which was by faith, and yet possible, So these me^ measuring Christ and his
power by natural knowledge, which is but gross dregs and suddes, to the
pure knowledge of faith, they come in doubt, and ask a question as of a
thing impossible, when yet yt is very possible.

But perchance ye will say to me, if it be a thing so very possible, how
Objection with answer. Faith judges yt possible, that reason judges
impossible.
does yt appear to this man and his likes impossible? I answer that yt
appears to them impossible, because they leaving the knowledge of faith, are
returned to the only knowledge natural, and thereby will they measure
Christ's doings in this matter. And for so much as this appears impossible
to that knowledge, therefore they also say that yt is impossible. For allthough,
because they would seem to build upon faith, they do sometime allege the
article of our faith, that Christ ascended into heaven that Christ's body can
not be in the Sacrament. Thus they reason.

He ascended into heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father. Ergo
he is not in the Sacrament.

If the true chrystian say, yt is no good consequence. For though yt be true
that Christ beat the right hand of the Father: yet yt improueth not the
presence of Christ in the Sacrament. For the catholic faith confesses both
that Christ is present with his Father in heaven, according to the article of
the faith, and also present in the Sacrament according to his word, when he
said: This is my body. This is my blood. This do ye in remembrance of me. So
that his presence in heaven, denies not his presence in the Sacrament, but he
is present in both, in manner convenient to both.

Against this they reply and say: Every natural body can be but in one
Sacramentaries chief growndes be natural reasons.
their faith? is yt not a sure piece of faith that is builded upon natural
philosophy, and natural reason, and not upon the scriptures, the ancient
fathers, or the universal received faith?

Perchance yt may be said, that I reason thus of my self to deface the
validity of their matter: Well, to avoid this ymaginacio^, I will bring in
the very argument of Oecolampadius, the great fownder, and prince of this
school Oecolamp. De verbis coenae Domini.
in our time, and the master of this Proclamer in this matter. Thus he
reasons: Si dicas, panis continet corpus, vide quid sequitur. ergo panis
locus erit, and vnum corpus erit in multis locis, and multa corpora in vno
loco, and corpus in corpore etc. If thou say, the bread co^teineth the
body, look what follows, the^ the bread shall be a place, and one body
shall be in many places, and many bodies in one place, and one body in an
other. Thus Oecolampadius. Do I now feign this manner Oecolampadius resort to
natural phisolophie, to prove his heresy, and impugn the faith catholic?
Although in deed the argument proceadeth directly against Luther, who taught
the bread in the Sacrament to remain with the body of Christ (soche is the
agreement of the Luther, and Oecola^padius, and so of one of the^ with an other)
yet yt is also against the catholic faith, for yt impugneth the presence of
Christ in the Sacrament. But how? as is said, by natural reason. And shall
I say why they prove this their doctrine by natural reason? In deed because yt
is so far unknown to the scriptures that I dare say, they never were, nor
shall be able to bring fruthe any one scripture to prove yt, and so much to
diminish the omnipotency or almighty power of God.

But to answer O^colampadius for his natural reason, I think the saing of
saint Ambrose to be a good answer. Quid hic quaeris naturae ordine^ in
Christi corpore, De initia^d mist. cap. 9
cum praeter naturam sit ipse Dominus Jesus partus ex virgin? What sekest
thowe (says saint Ambrose) the order of nature in Christ's body here,
seeing the self same our Lord Jesus besides nature was born of a virgen. And to
add to saint Ambrose saie^g, not only his birthe was besides nature, but
many other his acts: as his great learning and wisdom declared in his
disputacio^ Natural order had no place in many of Christ's doings,
walking upon the sea, his volu^tarie death in giving up his blessed soul at
his own pleasure, without force or violence, as yt were, to thrust yt out
and to cause vt to depart. His resurrection and his ascension withal be as
much against the order of nature, as his blessed body to be in diverse
places, and as good arguments may the Adversary find in natural philosophy
against them as against this. Which if he do or may do, shall we therefore
deny Christ's walking on the sea, his death, his resurrection, Mahomets
patched religion and the Sacramentaries ^och like.
and his ascension as theie do his presence in the Sacrament. Then shall we
make a mingled faith, as the Turks do. For as they keep part of Moses law,
part of Mohometes invention: So we must have a faith partly grownded upon
the scriptures, partly on natural reason. But so, that when we will
scripture shall rule natural reason, and when we list natural reason shall
command and withstand both faith and scripture. This is a madsetled faith.
Wherefore thus much to conclude with saint Ambrose, let us not seek the order
of nature in Christ's body, but let us seek the order of faith, and

But this proclamer would have some one scripture doctor, or Council, that
should declare that Chryststes body is or may be in a thousand places or mo
at one time.

In deed to au^swer truly, I must confess I find neither scripture, nor
doctor nor Council teaching this matter in soche manner. For there is not one
of these that speaks so fondly, and so irreverently, to prescribe the
omnipotency of God a certain limitacion, and a stinted no^bre and that with
soch a diffidencie uttered, as this Proclamer says, in a thousand places or
mo: signifieng thereby an impossibility, that yt is impossible for Christ to
be in a thousand places at one time, so in deed I find not. But I find the^
with reverence and faith, without prescription of nombre of places (for that
they leave to Gods will) saying and teaching, that the body of Christ is in
diverse, or in many places. And this (gentle reader) for thy satisfaction
shall I, by the testimony of diverse and many of the most ancient Fathers,
lay before thee.

And here I confess, that this matter, by learned Fathers has been so
asscribe, that I find collected in other, raither then thowe should be

And first, to declare and prove this matter by the scripture, I say that our
savior Christ taking the bread, and blessing yt, made yt his body Mat. 26.
Mare. 14. Luc. 22.
sainge: Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body. Which being done, his body
was at that time present in diverse places, as in his own hands, in the
hands also of every of his Apostles.

That at that time he did bear or hold him self in his own hands, saint
Augustine is a notable witness, speaking of king David and applieng yt to
Christ, saing: Et ferebatur manibus suis. Hoc vero fratres, quomodo August. in
Psalm. 33.
possit fieri in homine quis intelligat? Quis enim portatur in manibus suis?
Manibus altorum potest portari homo, manibus suis nemo portatur. Quomodo
intelligatur in ipso David secundum literam non inuenimus, In Christo autem
inuenimus. Ferebatur enim Christus in manibus suis, quando commendans ipsum
corpus, ait: Hoc est corpus meum. And he was borne in his own hands. But
brethren how this may be done Christ in his supper bare himself in his own
hands
in man, who can understand? Who is borne or carried in his own hands? For
Christ was borne in his own hands when he giving forth the self same body,
said: This is my body.

Ye have here heard saint Augustine affirming that Christ carried him self in
his own hands. Then this must needs follow, that the self same body that did
bear or carry, and the self same body that was born or carried, being but the
very one body of Christ, was then at one time in diverse places. And the
same one body of Christ being given forth to each of his Apostles, and they
sitting in diuerfe places, argues that the same one body of Christ, was at
one time in twelve sundry places at the least. And as yt was then in so many:
So may yt be now in fewer or mo, according to the omnipote^t pleasure of him
that is Lord of nature, and natural order

This was so well known, and so firmly believed of Saint Basil that holy
Father, that hereunto agreablie he prays in his Mass thus: Respice Domine
Basil. in sua Liturgia. Plain places for the Proclamer.
Jesus Christ, Deus noster, de sancto habitaculo tuo, and veni ad
sanctificandum nos, qui sursum Patri consides, and hic nobiscum inuisibiliter
coes. Dignare manu tua sorti dare nobis sanctum, and intaminatum corpus tuum,
and preciosum sanguinem, and per nos peccatores populo tuo. Look o Lord Jesus
Christ our God, from thy holy tabernacle, and come to sanctify us. Which
sit above with thie Father, and art with us here invisibly, vouchesafe
with thie mighty hand to give unto us thy holy and undefiled body, and
preciouse blood, and by us sinners to thy people.

Chrysostom in his mass has almost the same words, that he prays Respice
Domine Jesus Christ Deus noster de sancto habitaculo tuo, and de sede gloriae
regnitui, Chrys^in sua Liturg.
and veni ad sanctificandum nos qui sursum cum Patre seeds, and deorsum nobis
inuisibiliter assistis, Dignare tua potenti manu tribuere nobis immaculatum
corpus tuum, and preciosum sanguinem, and per nos omni populo. O Lord Jesus
Christ our God, look vouchsaif with thy mighty hand to give unto us thy
undefiled body, and preciouse blood and by us to all thy people.

These two holy Fathers, what soever natural reason or order would, not

Although Chrysostom does so plainly with Basil testify the presence of
Christ both with the Father in heaven, and with us here in earth: yet more
plainly he does witness the same in an other place, speaking of the
sacrifice of Christ's body offered in the Church, and says: Hoc autem
sacrificium Chrysostom in 10. ad ^c. hom. 17.
exemplar est illius. Idipsum semper offerimus, nec nunc quidem alium agnum,
crastma alium, sed semper eundem ipsum. Proinde vnum est hoc sacrificium hac
ratione. Alioquin quoniam in multis locis offertur, multi Christi sunt.
Nequaquam: Sed vnus vbique est Christus, and hic plenus existens, and illic
plenus, vnum corpus. Sicut enim qui vbique offertur vnum corpus est, and non
multa corpora: ita etiam and vnum sacrificium. This sacrifice is an exemplar of
that, that Christ offered: Even the self same do we allwaies offer. Neither do
we now offer one lamb, and to morrow an other, but allwais even the self
same. Therefore is this one sacrifice, by this reason. Otherwise for that The
sacrifice offered in many places is but one Christ.
yt is offered in many places, there be many Christ's. Not so. But there is one
Christ every where, both here being full and there full, even one body. And as
he, that is every where offered, is one body, and not many bodies: Even so also
is the sacrifice one.

Weigh well this testimony of Chrysostom, gentle Reader, and first this that
he says: That the sacrifice of Christ's body is but one. For otherwise
because yt is offered in many places, there should be many Christ's. In which
words how plainly does he say that Christ is offered in many places?
and yet not many Christ's, but one Christ. This Father teaches not like a
natural Philosopher, but like a divine Philosopher, a lover of the wisdom of
Christ's faith, according to the which, and contrary to Philosophy, he
confesses Christ's body to be in many places at once, and that with
reverence, and not with doubtful admiracion, and exclamacion (as this
Proclamer does) to be in a thousand places at once. Althouh in his reverent
words there is as much implied, as the words following do well declare.
Which also vbique offertur, he is every where offered, and that is more then in
a thousand places. And although this man's heresy has fretted, and eaten in
many places, much like a deadly cankre: yet I believe Christ is not so
forsaken, but he is yet offered in mo then a thousand places, and shall be,
except our sins shall deserve that he be taken away from us. As for that
that he says, that Christ is our sacrifice, and therefore present, I will
leave yt without note, to be considered in a place more convenient.

As before ye have heard S. Basil and Chrysostom uttering almost all one and
the same words of this matter: So shall ye hear Saint Ambrose speaking
almost the same words that Chrysostom did. So be these good Fathers linked
together in one truth, that they oftentimes speak all one, and the same
words in one and the same matter. Thus writes saint Ambrose: Proinde vnum
est hoc sacrificium. Alioquin hac ratione, quoniam Ambr. in 10. Heb.
multis in locis offertur, multi Christi sunt. Nequaquam: Sed vnus vbique est
Christus, and hic plenus existens, and illic plenus, vnum corpus. Sicut enim
qui vbique offertur, vnum corpus est, and non multa corpora: ita etiam and vnum
sacrificium. Therefore this sacrisice is Christ offered every where is but one
body, and one sacrifice.
one. or else by this reason, for that yt is offered in many places, there be
many Christ's. Not so but every where one Christ, both here being full and
there full, even one^ body. For even as he that is offered every where is one
body, and not many bodies: Even so also is the sacrifice one.

I will not trouble you with noting saint Ambrose words, but what is Vidimus
Principem sacerdotum ad nos venientem. Vidimus and audiuimus offerentem pro
nobis sanguinem suum. Sequamur vt possumus sacerdotes, vt offeramus pro populo
sacrificium, Amb. in Psalm. 38.
etsi infirmi merito, honorabiles tamen sacrificio, quia etsi nunc Christus non
videtur offerre, tamen ipse offertur in terris, qua^do Christi corpus offertur.
We have seen the high priest coming to us. We have seen and heard him offering
for us his blood. Let us priests, as we may, follow, that we may offer
sacrifice for the people, although by merit we are weak: yet are we by the
sacrifice honorable. For although Christ is not now seen to offrer: Yet is he
offered in earth, when the body of Christ is offered.

Leuing all other things that may be here noted, this is not to be
ouerpassed, that saint Ambrose says, that Christ is offered in earth. But
when Christ is offered in earth, when his body is offered.
is he offered? When his body is offered. Wherbie yt is manifest, that as we
may confess Christ verily to be in glory: So may we also confess that he
is verily in earth, for somoche as he is there offered in sacrifice. And so

But that, that is yet remaining to be said in this matter, will not suffer me
to tarry to note, and say, what might be noted and said here: For besides
other things we have yet to hear the goodly testimony of S. Bernarde, who so
plainly teaches this matter, and so godly, that yt were pity the reader
should be defrauded of the reading of so notable a sentence.

Thus he writes: Sed vnde hoc nobis pijssime Domine, vt nos vermiculi
reptantes super faciem terrae, nos inquam, qui puluis and cinis sumus te
praesentem habere mereamur Bernard. sermon de coena Dom.
prae manibus, prae oculis, qui totus and integer seeds ad dextram Patris, qui
etiam vnius horae momento, ab ortu solis vsque ad occasum, ab Aquilone vsque ad
Austrum praesto es omnibus, vnus in multis, idem in diuersis locis, vnde hoc,
inquam? Certe non ex debito, neque ex merito nostro: sed ex voluntate tua, and
dulcedinis tuae beneplacito. But how happens this unto us, O most merciful
Lord: that we little woormes creping may have thee present, before our hands,
before our eyes, which all and wholle sit at the right hand of the Father.
Which also in the minute of an hour, from the East to the West, from the North
to the South Christ being one is at one time in many places.
art present to all. Thowe being one, art in many, and being the self same
art in diverse places, from whence comes this I say? Truly not of any
duty, neither of our desert, but of thy will, and the pleasure of thy
gentleness. Thus saint Bernard.

See ye not how this holy Bernard not with words of skoffes and
doubtfullnesse, but with godly simplicity, and reverence confessing the
verity of Christ's presence, both at the right hand of God the Father, and
also in the Sacrament before our hands, before our eyes, and thereof nothing
doubting, woundereth at the great goodness and mercy of our Savior Christ,
how he does vouchsaif so much to do for us poour little woormes creping upon
the earth. Such was the simplicity of faith, the humbleness of mind in good
Fathers, that believing the thing, they did agnise the great benefitt of God,
where this Proclamer puffed up with pride, rejects the

But contemning him that contempneth God, let us hear more of this good
Father, that honored our Lord God. In the same sermon he has also this
saying, speakinge to the Church, which is the Spouse of Christ to stire her
also to agnise this great benefitte of God, saing thus: Gratulare sponsa, gaude
Bernard. sermon. cod.
incomparabiliter. Praesidentem habes, and rectorem sponsum in praesentis
exilij militia. Pignus habes, arrham tenes, quibus foeliciter vniaris sponso in
patria, gloriosa and amabilis sponsa. In terra sponsum habes in sacramento: in
coelis habitura es sine velamento, and hic and ibi veritas: sed hic palliata,
ibi manifestata. Gene thanks, O spouse, rejoice incomparably. In the
warrefare of this present bannishment, thowe hauest thy husband president, and
ruler, thowe hauest the pledge, thowe hauest thy earnest money, by the which
thowe may as a gloriouse and beloved Christ both in heaven and earth in
verity.
Spouse be united and joined to thy Spouse in heaven with felicity. In earth
thowe hauest thy Spouse in the Sacrament: In heaven thowe shall have him
without any covert. Both here, and there is the verity. But here covered,
there openly showed.

This is a goodly sentence, and worthy well to be noted, but this for our
purpose specialle, that the Church has her Spouse Christ in earth in the
Sacrament, which in heaven she shall have in open vision. Here verily Christ,
and there verily Christ, all the difference is, that here he is under

To conclude, that the adversary shall not reiecte saint Bernard for his
plain sainge: yt shall be confirmed by the like saing of Chrystom, who says
Chrysostom. li. 3. de sacer.
thus: O miraculum, O Dei benignitatem, qui cum Patre sursum sedet, in illo
ipso temporis articulo omnium manibus pertractatur, ac se ipse tradit
volentibus ipsum accipere ac complecti. Christ sitting above is also in the
hands of men.
O miracle, O the gentle godnesse of God, he that sits above with God the
Father, even in that same poincte of time is handeled with the hands of all,
and he delivers him self to them that will receive him, and embrace him. Thus
much Chrysostom.

Behold now (good reader) how Chrysostom agreablie to the speech of saint
Bernard, acknowlegeth the great goodness of God, that Christ which sits at
the right hand of the Father is in that time, meening the time of ministracion,
in the hands of men. In that he says, he is in the hands of men, yt argues
a real presence, for the spiritual presence can not be in hands, but in
heart.

To the proof of this also yt makes inuinciblie, that Chrysostom exclameth
Christ's being in the Sacr. is miraculouse contrary to the rules of
philosophy.
with reverent wonder saing: O miracle. In this that he acknowlegeth yt a
miracle, he does acknowledge more then the bread to be a figure of Christ's
body. For that is no miracle to be wondered at. But he does acknowledge the
miracle to be, that Christ that sits above with the Father, should also be
in the Sacrament in the hands of men. This is the miracle. For this is both
above nature, and against nature, and done by the only power of God, and
therefore is a miracle.

Thus then yt is manifest by the humble lowly, and faithful confession of the
faith of these holy fathers, that Christ's body miraculouslie is both in
heaven, and in earth in the Sacrament, and so in many places at one time
notwithstanding the contemptuouse exclamacion of this Proclamer, limiting the
power of God by an impossiblitie, as yt appears to his unbelieving
understanding, that the body of Christ should be in a thousand places. Which
his exclamacion was his best argument to bring the people from their fathe.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER PROVES THAT
AS the Adversaries to overthrow the work of faith have used natural
philosophy: So to maintein their natural philosophy, they have utterly
denied the very Gospel, the grownd of faith. For where the good catholic
learned men of charitable pity labored to bring them, from this their wicked
error, persuading the^ not to cleave to natural reason, as therewith to
measure, and streicten that, which is the body of the Son of God, exalted to
be in unity of person with the Godhead, as they would do our bodies which be
but natural, and earthly bodies only, infinite degrees under the condition
of that blessed body of Christ: but to consider, that as the body of Christ,
though yt be a natural body, might be with an other body in one place at one
time, which is against natural Philosophy and reason: So the same being

To prove two bodies to be in one place at one time, the Gospel of saint
Joan. 20.
John was alleged, where we read: Venit Jesus ianuis clausis, and stetit in
medio eorum and dixit: Pax vobis. Jesus came the doors being shett, and stood
in the midst of them and said: Peace be with you. This being testified of
saint John, for the miraculouse coming in of Christ to his Apostles, proves
that he so coming in, passed through door or wall as his pleasure was to do,
and so doing, there was, contrary to Oecolampadius saing, Corpus in corpore,
and duo corpora simul. One body in an other, and two bodies together one
place. Cranmer in his answer against winch.


I remember, that this scripture was objected by master Smith against Cranmer:
and for answer thereunto thus says Cranmer: But peradventure Master Smith
will ask me this question: How could Christ come into the house, the door
being shett, except he came through the door? To your wise question, master
Smith, I will answer by an other question. Could not Christ come as well into
the house, when the door was shette, as the Apostles could go out of prison,
the door being shett? Could not Act. 5.
God wourke this thing except the Apostles must go through the door, and
occupy the same place that the door did? In this answer by Cranmer made by
questions, as there be two questions so there be two parts. But by the
aunswering of the first, the aunswering to the second shall be the easier.

The first question asks: if Christ could not come as well into the house
the doors being shett, as the Apostles could go out of prison the door
being shett: which question I pray thee, Reader, well to weigh. Which if thou
do thowe shall perceive that to avoid this argument, and to deceive Cranmer
falsifieth the scripture to maintien his heresy.
the reader, he here utters a manifest and shameful untruth, and abuses
the Scripture for the maintenance of his heresy to wickedlie. For he, to make
the readers believe that the coming in of Christ into the house, and the goinge
of the Apostles out of prison, was of one manner, says that the goinge out of
the Apostles, and the coming in of Christ were both the doors being shett.
Which is very false, and directly against the truth of thus shall ye read
there: The chief priest rose up, and all they that were with him, which is the
sect of the Saduces, and were full of indignacion, and laid hands on the
Apostles, and putt them in the common prison. But the Angel of our Lord by
night opened the prison doors and brought them forth, and said. Go and stand,
and speak in the temple to the people all the words of life, When they heard
that; they entered early in the morning and taught. But the chief priest came,
and they that were with him, and called a council together, and all the elders
of the children of Israel, and sent men to the prison to fetch them, when the
ministers came, and fownde them not in prison they returned, and told, saing:
The prison truly we found shette, with all diligence, and the kepers standing
without, before the doors, but when we had opened, we fownd no man within.

In this scripture first note, that when the Apostles were committed to prison,
the Angel of God came by night and opened the doors of the prison and not
only opened the doors, but also brought the Apostles out. Then is yt false
that this man says, that the Apostles went out of the prison the doors
being shett. Truth yt is that the doors were made fast again after their
departure. For the messengers, that came in the morning to fetch the Venit
Jesus ianuis clausis, Jesus came, the doors being shette, signifieng that he
came in Christ entered in to his Apost. the doors being shett.
more miraculouslie by the power of his Godhead, not requiring the aid of the
opening of any door.

But that ye may perceive that I do expownd and understand this fact and
miracle of Christ as the holy fathers do, and that ye may the better
credit the matter, ye shall hear how they understand this place of saint

Chrysostom to prove the Mother of Christ a virgen both before and after his
birth, alleges this place, and says thus: Sancta Maria, beata Maria, matter
et Chrysostom. homil. de Joan. Bapt.
virgo. Virgo fuit ante partum, virgo post partum. Ego hoc miror, quomodo de
virgin virgo natus sit, and post nationem virginis matter virgo sit. Vultis
scire quomodo de virgin natus sit, and post natiuitatem matter ipsa sit virgo?
Clausa erant ostia, and ingressus est Jesus. Nulli dubiu^ quin clausa sint
ostia: qui intrauit per ostia clausa, non erat phantasma, non erat spiritus,
vere corpus erat. Quid enim dicit? Respicite and videte, quia spiritus carnem,
and ossa non habet, sicut me videtis habere. Habebat carnes, habebat ossa, and
clausa erant ostia. Quomodo clausis ostijs intrauerunt ossa, and caro? Clausa
sunt ostia, and intrat, quem intrantem non vidimus. Vnde intrauit? omnia clausa
sunt, locus non est per quem intret, and tamen intus est qui intrauit. Nescis
quomodo factum sit, and das omnipotentiae Dei: Da potentiae Dei, quia de
virgin natus sit. The holy Marie, the blessed Marie, mother and virgen, she
was a virgen before birth, a virgen after birth. I merueil at this, how of a
virgen, a virgen should be born, and after the birth of a virgen, The doors
were shett and Jesus entered in. No man doubts but that the doors were
shette, He that entered by the shett doors was no fantasy, he was no spirit,
he was verily a body. For what said he? Look and see that a spirit has no
flesh and bones, as ye see me have. He had flesh, he had bones, and the doors
were shette, How did slesh and bones enter the door being shette? The doors
be shette, and he goes in, whom we saw not going in. How did he go in? all
things are closse, there is no place, by the which he might go in, and yet he
is within, that went in, and yt does not appear how he went in. Thowe know
not, and do refer yt to the omnipotency of God. Give this also to the
omnipotency of God, that he was born of a virgen.

Saint Hierom uses the same argument, to the same purpose and says:
Hieron. in Apologia, cont. Jouin.
Respondeant mihi, quomodo Jesus ingressus est clausis ostijs, cum palpandas
manus, and latus considerandum, and ossacarnemque monstrauerit, ne veritas
corporis phantasma putaretur: Et ego respondebo quomodo sancta Maria sit matter
and virgo, virgo post partum, matter antequam nupta. Let them answer me (says
saint Hierom) how Jesus entered in the doors being shette, when, lest his
body should be thought a fantasy, he showed both flesh and bones, and his
hands to be felt, and his side to be considered: And I will answer them, how
the holy Marie, may be both a mother, and a yirgen. A virgen before birth, a
mother before she was known of man.

In both these Autours, we may perceive not only by their words, (as some
have wickedlie taught raither seking to shadow the miraculouse work of
Christ, and to falsify the scriptures, then they would forsake their error,
or have yt convinced) then could yt not prove that the clausures of the
virginity of the mother of Christ, notwithstanding his birth, remained
allwais closed which (as ye may perceive) they intended to prove.

Yt may be that the Adversary being pressed with the authority of these
grave and learned fathers, will grant that Christ went in to this Apostles
the doors being shett, But yet he went not (he will say) through the door,
nor no other body, so as there should be two bodies in one place at

To make this matter plain to the Adversary and thee, Reader, we will hear
Chrysostom in an other place, giving some cause, how he might so go in. Dignu^
autem dubitatione est, quomodo corpus incorruptibile formam clauorum acceperit,
Chrysostom. homil. 86. in Joan.
and mortali manu tangi potuerit. Sed hoc te non perturbet, hoc enim
permissionis fuit. Corpus enim tam tenue and leave vt clausis ianuis
ingrederetur, omni crassitudine earebat, sed vt resurrectio crederetur, talem
se exhibuit. Et vt ipsum crucifixum fuisse, and neminem alium pro eo
resurrexisse intelligas, proptered cum signis crucis resurrexit. Yt yt worthy
of doubt, how the incorruptible body did take the form of the nails, and
Christ's body was so void of grossnesse that yt might enter the doorees being
shett
could be touched with mortal hand. But let not this trooble thee, For this
was done of permission. For that body, being so subtle and light, that yt
might enter in, the doors being shett, was void of all grossnesse. But that
the resurrection might beleleued, he showed him self soche a one, and that
thowe might understand, that yt waseue^ he that was crucified, and no man
else did rise for him, therefore he rose with the figures and tokens of the
cross. Thus much Chrysostom.

The cause which is given here to help up the weakness of our faith the
sooner to believe that Christ passed through the door, is, that he had after
his resurrection, a pure, clear, and subtle body, void of all corruption, and
grossnesse, even a spiritual body, that might to our own judgment and
reason the easelier so do: and yet was yt a perfect body of a man in
substance, and lineamentes.

But that he came in to his Apostles through the door, and how, and by what
means he so did, Chrysostom by express words in an other place declares,
speaking in the person of Christ after this manner. Non est meum meos
ludificare phantasinate, vanam imaginem visus si timet, veritatem corporis
manus Chrysostom. de resarrect. sermon. 9.
and digitus exploret. Potest fortassis aliqua oculos caligo decipere, palpatio
corporalis verum corpus agnoscat. Spiritus (inquit) carnem, and ossa non habet,
sicut me videtis habere. Quod ostia clausa penetraui, sola est virtus diuini
Spiritus, non sola carnis substantia. Yt is not my property, mine to delude
with a fantasy. If the seight fear a vain image, Christ entered trough the
doors that were shett.
let the hand and fingar try out the verity of the body. Perchance some
mist may deceive the eyes, let the corporal feeling acknowledge a true body.
A spirit (said he) has not flesh and bones, as ye see me to have. That I
entered through the doors, that were shett, yt is only the power of the
divine spirit not the only substance of the flesh. Thus Chrysostom.

As this place gives goodly instruction to the reader: so does yt fully,
How Christ's body, entered through the doors shett. Amb. in Luc. li. 10. cap.
14.
the person of Christ, that yt entered through the doors. If ye will learn by
what mean, he says, yt was not by the substance of the flesh, but by the
virtue or power of the Godhead,

Of this matter also s^inct Ambrose is a goodly witness, who upon the
Gospel of saint Luke says thus: Habuit admirandi causam Thomas, cum
videret, clausis omnibus per inuia septa corporibus inoffensa compage Christi
corpus insertum, and ideo mirum quomodo se natura corporea per impenetrabile
corpus infuderit, inuisibili aditu, visibili conspectu, tangi facilis,
difficilis aestimari. Thomas had a cause to merueill when he saw (all things
being shetvppe and closed) the body of Christ

If ye note this testimony, yt varieth not from Chrysostom: For yt testifies
that our Savior Christ came in to his Apostles, the doors being shett And
that notwithstanding he went through the clausures of the house, they not being
broken. And hereupon, says saint Ambrose is the great wonder, how his
natural body could enter through an impenetrable body. Whereby both these
Fathers declare the truth of the doctrine of the Church, that Christ thus
entering, there were two bodies in one place.

There be many that bear very plain testimony in this matter. But we will
hear but two mo only. Which, I suppose, with these before alleged, being
all men of soche gravity, holiness, authority, and learning, may suffice,
contrary to them. But let us hear saint Augustine in this matter, thus Nec
eos audiamus, qui negant tale corpus Domini resurrexisse, quale positum August.
de agone Christi. cap. 24.
est in monume^to. Nec nos moueat, quod clausis ostijs subito eum apparuisse
Discipulis scriptu^ est, vt propterea negemus illud fuisse corpus humanum, quin
contra naturam huius corporis videmus illud per clausa ostia intrare, omnia
enim possibilia sunt Deo. Si enim potuit ante passionem clarificare illud sicut
splendorem Solis, quare non potuit and post passionem, ad quantam vellet
subtilitatem in temporis mome^to redigere, vt per clausa ostia posset intrare?
Neither let us give ear to them, that deny the same body to have risen,
Christ's body against the nature of a body entered through the shett doors
that was put in the grave. Neither let yt move us, that yt is written, that
sodenlie he appeared to his disciples, the doors being shett, that therefore we
should deny yt to be a man's body, because we see yt against the nature of
this body to enter in through the shette doors. For all things are possible
to God. For if he could before his passion make yt as clear as the brightness
of the Sun, why might he not after his passion also in a moment of time,
bring yt to asmoche a subtilitie as he would, that he might enter in through
the shett doors?

Note here in saint Augustine, that where the Adversary would not that
Clausis Cyrill. in Joan. li. 12. cap. 53.
foribus repent Dominus omnipotentia sua, natura rerum superata, ingressus ad
Discipulos est. Nullus igitur querat, quomodo corpus Domini ianuis clausis
penetrauit, cum intelligat non de homine nudo, vt modo nos sumus, sed de
omnipotente filio Dei, haec ab Euangelista describi. Nam cum Deus verus sit,
rerum naturae non subiacet; quod in caeteris quoque miraculis patuit. The gates
being shett our lord through his omnipotency, the nature of things being
ouercomed, suddenly went in to his disciples. Let no man therefore ask how the
body of our Lord went through the gates being shett, forasmoche Christ is
not subject to law of nature.
as he may understand, these things to be described of the Evangelist, not of
a bare man, as we be now, but of the Almighty Son of God. Who forasmoche
as he is very God, is not subject to the law of nature.

Now ye have heard a sufficient nombre of holy learned Fathers, auouching this
great miracle of Christ, not as some of the Adversaries say, that he came
into his disciples after the doors were shett, after the manner of other men:
neither as some other of them do say, that he caused the doors or walls to
open, and so came in: neither that an Angel did open the doors to him, as to
the Apostles, that were in prison: but that he being very God, gave unto that
his manhead that singular subtilitie above all other, that yt was not subject
to nature (as Cirill says) but above nature, so far, and in soche excellent
degree, that yt might pass through those doors, the doors not broken (as
saint Ambrose said.

In this matter, thus much have I labored, both that the miraculouse work of
Christ might not be obscured, nor shadowed by the malignitie of men, and also
that yt might be perceived, that in the works of Christ we may not so look
to the order of nature, to natural reason, or natural mundus est perpetuus,
the world is perpetual or ouerlasting: Faith teaches, that: In principio
creauit Genesis 1.
Deus coelum and terram. In the beginning God created heaven and earth, and
Psalm. 191.
that therefore the world had a beginning. And yt teaches, also that yt shall
have an end. For coelum and terra transibunt, heaven and earth shall pass
away. Of the which both, the Prophet says: In principio Domine terram
creasti, et opera manuum tuarum sunt coelitipsi peribunt, tu autem permanes,
etc. Thowe in the beginning (O Lord) did lay the fundacion of the earth,
and the heavens are the works of thy hand. They shall perish, but thowe do
abide. Of the which matter also saint Peter makes plain declaracion.
Likewise natural philosophy teaches, quod vnum corpus non potest esse simul
and semel in diuersis locis: that one body can not be at one time in diverse
places. But faith teaches us (as yt is declared in the last chapter) that
Christ's body is and may be in diverse places. Natural philosophy teaches,
that duo corpora non possunt simul esse in vno and eodem loco. Two bodies can
not be together in one place: Yet the Scripture teaches (as ye have heard the
holy learned Fathers understand them) that Christ's body entered in through
the door, and so there were two bodies at one time in one place.

Now therefore forasmoch as these two, that is, that the body of Christ is in
diverse places, and that the body of Christ and the door that he entered
through were in one place, be the works of God, let us in the consideracion of
them, forgett natural philosophy, and remember faith. That these appertein to
faith yt is proved by a nombre of the holy Fathers, and both these be
acknowledged of them to be miraculouse works of Christ above nature. And as
these works were verily done by Christ: So is the other mentioned in the
chapter before done by Christ.

Wherefore (chrystian reader) weigh well what in these two chapiters is said,
how many holy and learned Fathers be alleged, how plainly they testify
the matter, and have regard to them, stay thy self by them, and be not carried
away with them that have nothing to confirm their doctrine but natural
philosophy. For as touching the matter spoken of in this chapter let the
Aduersatie bring any one sufficient Author, that shall by express words
teach the contrary, and I will ioin with him.

THE TWELVETH CHAPTER AVNSWERETH certain objections that seem to impugn the
catholic doctrine of this matter.
THere is nothing so true in all our holy faith, but some heresy Nothing so
true but he resie may impugn yt Deuteronomy. 6. Heresies against God, and every
person in the trinity
may be fownde to against say yt, and arguments devised to impugn yt. Yt is
a most a certain truth, that there is but one God the scripture saying: Deus
noster Deus vnus est. Owre God is one God. Yet there were that taught that ther^
were two Gods, as Apelles, and Manichaeus. Who taught that there was a good God,
and an evil. And for the mainteinaunce of this their heresy, had their
arguments which apparantlie confirmed their sainges.

Yt is a very treuth that Christ is both God and man, and yet there were Ebion
and Cerynthus, and there were that said he was no man, as Eutyches, and
Dioscorus. Yt is a certain truth, that God the Son is God coequall, and
consubstanciall to the Father, yet Arius said that he was a creature not
equal to the Father in deity, power or majesty. Yt is an infallible truth
that the holy Ghost is God, yet Macedonius taught that he was a creature. Yt
is a certain truth that Christ suffered death for us: yet there were that said
that yt was Simon Cyrinensis, of whom there is

These and an innumerable sort mo have all apparent arguments, to make a
cowntenance, that their doctrines be true, and do intermingle in August ho. All
false doctrine has some treuth admixed.
deed some truth with their falshead as saint Augustine says: Nulla porro
doctri^a falsa, quae non aliqua vera intermisceat. There is no false doctrine,
that does not intermingle some treuth, therbie the better to utter their
heresy.

So of this matter of the presence of Christ in heaven and in the Sacrament,
apparent arguments be made by other Adversaries to deceive the people, which
well weighed and examined, have no force nor weight, to prove that they
intended.

As for this Adversary the Proclamer (as yt is said) made no argument in his
matter, for that he would have the people receive but his only bare
proclamacion, wherefore to him the answer is soen made.

But his great master Oecolampadius, heapeth up in deed a great nombre of
Scriptures by quotacion only, which (he says) he shall not need to allege
Scriptures alleged against the presence by Oecolamp.
at large because yt is an article of our faith, that Christ sits at the
right hand of the Father. Of the which scriptures I will allege some, that
the reader may both know them, and also perceive that they be not against the
doctrine of Christ's Church as touching the real presence of Christ's body
and blood in the blessed Sacrament.

In saint John his gospel we find written thus: Jesus knowinge that this
hour was comed, that he should go out of this world to the Father etc. And
in an Joan. 13.
other place thus: A little while (says Christ) and ye shall not see me, and
a little Ibid. 16.
while and ye shall see me. For I go to the Father. And in the same place: I
went forth from the Father, and came into the world, again I leave the world,
and go to the Father. Jbid.
Again in an other place: And now I am not in the world, and these be in the
world and I come to thee. And in the Acts of the Apostles: This Jesus that is
taken from Act. 1.
you into heaven shall so come as ye have seen him going into heaven.

These and all other like scriptures that teach us of Christ's going to his
Father, of his exaltacion above all poures, and soche other, we reverence the^
Phil. 2.
Arsicle of the Ascension impugneth not Christ's presence in the Sacr.
that he is in glory, But when we confess this, and believe this,. does this
take away this treuth, that Christ is verily present in the Sacrament? No in
deed. For that stands still as an untouched truth, neither impugning the
other, neither impugned of the other. And therefore we consesse both to be true.
For he that said: Vado ad Patrem, I go to the Father: said also. Hoc est
corpus meum. Hoc facite. This is my body. This do ye. Wherbie he both
consecrated his body (for as Chrysostom says, Qui enim dixit Chrystome. 51.
in Mat.
I loc est corpus meum, and rem simul cum verbo confecit. He that said, This
is my body, made the thing together with the word) and also gave authority
to his preistes to do the like. Which thing Luther denies not.

Then forasmoche as Christ willed that this mystery shall be continued,
frequented, and used until his coming, in the which mystery by his power,
is his body, we may not think any contrariety or repugnaunce we to believe
both that he is in heaven, and also in the Sacrament, forasmoch

If this our Savior Christ, where natural knowledge says, Omne grave
Examples of many thin ges done by our Savior Christ above and contrary to
nature.
appetit deorsum, every heavy thing is inclined downward, could yet by his
power make the earthly body of Peter, which was a mere natural body, and
therefore heavy, contrary to his nature to walk upon the sea, and when yt
pleased him to leave him to his nature to suffer him to sink, and begin to
drown: can not he at his own pleasure make that blessed body of his, which
is so excellently conceived and born, and therewith united to the Godhead in
unity of person, that although yt be a natural body, yet yt does surmounte,
and is above all nature, and natural bodies: can not he, I say, at his
pleasure demise, let down, or abase that his body to the state and condition
of a very natural body? and again at his pleasure exalte and magnify the
same above the state of a natural body?

He did fast forty days and forty nights and eat no meat, which Matt. 4.
was above natural order: In the end of that fast he was hungry, and Jbid.
17.
therein he subjected him self to natural order.

He was transfigured in the Mount where, as yt pleased him, he showed Joan. 4.
his power, and made his face to shine as bright as the Sun, and his
garments white as snow, which was above the state of a bare natural man. An
other time he was weary of his iourneie, which was agreeable to the nature of
man.

The Jews came to apprehend him, and with the voice of his mouth Jbid. 18.
Jbid. 19. Mat. 27.
he threw them all to the grownde: Again he abased him self, and suffered him
self not only to be taken of them, whom he had so easily over throwe^, but
also to be buffited, and to be scourged, and finally to be crucified. What
shall I stand in the rehersall of these things, which be so plentiful in the
Gospel? Therefore to conclude I will say with Cyrille, we may not think of
the body of Christ, as of the body of a bare natural man: but we must
think of that body, as of the body of the Son of God.

Wherefore methinke the Adversaries be to streict, yea and cruel to the body
of Christ, that where, for causes above said, yt is so excellent a body, and
yet for our sakes he made himself obedient to death even to the death of the
cross, they will for all this excellency, give unto yt no more prerogative,
nor preuilege, then they will do to an other body, which is an injury to
that blessed body. I wish that the Adversaries should not only after the
counsel of Cyrille think that yt is the body of the Son of God, and leave
yt as a natural body joined to the Godhead: but also consider the singular
prerogatives that yt has by the same conjunction to the Godhead. And then
shall they see how that body may, above the common condition of other bodies,
through the power of the Godhead, be in sundry places.

Although yt be not apperteining to the body of a man to give life: yet
Cyrill. in 6. foa^ ca. 14.
is life, yt gives life. Thus he speaks yt: Quonia^ Saluatoris caro Verbo
Dei, quod naturaliter vita est, coniu^cta, viuifica effecta est, qua^do ea^
comedimus tunc vita^ habemus in nobis, illi coniu^cti, quae vita effecta est.
Because the flesh of our savior joined to the Son of God, which is
naturally life, is made able to give life: when we

See this great prerogative that Cyrill gives to the flesh of Christ, for
that yt is joined to the Godliead. If yt have prerogative to give life to them
that receive yt: can not God give a less prerogative to yt to be in diverse
places?



Oecolampadius would not labor to bring in so many inconveniences upon yt,
if yt appeared possible to him.

To the second part I say, that yt is sufficiently showed allreadie, that
Christ caused his body to be in diverse places at one time, and that the holy
Fathers of Christ's Church, yea and that a good nombre teach, some

And thus although the scriptures alleged by Oecolampadius seem, if a man will
only lean to natural philosophy, to be against the faith, that the
catholic Church teaches: yet when those scriptures be compared to other
scriptures, and the Fathers well weighed and understood: and the omnipotency
of God considered, and the excellency of the body of Christ remembered, yt
shall be perceived that the Scriptures be not against us neither we against
them. For they say that Christ is in heaven and so say we: and yet
nevertheless we say that he is in the Sacrament, and so say they. If the
Scriptures, that be alleged, had said that Christ is in heaven only, and
can be in no other place, then the Adversary might have triumphed. But saing
that he is in heaven, without any exclusiues or exceptiues, there is no
denial implied in that his being, to a chrystian

There is made an other objection out of saint Augustine, who writes thus:
Cauendum est, ne ita Diuinitatem astruamus hominis, vt veritatem auferamus
August. ad Dardanum.
corporis. Non est autem consequens, vt quod in Deo est, ita sit vbique vt
Deus. We must beware that we do not so affirm the deity of man, that we take
away the verity of the body. For yt is no consequent, that that which is in
God, should so be every where as God is. Again in the same place. Jesus vbique
per id quod Deus est: in coelo autem per id quod homo. Jesus by that that he is
God, is every where: by that that he is man, he is in heaven.

For answer to these places of Saint Augustine first understand that S.
Augustine his place to Dardan. declared.
one Dardanus wrote to Saint Augustine to dissolve this question: whether
Christ's manhead, for that yt was united to the Godheade in unity of person,
was every whear as his Godhead is. For answer to which question, among
other things S. Augustine wrote the propositions, which Oecolampadius Wherefore
first I wish you to note, that S. Augustine in that epistle not speaking of the
Sacrament, the sentences alleged make not against the matter.

And although this might suffice: yet for the better understanding of the
matter, more shall be said. Wherefore that a thing may be at one time in many
places, understand that yt may be two ways. One thing in many places at one
time two ways. Hiere. 23. Esai. 66.
The one is by nature, the other by gift. By nature to be in many or all
places at one time, yt apperteineth only to God, who by his immensitie is
every where, so that there is no place in heaven, in hell, in earth, or in the
waters, in the which God is not. And therefore he says. Ego coelum and terram
impleo. I fill both heaven and earth. And again: Coelum mibi seeds est, terra
autem scabellum pedum meorum. Heaven is my seat, and the earth is my foot
stool. After this sort, that is, by nature, no creature can be in all places,
but only God. Wherefore Didymus by this did well make his argument to prove
the holy Ghost to be God, because of his own nature he is every where, and so
Didym. de Spiritu S.
can no creature be.

The other way that a thing may be in many places, not by nature, but by the
gift of God may be in man. For nothing being impossible to God, Oecolampadius
is nothing worth. And yt seems to me he did not understand this difference of
being in many places at once, when he argued, that if Christ could be in
many places at one time, by the like he might be in all places, and so should a
creature become God, which sometime was no God, which is a great absurdity.

By this argument if yt were good, yt might be proved that Christ's flesh is
not quickening or giving life, because yt apperteineth to God alone to give
life. And so should Christ's saying be untrue where he says: Qui manducat
meam carnem and bibit meum sanguinem, habet vitam aeternam. He that Joan. 6.
Cyril. in 6. Joan. ca. 14
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has everlasting life. And Cyrille
says, as ye have heard, that the flesh of Christ being made the flesh of the
Godhead, which is life, is made also able to give life.

But this is very true that the flesh of Christ is able to give life. Which
thing is as well only perteining to God to do yt by nature, and of himself, as
yt is to be in many or all places. And yet Christ's flesh having this power to
give life is not for all that, when yt is considered in yt self, thought that
yt is God, for yt has yt not of yt self, but by the power of the Godhead,
whereunto yt is joined in unity of Person. No more is the body of Christ
thought to be a God. because yt may be in many places at one time, because yt
is not so of the own nature, but by the power of the Godhead.

And this difference yt to be observed in all things that be given of God to
creatures, wherefore when Christ said: Nemo bonus, nisi vnus, Deus. No man God
alone good by nature, creatures by participacion. Genesis 1.
is good but God alone. Yt is not therefore to be thought that every creature
that is good, is forth with also God, for then all the creatures of God be
Gods, for they be all good, as the Scripture saeth: Vidit Deus cuncta, quae
fecerat, and erant valde bona. God saw all things that he had made, and they
were very good: but yt is to be considered that that, that is good good: yet
be they no Gods. And by this ye may perceive that the Church

Unto all this for the perceauing of a more difference between the nature of
the God head, and the nature of the manhead in Christ, Note Godheade of Christ
has not possibility but to be every where, his Manhead has possibility to
be somwher.
that the nature of the Godhead of yt self is so in every place, that yt has
not possibility to be out of any place. The nature of the manhead of Christ
though by the power of the Godhead yt is and may be in diverse places at one
time: yet yt has allwaies a possibility to be but in one place alone, and
may so be and is. By this Dardanus.

And other objection there is made out of the same epistle, which does raither
declare the maliciouse ignorance of the Adversary, then make any thing against
this truth here defended. And if we shall here write yt, eue^ as Oecola^padius
did, then shall we also see his subtlety and craft. Thus yt is to be fownde
in his book: Spacia locoru^ toll corporibus, and nusqua^ eru^t: and quia
nusquam Augustine. ad Darda^.
eru^t, nec eru^t. Toll ipsa corpora qualitatibus corporu^, non erit vbi sint,
and ideo non alibi qua^ in coelo corpore fatemur Christu^. Take the spaces of
places from bodies, and they shall no wheare be. And because they shall no
whear be, they shall not be. Take Oecolamp. falsisieth S. August. by a subtle
ad dicion.
where they may be and therefore we confess Christ in body to be no whear
else but in heaven. thus Oecola^padius. Ye hear all this alleged, as the
wholl were of S. Augustine, but yt is not. For Oecola^padius has wickedlie
patched on a co^clusio^, as though it were saint Augustines own words, but
yt is not. He has craftily pciced yt, to deceive the simple. For these
words (And there for we confess Christ in body to be no whear but in
heaven) be the words of Oecolampadius and not of Saint Augustine. Soche is
the sincereritie of these men, that they can not maintein there evil and false
matters, but with craft and subtletie.

Now to answer saint Augustines own words, they be not spoken of the
body of Christ, but they be spoken of natural bodies upon the earth, which
be subject to earthly qualities. Glorified bodies soch as Christ's body is,
are delivered from earthly qualities. For they areneither hot, nor cold,
weet nor dry, wherefore yt makes nothing for the Adversaries purpose to
allege saint Augustine in this place, more then to declare, that blind

An other place is produced out of saint Augustine and yt is this: Augustine.
30. Tract. in Joan.
Sursu^ est Dominus, sed etia^ hic est veritas Domini. Corpus enim Domini in
quo resurrexit in vno loco esse potest, veritas eius vbique diffusa est. Owre
Lord is above, but his For though the body of Christ may be in one place:
yet yt is not enforced that yt must of necessity be in one place. Now (gentle
Reader) thowe hauest seen the truth of this matter testified by witnesses
sufficient, thou hauest seen the objections of the Adversaries ^ullie
dissolved. I wish thee now soche faith as Abraham had, wherbie he was
justified. Who hearing the promise of God that his seed should be as the
stars of heaven, and Sands of the Sea, fainted not in faith nor yet
considered Genesis 13. and 15. Romans 4.
his own body, which was now dead, even when he was almost, an hondreth
years old, neither yet that Sara was past child bearing, he staggered not at
that promise of God through unbelief, but became strong in faith, and gave God
the praise, being full certified, that he which had promised was also able to
make yt good: that thou likewise knowing by faith which thowe hauest learned
of the Fathers, as they have learned the same of the very word of God, that
Christ's blessed body is in the Sacrament, and also in heaven, consider not
now the natural order of things, as Abraham did not, neither of his own
body neither of his wieues, but become strong in faith, and faint not, neither
stagger at the promise of God through unbelief, But consider and be fully
certified that Christ, who has spoken and said: This is my body, is able to
make yt Natural order had no place in many of Christ's doings.
good. And he that against the order of nature began ths life of man, for that
he was born of a virgen, and against the same order without enforcement gave
up his own soul, and died at his own pleasure, and that crieng with a
great voice, and likewise contrary to the same nature rose from death the
third day, passing through the stone, for that his monument was ^ast closed:
and the eight day after (as yt is testified) passed through the doors into
his disciples, and finally ending his a boade upon earth besides nature

THE THIRTENHT CHAPTER BEGINS THE exposition of an other text in the sixth
of S. John.
I Will now leave this matter of Christ's being in many places as
sufficiently treacted of and proved, and return to the sixth chapter of S.
John, and enter the exposition of the text there ensewing, which is this. Dixit
ergo eis Jesus, Amen Amen dico vobis, nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis,
and biberitis eius sanguinem, non habebitis vitam in vobis. Jesus therefore said
unto them: Verily, Verily I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood Joan. 6.
ye shall have no life in you.

Whereas the Jews through unbelief, thought yt an impossible thing for Christ to
give his flesh to be eaten, Christ here aunswering the^, declares yt to be
possible, and necessary to be done, yea and so necessary, that except we eat
his flesh and drink his blood, we shall not have life. For as man concerning
Nicodemus: Amen, Amen dico tibi, nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua et Spiritu
sancto non potest introire in regnu^ Dei. Verily, verily, Joan. 3.
I say unto thee: Except a man be born again of water, and the holy Ghost he
can not enter into the kingdom of God. Now when man by Baptism is born in to
the spiritual life, and has begone yt, he must needs have food to sustein the
same, or else he shall not continewe life, which food is the body, and blood
of Christ, a food by Christ himself appointed, which if we take not, we can
not live. And therefore he says: Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you.

Hitherto the Adversary will agree with me, expownding all that is said in
his sense of spiritual eating, and drinking of the flesh and blood of Christ,
with who^ I will thus far agree also, that soche as be of mature age, and
Corporal eating with out the spiritual eating avails not.
have atteigned to the years of discrecion, except they eat the flesh of
Christ, and drink his blood spirituallie they shall not live. For the
corporal eating without the spiritual eating, is not auailable. But both
these together nourishe life in man, and make him lusty and strong in God.
But that this text extends not the necessity therein mentioned, to the
corporal eating and drinking of Christ's flesh and blood also, which this
Adversary affirms, that is untrue. He would have no other receiving of
Christ, but the spiritual receiving: because he would have no other presence
but the spiritual presence, but that this text speaks also of the corporal
eating and receiving of the real and substanciall body of Christ in the
Sacrament, the connection and dependence of the Scriptures do prove.

For the first sainge of Christ, which we have already expownded, (that the
bread which he would give, is his flesh, etc. speaks of Christ's natural
flesh to be given in the Sacrament, as is already declared, and sufficiently
proved. And this text speaks of the same flesh, as the connection well
proves. Wherefore Christ here speaks also of the corporal eatinge of his
flesh in the Sacrament. The necessity of which eating is soche, that if we
contemn that eating of yt, being (as is said) of mature age, and discrecion,
we shall not have life.

But that yt may appear, that the Church through out all ages, has eue^
thus understood this text, as I do, I will convert me to the order that I
have prescribed to my self, to hear the great ancient men, and learned
Fathers of both sides of Christ's Parliament house, both of the greek and of
the latin Church. And although yt might suffice, for the understanding
judgments, both of this text, and of the rest that follow.

The first of this company that shall be brought forth to witness, is
Cyprian. sermon. de oratione. Do.
yt, saing thus: Quando ergo dicit in aeternum viuere, si quis ederit de eius
pane: vt manifestum est, eos viuere, qui corpus eius attingunt, and
Eucharistiam iure communicationis accipiunt: ita contra timendum est, and
orandum ne dum quis abstentus separatur a corpore Christi, procul remaneat a
salute, comminante illo and dicente: Nisi ederitis carnem filij hominis, and
biberitis sanguinem eius, non babebitis vitam in vobis. Et ideo panem nostrum,
id est, Christum dari nobis quotidie perimus, vt qui in Christo manemus, and
viuimus, a sanctificatione, and corpore eius non recedamus. Therefore when he
says him to live for ever, whosoever shall eat of his bread: As yt is
manifest that they do live, which do touch this body and according to the
right of partaking do receive the Sacrament: Even so contrary wise yt is to be
feared and prayed for, lest while any man being accursed, is separated from the
body of Christ, he may abide and remain far from health, he threatninge,
and sainge: Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, ye shall have no life in you. And therefore we daily desire our bread,
that is to say, Christ, to be given to us,

In which sainge first he manifestly shows that this text is to be
understood of the Sacrament. For by express words he says, that they
have life, which by right of partaking do receaue-the Eucharist, or Sacrament
(as I term yt) for that the english tongue has none apter term for yt. And
all men use the word (Sacrament) to that signification in common speech. And
as we do oftentimes by this term (the Sacrament) understand both the
Sacrament, and the thing signified by the Sacrament: So does saint Cyprian
likewise in this place understand and mien both. For as when he had said, that
we shall have life by partaking of the Sacrament. Even so says he, yt is to
be feared, that when we be separated from the body of Christ, that then we
shall be far from health. Whereby yt is plain that he speaks not only of
the Sacrament, as of the sacramental signs: but he speaks raither of the
Sacrament, as of the thing signified and contained in and under the
sacramental signs, which by the body of Christ.

But that ye may the better creditte the matter, not for my saing, but for
his, ye shall hear him expownde him self, that by this word, Eucharistia, he
Cyprian. Li. 3. Epist. 15
meneth the body of Christ, Illi contra euangelij lege, vestra^ quoque
honorifica^ petitionem, ante actam poenitentiam, ante exomologesin grauissimi
atque extremi delicti factam, ante manum ab Episcopo and Clero in poenitentiam
impositam, offerre pro illis, and Eucharistiam dare, id est, sanctum Domini
corpus prophanare audent. They against the law of the gospel, and also your
honorable peticio^, before the penance Eucharist. called the holy body of
our Lord by S. Ciprian.
was doe^, before the confession of the most greuouse, and extreme fawte made,
before the hand was put on by the Bishop, and the clergy unto penannce,
dare offer for them and give the Sacrament, that is, to profane the holy
body of our Lord. Thus Ciprian. In these words he plainly interprets him
self, and shows that he takes this word. Eucharistia, for the body of
Christ, and therwithall teaches the real presence of Christ's body to be in
the Sacrament. for if yt be not in the Sacrament, yt can not by receauinge of
the Sacrament be profaned.

This then being preceaued, that saint Ciprian understands this text of
the Sacrament, I will also call one of the greek church, to give us knowledge
how he expowndeth the same, who shall be Theophilacte, thus he writes: Iudaei
cum audiuissent de esu carnis illius discredunt. Ideo and verbum incredulitatis
dicunt, quomodo. Nam quando cogitationes incredulitatis ingrediuntur animam,
ingreditur simul quomodo. Propterea iple volens ostendere quod non sit
impossible, sed etiam The ophilact. in. 6. Joan.
valde necessarium, and non potest haberi vita nisi eius carnem comedamus etc.
Oportet igitur nos cum audiuerimus: Nisi comederitis carnem filij hominis, non
habebitis vitam: in sumptionibus diuinorum mysteriorum indubitatam retinere
fidem, and non quaerere, quo pacto? The Jews, when they had heard of the
eatinge of Christ's flesh, they do not believe. And therefore they say the word
of unbelief How. For How, the word of incredulity.
when the thoughts of incredulity do enter the soul, there enters withal
How. Therefore he willing to show that yt was not impossible, but even very
necessary, and that other wise life can not be had, except we eat his flesh
etc. Therefore we must when we hear: Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man ye shall have no life: in the receauinge the Divine mysteries retein an
undoubted faith and not ask, How or by what mean. Thus much Theophilacte.
Capite 7.


Mark that he would, when we hear this text: Except ye eat the flesh etc.
we should have an undoubted faith. what undoubted faith he meneth, he opened
in his saing alleged for the text before declared, where he said that the
bread (says he) yt transformed into the flesh of our Lord. This is that
undoubted faith, which Theophilacte would that we should have, when we hear
these words, Except ye eat the flesh etc. to believe that in the Sacrament,
we must eat the flesh of Christ, or else we shall not have life.
Nevertheless this necessity is not soche, that all that do not receive the
holy Sacrament actuallie, shall not have life: but all that do not in act or
purpose being of age agreeable, or do contemn the receipte of yt actuallie,
they shall not have life. But soche as be of mature age, and do of good
devotion purpose to receive it, though they do not receive yt actuallie, yet
having a godly faith, and not contemning the thing, they shall by Gods mercy
have life. As Baptism is a sacrament of great necessity, yet all that have
obtained life (I mien life everlasting) were not baptized in water according to
Christ's law, but some in blood, and all in purpose, none of them at the
least contemning the Sacrament, and therefore being so new

Much goodly matter offreth ytself here, and diverse other authors there be
of the ancient time, whose expositions be right plain in this matter. Whereby
the diligent Reader may perceive that the Adversaries have not dealt
sincerely, which would go about to put forth soche a false doctrine, and
therewith so feircelie reprove other men for wresting of the scriptures, when
they them selves most shamefullie wrest them, plaing the part of an evil man,
who will allwaies be accusing other men, and charging them with fautes, because
he will seem to be in no fault, but incupable, when he us most viciouse, and
most worthy reprehension.

THE FOVRTENTH CHAPTER EXPOVNDETH the same text by saint Augustine, and
Cyrill.
OF each side of Christ's Parliament house, ye have heard testimony, how yt
was there determined and enacted, that this text should be understood of
Christ's very body and blood. We will yet proceade to hear some mo of the
same house, of the which saint Augustinc shall be first. Who upon the same
text says thus, speaking to the Jews: Quomodo quidem detur, and quisnam
modus sit manducandi istum panem ignoratis. Veruntamen nisi manducaueritis
carnem filij hominis, et biberitis eius sanguinem, August. tract. 26. in Joan.
non habebitis vitam in vobis. Haec non cadaueribus, sed viuentibus loquebatur.
How yt is given, and what is the manner of the eating of this bread ye do not
know. Nevertheless except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood ye shall have no life in you. This did he speak not to dead
Carkasies, but to living men. Thus saint Augustine.

That the Jews did not know the manner of the eating of Christ's flesh in the
Sacrament, saint Augustine more plainly, hadling this text declares. Nisi
quis manducauerit carneni meam, non habebit vitam aeternam. Acceperunt illud
stulte, carnaliter cogitauerunt, et cogitauerunt quod praecisurus esset Dominus
particulas August in. in Psalm. 98
quasdam de corpore suo, et daturus illis. Except a man eat my flesh, he shall
have no life. They took it, says saint Augustine, foolishlie, carnally
they thought yt, and they thought that our lord would cut certain pieces from
his body and give them. This he.

Now the Jews thus grossly understanding Christ had no pleasure in
Christ's doctrine: But if they had understood that he by his divine and
almighty power might and would give his flesh to be eaten verily in the
Sacrament, after an other manner, and not grossly, as in that sort or manner
as he walked and lived upon the earth, then the words of Christ would have been to them lively and pleasant, but they took them foolishlie (says
saint Augustine) and carnally. So that he understands this saing of
Christ, of the eating of the flesh of Christ in the Sacrament, which is one
of the things, that we seek to prove, forasmoche as yt has been contrarily
taught of the Adversaries.

But they perchance will say, that though saint Augustine do understand
August. de Doct. Christ. li. 3 cap. 16.
this text of the Sacrament, yet he does not thereby teach the real presence
of Christ's body in the Sacrament but raither the contrary. For alleging
this text in a certain place he says that yt is a figurative speech. Si
autem slagitium, aut facinus iubere, aut vtilitatem and beneficentiam videtur
vetare, figurata locutio est. Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis, and
biberitis eius sanguinem, non habebitis vitam in vobis, facinus, vel flagitium
videtur iubere: figura ergo est, praecipiens passioni Domini esse
communicandum, and suauiter, atque vtiliter in memoria recondendu^, quod pro
nobis caro eius crucifixa and vulnerata sit. If the scripture seem to commau^de
any evil deed or great offense, or to forbid any profitte or well doing, yt
is a figurative speech. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you, Yt seems to command an
evil deed or offense, wherefore yt is a figure, commanding to communicate the
passion of Christ, and swetelie, and profitablie to keep in memoric, that
Christ's flesh was crucified and wounded for us.

This is saint Augustines saing, who (as the Adversaries say) plainly
affirms Except ye eat the flesh etc. is a figurative speech, which so
being, then the flesh of Christ (say they) is but figuratiuelie eaten in the
Sacrament

This argument have the heretics of our time borrowed of Berengarius and
Sacramentaries doctrine an old heresy new skoured.


But as the argument was inverted and made by the heretics of that time, so
was yt answered and solued by the good catholic Fahers at that same time.
Whose aunswers, and solucions be soche as they wipe away all the strenght that
was thought to be in that argument. Among the which we will only for this
present bring furthe the answer, which was made by Guitmundus. who lived in
the year of our Lord 1060, and solued this argument Guitmu^d. lib. 2.
thus: Ait beatus Augustinus quod Dominus videtur facinus, vel flagitium
iubere, non quia facinus aut slagitium inberet, iubendo manducari carnem suam.
Sed videtur (inquit) iubere: illis videlicet, qui putauerunt quod hoc iubendo,
necessario etiam se iuberet occidi, and membratim conscindi, atque ita
demu^carne^ eius cruda^, vel cocta^ma^ducari. Proinde ergo figura est (inquit)
in hac locutione. Hic ia^ adgaudet fortassis vmbraticus, hic iam obstrepit.
Noli praepostere vmbratice, noli praecipita^ter gloriari. Cuius reifigura
dicatur hic esse patie^ter and dilige^ter aduerte. Figura ergo est (ait
August.) praecipiens. Quid praecipiens? quid figurans? hoc enim figurat quod
praecipit. Passioni Domini (inquit) co^municandu^, et suauiter atque vtiliter
in memoria reco^dendu^, quod pro nobis caro eius crucifixa, and vnlnerata sit.
Deo gratias. Quicquid igitur illud est, quod Augustinus hic figura^appellat,
(Nam quid figuram dicat, in his eius verbis agnosci non difficile potest) non
vtique corporis Domini, sed crucifixtonis eias, and vulnerationis, hoc est
occisionis, nostraeque communicationis cum ea, id est vt imitemur Christum, and
communicemus passioni eius compatiendo, manifestissime figuram esse demonstrat:
Paulo quoque Apostolo concordante, qui ait, Quotiescunque panem hunc
manducabitis, and calicem Domini bibetis, mortem Domini annunciabitis donec
veniat. Saint Augustine says, that owre Lord seems to bid an eueldede,
or a great offense, not that he bidding his flesh to be eaten, did bid
Objection of the Sacramentaries.
any evil deed to be done or great offense, but that he seemed to bid, that
is to say, to them which thought that he bidding this, did necessarelie bid
his flesh to be slain, and to be cut one membre from an other, and so at the
last his fllesh either raw or sodden to be eaten. Therefore (says he) there
Answer.
man (meening the heretic) does rejoice, here now he makes his noise.
Rejoice thou not, shadow teacher, out of order, rejoice not to hastily. Of
what thing yt is said to be a figure patiently and diligently take heed. Yt
is a figure (says saint Augustine) commaundinge, what commanding? or what
figuring? (For yt does figure that, that yt does command) that we, says he,
should partake the passion of our Lord, and swetelie and profitablie keep in
memory, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. God bethanked. What
soever yt be then that saint Augustine here calls the Sacrament a figure
not of Christ's body but of his death.
figure (for what he does call the figure in these his words yt is not so
hard to be known) yt is not the figure of the body of our Lord, but of his
crucifieng and wounding, that is, of his death, and of owre communicating with
the same, that is to say, that we should follow Christ, and communicate his
passion, suffering with him, that does he most manifestly show to be a
figure, Paul also the Apostle agreinge with him, who says, As often as ye
shall eat this bread, and drink ths cup, ye shall show furthe the death
of our Lord until he come. Thus far Guitmundus.

In this answer (which although yt be long, yet I thought yt necessary to
bring yt not truncatelie, but wholly to satisfy the Reader) ye may perceane
that this Author manifestly proves that saint Augustine says not that
(Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man etc.) is a figurative speech
(For the eating and drinking of Christ's flesh and blood in the Sacrament is a
figure of Christ's passion and blood sheding for us) and a sign for the
continuance of the thing in our memory, and also for the moving of us to take
our crosses, and to suffer with Christ.

Which thing yet this Author both more plainly, and breiflie does set
forth in that that follows, sainge: Quod si quaeramus, quid hic figuram
Augustinus dixerit, nihil hic vtique tam congrue videtur occurrere, quam id
quod paulo superius Guitmu^d. Jbidem.
Doctor idem iam dixerat, id est celebratio corporis, and sanguinis Domini.
Quas obres stulte, and insipientissime Berengariani librum de Doctrina
Christiana nobis obijciu^t, cum cibus altaris Domini, nusquam ibi figura,
nusquam ibi signum dicatur. Et quicquid illud sit, quod and signum ibi vel
figura dicitur, non vtique figura corporis and sanguinis Domini, sed passionis
Domini, and nostrae communicationis cum ea, certissime demonstratur. If we ask
what saint Augustine here calls the figure, there is nothing here
Berengaria^s foolishlie objected S. Aug. So do the Sacramentaries now.
same doctor had now said, that is, the celebracion of the body and blood
of our Lord. For which cause the Berengarians foolislie, and most unwisely do
obiecte the book of the chrystian doctrine to us, seeing that the meat of the
Altar of our Lord in no place there is called a figure, in no place there is
called a sign. And what soever there is called a figure or a sign yt is most
certenlie showed, not to be a figure of the body and blood of our Lord, but
of the passion of our Lord, and of our communicating with the same. Thus much
Guitmundus.

I need not to note here to you any thing, where every thing is so plain,
neither after my rude manner to trauaill to say any more for aunswering this
argument, where the answer of this learned man is so full, that yt has
fully and perfectelie answered the Adversaries, and that by the same saint
Augustine whom they objected, and out of the same book, out of the which
the objection was taken. Yet raither to confirm the sainge

Quamuis horribilius videatur humanam carnem manducare, quam perimere, and
humae Aug. cont. aduers. legis and Prop. ca. 9
number sanguinem potare, quam sundere: nos tamen mediatorem Dei and hominu^
hominem Iesum Christum carnem suam nobis manducandam, bibendumque sanguinem
dantem, fideli cord, and ore suscipimus. Although yt may seem to be more
horrible to eat the flesh of man, then to kill a man, and to drink the blood
of man, then to shed yt: yet we for all that do receive the mediator of God
and men Jesus Christ, giving us his flesh to be eaten with a faithful heart
and mouth, and his blood to be dronken. Thus saint Augustine.

Remember now (gentle Reader) the rule of saint Augustine before given for
the understanding of the scriptures, and confer this his sainge, a token of
that body and blood, as the Adversary would have yt. For where he says there,
that Christ, willing us to eat his flesh, and drink his blood, seems

Ye see that though yt seem to be an horrible fact so to do: yet saint
Augustine here makes not the figurative speech soche, as to take away the
real presence of the body and blood of Christ from the Sacrament: but
Chrystesbodie and blood in the Sacr. to be received both with heart and mouth
that we should receive the body and blood of Christ, and that not only
with a faithful heart, which serves for the spiritual receipt of Christ's
body and blood, but also with a faithful mouth, which argues a corporal
receipt of the body of Christ, as the Proclamer knows right well. And
therefore I dare say, this saing of saint Augustine pincheth him even by the
conscience. I say then with Guitmundus, let not the Adversary triumph to
much upon his figurative speech, as once I heard master Horn do Master Horns
signracion.
manner of soche his likes, he abused the figurative speech, and placed yt there
where yt should not be placed. For saint Augustine did not so place this
figurative speech, as thereby to displace the body and blood of Christ from
the Sacrament, which we must receive with a faithful heart and mouth: but
he placed his figurative speech, as Guitmundus noted to you, that is, in the
sweet and dououte remembrance of Christ's death and passion, and in the
crucifieng, and mortifieng of our flesh with all his lust and concupiscence. If
then the Adversary be desierouse to have figures in the Sacrament, let him not
divise soche a figure as neither Christ nor his holy members did acknowledge:
but let him take soche and in soche place as by them be appointed, which
because the Adversary shall not lack, let him understand that there be many.

This holy Sacrament is (as is said) a figure of Christ's death and passion:
The Sacrament is a figure in diverse respects, but not only a figure.
yt is a figure teaching us, that as Christ was crucified for our sins,
(Except ye eat my flesh, and drink my blood) in gross understanding after
the sownde of the letter, as the Jews did take yt, do importe that we should
(as S. Augustine says) eat his flesh raw, sodden, or roasted by lumpes and
pieces, as we do flesh from the shambles, after which manner we do not, nor
may not eat yt, therefore yt is a figurative speech, that we must eat yt,
even the same flesh, and the same blood in substance, after a spiritual
manner, that is under the forms of the Sacrament invisibly, and thus yt is a
figure also. And because one thing is received not in his own form in
fensible manner, but in the form of an otther thing, in this respect yt is
figuratiuelie eaten.

Thus ye perceive how the sainge of Christ is a figurative speech, and (as
S. Augustine says) receive yt with owre mouth, which can not be but verily,
and reallie.

And now I leave this objection as fully answered, and turn me to

Yt were not a little to be meruailed, that so famous a man, so highly
learned, so constante in faith, who, as ye have already heard, and more
shall, has so plainly, so manifestly, without all obscurity, taught the
very real presence of Christ's blessed body and blood in the Sacrament,
should in this place forgette his faith, forgette his learning, leave his
constancy, and teach a contrary doctrine, that Christ should be there but
as in a figugure or sign. No, God be praised, as he is a strong pillar of
Christ's Church: So he will stand constantly and strongly in the same, and
will not be drawn into the company of the malignaunte Church, which God
hates: but remain in the catholic Church, which God loves.

S. Augustine thus being declared, for the better understanding of this
scripture, I will hear one other, who shall open unto us how he also
understands the same. This shall be Cyrille, whose sainge is this: Non
poterat enim aliter corruptiblis haec naetura corporis ad incorruptibilitatem
and vitam traduci, nisi Cyrill in. 15. Joan.
naturalis vitae corpus ciconiungeretur. Non credis mihi haec dicenti? Christo
te obsecro side^ praebe dicenti: Amen amen (in quit) dico vobis, nisi
manducaueritis carnem filij hominis, and biberitis sanguinem eius, non
habebitis vitam in vobis. Audis aperte clamantem non habituros nos vitam nisi
sanguinem eius biberimus, and carnem manducauerimus. In vobis ipsis dicit, id
est, in corpore vestro. vita autem iure ipsa vitae caro intelligi potest. The
corruptible nature of this body, can not otherwise be brought to
incorruptibilitie and life, except the body of natural life should be
conioined to yt. Do The receipt of Christ's body makes our bodies
immortal.
thowe not believe me saing these things? I beseech thee believe Christ sainge.
Verily verily I say. unto you, except ye eat the slesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you. Thowe hear him
plainly sainge, that we shall not have life except we drink his blood, and
eat his flesh, He says in your selves, that is, in your body. That same
flesh of life by

In this saying Cyrill needs no expositour, who so plainly teaches, that
this corruptible body could not atteign to incorruptibilitie and life, except
the body of natural life should be conioined to yt. what is the body of
natural life he teaches afterward, when he said: the flesh of Christ may
Chrysts slesh called life, as being the flesh of God, who is life.
of right be called life, because yt is the flesh of life, that is, of God, who
is the very life of his own nature, by whom all other things, in the which he
has put a living soul, do live. But he naturally lives, that is, of his
own nature, not by life powered into him, as by him yt is powered into us, but
of him self. Therefore Cyrill calls the body of Christ, the body of natural
life, because yt is the body of God, who is natural life. Now note that he
says, that this body of natural lif, which is the body of Christ, must
be joined to our corruptible nature, which ioining Christ's body is joined to
us by corparall receipt not by spiritual.
is not but by the corporal receipt of that body, and not by the spiritual
receipt, which ioineth not the body of Christ to our corruptible nature.
Therefore Cyrill proves by this text, that of very necessity we must receive

Hear therefore what the same Cyrill says in this same chapter: Non negamus
nos recta fide charitateque syncera Chrysto spiritualiter coniungi, sed nullam
nobis In 15. Joan A plain place of S. Cyrill for the proclamer.
coniunctionis rationem secundum carnem cum illo esse, id profecto pernegamus,
idque a diuinis scripturis, omnino alienum dicimus. Quis enim dubitauit etiam
sic Christum vitem esse, nos vero palmites, qui vitam inde nobis acquirimus?
Audi Paulum dicentem, quia omnes vnum corpus sumus in Christo, quia etsi multi
sumus, vnum tamen sumus in eo, omnes enim de vno pane participamus. An
fortassis putat ignotam nobis mysticae benedictionis virtutem, quae cum in
nobis fiat, nonne corporaliter quoque facit, communicatione carnis Christi,
Christum in nobis habitare? Cur enim membra fidelium membra sunt Christi?
Nescitis (in quit) quia me^bra fidelium, membra sunt Christi? Membraigitur
Christi, meretricis faciam membra? Absit. We do not deny (says Cyrill) We
are joined to Christ two ways corporally and spirituallie.
that we, by right faith, and sincere charity, spirituallie be conioined to
Christ, but that we have no manner of conjunction with him after the flesh,
that truly we utterly deny, and say that that is altogether contrary to the
scriptures of God. For who has doubted Christ even so to be the vine, and us
to be the branches, which from thence get life. Hear Paul saing that we be
all one body in Christ. For although we be many, know ye not (says he)
that your members be the members of Christ? shall I then make the members of
Christ the members of an Harlotte? God forbid. Thus much Cyrill.

In the which saing, ye perceive, he teaches that we be joined to Christ both
spirituallie and corporally: Spirituallie, by faith, and charity:
Corporally by the partakinge of Christ's flesh in the Sacrament, by the which
(as Cyrill says) Christ abides in us corporally, by the which saing, the
doctrine of the Adversary is quite overthrown, who would have no other
receipte of Christ's body, but a spiritual receipt, and detesteth the
corporal receipt. S. Cyrill de nieth that we receive Chrysts body only
spirituallie.
But ye have heard S. Cyrill earnestly denieng yt and constantly affirminge
yt to be against the scriptures, that Christ should not be joined to us
corporally, mystical benediction, where we take Christ's flesh.

In the incarnacio^ Christ took our flesh, and by yt was joined to us: in the
Sacrament we take Christ's flesh, and be joined to him. In the incarnacio^ he
Christ by his incarn. joined to us We by the Sacra. joined to him.
took our flesh, and the miseries of the same, sin only excepted, in the
Sacrament we take his flesh, and the merits of the same, his singular
exaltacio^ excepted. In the incarnacion he did take: in the Sacrament he does
give. Which both, that is, the taking of our flesh to him, and the giving of
his flesh to us, Chryfostome speaking in the person of Christ very well and
breiflie declares, saing: Vester ego frater esse volui, et co^municaui carne^
propter vos, and sanguine^. Hom l. 45. in 6. Joan.
Et per quae vobis coniunctus sum, ea rursus vobis exhibui. I would be you
brother, and for you I took flesh and blood, and by what things I was
co^ioined to you, those have I again given to you. Thus Chrysostom. And thus ye
may perceive the false doctrine of these naughty men, and there with their
bold shamelessnes, that where the saings of the learned fathers men's sainges be
against the scriptures: yet they will peruersedlie and arrogantlie proceade to
maintein their heresy, and give no place eitherto the fathers,

I can not cease to merueill that they will persist so obstinately against so
plain a matter, so plainly uttered and taught by this holy and learned Father
S. Cyrill. Wherefore, reader, weigh, and consider well this that is here spoken,
and if thou hauest stand in faith persevere, and give thanks: if thou hauest
erred, return, and seek mercy. Christ casts none away that come to him.

THE FIFTENTH CHAPTER CONTINVETH the exposition of the same text by Leo and
Euthymius.
THat right holy man Leo, the Pope, who was elected unto that office, in the
year of our Lord 443. so that he was above a thousand years a gone, whose
virtue and holiness was soche, that not only of the Synod of Chalcedon, where
were gathered 630. Bishops, he was highly commended: but also of Platina,
who would speak no more Hanc confessionem, Dilectissimi, toto cord promentes,
impia baereticorum commenta respuite, vt ieiunia vestra, and eleemosinae
nullius erroris contagio polluantur. Lee ser. 6. de i^iu. septmensis.
Tunc enim and sacrificij munda est oblatio, and misericordiaesancta largitio,
quando hi qui ista dependunt, quid operentur, intelligunt. Nam dicente Domino.
Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij hominis, and biberitis cius sanguinem, non
habebitis vitam in vobis. Sic sanctae mensae communicare debetis, vt nihil
prorsus de veritate corporis Christi, and sanguinis ambigatis. Hoc enim ore
sumitur, quod side creditur, and frustra ab illis Amen respondetur, a quibus
contra id, quod accipitur, disputatur. This confession, most well beloved,
uttering forth with all yowr heart, forsake the wicked co^mentes of heretics,
Aplain place of Leo for M. Iuell.
that yowr fastinges and allmesses be not desiled with the contagion of
error. For then is both the oblacion of the sacrifice clean, and the giving
of alms holy, when they that do these things, understand what they do.
For when our Lord says. Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you. Ye should so communicate of
the holy table, that ye should nothing at all doubt of the verity of the
body and blood of Christ. For that is taken and received by mouth, which is
believed in faith. And in vain is Amen answered of them, of whom, against
that, that is received, The mouth receaueth, that faith believes.
argument is made. Thus much Leo.

Who (as ye may perceive) so certenlie took this text to be understood of
the Sacrament, and of the very presence of Christ's body in the same, that he
uses yt for an authority to prove the same, and says, that for asmoche as
our Lord did say yt, we should nothing at all doubt of the verity of
Christ's body and blood.

Whereby this also may be gathered, that he using this as an authority against
heretics, did use yt as a scripture received, and so understood throughout
all the catholic, Church, which I say, he used against heretics, not
against them in the matter of the Sacrament (for there were no soche in those
times, but against Eutyches and his disciples, which most pestile^tlie taught,
that the nature of man, which the Son of God did take of the virgen, was
turned Eutiches his heresy.
into that nature of God. And so destroyed the co^iunctio^ of the two natures
in that one person of Christ. Against the which heresy this holy man brought
very flesh of the manhead of Christ was in the Sacrament, Christ had still
the very nature of man in him.

Thus ye may perceive, that the truth of this matter of the Sacrament that is
to say, that Christ's very body and blood be reallie in the Sacrament, Real
presence so certenlie believed that au^cie^t fathers used yt for authority in
co^futing of heresies.
was in those days so clear without doubt and controversy, so
substanciallie believed, that yt was reputed esteemed, and accounted an
authority sufficient to confute the heresy of Eutyches, and to defend and
maintein the true catholic faith, that in Christ was both the natures of
God and man. Now if the very flesh and blood of Christ were not truly,
verily, and reallie in the Sacrament, the matter of the Sacrament, could
prove nothing against this heresy, but raither make with yt. But forsomoche as
there is the very flesh of Christ, yt proves very well, that the very nature
of man is in Christ, directly against the heresy of Eutyches.

This alone, in my opinion, might suffice to reduce men from error,
considering that this was a truth thus received a thousand years agon, in the
which time we be well assured that the Church was without error in this
matter, and men so zelouse in the truth of the catholic faith,

But omitting to make any further prooff hereof by this author, I will,
according to my order prescribed, ioin unto him Euthymius a greek author, who
in his exposition of this text gives us thus to understand yt: saing: Nisi
comederetis carnem filii hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem, non habebitis
Euth. in 6. Joan.
vitam in vobis. Illi quidem hoc impossible iudicabant, ipse vero omnino
possibile ostendit, neque id tantum, sed necessarium, quod etiam fecit ad
Nicodemum. Addit autem and de sanguine, significans de pane ac poculo, quae, vt
dictum est, daturus erat Discipulis in vltima coena. Except ye eat the flesh
of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you. They
(meening the Jews) thought this impossible: but he (meening Christ) declared
yt altogether (as yt is said) to his Disciples in his last supper. Thus
Euthymius.

I have thought good in this exposition first to note to you, that this author
(notwithstanding the wicked wresting of the Adversary) understands this
scripture with the other holy Fathers, of the Sacrament. For by plain words
he says, that our Savior speaks here of the bread and cup, that he would
give in the last supper. And signifieng that he forgatt not what he had said
in the same matter before, refers himself to that, that he had before said,
saing Sicut dictum est, as yt is allreadie said.

For before he said that Christ is called bread two ways, that is, after his
deity, and after his humanity. Therefore after he had spoken of the Christ
called bread two ways.
bread which is his deitic, now in this place he speaks of the bread which
is his humanity, of the which bread he said not: which I do give you, but
I will give you: for he would give yt in his last supper, but when? when he
took the bread, and after thanks given, brake yt, and gave yt to Take, eat,
This is my body. And therefore yt is without al scruple or doubt, that seeing
Christ speaks here of the bread and cup, that he would give in his last
Supper, therefore these words be spoken

Neither may the Adversary here cauille upon these words, bread and wine,
that this author does mien that in the Sacrament is nothing but bread and
wine, as figurs of the body and blood of Christ. For so far wide was this
from his meening, that he plainly denies the substance of the Sacrament to be
a figure, sign or token of the body and blood of Christ, but the very body
and blood of Christ, as shall better and more at large appear by this same
authors exposition upon the xxvi. of Matthew, in the lviii. chap. of this
book. Euthimius denies that, which the Sacramentaries affirm, and affirms,
that they de nie.


So then this is first certain, that this sixth chapter of S. John is by this
author understood of the Sacrament, which is one thing that is denied by the
Adversaries. So likewise this author denieng the substance of the Sacrament to
be a figure or sign of the body and blood of Christ, but the very real and
substanciall body and blood of Christ (for if the sign or figure be taken
away, the very substance must needs be in place) the other part

Thus (gentle Reader) thou may perceive the doctrine of the Adversaries to be
directly contrary to the doctrine of the holy Fathers. Which thing when I
consider in the Proclamer, me seems to see before me him, upon whom this curse
of God is fallen: Woe be unto them, that call evil good, and good evil, which
make darkness light, and light darkness, which make sour sweet, and sweet
sour. Woe be unto them, that are wise in their own seight, Esaias 5.
and think them selves to have understanding. For the Proclamer and his
accomplices, teaching obedience to the catholic Church to be evil, and
disobedience to the same to be good, truth to be darkness, and falshead to be
light: penitent life to be sour, and sensual life to be sweet, are they not
under this curse? Does not the Proclamer take the second curse upon him also,
thinking himself wise in his own conceat? Does not he think himself wise and
to have understanding, that contemns all the learned men that have been this
thousand year? Stands not he in his own conceat,

THE SIXTENTH CHAPTER ENDS THE EXposition of this text in hand by the
Ephesine Council.
Having sufficiently proved by the sentences and judgments of diverse
learned and holy Fathers, that the saing of our Savior Christ in the sixth
chapter of S. John: Nisi manducauer. etc. Except ye eat the flesh, etc. is to
be understood of the Sacrament: Nestorius, in the which this text being
alleged, yt may be perceived by the judge meant of cc. By shoppes, both greeks
and latins, how the said text is to be understood. Which as Leo did allege
against Eutiches, So do these Fathers Nestorius. As Eutyches denied the nature
of man to Nestorius and Eutiches, their heresies.
remain in Christ: So did Nestorius deny the nature of God to be incarnate.
Eutyches said that he was but one person, for that he was only God, and not
man: Nestorius said that both the natures of God and man remained distinctlie,
as to several persons, the Godhead not incarnated, the Manhead not deitated,
as Gregory Nazianzen terms yt, and so implied he that Christ born of the
virgen, was only man and not God.

Against the which blasphemouse heresy, the Council sent him the epistle
before said, and in the same they write thus: Necessario and hoc adijcimus,
annunciantes Exepist. Ephesians. Concilijad Nestoriu^.
enim sicut secundum carnem, mortem vnigeniti filii Dei, id est, Jesus Christi,
and re surrectionem eius, and in coelis ascensionem pariter confitentes,
incruentam pariter celebramus in ecclesiis sacrificij seruitutem: sic and ad
mysticas benedictiones accedimus, and sanctificamur, participes sancti
corporis, and preciosi sanguinis Christi, omnium nostrum Redempto riseffecti:
non vt communem carnem percipientes (quod absit) nec vt viri sanctificati, and
verbo coniuncti secundum dignitatis vnitatem, aut sicut diuinam possidentis
habitationem, sed vere viuificatrice^, and ipsius verbi propriam factam, Vita
enim naturaliter existens vt Deus, quia propriae carni vnitus est,
viuificatrice^ eam professus est. Et ideo quamuis dicat ad nos, Nisi
manducaueritis carne^ filij hominis, and biberitis eius sanguine^, non
habebitis vita^ in vobis: non tame^ eam vt hominis vnius ex nobis existimare
debernus. Quomodo enim secundum natural sua^, viuificatrix esse caro hominis
poterit? Sed vt vere propria^ eius sacta^, qui propter nos et filius hominis
factus est, and vocatus. Necessarelie therefore this also we put to, showing
forth the death after the flesh of the only begotten So^ ne of God, that is
of Jesus Christ, and confessing also the resurrection and ascension of him into
the heavens, we do celebrate in the churches an unbloody service of Sacrifice.
So also do we come unto the mystical benedictions, and be sanctified, being
made partakers of the holy body and preciouse Ephesine Councellvn derstandeth
this text: Except ye cate etc. of the Sacrament and so did Nestorius also.
blood of Christ the Redemer of us all not taking yt as common flesh (which God
forbid) neither as of a sanctified man, and joined to the Son of God, after
the unity of dignity, or as possessing the divine habitacion, but truly
quickening or giving life, and made the propre flesh of the Son of God. For
Verily verily I say to you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man,
and drink bys blood ye shall have no life in you. Yet we should not esteem yt
as of a man that is one of us, for how can the flesh of man after his own
nature be a quickening flesh, or giving life, but as made his own propre flesh,
who for us was made the Son of man, and so called. Thus the Council.

Do ye not here see, how that this holy Counsel, which is one of the four
famous general Cou^cells, would that we should not take this text of S. John,
as Nestorius did, to be spoken of the flesh of Christ, as of the flesh of a
pure man, but of the flesh of Christ, as the very own propre flesh of God,
and that yt so taken and eaten does give life, being able so to do, not for
that yt is of the nature of man, but because yt is the flesh of God.

Now may yt not be said that this is to be understood spu^allie. For
Nestorius that said that Christ was but a very man, and grownded himself much
upon this text: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man. and concluded
there fore that he was but the Son of man, did not take the matter so finely
that And therefore the Council, who took the same scriptures to improve that,
that Nestorius seemed, to himself to have proved, must needs use the same sense
Real presence avouched by the Ephesine Council.
or else they should nothing prove against him. For if Nestorius spoke of the
very flesh of Christ, and the Council of the spiritual flesh of Christ, what
could they conclude against him, not speaking of the same thing that the other
spoke of. And therefore vndoubtedlie^ they spoke of the very real flesh of
Christ, which is the own propre flesh of God. Which thing also the A plain
saing of a Council for M. Juel
words of the Council do prove where yt is said: We come to the mystical
benedictions, being made partakers of the holy body and preciouse blood of
Christ the Redemer of us all, receiving yt not as common flesh, but as the
flesh truly giving life.

Yt makes also for this understanding not a little that Cyrill being president
of the Council, who (as before ye heard) does plainly affirm, that we do not
only by faith and charity, spirituallie receive the flesh of Christ, but
also verily and reallie, would not now, nor did not speak of the spiritual
receiving only, which only receiving of Christ spirituallie and not
otherwise in the Sacrament he did earnestly deny, and strongly improve by

To this holy Council I think yt vnsemlie to ioin any one particular man.
Wherefore to end here the exposition of this said text, I will only add to
yt being an holy multitude, the practice of an other holy multitude even the
ancient Church, who so streictlie, and yet directilie for the substance of the
thing, did take this text to be understood of the very real and The church
of Africa understanding the vi. of S. John of the Sacr. ministered yt to
infantes.
substanciall flesh and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, that they thought yt
a matter of necessity to ministre the same to infantes, as without receipt
whereof they thought they could not be saved. The practice whereof we find to
have endured in the Affrican Church from the time of S. Cyprian until the time
of S. Augustine at the least. By which yt is manifest that the Church then
understood this scripture of the Sacrament, and yet not of the bare Sacrament
only, but of the very flesh and

And though this practice of the communicating of infantes grounded upon this
understanding of this scripture, was ceased, yet that the Church did still
retein that understanding, this well proves, that Petrus Dresensis persuading
Iacobellus de Praga to minister the Sacrament under both kinds, used this
text here expownded, as being understood of the Sacrament, by the common
consent of the Church, for his argument, which text when Iacobellus had
weighed, and considered how yt had been always understood in the Church,
he began to persuade the people, that they aught of necessity, if they would
have everlasting life, to receive the Sacrament under both kinds, as under
which they should both eat his flesh and drink his blood: of which matter
more large disputacion shall be made to advertise him, that all the authors
herto fore alleged upon this text, and all these holy fathers in the Ephesine
Council representing the Church, Petrus Dresensis and Iacobellus, and after
there time, in the time of soche as have written upon the gospells, until the
time of Luther did understand this text, of the flesh and blood of Christ in
the Sacrament, as their works do well testify.

But thus much may I here well say, that yt pitieth me to see how the
people suffer them selves to be deluded of these new inuentours of disordres,
and by them both to be drawn from true faith, and also to break the usual
order of the Church, that where our Savior Christ said by plain words:
Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in you. Which text (as ye have heard) is fully proved to be
meant of Christ's very body and blood in the Sacrament, yet being inueigled
by Both flesh and blood was before under one kind, now neither of both under
two kinds.
thaduersaries doctrine hardly believe this mening of the Catholic Fathers to
be true, and therefore where the Adversaries maliciously persuade the^, that the
ministres of the Church deceived them, in giving them the Sacrament

THE SEVENTENTH CHAPTER EXPOVNDETH THE next text following in the sixte of S.
John by saint Augustine and Cyrill.
Now will I proceade to the text following in S. John, which, for asmoche as
yt is not much discrepant from that before, but as yt were an affirmative
sequel of the same, I will not troble the reader with long treacting upon yt,
but breiflie show the meninge thereof, and haste me to other that contein more
matter, not so plainly spoken of before, as this has been. The text is: Qui
manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, habet vitam aeternam. He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has eternal life.

As the absteining from the eating of the flesh and blood of Christ, causes
lack Food of Christ's flesh cause of immortality.
of life: So is yt consequent that the feading on the flessh and blood of
Christ causes the having of life. As the meat is, soche is the effect and
operacion of yt. If a man eat corruptible meat, yt will for a while maintein,
but yt will not preserve from corruption. If a man feade on mortal things, yt
can not preserve from mortality, but fuffer him to be mortal: So if a man
feed on spiritual things, and digest them well, yt will make a man
spiritual. If a man feed of immortal things, yt will bring the like effect,
and make a man immortal. For every food leaves his effect or operacion of
nature in the thing that feadeth. If then we feed on Christ, who is life, he
will leave his effect in us, which is life. And for so much as he is the
eternal and immortal life, he will woork in us according to his nature, that
we shall have eternal and immortal life. And therefore he says: Qui manducat
meam carnem and bibit meum sanguinem habet vitam aeternam. He that Hom. 46. in
Joan.
Cum dixisset si quis manducauerit ex hoc pane non morietur inaeternum, and
credibile esset eos dicturos, quemadmodum superius, Abraham mortuus est, and
Prophetae mortui sunt, and quomodo tu dicis, non gustabit mortem inaeternum?
Resurrectionem ponit, per quam soluit quaestionem, quod non morietur in fine.
When he had said: whosoever shall eat of this bread he shall not die for
ever: and yt was credible that they would have said, as they did before,
Abraham is dead and the Prophets be dead, and how do thowe say he shall
not taste death? He puts the resurrection by the which he solueth the
question that he shall not die in the end. And therefore he says: Et
egoresuscitabo eum in nouissimo die. And I will raise him up in the last day.

But I will leave my exposition to see the minds of the doctors upon this
scripture. S. Augustine writes thus: Hanc non habet, qui istum panem non
manducat, nec istum sanguinem bibit. Nam temporalem vitam sine illo habere
homines Tract 26. in Joan.
possunt, aeternam vero non possunt. Qui ergo non manducat eius carnem, nec
bibit eius sanguinem non habet in se vitam, and qui manducat eius carnem, and
bibit eius sanguinem, habet vitam aeternam. Ad vtrunque autem respondit, quod
dixit vitam aeternam. Non ita est in hac esca, quam sustenta^dae huius corporis
vitae causa sumimus. Nam qui eam non sumpserit, non vinet. Nec tamen qui eam
sumpserit, viuet. Fieri enim potest, vt senio vel morbo, vel ali quo casu,
plurimi qui eam sumpserint moriantur: in hoc vero cibo and potu, id est,
corpore and sanguine Domini non ita est. Nam and qui eum non sumit, non habet
vitam: and qui eum sumit habet vitam, and hanc vtique aeternam. He has not
this life, that eats not this bread, nor drinks this blood, For without
that meat, men may have the temporal life, but the eternal life they can not
have. He therefore that does not eat his flesh, nor drink his blood, has no
life in him. And he that does eat his flesh and drink his blood, has life
everlasting. He has answered to both in that he has said (everlasting) Yt
is not so in this meat, which we do take to sustein the life of this body.
For he that does not take yt shall not live, neither for all that shall he live
that has taken yt. For yt may be that many with age, disease or some other
chance even of them that have taken yt may die. In this meat and drink, that
is to say, in the body and blood of our Lord, yt is not so. For both he
that does not take yt, has not life, and he that does take yt has life, yea
and that eternal. This is saint Augustines mind upon this text Which
although yt does speak Ibidem.
immediately expowndeth him self to speak of the mystical body of Christ,
which is his Church, and not of the body of Christ in the Sacrament. For
thus he says: Hunc iraque cibum and potum societatem vult intelligi corporis
and membrorum suorum, quod est Ecclesia in praedestinatis, and vocatis, and
iustificatis, and glorificatis, sanctis and fidelibus eius. Quorum primum iam
factum est: secundu^ and tertium, and factum est, and fit, id est, vocatio and
iustificatio: quartum vero nunc in spe est, in re autem futurum est, id est,
glorificatio. This meat and drink therefore he will to be understood the
society or fellowship of the body and his me^bres, which is the holy
Churhe in the predestined, and called, and justified, and glorified saints,
and his faithful. Of the which the first us now done, that is to say:
predestinacion. The second and the third, is both doe^, and is in doing, and
shall be done, that is vocacion, and iustificacion: The fourth is now in hope,
but in deed to come, that is glorificacion. This is the sentence of S.
Augustine, which in deed does make plain mention of the body mystical of
Christ, and expowndeth the meat that is spoken

But what though S. Augustine in this place does expownde yt of the mystical
body of Christ, is that a good argument that yt is not to be expownded

Wherefore this is to be considered that S. Augustine in his treactises upon the
sixte of S. John, knowing the people to whom he spoke, then to be sownd S.
Augustines chief intent in his treactises upon the sixth of S. John.
in the faith of the Sacrament, and that there was no controversy in all the
Church of that matter, by the which he was occasioned to speak directly,
quid sumerent, sed quam been sumerent, what they did receive, but how well
they should receive yt. And therefore the most part of his doing was here to
move them that as they did according to there faith receive the body of Christ
sacramentallie: So also according to their duty with godly devotion, holy
conversation, and spiritual meditacio^ they might receive him spirituallie
without the which manner of receipt, the other was nothing profitable, but
raither hurtful and damnable.

And therefore in the end of the sixth of S. John showing his purpose to be (as
I have said) and that the people should perceive, that as he knew, that they
did believe well: so also they might receive well, he concludes Hoc ergo totum
ad hoc nobis valeat, dilectissimi, vt carnem Christi and sanguinem Christi non
edamus tantum in sacramento (quod and multi mali) sed vsque ad spiritus
participationem manducemus, and bibamus, vt in Domini corpore tanquam membra
maneamus, vt eius spiritu vegetemur, and non scandalizemur, etiamsi multi modo
nobiscum manducant and bibunt temporaliter sacramenta, qui habebunt in fine
aeterna tormenta. All this therefore (most wellbeloued) let yt auaill to this
end, The flesh of Christ eaten in the Sacr. of euel men.
that we eat not the flessh and blood of Christ only in the Sacrament
(which also many evil men do) but let us eat and drink to the
participacion or partaking of the spirit, that we may abide in the body of
our Lord as members, that we may be made lusty and strong by his spirit, and
not be slaundered, though many do eat and drink with us temporallie the
Sacraments, which in the end shall have eternal torments. Thus S. Augustine.

Here may ye clearly perceive the scope of S. Augustines treatises upon S.
August. does acknowledge both spiritual and corporalreceauing.
S. John, that he would the people should not only receive the flesh and
blood of Christ in the Sacrament, sacramentallie: but also by the partaking of
the spirit, spirituallie. In which his conclusion, as ye may perceive, not
intended or meant by Christ. Wherbye ye may perceive the great

But there doing herin is much like to their doing in the matter of
justification, that because saint Paul did so much extolle faith to the
Romans, therefore they contemned the works of charity set forth to the
Corinthians. The effect whereof has well appeared in their practice: For not
only Luther did condemn saint James epistle for the fetting forth of
works: but also he and his sequaces have maliciously separated, cut of, and
divided Luther condemned S. James epist
them selves from the unity of Christ's Church, and fellowship with yt. And
then being so separated, have without all measure and end, blasphemed, railed
at, and reviled the same, and odiblie and cruelly persecuted yt, which was
toward them friendly and blameless. But God kendle in them that be living
the fire of his low, that by yt they may return

And, Reader, behold thou the truth now laid before thy face, and see that
now taught of S. Augustine, that before thowe hauest seen taught by Chrysostom,
and Cyryll. Chrysostom said: Vt autem non solum per dilectionem, sed reipsa
in ipsam carnem conuertamur, per cibum id essicitur, quem nobis largitus est.
That we should not only by love, but in very deed be turned in to that flesh
that is brought to pass by the meat, which he has granted us, Where note
both our turning into Christ by love, which is the spiritual receiving, and
our turning into his flesh in very deed, which is by the corporal receiving.

Cyrill says: Non negamus nos rectafide charitateque sincera Christo
spiritualiter Iu. 15. Joa^. Corporal receiving avouched as well as spiritual.
coniungi: Sed nullam nobis coniu^ctionis rationem secundu^ carnem cum illo
esse, id profecto pernegamus We do not deny, that we be conioined to Christ
spirituallie by right faith and sincere charity: But that we hawe no manner of
conjunction with him after the flesh, that we earnestly deny. Note here a
spiritual

Now compare S. Augustine here to these, who says that we may not only
eat the flesh, and drink the blood of Christ in the Sacrament (which is the
corporal receiving) but we must eat yt even unto the participacion of the
spirit, which is the spiritual receiving, And thus thou see an uniform
doctrine, that we must both receive Christ in the Sacrament reallie, and also
by faith spirituallie. And therefore, thowe Chrystian, suffer not thy self to be
robbed of the one, seeing that the exceading love of Christ, as a pledge of the
same, has to thy endless comfort left thee both.

And now what S. Cyrill says agreablie to S. Augustine upon this text let us
hear: Manet enim immaculata vtraque natura, and vnus ex vtrisque Christus est,
sed inefabiliter, and vltra quam possit men's humana intelligere. Verbum
humanitati In. 15. Joan.
coniunctum, totam in seipsum ita reduxit, vt indigentia vitae possit
vinificare, Sic interitum a natura expulit, and mortem, quae peccato plurimum
poterat, destruxit. Quare qui carnem Christi manducat, vitam habet aeternam.
Habet enim haec caro Dei Verbum, quod naturaliter vita est. Propterea dicit,
and ego resuscitabo eum in nouissimo die. Ego enim dixit, id est, corpus meum
quod comedetur, resuscitabo eum. Non enim alius ipse quam caro sua. No^ id
dico, quia natura non sit alius, sed quia post incarnationem in duos se diuidi
filios minime patitur. Ego igitur (inquit) qui homo factus sum per meam carnem
in nouissimo die comedentes resuscitabo. Both the natures (says he) abide
inuiolated, and of them Christ's body received in the Sacr. shall raise our
bodies to immortal life.
life. So has yt expelled destruction from the nature of man, and death,
which by sin was very strong, yt has destroyed. Wherefore he that eats the
flesh of Christ has everlasting life. For this flesh has the Son of God,
which is naturally life: Therefore he saiethe: and I will raise him up in
the last day. He said I: that is to say, my body that shall be eaten will
raise him up. He is none other then his flesh. I do not say that he is none
other in nature, but because after the incarnacion he suffers not him self to
be divided into two sons. Therefore he says: I, which am made man by my
flesh will raise them up in the last day, which do eat me. Thus far S.
Cyrill.

Although yt be much wourthie to be noted, how he declares the flesh of
Christ to be able to give life, Yet because I would not digress so (as in the
fourtenth chapter more at large appears) to the intent, that he would thereby
open the truth of this saing of Christ: He that eats my flesh and drinks
my blood shall have eternal life. Which saing of Christ must be understood
of the same flesh, which he has proved to give life, which is the very
flesh of the Son of God, or else all his process were vain. For if the
probacion be of the very natural flesh of Christ, and the scritpture be under
standed of the spiritual flesh, what serves the probacion, and all the
process of the natural flesh? but that the scripture is to be understood of
the very flesh of Christ. he declares in the next saing And I will raise him
in the last day, I, says he, that is to say, my body that shall be eaten
will raise him up. Now the very real body of Christ shall raise up the
faithful at the last day, wherefore that same body is eaten. For yt is all
one body that is eaten of the faithful, and that shall raise up the
faithful.

Why the body of Christ shall raise up our bodies, he gives a reason in the
fourtenth chapter upon the sixth of S. John. Oportuit enim certe, vt non solum
anima per spiritum sanctum, in beatam vitam ascenderet: verum etiam vt rude
Cirill. in. 6. Joan ca. 14 Cause and manner of our raising to immortality
declared.
hoc and terrestre corpus, cognato sibi gustu, tactu, and cibo, ad
immortalitatem reduceretur. Truly yt must so have been, that not only the
soul, by the holy Ghost should asscend into the blessed life, but also that
this rude and earthly body by a like natured taste, touching, and meat,
should be reduced to immortality. Where note that as our spirit is brought to
the blessed life by the Spirit of God: so is our dodie reduced to immortallitie
by his body. Note further how yt is done (cognato cibo) with a like natured
meat, and soche there is none, that is of like nature to us, that can reduce us
to immortallitie, but the very body of Christ Therefore yt is the very body
of Christ that is this our meat, which meat who so does eat, as yt becomes
him to eat, shall have eternal life.

THE EIGHTENTH CHAPTER BEGINS
NOW follows in S. John the second determinatiue sentence of the substance of
this matter of the Sacrament. Caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere
est potus. My flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink.

Owre Savior Christ speaking much of the bread which his father gave, as
that: Non Moses dedit vobis panem, sed Pater meus dat vobis Joan. 6.
panem de coelo verum Not Moses gave you bread from heaven but my father
gives you from heaven the true bread. and that: Panis Dei est, qui de caelo
descendit and dat vitam mundo. Yt is the bread of God that comes from heaven,
and gives life to the world: yet had he not determined, who was this bread,
but at the last he determined saing: Ego sum panis viuus, qui de coelo
descendi. I am the living bread, which descended from heaven. So that as here
in these sainges he determined, speaking of the bread of his Godhead yt is
venlie meat.

Where note that our Savior determining this thing, has chosen raither to
say. Caro mea vere est cibus. My flesh is verily meat, by the Aduerbe, then
Thaeduerbe vere what force yt has and why Christ chose to speak by yt.
to say, Caro mea verus est cibus My flesh is the very meat: by the
adjective, For the aduerbe has a more force, and more fully expresses the
thing that yt signifies, than does the Adjective. As if I should say: Pium
hoc opus operatus est. He has wrought this godly work. Yt has not so full
and perfect sense, as if I say: Hoc opus pie operatus est. He has wrought
this work godly. For in the former sentence spoken by the Adjective, there is
but one thing determined, that is, that the work was good, but not the doing.

Over and above this, an Aduerbe put to a verb does fulfill the significacion
of the verb. Wherefore put to a verb substa^tiue yt does fulfill the
significacio^ of the same and more fully does signify the substance of the
thing that is ruled by the verb, as, Hic est verus homo, This is a true man,
does not signify so much the substance, as to say: Hic est vere homo. This
is truly or verily a man. This does fully express the nature or substance of
a man.

So likewise the Aduerbe here put to the verb substantive, does more fully
declare the Substance of the thing. As tho he might say: My flesh is meat not
by a metaphor, similitude, or figure: but yt is verylic meat, that is,
substanciallie meat, which so fedeth us, that (as Chrysostom says) reipsa
conuertimur in carnem Christi. in very deed we are turned into the flesh of
Christ.

But we will hear the auncientes of Christ's house upon this text also,
whether yt be thus to be understood or no, And first Origin, who says thus:
Lex Dei iam n^on in figuris, and in imaginibus, sicut prius: sed in ipsa specie
veritatls dgnoscitur. Et quae prius in aenigmate designabantur, nunc in specie
and veritate complentus. Jn Numer. homel. 7.
but in plain truth. And soche things as before were described or showed in a
dark manner, now are they fullfilled in plain manner and truth.

And what the things be, he after rehearses of the which some be these: Antea
in aenigmate fuit Baptismus in nube, and in mari: nunc autem in specie
regeneratio est in aqua and Spiritu sancto. Tunc in aenigmate erat Manna cibus:
nunc autem in specie caro Verbi Dei est verus cibus, sicut ipse dicit: Caro mea
vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere est potus. Before baptism was in a dark
manner, in the cloud, and in the sea: Now regeneracion is in plain manner, in
the water and the holy Ghost. Then Manna was meat in a dark manner, but now
the flesh The flesh of Christ meat in plain manner.
of the Son of God is very meat in a plain manner, As he him self says: My
flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. Thus Origin.

Now weigh with me (gentle Reader) that Origin says that the Gospel has
not things in ymageis and figures, and shadows, as the Law before had The
Gospel has not the figures but the very things.
Origin concludes, that the flesh of Christ figured by Manna, that was meat to
the Jews, is now not figuratiuelie, but verily the true meat of the
Chrystians. And for his authority uses owre text now in handling, saing
thus: As he says (mening Christ) My flesh is meat etc. By which manner of his
declaracion is yt not most plain that this is no figurative speech. But that
he understands Christ's saing as a plain assertion of a truth, without any
figure, and that they be, the very things in deed, as the words do plainly
signify? yt is most certain.

Perchance the Adversaries will say we take the flesh of Christ, as Christ
speaks here to be verily meat, spirituallie to be received in spirit, but
not reallie to be receaceaued of the body. This answer contains two
parts. one, that we do receive Christ but spiritually: the other, that we do
not receive him reallie, Origin.

For the first, Origin says, that the Jews had baptism spiritually, they
also The Sacramentaries. only spirituull receiving impugned by Origin.
did feed on Christ spirituallie, and drank his blood spirituallie, if we feed
of Christ none other wise, wherein then does the new law excel the old? What
has the Sacraments of the Chrystians, more then the figurs of the Jews? But
of this more at large in the third book For the second, if we do not receive
Christ reallie, then (as yt is said) we must needs receive him under a figure.
But Origin says that the law of the Gospellys not known now by figurs and
images, but by the very truth. In the law of Moses Christ was eaten in the
figure Manna, Now (says he) the flesh of the Son of God is eaten in very
plain manner. What is that, but that yt is eaten, reallie, verily, truly, and
not in figure? If the flesh of the Son of God, be eaten with us in a figure,
why does he say, yt is eaten in plain and open truth, and make soche
difference betwixt the Laws? Why did he not raither say, that yt is in both
laws eaten in figure? But if ye mark him well, he appoints figures to the
old law, and saing of this Adversary proclamer, that we receive Christ none
other wise in the Sacrament then the Jews did in Manna, saving that they
received Origin says that we do not receive Christ in a figure. for the lame
of God is not now in figurs and images, but in verity. And thus be the
figures of the Auersaries denied.

Further if we have not, and eat not Christ reallie, but in a figure of bread:
then was the Law of Moses much more excellent, then the new in that
respect. For Manna which came from heaven so miraculouslie, and had so many
woonders about yt, as the scripture does declare, was by all means, and
without all comparison more excellent figure then a poour little morcell of
artisiciall bread. Which has no excellency by miracle or wonder, but is a
plain common usual thing. All which vain confideracions are nothing but
vntreuths, whereby the law of the Gospel should raither be abased, then duly
magnified. Wherefore the singular inuencions of private men left, I will
creditte the word of Christ, and his holy inspired men declaring the same,
that the flesh of Christ is very meat in

And now that we have heard this great ancient thus understanding S. Ambrose
co^me^ded
this text of the very flesh of Christ, not figuratively but verily and truly,
we will now hear also holy S. Ambrose Bishop of Millan, the master of S.
Augustine in Christ's faith, whose fame, learning, and holiness is known to
all chrystendom, whose auncientie is great, for he lived about the year of our
lord 380. and therefore above eleven hondreth years agon. Whom I thus now
commend to thee, Reader, partly for that he is not in this order as yet
alleged, partly that his sentence may the raither move thee to creditte the
truth Thus he says: Sicut verus est Dei filius Dominus noster Jesus
Christus, non quemadmodum homines per gratiam, sed quasi filius ex substantia
Patris: Ita vera li. 9. de Sacra ca. 1. A plain place of S. Amb. for the
Proclamer.
caro (sicut ipse dixit) quam accipimus, and verus est potus. As our Lord
Jesus Christ is the very Son of God, not as men by grace but as a Son of
the substance of the Father: Even so yt is very flesh (as he him self says)
which we do receive, and very drink. Thus he* Mark well this saing, and then
shall ye well perceive the understanding and mening of this scripture, that yt
neither suffers yt self to be understood of the figure of the flesh of
Christ, neither of the spiritual As Christ yt the very Son of the Father,
so is his very in flesh the Sacr.
flesh of Christ only. But of the very substanciall flesh of Christ. For he
makes yt by similitude plain, that as Christ is the very Son of God, even of
the substance of the Father, Even so is yt very flesh that we receive. which
is thus much to say: As Christ is the very Son, of God: So is this verily
flesh that we do receive. And as he is the Son of the substance of the
Father: So is this flesh which we receive of the substance of Christ's flesh.

By which words of saint Ambrose the fond phansies of these fantastical
men be taken away. For here is not allowed the figure of Christ's flesh, but
the thing in deed. not a spiritual receiving of Christ only, but a real and
spiritual receiving of the substanciall flesh of Christ. And thus ye may see
the truth of the faith to be had in this matter, uttered plainly challenge
this scripture from the heretics, which so evidently refuses the figure, and
so plainly teaches the real and substanciall presence of Christ

THE NINETENTH CHAPTER PROCEAdeth upon the same text by Eusebius Emis. and S.
Augustine.
Now that ye have heard two auncientes understanding this text now in hand,
we will hear one other coople, of each side of Christ's Parliament house one,
as the other were, and these agreyng in one mind, as the other did, which
shall be Eusebius Emisenus, and saint Augustine. Of the which Eusebius being
the elder shall show his mind, who in his time was a great learned man, as
saint Hiero^ witnesses, and wrote many works, as against the Jews, and also
against the gentiles, and upon the Gospells, and the epistles of S. Paul also.
This man being so profowndly learned, so ancient in time (as living about the
year of our Lord. 344. so famous in constancy of faith, and holy in living,
is worthy of credit. In a certain homely alleging this text he shows the
same to be understood Quia corpus assumptum ablaturus erat ab oculis, and
illaturus sideribus, necessarium erat, vt in die coenae sacramentum nobis
corporis and sanguinis consecraret, vt coleretur Eusebius. Emisen. homil. spasch.
iugiter per mysterium, quod semel offerebatur in precium, vt quia quotidiana
and indesessa currebat pro omnium salute redemptio, perpetua esset redemptionis
oblatio, and perennis victima illa viueret in memoria, and semper praesens
esset in gratia, vera, vnica, and perfecta hostia, fide aestimanda, non specie,
neque exteriori censenda visu sed interiori affectu. Vnde coelestis consirmat
authoritas, quia caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere est potus.
Because he would take away his assumpted body from our eyes, and bring yt
up into the heavens, yt was necessary, that in the day of his Supper he
should consecrate unto us the Sacrament of his body and of his blood, that yt
might continually be woorshiped in mystery, that once for us was offered in
price, that because the daily and incessaunt redemption did run for the
health of all men, the oblacion of the same redemption should be perpetual,
and that perpetual sacrifice should live in memory, and always be present in
grace. A true, one only, and perfect sacrisice, to be esteemed by

In this sentence yt is first to be considered, that this author, declaring
the cause of the institucio^ of the Sacrament, and of the continuance of the
same: and also instructing us how we should esteem yt, believing there to be
another manner of thing, then there does appear in outward seight, teaches us by
the allegacio^ of this scripture, that yt is the very flesh and blood of
Christ which we must esteem by faith, and judge by our inward affect. And
therefore he says not, that Christ does say, but that the authority of Christ
confirms yt so to be, wherefore this is without all controversy, that this
scripture now in hand is by this author understood of the Sacrament.

But here the Adversaries do triumph, as allwais they do when any author
Objection of the Sacramentaries out of Eusebius.
speaks any word, that may by any wresting be drawn to their
understanding, though in very deed he meant nothing less. First, they say,
that this author does no affirm that Christ did consecrate his body upon the
Cross, that the everlasting sacrifice should live in memory, and (say they)
that he does not say that that he is present in body, but in grace.

But stay a while (Reader) and be not troobled with these their notes. For ye
shall see immediately that these notes shall be the notes of their co^fusio^,
Answer.
and declaracio^ of their false doctrine. For God be praised, though this
authorment, yea and did set forth the true faith of Christ by this that is
allreadie alleged, which yet might be perverted by mysvnderstanding of the
maliciouse, who have perverted even the very plain words of Christ: Yet
adioining immediately to this sentence more of this matter, he adds words
so plain, that they will neither suffer themselves, neither the words which
the Adversaries have gone about to wrest, to be so understood as the
Adversaries would have them. His words immediately adioined to the sentence
of Christ by him alleged, be these. Recedat ergo omne infidelitatis ambiguu^,
quandoquidem, qui author est muneris, ipse est testis veritatis. Nam inuisibilis
sacerdos visibiles Eusebins ibid.
creaturas in substantia^ corporis and sanguinis sui verbo suo, secreta
potestate conuertit. Let therefore al doubt of infidelity go away, for truly
he that is the author For the invisible priest by a secret power, with his
word does convert or turn the visible creaturs into the substance of bys
body and blood: Thus he.

What can the Adversaries now say? Do ye not hear what this authourment by
the sainges, which the Adversaries would wrest and pervert to The presence
plainly au^ached by Eusebius. against M. Iuell.
their wicked understanding? Did not he as well there as here (though not with
so plain words) teach the treuth of this matter, that Christ's body and
blood is in the Sacrament? Do ye not now perceane that he allead ged the text
of S. John, to declare that the flesh of Christ was to be esteemed by faith.

But I would the Adversaries, and all that be doubtful of the presence of
Christ's blessed body and blood in the Sacrament, would regard and follow the
counsel of this ancient father, to let all doubt of infidelity depart from
them. Which counseill if they well weigh, was given for the believing of a
weightier and greater matter of faith, then to believe that the bread may

And to show us by whom this great matter is wrought he adds: Qui author
est muneris, ipse est testis veritatis. He that is author of the gift, he is
the witness of the truth. Christ is the witness of the truth, wherefore he
is Bread and wine turned not into Sacramental bread and wine but in to the
body and blood of Christ.
the author of the gift, that is of the Sacrament. And yet that he would
certify the weak beleuer, he teaches by what mea^s the author does woork
this miraculouse gift and work, saing: Inuisibilis sacerdos, etc. The
invisible priest does turn, the visible creaturs (of bread and wine) into the
substance of his body and blood. Note that the bread and wine be turned, not
to be a sacramental

O merueilouse God what be they that will stick still in the filthy mire of
detestable heresy, when they hear the truth so plainly, so simply, so
expressly spoken and uttered, as they be not able to against say yt, and that
not

Now that this author being on the one side of Christ's Parliament house, has
so manifestly declared this our text to be understood of the very real and
substanciall flesh of our Savior Christ in the Sacrament, to be our very
meat: we will hear the other, which is S. Augustine, who upon the same
Tractatu 26. in Ioa^.
text says thus: Cum enim cibo and potu id appetant homines, vt non esuriant,
neque sitiant, hoc veraciter non praestat nisi iste cibus and potus, qui eos a
quibus sumitur immortales and incorruptibiles facit, id est, societas ipsa
sanctorum, vbi pax erit, and vnitas plena atque perfecta. Propterea quippe,
sicut etiam ante nos intellexerunt homines Dei, Dominus Jesus Christus corpus
and sanguinem suum in eis rebus commendauit, quae ad vnum aliquid rediguntur ex
multis. Namque aliud in vnum ex multis granis conficitur and constat: Aliud in
vnum ex multis acinis confluit. Forasmoche as by meat and drink men our Lord
Jesus Christ has commended his body and blood in those things, which to one
certain thing be brought of many. For the one is made into one of many
grains, and so consists: the other comes into one of many grapes. Thus he.
Three things in the Sacrament to be considered.


If ye call to remembrance what was said of a certain author upon this text:
The bread which I will give, etc. Yt will help you well to understand S.
Augustine here. Yt was said there that in the Sacrament be three things: The
first is the sacrament only, which does signify or is the sign of an holy
thing, and that is the form of bread. The second is that that is signified and
contained, which is the very body of Christ. The third is signified but not
contained, which is the mystical body of Christ, that is, the company of all
his elect joined to Christ the head by faith and charity, for the which thing

Now forsomoch as these three things be in the Sacrament, a man may speak of
each of the^ severally, and yet when he speaks but of one, he denies not
the other. So S. Augustine here speaking of the society of Saints, speaks
of the third thing of the Sacrament, but denies not the other. For by the
learning of the Adversaries: the Sacrament is as well a sacrament of Christ's
body broken upon the Cross, as yt is of the unity of Christ's body
mystical. And that ye may perceive that S. Augustine excludes not the body
and blood of Christ from the Sacrament but raither includes yt, note, he said
that our Lord Jesus Christ commended his body and blood in these things,
which be made one of many, that by the bread made of many grains, now
turned into one body of Christ, and by the wine made of many grapes, now
turned into the blood of Christ, all we (as S. Paul says) eating of this
one bread, and drinking of this one cup, might be one body in Christ, and
each of us

That S. Augustine denies not the very presence of Christ in the Sacrament
(though here upon S. John he speaks much of the effect of the same, the
consideracion whereof we have declared in the exposition of the last text Hoc
est quod dicimus, quod modis omnibus approbare contendimus, sacrificium
Ecclesiae August. lisente^. Pros.
duobus modis confici, duobus constare: visibili elementorum specie, and
inuisibili Domini nostri Jesus Christi carne and sanguine, and sacramento, and
re sacramenti, id est, corpore Christi. Sicut Christi persona constat ex Deo
and homine, cum ipse Christus verus sit Deus. and verus sit homo. quia omnis
res illarum rerum naturam and veritatem in se continet ex quibus conficitur:
Conficitur autem sacrificium Ecclesiae duobus, sacramento, and re sacramenti:
id est, corpore Christi. Est ergo sacramentum, and res sacramenti. This is yt,
which we say, which by all means we labor to Sacrifice of the Church
consists of the visible forms of breada^d wine and the invisible flesh and
blood of Christ.
approve, that the Sacrifice of the Church is made by two means, and consistes
of two things, of the visible form of the Elements, and the invisible flesh
and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Sacrament, and the thing of the
Sacrament, that is to say, the body of Christ. As the person of Christ is of
God and man, for as much as he is very God and very man

Does he not here in this sentence teach the presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, yes, if ye note well, he teaches three things by express words,
S. August. teaches three thiuges in one sentence against the Sacramentaries.
which the Adversaries deinie, that is, that the Church has a Sacrifice,
that therein is a sacrament, which he expowndeth to be the forms of the
Elements, that is, of bread and vine, that there is also present the very
body and blood of Christ, which he calls the thing of the Sacrament because
yt is the thing that the Sacrament does signify. And because men should not
cauille saing that the body and blood of Christ be not verily present, but
signified: He declares by the similitude of Chrysts person, that as verily as
Christ being God and man has both the nature of God and the nature of mam: So
verily has the sacrifice of the Sacrament, that is, the outward forms of
bread and wine, and the body and blood of Christ.

Now if the Adversaries will say, that in the Sacrifice of the Church, there
is not really either the forms of bread and wine or the very body and blood
of Christ: then must they likewise say that in the person of Christ, there is
not reallie, either the nature of man or the nature of God, which both are to
detestable to be spoken of the mouth of a Christen man. And so truly is the
other also. And yet not contented with this similitude, which is abundantly
sufficient, he proceadeth to prove the same by this saing Every thing (says
he) contains in yt the nature and truth of the things that yt is made of.
The Sacrifice of the Church is made of the Sacrament and the body and blood
of Christ. Wherefore S. Augustine thus concludes upon this reason: Est igitur
sacramentu^, and res sacramenti corpus Christi. There is therefore the Sacrament,
and the thing of the Sacrament, the body of Christ.

In these words I suppose S. Augustine has so plainly expressed and declared
his faith in this matter, that yt can not suffer any other opinion justly to
be conceived of him. For if we that have lived, and live in this time of
pestilent heresy, would against this heresy of the Sacrament, nor by better
and plainer words do the same, then saint Augustine has here done. Wherefore
what so ever he did speak or write to any party or

Therefore, Reader, be not carried away by the false co^mentes that naughty men
make of S. Augustins words. For though he speak sometime obscurelie, as yt
may appear to have a doubtful understanding, as before we end this chapter
of S. John thowe shall hear: yet for somoche as saint Augustine had but one
faith, which is so plainly here professed and settfurth, be well assured that
he never varieth or goes from and against this. But I tarry to long upon this,
seeing there be diverse cooples mo to be heard upon this text.

THE TWENTETH CHAP. PROCEADETH
Saint Hilarie is a great ancient of Christ's house living about S.
Hilarye commended.
the 360 year after Christ, and not only ancient, but also right excellent
in learning, and famouslie constant in faith. His excellency in learning is
not only testified by saint Hierom, who says he wrote many learned
works, but also by Rufinus, who says he was accounted the great light in
his time to all France, and Italy. His constancy in faith is well declared,
that notwithstanding the Emperors and Princes, ad many Bishopps were the
favorers of the heresy of the Arians: yet he neither moved with the favor of
mighty and great men, neither feared with their punishment, or banishment, did
constantly resist the said heresy, and also wrote learned books against yt.
This author writteh thus: Li. 8. de Trinita^s.
Quae scripta sunt legamus, and quae legerimus intelligamus, and tunc perfectae
fidei fungemur officio. De naturali in nobis Christi veritate quae discimus,
nisi ab eo discimus, stulte atque impie discimus. ipse enim ait: Caro mea vere
est esca; and sanguis meus vere est potus. Qui edit carnem meam, and bibit
sanguinem meum, in me manet, and ego in eo. De veritate carnis, and sanguinis
non est relictus ambigendi locus. Nunc enim and ipsius Domini professione, and
fide nostra vere caro est, et vere sanguis est. Et haec accepta atque bausta id
efficient, vt et nos in Christo, et Christus in nobis sit. Let us read those
things that be written, and soche things as we read let us understand. and
then shall we perfectelie do the office of our faith. Soche things as we learn
of the natural Of the verity of Christ's flesh and blood in the Sacr. there is
no doubt
verity of Christ in us, except we learn of him, we learn foolishlie and
ungodly. For he does say: My flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily
drink He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood dwells in me, and I in
him. Of the verity of the flesh and bood there is no place left to doubt. For
now both by the plain speaking of our Lord him self: and by our faith yt is
verily flesh, and verily blood. And these taken and dronken do bring it to
pass, that both we be in Christ, and Christ in us. Thus he.

Among many goodly notes to be gathered in this saing, three things will I
briefly note. The first is, that this our text is understood of the
Sacrament, And this matter appears so plain, so evident and so certain to this
great learned and holy man, that by the instruction that faith gave him to
understand of the verity of Chrystis flesh and blood there A plain saing for
M. Iuell.
is no place to doubt. And why was there no place left to doubt? He shows the
cause: For now (says he) by the suing of our Lord, and our faith, it is
verily flesh and verily blood.

O this was a blessed simplicity, a godly obedience, that curiously would not
ask with the Jews, how yt should be flesh and blood, and how his flesh and
blood should be meat, but reverently captiuating his understanding to the
obsequie of Christ says: by cause Christ did say, that his flesh was verily
meat, there is no place of doubt left, but that yt is flesh in deed, and
blood in deed.

And in this saing yt is not to be over slipped, that he faith: that by the
saing of our Lord and our faith: So that he puts our faith to the saing of
Christ, Faith how yt is requisite in the Sacrament
not that our faith is a woorker with the saing of Christ to work the
substance of the thing: but that as by the saing of Christ, the thing in yt
self is most certainly true: so by faith believing and accepting yt, yt is certain

The second note is, that this very flesh and very blood is taken of us, and
droke^ Flesh and blood of Christ verily eaten and dronke^ in the Sacr.
of us, whlche does teach us the corporal receiving of Christ in the
Sacrament, corporal I say in two respects, that both we receive his very
real and substa^cial dodie, and that we with our body and into our body
receive

This thing the same S. Hilarie in the same book does open more at large,
when he says: Si enim vere verbum caro factum est, and nos vere verbum carne^
Hilar ibid.
cibo Dominico sumimus, quomodo non naturaliter in nobis manner existimandus
est, qui and uaturam carnis nostrae iam inseparabilem sibi natus assumpsit, and
naturam carnis: fuae, ad naturam aeternitatis sub sacramento nobis
communicandae carnis admiscuit, If the word were verily made flesh, and we
receive the word made very flesh in our Christ naturally in us by receipt of
the Sacra.
Lords meat, how is yt to be thought that he does not naturally abide in us,
who being born man has both taken the nature of our flesh upon him now
inseparably, and also under the Sacrament of his flesh to be communicated unto
us, has admixed the nature of his flesh to the nature of the eternity? Thus
he.

In the which saing what would we wish to be more plainly spoken, tha^ that
the Son of God was made flesh, and that same Son of God A plain place of S.
Hilar. for the Proclamer.
being made flesh, we receive in the Lords meat? Neither may that gloss he
says: How is he to be thought not naturally to abide in us? Mark well
these words how can Christ naturally abide in us, but by the receipt of
his

The third note is, that Christ thus received woorketh in us this effect,
that we thereby be in Christ, and Christ in us, of the which manner of being,
the text which follows in saint John, will give us occasion to speak more.
Wherefore we will diffre yt till we come thither.

And now will we come to Euthymius who in few words says thus: Caromea vere
est cibus. verus est cibus sieve aptissimus, vtpote anima^, quae proprijssima
hominis In. 6. Joan. My fleshys verily meat: is no parabolical or figurative
speech.
pars est, nutrie^s. Et similiter de sanguine. Aut hoc dixit confirmans, quod
no^ enigmatice neque parabolice loqueretur. My flesh is meat in deed. Yt is the
very or most aptest meat, as which nourishes the soul, which is the most
propriest or wourthiest part of a man. And likewise of the blood, Orells he
said thus confirming that he did speak neither obscurelie, nor
parabolicallie. Thus Euthymius. Do thowe not perceive (reader) that one
spirit was in the mouth of all these holy and ancient Fathers? do they not
agree in sentence? Mark well how this Ancient Father expowndeth this text,
removing and denieng the figure, whereby he declares him self to understand
this text of the very real flesh of Christ, as Hilarie does. yt is (says he)
no parabolicall speech: yt is no figurative speech, but yt is a plain speech
signifieng no other ways then the words sownde, that is the very flesh and
the very blood, not the figure of them. Which manner of exposition thowe
shallt see (Reader) in other that do follow, especially in Chrysostom and
Theophilact. Wherefore coming to them remember this, and conferr the^ to
gether, and thowe shall find good matter, and agreeable to the truth of this
assercion.

THE ONE AND TVENTETH CHAPTER Continues the same exposition by Chrysostom
and Lira.
Whereas ye have hitherto heard the sentences of the Fathers and auncientes of
the higher house upon this text now in hand: Herafter for the better
declaracion of the consona^t doctrine of this truth in all times, and for the
more confusion of the Adversaries who so maliciously have depraved the writers
of the later time: I will as before is promised ioin to some of the elder sort,
some of the yo^ger. Of the which the first coople shall be Chrysostom and
Lira, the one a grecian Homil. 40. in Joan. Christ in the sixth of S. John spoke
not para bolicallie or obscurelie.
and of the higher house, the other a latin and of the lower house (as ye have
heard) Chrysostom upon this text says thus: Quid autem signat: Caro mea vere
est cibus, and sanguis meus vere est potus? Aut quod is est verus cibus, qui
saluat animam: aut vt eos in praedictis confirmet, ne obscure locutum in
parabolis arbitrarentur. My flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily
drink Either that this is the true meat that saves the soul, or else that he
might confirm them least they should think that he had spoken obscurelie in
parables

Where note that Chrysostom says, that Christ did speak these words My
flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed, is no obscure speech,
nor no figurative speech (says Chrysostom) let the Adversaries then wrest
and wring, and pervert the scriptures as they list, I will creditt holy
Chrysostom and the church that he lived in before any of the Adversaries, and
their maligna^t church, which they live A a plain saing of Chrysostom. for M.
Iuel.
in. If the Proclamer will not say that this is a plain saing when there is no
parbole in yt: I know not what he will say is plain, these words being of
them selves so plain.

Now whether the exposition of Lira, who was of the latin Church, and of the
later days, be consonant and agreeable to Chrysostom or not let us Hic
ostenditur buius Sacramenti veritas. Christus enim freque^ter parabolice
Discipulis loquebatur. Et ideo, ne crederent quod caro eius cotinere Lira in 6.
Ioann.
tur in hoc sacramento Eucharistiae tantummodo sicut in signo, ideo hoc remouet
dicens: Caromea uere est cibus, quia hic sumitur realiter, and non figurative.
Et eodem modo est de sanguine sub specie vini, and ideo subdit: Et sanguis meus
vere est potus. Dicitur ctiam caro Christi vere cibus, and sanguis eius vere
potus, quia reficiunt animam, quae est immortalis. Cibus autem corporalis
tantum reficit corpus quod est corruptibile. Here is showed (says Lira) the
verity of this Sacrament. For Christ oftentimes did speak to his disciples
parabolicallie. And therefore leest they should believe, that this flesh were
contained in this Sacrament only as in a figure: he remoueth that, saing: my
flesh is verily meat. For yt is here received really, and not The flesh of
Christ in the Saeaten reallie, not figurat.
figuratively. And after the same manner is yt of the blood, under the form of
wine. The flesh of Christ is also called meat in deed and his blood drink in
deed, because they refresh the soul, which is immortal. But corporal meat
refreshes only the body, which is corruptible. Thus he.

Remember. Reader, the exposition of Chrysostom, wherein he said two things:
The one that Christ says, that his flesh is verily meat, because yt faueth
the soul: The other that Christ so said, because he would confirm them in
the forsaied things that he did not speak in paraboles. And now conferr this
author to him, and see if he speak any other thing, but even the same two
things that Chrysostom did. For where Chrysostom says, that yt is the true
meat that saves the soul: This author says, that the body of Christ is
called verily meat, and his blood verily drink, because they refresh the
soul, which is immortal. Chrysostom says, that Christ would show him
self not to speak now in paraboles: This author more at large says, that
because Christ did often speak parabolicallie, least they should think or
believe, that his flesh were contained in the Sacrament, as in a sign only,
therefore he remoueth that, saing, that this flesh is verily meat, because yt is
received really, and not figuratively.

Thus ye see agreement between these authors, and one truth spoken here amost
by one manner of words of him that did write above a thousand received and
taught in the church in ancient time, as touching thexposition of this
scripture we have in hand.

THE TVO AND TVENTETH CHAP. Continues yet thexposition of the same text by S.
Cyrill, and Dionise
AS in the chapter last before ye heard one coople far distant in time of
there life's, but consonant in sownde of their faith: So shall ye in this
chapter hear an other coople, the one very ancient, the other of later time,
likewise agreablie declaring their faith and opening the right sense of our
text now yet in hand. This coople shall be Cyrill and Dionise the Carthusian.
the one of the greek church, the other of the latin church, as they before
alleged were. S. Cyrill says thus: Vmbram and figuram nosti? Disce ipsam
rei veritatem. Caro enim mea (inquit) vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere est
potus. Rursus distinguit inter Li. 4. ca. 16. in Joa^.
mysticam benedictionem, and Manna, aquarum fluenta ex lapide, and calicis
sancti communicationem, ne magis Mannae miraculu^ admirentur, sed ipsum potius
suscipiant, qui caelestis panis est, and aeternae vitae largitor. Mannae namque
alimentum non aeternam vitam, sed breue famis remedium attulit. Non erat ergo
ille verus cibus. Sanctu^ vero Christi corpus ad immortalitatem, and vitam
aeternam nutriens cibus est. Aqua etiam illa e petra ad momentum sitim
corporalem leuabat, nec quicquam adferebat preterea. Non erat ergo potus ille
verus, sed verus potus est sanguis Christi quo radicitus mors euertitur, and
destruitur. Non enim hominis simpliciter sanguis est, sed eius, qui naturali
vitae coniunctus, vita effectus est. Hauest thowe known the shadow and the
figure? Learn the very truth of the thing My flesh (says he) is meat in
deed, and my blood is drink in deed. He does again make a distinction betwixt
the mystical benediction, and Manna: the streams of waters out of the rock,
and the partaking of the holy cup: least they should more esteem the
miracle of Manna, but Figures of the old Law, and verity of the new, be as
the shadow and the thing shadowed.
raither should receive him, the which is the heavenly bread and the geuer of
eternal life. For the food Manna did not bring eternal life: but a short
remedy of hungar. but the holy boodie of Christ is a meat nourishinge to
immortality and eternal life. That water also out of the stone, did for a
little while ease the bodily thrist: but the trae drink is the blood of Jesus
Christ, by the which Yt is not the blood of a bare man, but of him, who being
conioined to the natural life is made life. Thus far saint Cyrill.

Do ye not perceive in these words that he speaks as much and the very same
in sense, though not in words that Chrysostom did? He had treacted before of
the paschall lamb, and thereby moved the Jews, to consider the Shadows of
Moses law, whereby being instructed, they should be the readier to
understand, these mysteries of the new testament, and therefore says: Hauest
thowe known the figure, learn also the very truth of the thing. what is that?
My flesh is meat in, deed and my blood is drink in deed.

Mark then (Reader) the figures were the Paschall lamb, Manna, and the water
flowing out of the stone: The verity (says he) that these figures did
prefigurate, is that truth that Christ uttered, saing: My flesh is meat in
deed. If this be the verity, then yt is not a figure: if yt be no figure, then
Christ speaking yt, spoke neither parabole, nor figure, as the last coople yt
is no figurative speech as they would feign yt to be: but a speech teaching

But that I be not to tediouse in tarieng to long upon every author, I will
say no more of this man's testimony at this present, both for the cause
alleged, and also that through all the sixth chapter of saint John, and
almost through all the gospel of saint John, he is not only plentiful
inmaking mention of this matter, but also as plain as he is plentiful. And
that know the adversaries right well. Therefore we will hear what Dionise who
is joined to him does say: Thus I teade there: Caro mea vere est cibus, and
sanguis meus vere est potus. Hoc ait Saluator, ne putaretur parabolice loqui
Dionys. Carthus in Joan. 6.
solito more, ita quod carnem suam diceret panem; quia significaretur per
panem, and esset sub forma panis solum sicut in signo: vel propter aliquam
proprietatem cum pane cibus diceretur, quomodo dicit Apostolus: Petra erat
Christus, quoniam figurauit Christum. Et Esaias: Vere foenum est populus,
propter conuenientiam quandam. Et infra ait de seipso Saluator: Ego sum vitis
vera. Ad insinuandum ergo quod caro sua sit vere and substantialiter sub specie
panis, veraciterque sumatur a communicante: Sanguis quoque ipsius vere sub
specie vini contineatur, and recipiatur, adiecit: Caro mea, id est, corpus
(sumitur enim nunc earo, non prout ossa excludit, pro toto corpore, neruos,
venas, and ossa habente) vere est cibus, animae non corporis, quia non
visibiliter, nec corporaliter sumitur, quamuis verum corpus sumatur. My flesh
is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink. Thus said our Savior leest he
should be thought after his customable manner to speak parabolicallie, so that
he should call his flesh bread, because yt should be signified by the bread,
and should be under the form of bread only as in a sign. Or that yt should
be called meat, for some propretie that yt has with bread. Even as the Apostle
does say: The stone was Christ, because yt figured Christ. And Esaie: Truly
the people The very flesh of Christ under the form of bread, and his very
blood under the form of vine.
is grass, for a certain agreement to the same. And in the gospel our Savior
says of him self: I am the true vine. To insinuate therefore unto us, that his
flesh is verily and substa^ciallie under the form of bread, and that yt is
truly received of the co^municant, and his blood also is contained in deed
under the form of wine, and is received, he added: My flesh: that is to say,
my body (For flesh is now here taken, not as yt does exclude the bones, but
for the wholl dodie, having, sinews, veins and bones) is verily meat, of the
soul, not of the body. For yt is not taken or received visiblie, nor
corporally, although the very body be received. Thus much Dionise.

Although I need not here to note any thing, where every sentence, and piece of
the same is so plainly laid forth to our understanding: yet I have thought yt
good not to ouerpasse to advertise thee (reader) that this author, though he
speak thus plain: yet he dissenteth not from the auncie^tes before alleged,
namely Chrysostom and Cyrill. For as they said that this saing of Christ is
no parable, nor figure nor dark speech: but containing the verity, and the
very thing in deed, that by figurs was perfigurated: So this author drawing by
the same line says, that where Christ was accustomed to speak parabolicallie:
yet to give us to understand that yt was neither figure nor parabole that he
spoke of here, but that yt was his flesh verily and substanciallie, that is
under the form of bread and his blood in very deed, that is under the form
of wine. He said, my flesh (which is here taken

Secondarely, where some of them said, yt was very meat because yt saved the
soul: Some other said yt was the meat of the soul, because yt brought to the
soul immortality, and everlasting life: so this Author also says,

If ye obiecte that Chrysostom did use no soche words as this Author does.
For Chrysostom, though he said that yt was the very meat that saved the
soul: yet he did not say that this very meat was under the forms of bread
and wine, as this man does.

Is this, trow you, abhorring from the sainges of the ancient Fathers, though
Chrysostom does not here speak yt by express words as this Author does?
Does not Chrysostom say that this is no parabolicall speech? whereby what
does he else insinuate, but that there is the thing even as yt is spoken of
Christ: which is the very flesh the very meat of the faithful? If this flesh
be verily there, as most certainly yt is, and we do see but the form of bread,
then yt is there under the form of bread.

But to declare unto you that this manner ofspeache and words is not Caro eius
est, quam forma panis opertam in Sacramento accipimus: and sanguis Lib. sent.
Prosp. A plain place for M. Juell.
eius est, quem sub vini specie and sapore potamus. Yt is the flesh of him,
which we receive, covered in the Sacrament under form of bread. And yt is the
blood of him, which we drink under the form and taste of wine.

Do ye not hear in these words of Saint Augustine, the same form of
words, used by Dionise? Do ye not hear the form of bread and Forms of
bread and wine a speech known to S. Augu.
wine? Do ye not hear that Christ's flesh is under the one, and his blood
under the other? Why then do ye stick still in the mire? Why do ye not frame
your selves to be obedient to the faith of Crystes Church? Or do ye think
that ye alone have the true faith, which the Church had not in the time of
saint Augustine? Why do ye persevere, deceauing the simple, and unlearned,
feading them with lies in stead of truth, with (as yt has been your common
slander) that these late writers were full of corrupt doctrine. For ye see
yet that they teach no other doctrine in this matter then the ancient Fathers
did.

And yet in this saing of saint Augustine, there is one thing wourthie of note,
that where the Adversaries travailed to impugn this doctrine of Christ's being
in the Sacrament under the forms of bread and wine, by the alteracion or
change of the significacion of this word, species, Species and forma used
both in one significacio^.
saing that the word does signify the nature or kind of a thing, and not
the outwaade form: Let them here weigh well and consider saint Augustines
manner of speech, who takes here this word, species, applied to the wine, in
the same significacion that he takes, forma, applied to the bread. But this
word, forma, is taken for the outward form, wherefore this word, species,
must needs be so likewise.

And here also I would wish the unlearned that have erred in this matter that
they would be advertised by this good Father and learned man Petra erat
Christus. and, vere foenum est populus: The stone was Christ. and, Truly the
people is grass: to the maintenance of their error, that because these be
spoken figuratiuelie, therefore this also: Caro vere est cibus: My flesh is meat
in very deed. Is spoken figuratiuelie. For if ye will so, then might ye make
these sentences: Tu es Christus filius Dei viui. Thowe art Christ the Et vere
filius Dei erat iste, And truly this man was the Son of God: ye might, I
say, make these sentences, figurative speeches, and so consequently subvert
the sense of holy scripture and all our faith.

Therefore understand by this Author, that they be figurative speeches, or
speeches so used for some agreablenesse of the things compared together, and
do not ouertwartly turn that to impugn the truth, that is brought in example
for the declaracion of the truth, as I heard a Reader do in Cambridge, who
being willing to please the world he lived in, began to impugn the presence
of Christ in the Sacrament, and the Mass. School arguments made for the
opening of truth, produced of a Protestant to confirm a false doctrine.
And to make his matter good in apparaunce, he induced many arguments and
delighted him self very much in them, as by which his matter was much
confirmed and strengthed, as he thought. In the hearing of the arguments,
methought they were soche as I had readde, wherefore the lecture being ended, I
repared to my study, and supposing I had readde the^ in Dunce, I took him in
hand, and turned, and fownde them. Which as Dunce

I thought yt good also not to omit that this Author says that we receive
in the Sacrament the very real, and wholl body of Christ, with veins,
sinnewes, and bones, for that I have heard some of the Jewish Capharnaites
ask, what do we receive Christ's body bones and all? How can yt come wholl
in to my mouth? Ah thou man of little faith, why do thowe doubt, because
thowe imaginest The presence of Christ's body in the Sac. no more impossible
the^ many other his works, which some as impossible to natural knowledge.
manner But thowe errest fowllie. He is there spirituallie, and yet verily, and
really, and no more to be thought impossiblie to thee, than that that body was
born of a virgen: then that yt walked upon the sea: then that yt was
transfigurated on the mount: then that yt rose from death life: then that yt
passed out of the grave the monument being still fast shett and close: then
that yt entered into the Apostles the doors being shett: then that yt ascended
into heaven: all which factes if thowe measure by natural knowledge, they
will seem as impossible as the other. For natural knowledge wondereth and
says: how could the body of Christ being a perfect body. Having flesh and
bones pass out of the sepulcher, the sepulcher not being opened but still
closed and shett? how could that body having (as is said) flesh and bones,
enter into the disciples the doors still being shett? So does yt also say:
How can a man receive the wholl body of Christ with his mouth? But as these
two former things be made possible to thee by faith, That same body in
substance, not the same in quality and condition. But yet the very same wholl
body. So did Chrystome teach that we should take In 10. 1 Co. Hom. 24.
yt saing thus: Et quando id propositum videris, dic tecum, propter hoc corpus
non amplius terra and cinis ego sum, hoc corpus crucifixum, verberatum, morte
victum non est. Hoc idem corpus cruentatum, lancea vulneratum, fontes sanguinis
and aquae, vniuerso orbisalutares scaturiuit. When thowe (says Chrysostom
speaking of the Sacrament) seist that thing set forth, say with thy self, for
this body I am no more earth and ashes. This body crucified and beaten, was
not ouercomed with death. This same very body bloodied and wounded with a
spear, has let run out fountains of water and blood wholesome to all the
world. Thus he.

Note, Reader, that Chrysostom wills you, when ye see the Sacrament The same
body is in the Sacr. that was crucisied.
set forth, to say with your self. This body being crucified, was not
ouercomed with death. This same very body wounded with a spear, sent holsom
streanies of water and blood to the world. Whereby ye are taught, that the
same body is in the Sacrament, that was crucified. And therefore are ye not
willed to say at the seight of the Sacrament: This is a sign, figure or token
of the body, that was

And therefore as that Christ was incarnate we know, and by whose work yt was
done we know, but the manner how that flesh was wrought we know not: That
Christ did rise from death, and that his soul was in Hell we know, but how
yt came to his body again we know not, yet by whom yt was done we know: So,
that Christ's body is in the Sacrament we know, and by whom yt is wrought
that yt is there we know, but how yt is there, more then is said, we know
not. Now if ye will not believe his body to be in the Sacrament, because ye
know not how yt is there, how will ye believe that Christ's soul returned to
his body, seeing ye know not how, yt came there.

Christ made the water wine in Cana Galilaeae, But how we know not. Joan. 2.
For he spoke no extern word, neither did any extern fact toward the turning
Ibid. 6. Matt. 15.
putting to of an other substance, or they the^ selves were increased, or
otherwise, we know not. That Lazarus was dead, and so certe^lie, that he being
four Joan. 11.
days in the grave did stink, we know: but how the soul came to that
putrisieng body, and from whence, and how that stinkinge body was made hole
and sweet, we know not, but by whom yt was done we know.

Therefore the manner of these and many mo being wrought by the divine power, for
somoche as the scripture says that they were done (though the manner of the
doing be unknown) we believe them: So forasmoche as the scripture says that
the slesh of Christ is meat in deed and that we must eat yt, if we will have
life: Let us believe yt, though we know not how yt is so made, nor can
comprehend how soche a body should enter into a We may not be curiouse in
the works of God.
man's mouth. Let us not be curiouse in searching the wonderful works of

THE THREE AND TWENTETH CHAPTER
THe last coople, which shall be brought forth for the expownding and
understanding of this text of S. John, shall be Theophilact. and Beda. Whom I
will breiflie, allege because I would be gone from this to other in same
chapter. Theophilacte says thus: Non enim nudi hominis caro est quae
manducatur, sed Dei, and quae deificare valet, vtpote contemperata Deitati.
Ista etia vere est cibus, eo quod non ad paruum te^pus duret, neque corrumpatur
sicut corruptibilis cibus: sed aeternae vitae sit subsidium. Similiter et potus
sanguinis Domini vere est potus quiae Jn 6. Joan.
non ad tempus sufficit siti sed semper absque siti conseruat, nec indigere
permittit bibentem sicut et ad Samaritanam dicebat: Qui bibit ex aqua, quam ego
dabo, non sitiet. Nam quisquis grattam sancti Spiritus per sumptionem diuinorum
mysteriorum susceperit, neque famem spiritualem, neque sitim patietur qualem
incredult. Yt is not the flesh of a bare man, which is eaten, but of God, and
which is able to make us as yt were

I shall not need to trauaill here to show that he understands this text of
the Sacrament. For that is all ready made so manifest, that yt can not be
denied. And for the presence I will not trouble the reader to make any farther
proof or declaracion here, seeing yt may be well perceived, by that that is
allreadie said, what this Authors meening is in this matter. I will therefore
pass him thus over, and come to Beda, who breiflie writes thus: Dixerat
superius, Qui manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem habet vitam
aeternam. Et vt ostenderet quanta distantia sit inter corporalem cibum, and
spirituale In Joan.
mysterinm corporis and sanguinis sui, adiecit: Caro mea vere est cibus, and
sanguis meus vere est potus. He had said before he that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, has everlasting life. And to the intent he might show
how great difference is between the corporal meat, and the spiritual mystery
of his body and blood, he added: My flesh is meat in deed and my blood is
drink in deed. Thus Beda.

That this Author understands this text of the Sacrament, yt can not be
obscure to any man, seeing that he so plainly says, that Christ to show the
difference of corporal meat, and spiritual mystery of his body and blood
added this saing: My flesh is meat etc.

And let no man take occasion to maintein his error against the presence How
the Sacr. is a mysterte, and what a mysterte is
of Christ in the Sacrament, because he calls yt the mystery of Christ's
body and blood. For a mystery is that covertly contains a thing not by
senseis or common knowledge to be perceived. So this mystery Non exteriori
censenda visu, sed interiori affectu. Not to be judged by outward seight, but
by inward affecte, that is by faith. Hom. 5. Pasch.
Wherefore Wherefore yt is very well called a mystery, for that yt contains the
very body and Christ, which the senseis can not perceive.

eaten, and drunk, they become Apostaties, and forsakers of Christ's religion

Do ye not here see two manners of eatinge of the flesh of Christ, and Two
manners of eating the flesh of Christ.
drinking of his blood, the one to eat and drink them verily, which if yt
be done with a feigned heart, or when they have so done, they forsake Christ's
faith (as many of late years have done and do in this matter of the
Sacrament) they, though they have received Christ's very flesh and blood in the
Sacrament: yet Christ does not dwell in them. Then there is an other manner of
eating Christ's body (says S. Augustine) which is a spiritual manner of
receiving by true and right faith, and fervent charity. And he that eats
Christ's flesh after this manner, he has Christ dwelling in him. But (as yt is
before said) he that eats Christ's flesh spirituallie, has Christ dwelling
in him spiritually: But he that eats Christ's very flesh in the Sacrament
with perfect faith, and godly charity, he has Christ

And here I wish the Reader, diligently to note that S. Augustine says that
evil men do eat the flesh of Christ, which invincible proves the real and
substanciall flesh of Christ in the Sacrament. For otherwise the evil man can
not eat the flesh of Christ.

Thus ye see to what purpose I have joined these two holy learned Fathers
together though they be both of the latin Church, that ye may Two ways of
dwelling in Christ, that is spirituallie and naturally.
perceive the abiding and dwelling of Christ in us to be not only spiritual
by faith and charity, but also natural by the receiving of Christ's very flesh

THE FIVE AND TWENTETH CHAPTER proceadeth in the exposition of the same by
Chrysostom and saint Gregory.
Chrysostom very breiflie expowndeth this text on this wise. Qui manducat meam
carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet, and Hom. 45. in Joan.
ego in eo. Quod dicit, vt cumipso se admisceri ostendat. He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him.

What he meeneth by this (mingled) if ye remember what is alleged of him
before, that shall ye soon perceive, and understand therewith that Chrisostom
according to our two manners of receiving, makes mention of two manners of being
in Christ, saing thus: Vt autem non solum per dilectionem, sed reipsa in illam
carnem conuertamur, per cibum id efsicitur, quem nobis largitus est. That Jbid.
we should (says Chrysostom) not only by love, but in very deed be turned
into his flesh, that is done by the meat which he has granted us.

Where note that he teaches, that we be turned into Christ two manner of ways:
by love, which is the spiritual manner, by the which we be spiritually Two
manners of being or dwelling in Christ.
in Christ, even dwelling in him (as saint John says) Deus charitas est and
qui manet in charitate in Deo manet, and Deus in co. God is charity, and he
that dwells in charity, dwells in God, and God in him: And also in very
deed, when we woorthilie eat his flesh, which is our hauenly meat, by which
meat (says Chrysostom) yt is brought to effect, and that not by an
imaginacion, but in very deed.

Thus ye perceive that these be two sondrie effects, to dwell in Christ
spirituallie, and to dwell in him in very deed (as Chrysostom says) or
naturally (as S. Hilary says) which two sondrie effects, have two sondrie
causes: which be to eat Christ's flesh spirituallie, and to eat id reallie,
or in

But now come we to S. Gregory joined with Chrysostom who upon Job says
thus: Natus Dominus in praesepi ponitur, vt significaretur, quod sancta
animalia, Greg. in Job cap. 6.
quae ieiuna diu apud legem inuenta sunt, incarnationis eius foeno satiarentur.
Praesepe natus impleuit, qui eibum semetipsum mortalium mentibus praebuit,
dicens: Qui comedit carnem, and bibit sanguinem meum, in me manet, and ego in
eo. Owre Lord being born is laid in the maunger that yt should be signified,
that the holy beasts, which long under the law were fownde fasting, should
be filled with the heie of his incarnacion. Being borne he filled the maunger,
who gave him self meat to the minds of the mortal, sainge: He that eats my
flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. Thus S. Gregory.

In this sentence ye hear that Christ gave himself meat to mortal men, and
that according to our text: he that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood

But if the Adversary reclame and say, that S. Gregory says Christ gave
Objection out of S. Gregory answered.
himself meat to the minds of the faitfull, and that therefore he meneth not of
any corporal receipt for the mind takes none soche. Thereto I say that
truth yt is, that saint Gregory says that Christ gives himself meat, to
the minds of the mortal: but I pray you, how take ye the mind here? do ye
not take yt for the soul? and do not all the holy writers say, that the
flesh of Christ in the Sacrae^mt is the meat of the soul? does not
Chrysostom say, that yt is verus cibus qui saluat animam. Yt is the very meat
in deed that saves the soul? Why then, what do ye win by this that ye say,
yt is the meat of the soul, seeing that the holy Fathers have so plainly
testified, that the very substanciall body of Christ being in very deed
received in the blessed Sacrament is the meat of the soul? What then does S.
Gregory help your cause, seeing he says none otherwise then they which have

And that you shall perceive, that he agrees with the rest acknowledging two
manner of receiptes of Christ's body and blood as they do, ye shall hear him
open himself. Quid namque sit sanguis agni, non iam audiendo; sed bibendo Greg.
in Homil. Pasch.
dedicistis, qui super vtrumque postem ponitur, quando non solum ore corporis,
sed etiam ore cordis hauritur. For what the blood of the lamb is, ye have not
only learned by hearing, but also in drinking. Which blood is putt on both
the posts

Se ye not here S. Gregory when he says, the blood of the lamb is Christ's
blood drok with mouth of body and mouth of heart.
drunk both with the mouth of the body and with the mouth of the heart? Does
he not plainly distinct and disseuer, these two receiptes, as the receipt of
the blood of the lamb with the mouth of the body to be the corparall
receipt, and with the mouth of the heart to be the spiritual receipt, which
although they be distincted receiptes: yet he wished them in this homely to be
joined together, for then we shall be sure to have the blood upon both our
posts to our more sauegarde against the destroier. Yt may be but upon one
post for as he says not much after: Qui sic Redemptoris sui sanguinem sumit
vt imitari passionem eius necdum velit, in vno post sanguinem posuit. He that
does so receive the blood of his Redemer, that as yet, he will not follow his
passion, he has put the blood upon one post.

Thus we understand by S. Gregory not only two manner of receiptes of
Christ's flesh and blood, but also we be taught by him that they may

THE SIX AND TWENTETH CHAPTER Continues this expositon by S. Cyrill and Lyra.
TO add yet mo witnesses how this text is to be taken, S. Cyrill expowndeth
yt in this wise: Qui manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum Jn Joan. cap. 15.
sangumem, in me manet and ego in eo. Vnde considerandum est, quod non
habitudme solum quae per charitat em intelligitur, Christum nobis inesse, verum
etiam participatione naturali. Nam quemadmodum si quis igne liquefactam ceram,
alij cerae similiter liquefactae ita miscuerit, vt vnum quid ex vtrisque factum
videatur: Sic communicatione corporis and sanguinis Christi, ipse in nobis est,
and nos in ipso. Non poterat enim aliter corruptibilis haec natura corporis, ad
incorruptibilitatem, and vitam traduci, nisi naturalis vitae corpus ei
coniungeretur. Owre Savior Christ says. He that eats my flesh, and
drinks Two ways of Christ's being in us: that is spirituallie, and
naturally.
my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. Whereupon (says Cyrill) yt is to be
considered, that not only by inward disposition, which is understood by
charity, Christ to be in us: but also by natural participation. For as if
any man would mengle wax that is melted by the fire, with other wax that is
likewise melted, so that of both there may be perceived to be made one: So by
the parta king of the body and blood of Christ, he is in us, and we in him.
For this corruptible nature of the body, could not otherwise be brought to
incorruptiblitie and life, except the body of natural life should be
conioined to yt. Thus Cyrill.

What can the Adversaries say to this Author? is there no other receipt of
Chrysts body, but a spiritual receipt? yes, this ancient father, as the
other ancient fathers have done before, says, that Christ is not in us only
by charity, wherbie he understands the spiritual manner, but also by
natural participacion, that is, by the eating and drinking of natural flesh
and blood. And that this should not be taken for a fantasy he says that
Christ's flesh is so in us, and we in him, as two waxes melted and put together
be made one. So also (as S. Hilarie says before) as God the Sone, and God the
Father be one in substance: So we by this receipt of Christ be one with him,
and by him also joined to the godheade. I need not to note then to you that
Cyrill understands this text of the blessed Sacrament, where the words
wholly fownde A plain place of S. Cyrill for the procl.
to that purpose. The real presence also is sufficiently taught, when he
says that we do partake the natural flesh and blood of Christ, whose
natural flesh is not nor can be received, but where yt is reallie present. The
effect of Lira ne of the lower house to show his understanding of this text.
Thus he says writing upon yt: Hic probat quodda^ suppositu^. Dixerat enim,
quod ma^ducatio dat vita^. Istud probat hic, quia illud, per qnod aliquis
vniture principio viuificatiuo, illud dat vita^. Hoc patet in vita corporali
etc. Here Lyra in 6. Joan.
he proves a thing supposed. For he had said, that the eating of this flesh
gives life. This he proves here. For that by the which a man is united to
the principle that makes things to live, gives life. This appears in the
corporal He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I
in him. that is to say, he is united to me. This Author proceadeth as you
have heard him begin, where he taught that Christ's flesh was so verily
meat, that yt was in the Sacrament not as in a sign, but reallie and in very
deed. To the which flesh of Christ (says he) we be united by the Sacrament,
that is by the receiving of the Sacrament wherein being reallie Christ's very
flesh we be united to the same. For if yt be not there, we cannot be united to
yt by the Sacrament. For an vnio^ is the making of two things or mo, one,
which things must be present so to be united. Wherefore the body of Christ is
reallie in the Sacrament or else there can be no vnio^. What manner of union is
wrought by the Sacrament S. Hilary has taught us, that yt is a natural vnio^,
that is, an vnio^ of Christ's natural flesh and substance, and of our natural
flesh and substance, which both by this Sacrrme^t be made one, so that Christ
dwells in us, and we in him. If any of the Adversaries would (as they will
do as well upon a word, as a whole sentence) that this Author says, that
Christ is the beginning of the spu^al life, wherefore we be joined to him
spirituallie, for the having of that spu^al life, and not corporal life: it is
very manifest, I say, that we live not corporally by the Sacrament but this
corporal life is maintained by other food. But the life that we have by the
receipt of Christ in the Sacrament is the eternal life, which is called the
spsial life, as distincted from the corporal and temporal life. Temporale^
vita^ sine illo habere homines possu^t, aeterna^ vero omnino no^ possu^t. Men
may have (says S. Augu.) the temporal life without the Sacrament but the
eternal life by no means can they have. For this meat suffers the temporal
death to come to us, but (as Chrysostom says) yt expels death, meening the
eternal death Of the which S. August. says. Quantu^ pertinet ad mortem
ista^ visibile^ et corporale^, nunquid nos no^ morimur, qui ma^ducamus pane^ de
caelo de scendente^? Sic sunt mortui et illi, quemadmodu^ et nos sumus
morituri. Quantu^ attinet, vt dixi, ad morte^ huius corporis visibile^ atque
carnale^. Quantu^attinet Aug. tract. n Joan. 26.
ad morte^ illa^ de qua terret Dn^s quia mortui sunt patres istorum. Manducauit
Manna et Moses, manducauit Manna et Aaron, ma^ducauit Manna et Phinees,
manducauerant ibi multi, qui Dn^o placuerunt et mortui non sunt. For somoche as
does pertein to this visible and corporal death do not we die, which do eat
the bread descending from heaven? So also be they dead, even as we also shall
die. for somoche as pertains to the visible and corporal death of this
body, as I have said, for somoche as pertains to that death from the which
our Lord does fear us, that the fathers of these be dead, Moses also did
eat

In all which sainges ye perceive that by the receipt of Christ in the
Sacrament, we have life, not corporal and temporal, but eternal. Neither by
yt do we eschape temporal and corporal death but eternal death, So that you
se the eternal life, set against visible, corporal, and temporal life, as a
spiritual life, which spiritual and eternal life is by faith and holy
conversation answerablie begone in this life, in owre inward man, and in our
bodies by the receipt of Christ's living flesh (as he himself says) Ego
resuscitabo eum in nouissimo die. I will raise him in the last day. Ego
(says Cyrill) id est corpus meum quod comedetur, resuscitabo eum. I, that is,
my body, which shall be eaten, shall raise him up in the last day. And
again he says: Ego ergo, qui homo factus sum, per meam carnem in nouissimo
die comedentes resuscitabo, I therefore Christ's body, shall raise our bodies,
(says S. Cyrill in the person of Christ) who am made man, by my slesh will

THE SEVEN AND TWENTETH CHAP. Abides in the same exposition by Theophilact,
and Rupertus Tuicien.
THeophilacte upon the text now in hand says thus: Hoc loco discimus
Sacramentum Communionis. Nam qui edit, and bibit carnem and sanguinem In 6.
Joan.
Domini, in ipso manet Domino, and Dominus in ipso. Contemperatioenim fit noua,
and super rationem, ita vt sit Deus in nobis, and nos in Deo. Non audis
terribilem auditum? Non Deum nudum manducamus, tangi enim nequit, and
incorporeus est, and neque occulis, neque manibus apprehendi potest. Iterum
nudi hominis caro nihil prodesse potest. Sed quia Deus vniuit sibi carnem
secundum ineffabilem contemperationem, viuisica est and caro, non quod in Dei
naturam transierit (absit) sed ad similitudinem candentis ferri, quod and
ferrum manet, and ignis ostendit operationem: sic ergo and Domini caro manens,
caro viuisica est, sicut Dei caro. In this place we learn the Sacrament of
Communion. For he that eats and drinks the flesh and blood of our Lord,
dwells in the same our Lord, and our Lord in him. For there is a new
contemparacion Not God alone, spirituallie but the flesh of Christ verily and
also corporally receaeued in the Sacr.
made, and that above reason, so that God should be in us, and we in him.
Do thowe not hear a terrible hearing? We do not eat bare God, for he can
not be touched, and is without body, and can neither with eyes, nor with
hands be apprehended. Again the flesh of a bare man nothing profits, but God
has united to himself this flesh after an unspeakable contemperacion, yt is
flesh causing life, as the flesh of God, not that yt is gone into the nature of
God (God forbid) but to the likeness of fiery Iron, which still remains
Iron, and shows the operacion of fire: So therefore the flesh of our Lord
also, remaining still flesh, is quickening or causing to live, as the flesh of
God. Thus much Theophil. The flesh of Christ gives life and yet remains
still natural flesh.


Who in the first front of his sentence testifies by express words, that
this text is to be understood of the Sacrament. For he says: that in this
place we learn the Sacrament of Communion. In the rest he trauaileth to set
forth the which has the operacion of fire, and yet is still very natural
Iron: So the flesh of Christ has the power to give life as the flesh of God:
and yet yt remains

All which process why has he made, but to declare to us, that the flesh of
Christ being received of us (for that therbie Christ dwells in us, and we in
him) we have that in us, which is able to give us life, because (being the
flesh of God) yt has soch power. And so he does not only testify, this
scripture to speak of the Sacrament, but also he testifies the very flesh of
Christ, that is joined to the Godhead, to be there present, and so received and
eaten to give life. Of the which matter he has so manifestly allreadie upon
the scriptures before alleged spoken his faith that yt can not here be called
in question whether yt be so understood of him in this place or no. Wherefore I
leave this author as one most plainly showing himself, and for the further
exposition of the text I will hear the testimony of Rupertus who making a
conference betwixt the godly assured and certain promise of Christ, and the
wicked and false promise of the serpent to our Mother Eve, says thus: Qua^to
enim suauior est haec vox (Qui mandacat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem,
in me manet and ego in illo) illectione illa, qua Serpens susurrauit: Comedite,
and eritis sicutdij? Rupertus Tuicien.
qui vtique de suo non dabat, sed rapinam facere suadebat. Hic autem non
qualecunque suum sed suam carnem, and suum sanguinem dat. In illis qui non
credunt, and non credentes, ore tamen, Sacramentum percipiunt, cibus and potus
iste operatur iudicium. How much more pleasant is this voice (He that eats
my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him) then that
enticement, which the serpent whispered. Eat and ye shall be as Gods? Who
yet gave nothing of his own, but moved them to do robbery. But this (mening
Christ) gives not every manner thing of his, but even his flesh and his blood.
In them that believe not, and yet not believing, with their mouth receive the
Sacrament, this meat and drink unto them woorketh judgment. Thus Rupertus.

As in other, so in this author ye may perceive, that he understands this
scripture (as the rest do) of the Sacrament. For he says that they which
without faith receive the Sacrament, receive yt to judgment. Which saing as
yt delights me, and reioiceth me, for that I see soche concord, consent, and
agreement among the Fathers, and Christ's Parliament house, all affirming

As for the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, there is none that is
familiarely acquainted with this author, but knows that the confesses
Rupertus most plainly avouches the presence.
and avouches the very real presence of Christ in the Sacrament not only
in this place, when he says, that Christ gives us no small thing of his, but
he gives us his flesh and his blood: But also upon this chapter in many
places. Of the which for the better creditt to be given by the reader, I will
here bring in one, and hereafter diverse other shall be brought forth. Thus he
says: Proinde cunctis figurarum vel similitudinum Li. 6. coment. in Euang.
Joan.
nebulis amotis, non corpus quodlibet, non corpus Christi quod est Ecclesia,
sed illud corpus Domini, quod pro nobis traditum est, nos manducare, and illum
sanguinem, qui pro nobis fusus est in remissionem peccatorum, nos bibere,
indubitanter credimus. Et quod fecit ipse, hoc idem in co^memorationem ipsius
scimus, et been scimus nos facere, id est, carne^ ipsius manducare, and
sanguinem bibere. Therefore all clouds of sigures and similitudes but the same
body of our Lord that was betrayed for us, and that same blood that was shed
for us in the remission of Sins. And we know, and know well, that we do
even the same very thing in the remembrance of him, that he himself did, that
is, that we do eat his flesh, and drink his blood. Thus he.

Has not this Author taught the presence of Christ in the Sacrament plainly
enough? I Suppose he has spoken so plain that he shall be shent for his
labor, and get little good will of the Proclamer, but hatred ( For veritas
odium parit, truth causes hatred) and so shall be cast out as a man not
worthy to be heard, and yet a man as well learned, and as well esteemed, as the
Proclamer, and not yesterdaie born, but one that lived almost five hundredth
years agone. Well in this his plain manner of writing, and testifieng of the
faith that was in the Church in those days let us examine him, what he does
say, that Rupertus his saing conserred with other more ancient fathers
other Fathers have not said before. First he says that we must remove, all

THE EIGHT AND TVENTETH CHAP. Ends
SVfficient testimony being produced for the right and rtue understanding of
this text, I have determined now to end the same with this one only coople
mo, whom I will breiflie alleadg and ouerpasse. The first of these shall be
Haymo, who alleging this scripture declares well how yt is to be
understood. For speaking of the Haim. in. 10. 1. Cor.
flesh and body of Christ, he says thus: Sicut illa caro corpus Christi est,
it a iste panis transit in corpus Christi. Nec sunt duo corpora, sed vnum
corpus. Diuinitatis enim plemtudo, quae fuit in illo replet and istu^ pane^,
and ipsa diuinitas Verbi quae implet coelu^ et terram, and omnia quae in eis
sunt, ipsa replet corpus Christi, quod a multis sacerdotibus per vniuersis The
God head of the Son fills the body of Christ sanctisied by the preistes
orbe^ sanctificatur. Et facit vnu^ Christi corpus esse. Et sicut ille panis
and sanguis in corpus Christi tra^seunt: ita omnes qui in Eccle sia digne
comedu^t illud, vnu^ corpus Christi sunt, sicut and ipse dicit: Qui ma^ducat
carne^ meam, and bibit sanguine^ meu^, in me manet, and ego in eo. As that
flesh is the body of Christ; even so this bread passes in to the body of
Christ. Neither be they two bodies, but one body. For the plenitude be in
them, the same does fill the body of Christ, which is sanctified of many

And here note, Reader, against the carnal disputers that allthough he say,
that the body of Christ be consecrated of many preistes through the whole The
body of Christ consecrated of many preistes is but one body.
world: yet he says not that they be many bodies of Christ, but only one
body. And shows also how that is brought to pass, and who is the woorker
of yt. The Godhead (says he) that is fully in Christ, makes this to be one
body. Thus when he had showed how great a thing the Sacrament is in yt self,
then he begins to show what yt is toward us, and what yt woorketh in us if
we receive yt woorthilie. As the bread (says he) is become the body of
Christ: So all they that woorthilie eat the same are the body of Christ. And
to prove this, he alleges the saing of Christ, which we have in hand: He
that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him.

So then in this discourse yt is easily perceived, that he teaches the bread
to be turned into the body of Christ, that the body of Christ is in the
Sacrament, and not alone, but with the Godhead in yt, and so perfect God and
man: that though the body of Christ be consecrated of many preistes: yet by
the power of the Godhead yt is wrought, to whom nothing is impossible. Finally
that we receiving this body of Christ in the Sacrament, according to Christ's
saing, we may dwell in Christ, and he in us. And thus yt is manifest that this
Author understands this text of the Sacrament.

Now this being plain, we will breiflie hear his yocke fellow, whom for this
time we make Euthymius. Thus writes he. Si (inquit) de vno corpore, and Jn
Matthew. 26.
sanguine omnes fideles participamus, omnes vnum sumus per ipsam horum
mysteriorum participationem, and in Christo omnes, and Christus in omnibus. Qui
edit (inquit) meam carnem, and bibit meum sangumem, in me manet, and ego in eo.
Verbum siquidem per assumptionem The flesh that the Son of God took by in
carn. is united to us by the Sacra.
carni vuitum est, haec rursus caro vnitur nobis per participationem. If all we
(says Euthymius) do partake of one body, and one blood, all we are one by
participacion He (says Christ) that eats my body, and drinks, my blood,
dwells in me and I in him. For truly the Son of God by taking of flesh
upon him, is united to the flesh: Again this flesh is united to us by
participacion. Thus Euthym.

This sentence is but short, but yt is effectuouse. But hasting to end the
Aplain proof of the presence against the proclamer:
him, that flesh again is united to us by participacion. Wherein I note that the
same flesh that was united to the Son of God, the very same and none other is
united to us. The very natural flesh was united to the Godhead. Wherefore the
very natural flesh of Christ is united to us by participacion. That yt is the
same flesh, this Author well shows when he speaking of the flesh united to
the Godhead says: Haec rursus caro: This flesh again: not this flesh
spirituallie, but this flesh that was united to the Godhead, which was natural
flesh. The mean how this flesh is united to us he says is by participacion.
Where do we participate yt? in the Sacrament. Then this flesh is in the
Sacrament.

THE NINE AND TWENTETH CHAP. EXpowndeth
THe text that follows in the sixth of S. John is this: Sicut misit me viuens
Pater, and ego vino propter Patre^. Et qui ma^ducat me, and ipse viuet propter
me. As the living Father sent me, and I live for the Father: Eue^ so he Joan. 6.
that eats me shall live by the means of me. Not mindinge to tarry upon this,
as to declare how we eating Christ do live by him, for that this is (I trust)
sufficiently declared already, I will no more now trauaill but to show
that, that yet was not declared, namely how Christ lives by the Father,
Which matter S. Augustine does so well open that yt satisfies me: and so, I
trust, yt will do the Reader.

Thus he says upon the same text: In qua sententia, si recte accipiuntur haec
verba, ita dixit: Sicut me misit viuens Pater, and ego viuo propter Patrem: and
qui manducat me, and ipse viuet propter me. Ac si diceret vt ego viuam propter
Patrem, id est, ad illum tanquam Aug. tra^c. 26 in Joan.
ad maiorem vitam meam referam, exmanitio mea fecit, in qua me misit: vt autem
quisquam viuat propter me, participatio facit, qua manducat me. Ego it aque
humiliatus viuo propter Patrem: ille erectus viuit propter me. Si autem ita
dictum est, Viuo propter Patrem, quia ipse de illo, non ille de ipso est, sine
detrimento aequalitatis dictum est: Nec tamen dicendo, Et qui manducat me, ipse
viuet propter me, eandem suam, and nostram aequalitatem significauit, sed
gratiam Mediatoris ostendit. In which sentence, if these words be rightly
taken, thus he said: As the living Father sent me, and I live for the Father:
Even so he that eatethme, lives by the means of me. As though he should say,
that I live for the Father, that is, that I refer my life to him as to a
greater, the abasing or demission of my selfmade yt, in the which he sent me.
But that any man lives by me, the participacion makes yt, in the which he
eats me. I therefore humbled do live for the Father: and he exalted lives by
the means of me. If yt be so said, I live for the Father, because the Son is
of the Father, and not the Father of the Son: yt is said without detriment
of the equality. Neither yet saing: and he that eats me, lives by the means
of me, has he signified his equality and owrs to be all one, but he has
showed the grace of the Mediator. Thusfarre S. Augustine.

In whose sentence ye see how the saing of Christ may be vprightlie
understood, either of his Godhead, or of his manhead. Of his Godhead yt may
be said, I live for the Father, not that the Son, whoys born equal to the
Father, and is from ever with the Father, being one in nature and substance
Pater mayor me est, The Father is greater then I. who being so was bettered by
the Father, and lived by the Father the fountain of all life in all living
creatures.

And that I break not the order that I have hitherto observed, I will ioin to
saint Augustine being of the one side of Christ's Parliament house, saint
Cyrill an ancient of the other side of the house, who says thus: In 6. Joan.
cap. 18.
Sicut misit me Pater, and ego viuo propter Patrem, and qui manducat me, viuet
propter me. Cum missum se dicit Filius, nihil aliud quam incarnatum se, vult
significare. Consueuit autem Christus quae vim excedunt humanam, ea Patri
tribue re. Humiliauit enim seipsum factus homo, and ideo conuenientem homini
mensuram non recusat. Pater (inquit) qui manet in me ipse facit opera. Patri
ergo etiam incarnationis operationem, quae vim excedit humanam, vt solet,
accommodat. Hoc ergo est quod dicit: Quemadmodum ego factus sum homo voluntate
Patris, and viuo propter Patrem. quia scilicet e vita, quae secundum essentiam
est, naturaliter, emanaui, and genitoris naturam ad vngucm conseruo, vt and ego
naturaliter vita sim: ita qui manducat meam carnem ipse viuet propter me, totus
ad me reformatus, qui vitasum, and viuisicare possum. Se vero manducari dicit,
cum sua caro manducatur, quia Verbum caro factum est, non naturarum confusione,
sed ineffabili illo vnionis modo. As the living Father has sent me, and I live
for the Father: Even so he that eats me, shall live by the means of me. When
the Son says that he is sent, he will nothing else signify, but himself to
be incarnated Christ uses to attribute to the Father says things as exce^
man's power.
For Christ has used to attribute soche things as exceade the power of man,
to the Father. He has humbled him self being made man, and therefore he does not
refuse the measure convenient to man. Therefore the work of the incarnacion,
which passes the power of man, he does (as he was woute) apply yt to the
Father. This is yt therefore that he says Even as I am made man by the will of
the Father, and do live for the Father, because I have flowed out naturally of
that life, which is of very nature, and I do conserve the nature of my Father
in every poincte. so that I am also naturally life: Even so he that eats my
flesh, he Christ is eaten when (...) is eaten.
shall live by me altogether reformed unto me who am life, and am able to make
to live. He says himself to be eaten, when his flesh is eaten. For the word
is made flesh not by confusion of natures, but by an unspeakable manner of
union. Thus far S. Cyrill.

As the text does speak of two manner of lives, that is of the life of Christ
by the Father, and of the life of us by Christ: So does this author declare,
both that Christ flowing from the nature of the Father, who is life him self,
and having and being the same very nature: is life him self, and lives by the
Father, and also that we eating him, for somoche as he is the very life, shall
live by him. Where note that Cyrill says that Christ says him self to be
eaten, when his flesh is eaten. whereby he signifies to us that the flesh of
Christ is verily eaten. For if yt were spoken of the spiritual eating of
belief, he would not transfer Christ only, or so apply yt to yt, as by
yt to come to whole Christ. As a man may say, I am whole when either hand,
or head or some membre, (as Cyrill says) does say him self to be eaten, when
his flesh is eaten, to whom yt apperteineth proprely to be eaten, and not to
the God head.

For (as Theophilacte says) Deum nudum non manducamus, tangi enim nequit, and
In. 6. Joan,
incorporeus est, and neque oculis neque manibus apprehendi potest. We do not
eat bare God, for he can not be touched, and he has no body, neither can he
be apprehended with eyes nor hands, So then as the spiritull eating of As to
the Godhead to be believed: So to the flesh yt proprelie apperteineth to be,
eaten.
Christ by belief most proprely does appertein to the Godhead, and by yt is
applied to the wholl person of Christ: So to the flesh of Christ yt
apperteineth most proprely to be verily and really eaten, and by yt (for
somoche as the Godhead is inseparably annexed to yt, (as Cyrill says (non
enim abest Vnigenitus, the only begotten son of God is not absent from yt)
we do say that wholl Qui manducat me, he that does eat me, not dividing the
Godhead from the manheade, but me, that is wholl Christ.

Being thus then, made manifest, that by this text also Christ taught us the
eating of his very flesh, which can not otherwise be then in the Sacrament,
wherbie yt is consequent that this text is to be understood of the Sacrament:
I will procead to seek the understanding of other textes following.

THE THIRTETH CHAP. BEGINS EXPOSITION of the next text by saint Ambrose and
Chrysostom.
YT follows in the sixte chapter of saint John: Hic est panis qui de caelo
descendit, non sicut manducauerunt patres vestri Manna in deserto, and mortui
sunt. Qui manducat hunc pane^ viuet in aeternu^. This is the bread that camme
down from heaven, not as yower Joan. 6.
bread, shall live ever. Owre savior Christ, who began to declare this great
mystery to the Jews, and notwithstanding their murmuring, did open to them not
only, that yt was possible, that his flesh should be eaten, but also
necessary, and now in the last sentence as in other before he had made
mention of the same, and had declared the benefit, and great commodity that
should ensewe to them that would eat his flesh, namely that they should have
life everlasting: Now as yt were after a disputacion he makes a conclusion or
determinacio^ of the matter, saing: This is the bread that came from heaven.

The Jews (as in the beginning of this sixth chapter, yt does appear)
although they had seen the great miracle of our Savior Christ wrought in the
multiplieng of the bread, and in feading so great a multitude whith so few
loaves, that then they could say, this is the very Prophet, which should come
into the world, whereby they meant Messiah, and therefore would then have made him
a king: yet shortly after like an unthankful and unmindful people some
notable sign at Christ's hand, as though they had never seen any, and therefore
said: Quod tu facis signum, vt videamus and credamus? What sign Joan 6.
they said: Patres nostri manducanerunt Ma^na in deserto, sicut scriptu^ est:
Panem de caelo dedit eis. Owre fathers have eaten Manna in the wilderness, as
yt is written he gave them bread from heaven to eat.

To determine directly against them, and that they should perceive, that Manna
was but a figure of this very bread, that came from heaven (For Manna gave not
life to the eaters of yt, but this bread does) therefore he said Effect of the
Sacrament everlasting life.
Not as yower fathers did eat Manna and be dead, but he that eats of this
bread shall live sor ever. He well declares what death their fathers died, who
did eat Manna, that is the everlasting death, not all that did eat Manna died
that death but their fathers in unbelief. And as they through unbelief died an
everlasting death: so they that shall eat this bread with true belief shall
live an everlasting life. But yt shall be to the purpose to hear the holy
Fathers how they understand this text* of the which the first coople shall be
saint Ambrose and Chrysostom. Saint Ambrose says thus: Reuera mirabile li.
8. de initiand.
est quod Manna Deus plueret patribus, and quotidiano coeli pascebantur
alimento. Vnde dictum est: Panem Angelorum manducauit homo. Sed tamen illum
panem qui manducauerunt in deserto mortui sunt. Ista autem esca, quam accipis,
iste panis viuus, qui de caelo descendit vitae aeternae substantiam
administrat. Et quicunque panem hunc manducauerit, non morietur in aeternum.
and corpus Christi est. Truly yt is merueilouse that God did rain Manna to the
fathers, and that they were fed with the daily food from heaven. Wherefore
yt is said: Man has eaten the bread of Angels. but for all that they that
have eaten that bread in desert, are dead. This meat that thowe take, this
bread of life, that came down from heaven, does ministre the substance of
everlasting life, and who soever shall eat this bread, he shall not die for
ever, and yt is he body of Christ. Thus far he.

What this bread is that descended from heaven, and what the profit and
benefitt of yt is, saint Ambrose has in this his saing declared, the bread is
the body of Christ (says he) which body is the meat that the faithful
does take, and the benefit of this so taken is everlasting life.

Wherefore saint Ambrose being so plain, I will bring in his yocke follow
Chrysostom, who has (according to the counsel of saint Paul) not carried
the yocke with the unfaithful, but with the faithful, which is the yocke of
Christ, which, as he himself says, is sweet. Thus he says: Dicit ergo: Qui
manducat carnem meam in morte non peribit, neque damnabitur. Sed non de communi
dicit resurrectione (siquidem omnes resurgent) sed de clara illa and gloriosa
quae 2. Cor. 6. Math. 11. Homiti. 46 in Joan.
praemium meretur. Patres vestri manducauerunt Manna in deserto, and mortui
sunt. Qui manducat hunc panem, viuet in aeternum. Frequenter idem repetit, vt
auditorum animis imprimatur. Vltima enim haec erat doctrina, vt resurrectionis,
and vitae aeternae fidem confirmaret. Quocirca post vitae aeternae promissionem
resurrectionem proponit, postquam illa^ futuram ostendit, and hoc vnde constat?
a scripturis, ad qua^ eos semper relegat, vt inde erudiantur. Cum autem dare
vitam mundo dicit, in aemulationem eos adducit, vtsi aliorum bono mouentur,
nolint ipsi excludi. Frequenter autem Mannae meminit, and differentiam
conferendo ad fidem allicit. Nam si possibile fuit vt quadraginta annos sine
messibus and frumento, and aliis ad victum necessarijs viuerent, long magis
nunc cum ad mato^ venerint. Nam si in illis figuris sine labor expositum
colligebant: nunc profecto magis, vbi nulla mors, and verae vitae fruitio.
Vitae autem vbique meminit. Nam eius trahunur cupiditate, and nihil suauius
quam non mori. Etenim in veteri Testamento longa vita, and multi dies
promittebantur: Nunc vero non simpliciter vitae longitudo, sed vita sine fine
promittitur He says therefore, he that eats my flesh, shall not perish in
death, neither We cometo greater things in the Sacr* then the Jews did in
Ma^na.
possible that they should live forty years without haruestes, and other
necessares to their living: much more now when they are comed to greater
things. For

Albeit Chrysostom in this sentence makes no great mention of the Sacrament in
open and express words: yet following the sense in the beginning of this part
of this chapter, which by his judgment is of the Sacrament, if yt be well
considered he says sufficiently: as also where he says that if yt were
possible for the Jews to live forty year without harvest or corn much more
now when we be commed to greater things. Manna was a great miracle as saint
Ambrose says, and if they did well receive yt, they did Ma^na and the
Sacrament compared.
receive spirituallie Christ. Then if our Sacrament be (as the Sacramentaries
say)

Wherefore by these words of Chrysostom that we be comed to greater things,
is signified to us that the Sacrament co^teineth a woorthier thing, and a thing
of greater miracle, then Manna was, which also was a miraculouse thing, which
thing contained in the Sacrament is the very body of Christ, of the which
Manna was the figure, of the which more shall be said in the third book.
But here to be short if the real presence of Christ's body be not in the
Sacrament, then is Manna a woorthier and greater thing then yt by all means, as
by that, that is already said yt may appear. And so shall Chrysostom be
reproved of an untruth for that we are not

THE ONE AND THIRTITH CHAP. PROCEAdeth
LEt us hear the testimony of an other coople for the understanding of this
text. S. Hierom says: Si ergo panis, qui de coelo descendit, corpus Hieron. ad
Hedibiq. 2
est Domini, and vinum quod Discipulis dedit sanguis illius est noui
Testamenti, qui pro multis effusus est, in remissionem peccatorum, iudaicas
fabulas repellamus, and ascendamus cum Domino coenaculum magnum stratum, atque
mundatum, and accipiamus ab eo sursum calicem noui Testamenti, ibique cum eo
Pascha celebrantes, inebriemur ab eo, vino sobrietatis. Non enim est regnum Dei
esca, and potus, sed iusticia and gaudium, and pax in Spiritu sancto. Nec
Moses dedit nobis panem verum, sed Dominus Jesus, ipse conuiua, and conuiuium,
ipse comedens, and qui comeditur. If therefore the bread that descended from
heaven, be the body of our Lord, and the wine that he gave to his Disciples
be his blood of the new Testament, which was shed for The bread that
descended from heaven is the body of our Lord.
many in remission of sins, let us repel and cast from us Judicial fables,
and let us ascend with our Lord in to the great parlour paued and made but
our Lord Jesus, he is the feaster, and he is the feast, he is he that eats,
and is eaten. Thus far S. Hierom.

By these words we are after the understanding of S. Hierom, fully Christ
is the feast and the feester.
enstructed what the bread is, that our Savior Christ speaks of when he
said: This is the bread that descended from heaven. Yt is (says S. Hierom)
the body of our Lord, and the wine is the blood that was shed for many in
the remission of sins. By the which words he does not only teach us,
that this scripture is to be understood of the Sacrament, but by the same
also he has testified with other holy Fathers the presence of Christ's body
in the Sacrament. For in the beginning he said, that the bread that descended
from heaven is the body of our Lord, and to show us where he meant yt to be,
in the that not Moses did give the true bread, but our Lord Jesus, he is the
feaster and the feast, he is he that does eat, and is eaten. Whereby he well
shows that that bread is the body of our Lord, which is in that holy
feast, where our savior Christ is the feaster, and he him self also is the meat
and drink of the feast, and so the wholl feast. In the which as he does in
his members, being the head of them, eat the blessed meat of that holy feast:
So yt is even he, even his very dodie, and blood that is there eaten and
dronken. Wherefore soch a noble feaster being present, and so holy meat being
there eaten, the Church right well with goodly concord, and consent sings: O
sacrum conuiuium, in quo Christus sumitur. O holy feast in the which Christ is
received.

But the prolixitie of this matter, if yt should be woorthilie followed,
calls me back, and moves to stay and hear the other that is joined to
saint Hierom, which is S. Cyrill, who says thus: Non enim prudenter, quae
ad breue tempus sufficient, hoc nomine appellabuntur, nec panis erat ex Deo,
quem maiores Iudaeorum comederunt, and mortui sunt. Nam side coelo and ex Deo
fuisset, liberasset a morte participantes. Contra vero corpus Christi, panis de
coelo est, quia aeternam comedentibus vitam largitur Those things which for a
short time suffice shall not wisely be called by this name. Neither that bread,
which the elders of the Jews did eat, and be dead, was of God. For if yt had been from heaven and of God, yt had delivered the partakers of yt from death.
Contrary wise the

THE TWO AND THIRTETH CHAP. ENDS THE exposition of this text by saint
Augustine and Theoph.
Now let us hear as briefly one coople mo and then we shall Hic est panis,
qui de coelo descendit, vt illum man ducando viuamus, quia aeternam vitam ex
nobis habere non possumus. Non sicut (inquit) manducauerunt patres vestri
Tract. 26. in Joan.
Manna and mortui sunt. Qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aetenum. Quod ergo
illi mortui sunt, ita vult intelligi, vt non viuant in aeternum. Nan
temporaliter profecto, and hi moriuntur, qui Christum manducant, sed viuunt in
aeternum, quia Christus est vita aeterna. This is the bread that descended from
heaven, that we eating him may live. For we can not of our selves have
eternal life. Not (says he) as yower Fathers have eaten Manna, and are dead,
he that eats this bread, shall live for ever. That they then be dead, thus he
would yt should be understood, that they live not for ever. For te^porallie
these truly shall also die, which do eat Christ, but they live for ever. For
Christ is eternal life. Thus far he.

What gloses the Adversaries do here upon S. Augustins saing invent, I leave
them to their the same inuencion. But forsomoche as Christ him self and S.
Augustine expownding Christ's saing, does apply the figure of Manna

Which Theophilact, who at this present is joined with S. Augustine, will Jn 6.
Joan.
by express words declare. Patres vestri comederunt Manna in solitudine. Hoc
saepe and multum versat in ore, vt persuadeat hominibus. Nan si possibile fuit
quadraginta annis sine mess, and semente pasci homines, and conseruari illorum
vitam, multomagis nunc conseruabitnaturam spiritualem meliori pane Dominus,
carne sua, quae absque semine viri ex virgin constituta est. Yower fathers
have eaten Manna in the wilderness. This (says Theophilact) often and much
he speaks, that he might persuade men. For if yt were possible men to be
fed, and their lives to be conserved forty years, without sowing or
harvest, much more now shall our lord with a better bread, that is, his
flesh, which without the seed of man is made of a virgen conserve our
spiritual life. Thus he.

Observe, as is before noted, that the applicacion of the figure argues yet
that which he has hitherto upon this part of the sixth of S. John Our lord
feadeth us with a bread which is his flesh. A plain saing for the Procla.
when he had said that our Lord would feed us with a better bread, expownding
yt, that is (says he) his flesh. And that he would not make yt an imaginary
flesh, he says that he feeds us with the same flesh, which without the
seed of man was born of the Virgen, Which manner of speech is so plain that I
cannot but merueill that men will suffer them selves to be seduced, and led
away by vain men, when soche ancient Fathers do teach them in soche sort,
that they have nothing to keep them selves from the truth, but self will, and
malice.

THE THREE AND THIRTETH CHAP. PROCEADETH to the next text in the sixth of
saint John.
HItherto our SauiourChryst speaking of this great mystery of the Hec dixit in
Sinagoga docens in Cpharnaum. These things said he in the Sinagog as he
taught in Capharnaum. Joan. 6.
But for asmoche as many hearning this doctrine of Christ were not edified,
but offended therewith, as many of our faint Chrystians are, whose manner of
incredulity, and hardness of belief, with Christ's proceading to
Sacrame^taries of our time are Capharnaites.
reform the same, as the Evangelist sets yt forth, our Capharnaites,
through unbelief of that that Christ spoke to the better declaracion of his
doctrine, have taken to the more occasion of their doubt, eroure, and ruin,
seeing that they would so take his words to turn them against him self, and
with them to impugn that truth that he has taught, and left in his Church to
remain and continue until he come: we shall by his grace take these scriptures
from them, and by like process, as hertofore is used show the true
understanding of them, that all men may perceive that these Adversaries have
raither sought occasion to be raither enemies of Gods Heretics call their.
fantasies gods word and their lies, truth.
outwardly they ever cry Gods word, when in deed they utter their
inuencions grownded upon affection, raither to please the peoples fantasies,
then fulfill Gods pleasure. So they cry the truth, the truth, when they in
very deed set forth lies, and heresy to impugn and destroy the truth.

And as they that misliked the doctrine of Christ were of his Disciples: So
these now that mislike the same doctrine were of his Disciples, but now
abierunt retro post Satanam, they are gone back after Satan. And as the
disciples said when they heard this doctrine: Durus est hic sermo, quis potest
eum audire? This is an hard saing, who can abide the hearing of yt: So these
men say that yt is an hard saing, and they can not abide the hearing of yt.

But as saint Augustine said by the Disciples, which first spoke these
words: Aug in Psalm. 98.
So may yt be said by their disciples, who in these days do follow the^:
Ipsi erant duri non sermo. They were hard, and not the word. But as he says
in an other place: Si Discipuli durum habuerunt istum sermonem, quid inimici?
If the Disciples counted this word hard, what do the enemies? If those that
did know and follow Christ of late days do acco^pte yt an hard saing, that
Theophilact says speaking of the process of Christ's doctrine as concerning
this mystery: Quod lucrum ex his verbis? imo plurimum, and maximu^.
Theophilact in 6. Joan.
Nam quoniam memores erant subinde cibi corporalis, ostendens eis quia omnia
illa figura erant, and vmbrai Quae autem ab ipso nunc introducuntur, veritas
sunt. eius gratia haec dicit, and spiritualis cibi recordatur, vt faciat eos a
sensibilibus aliquantum remergere, co^temnereque figuras and vmbras, and
accurrere ad veritatem. Sed illi cum nibil possent intelligere, quod supra
sensum est, meliores non fiunt, sed magis resiliunt, and dicunt: Durus est hic
sermo, hoc est asper, and qui suscipi nequeat. Quis enin cum carnalis sit,
posset suscipere spiritualem cibum, and panem qui de coelo descenda, and
carnem, quae comeditur, etc. Nam quia carnem audierant, putabant quod eos
cogeret carnis and sanguinis fieri deuoratores: quia autem nos spiritualiter
intelligimus, neque carnium voratores sumus, imo sanctificamur per talem cibum.
What advantage or gain of these words? very much and great. For for that
they were often mindful of bodily meat, Christ showing that all those
things were but a figure, and a shaddowe: but soche things as by him were
brought in were the truth, for this cause he said these things, and
remembers the spiritual meat, that he might make them somewhat return from
sensible things, and to contemn figures, and shadows. But they Carnal me^
understanding nothing above thersensies leap back from the understanding of
the Sacr.
when they can understand nothing that is above the senseis they are made never
the better, but they leap and say: This saing is hard, that is, unpleasant
to sensual knowledge, and which can not be received For what is he who when he
is carnal, can receive spiritual meat and the bread, that descended from
heaven, and the flesh which is eaten? for because they had heard him say
(flesh) they thought that he would compel them to be deuourers of flesh and
blood. But because we understand the spiritual meat, we are not the deuourers
of flesh, but raither we are sanctified by soch meat. Thus much Theoph.

Who giving a cause why this doctrine of Christ seemed hard to them says, yt
was because they could not understand any thing, that was above Carnal
understanding
the knowledge of the senseis: Even so our sensual and carnal men
understanding not how Christ's very body should be in the Sacrament, unless
yt should occupy the place of a body, neither be eaten unless yt should be
felt with our teeth, as other flesh, and soch like after the gross knowledge of
the senseis, they leap back and say: yt can not be done, yt is a thing
impossible, and who can abide to hear yt? But if they would (as Theophilact
says) understand above the senses that there is the very real body of Christ,
which is yet a spiritual meat, and not take yt so grosslie and carnally, but
yet verily and spiritually, they should not be gross deuourers of flesh, but
yet eat the very flesh of Christ, not with teeth percing and hurting that,
which is living impassiblie, and yet with the mouth receiving that flesh
faithfully.

THE FOUR AND THIRTETH CHAP. Begins
OWre Savior perceauing some of his own Disciples, and other who heard him so
plainly speaking of the eating and drinking of his flesh and blood, to be
offended, because they phansied that he would have them groslie to devour his
flesh, and drink his blood, to lead and bring them from this there gross
understanding he said: does this offended you. Si ergo videritis filium
hominis ascendente^ vbi erat prius? What Joan. 6.
and if ye shall see the Son of man asce^de up thither where he was before?

Or we enter to show the exposition of this text, as to know to what purpose,
or wherefore Christ spoke these words to the Jews, and how he does answer
their in credulity to his words, or dissolve their error: this is to be
examined, how Christ does say that the Son of man shall ascend where he was
before. Yt is known to all that profess Christ, being of discrecion, that
Christ as man was born of the Virgen in earth, and was never in heaven before
he spoke these words. How then does he say, that the Son of man shall
ascend where he was before?

As I have learned of S. Augustine how to dissolve this doubt: So do I Aug.
tract 27. in Joan
think yt mete that ye do, for that his authority is great, and his saings be
weighty, In this matter thus he reasons. Illud non negligenter praetereundum
est, quod ait: Si ergo videritis filium hominis ascendentem vbi erat prius?
filius hominis Christus ex virgin Maria. Ergo filius hominis hic coepit esse
in terra, vbi carnem assumpsit ex terra. vnde prophetice dictum erat: Veritas
de terra orta est. Quid ergo sibi vult quod ait: Cum videritis filium hominis
ascendentem vbi erat prius? Nulla est quaestio si ita, dixisset: Si videritis
filium Dei ascendentem vbi erat prius: Cum vero, filium hominis, dixit,
ascendentem vbi erat prius, nunquid filius hominis in coelo erat, priusquam in
terra esse coepit? Hic quidem dixit vbi erat prius, quasi tu^c non ibi esset
quando haec loquebatur. Alio autem loco ait: Nemo ascendit in coelum, nisi qui
descendit de coelo, filius hominis, qui est in coelo Non dixit (erat) sed
filius (inquit) hominis, qui est in coelo. In terra loquebatur, and in coelo se
esse dicebat. Quo pertinet nisi vt intelligamus, quod etia^ pristino sermon
commendaui charitati vestrae, vnam persona^ esse Christu, Deum and homine^, non
duas, ne fides nostra non sit Trinitas sed Quaternitas. Christus ergo vnus est.
Verbum, anima and caro, vnus Christus, filius Dei, and filius hominis vnus
Christus. filius Deisemper: filius hominis ex tempore. tamen vnus Christus
secundum vnitatem personae in coelo erat, quando in terra loquebatur. Sic erat
filius hominis in coelo, quemadmodum filius Dei erat in terra, filius Dei in
terra in suscepta carne: filius hominis in coelo in vnitate personae. That is
not necligently to be ouerpassed that he says: What and if ye see the Son
of man ascending where he was before? The Son of man, Christ of the Virgen
Marie. Therefore the Son of man began How christ the Sone of man was in heaven
when he spoke in earth.
here in earth, where he took flesh of the earth. Wherefore yt was spoken by the
Prophet: Truth shall spring out of the earth. What meneth then that he
says, when you shall see the Son of man ascend where he was before? There
were no question if he had said: What if you shall see the Son of God asce^d
up where he was before? but when he said the Son of man to ascend where he
was before, was the Son of man in heaven, before he began to be in earth?
Here he said, where he was before, as though he were not then there, when he
spoke these words. In an other place he says. No man ascends up to
heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man (which was)
but the Son (says he) of man which is in heaven. He spoke in the earth, and
he said he was in heaven. To what powrpose yt is, but that we may understand,
which I have already

Although this sentence be somewhat long. yet if ye weigh yt well, yt shall not
repe^tyow of the reading of yt. For in yt ye may see the doubt fully
dissolved for the being of Christ the Son of man in heaven, who the^
presently spoke in earth: and how he was before in heaven, who was born in
time in the earth.

Now this doubt being dissolved, let us seek the understanding of the
scripture why Christ made mention of his ascension in the vi. of S. John.
we have to expownde, which in a great part we shall do, if we know Quid est
hoc? Hinc soluis illos, quos nouerat. Hinc aperuit vnde fuerant scandalizati,
hinc plane si intelligerent. Illi enim putabant eum erogaturum corpus suum:
Ille autem dixit ascensurum se in coelum vtique integru^. Cum Tract. 27. in
Joan.
videritis filiu^ hominis ascendente^ vbi erat prius, certe vel tu^e videbitis,
quia no^ eo modo quo putatis, erogat corpus suu^. Certe vel tunc intelligetis,
quia gratia eius non consumitur morsibus. What if you see the Son of man
ascend up where he was before? what is this (says S. Augustine.) By this he
solued them, whom he had known. By this he has opened whereby they were
offended, by this plainly if theywold understand. For they thought that he
would deal forth his body, but he says that he would ascend into heaven,
and that wholl. When ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was
before, certenlie even then shall ye see, that not after that manner that ye
think, he gives out his body, certenlie even the^ shall ye understand,
that his grace is not consumed by morsels.

Do ye not here see the cause, why Christ spoke of his ascension? S. Augustine
has opened yt unto you. They thought that Christ would have given his body in
lumpes or pieces among them. Therefore to pluck the^ from that gross and carnal
understanding, he tells them before that he will leave no part nor piece of
his body behind, but he will wholly ascend into heaven with an wholl body.

But let not now the Adversary, neither the weak man take any occasion of
error, where none is justly given, that because S. Augustine says that the
Disciples thought that he would give his body among the^, and Christ said, he
would ascend up wholl, that therefore by no means Christ gives his body unto
us in the Sacrament. For if by no means, then he gives yt not spirituallie
neither, and so were the doctrine of the Adversaries overthrown. But that he
gives not his very real body in the Sacrament, although the Adversaries
would have yt so only to be understood: yet yt does not so mee^ but, as S.
Augustine says, non eo modo, quo putatis, erogat corpus suum, not after soch
manner as you think he gives out his body. So that he denies not the
saing: Tunc autem, quando Dominus hoc commendans, de carne sua locutus erat,
and dixerat: Nisi quis manducauerit carnem meam non habebit in se vitam
aeternam, scandalizati Jn Psalm. 98.
sunt quidam ex septuaginta, and dixerunt: Durus est hic sermo. Quis potest eum
intelligere? and recesserunt ab eo, and amplius cum eo non ambulauerunt. Durum
illis visum est quod ait: Nisi quis manducauerit carnem meam, non habebit vitam
aeternam. Acceperunt illud stulte, carnaliter illud cogitauerunt, and
putauerunt, quia praecisurus esset Dominus particulas quasdam de corpore suo,
and daturus illis, and dixerunt: Durus est hic sermo. Then, says S. Augustine,
when our Lord setting forth this had spoken of his flesh, and had said: Except
a man eat my flesh, he shall not have Capharnaites how they understood Christ
carnally.
in himself life everlasting. Certain of the seventy Disciples were offended
and said: This is an hard saing. Who can understand yt? And they went from
him, and walked no more with him. Yt seemed hard to them, that he said: Except
a man eat my slesh, he shall not have in himself life everlasting. They took
yt foolishlie, carnally they thought yt. And they thought that our Lord would
cut certain pieces from his body and give to them, and they said: This an
hard saing. Thus S Augustine.

Here ye perceive after what manner the Disciples thought that Christ Non co
modo quo putatis, not after that manner, that you think, so that S. Augustine
2. Arg. detu^ th not the giving forth of Christ (...) reallie but thegrosse
manner conceived of the Disciples. Objection out of S. Aug. answered.
in this place does neither deny the giving out of Christ's body verily,
and reallie, to be received: nor yet the manner convenient to the giving out of
the same, which now the catholic Church throughout the world uses: Wherefore
let neither the weak man waver for this, neither the Adversary triumph
thinking his heresy to be confirmed, and himself to have gotten the victory.
Ne ante victoriam canat triumphum, Least he make a triumph before the victory.

But yet the Adversaries will say that S. Augustine does not teach here the
presence of Christ's body reallie, but spiritually, that is by grace, for he
says plainly that then when the Son of man is ascended up where he was
before, we shall perceive that his grace is not consumed

This reason or argument is as good here as yt is in some other places of S.
Augustins works, where because he speaks of the spiritual receiving of
Christ, therefore ye will clean expel the real receiving of his body. And
thus might some other Heretic contrary, take some other place of S.
Augustine, where he speaks of the real presence, and thereby contend against
you that there is no spiritual presence. But an vppright reader shall, as is
before said, find in S. Augusten both manners of the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, that is a real presence, and a spiritual presence, and agreablie
thereunto, a real receiving of the same body, and a spiritual.

But that the reader may perceive that this is true that I have said, that S.
Augustine teaches the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, harken
how saint Augustine taught as yt were the young Aug. sermon. ad Neoph. Aplain
place of S. Aug for M. Juel.
scholars in the faith of Christ in this matter. Thus he taught them: Hoc
accipite in pane quod pependit in cruce. Hoc accipite in calice, quod effusum
est de latere Christi. Erit enim illi mors, non vita, qui mendacem putauerit
Christum. Take ye this in the bread, that did hang on the cross. Take this in
the chalice, that was shed out of the side of Christ. He shall have death
not life that thinks Christ a Liar.

What is there to be thought here but that S. Augustine teaching young scholars
would speak in plain words, and plain sentence, that the young learners might
perceive the thing to be as yt is spoken, and not use to them obscure figures,
and tropes? For in these do not they understand what is to be believed. If
therefore Christ were in the Sacrament but as in a figure, then would saint
Augustine have taught these young ones thus: Take ye, this bread, as a sign,
token or figure of Christ's body, and when ye see yt broken, remember that
Christ's body was broken upon the Cross for you. And likewise, take this
wine as a sign, or token of Christ's blood shed for you upon the Cross.
But understand that yt is not in very deed the body and blood of Christ, but
signs and tokens of them. This were a manner of speech mete to teach young
ones, if the truth of the thing were agreeable, but because the truth is not
so, therefore S. Augustine taught them by soche plain speech, as the truth would
bear, that is, that they would take in the Sacrament that body that hanged
upon the Cross, and in the cup that blood that was shed out

Yea and that they should so take he adds a co^minacio^ that they should
Christ is made a liar when his word is not believed
take death and not life, which think Christ a liar. Why? What said Christ?
Take eat, this is my body. He then that does not believe Christ herin, but
says yt is not his body, but a figure of his body: he is the Adversary of
Christ, the reprouer of Christ. And he makes Christ a liar, as S. Augustine
says and therefore shall have death and not life.

In time therefore take heed if thou be in error, thou cannest not make
Christ a liar, but thou thy self shall be fownde a liar. And therefore thowe
shall not be admitted to the blessed company of the master of the truth: but
to the cursed and damnable company of the Father of lies. Repent thee therefore
of thine heresy, and embrace the truth, that by yt thowe may atteign to the
true life.

Now to this learned Father shall be joined S. Cyrill, who says thus: Ca.
22. sup. 6. Ioann.
Ex imperitia multi qui Christum sequebantur, verba ipsius non capientes,
pertur babantur. Nam cum audissent: Amen, amen dico vobis, Nisi comederitis
carnem filij hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem, non habebitis vitam in
vobis: Ad immanes ferarum mores vocari se a Christo arbitrabantur, incitarique
vt vellent crudas hominis carnes manducare, and sanguinem bibere, quae vel
auditu horribilia sunt, nondum enim mysterij huius formam and dispensationem
pulcherrimam cognouerant. Illud etiam adhoc cogitabant: Quomodo caro huius
hominis, aterna^ nobis vitam largietur? aut quomodo ad immortalitate^ adducere
poterit? Quae cum intelligeret is, cuius oculis omnia nuda sunt, atque aperta,
alia eos re mirabili ad fidem impellit. Frustra (inquit) o vos, propter verba
mea conturbamini. Quod si credere non vultis vitam vobis a meo corpore dari,
quid facietis, quando in coelum me volare conspicietis? Non enim ascensurum me
solummodo profiteon, ne rursus quomodo id fieri possit quaeratis, sed oculis
etiam ita fieri vestris cernetis. Quid ergo hoc videntes, dicetis: Annon erit
hoc magnum Capharnaites how they understood Christ. Joan. 6.
vestrae dementiae argumentum? Si enim putatis carnem meam vitam vobis afferre
non posse, quomodo tanquam volucris in coelum ascendet? quomodo per era
volabit: hoc enim similiter generi humano impossible est. Quod si praeter
naturam caro mea in coelum conscendet, quid probibet ne similiter praeter
naturam viuificet? For lack of knowledge many that did follow Christ not
understanding his words were troobled. For when they heard: verily verelye
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in you. They thought themselves to be called of Christ to the
cruel manners (says he) vainlie are ye troobled for my words. For if ye
will Christ's flesh besiae nature ascendedin to heaven: beside nature yt gives
life in the Sacra.
not believe life to be given you of my body, what will ye do when ye shall see
me fly up into heaven? I do not say that I will only ascend into heaven,
least you ask again how that may be done: but ye shall even so see yt with
yowr eyes. What therefore will ye say seeing this? shall yt not be a great
argument of yowr madness? If ye think that my flesh can not bring life unto
you, how shall yt as a slieng thing ascend into heaven? how shall yt fly by
the air, for this likewise is impossible to mankind? Then if my flesh

You may in this goodly and lively exposition perceive two vain thoughts,
that the gross Disciples had, one that they should after the cruel manner of
wilds beasts, eat the raw flesh of Christ, as yt were tearing yt, or
cutting Two vain thoughts of the Capharn.
yt out by pieces, and so Christ's blessed flesh, as other things that be
eaten, to be consumed. The other vain thought was how that flesh, which they
accounted but as the flesh of a natural man only, and not as the flesh of God
joined to the Godhead in unity of person, and therefore supposed yt to be a
mortal, and a corruptible flesh, how (I say) that mortal and corruptible
flesh could give unto them immortality, and incorruption.

Now to answer both these vain thoughts, and to reform the^, Christ said:
what yfye see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? By which one
saing he answers both their thoughts, and teaches as concerning the first,
that where they thought, that his body should be cut or torn in pieces,
that they had an evil understanding. For yt should ascend up into as S.
Augustine said. And that they might the better believe yt, they should see yt,
as S. Cyrill here says. The other vain thought is also answered in that he
says his body shall ascend up to heaven, which ascension is above the
order of nature. Thereby instructing them, that as his body above the course of
nature should ascend: So yt above the course of nature should give life. How
the flesh of Christ should give life S. Cyrill heretofore has declared upon
the sainges of Christ, that yt is by the eating of Christ's flesh. And therefore
he said of the power of Christ's flesh: Non verbo solum verumetiam tactu
mortuos excitabat, vt ostenderet corpus quoque suum viuificare posse. Quodsi
solo tactu suo corrupta redintegrantur: quomodo In 6. Joan cap. 14.
non viuemus, qui carnem illam and gustamus and manducamus? Reformabit enim
omnino adimmortalitatem suam participes sui. Ne velis iudaice quomodo quaerere,
sed recordare quamuis aqua naturaliter frigidior sit: aduentu tamen ignis
frigiditatis suae oblita, aestuat. Christ did not with his word only, but
also with his touching he did raze dead men, that he might show, that his
body also could give life. If then with his only touching corrupted things
are made sownde again, how shall not we live, which taste and eat that flesh?
He will without all doubt reform the partakers of him to this immortality.
Neither do thowe after the Jews manner ask, how: but remember that though the
water naturally be cold: yet by the coming of the fire to yt, having

Let not the Adversaries now cast in there common gloss, that Cyrill speaks of
the spiritual receiving and eating of Christ's flesh For he teaches more then
in one place, that we are joined to Christ not only spirituallie, but also
after the flesh, by the eating of the same very flesh. And to this purpose
also tends this his disputacion in this sentence last alleged, that he
would prove the flesh of Christ to give life by the corporal touching of yt,
and therefore yt gives life to us that corporally do taste and eat the same.
And therefore let not the Sacramentarie ask, how, For as Christ ascended above
the course of nature of man: So he gives him self in the Sacrament to be eaten
above the order and course of the nature of man.

And now ye may perceive, where the Adversaries have abvsed this scripture to
prove that there is no real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, by cause they
say that Christ by this text minded only to pluck the Disciples from their
gross thought of the carnal eating of him, to a spiritual manner of eating,
and therefore here is no real flesh to be eaten. Whereupon they The
Sacramentaries sifte the Sacra. so fine that they leave nothing but the bra^
for themselves.
charge us, not only with the name, but also with the gross error of the
Cpharanaites, that we (like as they did) do go far wide from the true mening
of the scripture. But they are so busy in charging us with the gross
carnalitie of the Capharnaites, and so curiouse in sifting of their
spiritualytie, which they sifte so long and so finely, that they let all the
fine flower of Christ's heavenly bread fall from them, and keep nothing but
the bare branne of the signifieng sign in their own hand, which in deed is
the gross bread they feed on.

For, as ye have heard, neither S. Augustine, nor S. Cyrill do so expownde yt
that there is no real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but that Christ's
mind was only to remove the carnal and gross manner of eating

THE FIVE AND THIRTETH CHAP. PROCEADETH
Now having heard one coople of the elder house expownding this text: we will
hear one coople mo only, expownde the same, and Jn 6. Joan.
so end yt, and pass to the next. Euthymius expownding this scriptute writes
thus: Si ergo videritis filium hominis ascendentem vbi erat prius, quid
dicetis? Loquitur de futura sui in coelum assumptione. Ascendentem, quoad
humanitatem: vbi prius erat, quoad diuinitatem. Qui enim potest hanc carnem
reddere coelestem, potest vtique ipsam cibum hominum efficere. What if ye see
the Son of As easiefor Christ to make his flesh meat in the Sa. as to make it
to asce^d.
man ascend up where he was before, what will ye say? says Enthymius He
speaks of the assumption of him self in to heaven, to come. what if ye see
him ascending? Ascending up, as touching his humanity, where he was before,
as touching his deity. For he that can make his flesh heavenly, can also make
the same meat of men. Note I pray you, that this author by the possibility
of

And that this author meneth of the real flesh of Christ to be the meat
Argument of the asce^sion used by Christ Jo. vi is vain to prove the spiritual
eating, but good to prove the real eating of his flesh.
of men, yt do the most euidenlie appear by his argument deduced wpon the
possibility of Christ in making his flesh heavenly. For if he had spoken of
Christ's flesh to be eaten spirituallie, there neded no soche argument upon
possibility to be made upon his very real flesh. For the flesh of Christ was
spirituallie the meat of the holy fathers in the old law. Wherefore that
neded not to be proved possible, which so many years had been in use: but that
was needful to be proved to be possible, which before was not in use, which
was that the very flesh of Christ should be eaten of men reallie.

If the saing and mening of Christ had been, that the Jews should have eaten
his flesh spiritually only, as the Adversaries would have yt, this argument
of his ascension should not have neaded, but he might have said to

Of this scripture Petrus Cluniacensis makes a very goodly exposition
paraphrasticallie: Si videritis filium hominis ascendentem vbi erat prius.
Spiritus est qui viuificat, caro non prodest quicquam, hoc est, quia me
hominem, inter homines videtis, Petrus Cluniacen.
nihil de me adhuc, quod ad hoc Sacramentum spectat, plusquam de alio homine
sentire potestis. Et i leo carnaliter sapientes velut per frusta concisam
carnem meam me vobis velle dare creditis. Sed postquam in coelum ascendero,
postquam hanc carnem, de qua agitur, adhuc mortalem, in Deum glorificauero,
tunc intelligetis, quia Spiritus est qui viuificat, hoc est spiritualliter
intellecta, accepta viuificant. Caro autem non prodest quicquam, quia
carnaliter intellecta mortificant. Dabo enim carnem meam hominibus, non more
cadauerum detruncandam, minuendam, consumendam, quia sic accepta caro mea non
prodesset quicqua^, sed dabo eam absque dolor diuidendam, absque imminutione
partiendam, absque consumptione comedendam, quia Spiritus est. qui viuificat,
and quia sic accepta, and intellecta caro mea vitam non mortalem, sed aeternam
percipientibus donat. What if ye see the Son of man ascend up where he was
before? Yt is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, that is,
because ye see me a man among men, ye can nothing more understand of me (for
somoche as apperteineth to the Sacrament) then ye can of an other man. And
therefore understanding This is the manner of our Sacrament aries.
carnally, ye believe that I will give my flesh to you, as cut in lumpes or
pieces, but after that I ascend into heaven, after that I shall glorify this
This is the faith of all catholics
carnally understood they kill. I will give my flesh unto men, not after the
manner of dead karkases to be cut in pieces one from an other, to be
diminished, to be consumed, For my flesh so taken should not profitt any
thing, But I will give yt without grief to be divided, without diminucion to
be parted, without consumption to be eaten. For yt is the Spirit that
quickneth. And my flesh so taken and understood, yt gives to the receauers,
not mortal life, but eternal. Thus far Petrus Cluniacen.

In this Author as in the other before, ye see that expowndeh he not this why
Christ made mention of his ascension John. vi.
saing of Christ of his ascension into heaven, that the real presence of his
body should not be in the Sacrament: but only Christ made mention of his
ascension to pull them from that gross manner of eating of his flesh, that they
thought he would give them lumpes or pieces of that his visible flesh in
carnal and gross manner, as a man would give a piece of beof or mutton I will
give my flesh to men not after the manner of dead karkases to be cut in pieces,
to be diminished, to be consumed (for my flesh so taken should nothing
profitt) but I will give my flesh without grief to be divided, without
diminucion to be part, dwith out consumption to be eaten. Thus ye may
perceive that though the gross manner of the unbelieving disciples be
reprehended: yet the faithful manner of the believing Chrystians is approved,
and thereby also as the wresting

THE SIX AND THIRTTETH CHAP. TREACTETH
SPiritus est qui viuificat, caro non prodest quicqua^. yt is the spirit that
quickneth, the flesh profitteth nothing. This text the Adversaries have not a
little Joan. 6.
triumphed on, and have made yt so familiar, that boys and girls, could
blatter this against Christ's presence in the Sacrament. The flesh profits
nothing. My saing therefore left aparte, I will lay the sainges and expositions
of the Fathers before the reader, and then shall ye see whether these wicked
schoolemasters have not well taught their wicked scholars, and young ympes, to
blaspheme Christ's blessed flesh, saing that yt profits nothing, and also
how well they wrest the scripture, and violently pluck yt and tear yt, as
yt were, from the native sense. The first coople to show us the exposition of
this text, shall be S. Augustine and Chrysostom.

S. Augustine says thus: Quid est quod adiungit: Spiritus est qui viuificat,
caro non prodest quicquam? Dicamus ei (patitur enim nos non contradicentes, sed
nosce cupientes) Tract. 27. in Joan.
O Domine magister bone, quomodo caro non prodest quicquam, cum tu dixeris,
Nisi quis manducauerit carnem meam, and biberit sanguinem meum, non habebit in
se vitam? An vita non prodest quicquam? and propter quid sumus, quod sumus,
nisi vt habeamus vitam aeternam, quam tua carne promittis? Quid est ergo, Non
prodest quicquam? Caro non prodest quicquam, sed quomodo illi intellexerunt.
Carnem quippe sic intellexerunt, quomodo in cadauere dilaniatur, aut in macello
venditur, non quomodo spiritu vegetatur. Pro^pte sic dictum est: Caro non
prodest quicquam, quomodo dictum est: Scientia inflat. I am ergo debemus odisse
scientiam? Absit. Et quid est, Scientia inslat? sola sine charitate. Ideo
adtunxit: Charitas vero aedificat. Add ergo scientiae charitatem, and vtilis
erit scientia, non per se, sed per charitatem. Sic and nunc, Caro non prodest
quicquam, sed sola caro. Accedat Spiritus ad carnem quomodo accedit charitas ad
scientiam, and prodest plurimum. Namsi caro nihil prodesset, Verbum caro non
fieret, vt habitaret in nobis. Si per carnem multu nobis profuit Christus,
quomodo caro nihil prodet? Sed per carnem spiritus aliquid pro salute nostra
egit. Caro vas suit, quod habebat attend, non quod erat. Apostoli missi sunt,
nunquid caro ipsorum nihil nobis prosuit? Si caro Apostoloru^ nobis profuit,
caro Domini nihil potuit prodesse? Vnde enim ad nos sonus verbi, nisi per vocem
carnis? Vnde filius? Vnde conscriptio? Ista omnia opera carnis sunt, sed
agitante Spiritu tanquam organum suum. Spiritus ergo est qui viuificat. Caro
non prodest quicqua. Sicut illi intellexerunt carnem: non sic ego do ad
manducandum carnem meam.

A long sentence of S. Augustine, but as profittable and pleasant, as yt is
long, which I bring wholly that the reader should not be defrauded of the
right meninge of S. Augustine upon this scripture, and that the Adversaries
should not have occasion to reprehende that in us, that so often they have
offended in, namely to bring in a sentence of an Author truncately so much as
apparently would serve for their poupose, but not so much as would truly open
the right mening of the Author in that matter. In this sentence thus alleged
ye shall perceive the full mind of S. Augustine, for so much as he thought
necessary to be said for the explicacion of Christ's mind in this scripture.
Thus may S. Augustines words Spirit how yt quickneth, and flesh how yt
profits nothing.
be englished:

What is yt then that he adioineth: Yt is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh
prositeth nothing? Let us say unto him, he suffers us, not against saing, but
desiering to know: O Lord, good master, how does the flesh profitt nothing,
seeing thowe hauest said: Except a man eat my flesh, and drink my blood, he
shall have no life in him? Does not life profitte any thing? And for what be
we, that we be, but that we may have eternal life, which thowe promisest by
thy the flesh profitteth nothing, as yt is said: that science does puff up
or make proud. Shall we now therefore hate science? God forbid. And what is
yt: Science does puff up? Alone without charity. Therefore he adioined:
Charity edifieth. Add therefore to science charity, and science shall be
profitable, not by yt self, but by charity. So also now the flesh profitteth
nothing, but the flesh alone, let the spirit come to the flesh, as charity
comes to science, and yt profits very much. For if the flesh should profitt
nothing, the word should not have been made flesh, that he might dwell among
us. If Christ by the flessh has profitted us much, how does the flesh
profitt nothing? But the spirit by the flesh has done somewhat for our health.
The flesh was the vessel, what yt had attend, not what yt was: The Apostles
were sent, did not their flesh yt is the Spirit that does quickens, the flesh
profits nothing. As they do understand the flesh: So do not I give my flesh
to be eaten. Thus far S. Augustine.

Now weigh, gentle Reader. whether the flesh of Christ does profitte any
thing or no. Now weigh also whether this scripture does any one iotte The
presence of Christ's flesh in the Sacr. after the catholic faith.
speak or make against Christ's blessed flesh in the Sacrament. The catholic
faith teaches not that the flesh of Christ is given in the Sacrament as pieces
or lumpes of flesh betorn out of a dead karkas, neither that the flesh of
Christ is there as yt is in the shambles, nor that yt is a pure natural flesh
without the spiritte, not the flesh of a person that is only man, for so
understood as they did understand yt, says S. Augustine, yt profits
nothing. But the flesh of Christ of the good catholics is believed to be in
(as Petrus Cluniacensis says) yt is parted, every man without diminucio^
every one receiving whole Christ. Neither yt is eaten, that thereby yt is
consumed, but yt is eaten and yet ever remains (as the Church says) Nec
sumptus, absumitur. neither being received yt is consumed.

This is the catholic faith against the which this scripture does nothing
The flesh of Christ received as the flesh of God profits much.
speak, but raither with yt, For as S. Augustine says: The flesh of Christ
taken as yt is quickened with the Spirit, that is, with the Godhead, and as the
flesh of God, yt profits much, which flesh is so taken of the faithful. And
therefore the Sacramentaries may be ashamed and much repent of there wicked
blasphemy, wherewith they have blasphemed the true catholic faith of Christ,
calling yt the gross and vain imaginacions of the Capharnaites, with soche
like impieties: seeing that the faith is pure, nothing: So after that manner
Christ does not give his flesh, as S. Augustine Christ gives his flesh in
substance verily, but not in rude manner grossly.
in the person of Christ concludes his exposition, sainge: Sicut illi
intellexerunt carnem, non sic ego do ad manducandum carnem meam. As they did
understand the flesh, so do not I give my flesh to be eaten. In the which
words saint Augustine does insinuate to us that Christ does give us the same
his flesh to eat, but not after that manner For the substance is not here
denied of the thing that is given, but the manner, which he signifies plainly
when says: As they did understand flesh: so do I not give my flesh. of the
which this follows well: I do give my flesh, but not as they understand yt.

The like we yse in common speech, as when we say: we be no soch men as you
take us to be: we grant the substance of the thing, that we be men: but saing
(no soche men) we deny but the condition or manner of the thing, and not the
thing yt self. So he saing: I do not give my flesh as they did understand, the
manner only is denied, but the thing is raither admitted, and affirmed.

I am compelled to leave S. Augustine, least I should be to tediouse to Quid
igitur caro non prodest quicquam? Chrysostom. hom. 46. in Joannem.
Non de ipsa carne dicit, absit, sed de his qui carnaliter accipiunt, quae
dicuntur. Quid dute^ est carnaliter intelligere? simpliciter vt res dicuntur,
neque aliud quippiam excogitare. Non enim ita iudicanda sunt quae videntur, sed
mysteria omnia interioribus oculis consideranda, hoc est, spiritualiter. Qui
non manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, non habet vitam in
semetispo. Quomodo nihil prodest caro, sine qua nemo potest viuere? Vide quod
ea particula, Caro non prodest quicquam, non de ipsa carne, sed de carnali
auditione dictum est. What then? Does the flesh profitt nothing? He speaks yt
not of that flesh (God forbid) but of these that carnally take these things,
Caro non prod. is not spoken of the flesh of Christ, as being the flesh of God.
that be spoken. But what is yt to understand carnally? Plainly as the
things be spoken, neither to think any other thing. Not so are things that
be seen to be judged: But all mysteries are to be considered with the inward
eyes. that is spirituallie He that does not eat my flesh, and drink my
blood, has no life in him self. How does the flesh profitte nothing (the
flesh profits nothing) is not spoken of that flesh, but of the carnal
hearing. Thus Chrysostom,

He needs no expositour to open and expownd his exposition. For at the first
seight he makes yt manifest, that this saing of Christ: The flesh profits
nothing, is not to be understood of the flesh of Christ. Non de ipsa carne
dictum est. yt is not spoken of that flesh of Christ, saieh he. And in the end
of his saing again he says: Vide quod ipsa particula, Caro non prodest
quicquam, non de ipsa carne dictum est. See that, that particle (the flesh
profits nothing) is not spoken of that flesh, mening the flesh of Christ.
What ungodly schoolemasters and impudent be these that teach their ungodly
disciples so to understand this scripture, as two of the most famous Fathers
of Christ's Church understand yt (as ye hear) to the plain contrary. They
say the flesh of Christ is not in the Sacrament, for the flesh profits
nothing: But that the flesh of Christ is in the Sacrament, and so being
received does profitte both these Fathers and other also, have, and shall
hereafter testify against impugn their wicked doctrine, and maintein the true
faith of Chrysts catholic

THE SEVEN AND THIRTETH CHAP. PROceadeth upon the same text by Theophilact and
S. Bernard.
THeophilact gives a brief testimony of his understanding of this text,
writing thus: Spiritus est qui viuificat: Caro non prodest quicquam. Quoniam
(vt saepe diximus) carnaliter exponentes ea quae dicebantur a Christo,
offendebatur, dicit quia spiritualiter intelligenda sunt, quae dicu^tur a me,
hoc est prodesse. Caro aute^, hoc est, carnaliterilla exponere, nihil prodest.
Sed offendiculi occasio fit. Sic ergo illi qui carnaliter audieba^t, quae a
Christo dicebantur, offendebantur. Yt is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh
profits nothing. For that (as we have often said) that they expownding those
things carnally which were said of Christ, were offended, he said that they
are spiritually Theophilact.

In which words ye se nothing spoken against the flesh of Christ in the
Sacrament. He bends not himself to expownde this scripture against yt, as
Christ's enemies have done: but he bends himself to expownde yt So as
Christ's very mind may be opened unto us. Which was to teach the
Capharnaites spirituallie to understand Christ's words, which he spoke of
the eating and drinking of his flesh and blood. Which words if they were
understood spirituallie they did profit. If they were understood carnally,
they did not profitte. But he does not say that Christ's Objection of the
Sacramentaries for the spiritual eating.
flesh in the Sacrament profits nothing. But here will the Sacramentaries
object and say, this is the thing that we would, that Christ's words should
be taken spirituallie, that the eating which Christ speaks of,

Ye say very well, and ye seem in yowr own conceit to have madea strong
argument. But weigh well the author that ye have grownded yowr Tha^swer to the
former object.
argument upon. Yt is Theophilact, who says that Christ's words must be
understood spiritually. And even so say all the Catholics, whom yt likes
you to call Papists and Capharnaites. And what is the spiritual understanding
of Christ's words by Theophilact? that we should only believe Christ to have
died, and shed his blood for us? and that we be partakers of the meritte of
the same? Call to mind how he expownded these words of Christ: Panis quem
ego dabo caro mea est. The bread that I will give is my flesh: and there shall
ye perceive the understanding of Christ's words, that he meneth of. He says
there these words. Take heed that the bread which is eaten of us in the
mysteries is not only a figure of our Lords body, but the very flesh of our
Lord. For he did not say, The bread that I will give is a figure of my flesh,
but yt is my flesh. And how yt comes Theophilact furthwith Spiritual
vnderctanding what yt is.
declares. That bread (says he) is transformed with the secrett words by
the mystical benediction, and the coming of the holy Ghost, into the flesh of
our Lord. This is the spiritual understanding of Theophilact, which is in
deed a spiritual understanding. For if that be spiritual that is wrought hy
the work of the Spirit of God, and that is above the reason of man, and is
not with in the compass of sensual knowledge, but is apprehended and known
only by faith, then is this a spiritual understanding. That yt is wrought by
the Spirit of God, this Author does testify, that yt is above natural
reason, yt is manifest. For there is no natural mean used in the doing of yt.
That yt is not within the compass and the knowledge of the senseis, this
Author also does there show. And how (says he) is yt, that yt does not
appear flesh to us, but bread? That we should not (says he) abhor from
the eating of yt. For if yt should have appeared flesh, we

This flesh then of Christ is not seen of us. And so truly is yt not perceived
of any sense. And therefore for somoch as yt is perceived by no sense, but that
faith is of hearing, in that respect yt may also be called spiritual. What
Sermon. adin fances.
is known in the Sacrament by senses and what aught to be known by faith S.
Augustine also teaches saing: Quod videtis in altari panis and calix est, quod
etiam oculi vestri renuntiant. Quod autem fides postulat instruenda, panis est
corpus, calix est sanguis. Potest animo cuiuspiam cogitatio talis suboriri.
Dominus Jesus Christus nouimus vnde carnem acceperit, de Virgin Maria
scilicet, nutritus est, creuit, sepultus est, resurrexit, coelum ascendit,
illuc leuauit corpus suum, vnde venturus est iudicare viuos and mortuos. Ibi
est modo sedens ad dextram Patris, quomodo ergo panis corpus eius? vel quod
habet calix, quomodo est sanguis eius? Ista ideo, fratres, dicuntur sacramenta,
quia in eis aliud videtur, aliud intelligitur. Quod videtur speciem habet
corporalem, quod intelligitur sructum habet spiritualem. That ye do see in the
altar, yt is bread and the cup, the bread is the body, and the cup is the
blood. But in the mind of some A plain saing of S. August. for the Proclamer.
body soch a thought may rise. We know from whence our Lord Jesus Christ
has taken flesh, that is, of the virgen Marie, he was nourished, he did grow,
he was buried, he did rise, he has ascended into heaven, thither he has
lifted up his body from whence yt shall come to judge the quick and the
dead. There is he now sitting at the right hand of the Father. How then is
the bread his body? or that the chalice has, how is yt his blood?
Brethren, therefore these things be called Sacraments, because there is one
thing seen in them, and an other understood. That which is seen has a
corporal form that which is understood has a spiritual fruit or profyt.
Thus far saint Augustine.

In the which words S. Augustine does plainly open what is judged to be in
the Sacrament by the judgment of the senseis, and what by Senses and faith
judge diuer selse.
the judgment of faith. The eyes judge yt bread, and a cup of wine, but Then
if the body of Christ be not known in the Sacrament by any other (as the
Sacrame^taries do slanderously charge us) but like lowly subjects unto our
master Christ, striving against our natural knowledge, and though even by
faith we cannot comprehend the wholl mystery: yet for that he has said yt
we believe yt so to be, as Algerus werie well to this purpose says.

Dum in mysterio, quod non est apparet, quod est occultatur, fidei lucta
proponitur, vt meritum augeatur. Dum contra hoc quod videtur, credens quod non
videtur, de credita intus veritate, de suprata exterius falsitate, duplicem
assequitur gratiam. Algerus li. 2 ca. 3.
Caetera enim Christi miracula, cum sint infidelibus in signum vt conuertantur,
hoc solum sidelibus datur ad meritum, vt illo erudiantur, In illis enim quae
Deus in extrinseca materia secit, roboratur fides. In hoc autem solo quod ex
seipso facit, fides exercitatur, vt victa, et inuicta facilius coronetur.
Victa, inquam, ne comprehendat, sed inuicta, ne diffidat, dum exteriores quidem
sensus obiecta panis, and vini speciem, color, odore, and sapore, ipsum quod
fuerat mentiendo, panem and vinum quod non est nituntur instruere. Interior
autem intellectus ipsum quod est, corpus scilicet Christi contemplans uec
comprehendere sufficiens, non tamen desistit credere. While in the my sterie
that that is not appears, that that is, is hidden, battaill unto faith is
propownded, that meritte may be increased, while that against yt that is seen,
believing yt that is not seen of the believed inwardly verity, of the ouercomed
outward falsitie, she gets duble grace. For other miracles of Christ, where
they be to the unfaithful for a sign, that they may convert, this alone is
given to the faithful to merit, that by yt they may be taught. In those
miracles, that God did make in an owtwarde matter, faith is strenghtned. In
this alone that he makes of himself, faith is exercised, Faith over co^med and
not over comed in the mystery of the Sacr.
that being ouercomed, and vnouercomed, she may be more easily crowned. I
say ouercomed that she can not comprehend, vnouercomed, that she distrust
not, while the outward senseis by the forms of bread and wine objected, the
color, the savor and the taste, falsely saing to be yt that yt was, do
labor to affirm yt bread and wine, which yt is not. But the Algerus.

Thus far be we from the Capharnaites that where they rested within the
compass of carnal knowledge and understanding, we fly to the height of faiths
crudicion, and so leaving carnal knowledge, mete for the senseis, we accept,
and cleave to that is spiritual, according to the instruction of faith.
Therefore seeing that nothing is taught of the catholic Church, or believed, as
concerning Chrysts very body in the Sacrament, that comes under natural
knowledge, either of reason, or of the senseis: what blind malice is there in
the Adversaries to call us carnal Capharnaites, who judged of Christ no
otherwise then by natural reason and senseis? If they will say, that we be
carnal, because we believe Christ's divine flesh miraculouslie by the divine
Cpharnaites judged only by reason and senses.
power to be in the Sacrament, and verily to be received of the faithful:
then may they call us carnal because we believe the same flesh to be united to
the Godhead in unity of person, and now to be exalted above all creatures,
and to be at the right hand of God the Father. For what more For as the power
of God woorketh the one: So yt woorketh the other. And as by the scriptures we
be certified of the one: So be we thereby also certified To believe Christ's
flesh to be in the Sacr. is a spiritual faith.
of the other. And therefore as all faith concerning Christ's body, as his
incarnacion, passion, resurrection, and ascension, is spiritual and not
carnal, though yt be about Christ's flesh: So is the faith believing the same
flesh to be in the Sacrament, a spiritual faith. And the beleuers in that
respect, be like wise spiritual, and not carnal.

And Albeit yt were necessary of this to have said more, for that the
Adversaries have much delighted themselves with their spiritualitie, and have
much slattered themselves to be by this their heresy right spiritual, when
in deed they be thereby very carnal (heresy being a work of the stesh) and
have thought themselves with this alone clean to abolish the name of the
catholic Church, and the memory of the same from the earth, the contrary
effect whereof they have seen: yet for that I see the matter so to fall out
that this rude book will excead the quantity and proporcion by me intended to
the more trooble of the reader, and for that I have been longer upon Theophilact
then I minded. I will breiflie touch his yockefelowe S. Bernarde and

Thus writes S. Bernarde. Quis non illic vehementer cupiat pasci, and propter
pacem, and propter adipem, and propter satietatem? Nihil ibi sormidatur, nihil
fastiditur, nihil deficit. Bernard. sermon. 33 in Cant.
Tuta habitatio Paradisus: dulce pabulum, verbum: opulentia multa, nimis
aeternitas. Habeo and ego verbum, sed in carne: and mihi apponitur veritas, sed
in Sacramento. Angelus ex adipe frumenti saginatur, and nudo saturatur grano:
me oportet interim quodam sacramenti cortice esse contentum, carnis fursure,
literae palea, velamine fidei. Et haec talia sunt, quae gustata adferunt
mortem, si non primitijs Spiritus quantulumcunque accipiant condimentum.
Prorsus mors mihi in olla, nisi ex prophetae farinula dulcoretur. Denique
absque Spiritu, and Sacramentum ad in dicium sumitur, and caro non prodest
quicquam, and litera occidit, and fides mortua est: sed Spiritus est qui
viuificat, vt viuam in eis. Who desiereth not earnestly there to be fed, both
for peace, and for the fat, and for satietie? There is nothing feared, nothing
loathed, nothing lacking. There is Paradise a saif habitacion: the word, a
sweet food: eternity, great abundance. I also have the word, but in the
flesh: and the verity is set before me, but The verity of Christ's flesh is
set forth before us in the Sacr.
in the Sacrament. The Angel is fed of the fat of the qwheat, and is
filled or satisfied with the open corn in seight. In the mean while I must be
contented with a certain bark of the Sacrament, with the branne of the flesh,
with the chafe of the letter, with the veil or covering of faith, and these
things be soche that being tasted they bring death, if of the first fruits of
the Spiritte they take not some manner of seasoning, my death is surely in the
pot except yt be made sweet with the Prophets meall. Lastly without the
Spirit the Sacrament also is taken to condemnacion: and the flesh profits
nothing at all: and the letter kills: and faith is dead: but yt is the
Spiritte, that gives life, that I may live in them. Thus much S. Bernarde.

Who in this chapter, showing the great difference betwixt this present life
and the blessed life to come, opens the commodities of the one, and the
incommodities of the other: the perfection of the one, and the imperfection of
the other, among which to our purpose he says: that Paradise is a saif
habitacion, There the Son of God is the sweet food. Whereunto comparing I
also have the word the Son of God, but in the flesh: the verity is
settfurth before me, but in the Sacrament.

Here first note that the verity is settfurth in the Sacrament, and not a bare
figure: and yet this Sacrament, though yt has the verity yet if yt be (says
saint Bernard) received to condemnacion. Spirit taken two manner of ways.
For the flesh prositeth nothing. But yt is the Spirit that gives life. The
spirit, as before ye have been taught of Chrysostom and Cyrill, is taken two
manner of ways: either for a spiritual understanding in believing, and therbie
understanding the very flesh of Christ to be verily in the Sacrament, not
after a gross manner to be cut out to us in Lumpes (as the Capharnaites
understood yt) but spirituallie, and yet verily, vnspeakeablie, and yet
credibly by the work of Gods power even very wholl Christ: orells for the
flesh of Christ as a divine or godly flesh united to the spirit, which is the
Godhead, and so becomed now spiritual, and quickening, able to give life, for
that yt is the flesh not of a sole man, but the flesh of God.

Now, says S. Bernard, the verity is in the Sacrament, the very flesh of
Christ is there received, but if yt be received without the spirit (as is
declared) the flesh alone profits nothing, if ye ioin the spirit to the flesh
(as saint Augustine wills you) the flesh prositeth much. For to take the
flesh alone, and so to understand carnally, the flesh profits nothing. Thus
may ye perceive how holy Bernarde with the rest agrees, that he places not
so the spiritte, that he expels the flesh of Christ from the Sacrament, as
the Adversary does, but he ioineth the verity of the flesh and the spirit
together, and so stand they in much amity, and do greatly profit the beleuers.

THE EIGHT AND THIRTETH CAAP. Ends the exposition of this text by Euthymius
and Lyra.
Now fearing with prolixitie to be tediouse, I will breiflie hear the
testimony of one coople mo expownding this text now in hand, and so end the
same. Euthymius writes thus: Spiritus est qui viuificat. Spiritum nunc vocat
intellectum spiritualem eorum quae dicta sunt. Similiter and carnem, Euthy. in
^ Joan.
Intelligere ea carnaliter. Non enim de carne ipsius quae viuificat, nunc sermo
est. Ait ergo: Haec spiritualiter intelligere vitam prabet, quam supra dixi:
carnaliter vero intelligere, non prodest quicquam. Yt is the Spiritte that
quickneth. He calls the Spirit now the spiritual understanding of those
things that be spoken. Likewise the flesh carnally to understand. For now
he speaks not of his flesh that quickneth. He says therefore to understand
these things spirituallie, yt gives life, which I spoke of before. But
carnally to understand them yt profits nothing.

I shall not need to note the words of this Author, for all the authors yet
alleged draw so justly by one line, that almost they speak all one manner
of words, even from the first to the last, as well the later writers, as the
most ancient. For this man with Chrysostom and Augustine says: that this
scripture: the flesh profits nothing: is not spoken of the flesh of Christ,
which does quicken: but of carnal understanding, of the which ye have not a
few times heard. He says also that these words, the Spirits does
quicken: are to be understood of spiritual understanding this process. But
breiflie upon these words of Christ: My flesh is meat indede: This (says
he) Christ said, confirming that he neither spoke in dark

Spiritus est qui viuificat. Quia dixerat carnem suam esse cibum necessarium ad
salutem, and ipsi intelligebant hoc, acsi daretur in propria specie, sicut
laniatur, vel ve^ditur in macello, quod est horribile, ideo tollit hunc
intellectu^, dicens: Spiritus est qui viuificat, quasi dicat: Lyra in 6. Joan.
Verba quae dixi spirituale^ habent sensum, and sic viuificant. Caro aute^ non
prodest quicquam, quia caro Christi manducata eo modo quo intelligebant, non
esset vtilis, sed magis horribilis. Yt is the spiritte that quickneth, the
flesh profits, nothing. For because he had said, that his flesh is a
necessary meat to salvation, and they did understand yt, as though yt should
be given in his own form, as yt is cut and Lyra.

In this exposition ye do also see the gross manner of the Capharnaites, who
(as ye have heard) thought the flesh of Christ should be given unto the^, as
yt is cut or sold in the shambles, in his own propre form and manner, that is
as very pieces of flesh both in seight and substance, to be refused. For this
manner of understanding is gross and carnal, and therefore these words must
have says this Author a spiritual sense. What spiritual sense also this
Author understands of Christ's words, yt appears well in the exposition
of these words of Christ: My flesh is meat in deed, etc. Where this Author
says, as before is alleged that by this text was showed the verity of the
Sacrament. For Christ did often speak to his Disciples in Parables, and My
flesh is meat in deed, for here yt is taken reallie, and not figuratiuelye.
Mark that he says reallie, and yet he accompteth this a spiritual
vndetstanding, as yt is in deed, as before is declared, though the Adversaries
sifting yt so finely until they make yt nothing, say that we be carnal,
carnally understanding the words of Christ. But God bring them from there
carnal heresy.

THE NINE AND THIRTETH CHAP. Begins the exposition of the next text by
saint Augustine, and Cyrill.
Now we come to the last scripture that treacteth of this matter in the sixth
of saint John, which being appendent, has almost the same understanding that
the last scripture before has. Verba quae ego locutus sum vobis, spiritus and
vita sunt. The words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life. I will
not detein the reader, but even furthwith hear

And first S. Augustine, who writes thus: Quid est spiritus and vita sunt?
Spiritualliter intelligenda sunt. Intellexisti spiritualliter? Spiritus and
vita sunt. Intellexisti carnaliter? etiam sic illa spiritus and vita sunt, sed
tibi non sunt. What is yt: The words that I have spoken to you, are spirit
and life? They are spiritually to be understood. Hauest thowe understood
them spirituallie? They are spirit and life. Hauest thowe understood them
carnally? Even so also are they spirit and life, but to thee they be not. Thus
he.

What S. Augustine meneth by carnal understanding ye have heard more then
once by his own words alleged. that is, to understand that we should eat
the flesh of Christ in the very form and manner of flesh cut out to us in
morselles or pieces, as flesh is cut out and sold in the shambles. And not
only so, but to take yt as the flesh of an only natural man and not as the
flesh of the Son of God, and to be of that weak and base degree, that yt
should be mortal, and consumptible, not able to give life everlasting to them
that should woorthilie eat yt, neither for ever to endure, and continue and
never to have end. This (if you have marked the sainges of S. Augustine,
Chrysostom, and Cyrill) is to

And what is the spiritual understanding of this process of Christ, for the
eating of his flesh, yt has been by many places of S. Augustine alleged, Sup.
ca. 22
declared. But at this present to be short, these his words may declare.
Caro eius est etc. Yt is his flesh, which we take covered under the form of
bread, and his blood, which we do drink under the form, and taste of wine.
This is the spiritual understanding of S. Augustine, Spiritual understanding
of the Sacrament
as concerning the substance of the Sacrament, although there be an other manner
of spiritual understanding, which both he and all the holy Fathers, and all
good catholic men do believe, receive, and approve, and do not deny this
spiritual manner, but both must be joined, and concur in every good chrystian
man, if time and condition will serve, as before is said.

Now what S. Cyrill says, whom here we place with S. Augustine, Let us
hear: Verba quae ego locutus sum vobis, spiritus and vita sunt. Totum corpus
suum viuifica spiritus virtute plenum esse ostendit. Spiritum enim hic ipsam
carnem suam nuncupauit, non quia carnis naturam amiserit, and in spiritum Ca.
24. in 6. Joan.
mutata sit. sed quia sum cum eo coniuncta, totam viuificandi vim hausit. Nec
indecenter hoc dictum quisquam existimet. Nam qui Domino conglutinatur, vnus
cum eo spiritus est. Quomodo igitur caro sua vna cum eo non appllabitur?
Huiusmodi ergo est, quod dicitur: Putatis me dixisse viuificum natura sui esse
terrestre, and mortale hoc corpus, ego vero de spiritu and vita locutus sum.
Non enim natura carnis secundum se viuificare potest, sed virtus ipsius
spiritus, viuificantem carnem reddidit. Verba ergo quae locutus sum, id est, ea
quae locutus sum vobis, suntspiritus and vita, qua ipsa etiam caro mea viuit,
and viuifica est. The words, which I have spoken unto you are spirit and
life. He shows all his whole body to be full of the quickening The very flesh
of Christ called spirit.
power of the spiritte. For he calls here the spiritte his very flesh, not
that yt has leftof the nature of flesh, and is changed into a spirit: but
because being excellently conioined with him, yt has taken the wholl power to
quicke^. Neither let any man think this, to be spoken vndece^tlie. For he
that is surely joined to our Lord, is one spirit with him, how then shall not
his to be quicking or giving life. but I have spoken of spirit and life. For
the nature of the flesh yt self ca^ not give life. But the power of the
Spirit,

In which words, yt is easy to be perceived that where S. Augustine before
expownding these words of Christ, said, that they are to be understood
spirituallie, this author, as yt were expownding him and the words of
Christ, says, that so they are to be expownded spirituallie, not by an
exposition of a singular imagined spiritual manner of understanding, that shall
be so spiritual that yt shall utterly deny Christ's flesh, but the very
real and natural slesh of Christ, for that yt is so inteirlie joined to the
God head, which Cyrill here calls the Spirit, yt is soche a spiritual flesh
that yt may be called also the Spirit, as S. Hierom also for like
consideracion, and for that yt is so exalted, calls yt the divine flesh. So
that S. Cyrill understands Christ, that where he said, the words that I
have spoken to you are spirit and life: yt is thus to be understood, that
the flesh of Christ is spirit and life. And therefore the Aduersaies seem to be
carnal and gross, that where the Sacramentaries are Capharnaites.
se holy Fathers understand the very flesh of Christ to be a spiritual
flesh for co^sideracions above specified, they maliciously and despitefullie
to the great derogacion of so high a mystery, call us Capharnaites, as though
we should receive nothing but carnal flesh, the flesh of an only bare
natural man, and not the flesh of Christ, which being inseparably joined to
the God head, and therefore the very flesh of God, end wed with the power of
the same Godhead to give life, is called both Spirit and life, and so is both
very The flesh of Christ is both natural and spiritual.
natural, and yet spiritual flesh. And therefore the catholic people receive
Christ's very real flesh spirituallie, because yt is a spiritual flesh, and
also by cause yt is known with a spiritual knowledge, not with the knowledge of
natural reason, nor with the knowledge of carnal senseis, but with the
spiritual knowledge of faith, which believes that in the Sacrament, that reason
can not comprehend, nor the senses perceive.

And so as, Algerus says. Etsi sciri non potest: credi potest, quia quod
videtur non materiale corpus panis est, sed species corporalis. Quod autem
intelligitur Alger li. 2. cap. 3.
Christus est, qui omnia quaecunque vult in coelo and in terra potest. Sicque
dum exteriorum sensuum testimonio non acquiescit, nec interiori inquisitione
comprehendens, de veritate tamen non titubat, fit per Dei gratiam vt in tali
suo agone fides nostra exerceatur, exercendo augeatur, augendo perficiatur,
perfecta coronetur. Although yt can not be known: yet yt may be believed, for
that that is seen is not the material body of bread, but the form of bread,
but that that is understood is Christ, who can do all things that he will
in heaven and in earth, and so Conflict of faith with reason and senses.
while man does not agree to the witness of the outward senses, neither by
the inward inquisition co^prehending, does not yet doubt of the truth yt is
done by the grace of God that faith in soche her conflicte is exercised, in
exercising is increased, in increasing is perfected, and being perfect is
crowned. Thus Algerus.

So far wide then is the catholic faith from carnalitie in believing and
recauing Christ's very body in the Sacrament under the form of bread (as
this author says) that our faith has a great battaill and conflicte with
reason and the knowledge of senseis, which conflicte if we proceade to
continue, our faith by soche exercise shall be perfected, and in the end by
Gods grant all catholic people strongly to continue the fight of this
battaill, and

THE FOVRTETH CHAP. ENDS THE EXPOsition of this text and so of the process
of the sixth of S. John by Euthymius and Lira.
Now one coople mo and then we end this scripture, and this process of the
sixth of saint John. The coople shall be Euthymius, and Lyra. Euthymius says
thus: Verba quae ego loquor In. 6. Joan.
vobis spiritus and vita sunt, Spiritualia and viuifica sunt. Oportet namque
non simpliciter ea intueri, id est carnaliter intelligere, sed aliud quippia^
imaginari, and interrioribus oculis ea aspicere tanqa^ misteria. Na^ hoc est
spiritualiter intelligere. The words that I have spoken to you, are spirit
and life, that is, they are Spiritual understanding what yt is.
spiritual and quickening. For we must not simply heholde the^, that is,
carnally

Ye may perceive this author still to proceade and continue in one manner of
understanding and allwaies declaring one spiritual manner of Christ's flesh in
mystery, where things may not be taken, as they appear simply, but
considering that they be mysteries, there must be considered some other thing
there to be present, which is to be beholden not with the outward eye, but with
the inward eye, which thing is the very body of our Savior Jesus Christ by
faith there in very deed, as verily to be believed, as the outward form be by
the senseis verily to be seen.

All violent mocions (says he Philosopher) be slack or slow in the
beginning, and quick in the ending, so man violently moved to virtuous and
godly, deeds goes slacklie and slowly in the beginning, but when he
approaches to the end, he makes much speed to come to yt. And eue^ so I
miself drawing to the end of the exposition of the matter of the Sacrament by
the

Wherefore as I have breiflie ouerpassed this last author, so will I his
yockelowe, which in this place is Lira. who says thus: Verba quae ego locutus
sum vobis, Jn 6. Joan.
de carne mea ma^duca^da, spiritus and vita sunt. quia spirituale^ habe^t
intellectu^. nec miru^, quia sunt a Spiritu sancto. Ista tame^ spiritualitas
non est sic accipie^da, quia caro Christi sit in sacrame^to Eucharistiae tantu^
modo sicut in signo, vt dixeru^t aliqui haeretici, quia est ibi realiter, vt
dictu^ est, sed quia ma^ducatur caro Christi in hoc Sacrame^to quodd
spiritualli modo, in quantu^ species visibiles atteru^tur, and comeduntur, and
spiritus ex virtute Dei carni vnita reficitur. The words which I have spoken
unto you, of my flesh to be eaten, they are spirit and life, for they have a
spiritual understanding. And no merueill. For, they be of the holy Ghost. This
spiritualitie for all that, is not so to be taken that the flesh of Christ is
only in the Sacrament as in a sign, as certain heretics did say, for yt is
there reallie, as yt is said, but because the flesh of Christ is eaten after a
certain spiritual manner, forsomoche as

In this sentence of this author ye see the spiritual manner of the flesh of
Christ in the Sacrament which the Sacramentaries had divised, plainly
rejected, Real presence called spiritual for diverse causes.
as heretical, and the right spiritual manner taught, which is, that the.1.
by Gods Spirit are called spiritual of the woorker: so is this being wrought
by the holy Spirit, called spiritual. An other cause is, that the body of.2.
Christ, although yt be verily present, yet yt is not perceived by any
corporal knowelege, but only by the spiritual knowledge of faith. Wherefore
as all things not atteigned unto by corporal knowledge but by spiritual, are
spiritual: So is this which (as before is said) is by faith believed, but not
of natural knowledge comprehended, An other cause this author rehearses..3.
Which is, that our spirit by the virtue and power of God, united to the slesh
is refreshed. As the refection where with the body is refreshed is a corporal
refection: so the refection of the spirit is a spiritual refectio^. Forasmoche
then as our spirit is by this meat refreshed, yt is a spiritual refection. And
in his last cause this author touches an other cause why yt is spiritual,

Now, gentle Reader, where the Adversaries would have wrested, and perverted
this chapter of S. John, to have not ben understood of the Sacrament whether
they were obcecated, and blinded through malice, now judge. Heretics
maliciouse, arrogant and impudent.
Whether also they were not arrogant, which contemning the authority of so
many noble famous, and ancient Fathers, as ye have heard now faith fully
alleged, would seek and procead most arrogantly to prefer their own vain
and false Commentes and gloses, before the others expositions. Whether also
they were not impudent, shameless, yea and clean past shame that so boldie
would comme^d their lies to the people, not only, by their sermons, but also
to their continual shame with their pens in their

Wherefore now, Reader, being advertised beware of them, and learn, as ye
Doctrine flieng the common received understanding of the script. is to be
suspectd.
have just cause, to mistrust them, and fly from them. And cleave to that
company where ye see the ancient truth taught by ancient fathers as here ye
have done, And not by proud arrogant will, as the other have done, fly from
the truth. Their doctrine is to be suspected that fly from the common
understanding of the scripture received in the Church, as yt is now to be
perceived that these singular men have done by their single sigularitie. As our
Savior Christ said to the Jews: Si non venisse^, and locutus eis non
fuisse^, peccatu^ non haberent. Nunc autem excusationem non habent de peccato
suo. If I had not Joan. ca 15.
comed and not spoken unto them, they should have had no sin but now they
have no excuse of their sin. If then soche as have heard the word of
Christ teaching the^ his promise of the giving forth of his very body and
blood, and do not believe yt, have no excuse to save them from eternal the
guide, and leader in to all truth, and yet will persist in perverting the
scriptures, and through arrogancy will credit none but them selves, they be
not

Wherefore ye that have erred, stay, and look up in time, behold all the
chrystia^ world professing Gods true faith and religion, and come to the same.
Lurk not in the corners of darkness, which will bring you to extrea^
darkness, but com to the light, which Christ has left in his Church, which
shall lighten you the way to that light, that ever has showed and shined,
and never was darkened nor shadowed.

THE ONE AND FOVRTETH CHAP. Begins the exposition of these words of
Christ: This is my body, after the mind of the Adversaries.
Great and manifold are the maliciouse inuencions and deuiseis of the graund
enemy of mankind against the same. Which enemy perceauing man to be in that
state to come and enioie the glory and felicity that he was fallen from,
envied him, and subtellie under the countenance or prete^te of a co^modtie,
brought him to a most miserable Ye shall not die (says the enemy to the
woman) but God does know, that the same day that ye eat thereof yower eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing good and euel. To which his
persuasion and false assertion the woman giving place by to light Genesis 3.
creditte, seeing also the fruit of the tree to be delectable and pleasant to
the eyes, not regarding the certain and most true word of her Lord God, who
before had said, that in what day they did eat of the tree of the knowledge
of good and Jbid. 2.
evil, that they should die the death, she took of the forbidden fruit, and
did eat thereof, and gave to her husband, who did eat of yt also, and so not
believing the word of their Lord God, but transgressing his commandment
they were not only expelled out of that pleasant garden of Paradise, but
also being fallen under the heavy burden of gods wrath and justice, were now
banished from the eternal felicity, and glory of heaven, and made bond to
hell and everlasting damnacion.

Even so the same enemy seeing the chrystia^ people redeemed with Christ's
Temptacio^ of our first parents, and of Christians in these days compared.
mea^s he had once caused the^ to lose, and that they were now quiet, and in
godly order in the eartlie Paradise of Chrysts Church, he not bearing their
happiness in the unity of faith and godly co^uersacio^, has used his like
subtletie and craft to make us tra^sgresse the commandment of our lord God,
as he did our first Pare^tes, to the intent he would cause us to be banished
from the inheritance of the glory of God, whereunto by Christ's blood we are
made free. And will ye see how like his subtilties be: Owre first Parents had
an order appointed to the^ what meat they shoolde eat in the Paradise where
they lived: The builder of our Paradise has appoincted us what the meat shall
be that we shall eat, saing: Take, eat, this is my body. The enemy tempted
them to break their order about their meat and food: he tempts us to break
our order about our meat and food. Their meat was the fruit of every tree in
Paradise, saving the tree of knowledge of good and evil, God saing: Of every
tree that is in the garden thowe shall eat, but as touching the Genesis 2.
tree of knowledge of good and evil thowe shall not eat of yt: Owre meat in
the Paradise Take eat, this is my body. Take, drink, this my blood. The
enemy not withstanding gods own saing to our Paretes: In what day soever ye
eat of that tree, ye shall die the death, he directly contrary said: Ye
shall not die. The same enemy notwithstanding This is my body This is my
blood: directly contrary says: yt is not his body, yt is not his blood:
yt is but a piece of bread, but a cup of wine, figures, signs, or tokens of
his body, and his blood, and to compass that this his persuasion and
assertion may be received, as to our first pare^tes he said: that if there
did eat of that fruict they should be as Gods knowing both good and evil,
prete^ding a great commodity: so now he said: Esteem this no better the^ a
piece of bread, and a cup of wine, and not as the body and blood, of
Christ. For so (foramoch as Christ's body is in heaven and therefore can not be
here) ye shall not commit idolatry which is yower great commodity.

And as to the furtherance of the temtacion of owre Pare^tes the pleasing of
their senseis in seeing the fruict fair and pleasant, and not regarding the
word of their Lord God, did much provoke the^: so in this our te^ptacio^ he
wills us, not regarding the word of Christ our Lord God, to follow the
pleasant judgment of our sensies. And for somoche as we see nothing but bread
and wine, we taste nothing but bread and wine, we feell nothing but bread and
wine: Therefore we must believe nothing to be there but bread

Now if we so assent, and eat of the meat, which the enemy persuades us to
eat of, and not of the meat which our Lord and God has appoincted, we shall
not only be expelled out of this Paradise, of Christ's Church by the Angel
of God: but also being disherited from the inheritance of heaven, which Christ
our Savior by his blod has bought us to, we shall be co^de^pned to that pain
that we were once redeemed from, and so eternally become miserable with him,
unto whoose words we would give credditte before the words of our Lord God.
As now ye perceive how like the te^ptacions be: so may ye perceive how like
the reward of the asse^ting or agreing to the te^ptacio^ of the enemy is. If
therefore ye will avoid the reward, which is pain eternal, withstand the
temptacion, which begins the thrall.

A mong many other, two things (methinketh) should with the assiste^ce of
Two things which aught to move us to resist the temptations of the
Sacramentaries.
gods grace, much move you to withstand his wicked te^ptacions in this be
This is my body: But Satan says: yt is not his body. Now when any thing
is taught, that is manifestly repugnant to the word of our Lord God (who
ca^ speak nothing but truth) except we be worse bewitched them the Galathians
were, we must needs deem and judge that doctrine to be false coming from Satan
the father of lies, untruth and falshod. And being false, what else is to be
done but to withstand and reiecte yt?

The other thing that aught to move us to withstand this te^ptacio^, is, that
Sects of Sacramentaries. Bereng. Wicleff Io. Hus.
the words of his doctrine be not consonant nor agreeable. For besides his
diverse and contrary spirit, which he breathed into Berengarius, the first
public and open impugner of this blessed mystery (as yt is said in the
preface of this book) into Wiceff, and Hus: he has in this our time poured
out many contrary spitites, and meruelouslie showed himself the author of
disse^tion, and repugnant doctrine in the same mystery. But for that I might
be judged partial in the report of this diverse doctrine, I will not use mie
own

Luther in his brief confession, noting the diverse, and repugnant spirittes,
At the first Eight disaegreing spirittes among the Sacramentaries nombred by
Luther. Carolstad. Zwinglius. Oecolamp. Swenckfel.
these men were well warned of the holy Ghost; when that upon that one text
they divided them selves into seven spirits, each one differing allwaies from
the other. First Carolstadius would have the text so, that this is my body,
should signify: here sits my body. Then Zwinglius says, that that could
not be well said, no, though the Father of heaven had reueiled yt. Therefore
being moved with an other holy spirit of his own thus he turned the text:
Take, eat, this signifies my body. The third, Oecolampadius, brought forth
his third holy spirit, which turned that text into an other hew, as thus:
Take, eat, this is the token of my body. The fourth, Swenckfeldius, thinking
to make his stench to smell as musk brought us forth of his holy spirit this
rule: These words, this is my body, must be removed from our seight. For
they do let us of the spiritual understanding. The fifth holy spirit, being
but excrementes of that other, does thus read that text. Take and eat, that
which is delivered for you in this my body. The sixth holy spirit says,
Take and eat, this is my body in remembrance, as though Christ had said:
Take and eat, this is the monument of my body. The Ioannes Campanus, brings
this exposition: Take and eat this is my breadie body, or body of bread.
Beside all these, an other spirit flies Joan. Came
about (For the Deuell is an holy, and great spirit) which persuadeth men
that herein is no article of our faith, and therefore we aught not to contend of
this matter, but leave yt free to every man to believe herein what he list. Thus
far Luther.

See ye not by Luthers one words seven, and in thend of his collection one mo
to make eight dissonant, and disagreable doctrines upon these words of
Christ: This is my body? See ye not Satan divided against Satan? See ye not
his ministres plaing at cross wasters for the victory? Be persuaded then,
that where soche contencion, soche strife, soche Battaill is amongst men,
springing all out of one Gospel, that in that Gospel is no treuth. But we
have not yet seen the end.

Melanchton the right of spring, and heir of the Lutheran doctrine, Five
sects of Sacrame^taries among the Lutherans nombred by Melanct.
master Martin Luther, in the end of his life, but also reports that among
the Lutherans them selves, there were five Sacramentaries sects, or heresies.
For some (says he) be of Helhusius mind some of Sarcerius mind: some other
follow the ministers of Breme: and some Ioachimus Morlinus: other also he
alleges, whose opinion is, that Christ's body may be in every place. Which
sects being five in nombre, if ye put them to the eight enombred by Luther,
they make thirtene.

Thus by their own report yt is to be perceived that the words of Satan's
doctrine be not of one sownde, of one agreeement, but his spirit Christ's
words wrested to sixtene diverse senses by the Protestants.
has breathed into his disciples upon these few words of Christ diverse and
and plain repugnant expositions and doctrines.

To these thirtene diverse doctrines, if we add and putto the expositions of
Luther himself, Melanchton and Calvin, which esteemed them selves as the
lights of the world, we shall make up sixtene

As for Luther, yt is euindent that he expounded Christ's words far unlike
to Zuinglius, Oecola^padius, or any of that line, yea unto Berengarius himself
For he says they must be thus understood: This is my body, that is, this
bread is my body.

Melanchton in his later days (as yt is common to heretics to grow worse
and worse) forsook Luthers spirit, and tasted of Zwinglius spirit, Melancth.
His mutabilitie.
but so as he would in soch wise correct him, that he would make him a new
spirit. And therefore he would have this sense upon Christ's words, This is my
body, that is, This is a participacion of my body, which new interpretacion
(says Staphilus) is plainly a new Sacramentaries heresy.

Last of all the doctrine of Calvin swarueth from all these, teaching that
Christ is given to us reallie, but not corporally, as though the sense of Io.
Calvin
Christ's words might be: This is my body, that is, This is the very
substance of my body, but it is not my bodily substance.

Thus about the sense of Christ's words ye have among these Egyptians seen a
merueillouse variety, who creping and groping in their palpable darkness
took that for truth, that Satan suffered to come first to their hand, by
which mean every one of them uttered that for truth, that in his darkness he
had lighted on. But among all note how by Swenckfeldius, Satan

But now returning to my purpose again, I wish that to be perceived in this
process which before I spoke of to be noted, the better to withstand Satan
in his temptacions against the true doctrine and faith, namely that his
doctrine is not consonant, nor agreeable in yt self, but dissonant and
repugnant, some of his disciples teaching that the body of Christ is in the
Sament with the bread, some that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament in and
under the bread: other some that the bread is the body of Christ: other of the
contrary manner denieng the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but yet
diversely, some of them teaching that the Sacrament is but a sign of the body
of Christ: other some that the bread is a figure of the body of

In which diversity, and contrariety of doctrines, yt is easelie to be
perceived not only how much dissonant they are from the doctrine and words
of Christ: but also how far disagreing they are among them selves. Which
faut perceived, I think him more then bewitched that will give credittte to
any of them, forsomoche as there is no man but knows that in the doctrine of
God is concord agreement. And forsomoch as in these other doctrins there is
none agreement, but repugnance and contrarities, yt is certain that they be not
of God.

Besides this what proof have any of all these either in the scriptures or
holy Fathers, that this saing of Christ: This is my body, should be
understood as each of them stowtly seem to auouche, and that after their
sondrie manners?

Now therefore, Reader, stay thie self, and choose raither to believe Christ,
then Satan who goes about to deceive thee, as he did thie first parents,
who This is my body: I shall now address my self, first somewhat to say of
things apperteining to the true understanding of those words, and afterward
open to you he right understanding of the same words by the most ancient
and holy Fathers of Christ's Church, where ye shall perceive not a repugnance,
as in Satan's school, but concord and agreement meit for Christ's school.

THE TWO AND FOVRTETH CHAP. BEGINS the exposition of the words of Christ
after the catholic manner with certain proofs of the same.
AS ye have heard Satan teaching his scholars with much contrariety,

The chiefest scholars reporters of these words be the three Evangelists,
Matthew, Mark and Luke, and the Apostle Paul. S. Matthew reports Jesus
took bread and when he had blessed it, he break it, and gave it to the
disciples, Mat. 26.
and said: Take, eat, this is my body. And he took the cup, and thanked,
and gave it them, saing: Drink ye all of this. This is my blood which is of
the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.

S. Mark agreablie testifies the same thus: Jesus took bread, and blessing
Mar. 14.
he brake it, and gave to them and said. Take, eat, this is my body, and he
took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he took it to them. And they
all drank of it, and he said to them: This is my blood of the new
testament, which is shed for many.

S. Luke reports yt after this manner. And when he had taken bread he gave
thanks and brake it, and gave it unto them saing: This is my body, which is
given for you. Likewise Luc. 22.
also when he had supped he took the cup saing. This cup is the new
Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

With this testimony of S. Luke agrees S. Paul thus: Owre Lord Jesus, the
same night that he was betrayed took bread, and when he had given thanks he
brake 1. Cor. 11.
it and said: Take ye and eat, this is my body, which is broken for you.
This do in remembrance of me. After the same manner also he took the cup when
supper was done saing: This cup is the new testament in my blood. This do
as often as ye drink yt in the remembrance of me.

Thus ye see first these four high scholars of Christ's school consona^tlie
and agreablie reporting the doctrine of their master namely that he took
bread and after he had given thanks or blessed yt gave yt to them, saing take,
eat, this ye my Tropes and figures patched to Christ's words excluded.
body. Of the which ye see not one making any one title or mention of tropes
Take, eat, this is my body, wherefore these words, this is my body, are
simply and plainly whith out tropes and figure so to be understood, as
they may answer the pmesse.

As for the understanding of these words of the promise and the rest The
sixte of S. John being understood of the body and blood of Christ, the
words of the supper must of necessity be so likewise.
adioined to the same in the sixth of S. John, yt is already made evident, that

Yt makes also an evident proof for this purpose that S. Paul, who taught
the Corinthians the use of the supper of our Lord, did never teach them that
yt was but a figure of the body of our Lord, but simply that yt was the
body of our Lord. The proof of this is easy, for he taught the^ none
otherwise the^ he wrote to the^, He wrote none other meeninge or understanding
of the words of Christ, but even as they were of Christ, spoken, which was
without trope or figure, wherefore S. Paul taught them without

That the words of Christ are to be understood without trope or figure The
fame among insidests of the christian religion in the primitive Church, proves
the presence.
not only the faith of Christ's Church, which shall be hereafter declared,
but also the fame grounded upon the same faith spread thoroughout among the
infidells and heathen in the primitive Church does well woman and constant
Martyr Blandina, said to them that were about her: Multu^ erratis, o viri,
quod putatis infantum vsceribus vesci eos, qui ne brutorum quide^ animaliu
Eusebius. li. 5. cap. 2. Blandina.
carnibus vtuntur. Ye are deceived, o ye me^, that ye think the^ to eat the
bowels of children, which use not to eat the flesh of brute beasts. Attalus
also heing sore tormented, when he saw the people delighted with the smell
Jbid. cap. 3. Attalus.
of his flesh being roasted, said unto them. Ecce, hoc est hommes comedere,
quod vos facitis, quod a nobis velut occult^ inqniritis facinus, quod vos
aperta luce committius. This Lo that you do, is to eat men, which as a secret
wickedness ye enquiere among us, which ye commit in the open light. Lib.
de passione eius quem scripserunt presbyteri and Diacones Achaia.


The heathen, as yt is supposed, knowing the chrystians to assemble, and
hearing that in those assembles they did eat the flesh of a man, and not
knowing the mystery, suspected that they killed either men or children for
that purpose, when in deed they eat the flesh of Christ. Who (as saint
Androwe said) when his veryflesh is eaten of the people, and his blood drunk:
yet does he still remain wholl and sownde undefiled, and alive.

Yt prooneth well also this fame, that Auerrois the Philosopher says of the
Chrystians: Mundum peragraui, varias sectas inueni, and runquam tam fatuam
repperi sectam, sicut est secta Christianoru^. Quoniam Deum suum, quem colunt,
deuorant dentibus. I have walked over the world, I have fownde diverse sects,
and yet did I never find so foolish a sect as the sect of the Chrystians. For
they devour with their teeth, whom they honor as God. Yt was known to all
the world, that the Chrystia^s honored Christ as their God. Wherefore yt is
easy to perceive, that the fame was that they received and eat Christ. And
forasmoche as the heathen reputed Christ but as a very man, and were ignorant
of that great mystery of the conjunction of the Godhead and manhead in unity
of person in Christ, they said that the Chrystians did eat the flesh of man.
By which voice other some, as in a multude yt often happens,
mysvnderstanding yt, and taking yt absolutely, reported the Chrystians as
before is said, that they did eat secretly the flesh of men and children.

With this suspicion yt is not unlike that the Jew was led of whom S.
Amphilochius makes mention: who being desierouse to search and know S.
Amphil. in vita Basilij.
the secrett mysteries of the chrystians, at the time that S. Basille should
go to the holy ministracion, feigning himself a chrystian, entered among the
Chrystians, and when the Sacrament was broken by the hands of S. Basil, A
jew induced to be a Chrystia^ by a miracle of the Sacramit.
he saw the^ a child divided, and when with other he came to the communion,
the Sacrament delivered unto him was made flesh, and the cup was full of
blood, of which both reserving some token, he went home and showed yt to his
wief, and for declaracion told her what he had seen with his eyes. Whereupon
belcuing the mysteries of the Chrystians to be merueillouse and wonderful, the
next day he came to S. Basil, and desired to be baptized, and made a
chrystian.

Thus we may perceive, that the works of God be great and merueillouse, who
unto this Jew but suspecting the chrystians to eat flesh and drink blood in
their mysteries made yt soch to him as he suspected yt to be and to appear
soche to his seight as yt was covertly to other in very deed. But he saw yt
with his bodily eye for his instruction, that the true Chrystian

But to return to our first matter, so great was the fame that the Chrystians
did eat man's flesh in their mysteries, that to deliver the^ from the envy
that was conceived, against the^ for the same Justinius the holy martyr was
enforced in his Apollogie made unto Antonius Pius to reueil and declare unto
him all the wholl order of the mysteries of the chrystians, and what was their
faith Justinius declared the matter so plainly, as no man of his auncientie to
soche men more plainly, as shortly here after ye shall perceive.

As these things then hitherto said do prove by the same that Christ is
present in the Sacrament, and so consequently that the words of Christ, have been and so ought to be understood in their propre sense without trope or
figure: So would I wish them of all chrystians in these days to be received.
And as by these things we may be moved. So by other reasons we may from the
contrary understanding be dissuaded. Among many of which I will bring but one
or two, that Rupertus does make and the first is this. Nonne Ioannes
Euangelista dicit in Apocalipsi: Si quis apposuerit ad haec, apponet super
illu^ Rupert. li. 6. in Joan. Apoca. 22.
Deus plagas scriptas in libro isto. Et si quis diminuerit de verbis prophetiae
libri huius, auferet Deus partem eius de ligno vitae, and de ciuitate sancta,
and de ijs quae scripta sunt in libro isto? Nunquid minus timenda est hic illa
maledictio, vt non detrahamus, vel apponamus quidquam verbis dicentis, Hoc est
corpus meum, quod pro vobis tradetur: Hic est sanguis meus noui testamenti, qui
pro multis effundetur, in remissionem peccatorum? Cum enim illo dicente: Hoc
est corpus meum, nos subauditionem apposuerimus dicentes, figuratiuum, vel per
similitudinem dictum: Cum inquam illo dicente: Hoc est corpus meum, nos
dixerimus, hoc signisicat corpus meum, nonne multum est quod apponimus, vel
praua demutatione detrahimus, and sensum generamus, quem tantus Author Deus and
homo nusqua^ est locutus, nec ascendit vnquam in cor eius? Does not the
Evangelist John say in the Apocalipse: If any man shall add unto these
things, God shall add unto him the plagues, that are written in this book.
And if any man shall minishe of the words of the book of this prophecy,
God shall take away his part out of the book of life and out of the holy
To the words of God may nothing be added nor diminished
citte, and the things which are written in this book? Is this maledictio^
or curse less to be feared here, that we diminish not or put any thing to
the words of him that said: This is my body, which shall be delivered for
you. This is my blood of the new testament, which shall be shed for many
in the remission of sins? For when This is my body: we shall putto an
understanding, saing a figurative body, or that yt is spoken by a similitude,
when I say, he says. This is my body: we shall say this signifies my
body, is yt not much that we putto his words, or by an evil change take
from them, and make a sense, which so great an Author God and man, in no
place has spoken, neither at any time did yt ascend in to his heart? Thus
Rupertus.

This is the first reason of this Author, which if yt be well weighed, and
the thing well considered, how much we by figures, tropes, and
significacions, do alter and change, how much we putto in words and
diminish in substance, how the exposition denies, that the text affirms: we
have good cause to fear the malediction of God spoken by S. John, who bears
not soche expositions denieng what he has said, nor soche gloses confownding
his text. Wherefore we may well be dissuaded from soche expositions, or rather
deprauacions, and the rather that their is no warrant to bear us so to
expownde these words of Christ, as of the circumstance of the place

Cum obijcit quis suisque scriptitat in sedulis, quod itidem dixerit eadem
veritas. Ego sum vitis, tam audacter, qua^ imperite in argumentum mendosum
illud attrahit, cum statim subsequentia verba dicentist Sicut palms non potest
far fructum a semetipso nisi manserit in vite: sic nec vos nisi in me
manseritis, manifest per similitudinem compellant intelligi, praesertim cum
non signanter dixerit: Ego sum haec vitis: sicut signanter dixit, Hoc est
corpus meum, hic est sanguis meus, apposita protinus descriptione verae
proprietatis, de corpore inquiens, quod pro vobis tradetur, de san guine autem,
qui pro multis effundetur. Igitur ne veniant super nos plagae nouissimae, neque
apponimus, neque diminuimus quicquam diuinae definitioni, vel descriptioni,
quam incarnatum Verbum ore proprio deproinpsit. Imo quia perfecta charitas
for as mittit timorem, non tam plagarum timore, qunm veritatis amore,
confitemur, quia panis iste corporeus, postquam signauerit eum Pater, and vinum
hoc expressum acinis praesentibus mox vt eodem signo signatum est per manus
ecclesiae dicentis: vt nobis corpus and sanguis fiat dilectissimi filij tui,
Domini nostri Jesus Christi, etc. vsque in memoria^ mei facietis: corpus and
sanguis eius, qui huius traditionis author est, and hoc sacrisicium ipse
Christus est, cuius passione vt sacrificium fieret a Deo Patre in veritate
signatum est. When one obiecteth, and writes yt also in his books even as
boldly as unlearned These words J am a vine. Joan. 15. are proved by the
circumstance to be a similitudi.
lie that the same truth (mening Christ) says also, I am a vine: he draws
yt into a false argument, seeing that the words immediately following of him As
the branch can bear no fruit of him self, except he abide in the vine: So
neither can you except ye abide in me: Do manifestly enforce that saing to be
vnde by a similitude, specially for that he did not with a singular
demonstracio^ sat: I am this vine: as with a singular demonstracion he said:
This is my body, this is my blood: Whereunto furthwith he put the description
of the true property of each of them, of the body saing: which shall be
delivered for you, of the blood also, which shall be shed for many.
Therefore that these later plagues come not upon us, we neither diminish, nor put
to any thing to the divine definition or description, which the Son of God
incarnate has spoken or uttered with his own mouth. But raither, because
perfect charity casts our fear, not so much for the fear, as for love
of truth we do confess, that this bodily bread, after the Father has
blessed it, and this wine pressed out of these present grapes, as sooen as yt
is blessed by the hands of the church saing: that yt may be made to us the
body and blood of thy most beloved some Jesus Christ, and so forth until ye
come to these words, ye shall do yt in the remembrance of me, that yt is the
body and blood of him, who is the Author of this tradicion, and that this
sacrifice is Christ him self, by whose passion yt was blessed of God the Father
in very deed, that yt might be made a sacrifice. Thus far he.

Two things I think, good gentle Reader, in this reason of this Author to
note to thee: The one is that where the Adversary brings forth certain
places of the scripture, which be understand by tropes: as where Christ
says: I am a vine, I am the door, and soche like, thereby to prove that these
words of Christ. This is my body: should so be understand also (which in
deed proves nothing) this Author declares that the circumstance of these
places, does compel us so to understand them, as in the opening of this text:
I am a vine, he has declared. So this scripture also: I am the door, the
words of Christ immediately following teach us that they are to be
understand by Joan. 10.
a similitude, for straight way he says: By me who soever enters he shall
be saved, and shall go in, and go out, and find food. So that we have
Christ's own warrant Wilful or natural reason is no sufficient warrant
allwaies in the court of faith.
so to understand them. But to understand the words of Christ's supper in
like manner, vieue the place, ye shall find no title in the text, to cause yt
to bear the Adversaries sense. So that they have no other warrant but wilful
and natural reason, which warrant is not allwaies sufficient and aloweable in
the court of faith. Wherefore as these scriptures be to be understood

For declaracion of which matter, I may divide the second note into two
parts. The one is, to note the enunciacion of both scriptures. For though
Christ said, I am a vine: yet he did not particularly take a branch of a
vine, and say, I am this vine, or this vine is my body: but used the general
word, and said I am a vine. But speaking of the mystery of his body, he
did not use that manner of speech, saing, I am bread, which manner of phrase
may seem well to bear a trope, if any circumsta^ce had been adioined to
declare and open the same: But leaving the general word of bread, and
particularly taking a piece of bread in his hands, and blessing, and giving
thanks, said with a particular and special demonstracion: This is my body.
As these two propositions spoken of an old man. I am a child, and by special
demonstracion to this child saing: This is my child: have a great difference.
The first I am a vine: and this is my body be no like speeches.
being spoken by a similitude, for that reason wit understanding and senseis
being decayed in him, he may say. I am a child, that is, like a child, The
other being spoken of his own child, and importing not a similitude, but a
natural substance of him in the child: So these propositions: I am a vine,
and this is my body: have great difference: The one being spoken by a
similitude because Christ is like a vine: The other by certain demonstracion of
substance, for that that Christ made demonstracion unto was his very substance.

The second part of the note is that the circumstance of the scripture
rejecting figures, and tropes does mightily prove the sense of that place to
be propre, and not figurative or tropicall. For the propretie (says he) apper
tein^ng to the body (which can not be applied to the figure) is furthwith
added, which is that the thing is there, which sha^ll be delivered for many.
And that is in the cup, which shall shed in the remission of sins, which
can be nothing else, but the body and blood of Christ. Who only gave his
body to be crucified, and his blood to be shed for owre redemption.

Thus then ye perceive that these words of Christ: This is my body: were
spoken of him without the putting to of any trope, figure or sign. They This
is my body no figurative speech.
are left to us written by the three holy Evangelists, whithoute any mencio^
of trope or figure. They were so taught by S. Paul to the Corinthians, and
afterward so written. The promise of Christ, wherein he said: The bread,
which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world,
was plainly whithoute any trope spoken. Yt is so reported of the Evangelist S.
John. Yt is so expownded of all the ancient doctors, and so showed what the
words be, teaching the perfourmance of that promise.

Ye perceive also the fame of the communion of the Chrystians among the
infidels to be not by a figure of flesh, but by very flesh in deed. Ye
perceive among Chrystians the belief of the Sacrament, to be the flesh of
Christ, to be so commonly received and believed, that young babes in those
days could speak yt. Ye perceive that yt is not laufull for us to put to,
or to take away from the word of Christ. For if we do, we fall into the
Signum or figura, Token or figure, is not that put to that Christ spoke not?
and do ye not so fall into the danger of Gods plagues? Over and besides this
ye perceive that the circumstance of the scripture refuses tropes and figures
and enforces

Wherefore chrystian Reader, beware of that flattering contenaunce and
deceiptfull lieng of the old serpent Satan: fly the hissing of the vipers:
be not carried away with light creditte, as our first parents were thereby to
creditte the deuel, and discreditte God. But know the one to be thie enemy,
and fear him: know the other to be thy Lord God, thy Savior and Redemer,
and embrace him,

Of the which matter hark farther to the godly saing of Rupertus: Accipe,
inquit, and comedite, Hoc est corpus meum. Et alibi Qui manducat carnem meam,
and bibit sanguinem meum, in me manet and ego in eo. Cum haec dicit agnus Dei,
oportune nobis ad memoriam recurrit illud: quod dixit serpens, imo per
serpentem Diabolus, hostis bumani generis. Accipite and comedite, and eritis
sicut dij. Optimae, and spectabiles valde propositiones. Ille serpens erat:
iste agnus est. Ille vetus peccator, iste antiquut creator. Ille spiritu
Diaboli falsum sibilans. iste spiritu Dei verum euangelizaus. Ille de ligno non
suo raptor optulit: Iste de corpore and sanguine suo largitor dedit. Ille quod
non habebat mendaciter promisit, eritis (inquiens) sicut dij: Iste quod
habebat, quod semper naturaliter habet, fideliter dedit vt simus dij, dum manet
ipse in nobis: Illi tandem nephandissime creditum est plusquam Deo: Credatur e
contrario buic Deo, si non plus, at saltem quantum creditum est illi Diabolo,
Creditum est enim, quod illi pomo inesset, quod non videbatur, scilicet vis
deos efficiendi: Credatur buic Sacramento inesse quod non videtur, videlicet,
veritas carnis and sanguinis, valens efficere nos corporales Vnigenito filio
Dei. Hoc enim ratio vel ordo, iustitiae exposcit. Accipite ergo (inquit) and
comedite. Accipere est fideliter credere, cum gratiarum action diligere,
compatienti affectu corporis huius traditionem, and sanguinis huius effusionem
respicere. Hoc fieri non potest, nisi prius reijciaturid, quod ab illo male
acceptum est. Illud igitur mendacium execrantes, hanc veritatem accipite,
approbate, amplectimini, and contra cibum mortis, pane^ comedite vitae eternae
and calicem bibite salutis perpetuae. He says (mening Christ) take Conference
of Christ's words and the serpents.
and eat, this is my body, and in an other place: He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him. When the lamb of God says
these things yt comes in due time to our memory, that the serpent said, or
raither by the serpent, the Deuell, the enemy of man kind: Take and eat, and
ye shall be as Gods. Goodly and very notable propositions. He was a serpent:
this is a lamb. He an old offender: this an ancient creator. He by the
spirit of the Deuel hissing out an untruth: this by the spirit of God
preaching a truth. He a theeif gave of the fruit that was not his: This a
right geuer, gave of his own body and blood. He falsely promised that that
he had not, ye shall (says he) be as Gods: This truly gave that he had,
which allwaies naturally he has, that is, that we may be Gods, forsomoche
as he dwells in us. Unto him never the less most wickedly was given more
credit then to God: Unto this contrary wise let credit be given being God, if
not more, yet at the least as much creditte as was given to the Deuell. For yt
was believed, that to be in that apple which was not sein, that is to say,
power to make Gods: Let yt be believed to be in the Sacrament, that is not seen,
that is to say, the verity of the flesh and blood of Christ, able to
incorporate us to the only begotten Son of God. Thus much reason, or order
of justice does require. Take therefore, says he, and eat. To take is
faithfully to believe, with thanks giving To take Christ's body, what yt is.
to love, with a compatient affection to behold the deliverance of this
blood.

Thus being by this good Father admonished of the true understanding

THE THREE AND FOVRTETH CHAP. BEGINS to prove the understanding of Christ's
forsaied words not to be figurative by the anthoritie of the Fathers. And
first by Alexander and Instinus.
FOrsomoche as the misunderstanding of the words of the supper of Christ has
and does maintein great and lamentable contencion among soche as profess
Christ's name, and the right understanding of the same ought to be the occasion
of the restitucion of peace, and concord: Let yt not greiue thee (gentle
Reader) though I tarry somewhat long upon this text, in producing many holy
Fathers of Chrysts school. who shall teach us how these words, This is my
body, were there taught to be understood,

Although there are right ancient Fathers, that do very no tablie declare,
and testify the presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, as
Martialis the disciple of Christ: Ignatius the disciple of S. John the
evangelist, Dionysius Arcopagita, the disciple of S. Paul, with diverse other:
yet the eldest that I find after the Evangelists and S. Panle, treacting of
the words of Christ are Alexander and Justinius, of the which although
Alexander be the elder: yet for that by him occasion is given to speak of some
matter more at large, I shall first produce Justinius.

This holy martyr, for answer and defense of the Chrystians, who were
slaundered, that they should eat man's flesh, wrote to the Emperor Antonius
Pius, and among other things declares what is the religion of the christians
Cum autem is qui priest gratias egerit, and totus populus approbauerit hi qui
vocantur apud nos Diacom distribuunt vnicuique praesentium, vt participent de
pane Justin. Apolog. 2.
in quo gratiae actae sunt, and de vino and aqua, and ijs qui non sunt
presents deferunt. Atque hoc alimentum apud nos vocatur Eucharistia. De quo
nulli alij participare licitum est, nisi qui credit vera esse, quae docentur a
nobis, et qui lauacro in remissionem peccatoru^ and in regenerationem lotus
est. and sic viuit, sicut Christus tradidit. Neque vt commune^ panem and
commune poculu^ haec suscipimus: sed quemadmodum per verbum Dei incarnatus
Jesus Christus, Seruator noster, and carnem and sanguinem habuit: Sic and verbi
sui oratione, consecratum gratiarum action alimentum, ex quo caro nostra, and
sanguis per transmutationem aluntur, ipsius incarnati Jesus Christi and carnem,
and sanguinem esse edocti sumus. Apostoli enim in commentarijs suis quae
Euangelia vocantur, sic ipsis praecipisse tradiderunt. Cum accepisset panem,
gratijs actis, dixisse: Hoc facite in mei commemorationem, Hoc est corpus meum.
Et poculum similirer cum accepisset, and gratias egisset, dixisse: Hic est
sanguis meus, and solis ipsis impartisse. When the priest has ended his
thanks giving, and all the people have said Amen, they whom we call Deacons
distribute to every one then present to be partakers of the bread, wine, and
water consecrated, Bread, wine and water consecrated in the primitive church
and carry part to them that be absent. And this is the food which among us
is called Eucharistia. Whereof yt is laufull for no man to be partaker, except
he believe those things to be true, that be taught us: And be baptized in the
water of regeneracion in remission of sins, and so lives as Christ has
taught. For we do not take these as common bread and wine: but like as Jesus
Even so we be taught that the food (wherewith our flesh and blood be nourished
by alteracion) when yt is consecrated by the prayer of his Bread and wine after
consecracio^ be the body and blood of Christ.
word to be the flesh and blood of the same Jesus incarnated. For the
Apostles in those their books, which be called Gospells, teach that Jesus
did so command them, when he had taken bread, and given thanks said, Do
this in my remembrance, This is my body, And likewise taking the cup when he
had given thank^s, said: This is my blood, and gave them to his Apostles
only. Thus much holy Iustine.

In this Author be many things worthy note. But omitting them all I shall
only note that, that he is at this time alleged for, namely for the right
understanding of Christ's words in their propre sense, without figure or
trope. For the which, note well that he says, that we be taught that the
food (mening the bread, wine and water) after the consecracion is the flesh

And herwith all note how certain this doctrine was. Yt was as certain, and
sure, as the mystery of the incarnacion of Christ. For (says this Author)
Doctrine of the real presence as certain as the incarnacion to the primitive
church.
Like as Jesus Christ our Savior incarnated by the word of God, had flesh
and blood for our salvation: Even so we be taught, the bread wine and water,
after the consecracion, to be the flesh and blood of the same Jesus.

Weigh this (gentle Reader) and mark these words well that even as we be
taught as a principle of our faith, to believe that Jesus Christ in his
incarnacion had flesh and blood: even so we be taught the food of the holy
Sacrament to be the flesh and blood of the same Jesus. But how does this
Author prove that this doctrine was so taught? By this proof. For the Apostles
(says he) in their works, which they call Gospells do teach, that our
(when he had taken bread and given thanks) do this in the remembrance of me.
This is my body. And likewise taking the cup, when he had given thanks
said: This is my blood.

In this proof of this Author there be two things to be noted. The one against
the blasphemouse reproach of the Adversaries and this Proclamer, Real presence
plainly avouched by Justinus.
which say that yt is an inuencion of the papists to teach Christ's flesh
and blood to be in the Sacrament. But this Author says, that the Apostles
taught that our Savior Jesus did command them so to do. So thar yt is his
commandment and tradicion, an not the papists inuencion, but if they will
account Jesus Christ for this his so doing to be a papist, Then in deed they
may say, yt is the inuencion of a papist.

The other note is for the applicacion of the words of Christ to the
Sacrament. Ye have perceived that we be taught, that the food of the Sacrament
is the flesh of Jesus Christ. Yeperceaue also that the same Jesus Christ so
commanded, as the Apostles have taught in their Gospells. But where is that
commandment in the Gospells? This is the commandment. Do this in the
remembrance of me. This is my body, this my blood. By these words we are
commanded to do the thing. By these words we are taught what the thing is.
The thing (as this author says) is the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ
incarnated. And this thing also he says, we are taught by these words.
Wherefore these words are to be understood of the flesh and blood of

Now look well upon the doctrine of Christ and his primitive Church: compare
them to the doctrines of the catholic Church that now is, and see if they be
not agreeable: Try if they be not all one. Christ says, after Doctrine of the
primitive church, and the church since and now compared.
he had blessed the bread and the wine: This is my body, This is my blood.
This Author says, that they were taught in the primitive Church, that the
bread and wine with water, after co^secracio^ be the flesh and blood of Jesus
incarnated: The catholic Church, that has been, and now is, teaches that
the bread and wine on the Altar after the consecracion be the body and blood
of Christ. Would ye desire any more agreement? would ye desire any better
concord?

And where the Proclamer requires any one ancient Author that teaches
plainly Christ's very real presence, would he have any plainer speech, A
plain place for M. Juell.
then that which he impugneth in us? This Author says that, that we

But here is not be ouerpassed the exceading craft and untruth of Cranmer,
one of the Fathers of this Proclamer in the corrupting, falsieng, and Cranmer
falsifieth and abuses Justin.
abusing of this Author Justinius. And that yt shall not be laid to my charge
that I misreporte him. I will faithfully asscribe his, words as they be
written in his book. Thus he writes. Justinius a great learned man, and an
holy Martyr the eldest Author that this day is known to write any
treactice upon the Sacraments, and wrote not much after one hundredth years
after Christ's ascension. He writes in his Lib. 2. ca. 5
second Apology, that the bread, water and wine in this Sacrament are not to
be taken as other common meats and drinks be, but they be meats ordained
pourposely to give thanks to God, and therefore be called Eucharistia, and be
called also the body and blood of Christ, and that yt is laufull for none to
eat or drink of them, but that profess Christ, and hue according to the
same, And yet the same meat and drink (says he) is changed into our flesh
and blood and nourishes our bodies.

These be his very words, and in this manner does he report Justinius. Which
report how yt agrees with Justinius own words, the reader by conserence
shall easily perceive. And therefore omitting many falsheades Two false
sleights of Cra^mer noted in thallegacion of Justin.
Petrus Nannius declares, which for the better opening of the truth I will
here also ascribe: Thus he translateth that part of Justinius. Non enim vt
quemuis panem, neque vt quemuis potum, ista omnia accipimus, sed quemadmodum
per Petrus Nannius
verbum Dei incarnatus est Jesus Christus saluator noster, and carnem and
sanguinem pro nostra salute assumpsu: ita quoque per preces verbi illius, cibu^
ex quo caro nostra et sanguis per immutatione^ aluntur cu^ bedictus fuerit,
Jesus ipsius incarnati, carne^ et sangume^dicimus esse.

Neither do we take all these things, as every other bread, neither as every
other drink. But eue^ as Jesus Christ our savior by the word of God was
incarnated, and for our health took flesh and blood: eue^ so have we learned
that food of the which our flesh and blood by immutacio^ are nourished, when
yt is blessed by the prayers of his words, to be flesh and bloodo Jesus
incarnate. In which translacion, as in the other ye see, that the nourishment
of the food, of bread, wine and water, is put before the consecracion, which
Cranmer untruly would place after the consecracion, for the purpose before
said and thereby also to deny transubstanciacion. But Iustine to declare yt is
the flesh of Jesus incarnated.

The like manner of speech uses both S. Ambrose and S. Augustine, saing: Amb.
li. 4. de Sac. ca. 5 Plain samges for M. Juell.
Antequam consecretur panis est, vbi autem verba Christi accesserint, corpus
est Christi. Before yt be consecrated yt is bread, but when the words of
Christ have comed to yt, yt is the body of Christ. S. Augustine thus: Ante
verba Christi quod offertur panis dicitur: vbi Christi verba deprompta fuerint,
iam non panis dicitur, sed corpus appellatur. Before the words of Christ,
that which is offered is Augu. de verbis Do. sermon. 8,
called bread: but when the words of Christ are spoken, yt is not now called
bread, but yt is called the body.

Thus Reader, thowe may see, the sleight of Cranmer and his falsifieng of the
holy doctors, by him. The like in diverse places of this book shall thowe
find proved in Oecolampadius, whom Cranmer followed, and also in this
Proclamer who follows Cranmer. Soche and so good is the quarrel that yt will
give thee occasion to look er thowe leap: I will leave Iustine, and call in
Aleander an holy martyr, who lived not long after Christ even in Ignatius and
Polycarpus.

Thus writes Alexander. In sacramentorum oblationibus, quae inter missarum
solemnia Domino offeruntur, passio Domini miscenda est, vt eius, cuius corpus
and sanguis consicitur, passio celebretur, ita vt repulsis opinionibus
superstitionum, panis tantum and Alexand. 1 epist. 1.
vinum aqua permixtum in sacrificio offerantur. Non debet enim vt a patribus
accepimus and ipsa ratio docet, in calice Domini aut vinum solum, aut aqua sola
offerri, Sed vtrumque permixtum, quia vtrumque ex latere eius in passione sua
profluxisse legitur. Ipsa vero veritas nos instruit, calicem and panem in
sacramento offerre, quando ait: Accepit Jesus panem, and benedixit, deditque
Discipulis suis, dicens (Accipite and manducate: Hoe est enim corpus meum, quod
pro vobis tradetur. Similiter postquam coenauit accepit calicem, deditque
Discipulis suis, dicens: Accipite and bibite exco omnes. Hic est calix
sanguinis mei. qui pro vobis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum. Crimina
atque peccata, oblatis ijs Domino sacrificijs delentur. Idcirco and passio eius
in iis commemoranda est, qua redempti sumus, and saepius recitanda, and haec
Domino offerenda. Talibus hostijs delectabitur, and placabitur Dominus, and
peccata dimittet ingentia. Nihil enim in sacrificijs maius esse potest quam
corpus and sanguis Domini. Nec vlla oblatio hac potior est, sed haec omnes
praecellit Quae pura conscientia Domino offerenda est, and pura mente sumenda,
atque ab omnibus veneranda. Et sicut potior est caeteris, it a potius excoli
and venerari debet.

In the oblacions of the Sacraments, which in the solemn doings of the
Masses be offered, the passion of our Lord is to be intermedled, that the Mass.
passion of him, whose body and blood is consecrated, may be celebrated, so
that, the supersticions of opinions repelled, only bread and wine mixed with
water may be offered. For there aught not (as we have received of our Fathers,
Neither wine alone nor water alone aught to be offered in the sacrifice
and also reason yt self does teach) either wine alone, or water alone to be
offered in the cup of our Lord: but both mixed together, because yt is read
that both in the time of his passion did flow out of his side. The very
truth yt self does teach us to offer bread and wine in the Sacrament, when he
taking the bread, and blessing yt said: Take ye and eat, This is my body,
which shall be delivered for you. Likewise when he had supped, he took the
cup, and gave yt to his disciples, saing: Take ye, and drink ye all of this:
For this is the cup of my blood, which shall be shed for you in remission
of sins. These sacrifices being offered to our Lord, crimes and offenses are
wiped away. Therefore his passion also by the which we are redeemed, is in these
to be remembered, and often to be recited, and yt also is to be offered to our
Lord. For with soche sacrifices Among all sacrifices none of more estimacion
then the body and blood of our Lord.
our Lord will be delighted, and appeaced, and will forgive great sins.
Among all sacrifices nothing can be of more estimacion then the body and
blood of Christ. Neither is there any oblacion more worthy. But this does
precell all. Which is to be offered to our Lord with a pure conscience, and
with a pure mind to be received of al, and woourshipped. And as yt is more
worthy then other: Even so yt aught more woorthilie to be honored and
woourshipped. Thus far Alexander.

Who alleging the words of Christ: This is my body. And this is my blood,
does by other his words therewith declare that they are not to be understood
by figure or trope: but in their propre sense. And among many notes, that may
here be made, I will take, but three to prove the Threenetes plainite
unp^gning three articles of the Proclamer.


The first is that he confesses the presence of Christ's body, and blood in
the Sacrament, for that he agreablie to holy Iustine, who said that the bread
and wine after the consecracion be the body and blood of Jesus incarnated:
the body and blood of him is in the Mass consecrated. Whose passion is there
celebrated. The passion of Christ Real presence avouched.
is in the Mass celebrated wherefore his body and blood be there consecrated:
Who soever confesses Christ's body to be consecrated on the altar,
confesses that consecracion to be done by these words of Christ: This is my
body, etc. Wherefore who soever confesses soch consecracion, confesses the
words to be vnderdanded without figure and trope. This Author confesses
soche consecracion. Wherefore he confesses soche understanding.

And here by the way note, that this ancient old Author has that manner of
phrase and speech that the catholic Church at this day uses, namehe when
he says: that the body and blood of Crhyst be consecrated in the Mass, and
not the manner of speech of the Adversary, saing that yt is made a
sacramental bread, a figure, sign, or token of Christ's body. He has no
soche word, no more has any one of all these fathers, and holy doctors,
that shall be alleged in that sense and understanding, that the

The second note to prove the words of Christ to be understand without
figure, is that alleging these wooordes, This is my body, This is my blood:
Sacrifice propiciatorie avouched.
immediately he says: By these sacrifices offered offenses and sins be
wiped away, by which words calling those things, which Christ before
spoke of in the words of the Supper, sacrifices, and that soche sacrifices,
as put away sins, and we have no sacrifice to put away sins, but the
Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood. Yt is more then manifest, that the
understands the words of Christ in theirpropre sense of the body and blood
of Christ, and not of the figure of his body, for that is no sacrifice to
put away sins.

That he calls the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the
altar, sacrifices, the words following in the same process do well prove
and declare, when he says: Nihil in sacrificijs maius esse potest, quam
corpus and sanguis Domini. Among the sacrifices there is nothing greater, then
the body and blood of our Lord, And that he speaks this of the sacrifice
and oblacion of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament of the altar, yt is
made certain by the words that do follow, which be these: Nulla oblatio
potior est, sed haec omnes praecellit, quae pura Domino conscientia offerenda
est, and puramente Sacrament of the altar is a sacrifice.
sumenda. There is no oblacion woorthier then this, but this excels all
other, which is to be offered to our Lord with a pure conscience, and to be
received with a pure mind. Among the Chrystians there is no sacrifice to be
offered, and with pure mind to be received, but the sacrifice offered on the
altar. And thus of necessity yt follows, that this Author grants the
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and that yt is a sacrifice, and
that the words of Christ's supper are to be understood without figure.

The third note is, that when he had taught that the sacrifice must be of
Adoracion of the Sacrament avouched.
fred with a pure conscience, and received with a pure mind, he teaches also
(says he) does precel al: so it is above all to be honored. By which
doctrine yt may appear, that if the thing of the sacrifice does excel all
other, and ysaboue all other to be honored, and the only sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood excels all

Now when all this disputacion of this holy Father is granted upon these
words of Christ: This is my body, this is my blood: yt can not be but that
these words of Christ, must be understood simply and plainly in their
propre sense with out figure or trope. And thus to conclude for these two
great Seniours of Christ's school and Parliament house: ye perceive that they
use Christ's words in there propre sense. And also thereupon testify to us the
enacted truth of Christ's very presence in the holy Sacrament, which is the
chiefest matter here sought.

THE FOUR AND FOVRTETH CHAP. BY occasion of the words of Alexander treacteth
of the adoracion
But occasion being given by this holy Father Alexander to speak of the
adoracion of Christ's body in the Sacrament: I can not ouerpasse somewhat more
to say of yt, to the confutacion of the most impudent and blasphemouse
untruth spoken and uttered by this Proclamers words against adoracion
recited and confuted.
Proclamer, for thus he says: Christ that best knew, what aught to be done
herein, when he ordained, and delivered the Sacrament of his body and blood,
gave no commandment, that any man should fall dowen to it, or woourshippe
it. S. Paul that took the Sacrament at Christ's hand, and as he had taken
it, delivered it to the Corynthians, never willed adoracion or godly honor to
be given unto it. The old doctors and holy Fathers of the Church S.
Cyprian, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S. Augustine, and others that
received the Sacrament at the Apostles hands, and as it may be thought,
continued the same in soche sort, as they received it, never make mention, in
any of all their books of adoring or woourshipping of the Sacrament. Yt is a
very new devise, and as it is well known, came but lately into the Church,
oboute three hundredth years past, Honorius then being Bishop of Rome,
commanded the Sacrament to be lifted up, and the people reverently ta bow
down unto yt. After him Vrbanus the fourth appoincted an holy feast of Corpus
Christi. And granted out large pardons to the kepers of it, that the people
should with the better will resort to the Church and keep it holy. This is
the greatest antiquity of the wholl matter, about three hundredth years ago
it was first fownde out, and put in practice. But Christ and his Apostles
the holy Fathers in the primitive Church, the Doctors that followed them, and
other godly and learned men what soever for the space of a thousand and two
hundredth years after Christ's ascension into heaven, this woourshipping of the
Sacrament, was never known nor practiced in any place within the wholl
catholic Church throughout the wholl world. Thus much the Proclamer.

When I readde these his words, I stayed as one astoined, considering that
they could not proceade from any man, but either by ignorance, or else by
perverse malice, that wittinglie would, al shame set apparte, utter soche an
untruth as the mea^ learned, I suppose, of all the catholic Church knows
it so to be. And the more did I merueill that it was so impude^tly setfurth
with a repeticio^, as therbie with much boldness to auouche the matter. Now
for perverse malice. But remembering how Macedonius, Nestorius, and diverse

But that we may perceive how far wide he is from the truth, we will
examen his words. His first argument is that Christ never gave commandment
to woourshippe the Sacrament. Ergo: yt is not to be done. To this, first I say
to him, as to one exercised in schools that an argument of negatiues
concludes The ngatiue argument of the Proclamer concludes nothing.
nothing. But for more large declaracion, to the understanding of the Reader:
yt is not read in the Gospel, that Christ commanded any body to adore him
while he here lived in the earth: yt is therefore a good argument that he was
not to be adored? The three wise men of the east came with their gifts, and
offringe them, adored the babe Christ. They had no commandment of Christ so
to do, should they not therefore have done yt? or did they offend in so doing?
Diverse that were cured of Christ came

If this argument be good, then is his good. But the truth is, this argument
is naught, and so is his, but this disputer knew well what school he was in,
he was certain that there was no respondent, that presently would S. Paul that
took the Sacrament at Chrysts hand, an as he had taken yt delivered yt to the
Corynthians never willed adoracion or godly honor to be given to yt.

Leaving this argument, as a thing of no force to conclude that the Author
The proclamers argument out of S. Paul fails for want of truth.
thereof intends, let us examen the truth of yt. This Proclamer first
alleging Christ's institucion, wherein he says, Christ made no mention of
adoracion, ioineth S, Paul to yt, as one receiving of Christ no other order
then in the ministracion of Christ was used, and delivered also to the
Corynthians no other, nor no more then Christ did, which thing how false and
untrue yt is S. Paul him self shall declare. S. Paul delivered to the
institucion gave no soche commandment, but raither admitting Judas to the
receipt of the holy mysteries whose wicked intentes and pourposes were

Thus ye may perceive that S. Paul delivered diverse doctrines to the
Corynthians concerning the receipt of the holy Sacrament, which Christ is not
fownde by the testimony of any of the Evangelists to have delivered to his
Apostles, and yet who being a chrystian doubts that yt is the doctrine of
God, and of our Savior Christ? In this argument this disputer also says,
that S. Paul never willed adoracion, or godly honor to be given S. Paul
willed adoracion to be given to the Sacrament.
to the Sacrament, if he speak of the word adoracion, I consent unto him,
for truth yt is that S. Paul has not these words: Adore the Sacrament.
But if he speak of the thing? I dissent from him. For that I judge to be
untrue. Many things are spoken of in very deed, when the propre vocable
appropriated to the same thing to signify yt to a man's understanding is not
spoken or uttered. As if I say: Plato was a reasonable living creature. Though
I apply not the propre vocable of a man to Plato: yet to the understanding I
signify as much in deed, as if I had called him a man: So though S. Paul
speak not in the delivery of the Sacrament to the Corynthians, of these
words, adoracion or honor: yet he speaks of the thing in deed. For when he
gives this rule: Probet seipsum homo. Let a man examen him self, and so let
him Yt is great honor to the Sacrament to examen our selves er we presume to
receive yt.
eat of that bread, and drink of that cup: Does he not will us to give
most singular honor to the Sacrament? What more honor can be done, then to
fee that our faith toward the Sacrament, be firm and stable, void of all
sinistre opinions, thinking nothing of so great a mystery, but that, that is
semelie?

S. Augustine says: Placuit enim Spiritui sancto, vt in honorem tanti
Sacramenti in os Christiani prius Dominicum corpus intraret, quam exteri cibi.
Yt has pleased the holy Ad Jan. Epist. 118.
Ghost, that in the honor of so great a Sacrament the body of our Lord
should enter the mouth of a chrystian before worldly meats. If the holi^e
Ghost does esteem yt as done to the honor of the Sacrament, to receive yt If
corporal abstinence be to Gods honor, much more spiritual abstinence.
fasting before al meats: how much more is it to the honor of the Sacrament,
that we fasting from all vices, from all horrible sins and crimes come with
pure conscience hongring and thirsting righteousness, to receive in the
Sacrament the Lord and geuer of righteousness? If any honor be done to God
by corporal abstinence or fasting, how much more is done, by spiritual
abstinence from sin?

But the Adversary will say, that this honor is not done to the Sacrament,
but to God, and to his grace received in the receipt of the Sacrament. Whereunto
I say, that the very words of S. Paul overthrows this saing: For S.
Paul by express words speaks of the Sacrament saing: Let a man examen
himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. He says
not: Let him examen himself, and so he shall receive the grace of God, and the
virtue of the meritte of Christ's passion and death. which is a matter much
and almost generally taught thorowoute all the Gospel. For what is more
taught then remission of sins to true penitentes by the virtue of Christ's
passion? But here S. Paul speaks of the Sacrament by a special manner, and
therefore says: And so let him eat of that b^ead, and drink of that cup.

For more manifest proof of this, note, that S. Paul refers the honor or
dishonor, that is done by worthy or unworthy receiving, not 1. Cor. 11.
Honor or dishonor done by the receauer is referred to the Sacrament by
express words of S. Paul.
immediately to the grace of God, or meritte of Christ's passion: But to the
Sacrament, and therefore says: Itaque quicunque manducauerit panem and biberit
calicem Domini indigne, reus erit corporis and sanguinis Domini. Who soever
therefore shall eat the bread, and drink the cup of our Lord vnwoorthilie,
he shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord, so that the unworthy
receiving is referred to the bread and the cup of our Lord. Wherefore yt is
manifest, that as the worthy or unworthy receiving is referred to the
Sacrament: so is the honor or dishonor done by the same referred

Unto all this, this may be added, that forasmoch as S. Paul, taught the
Corynthians and by them all Chrystian people; the presende of Christ in the
Sacrament, that he might well teach them to honor him in the Sacrament. For
where Christ is verily present, there is no danger but the chrystian may their
honor him. That S. Paul teaches the presence yt shall be made manifest to
you in the third book, where the scriptures of S. Paul shall be more at large
handled. Wherefore to avoid prolixitie I leave to speak any more of them here.
But this may be said here, that forasmoche as the words of Christ, which
we have now in hand do teach us the presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
that we may also honor Christ in

THE FIVE AND FOVRTETH CHAP. PROVES BY the same doctors that the Proclamer
names, that the Sacrament is to be honored.
AFter this man had abused the scriptures to makesome show of his wicked
purpose, he used his like synceritie in naming certain doctors, which
doctors (as he says) never make mention in any of their books of adoring
or woourshipping of the Sacrament.

To declare the truth of this man, we will first produce them, whom he has
named as making for him, and afterward some other. Among those To bring many
of his testimonies the condition of this rude book will not suffer, for yt
would thereby grow to great* Wherefore one or two places Cum autem ille and
Spiritum sanctum inuocauerit, Chrysostom. de sacerd. li. 6.
sacrisiciumque illud horrore ac reuerentia plenissimum perfecerit, communi
omnium Domino manibus assidue pertractato: quaero ex te, quorum illum in ordine
collocabimus? Quantam vero ab co integritatem exigemus? quantam religionem?
Consideraenim quales manus illas administrantes esse oporteat, qualem linguam,
quae verba illa effandat. Denique quae anima, non puriorem, sanctioremue
conueniat esse animam, quae tantum illum, tamque dignum spiritum reoeperit. Per
id tempus, and Angeli sacerdoti assident, and caelestium potestatum vniuersus
ordo elamores excitat, and locus Altari vicinus in illius honorem qui
immolatur, Angelorum choris plenus est. Id quod credere abunde licet, vel ex
tanto illo sacrificio, quod tum peragitur. Ego vero and commemorantem olim
quendam audiui, qui diceret senem quendam virum admirabilem, ac cui
reuelationum mysteria multa diuinitus fuissent detecta, sibi narrasse, se tali
olim visione dignum a Deo habitum esse, ac per illud quidem tempus derepente
Angelorum multitudinem conspexisse, quatenus aspectus humanus far poterat,
fulgentibus vestibus indutorum Altar ipsum circundantium. Denique sic capitc
inclinatorum, vt si quis milites, praesente Rege stantes videat, id quod mihi
ipse facile persuadeo. When he (mening the priest) has called upon the holy
Ghost, and has perfected that sacrifice, most full of horror and reverence,
when the universal Lord of all things is in his hands handeled, I ask of
thee, in what order of men shall we place him? how great integrity shall we
require of him? how great religion or godliness? Consider also what hands
those aught to be, that do ministre: What manner of tongue, that speaks those
words (mening the words of consecracio^) last of all that it is meet that
that soul be purer and holier then any other soul, that receaueth him so
great, Angels attend upon the priest in the time of oblacion, and a vision
thereof showed to an old man.
and so worthy a spirit. At that time the Angels also give attendance to the
priest, and all the wholl order of the heavenly powers singpraises, and the
place nighe to the Altar, in the honor of him, that is then offered in

In this saing easy yt is to perceive, how honorably he thinks of the
Sacrament, and what honor he thinks yt of. For that the Sacrament, is so
honorable, he knows not where to place the priest that does consecrate yt.
He questioned, what hands they aught to be, that handle the universal The
universal Lord of all handled by the priest.
Lord of all things: What tongue that aught to be, that speaks the mighty
words of consecracion: how pure that soul aught to be, that Angels honor
the Sacram.
stand about the Altar, and bowing down their heads to honor the
Sacrament. Which thing Chrysostom says, he did believe. If man for the
ministracion of the Sacrament be so honorable, if yt be soche as Angels

That man aught to honor yt, the same Chrysostom in the order of the Mass by
him sethfurth, by his own practice declares, where we find his prayer, and
after his prayer, his rule for the honoring of this Sacrament. Thus we read
there: Qni supra vna cum Patre seeds, and hic vna nobiscum inuisibiliter
Chrys^an Liturg.
versaris: Dignare potenti manu tua nobis impartiri impolutum corpus tuum and
preciosum sangninem tuum, and per nos toti populo. Deinde sacerdos adorat, and
Diaconus in eo, in quo est loco, ter secreto dicentes: Deus propitius esto mihi
peccatori. Et populus similiter. Omnes cum pietate and reuerentia adorant.
Thowe that sit above with the Father, and also art with us here
invisibly, vouchesaif with thy Priest deacon and all the people adored the
Sacr. in Chrysaime
mighty hand to give unto us thy undefiled body, and thy preciouse blood, and
by us to all the people. This is his prayer. After this prayer he gives this
rule: Then the priest adoreth, and the Deacon also in the place, that he is in
thrice, saing: God be merciful unto me sinner: And all the people likewise
with godliness and reverence do adore.

Perceive ye not in this saing, Christ both to be above with his Father, and
also here with us? See ye not the rule of Chrysostom, that the priest, the
Deacon, and all the people did adore before they received the Sacrament? These
places might suffice to any man, that is not contenciouse. But that the Reader
may see plenty of matter, to stay him, and to confound the Proclaimer, that
so vntreuly reports of the holy Fathers we will hear one place more of
Chrysostom which is this: Christus suam carnem dedit Homi l. 24 10. 1. Cor.
vobis, vt ea saturemur, quo nos in sui amorem plurimum allexit. Ad eum igitur
cum feruore accedamus, and dilectione quam vehementissima ne grauius subeamus
supplicium. Quanto enim maius beneficiu^ accipimus, tanto magis puniemur,
qua^do eo indigni apparebimus. Hoc corpus in praesepireueriti sunt Magi, and
viri impij, and barbari, longo itenere confecto, cum timore et tremore plurimo
adorauerunt. Imitemur igitur barbaros, nos qui caeloru^ ciues sumus. Illi enim,
cum id praesepe, and tugurium tantum, neque eorum quidquam, quae tu nunc
intueris, viderent, summa accesserunt reuerentia and horrore. Tu vero non in
praesepi id, sed in Altari, non mulierem, quae in vlnis teneat, sed sacerdotem
praesentem, and Spiritum per abunde super proposito diffusum sacrificio vides.
Nec simplex, vt illi, corpus vides, sed et eius potentiam and omnem agnoscis
administrationem, and nihil eorum quae per ipsum facta suntignoras, and
diligenter initiatus es in omnibus. Excitemur, horrescamsque, and maiorem quam
barbari illi prae nobis feramus pietatem. Christ gave unto us his flesh, that
with yt we might be fed, whereby he much alleured us into his love. Let us
therefore with feruencie, and most vehement love, come unto him, leest we suffer
a more greuouse condemnacion. The greater benefit we take, the Christ has
given us his flesh to feed upon
more shall we be punished if we be fownde unworthy of yt. This body did the
wise men, and men without God, and barbarouse, reverence, and woourshippe. And
after they had ended a long iourneie with much fear and tremblinge, did adore
yt. Let us therefore at the leest follow the example of these barbarouse, we that
be the citizens of the heavens, for they when they saw that maunger and
cottage only, and did not see any of these things which thowe do now
behold, they came with great reverence and horror. But thowe see not that
body in the maunger, but in the altar, thowe see not a woman that holds
yt in her arms, but thowe see the priest present That same body on the
altar that was in the maunger.
and the Spirit plentifully powered upon the proposed sacrifice. Neither do
thowe diligently instructed in all poinctes. Let us be stirred up and fear,
and

Now have we heard three testimonies of Chrysostom. In the first, we were
taught his faith as touching the honoring of the Sacrament, which he says
to be so honorable, that not only men, But also Angels do honor yt. In
the second, he declared the practice or execution of the honoring of the
Sacrament, by him self, his ministers, and his people before the receipt of the
same Sacrament. In the third he gives general exhortacion to all men to do
the same. And thereunto provoke by the example of the three wise men that came
to honor Christ at his birth, teaching us that we honor the same body in the
altar, that they did in the maunger. These places being plain enough let us
leave them and hear Saint Ambrose who says thus, evpownding a verse of the
Prophet David. Per seabellum terra intelligitur, per terram autem caro Christi,
quam body quoque in mysterijs adoramus, quam Apostoli in Domino Jesus, vt supra
diximus, adorarunt: Neque Amb. despiritu S. li. 3. ca. 12. We adore the flesh
of Christ in the mysteries.
enim diuisas est Christus, sed vnus. By the footestoole is understood the

what think you (gentle Reader) does not Saint Ambrose plainly enough
testify, and teach the adoracion of Christ? who, that ye shall not be carried
away with the wicked gloses of heretics, which to rob Christ of his
honor in the most holy and blessed Sacrament, say that thowe must adore
Christ in heaven, teaches you by express words that the flesh of Christ is
to be adored and honored in the Sacrament, which he calls the mysteries,
where he affirms the same flesh to be, that the Apostles did adore in our
Lord Jesus.

Now after S. Ambrose, we will hear S. Augustine, who in diverse places
teaches us to adore Christ in the Sacrament. But yt shall be best first to
lay before you that place of Saint Augustine at the lenght wholly: and
plainly, which this Proclamer with slight does truncately, and by piece meal
touch, that yt might appear to his readers, and hears Adorate scabellum
pedum eius, quomam sanctum est. Sed videte fratres, quid nos iubeat adorare.
Alio loco scriptura dicit: Coelum mihi seeds est, terra Aug. in Isal. 98.
autem scabellum pedum meorum. Ergo terram iubet nos adorare, quia dixit alto
loco quod sit scabellum Dei. Et quomodo adorabimus terram, cum dicat aperte
scriptura: Dominum Deum tuum adorabis. Et hic dicit: Adorate scabellum pedum
eius? Exponens autem mihi, quid sit scabellum pedum eius, dicit: Terra autem
scabellum pedum meorum. Anceps factus fam, timeo adorare terram, ne damnet me
qui fecit coelmi and terram. Rursum timeo non adorare scabellum pedum Domini
mei, quia Psalmus mihi dicit: Adorate scabellum pedum eius. Quaro quid sit
scabellum pedum eius, and dicit mihi scriptura.: Terra scabellum pedum meorum.
Fluctuans conuerto me ad Christum, quia ipsum quaero hic, and inuenio, quomodo
sine impietate adoretur terra, sine impietate adoretur scabellum pedum eius.
Suscepit eium de terrae terram, quia caro de terra est, and de carne Mariae
carnem assumpsis. Et quia in ipsa carne hic ambulauit, and ipsam carnem nobis
manducandam ad salutem dedi^. Nemo autem carnem illam manducat, nisi prius
adorauerit, inuentum est, quemadmodum adoretur tale scabellum pedum Domini, and
non solum non peccemus adorando, sed peccemus non adorando.

Adore ye the footestoole of his feet, for yt is holy. But mark ye brethren
what he commands us to adore? In an other place the scripture says: Heaven
is my seat, and the earth is my footestoole. Then he commands us to adore
the earth. For he has said in an other place, that yt is the footestoole of
God. And how shall we adore the earth. seeing the scripture openly says:
Thowe shall adore thy Lord God. And here says: Adore his footestoole? And
expowdding to me what is his footestoole, he says: The earth is my
footestoole. I am doubtful, I fear to adore the earth leest he damn me that
made heaven and earth. Again I fear not to adore the footstool of my Lord,
because the Psalm says to me: Adore his footestoole. Thus wauing up and
down, I turn me unto Christ (for I seek him here) and I find how without
impiety the earth may be adored: how without The flesh born of the Virgen
is given us to eat, which we must also adore or else we do offend.
impiety his footestoole may be adored. For he took earth of earth, for
flesh is of the earth, and he took flesh of the flesh of Marie. And because he
lived here in the same flesh, and the same flesh he gave us to eat to our
salvation, and no man eats that flesh, eycept he first adore yt, yt is
perceived how soche a footestoole of our Lord may be adored. And

If ye have marked, ye may perceive a goodly and pleasant discurse, how he
tries out the footestoole of God, and how yt may be adored. The footestoole
of God at the last he finds to be the flesh of Christ the same flesh that he
here lived in, the same flesh also that he gives us to eat: This flesh then
is the footestoole of God. This footestoole is to be adored (says Saint
Augusten) that in heaven yt aught to be adored at all times no man doubts.
But forasmoche as the same footstool, the same flesh of Christ is given us to
be eaten, we must also remember our duty before we receive yt, that we adore
yt, and honourelyt. For if we do not honor yt, omitting then our duty we
offend says Saint Augustine. This flesh we receive in the Sacrament,
wherefore we must honor yt in the Sacrament.

If Saint Augustine meant not this adoracion to be done to the Sacrament, he
would never have spoken of this slesh of Christ as eaten in the Sacrament, but
as exalted in glory, and sitting at the right hand of the Father. Yt is an
easier way to induce us to honor a thing for that yt is in heaven glorified,
then for that yt is here in earth received. But because this adoracion of the
Sacrament, was in use among chrystians, and gave him light to understand the
Prophet David, Therefore he spoke of yt. That the adoracion was in use, yt
appears in sondrie places of the which I shall bring forth one or two.

Saint Augustine declaring the godliness of his mother, lieng in her Li. 9.
confe. cap. 13.
death bed, says thus of her. Illa imminente die resolutionis suae non
cogitauit corpus sunm sumptuose contegi, aut condiri aromatibus, aut monumentum
electum concupiuit aut curauit sepulchrum paternum. Non ista mandauit nobis,
sed tantummodo memoriam sui ad altar tuum fieri desiderauit, cui nullius diei
praetermissione seruierat, vnde sciret dispensari victimam sanctam, qua deletum
est Chirographum, quod erat contrarium nobis, qua triumphatus est hostis. She
when she perceived the day of her departinge to be at hand, she had no care to
have her body sumptuously buried, or to be spiced with sweet spices, neither
did she covet a special monument, or cared to be buried in her own contrie.
She did not charge us with those things, but she desiered, that her memory
might be made at thie altar, which she The mother of S. Augu. served the
altar daily.
holy sacrifice to be dispensed, by the which the obligacion that was against
us was cancelled, wherbye the enemy also was ouercomed. Thus he.

In this that Saint Augustine to the comendacion of his mother before God and
the woorlde, says, that she daily did serve the altar, I Altar.
would learn of the Proclamer, what service yt was that she did, was yt not the
service of Christ her Lord God, and redemer that she did: yea truly: And why
did she yt at the altar, and not in heaven, as the Proclamer would that we
should only do? Because she knew (as Saint Augustine S. August. plain
against the Proclamer.
witnesses) that Christ owre sacrifice was from thence dispensed and
ministered: So where this Proclamer denies the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, Saint Augustine confesses that same Christ to be there that
cancelled the writing that was against us, and so made us free. And where the
Proclamer discommendeth them and cries out against

Besides this the opnion that many had of the chrystian people, who, not
knowing the hidden mystery of Christ's presence in the Sacrament, The fame
that the Chrystia^s did honor Ceres and Bacchus, Proves their adoracio of the
Sacr. in the Primitive Church. Cont. Fau. li. 2. cap. 13
said that they did honor Ceres and Bacchus, Gods, among the gentiles, does
prove the use of the honoring of Christ in the Sacrament. For if the
chrystians had done no more but eat their bread and drink their wine, soche
report had not risen of them. But because they were perceived to honor the
Sacrament therefore they were so reported.

Of this same opinion, fame and report, speaks Saint Augustine, writing
against Faustus, sainge: Quomodo ergo comparas panem, and calicem nostrum and
parem Religionem dicis errorem long a veritate discretum: peius desipiens quam
nonnulli, qui nos propter panem and calicem, Cererem and Liberum colere
existimant? How do thowe compare our bread and wine, and saest error far
divided from the truth to be like religion, plaing the fool worse then
many, which for the bread, and the cup think us to honor Ceres and
Bacchus.

And again in the same place he says: Sicut a Cerere and Libero Paganorum
Dijs long absumus, quamuis panis and calicis Sacramentum, quod ita laudastis,
vt in eo pares nobis esse volueritis, nostro ritu amplectamur: ita patres
nostri long fu^runt a Saturniacis catenis, etc. As we are far from Ceres and
Bacchus, the After the manner of our religion we honor the Sacr. says S.
August.
Gods of the Pagans, although after the manner of our religion we honor the
Sacrament of bread and wine, which ye have so praised, as in yt, ye would be
equal to us: Even so our Fathers were far from the bonds of Saturn,
although for the time of the Prophecy, they have observed the vacacion of the
Sabbath. Thus the use of the honoring of the Sacrament in and before the time
of Saint Augustine being perceived, we will hear one place more of him, and
so for this matter

Thus he writes: Edent pauperes, and saturabuntur. Quid edunt? Quod sciunt
fideles. Quomodo saturabuntur? Imitando passiones Domini sui, and non sine
causa accipiendo precium suum, etc. Diuites quid? Etiam ipsi edunt, sed quomodo
Jn psalm. 4^.
edunt? Manducauerunt, and adorauerunt omnes diuites terrae. Non dixit
manducauerunt, and saturati sunt: sed manducauerunt, and adorauerunt. Adorant
quidem Deum, sed humanitatem nolunt exhibere fraternam. Manducant illi, and
adorant: Manducant isti et saturantur, tamen omnes manducant. The poour shall
eat and be satisfied. What eat they? That the faithful do know. How shall
they be satisfied? In following the passions of their Lord, and taking their
price not in vain. What do the rich? They also eat, but how do they eat?
All the rich of the earth have eaten, and have adored. He said not, they have
eaten, and be satisfied. But they have eaten and have adored. They do in deed
adore God, but they will not show forth brotherly humanity. They do eat,
and adore, these do eat and be satisfied: yet all do eat, hitherto he.

As the scripture ioineth eating and adoring together, saing: They have Eating
and adoring both referred to the Sacrament
eaten, and adored: So Saint Augustine, expownding the scripture, and
declaring that the thing that is eaten, is our price, a thing known to the
(which our price, and thing known to the faithful is the body of Christ) he
ioineth also adoracion to the same. And so both by the Scripture, and by
Saint Augustine, eating and adoring be referred to the Sacrament.

Which thing although he does plainly enough here setfurth: yet handling the
same scripture in an other place, he does more plainly open the matter, saing:
Neque enim frustra it a distincts sunt, vt de pauperibus supra diceretur: Ad
Honorae tu^ Epi. 129.
Edent pauperes, et saturabuntur. Hic vero: Manducauerunt, et adorauerunt omnes
diuites terrae. Et ipsi quippe adducts sunt ad mensam Christi, et accipiunt de
corpore et sanguine etus: sed adorant tantum, non etiam saturantur, quoniam non
imitantur. Manducantes enim pauperem, dedignantur esse pauperes, quia Christus
pronobis The poor eat and are satisfied the rich eat and adore only.
passus est, relinqnens nobis exemplum, vt sequamur vestigia euis. Neither are
they without purpose so distincted, that before of the poour yt should be
said: The poor shall eat, and shall be satisfied. And here: All the rich of
the earth have eaten, and have adored. For they also are brought to the table
of Christ, and they receive of his body, and his blood. But they do adore
only, they are not also satisfied for that they follow not. For they eating
the poour man (meaning Christ) they disdein to be poour. For Christ suffered for
us leaving us an example, that we should follow his steps.

Among Chrystian people Saint Augustine finds two sorts: Some Two sorts of
chrystia^ people.
that be rich, that is, not leaving worldely affections, but rich in heart,
not humble in spirit, not submitting them selves to the sweet yocke of Christ,
and yet beleuinge, and therefore when they eat poour Christ, when they receive
of his body and blood they know by faith what they receive, and they adore
and honor Christ, whom they receive. But they are not satisfied. An other
sort there be, which be called poour and they contemning, at the leest
labouriug to suppress wordly affections not being rich in desire of heart,
but poour and humble in spiritte, taking their cross and so following Christ,
do walk under his holy yocke. These acts, in their deeds, in their
liuinges, that they have well fed and be satisfied. In which two sorts of
men, who seith not how Saint Augustine

Thus now ye may perceive, that even of those Authors, which the The
authors named by the Proclamer make against him.
Proclamer did name, as making no mention of adoracion or woourshipping of the
Sacrament in their books, ye may perceive, I say, that they make soche plain
mention of yt, as yt not only overthrows his pestilent doctrine, but also
gives him just occasion to rub his forehead for very shame that he should
so untruly both speak and write.

THE SIXTH AND FOVRTETH CHAPTER, proves by other Doctors, that the Sacrament
is to be adored.
I Have first in his matter of adoracion produced some of these Authors,
which the Proclamer named. Now for somoche as Dominum Deum tuum adorabis. Thy
Lord God shall thowe adore. By the which as we be commanded to Deuteronomy. 6.
honor him for that he is God: So have we commandment in the psalm 10 adore
his wholl person God and man, as Saint Paul to the Hebrews teaches us to
understand yt. Adorate eu^ omnes Angeli eius. Adore him al ye his Psalm. 96.
Heb. 1. Mat. 2. Joan. 9. Mat. 15. Luc. 24.
Angels. Thus they being taught, and by the doctrine of the Gospel perceauing
the same by the three wise me^ of the east, that came from far contries, to
Bethleem, by diverse also that were cured of Christ, more over also by

That the Chrystian orb did so believe, yt shall appear to you by the
testimony of diverse in diverse ages. To begin at our age and so to ascend
we will first hear Erasmus a man of most fame in this age. Who says thus.
Hactenus cum omnibus Christianis adorani Christum pro me passum, in Euchristia.
Nec Frasmus ad Co^radu^ Pellicanu.
adli^c video quicquam cur debeam ab hac opinione recedere. Nullis humanis
rationibus abduci potero, a concordi sententia Christiani orbis. Plus enim apud
me valent illa quinque verba: In principio creauit Deus coelum, and terram:
quam omnia Aristotelis, caeterorunique Philosophorum argumenta, quibus docent
mundum carere iniiio. Quid autem adferunt isti, cur tan impiam tamque
seditiosam sententiam profitear? Rations stupeae sunt: Semel sustulit carnem
ne esset offendiculo. Non admirati sunt, non adorauerunt Apostoli: Iubemur esse
spirituales, quasi caro sit exhibita officiat spiritui. Caro est sed nullis
obnoxia sensibus, and tamen hoc ipsum pignus est diuinae erga nos charitatis,
solatium est expectationis. Hitherto with all christen men I have in the
Erasmus Rot his sentence of adoracion.
Sacrament adored Christ that suffered for me. Neither do I yet see any thing,
why I should go from this opinion. With no humane reasons can I be sedde away
from the full agreement of the chrystian orb. For those five words: In the
beginning God created heaven and earth: are of more weight with me, then all
Aristotle's and other Philosophers arguments, with which they teach the
world to have no beginning. What do these men bring, why I should profess
so wicked and so sediciouse a doctrine? Their reasons are friuolouse. He took
away his flesh that yt should not be an hinderance to us: The Apostles did
not wonder at yt, they did not adore yt: we are commanded to be spiritual,
as though the flesh so given to us, as yt is, should hinder us to be
spiritual. Yt is flesh in deed, but not subject to the senseis. And yet the
same very thing is the pledge of the love of God toward us, and the comfort
of our expectacion. Thus Erasmus.

Ye see now this man's profession, he adored Christ in the Sacrament. Ye hear
him say that all christen people did the like. Ye see that yt was (which I
wish to be, and would God yt were in all christen men) that he would not by
men's reasons be led away from that, that was fully agreed upon thoroughout
all and so received. Note with all on the other side what judgment he has of
the Eras. Rot. his judgment of the Sacramentarie doctrine against adoracion.
contrary doctrine, which this Proclamer sets furthe in this behalf. First
he says that he seieth nothing, why he should go from the faith of the
catholic Church, as not to adore Christ in the Sacrament. Secondly he
accompteth the doctrine of the Adversary, contrary to this, to be wicked and
sediciouse. The reasons also (says he) which they make to maintein their
doctrine are but vain and friuolouse: So that as ye see the doctrine of the
Adversary wicked and sediciouse, not pithie, and weighty, never of all
chrystian people agreed upon, and received: So may ye see the catholic
Luther and Oecolampadius, has in all places with great consent and concord
accepted yt, and approved yt,

A good nombre of years, more then four hondreth before Erasmus, was Algerus,
who also testifies that the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, was
received of all the catholic Church, and so believed. Thus writes he: Idem
quod Christus de veritate corporis sui testatur, and Petrus Algerus.
and (quia pro alijs loquebatur) cum eo and alij Apostoli. Quid ergo de
veritate corporis and sanguinis Christi in Sacramento dici potest certius, nisi
forte eam ipsam oculis videre velimus? In quo tamen nec ipse Dominus nobis
deesse voluit, sed modicae fidei nostrae per omnia consuluit. Quamuis enim
ipsius Christi and tot sanctorum testimonijs and vniuersalis etiam Ecclesiae
catholica fide, quae ab initio conuersionis suae ita credidit, and ita saluata
est, sufficienter astructum sit, quod vera Christi caro verusque sanguis in
mensa Dominica immmoletur, ne quis tamen peruersor aliter intelligeret, aut
exponeret, facta sunt a Deo congrua huic nostrae fidei miracula quando, vel
vbi, vel quibus reuelare dignatus est, huius mysterij secreta. Qnae nimirum
facta esse non ignorabit, quisquis studiosius sanctorum patrum gesta legerit,
quae testantur sacramentum corporis and sanguinis Domini, oblata panis and vini
specie, carnem and sanguinem naturali sua specie, sicut esse soles, exhibuisse.
Cum ergo praeteriti and praesentes fideles vbique terrarum hoc credant, and
astruant, si haec vniuersalis Ecclesiae fides vera ad salutem non extitit: aut
nunquam catholica fuit, aut perijt. Sed aut non fuisse, aut perijsse Ecclesiam,
nemo catholicus consenserit. Nam cum Ecclesia, and Prophetia, and Euangelijs
instituta sit, vbi est quod Abrahe veritas promisit: In semine tuo benedicentur
omnes gentes? Itemque vbi est, quod eadem veritas Apostolis ait: Docete omnes
gentes, qui crediderit, saluus erit? Cum enim onmes gentes ita se credere
glorientur, si salutis benedictione carent, vtrobique veritas Dei, and in
prophena, and in Euangelio perichtatur. Even the same that Christ did testify
of the verity of his body, did Peter testify also, and hicause he spoke for
the other Apostles, the other Apostles testify with him. What then can more
assuredly be said of the verity of the body and blood of Christ in the
Sacrament, except we would see the very same flesh with our eyes? In which
thing yet our Lord has not left us, but has in all poinctes helped our little
faith. For although by the testimonies of Christ him self, and so many holy
men, and also by the catholic faith of the vninersall Church, which from the
beginning of her conversion has so believed and is so saved, yt be sufficiently
taught or avouched that the very The universal Church from the beginning of
her conversion has ever believed the presence and sacrisice.
leest yet any ouerwhart man should otherwise understand or expownde yt,
there have been done of God certain miracles agreeable to this our faith when, or
where, or to whom he has vouchesaif to reuele the mystery. Which truly to be
done no man shall be ignorant, that shall read the works of the holy Fathers,
which do testify, that the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ (the
forms of bread and wine taken away) to have showed yt self flesh and blood in
his natural form, as yt is wont to be. Seeing then the faithful that be past
and goen, and they also that be now living in every place of the world do
this believe, and this teach: If this faith of the universal Church be not a
true faith to salvation, then either the Church was never catholic, or else
yt has or is perished. But that the Church has not ben, or that yt has
decayed or perished, no man that is The church never yet perished.
catholic will consent. For, forsomoche as the Church was set up both
with Prophecies and Gospells, where is that that the truth promised to Abraham:
In thy seed shall all nacrons be blessed? Likewise also where is that Teach all
nations, he that shall believe shall be saved? Forasmoch then as all nations
glory, that they so believe, if they arteign not the blessing of salvation, the
truth of God in both parts, both in prophecy, and in the Gospel is in
danger. Thus far Algerus.

By whose testimony ye see that the universal Church professed this faith of
the presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, which faith was
good to salvation, or else we must say that there was never any catholic
Church, or else if there were any, that yt is decayed, perished and goen. Which
may not be said. For Christ's Church abides for ever. And as all the
Church believed Christ in the Sacrament to be present: so no doubt they adored
him there, whom they knew there to be present.

Before this Author was Paschasius more then two hundredth years. Who
reports the same faith universally to be professed in the Church of Christ
until his time of all that truly believed in Christ. Thus Discant diuinis
verbis in omnibus acquiescere, and in nullo de ijs dubitare, quia vsque in
praesens, nemo in ^ijs errasse legitur, nisi qui de Christo errauerit. Quin
potius admiremur profundissimum Dei consilium, quod magni consilij Argelus
instituit, qui vult omnes saluos fieri homines. Admiremur, and saudemus atque
m^elligamus in his, quod beatus Hilarious intellexit, quo artificio (vt ita
loquar) nos Christus in se collegit, vel quo mysterio vnum in se nos esse
naturaliter voluit, non per concordiam solummodo voluntatis, sed and per
naturam carnis suae, and sanguinis. Ideo verum est, quod Ambrosius ait
sanctissimus: Quia ipsa eademque caro est, and sanguis quam accipimus and
communicamus, quae nata est de Maria, and quae pro nobis pependit in cruce.
Vnde si quis negat hoc ita esse, quia Sacramentum vocatur, erit ei, sicut
sanclus Augustmus testatur, mors non vita, qui mendacem putauerit vitam. Et
quia Christus suum dicit esse corpus, suumque sangumem, non oportet, etsi
carneis non videmus oculis, quod credimus mente dubitare in aliquo. Audiuimus
quid sanctus Cyrillus cum vniuersis coepiscopis in Epheso congregatis sentiat,
Quid Graecia cum ijsdem, quid Aegyptus, and sanctus Hieronymus presbiter. Et
ideo quamuis ex hoc quidam ex ignorantia errent: nemo tamen adhuc est in
aperto, qui hoc ita esse contradicat, quod totus orbis credit and confitetur.
Quapropter charissime, nihil in hoc dubites mysterio quod veritas-Christus de
se largitus est nohis, quia etsi sedet in dextra Patris in caelis, non
dedignatur suo sacramento, quotidie per manus sacerdotis, vt vera hostia non
infideliter sed fideliter immolari.

Let them learn to agree to the word of God in all things, and in no one
poinct to doubt. For unto this present, no man is read to have erred, but he
that has erred about the person of Christ. But raither let us reverence the
deep secrettes of God, which the Angel of great secret has instituted, who
will all men to be saved. Let us honor, and praise, and also understand in
these things, that Saint Hilarie has understood, by what workmanshippe or
cunning (if I may so spcake) Christ has gathered us into him, or by
whatmysterie he would us naturally to be one in him, not only by concord of
will: but also by the nature of his flesh and blood. Therefore yt is true that
the most holy Ambrose said, that yt is the same Notable proves of the real
presence.
very flesh and blood, which we receive and communicate, which was born of
Marie, and which hanged for us upon the Cross. Wherefore who soever denies
this so to be because yt is called a Sacrament, yt shall be to him, as Saint
Augustine does testify, death and not life, that will think life to be a
liar. And because Ephesus, does believe: what Greece does with them: What
Aegipt, and also Saint Hierom the priest. And therefore although some may err
of ignorance: there is no man yet hitherto that openly against says this so
to be, which the world does believe and confess. Wherefore, derely beloved,
doubt nothing in this mystery, which Christ the truth has of him self
granted unto us. For although Christ sits in heaven, and yet is daily
sacrificed by the priest.
he sits at the right hand of his Father in heaven, he disd meth not dathe
by the hands of the priest in the Sacrament, as a true sacrifice, not untruly
to be sacrificed. Thus far Paschasius.

See ye not the faith of the presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament stand untouched, and not shaken with any heresy against saing yt
openly until the time of this writer? Perceive ye not Saint Hilarie,
Ephesus, which were four hundredth and eightene, Saint Hierom also, all Greece
and Aegipt, and finally that the wholl world in this writers time did so
believe, and so confess? The cause why the Proclamer denies the Sacrament to
be adored, is that he The Proclamer impugneth adoracio^ of the Sacr. because he
believes not real presence.
denies also Christ's body and blood to be there. But if that blindness of
heresy taken from his heart, he could by pure and clear faith see that
blessed body there, there is no doubt but he would adore yt, Even so forasmoche
as all the world with godly confession acknowledged Christ's presence in the
Sacrament, even the same that was born of Marie, as Saint Ambrose says,
which Christ is of all Chrystians humbly to be adored, and honored, who can
doubt but that they, where they believed him to be, there they honored him?

Before this Author was Leo, more then four hundredth years. For he lived
about the year of owre Lord 452. and so more then eleven hundredth years
agone: in whose time what the faith of Christ's Church was in the matter of
the blessed Sacrament, ye shall hear him report. Separentur buiu smodi a
sanctis membris corporis Christi, neque sibi catholica libertas infidelium Leo
Epi. 22 ad Costant.
iugum patiatur imponi. Extra enim domum diumae gratiae, and extra Sacramentum
habendi sunt salutis humanae, qui negantes naturam nostrae carnis in Christo,
and Euangelio contradicunt and Symbolo reluctantur. Nec sentiunt se in hoc
praeruptum sua obcaecatione deduci, vt nec in passionis Dominicae nec in
resurrectionis veritate consistant, quiae vtrumque in saluatore vacuatur, si in
eo nostri generiscaro non creditur? In quibus isti ignorantiae tenehris, in quo
hactenus desidiae torpore iacuere, vt nec auditu descerene, nec lectione
agnoscerent, quod in Ecclesia Dei in omnium ore tam consonum est? vt nec ab
insantium linguis veritas corporis and sanguinis Christi, inter communis
Sacramenta fidei taceatur? quia in illa mystica distributione spiritualis
alimontae hoc impertitur, hoc sumitur, vt accipientes virtutem caelestis cibi,
in caruem ipsius, qui caro nostra factus est, transeamus.

Let soche manner of men be divided from the holy members of Christ's body,
neither let the catholic liberty suffer the yocke of infidelity to be
Eutyches and Diose. their here is.
put upon yt. Theie are to be accounted out of the house of Gods grace, and
out of the Sacrament of man's health, which denieng the nature of our flesh in
Christ, do both speak against the Gospel, and strive against the Symboll.
Neither do they perceive them selves through their blindness

Of this Author also being both ancient and holy ye perceive yt testified
Verity of the body and blood of Christ st^en of by the tounges of babes
that the verity of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament was so
certainly believed, and so commonly received, that yt was not Eutyches and
Dioscorus and their adherentes, how they could deny Christ to be a very
man, seeing that all Chrystian people confessed the natural body of Christ God
and man to be in the Sacrament. For

Thus ye may perceive that the prefence of Christ's very body and The real
presence so certenlie believed that ancient Fathers made argument thereof to
confute heresies.
blood in those days was reputed, esteemed, and believed, so certain, so sure,
and so undoubted a matter of faith, that learned men did use yt as a strong
argument to confute and convince diverse heresies. For as this Author did use
yt against the heretics of his time: So did Irenaeus and Hylarius (which were
long before him) against the heretics of their times. Which they would never
have done, if in their times also the presence of Christ in the Sacrament had
not ben a clear matter out of all controversy, and received of all, as well
heretics, as catholics as a substanciall poinct of their faith, whereupon
an argument might be well grownded.

Now ye have heard the presence of Christ's body testified to have been
received of all the chrystian Church, from this our time to the time Irenaeus,
who was the Jn catolog. script.
disciple of Polycarpus (as Saint Hierom witnesses) which Polycarpus was
disciple of Saint John the Evangelist, so near was this man to the Apostles
time.

This discourse have I made ascending from our time to the primitive Church,
to prove by consent of the wholl Church the presence of Real presence
proved, adoracion must needs follow.
Christ's very body and blood in the Sacrament. Which proof being made, yt
is easy to prove the adoracion of Christ in the Sacrament. For Christ being
verily there, adoracion must needs follow.

Now let this Proclamer who so blasphemouslie has denies Christ to be adored
in the Sacrament (which his denial is for that he also denies Christ to be in
the Sacrament) Let him, I say, bring soche a

THE SEVEN AND FOVRTETH CHAPTER
AS in the last chapter I have proved the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, thereby to infer the adoracion of the same: So will I here prove
adoracion, thereby to infer the presence. For as the presence proved, yt is
but foolerie to deny adoracion: So adoracion proved, yt is but vain to deny
the presence. Ye have heard yt sufficiently proved by soche as the Proclamer
named not to have spoken of yt: now we shall bring other, of the which Saint
Dionyse the disciple of Saint Paul, as of many learned men he is thought,
whom also this Proclamer alleges, shall be first. Who declaring the order of
the ministracion of the holy Sacrament, makes this prayer to the same. O
diuinum penitus, sanctumque mysterium, obducta tibi significantium operimenta
Dion. Are. Ecclesiast. Hiera 3. part. ca 3. S. Dionyse adored the Sacram.
signorum dignanter aperiens, nobis palam atque aperte lucesce, nostrosque
spirituales oculos singulari and aperto tuae lucis fulgore imple. O very godly
and holy mystery, opening favorably the coueringes of fignifieng figures,
wherewith thowe art covered, show thy self to us openly and apertlie, and
fill our spiritual eyes, with the singular, and clear brightness of thy light.

The peticions that be here made well weighed and considered; as to desire our
spiritual eyes, owre understanding, our mind to be illumined, well clearly
and perfectly to see, to believe and understand, the wholl secret mystery of
the Sacrament: what is yt but an adoracion, and acknowleging of that thing to
be God of whom we desire soche things (for soche things can no creature give
nor graum) and a plain submission of our selfs as to God to obtein that we
desire, as only of him, which is one of the chiefest parts of adoracion?
These kind of peticions made this holy Dionyse unto the Sacrament. For unto
yt he directed his words, sainge: O very godly and holy mystery. Yt does
very well appear then that he adored

As in Dionyse we find adoracion of the Sacrament practiced and left to us as
an example to follow: So a much like thing find we reported of Gregory
Nazianzen. And this yt is: Quid igitur magna, and maximis dignae faciebat
anima, and quodnam aduersus infirmitatem remedium habebat? Iam enim occultum
Greg. Naz in epitaph. Gorgoniae sororis: Gorgonia prostrate before the altar
calls on him whom the woourshipped on the altar
proditur, quum iam de omnibus alijs desperasset, ad omnium consugit medicum,
noctisque captata solitudine, quum illi morbus paruas concessit inducias, ante
altar cum side procubutt, ac illum quem super altar venerabatur, magna voce,
ac omni inuocauit conanime, etque miracula cuncta, quae olim secerat in
memoriam reduxit. altar, and with a great voice and all her might she called
upon him whom she woourshipped upon the altar, and unto him she rehearsed

In whom beside other things, this may ye note, that this holy woman lay
prostrated before the altar, and called upon him, whom she woourshipped upon
the altar. This makes mightily against the Adversary, who denies Christ
any other where, or in any other place to be honored but in heaven. For his
woman did honor him upon the altar, where she lay prostrated as before,
Christ her Lord God there present.

This also is not to be ouerpassed, that this holy and ancient Author
reports this fact of this holy woman to her perpetual praise, as did S.
Ambrose the fact of his brother Satyrus for the hanging of the Sacramentat his
neck, in the which he reposed his hope of his saiftie, which according to
his trust was not frustrated, but had good effect.

By the report of Nazianzen we may perceive two things: The one that he
being a great learned man, an ancient and catholic Father would praise
nothing that was against the true honor of God, and the vpprightnesse of the
catholic faith. Wherefore we may be assured that

The other is that we compare the doctrine and doing of this holy man and of
the Proclamer together: Saint Gregory teaches Christ to be Gre. Nazi. and
the Proclamer compared in their doctrines.
honored upon the altar: This Proclamer no where but in heaven. Saint
Gregory with gravity praised his sister for so honoring of Christ: This
Proclamer with mocking and taunting derideth and dispraiseth them that do so
honor Christ. Saint Gregory by all men's judgments as he was ancient: so
is he judged to be catholic and to favor Christ, and the catholic
Church: This Proclamer as he is of these days, and but young of age, so
dissentinge from this holy Father may well be iudgd the enemy of Christ, and
his catholic Church. And as we have said of Saint Gregory: So may we
say of Saint Ambrose, who commends

In this matter also is Eusebius Emisenus a goodly witness writing thus. Quia
corpus assumptum ablaturus erat ab oculis nostris, and sideribus illaturus
necessarium Eus. Emis. Hom. pas.
erat, vt nobis in hoc die Sacramentum corporis, and sanguinis consecraret, vt
coleretur iugiter per mysterium, quod semel offerebatur in precium. For that he
would take away his assumpted body from our eyes and carry yt into be
honored by mystery, that once was offered for our price. Thus he.

Now where the Proclamer says, that Christ did institute the Sacrament only
that yt should be received in the remembrance of his death: Eus^b. Em.
directly against the Proclamer.
This Author says that because the visible presence of his body should be
taken from us, he did institute the Sacrament that the same his body might
continually be honored by mystery. And forsomoch as yt is so, he exhorts
us so to do, sainge: Cum reuerendo altari caelestibus cibis satiandus accedis,
sacrum Dei tui corpus and sanguinem fide respice, honora, mirare, mente
continge, cordis manu suscipe, and maxim haustu interiori assume. When thowe
come Eusebius. ibi.
to the reverend altar to be satisfied with heavenly meats, look with faith
upon the body and blood of thy God: Honor yt, wonder at yt, touch yt with
thy mind, receive yt with the hand of thy heart, and cheiflie receive Eusebius.
bids us honor the Sacrament.
yt with the inward draught. This Author in this his exhortacion, first
teaches us what we shall behold by faith, when we come to the reverend
altar, the body (says he) of our God. Whereby he teaches the presence of
our Lords body in the Sacrament, which in deed by

But let not the Proclamer walkinge in his dark mistes of his figures, say
that Christ is in the Sacrament, as in a figure, because this Author says,
that we by faith must behold him, and thereupon triumph that this Author is
on his side. For this cauille is avoided by the words that shortly after
follow, which be these: Sicut autem quicunque ad fidem Christi veniens ante
verba Baptismi, adhuc est in vinculo veteris debiti, ijs vero memoratis mox
exuitur omni fece peccati: ita quando benedicendae verbis caelestibus creaturae
sacris a taribus imponuntur, antequam inuocatione summi nominis consecrentur,
substantia est illic panis and vini, post verba autem Christi, corpus and
sanguis Christi. As any man cominge to the faith of Christ before the wooordes
of Baptism, is yet in the bands of the old debte, but when the words be
spoken is furthwith delivered from all the dregs of sin: Even so A plain
place for M. Juell.
of the most high name, there is the substance of bread and wine: but after the
words of Christ, the body and blood of Christ. Thus Eusebius. This his
sainge clean dissolueth the cavil of the Adversary. For though before the
words of Christ yt be bread and wine: yet after the words yt is the body
and blood of Christ.

Thus the mind of Eusebius being declared that Christ's body and blood be in
the Sacrament after the consecracion, yt follows in his exhortacion Real
presence and adoracion plainly avouched by Euso. Emis.
(as meit is we should do) Honora, honor yt. When by soche an ancient
holy Father we be moved and advertised to honor the body of our God, and
that not only in heaven, but when we come to the reverend altar, where after
the words of Christ is the body and blood of Christ, is yt meit (suppose
ye) to leave so ancient doctrine, and to cleave to the newfangled inuencion of
this Proclamer? After this he mirare, that is merueill or wonder. As who might
say, that the body of thy Lord God is in the Sacrament, the senseis of man
can not perceive yt, his imaginacion can not compass yt, his might and power
can not work yt: his reason can not comprehend yt, therefore with reverence
and honor merueill and wonder at yt. Remember that to God nothing is
vnpossiblie. Remember the works of God be merueillouse: And therefore
reverently wonder and say: Tu es Deus qui facis mirabilia. Thowe art the
God

Now if there were but a figure, but bread and wine, signs and tokens of
Figures of things be not merueillouse but the blessed Sacram. is merueilouse
the body of Christ, what neaded this Author to advertise every chrystian
man, and say: Mirare, merueill. There was never man that bid the Jews
merueill at the Paschall lamb, because yt was a figure of Christ, there was
never man bid wonder at Isaac, at Joseph, at Jonas, at the brazen serpent,
and soche other because they were figures of Christ: but the merueill is here
at the ineffable and unspeakable work of God, who above all man's devise
makes present by his almighty power the body and blood of his Son our
Savior Christ.

This therefore touches the wicked saing of Oecolampadius, who thinking very
basely of this Sacrament, denies any miracle to be wrought in yt: whose saing
how false yt is, this Author who wills us to merueill at yt does declare,
for no wise man wills men to merueill where no thing is to merueilled at.
Wherefore in this Sacrament something is wrought where at

But I see, I stand to long in the alleging of the Fathers, wherefore leaving
these auncientes, which have taught us the practice of the primitive Church
in the adoracion of the holy Sacrament, we will among many of the later time,
hear but holy Bernardo, to see the agreement of the two times. Christus enim
pridie quam pateretur, Discipulis suis huius sacramenti formam praescripsit,
efficaciam exhibuit. Cum adhuc caenaretur surrexit a caena: Discipulorum pedes
Dominus Bernar. de dign. sacer.
vniuersorum lauit: Dehinc ad mensam regressus ordinat sacrificium corporis and
sanguinis sui. Christus in coena illa munerans and munus, cibans and cibus,
conuiua and conuiuium, offerens and oblatio. Obstupescentes admiramtui, nulli
Angelorum, nullis spiritibus supernis, sed hominibus, nec tamen omnibus: sed
ordini vestro tantum mandatam esse tanti sacramenti celebrationem in altari,
quod Christus fecit manibus suis in coena Paschali. Quid facis indigne? quid
facis homo ingrate? Adora deuotius, and recole frequentius in Sacramento
altaris salutem mundi pro te passam. Christ the day before that he would
suffer prescribed to his disciples the form of Christ in his supper, the geuer
and the gift, the feeder and the food, the seaster and the feast, the offerer
and the offering.
of his body and blood. In that supper Christ was the geuer and the gift:
the feed: and the food: the feaster and the feast, the offerer and the
offeringe. Wonder ye therefore and merueill, for to none of the Angels, to none
of the heavenly spirittes: but to men, neither yet to all men, but only to
your order was appoincted the celebracion of so great a Sacrament in the
altar, which Sacrament Christ made with his hands in the Paschall supper,
what do thowe, thowe unworthy man? What do thowe, thowe unthankful
man? In the Sacrament of the altar, adore deuoutely, remember often the health
of the world, that suffered for thee.

Of this Saint Bernarde we may first learn (as he did of the Evangelist
Saint John) Christ's order both in the preparacion of his Apostles toward
Washing of the Apostles feet what yt signifies.
the institucion of the holy Sacrament, and also what he himself did in the
all chrystians, that will come to this holy mystery, must be pure and clean
Joan. 13
one an others feet. For I have given you an example, that as I have done, ye
should so do.

Thus much done for the preparacion of his Apostles and all Chrystians: he
returns to the institucion of the Sacrament. In the which what he did S.
Bernarde also declares. He did (says he) there institute the sacrifice of his
body and blood, and of his body and blood there is no other sacrifice, but
the same his body and blood. And that he so did S. Bernarde teaches by the
words immediately following. For he says, that in that supper. Christ was
the geuer and the giste: The feeder and the food: The feaster and the feast:
The offerer, and the offering.

Mark well, gentle Reader, these propre speeches. For as they contein a
notable declaracion of the truth: So also be they not spoken without
imitacion of holy ancient doctors. For the first, if Christ him self were in
his supper, the geuer, the feader, the feaster, and the offerer (as most
certenlie he was) then was he also the thing that was given, he was the food
or meat that was eaten, he was the wholl feast, he was the oblacion. What is
Christ him self but God and man? Then was Christ God and man so given of him
self in the last supper. These manner of speeches be used of S. Hierom, S.
Ambrose, and S. Augustine.

S. Hierom says thus: Dominus Jesus ipse conuiua and conuiuium, ipse
comedens, Hieron. ad Hedib. q 2 Amo orat. Prapar. ad missam. (...). in psalm.
33. conc. 1.
and qui comeditur. Owre Lord Jesus he is both the feaster, and the feast, he
is the eater, and that which is eaten. Saint Ambrose praing to Christ says:
Tu es sacerdos and sacrificium, mirabiliter and ineffabiliter constitutus.
Thowe art the priest and the sacrifice, wonderfully and vnspeakeablie
appoincted. Saint Augustine speaking of Christ, says. Ferebatur manibus suis.
He was born

These I hauebroughtin, that the Reader might perceive that S. Bernarde has
not framed soche manner of speeches of his own inuencion, but has taken the^
of the Farhers by imitacion, Which manner of speeches I have the more willingly
setfurth at large, because they do very well, and godly declare the true
catholic faith, they mightily overthrow the heresy of the Adversary they
also confirm and comfort the true chrystian, notably prouinge unto us the
presence of Christ in the Sacrament.

This presence of Christ by S. Bernarde so setfurth, then he puts us in
Christ in the Sac. denoathe to be adored.
mind of our duty sainge: Adore in the Sacrament, the health of the world
that suffered for thee. Observe diligently that he wills thee to adore Christ
in the Sacrament, which words be directly against the words of the
Proclamer, who wills thee not to adore Christ in the Sacrament, but only in
heaven.

Now Reader, where the Proclamer said, that Saint Ambrose, Saint Augustine,
Saint Chrysostom made no mention of the adoracion of Christ in the Sacrament,
thowe hauest heard them plentifully testifieng the contrary. Where also he
said that no other doctors made mention of yt, thowe hauest heard diverse
declaring the contrary. And not only these doctors: but also thowe hauest
heard S. Paul theaching us to Occolampadius the great fownder of this doctrine
in this our time, and I assure you that neither in the one or the other of the^
did I find any authority of scripture or doctor fully and truly alleged
for the maintenance of their doctrine. Trisling arguments of negatiues and
untruths they have a sewe: other have they none.

And here in this matter to conclude I will ioin this issue with the
Proclamer^ let him bring but one ancient catholic doctor that by express
Jssue joined with the Proclamer upon adoracion.
words, shall say as he says, that Christ is not to be adored in the
Sacrament, and I will subscribe to him. But I am very sure that he can bring
not one. If he can bring none what madness is there in him that so Goliath like
reuileth the holy catholic Church, and wills her childeren to forsake
her, not to creditte her, not withstanding that she has much and

God open the eyes of all chrystia^ me^ well to see yt, and so to consider yt,
that they may eschew yt. Great occasion is given the^ so to do when they
seeing him auochinge soche an untruth as this is, that none of the doctors
make mention of the honoring of Christ in the Sacrament, shall see so many
as now be alleged, make plain mention of yt beside many other not here
alleged. If there were no mo vntreuthesin him butthis (as there be to many)

THE EIGHT AND FOVRTETH CHAP. CONsuteth the rest of the Proclamers words
before rehearsed against the honoring of Christ in the Sacrament.
AS the two wicked judges when they had once by their carnal lusts corrpted
their judgment, did not spare to testify a wicked untruth against the
innocent and godly Suzanna, and that before all the people, and being so
entered into shamelessness proceaded to auouche the same before the holy
prophet Daniell: So this Proclamer, when he had corrupted his judgment in the
matters of faith, and uttered an untruth against the innocent and godly
Suzanna passes from untruth to untruth even by yonde measure. For to these
Yt is (sateth he) a very new devise, and as yt is M. Juell.
well known, came but late into the Church. About three hundredth years past,
Honorius then being Bishop of Rome, commanded the Sacrament to be lifted
up, and the people reverently to bow down to yt.

Yt is (says he) a very new devise. If he had spoken of the doctrine, which
Luther and Oecolamp. First deniers of adoracion of the Sacr.
he himself teaches, that we should not adore Christ in the Sacrament, be had
spoken a truth: For among all that confessed Christ to be God and man, and
Christ's body to be present in the Sacrament, Luther was the first that
fondly erred in that poinct. And among them that denied Christ to beverilie
and really in the Sacrament, Oecolampadius is the first, that (by the report
of the learned) has in writing setfurth, with trifling persuasions, and vain
arguments of negatiues, the impugnacion of the adoracion of Christ in the
Sacrament. Wherefore this his untrue saing against Christ's honor, and the
doctrine and doing of the catholic Church, may truly be turned into his
own lap against him and soch like blaspemers and deprauers, that this his
and their doctrine, that Christ should not be woorshipped (as yt is well
known) but lately comed in. For in deed yt came in by Luther and
Oecolampadius, who were both late enough and sooen enough, yea to soon, but
that they were the instruments of Satan, soche as God permitted for the
punishment of the sins of the people.

But to our purpose, that his saing against the adoracion of Christ in the
Sacrament is untrue, not only the Fathers of the primitive Church before
alleged do prove: but also the practice and doing of the thing: As
Chrysostom in his Mass, Gregory Nazianzen of his sister, S. Ambrose of his
brother, S. Augustine of his mother do declare. All which are before alleged,
and were above a thousand years agone, so true is this man's saing that yt is
but a new devise. Whereunto if ye add the commandment of God, to adore
Christ: and the rule of S. Paul for our examinacion before we receive, ye shall
perceive how far wide this man is from all truth in this matter, and how
ancient the adoracion of the Sacrament is, and how new the denial of the same
is. Yt is so new I say, that before Luther and Oecolampadius Berengarius and
Wicleff may be thought in corners to have whispered yt, as by Ioannes Rokizana
yt may be gathered, who writes thus: Joan. Rokizanatract. de 7. Sacr. cap. 12.
Sacerdotes debent verbo and exemplo docere populu^ vt contremiscant, adorando
and colendo, and summum ac viuacem respectum habendo circa haec diuinissima,
and ineffabilia mysteria. Ex quo patet error dicentium quod corpus Christi, vel
Sacramentum, solum sit nobis datum ad manducandum, and sanguis in calice solum
ad bibendum, and non ad colendum sieve adorandum. Sed patet quod inanis and
fatua sit irrisio eoram, qui luminum accensionem cora^ Dominico corpore in
sacramento derident, dicentes: quia Deus est lux, and non egent lumme. Nam in
veteri lege etiam Domini mandato lucernae sine luminaria in candelabro
disposita coram panibus propositionis, qui fuerunt figura tantum corporis in
Sacramento, exardebant, multo magis decens est vt hoc in praesentia tanti
sacramenti fiat. Sinempe decens est and honestum (test Hieronimo ad Riparium)
vt lumina ardeant coram corporibus and os^ibus sanctorum; Etsi decens fuit
temporibus primorum sanctorum, vt lampades mortuis christianis fidelibus
accendantur, vt haec describit Chrysostomus sermon quarto super epistolam ad
Hebraeos: multo magis decens honestu^, and sanctu^ est, vt lumina cora^ ta^
deifico, et diuino corpore Christiacce^da^tur: The preistes aught to teach the
people both with example and word, that they in adoring and woorshipping and
having an high and, (S. Hierom being witness unto Riparius) that lights do
burn before the bodies or bones of saints: And if yt were comely in the time
of the chief holy me^, that lamps should burn before the faithful Chrystians
that were dead, as Chrysosto^ describes these things in his fourth sermon
upon the epistle to

Who although he were otherways naught himself, yet understanding so me soch
secrett talk against the honoring of the blessed Sacrament he has earnestly
labored and learnedly, to extinct the same. So (as before is said) though
some have in their corners murmured against the honoring of Greatest
antiquity of denial of adoracio^ of the Sacr is but forty years.
the Sacrament: yet sure I am that none believing Christ, God and man, did
openly write that Christ was not to be adored in the Sacrament, until the
times of Luther and Oecolampadius, none neither catholic nor heretic. And
therefore I shall return the words of this Proclamer truly to him, which he
untruly has published to the world, that this is the greatest antiquity of
the wholl matter: About forty years agon yt was first fownd out, and putt in
practice by Luther, and Oecolampadius, that the Sacrament might not be
honored. But Christ and his Apostles, the holy Fathers in in the primitive
Church, the doctors that followed them, and other learned and godly men,
whatsoever for the space of xv. hondreth years and

And now where he says that Honorius was the first that commanded the
Sacrament to be honored, in case yt were true, as yt is already proved
Honoring of the Sacr. universally received but never yet universally denied in
the Church.
to be false: yet is the doctrine of the honoring of the Sacrament much more
ancient then this his doctrine, that wickedly denies yt. For that by his own
confession was begone by Honorius three hondreth years agon: This doctrine but
about forty years agon. Honorius was never diffamed of heresy: Luther and
Oecolampadius, diffamed and condemned for heretics. The honoring of the
Sacrament was received, of the wholl Church, and quietly continued those three
hondreth years at the least even by this man's own rekning: The contrary
doctrine was never

But he says that Honorius commanded the adoracion of the Sacrament, A fond
argument of the Proclamer
I grant he did: But what of that? Will he therbie infer, that because he
commanded yt, that yt was never in use before? A very fond kind of argument,
And yet, as fond as yt is, much used in the School of the doctrine of this
Proclamer, from whence no doubt he has learned so to dispute. For even in
like manner the fleshly sort of them dispute to maintein their shameful
aboade with their women. Yt is (say they as this Proclamer says) a new
devise, yt is as new fownd holy day, that preistes should not marry For yt
was but of late days invented by Urban and Gregory.

Now truth yt is, that these Popes made decrees that preistes should not
marry, but does this prove that yt was never forbidden before? No truly.
Decrees against marriage of Preistes
For Siluester long before them made a decree that if a priest did marry after
he had received holy orders he should be deprived of his office ten years, but
if he disobediently kept his woman, and would not submit himself to the law,
he should be condemned for ever: shall we yet now here rest, and say that
Siluester was first fownder of this matter, because yt is fownd that he made
soche a decree? Naie. Calixtus was before him, who made a like Presbyteris,
Diaconis, Subdiaconis, and Monachis concubinas habere, seu matrimonium
contrahere poenitus interdicimus. Contracta quoque matrimonia ab buiusmodi
personis Calixtus.
disiungi, and personas ipsas ad poenitentiam debere redigi, iuxta sacrorum
Canonum defuntionem iudicamus. We utterly forbid: preistes, Deacons,
Subdeacons and monks to have concubines, or to marry. We judge also the
matrimonies contracted of soch persons to be dissolved or undone, and the
persons themselves to be set to penance, according to the definition of the
holy Canons.

For this decree some have been angry with Calixtus, and have fathered the
prohibition of preistes marriages upon him, but yet they have erred. For they
might have perceived that he in this his decree refers the penance of the
married preistes, Deacons and other, to the holy Canons. So that there was an
other decree for that purpose before Calixtus, and that Canon Apost 17.
was the decree of the Canon of the Apostles. For soche a Canon have they made,
which is thus: Ex bis qui coelibes in clerum peruenerunt, iubemus, vt lectores
tantum, and cantores, si velint, nuptias contrahant. Of them that becomed
single into the clergy, we command that readers only, and the singing men,
if they will, do marry. And an other like, which is this. Qui duxit viduam,
aut diuortio separatam a viro, aut meretricem, aut ancillam, aut aliquam quae
publicis sit mancipata spectaculis, Episcopus, presbyter Canon 18.
aut Diaconus, aut demque ex consortio sacerdotali esse non potest. He that
has, married a widow, or a woman divorced from her husband, or an harlott,
or a bond maiden, or a any that is accustomed to play in enterludes, can
neitherbe Bishop, priest, nor Deaco^, nor be of the company of the preistes.

By this brief discourse ye may perceive the Fathers of the later times made
decrees of that was in use in the Apostles time, where unto they were enforced,
by the wickedness, and licenciouse life of men in their times, not to make
new devises, but to cause the old ancient laws to be observed and kept.

There be decrees made in these later days for the fasting of Lent, both Lent
fast commanded.
by Counsels and Popes. As for example to produce one. In the eight Illis qui
ausu temerario quadragesimae dies contemnunt, nec voracitatis ingluuiem
frenant, and (quod peius est) Paschalia festa, Concilium Toleta^. 1.
illicitorum esuum perceptione profanant, ex hoc adeo acerrime interdicitur, vt
quisquis sine ineuitabili necessitate atque fragilitate, and euidenter languore
seu etiam impossibilitate aetatis diebus quadragesimae esuin carnium
praesumpserit attentare. non solumreus erit resurrectionis Dominicae,
verumetiam alienus ab eiusdem diei sancta communione. Et hoc illi cumuletur ad
poenam, vt ipsius anni tempore ab omni esu carnium abstineat, quia sacris
diebus abstinentiae oblitus est disciplinam. Unto them that presumptuouslie
contemn the days of Lent, neither do refrein the excess of their
greadinesse, and that which is woorst of all, do profane the Easter
solemnities, with the eating of unlawful meats: from hencefurth we
straightly command, that whosoever without inevitable necessity and
weakness, and evident sickness, great weakensse of age, shall presume in the
days of Lent to eat flesh, he shall not only be guilty of the resurrection
of our Lord, but shall be also excommunicated from the holy Communion of that
same day. And this shall be added to his farther pain, that that year he shall
abstain from all eating of flesh, because in the holy time of Lent, he forgotte
the discipline of abstinence. Thus the Council.

In the which Council the fast of Lent is commanded, as ye perceive, but this
proves not that yt was but then begone, and that yt is Hieron. aduersus
Mo^tan.
before that Council says thus: Nos quadragesimam secundum traditione^
Apostolorum ieiunamus. We fast the Lent according to the tradition of the
Apostles.

But this fast of Lent (not withstanding that yt is the tradicion of the
Apostles) has been in diverse Councels since the Apostles, and long after their
The queen that now is commanded Lent to be fasted and yet yt was in use
before.
time commanded, because in process of time the deuocio^ of the people
decayed, as yt does to much in these our days, Wherbie the decrees of the
Apostles being conte^ned (as now also they be) yt was necessary by a new
commandment to revive and confirm the same, and so cause them to be
continued which else had been omitted. Even so Honorius perceauing the deuocio^
of the people to be decayed, and their regard of the blessed Sacrament, through
the wicked doctrine of Berengarius ( which yet, as yt may be thought, late
smoldering in putrified and rotten posts and sticks) to be much abated, to
revive that that so long had continued, he gave commandment to honor the
Sacrament as the like may be doe^, when the catholic faith shall be resumed
in England.

After this yt likes him to dally and solace himself in alleging certain
scholastical doctors, as S. Thomas. Dunce, Durande, Holkot and other, not in
reproving Mocking and skorning easy kinds of confutacion.
their learning by learning (which he can not do) but reproving yt with
mocking and skorning (which is in deed easy to do) The Sum of all that long
disputacion is only to make the matter appear to the world, that yt is a
daungerouse thing to honor the Sacrament, for that the people can not
discern the accidents or the outward forms of the Sacrament, from the body
of Christ, and therefore may soen commit idolatry in honoring the outward
forms in the stead of Christ's body.

Yt is a woorld to see this man, that when he has no substa^cial argument to
make against the matter derectlie, he seeks out dangers to bring himself and
the people into more danger. For where yt is our duty to honor our savior
Christ, whersoeuer we know him by faith to be. to avoid his inverted danger,
he would have us, by omissio^ of owr duty, to ru^ne into a certain danger,
Licurgus did, who seeing wine to be abused, for that me^ took excessiuelie of
yt, caused all the vines in the contrie to be cut dowen, that there should be
no wine. So this man for an abuse that he phantasieth, he would take away

By like fantasy he might also move us not to honor Christ in heaven. Like
Fantasy joined with avarice pulled down all Abbeis in England.
But much more yt might seem to have moved the Apostles and other that were
conuersaunt with Christ in the flesh, and believing in him honored him. What
danger were they in that seeing the humane body of Christ, and percase not
sufficiently discerning the humanity from the deity, nor fully perceauing
the unition of these two natures in the unity of person, neither yet well
understanding how the body of Christ is to be adored, and how yt is not, how
the deity was in that person of Christ, and how to be considered, and yet did
adore him? Al these poinctes, as yt may be gathered by the peticion of
Philippe, were not well understood of the Apostles themselves. For when he
said: Domine, ostende nobis Patrem, et sufficit nobis, Lord show us the
Father, and yt is enough for us: yt seems that he had not that consideracion
of the Deity, that faith required.

And further by the answer of Christ, yt seems that the Apostles didnot
Tanto tempore vobiscum sum, and non cognouistis me? Have I ben so long time
with you, and have ye not known me? If they that had been so long conuersaunt
with Christ, and so long traded in the school of Christ did not know Christ,
how did the three wise men of the east, the woman of Chananie, the man born
blind restored to his seight, with other which did adore Christ without
reproach? Did they (trow ye) know Christ, seeing the Apostles did not know him?
Did they (trow ye) under stand this quidditie of faith, how the flesh and
body of Christ was to be adored, and how yt was not to be adored? And yet
were not they in the simplicity of their faith well accepted?

And to come nearer to answer this man, do all Chrystian people, which at this
present day adore Christ in heaven, understand this quidditie, how the flesh
of Christ being a creature, may be adored with Godly honor? To adore the
Godhead of Christ with godly honor, yt is a plain matter, but to adore the
manhead, to adore the natural flesh of a natural man, to adore a very man
with God, I think the Disciples of this Proclamer, who not understanding
Richerus forbid to pray to Christ, least we should honor his humanity
with godly honor? Has he Richerus a Calumist forbids to pray to Christ.
not said that he is to be accounted an heretic that says that Christ must
necessarely be prayed unto? See you not how Satthan goes about by pretty
means to take away Christ from you? Among the Caluinistes, as now among
you, he began to take away the adoracion of Christ in the Sacrament, but now
he takes away the adoracion of Christ in heaven. Take heed therefore Satan is
subtle.

He says that the schoolmen make a doubt of the adoracion of the Sacrament,
Damascen li 4. ra. 3.
woorshippe the outward forms or shows of bread, and give honor to that in
stead of Christ's body. Damasen says, that the flesh of Christ, the
humanity of Christ is not in some consideracion to be adored, and if they
Phanticall dangers may not draw us from our says and duty doing.


Among the dangers that may happen in matters of faith, this man to dissuade
his hearers and readers from the faith, brings in one other, about the
consecracion of the holy Sacrament. what (says he) if yt happned the priest
not to consecrate? what if he leave out the words of consecracion and never
speak them? or what if the priest have no mind or intencion to consecrate?

As this man goes about to shake the fundacion and building of this
Sacrament, which is (as S. Dionise says) the perfection all other
Sacraments: So his bothers and likes have goen about to shake the fundacion
of Brentius says that baptism is good and may be ministered without the
form of the words of Baptism. But yt shall be best, that I asscribe his
own words, that I be not thought to misreport him. Thus he writes: Christus
non collocauit fundamentum Baptismi super certis literis, sillabis, aut
dictionibus, nec alligauit nos ad certa verba (non enim instituit magiam, quae
ad certam verborum formam, aut ritus alligata est) sed instituit coelestia
sacramenta, Brentius in explicatione Baptismi.
quae constant sua ipsius sententia and voluntate, his vel illis verbis
significata. Itaque si quis post recitationem Symboli Apostolici in Baptismo
diceret ad baptisandu^ haec verba: Audiui iam ex te confessionem fidei tuae,
quod credas in Deum Patrem omnipotentem creatorem coeli and terrae. Et in
Vnigemtum Filium eius Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, and in Spiritum sanctum.
In hanc igitur confessionem, and sidem, intingo te in aquam seu perfundo te
aqud, vt hoc signaculo certus fias, te insertum esse in Iesum Christum, and
communionem omnium bonorum. Vade ergo in pace: Hic certe Baptismus vere esset
Baptismus.

Christ has not settled the fundacion of Baptism upon certain letters
Berentius impugneth the form of Baptism.
sillables, or words. For he has not instituted magike, that is to say,
incantacion, Symbol or Creed of the Apostles in Baptism should say these
words to him that is to be baptized: I have now heard of thee, the confession
of thy faith, that thowe beleuest in God the Father almighty maker of heaven
and earth: And in his only begotten Son our Lord Jesus Christ: And in the
holy Ghost. Upon this consession therefore and faith, I dippe thee in the water,
or I wash thee with water, that by this sign thowe may be made certain, that
thowe art inserted or engraffed into Jesus Christ and into the communion of
all good things etc. Therefore go thie way in peace. Certainly this Baptism
should be verily Baptism.

Ye see here how this man rejected the words of Baptism, and accounted yt
sorcerie and supersticion to be bownde to a certain form of words in the
ministracion not only of this but of other sacraments. Yt is lamentable to
see the wickedness of these men, how they labor to

But to return to our Proclamer and to answer him with his own learning
Brentius and he be of one religion and doctrine, or else Satan is divided in
him self) saying that to use a prescript form of words in the Sacrament is
supersticion, and Magic, what needs he to make any doubt whether those
forms (which the holy ancient Fathers call the words of consecracion) be
used or no? as shough there were danger if they were omitted, where by the
learning of his schoolefelowe Brentius, to omit them is raither religion,
then danger. For if the words of the form of Baptism may without danger
be omitted, why may not the words of consecracion without danger be
omitted?

Thus hitherto I have answered this Proclamer with the doctrine of his own
school, that yt may appear to the reader, how wicked and detestable the
doctrine is, and how yt confowndeth all order, and all certentie of the
ministracion of sacraments in Christ's Church, leaving a man so receiving
these Sacraments uncertain and doudtfull, whether he has received either the
one Sacrament or the other.

I would here rehearse mo dangers that might likewise happen in the
ministracion Protestants admit some two Sacraments, some three some four
some never one.
of the other sacraments if I knew of what religion this man

And first for the Sacrament of Baptism, thus teaches the holy catholic
church, that the inuocacion of the holy Trinity, may not be omitted, as
wittnesseth S. Basil: Neminem impellat ad errorem, illud Apostoli, quod nomen
Patris, ac sancti Spiritus in baptismatis mentione saepe omittit. Neque ob id
puter nominum nomenclaturam non necesse esse obseruari. Quicunque (inquit) in
Christum baptisati estis, Christum induistis. That the Apostle in the mention
of baptime does often omit the name of the Father, and the holy Ghost, let yt
drive no man to error. Neither for that let him think, that yt is not
necessary the naming of their names to be observed.

And again he says: Oportet immortalem manner traditionem in viuifica gratia
datum. Qui enim liberauit vitam nostram ex corruptione, potestatem renouationis
nobis dedit. Quae potestas inexplicabilem causam habet, and in mysterio
abstrusam, verum magnam Basil. de spiritu. sa^ct ca. 12. Form of Baptism
necessarily required in that Sacra.
animis salutem adferentem. Quare addere quid, aut detrahere, palam est elapsus
a vitae aeterna. Si igitur separaetio Spiritus in Baptismate a Patre and Filio,
periculosa est baptizanti, and inutilis Baptisinum suscipienti, quomodo nobis
tutum est a Patre and Filio diuellere Spiritum sanctum? Fides and Baptisma duo
salutis modi sunt inter se cohaerentes, and inseparabiles. Fides enim
perficitur per baptisinum: baptismus vero fundatur per fidem and per eadem
nomina vtraque res impletur. Sicut enim credimus in patrem, and Filium, and
Spiritum sanctum: sic etiam baptizamur in nomine Patris, and Filij and Spiritus
sancti.

The tradition given in the quickening gracemust abide unmoved. He that
delivered our life from corruption, gave us the power of renouacion, which
power has an inexplicable cause, and hidden in mystery, but yet bringing
Jbidem.
great health to our souls. Wherefore to putt to, any thing, or to pluck away
Faith and baptism two insepaerable means of salvation.
aniething, yt is an open fall from everlasting life. If therefore the separacion
of the holy Ghost in Baptism from the Father and the Son, is peri-Louse to
the baptizer, and unprofitable to him that receaueth baptism, Faith and
Baptism be two means of health conioined together, and inseparable. For
faith is perfected by Baptism, and Baptism is founded Damasce^. li. 4 ca. 10.


Damnascen also says: Quemadmodum semel completa est Domini mors: sic semel
oportet Baptizari iuxta Domini verbum: In nomnie Patris, and Filij, and
Spiritus sancti, instructos confessionem, Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus
sancti. As the death of our Lord was once done: So must they, that be taught
the confession of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, be once baptized
according to the word of our Lord: In the name of the Father, the Son, and
the holy Gste. Thus Damascen.

Many other Fathers may be brought, but these two may at this time suffice,
which both do declare that not only the confession of the Father, and the
Son, and the holy Ghost must be had in Baptism: but also over and

But now by cause Brentius teaches that the words of the form of Baptism
be not necessary, and yt may be that this Proclamer thinks eue^ This peril
I fear falls upon many in England in these days.
the same, and herein some light heads leauinge the doctrine of the ancient
church will follow Berentius his doctrine, and will not baptize in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, which (as S. Basil
says) is perilouse to the baptizer, and unprofitable to the baptized, shall
we therefore reject and cast away the Sacrament of Baptism, because soch
perils and dangers may happen in the ministracion of yt, as this man would
that we should Christ's body and blood in the blessed Sacrament because
dangers may happen in the honoring of the same? As for the consecracion of
the Sacrament, yt is taught us also hy the catholic Church, that yt is done
by the power of God woorkinge at the due pronunciacion of the words of
Christ, as witness Eusebius Emisenus, Chrysostom, and Ambrose What danger
to the priest, and what to the people if the woods of Consecracion be left
vnsaied.


But this Proclamer says, that yt is known that some preistes have many
years left out the words of consecracion. Yt is plain then (say I) that
the body of Christ is not present in the Sacrament, because the institucio^ is
not observed. Then yt follows (as the proclamer says) that there is danger.
There is danger in deed to the wicked priest, who pretending in outward face
to do that, that Christ has appoincted, and does yt not indeed. But to the
people simply believing the ministre to do that, that to his ministry
apperteineth, and perceauing nothing to the contrary, there is no danger to
them in doing their duty, though the naughty man the priest do not his
duty. And where the Proclamer says that yt is known that preistes have so
done: I think if yt be so, yt is known to him of him self and of his likes,
who of perverse minds being corrupted in their faith have committed soche
impiety in deed to their greater and more greuouse damnacion, but not to the
hurt of the people if they knew yt not. And here also to say, I believe that
if any catholic priest had been known to Conuenerunt in vnum adnersus
Dominum, and aduersus Christum eius, have conspired

But to return to the matter, and to move the same scruple to him, that he
moves against the catholic Church: What if some that ministre the communion
after the sort that is now received, do neither speak the words of Christ
upon the bread (For Richerus a Caluinist rejects the words of consecracion,
as not needful to be spoken, or munbled, as his term is, upon insensible
creatures) neither entende to make any sacramental bread: what then do your
people receive? If they receive no sacrament (as yt is none, if both words
and intencion be lacking) then they receive no promise, they receive no
remission of sins, nor soch other benefittes (for the promises be annexed to
the sacraments) how are they then deceived? How then is the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood in As often as ye shall eat of this bread, and
drink of the cup: he says not bread generally, but this bread, mening
the bread of the Sacrament? Thus if men shall improve the great matters of
religion, with why, what, and how, and invented dangers and abuses, your
own religion, which you magnify as most sure and good, may be proved
unsure and weak. To be short, all his arguments grownded upon (if and and)
are to no purpose. For if makes no certain argument. Wherefore leaving them as
sufficiently touched, I shall reuert to matter of more substance, and proceade
in the allegacion of the fathers for the exposition of Christ's words now in
hand.

THE NINE AND FOVRTETH CHAP. PROCEAdeth in the understanding of Christ's
words by Irenaeus, and Tertullian.
ALlthough between Iustine and Irenaeus, there were some holy Fathers, that have
left behind them goodly testimonies, for the proof of Christ's very presence
in the Sacrament: Yet I find Irenaeus li. 4. cap. 32. cont. here is.
none that do allege Christ's words, and thereby give us light to understand
them, until we come to Ireneus, who writes thus: Sed and Discipulis suis dans
consilium primitias Deo offerre ex suis creaturis, non quasi indigenti, sed vt
nec ipsi infructuosi, nec ingrati sint, eum qui ex creatura panis est accepit,
and gratias egit dicens: Hoc est corpus meum. Et calicem similiter, qui est ex
ea creatura quae est secundum nos, suum sanguinem confessus est, and noui
testamenti nouam docuit oblationem, quam Ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in
vniuerso mundo offert Deo. Giving also instruction to his disciples (the
author speakethe of Christ) Sacrifice of the new Testament instituted and
taught by Christ in consecracio^ of his body and blood.
to offer to God the first fruictes of his creatures, not as to one having
need, but that they should be neither vnfruictfull, neither unthankful, he
took that bread, which is a creature, and gave thanks saing: This is my
body. And the cup likewise, which is a creature as we be, he confessed to
be his blood, and of the new Testament, taught a new oblacion, Irenaeus.

who when he had declared how almighty God instituted and appoincted
sacrifices and oblacions in the old testament, as things to be given to him
not as to one that neaded soche things or gifts, but for the exercising New
sacrifice of the new Testament, what yt is.
and therbie pourchase gain and profitte, and for benefittes received be fownde
thankful, Christ also taught his Apostles to offer sacrifice. And what the
sacrifice is he teaches saing that yt is his body made of the creature of
bread, and his blood, made of the creature of wine. How this thing is
brought to pass he shows when he says: that Christ took the bread, which
is a creature and gave thanks saing: This is my body: And likewise the cup,
which also is a creature, and confessed yt to be his blood. In which words,
where he has expressedly said, that Christ confessed yt to be his blood, and
the like is meant of the bread to be his body: what more plain speech would we
desire of any authoure? If Christ confessed yt to be his body, Li. 4. de
Sacrament c. 6
and his confession is allwaies true, how then stands the sainge of the Ipse
Dominus Jesus testificatur nobis, quod corpus suum accipiamus and sanguinem:
Nunquid debemus de eius fide, and testificatione dubitare? Owre Lord Jesus
testifies unto us, that we receive his body and blood: ought we to doubt of
his treuth and testimony?

Seeing then this author says, that Christ confessed his body and blood
Jrenaeus avouches both real presence and sacrifice.
to be present and that by these words: This is my body. This is my blood:
yt is plain that he understands them in their propre sense, without figure
or trope, and so acknowledges the very real presence of Christ's body and
blood in the Sacrament. For farther proof whereof, the words that immediately
in the same author do follow do make very much, where he says, Et noui
Testamenti, nouam docuit oblacionem: And of the new Testament he taught a new
oblacion. This new oblacion of the new Testament, is the body and blood of
Christ, as before in the first book is declared and proved. And here to the
purpose farther to say, if the sacrifice that

In the leuiticall law also we find bread and wine offered in the sacrifice.
The show bread also was offered in sacrifice. Wherefore of necessity yt must be
understand of an oblacion and sacrifice not hertofore accustomed to be offered,
which by that reason may be called a new oblacion, which is none other but
the very body and blood our Savior Christ. Which although yt were
figuratiuelie offered before of Melchisedech in material bread and wine: yet
now in the new testament, yt is offered as never before, not in figure but in
very deed, the very body and blood of Christ him self, the heavenly bread,
and heavenly wine answering the bread and wine of Melchisedech, as the thing
the figure. And so yt is a new oblacio^ instituted to be offered in the new
Testament. Wherefore also Christ to show confessed them (as this author says)
to be his body and blood, that the

If the malice of the adversary will go about to peruerte this plain sainge
and testimony of his author: sainge: that allthough Christ did confess the
bread and wine to be his body and blood, yet yt follows not that they were
so in deed. This were a merueilouse saing, that Christ should confess a thing
to be in plain manner of speech without any circunstance, leading us to an
other sense: and yet in deed not to be so. But that he shall not so wickedly
avoid the truth uttered here by this author, he shall hear an other
testimony of the same, in the which, as before he said that Christ confessed
the bread and wine to be his body and blood: so here the author affirms
them to be the body and blood: Thus he says Quomodo constabit cum panem in
quo gratiae actae sunt, corpus esse Domini sui, and calice^ sanguinis eius, si
non ipsum fabricatoris mundi filium dicant? etc. Quomodo autem rursum Irenaus
li. 5. cont. Heresy.
dicunt carnem in corruptionem deuenire, and non percipere vitam, quae a
corpore Domini and sanguine alitur? How shall yt be manifest, that bread in
the which than A plain saing of Irenaeus for the Proclamer
they say that he is not the son of the maker of the world? etc. And again,
how say they the flesh to come into corruption, and not to receive life,
which is nourished of the body and blood of our Lord?

There be here in this testimony two notes, whereby as the adversary is
answered and convinced: so is the truth notably settfurth and confirmed.

The first is, that he says that the bread, in the which thanks are given,
is the body of our Lord, and the cup is the cup of his blood. The bread
in the which Christ gave thinks, was the bread which the Evangelists say
that Christ took in his hands, and gave thanks saing: This is my body.
Christ then might very well confeffe yt to be his body, seeing (as Irenaeus
says) yt is his body. So that of this author we learn yt not only to be
called and confessed the body of Christ, but also to be, and that not in
obscure words, but in plain and evident

The other note is, that our flesh is nourished of the body and blood of Our
flesh is nourished of the body and blood of our Lord.
our Lord. Whereby the error of the Adversary teaching that Christ is only
spiritually and not reallie received in the Sacrament is overthrown and fownde
false. For by that spiritual manner our flesh is not nourished, wherefore of
necessity the other manner, that is, Christ's very real body must be in the
Sacrament received. Yt shall help you the better to perceive the mind of this
author as concerning the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, if ye do
understand wherefore he wrote this, that is here alleged.

Understand therefore that by this place last alleged he impugneth two
heresies: the one was that Christ was not the Son of God that made the
world, but that he was a man living in Iewrie, who did not only dissolve Two
heresies confuted by one argument grownded upon the Sacr.
the law and the Prophets, but also all the works of that God, that made the
world. The other taught that the soul only shall be saved, and live
everlastingly, and not the body, for that yt being a gross thing, made of
Irenaeus growndeth him self upon the Sacrament, as a matter certain, evident,
plain, and known as well of the heretics, against whom he disputed, as of the
true catholic Chrystians.

Now against the first heresy, he proves Christ to be the Son of God by
that that they confessed the body of their Lord, to be in the Sacrament. For
if he whose body is in the Sacrament were not the Son of him that made the
world, but a bare natural man, how could a man of his own power compass
that his body should so be? and how could yt be the body of their Lord, if
he were not the Son of God? So all the weight of this argument stands and
rests upon the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. Now deny the
presence with this Proclamer, and then the argument makes nothing against the
heresy, and so the argument which this holy Father thought to be strong
shall be but weak. But who can doubt of the true knowledge of this ancient
Father? When he grownded his argument upon the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, he was sure that his grownde was fast and good. If the Sacrament
were nothing but a figure, what more proof could be grownded upon yt then
upon any other figure of the old law?

The second heresy he also impugneth by the receipt of the body and blood of
Christ in the Sacrament. For where that heresy denied the body of man to be
able or like to atteign to life everlasting, this holy man proves that yt
shall. For how can yt (says he) but receive life, seeing yt is nourished by
the body and blood of Christ? as though he might Cyrill in 6. Joan. ca 14
have said, as saint Cyrill says: Quoniam Saluatoris caro Verbo Dei, quod
naturaliter vita est, coniuncta, viuifica effecta est, quando eam comedimus
tunc vitam habemus in nobis illi coniuncti, quae viuifica effecta est. Because
the flesh of our Savior joined to the Son of God, which is naturally life
is made quickening or giving life, when we eat that flesh, then Jn 15. Joan Our
corruptible body can not atteign to incorrup. and life, except the body of
Christ be joined to yt
have we life in us. For (as he says in an other place: Non poterat aliter
corruptibilis haec natura corporis ad incorruptibilitatem and vitam traduci,
nisi naturalis vitae corpus ei coniungeretur. This corruptible nature of our
body could not otherwise be brought to incorruptibilitie and life, except the
body of natural life should be joined to yt.

So then ye may now likewise perceive the force of this argument Irenaeus to
consist upon the corporal receipt of the body of Christ in the Sacrament,
which (as Cyrill says) being the flesh of life, and incorruption when yt is
joined to our corruptible and mortal flesh (which manner of conjunction is by
none other mean done, but by the Sacrament) yt makes this natural body of
our to be apt to incorruption and life. If in the Sacrament we do not receive
the very real body of Christ, but a figure of the body, which gives not
life to our bodies, how stands the argument of Irenaeus? what truth is there
in the saing of Cyrillus? how shall these our mortal and coruptible bodies be
made immortal and incorruptible, if the flesh of life, the flesh of our Lord
Christ be not joined to our flesh? The nourishing of our slesh to
incorruptibilitie by the flesh of Christ proves inuinciblie the real presence.


And here note, Reader, that these manner of speeches of these two authors
improve the fantasy and error of the Sacramentaries, and inuinciblie prove
the true catholic doctrine of the Church. As touching the false doctrine of
the Sacramentaries, where yt teaches that we only receive Christ's body
spirituallie, that is, the meritte and virtue of spiritual Christ is joined to
spirittes. But these authors say that the flesh and body of Christ is
received and so joined to our flesh and bodies. Irenaeus be of great force and
strenght, against the heretics, against whom he disputed: So is the
testimony of Cyrill true: So is the doctrine of the catholic Church fownd
ancient substanciall and well grownded: So is the doctrine of the
Sacramentaries improued and fownd false as yt is in deed.

And where the Proclamer required but one plain place of any one ancient Plain
places and arguments against M. Iuell.
doctor, he has now one, not only plain, but also strong and mighty, so
overthrowing the green wrought walls of his late invented heresy, that well he
may hang up some painted clothes, paincted like strong walls, which may
deceive simple eyes, and weak seightes, but they shall be in deed but painted
cloutes. This Irenaeus is not only taken of the catholics to be (as I have
said) plain and strong, but also Melancthon against Oecolampadius this
proclamers late fownder, alleges the same Irenaeus as one most plain and
ancient, and there for not to be against said.

Thus having brought forth an ancient scholar of Christ's school, and a grave
counseilour in Christ's Parliament house, who has declared unto us the true
doctrine of Christ's school, and the enacted and received truth of his
Parliament house, that the words of Christ teach us the presence of his
very body in the Sacrament, and that they are to be understood in their
propre sense: Now follows Tertullian a man very nere the time of Irenaeus,
whom the Adversaries seem to make the patron of their figurative doctrine,
but yt shall be well perceived, that he is against them and favors them not.
Thus he writes. Professus itaque Tertullian li. 4. cont. Marc.
se concupiscentia concupiscere edere Pascha, vt suum (indignum quippe vt quid
alienum concupisceret Deus) acceptum panem, and distributum Discipulis, corpus
suum illum fecit, dicens: Hoc est corpus meum id est, figura corporis mei.
Figura autem non fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus. When Christ therefore had
said, that Christ made the bread his body, says Tertull.
unseemly that God should desire any strange thing) the bread that was taken
and distributed to his disciples, he made yt his body, sainge: This is my
body, that is to say, a figure of my body. But yt had not ben a figure,
except yt were a body of truth.

As Irenaeus against Valentinus: So Tertullian against Marcion used his
argument taken of the Sacrament. Marcion the disciple of Cerdon (whose heresies
S. Augustine reherseth) wickedlie taught as his master did, that Christ had no
August. li. Aduers. Here Is. c. 28 Heresy of Marcion
very true body, when he was here conversant upon the earth, but a
fantastical body. Now Tertullian to prove that he had a very true body,
brings in the institucion of the Sacrament, sainge, that Christ made the
bread that he took and distributed to his disciples, his body, saing: This
is my body. Wherbie as he strongly proves by Christ's own fact, who made
the bread his body, and by his own word (who said of the same that he had
so made: This is my body) that Christ had a very body, Which could not
well have Tertullian, if that, that he made his body, and said to be his
body, had not ben a very body. Even so saing that This is my body, proves
against the Sacramentaries both the presence of Christ's very body in the
Sacrament, and also that the words of Christ are to be taken in their propre
sense.

But here reclaimeth the Adversary, and says that not withstanding this that
is said, Tertullian adds and says that yt is a figure of his body. I
wish that the Adversary would here ioin with me, as I will with him, that
both of us accept the wholle saing of Tertullian, as yt is here alleged, and
that he whose doctrine repugneth against any part of yt, to confess that his
doctrine is not good, and he that confesses the whole, that his doctrine be
accepted as sownde and good. Let is then open the parts of Tertullian his
saing.

There be in yt two parts: The one is that he says, that Christ made
Tertullian opened and delivered from the Sacramentaries.
the bread that he took in his hands his body: The other that he says:
This is my body, that yt is to say, a figure of mi body. I now require of
the Tertulians saing, that Christ made the bread his body? Certain I am that
neither he, nor any other Sacramentarie does grant that. For if Christ made
the bread his body (as by the testimony of this author yt is most certain
that he did) then is his very body certenlie and verily in the Sacrament.
Which they all deny, as by declaracion of the sainges of some of their
capitans yt shall appear. Zuinglius ad illutris. Germ. principes.


Zuinglius writes thus: Cum panis and vinum illius amititiae symbolum sint,
qua Deus humano generi per filium suum reconciliatus est, illa non aestimamus
pro materiae praecio, sed iuxta significate rei magnitudinem, vt iam non sit
vulgaris panis, sed sacer, nec panis tantum nomen habeat, sed corporis Christi
quoque, imo sit corpus Christi sed appellatione, and significatione, quod
recentiores vocant sacramentaliter. Forasmoche as bread and wine be the token
of the frendshippe, by the which God by his Son was reconciled to mankind,
we weigh not these things for the worthiness of their matter, but according
to the greatness of the thing signified: that now yt be not common bread, but
holy, neither that yt have only the name of bread, but also of the body of
Christ: yea that yt be the

Ye see that this Sacramentarie, would not have the Sacrament to be esteemed for
the substance of yt, wherbie he denies the presence of the substance of
Christ's body. In the end he also says that yt is the body of Christ but
he corrects or raither corrupts himself saing: that yt is so by name and
significacion only, and not by truth, and substance.

Oecola^padius also says thus Barbaries plus quam Scythica, vel Diomedaea
est, in panis in Jn exposit. verboru^ coenae. Dom.
volucroceu in aenigmate ipsam hospitis carne^ quaerere. Rusticitas est non
obseruare nec cognoscere in quo hospes beneuolentia^ suam doceat, and pro
spirituali carnalem requirere coenam. Yt is more then scythicall or diomedicall
Barbarousnesse, in the covering of bread to seek the flesh of Christ, yt is
gross inciuilitie not to regard and know wherein Christ teaches his
benevolence, and for a spiritual to require a carnal supper. And here
Oecolampadius also denies that Tertullan affirms. For he says yt is a
barbarousnesse or rudeness to seek the flesh of Christ in the Sacrament: but
Tertullian (whom I often repete) saing that Christ made the bread his body
gives us not a rude, but a godly doctrine

Bullinger also says thus: Commemoratio ac symbolum est corporis very, non
ipsum corpus. Yt is a remembrance and a token of the very body, not the very
body Bullingerus in 2. Act.
yt self. What need I trouble the reader with the sainges of any more of them,
seeing yt is certain, that the wholl rabble of them, and this Proclamer also
denies that, that Tertullian says, and abhors to say as he says, that
the bread is made the body of Christ. And note well that Tertullian says
not, that yt is named or called the body of Christ, but in plain express
Christ named not only, but made the bread his body.
words says, that yt is made the body of Christ. And now yt is plain
that the adversary receaueth not this part of Tertullian his saing: but all the catholic church ever has and does receive yt, confessing yt with this
man and S. Cyprian, who followed him, and highly embraced him, and S. Ambrose,
which both use the like words, that the bread is made the body of Christ.
Cyprian in this manner: Panis quem Dominus Discipulis edendum porrigebat non
essigic, sed natura mutatus omnipotentia verbi factus est Caro. The bread
Cypria^. de coena Dom.
that our Lord gave unto his disciples, changed not in outward form, but in
nature, by the omnipotency of the word is made flesh. S. Ambrose in this
sort: Panis iste, panis est ante verba sacramentorum, vbi accesserit
consecratio de pane Amb. li. 4. de Sacr. c. 4 Bread is made the flesh of Christ.
sit caro Christi. This bread is bread before the words of the Sacraments:
but when the consecracion is comed to yt, of the bread is made the flesh of
Christ. In all these ye see this manner of speech, that bread is made the
flesh or body of Christ. Which manner fully excludes the only figure and
includes the very substanciall presence of Christ's body.

Thus much being said of the first part of Tertullians saing: Let us also
have a few words about the second part. The second part (if you
remembrer) is that calls yt a figure of Christ's body. This part the
Adversary (there is no doubt) receaueth though he receive yt not well,
according to the mind of the author. The catholic also receaueth yt, and
receaueth yt well. For he receaueth yt according to the mind of the author.
How shall the reader perceive that? Thus shall he perceive yt.

He that so understands a catholic author, that he make him not repugnant
to himself, nor to other his likes, he understands the author well, The
right way to understand a catholic author.
and receaueth him well. But he that so understands an author that he makes
him contrary, and repugnant to himself, and other learned authors which be
his likes, he understands the author evil, and receaueth him evil. The
catholic receaueth this part of Tertullian, where he says yt is a figure of
Christ's body, and grants yt, and also following Tertullian, teaches that
yt is a figure, but so that the presence of Christ's body be not denied, which
the first part (as above is said) teaches. And therefore though yt be a
figure: yet not only a figure, but also the body with yt. The Adversary
receaueth this part of the author understanding yt as Oecolampadius The Sacr.
a figure but not only a figure.
does. quod panis assumitur in signum tantum, that the bread is taken for a
sign only, denieng therbie the presence of the body. And so makes the
author not only repugnante to himself, but also to other holy writers. To
himself thus: For where he said, that Christ made the bread his body, now
understanding by the figure, the Sacrament to be only a figure or sign of
Christ's body and not the body yt self, the bread is not made his body.
Oecol. de verbiscoen.
And so shall the author deny in the second part of his saing, that he
thaught in the first, which may not be allowed, and therefore he receaueth S.
Ambrose. S. Cyprian, to Irenaeus, Justinius, and Alexander which all teach (as
before is declared) that the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood contains
the very body of

For the better understanding of this matter, I wish thee, reader, to perceive
that for somoch as to our purpose apperteineth, a figure may be taken two
manner of ways. One way as yt is a sign or token of a thing absent in deed, A
figure may be taken two ways.
but present in figure or sign. As a ring given of a man to his loving spouse,
is a sign or token of remembrance of him being absent. An other way a figure
may be taken as of a thing absent in manner and condition soche as sometime yt
has been in, but present in very deed and substance. As the spouse beholding
her very husband, and seeing the skars and tokens of wounds that he suffered
for her defense and sauegarde, and of his children an hers: is A figure may be
of a thing present in substance.
brought in remembrance of his loving kindness, and of the dangers sustained
for her sake. In which case although the substance of the man be present: yet
to his wife he is a figure and token of remembrance of himself absent in
condition of a man now in fight, and daungered with sore and deep woondes. For
now he is no soch man, but whole and sownd, and a perfect man.

Now where Tertullian says that the Sacrament is a figure of Christ's The
Sacr. is a figure of a thing present.
body now present in the Sacrament, and there by faith certenlie and
assuredlye seen and beholden, is a figure and a token of remembrance to his
spouse the Church of his afflictions, passions, and wounds suffered upon the
Cross for her sauegarde and delivery, which body although yt be
substanciallie present: yet in that manner of a passible, and suffering body yt
is not now present. Caro carnis, and sanguis sacramentum est sanguiuis.
vtroque inuisibiliter August. il. sente^. Pros.
spirituali and intelligibili signatur Domini Jesus Christi corpus visibile and
palpabile, plenum gratia omnium virtutum, and diuina maiestate. The flesh,
says S. Augustine, is a Sacrament of the flesh, and the blood is a sacrament
of the blood. By both which being invisibly spiritual and intelligle is
signified the visible and palpable The invisible body of Christ in the Sacr.
ae figure of the same visible, etc.
body of our Lord Jesus Christ, full of grace and all virtues, and divine
majesty. Thus much he. Here do we learn of S. Augustine that the body of
Christ and blood in the Sacrament being under the forms of bread and wine
invisible, spiritual, and intelligible, be figures of the same body visible
and palpable.

Let not this then seem incredible to thee (gentle Reader) seeing S. Augustine
testifies yt by so plain words, and the scriptures also testify unto us
that Christ was made in the likeness of men: and yet was he nevertheless
Philip. 2.
a very natural and substancial man, and that he is the very image of the
Father, and yet he is of the substance of the Father also. So that as we are
taught, that Christ is made to the likeness of men, and is also a very man,
and is the image of the substance of the Father, and yet of the very substance
of the Father also: So we be taught that the Sacrament is a figure and the
thing yt self also. For we say the body of Christ under the form of bread,
and his blood under the form of wine, to be a figure of that body that
suffered upon the Cross, and of the blood there yssuing out of the same body,
and divided from yt. And yet nevertheless to be the same very body in
substance that hanged upon the Cross, and the same blood in substance that
ran out of that blessed body. And therefore Tertullian might very well call
yt a figure as before he called yt the body of Christ, for yt is both.

This shall farther appear by two places of S. Augustine, in the which speaking
of one thing, he calls the Sacrament in one the figure of the body of
Christ: in the other he calls yt or price or Redemption, Judas the
traditour. Cum Christus eius cogitationes non ignoraret, eum tamen adhibuit and
conuiuium, in quo sui corporis and sanguinis figuram Discipulis commendauit.
When Christ was not ignorant of the thoughts of Judas: yet he had him Aug. in
Psalm. 3.
present at the feast, in the which he commended to his Disciples the figure of
his body and blood. Here ye perceive that saint Augustine calls the
Sacrament the figure of Christ's body and blood. In an other place he says
thus: Tollerat ipse Dominus Iudam, Diabolum, furem, and venditorem suum. Sinit
Epist. 162. Judas received the body of christ which is our price.
accipere inter innocents Discipulos, quod norunt fideles, precium nostrum.
Owre Lord himself does suffer Judas, a deuell, a thief, and his seller, he
suffers him to take among the innocent Disciples, that the faithful know,
our price or redemption.

Now mark that what in the other sentence he called the figure of Christ's
body, here he calls yt our price or redemption, which is Christ him self as
saint Paul testifies: Qui factus est nobis sapientia, and iustitia, and
sanctificatio and redemptio. Who is made to us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctificacion, and redemption. If the Sacrament be but a bare figure: if yt be
but

Whereunto agreably says Theophilact: Attend quod panis qui a nobis in
mysterijs manducatur, non est tantum figuratio quaedam carnis Domini, sed ipsa
caro Domini. Note or take head that the bread, which is eaten of us in the
mysteries, Jn 6. Joan. Bread of the Sacra. very flesh A plain saing for M.
Juell.
is not only a certain figure of the flesh of our Lord, but the flesh yt self
of our Lord. Thus by this declaracion of saint Augustine and Theophilact ye
may clearly see and perceive, the right and true understanding of Tertullian,
who according to the Chrystian and catholic faith taught that Christ made
the bread his body whereby he conuinceth his Adversary Marcion. And after to
his farther confutacion (for that a figure, must needs be a figure os a body)
he says also that yt is the figure of Christ's body,

This understanding of Tertullian must needs be good and upright. For Li. de
resur. carnis. A plain saing for the Proclamer
after this manner he agrees with himself both in this place and other, as where
he says: Caro corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur, vt anima de Deo
saginetur. The flesh eats the body and blood of Christ, that the soul may
be made fat with God. Where in plain words he says that man, not by
spiritte, but by his flesh eats, not a piece of bread a sign or figure only
of Christ's body, but yt eats Christ's very body and blood yt self. After
this understanding also he agrees with saint Augustine, and Theophilact, and
other holy Fathers, as partly ye have before heard, and shall herafter
plentifully hear. And thus understood he agrees to be short with the
wholl catholic Church, which always has and does teach the body of
Christ both to be a figure, and the thing yt self in verity. Wherefore neither
Tertullian, neither saint Augustine in these places alleged neither against
Amantus, be either refused or denied but accepted and embraced. For the Church
does acknoledge as much as they say, and they with the

But let the Adversary bring but one ancient author that says as he
figura tantum. only a figure, and therewith says as he does that the real
and very body of Christ is not in the Sacrament, and then I will say he has
done somewhat. Hitherto all they have done nothing to effect to prove their
matter, but only made some cowntenance and appearance No catholic author
says that the Sacr. is only a figure.
in words to deceive the people, and to pluck them from the catholic
faith. For where their doctrine is that the Sacrament is a figure only, when
they read this word (figura) in Tertullian, S. Angustine, or any other
author they run away with yt, and violently wrest yt making their
auditorie believe, that the author say as they say. And that is false. For
the authors say no not one of them that yt is only a figure, which is the
thing that the Adversary must prove, and that shall he never do.

Wherefore Reader, look to thy self, and be not deceived, mark well which
part says as Tertullian says, and follow that part. Tertullian says,
that the bread is made the body of Christ, so says the cathoiique, so
says the holy Church, but that denies the Adversary. Tertullian says
(Figure) yt seems so to say, and to have agreement with Tertullian: yet in
sense yt denies the wholl. For neither does the Adversary agree upon the
thing that is the figure, neither does he say as Tertullian does say, that
yt is a figure, but with an exclusuie, that yt is a figure only, which as yt
is more then Tertullian says: so yt is more then is true and thus trusting ye
clearly, and fully perceive, who agrees and who dissenteth from this ancient
Father of the primitive Church, I end with him, and proceade to hear other,

THE FIFTETH CHAP. ABIDES IN THE EXposition of the same words by S. Cyprian,
and Athanasius.
NOt long after Tertullian was S. Cyprian, who being a senior in Christ's
school, and an ancient in his Parliament house, Cypry. de coena Dom. vide
sup. li. 1. cap. 29.
Thus he writes: Significata olim a tempore Melchisedech prodeunt sacramenta,
and filiis Abrahae, facientibus opera eius, summus sacerdos pane^ profert and
vinu^ Hoc est (inquit) corpus meum etc. The sacraments signified long agon
from the time of Melchisedech come now abroad, and the high priest to the
child ren of Abraham doing his works, brings forth bread and wine. This
(says he) is my body. They had eaten of the same bread after the visible
form, but before those words, that common meat was only meat to nourishe
the body, and ministered the help of the corporal life. But after that our
Lord had said: Do this in my remembrance, This is my flesh, and this is my
blood: As often as yt is done with these words, and this faith, that
substanciall bread and cup consecrated by the solemn benediction does
profitte to the health and life of the wholl man, being both a medicen and a
sacrifice, to heall infirmities, and to pourge iniquities. Thus he.

What sense the words of Christ's supper have, this holy Ciprian but after
that our Lord had said: This do in the remembrance of me: This is my flesh,
and this is my blood, that substanciall bread and cup consecrated does
profitte the wholl man, that is, both the body and soul of man, for so much
as yt is a medicen to heal the infirmities of them, and a sacrifice to pourge
their iniquities. In the Sacrament after the words of S. Cyprian saing that
the bread and cup after the co^sccracio^, is a medicine to heal insir. and a
sacrifice to pourge iniquit. proves invincible the real presence of Chrysts
body.
Christ spoken what can be said to be, that profits both body and soul,
and is a medicen and also a sacrifice, what I say, can there else be that
should be these great works but the body and blood of Christ? Yt is that
body that is our medicen: yt is that body that is our sacrifice. Wherefore S.
Cyprian mening that after the words of our Lord, that body and blood is in
the Sacrament, inuinciblie proves against the proclamer the presence of
Christ's body and that the words of our Lord be not to be understand
figuratively, but proprely in their own sense.

And this is not to be ouerpassed, what difference this author makes betwixt
the condition of the bread before the words of Christ spoken, and after the
words. Before the words (says he) yt is common meat meet only to
nourish the body, but after the words yt is, as ye have heard, profitable
both for body and soul:

This also is to be noted that this author speaking of these great benefittes
does not attribute the^ to faith, nor to the virtue of the passion of Christ,
Benefits at tributed to the Sacra.
nor to the spiritual body of Christ, or receipt of that (although all these

Of this place of S. Ciprian, forasmoche as I have more at large spoken in the
opening of the figure of Melchisedech, I shall desire the reader, if he would
In the first book c. 29.
see what may be more said upon yt, to resort thither, where, I turst, he
shall find matter to the better opening of this place.

But yet that yt may be fully perceived that S. Cyprian in this place meneth
as is said, that the very body of Christ is in the Sacrament, and that Cypr.
de cae na. Dom. A plain place for M. Iuell.
that this sentence before alleged is in, which is this. Nouae est buius
Sacrame^ti doctrina, and scholae cuangelicae hoc primu^ magisteriu^
portulerunt, and doctore Christo primu^ haec mu^do innotuit disciplina, vt
bibere^t sanguine^ christiani, cuius esum legis antiquae authoritas
districtissime^ interdicit. Lex quippe esu^ sanguinis probibet: Euangeliu^
praecipit vt bibatur. In quibus ma^datis hoc maxim discernere debet christiana
Religio, quod sanguis animaliu^, a sanguine Chricti per omnia differens,
te^poralis tantu^ habet viuificationis effectu^, and vita little finem habet
sine reuocacione constitutu^. The doctrine of this Sacrament The law did
forbid the eating of blood, the Gospel commands yt.
is new, and the evangelical schools first brought forth this manner of
teaching, and Christ being the teacher this learning first was known to the
world, that chrystian men should drink blood, the eating whereof the
authority of the old law did most strictly forbid. The Law forbids
the eating of blood: The Gospel commands that yt be drunk. In which
commandments this most cheiflie aught the chrystian religion to discern
that the blood of beasts by all means differinge the life of them has an
end appoincted without reuocacion. Thus he.

I wish the (gentle reader) against the blasphemies of the Adversaries, to
weigh well every part of this saing of S. Cyprian. The Adversary says that
the doctrine of the Sacrament, is the Papists divise, and their inuencion: But
S. Cyprian teaches us first that yt is a new doctrine, he teaches us in what
school yt was first, taught. In the school (says he) of the Gospel, he
teaches us who was the school master, who was the first teacher of yt, Christ
(faieth he) was the first teacher of yt, he first did notify yt to the world.
But if ye ask what is this new doctrine: He says that yt is a new doctrine
of the Sacrament that chrystian men should drink blood. If ye proceade
Doctrine of the real presence how yt is called new.
and ask whether they must drink very blood: He says very blood. For yt
is soche blood as the law did forbid to be eaten. And that assuredly was
very blood. Wherefore this is very blood. If ye question farther, if the
chrystians must drink very blood, whose blood must they drink? He
answers, Christ's blood, as in the comparison of the commandments of the
two laws (the old law forbidding blood, the

In this then ye may perceive that the doctrine of the presence of Christ's
body and blood in the Sacrament and the real receipt of the same is not the
inuencion or devise of the Papists, but yt is as this holy Father and martyr
of Christ, and therefore a good scholar of Christ, says, who knew Doctrine of
the real presence is no new i^nuention of the Papists.
the learning of his master well, yt is says he, the doctrine of Christ, yt
is his ordeinance, yt is his inuencion, divise, and institucion. Wherefore they
may bashe, and be a shamed, yea they may tremble for fear to see themselves
fallen into that impiety, that the Jews were, who saying Christ casting out
the dumb spiritte out of a man, maliciouselie and wickedlie ascribed the
miraculouse work to Beelzebub, which was done by the power of God in Christ:
So they wickedly ascribe this institucion of the Sacrament this doctrine of the
presence of Christ's body and blood in the same Luc. 11.
(which is the miraculouse work of God) to the Papists, at yt pleases them
to term them. But here may ye learn that Christ is the first teacher

And first where he says, that the doctrine of the Sacrament is new This
does plainly and strongly reiecte the figure and Tropes of the Aduersaties
from the Sacrament. For if the Sacrament be but the figure and not the thing:
how is yt, or how can yt be a new doctrine? To offer bread and wine as
figures of Christ, we find Melchisedech in the law of nature Genesis 14. Exodus
16. 1. Cor. 10.
to have so done. That the people of the Jews did eat Manna, and bread from
heaven, and drank the water of the rock, as figures of Christ's body and
blood, yt is more manifest, then can be denied. The two tenth deals of fine
flower made in cakes, and the wine also that was offered for a drink offering,
stinted in Leuiticus by the measure of a fourt deal of an hyn were offered as
figures of Chrysts body and blood, as Isichius witnesses, so Li. 6. ca. 23
that to have bread and wine, or to eat and drink soche things as figures of
Christ's body and blood, yt is no new doctrine. Yt was in the law of
nature, yt was in the law of Moises. Wherefore yt can not be a new yt. When
and where did he teach yt? Before his passion at his (as Cyprian terms yt) in
the school of the Gospel. Where in the Gospel then find we this new doctrine
or commandment? The doctrine we find (as before is declared) in the sixth of
S. John. Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est, quam dabo pro mundi vita. The
bread, that I will give you, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of
the world. And that which follows in the same chapter concerning the
Sacrament.

The commandment we find in the three other Evangelists and in S. Paul.
Accipite, and comedite, hoc est corpus meum. Bibite ex hoc omnes. Hic est calix
sanguinis mei. Take and eat. This is my body, drink ye all of this, This is
the Matthew. 26 Mar. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11.
cup of my blood. Cyprian says that Christ first taught that men should
drink blood, and that the school of the Gospel did first set yt forth, and
also the Gospel did command yt. But in all the Gospel we find no soche
commandment, but this that is now said. Wherefore these words do command
us to drink the very blood of Christ, and not the only figure of yt. Which
being so yt proves the very real presence of Christ's

Now follows Athanasius, whom for that he was not long after Cyprian, I have
coopled with the same, as a famous ancient father of the greek church, with
an holy famous martyr of the Latin church. Thus writes Athanasius. Corpus
est ergo cui dicit: Sede a dextris meis. Cuius etiam fuit inimicus Diabolus,
Athanasius li. de fide vt ^i^tatur a Theodoret. Dialogo 2. Inconfusus.
cum malis potestatibus, and Iudaei, and Greci, per quod corpus Pontifex and
Apostolus fuit and dictus est, per id quod tradidit nobis mysterium dicens: Hoc
est corpus meum, quod pro Vobis frangitur. Et sanguis noui testamenti non
veteris, qui pro vobis effunditur etc. Yt is therefore a body to the which he
said: Sit on my right hand, whose enemy was the Deuell, with the evil
powers and the Jews, and the greeks. By which body he both was in deed, and
was called an high priest, and an Apostle, by that mystery that he delivered
us saing: This is my body, which is broken for you, and the blood of the
new Testament, not of the old, which is shed for you. The Godheade has
neither body nor blood, but man, which he did take of the virgen Mary.

Theodorete, who in his second dialoge labors to prove two distincted
natures without confufion, that is, the nature of God and the nature of man,
each of them full and perfight joined, but not commixed in unity of person in
Christ owre savior, alleges this saing of Athanasius, where in Athanasius
touching both natures, does most abide to prove the nature of man to remain in
Christ. And to prove that, he proves that Christ had a very man's body, and
that by two arguments: The first is that where David in the psalm prophesied
that Christ should be exalted to sit on the right hand of God the Father,
and therefore said: The Lord said to my Lord, suit thowe on my right hand.
This could not be said but to a body. But Christ as God, had neither body
nor blood. Wherefore yt is spoken to Christ as man. The other argument is after
this sort Christ by that that he delivered unto us the mystery of his body
and blood, was in deed, and so also was called an high priest. But in the
delivering of this mystery he said This is my body, This is my blood. And
the Godhead of Christ has neither body nor blood: Wherefore he spoke hy his
very ma^heade which had both This is my body: This is my blood.

In both these arguments, this is principally intended, to prove Christ a
very man by that that he had a very body. Now to our purpose in the
second argument to prove that he had a body, by that that Christ This is my
body: does yt not prove that this author understands Christ to have spoken
this by his very body? if the should not so do, what should yt help his
matter that he entendeth to prove, to bring in this saing of Christ: This is
my body, if yt be not spoken of his body?

To prove that this auhour, does so understand this place of Christ, as
spoken of his very body this makes yt most certain, and yt may not be
against Scriptures must be alleged in their literal sense in matters of faith
said. S. Augustine says, and yt is a rule among all the learned divines,
that in the disputacion of matters of faith all scriptures must be alleged in
their literal sense. Forasmoche then as this scripture is alleged in the
disputacion of an high matter of faith (as ye have heard) yt must be taken
and understood in the literal sense. The words are taken to prove that
Christ had a very body. Wherefore in the literal sense they are spoken, and
understand of his very body. Thus ye may perceive that figures signs,
tokens, and tropes, are not admitted by this author to give us the true sense
and mening of these words.

And thus much may we here note (as I have before touched) that the Irenaeus:
This have you seen in Tertullian: This same ye see in Athanasius. Which as yt
aught to be an occasion of an assured stay, and confirmacion of our faith in
the same matter in the Sacrament: so wish I that yt may be a reuocacion of
the Proclamer, and all other walking in error with him to the very faith of
the Sacrament, that Christ may by the mouth of all that profess his name, be
in his Sacraments praised and magnified, even according to his holy will and
pleasure.

THE ONE AND FITITETH CHAP. SHOWS the mind of Iuuencus, and Eusebius. Emisen
upon the words of Christ.
Among the Latins that do open unto us the understanding of the words of
Christ's supper, the next that I find to S. Ciprian is Juuencus lib. 4.
Euangelice histor.
Iuuencus the priest, a chrystian Poet in Spain, who in Verse gives a notable
and a plain understanding of Christ's words. He is very ancient, he did
write a good nombre of years above xii hundredth years agone. Thus says he.
Haec vbi dicta dedit, palmis sibi frangere panem,
Diuisumque dehinc tradit sanctumque precatus,
Discipulos docuit proprium se tradere corpus.
Hinc calicem sumit Dominus, vinoque repletum
Gratis sanctificat verbis, potumque ministrat.
Edocuitque suum se diuisisse cruorem.
Atque ait, hic sanguis populi delicta remittet.
Hunc potate meum etc.


Christ delivered to his Apostles his own body.
Of these verseis, this may be the sense in english. When Christ had his own
body. And after that our Lord took the cup filled with wine This blood
shall remitte the Sins of the people. Drink ye this my blood etc.

This Author setting forth the history of the Gospel in verse, and therewith
oftentimes giving us with the history the sense and understanding of yt, does
even so here. For he does not only say that Christ said, This is my body,
but gives the understanding of yt, saing, that Christ taught his Apostles that
he delivered unto them his own body. In which manner of speech note this
also, that he says not only, that Christ delivered them his body: But
adds this word (own) and says that he taught them, that he delivered to
them his own body. Which manner of speech has soche force and strenght with
yt, that as yt declares the catholic says and gives great testimony of
the same: so yt beats and drives away the wicked gloss of only figures and
signs, invented by the Adversaries to pervert the truth. For what more plain
testimony would we desire for the understanding of Christ's words, then to
say, that when Christ says: Take eat, this is my body, that he taught his
Apostles, that he gave them his own body? A plain saing for the Procla.
Thus may you see that for the catholic faith you have plain testimony, for
the heresy of the Adversary, you have not one word. For I assure you of
this, as partly before is said, there is not one catholic writer, neither
old nor young, from Christ to Berengarius that ever taught or wrote that the
Sacrament is only a figure or sign of the body of Christ. And therefore
(Reader) look to thie self, be not carried away from Christ's faith with only
bragges and glosing words void of all good proof. But raither settle thy
self where thowe find the truth set forth to thee with simplicity and
plainness commended with much proof and authority.

But having yet many mo witnesses let me have me to bring him, that is
appoincted to be this authors yockfelowe, to declare the continuance of the
understanding of Christ's words in the greek church, as the other has done
in the latin church. This is Eusebius Emisenus, who by the supptacion of
learned men, lived in the same time that Iuuencus did. He writes Recedat omne
infidelitatis ambiguum, quoniam quidem qui author est muneris, ipse est etiam
testis veritatis. Nam inuisibilis sacerdos visibiles creaturas in substantiam
corporis and sanguinis sui verbo suo, secreta potestate conuertit, ita dicens:
Hoc est corpus meu^. Et sanctificatione repetita, Accipite, and bibite, ait,
Hic est sangnis meus. Let all doubt Eusebius. Emis. Homil. 5. Pa. Visible bread
and wine turned into the substance of the body and blood of Christ
of insidelitie or unbelief depart. For truly he that is the author of the
gift, he also is the witness of the truth. For the invisible priest by his
secret power, does with his word convert or turn the visible creatures into
the substance of his body and blood, saing thus: Take and eat, This is my
body. and the sanctificacion repeted: Take and drink (says he) this is my
blood,

In this saing of Eusebius there is no soche dark manner of speech that the
reader need to doubt of the true presence of Christ in the Sacrament, or how
to understand the words of Christ's supper, seeing that he so plainly says,
that Christ (whom he calls the inuinsible priest) with his power and word,
saing This is my body, This is my blood, turns the visible Real presence
and transubsta^tiacio^ plainly avouched by Eusebius. Emis.
creatures of bread and wine into the substance of his body and blood. If
they be turned into the substance of his body and blood, as by the testimony
Corpus, and sangnis, body and blood, in the sainges of Christ do not signify
the figures of the body and blood of Christ, but the substance of the body
and blood of Christ, into which substance to make the body and blood verily
present, This is my body, this is my blood: yt is asmoch as he had said, This
is the substance of my body, this is the substance of my blood. This doctrine
is so certain, so sure, and so true, that this author gave exhortacion and
admonicio^ in the beginning of his saing, that in this matter there should be no
doubt, all unbelief should depart, and so faithfully to believe Christ's
words, that forasmoch as he is the author of all truth, and says: This is
my body, This is my blood, undoubtedly so to take yt.

Beside this doctrine of faith of the presence of Christ's very substanciall
body and blood in the Sacrament, this author also teaches the mea^ how
Transubstantiacion treacted of.
God woorketh yt, and says, that yt is done by turning the creatures of bread
and wine into the substance of the body and blood of Christ, which turning or
changing of one substance into an other, as the holy Fathers do diversely
term, some of the^ calling yt a conversion or turning, some of the^ mutacio^
or chau^ging, some communicacion or translacion, some transelementacio^: some
tra^smutacion: Berengarius, has termed yt Transubstanciato^n, which term
imports no more in this matter, then transmutacion, or transelementacion, but
yt sowndeth and opens the thing that yt signifies more lively, and suffers
notthe heretics to wrest yt as they do the other. Which is the cause that
many be so greuouslie offended with the term. But because the Proclamer does
lightly ouerpasse yt I will not tarry long upon yt. But in the allegacio^ of
the Fathers, as they shall make me^cio^ ofit, so shall I breleiflie not it.

And yet that the reader shall not think that that matter is so barren, that
nothing can be said of yt, or being desielrouse to learn should be frustrate
of his desire, and expectacio^. I shall somewhat here say of yt, desiering
withal that as they do read the doctors that shall be hereafter alleged, they
will note in them what they shall find, as thereunto I shall give the^ occasion
in every one that does speak of this matter. And for that we have taken
occasion of this authors words to speak of yt, we will first hear what he
says Eusebius. Emiss. ibid.
said, the author immediately adds this that follows: Ergo vt ad nutu^
Domini praecipientis, repent ex nihilo substiterint alta coelorum, profunda
sluctuu^, vasta terrarum: ita pari potentia in spiritual (...) Sacramentis,
verbo praebetur virtus and reiseruit effectus. Quanta itaque, and quam
celebranda vis diuinae benedictionis operetur, and quomodo tibi nouu^ and
impossible videri non debeat, quod in Christi substantiam terrena and mortalia
co^mutantur, teipsum, qui iam in Christo es regeneratus, interroga. Therefore as
at the will of our Lord commanding, sodenlie of nothing, the heightes of the
heavens, the deapths of the waters, the greatness of the earth were in
substa^ciall being: Even so in the spiritual Sacraments unto the word is
given virtue or power, and the effect is brought to pass. Therefore how great
and How the bread and wine beturned into the body and blood, etc.
notable things, the power of the divine benediction may woork, and how yt
should not seem to thee as new or impossible that earthly and mortal things
are co^muted or changed into the substance of Christ, ask of thy self,
Eusebius. Who, to prove that, which he had before said, that the visible
creaturs of bread and wine are turned into the substance of the body and blood
ofChryst, brings this argument: that asat as the commandment of God his
only word, sode^lie the heavens, the waters,

An other argument he brings by the change that God makes of a man in
Baptism, that he that was a stranger and a banished man from God, yea and
dead before God, suddenly is revived, and of a banished man is made a friend,
and of a stranger is made an adoptiue Son of God. Whereby he would not have
yt thought impossible, but that earthly and mortal things, as the bread and
wine in the Sacrament, may be and are changed into the substance of Christ.

In the same homely to this purpose also he makes this persuasion: Nec
dubitet quispiam primarias creaturas nutu diuinae pote^tiae, praesentia summae
maiestatis in domiaici Eusebius. ibid
corporis posse transire natural, cum ipsum hominem videat artificio coelestis
misericordiae Christi corpus effectum. Neither let any man doubt that by the
commandment of the divine power by the presence of his high majesty, the
former creatures (mening bread and wine) can pass or be changed into the
nature of (...) of ^ (...) and ^me the body etc is not to be doubted of
the body of our Lords body, seeing that he may see man himself by the

And there again yt follows immediately: Sicut aute^ quicunque ad fide^
Christi^ eniens ante verba Baptismi adhuc in vinculo est veteris debiti, ijs
vero memoratis, mox exaitur omni fece peccati^ta qua^do benedicendae verbis
coelestibus creaturae sacris altaribus imponuntur, antequam inuocacione summi
nominis consecrentur, substantia est illic panis and vun, post verba aute^
Christi, corpus and sanguis Christi. Quid aute^ miru^ est, si ea quae po^t
Eused ibid.
verbo creare, verbo possit creata conuertere? As any man coming to the faith
of Christ, before the words of Baptism is yet in the ba^d of the old debt,
but as soen as they be spoken furthwith he is delivered from al filth of sin:
Even so when the creatures are set upon the holy altars to be blessed with
the heavenly Before the words of Christ there is the substance of br^ad after,
the body of Christ, a plain sam^ for M. Juel
words, before they be consecrated with the inuocacio^ of the most high name,
there is the substance of bread and wine: but after the words of Christ, the
body and blood of Christ. What woo^der is yt, if he that could create these
things with his word, ca^ now being created turn the^ with his word.

And he adds: Imo ia^ videtur minoris esse miraculi, stid quod ex nihilo
agnoscitur co^di lisse, ^am conditu^ in melius valeat co^mutare. Yea raither yt
seems to be a less miracle,

But yt shall do well to hear some other besides him, what testimony they
give in this matter, that therbie the reader may have morefull instruction,
Among these we will first hear Gregory Nissen the brother of. Basil, who says
(...) Nis^ (...),
thus: Sicut aute^ qui pane^ videt, quoda^modo corpus videt humanu^, quonia^
panis incorpore existens corpus euadit: ita diuinu^ illud corpus, panis
nutrimentu^ accipie^s, ide^ quodammcdo erat cum illo cibo (vt diximus) in eius
natural immutato. Quod enim cuiusque carnis propr^im est, id etiam illi
conuenisse confitemur. Nam and corpus illud pane sustentabatur, corpus autem,
proptereaquod Deus Verbum in illo habitauit, diuinam obtinuit dignitatem.
Quamobre^ recte nunc etiam Dei verbo sanctificatum pane^, in Dei Verbi corpus,
credimus immutari. As he that sees bread, in a manner sees the body of a man,
for bread being we have said) changed into the nature of his body. For that
that is propre

Let not this eschape thee, reader, without diligent note, that this author
Transubst. believed of the ancient fathers.
does not only say that the sanctified bread is changed into the body, of
the Son of God, but he says also (as yt were in the person of the
wholChurch) that we believe yt so to be. Wherbie we be advertised that yt is a
matter offaith, and not a matter of opinion. Yt is not lauful for every man to
think what he list in yt, but if he will be among the faithful he must without
disceptacion humbly accept and embrace what faith commands to be believed.
But let us also hear S. Ambrose, who writes thus. Forte dicas: Aliud video,
quo modo tu mihi asseris, quod Christi corpus accipiam? and hoc superest, vt
probemus. Quantis Ambr. de his qui initian. ca. 9.
igitur vtimur exemplis, vt probemus hoc non esse quod natura formauit sed quod
benedictio consecrauit, maioremque vim esse benedictionis, quam naturae, quiae
benedictione natura ipsa mutatur? Virgam tenebat Moses, proiecit eam, and
facta est serpens. Rursus apprehendit caudam serpentis, and in virgae natural
reuertitur. Vides igitur prophetica gratia bis mutata^ esse naturam serpentis,
and virgae. Peradventure thou may say: I see an other thing, how do thou
assure me that I take the body of Christ? And this remains for us to
Benedictio^ what power yt has.
prove. How many examples therefore do we use, that we may prove that this
is not yt that nature has formed, but that the benediction has consecrated,
and that greater is the power of benediction then of nature. For by benediction
nature yt self is changed. Moses did hold a Rod, he cast yt down, and it
was mad a serpent. Again he takes the tail of the serpent and yt returns
into the nature of the rod. Thou see the^ by the grace of the prophet the
nature of the Serpe^ta^d the rod twice to be changed. Hitherto S. Ambr.

After which words and diverse other examples brought in to prove nature in
the Sacrament by the benediction to be clean changed, he makes this argument.
Quodsi tantum valuit humana benedictio vt naturam conuerteret, quid dicimus de
ipsa consecratione diuina, vbi verbae ipsa Domini saluatoris operantur? Nam
sacramentu^ istud quod accipis Christi sermon conficitur. If then the
benedictio^ of man Amb. ibid.
was of so great power, that yt changed nature, what say we of the very
consecracion of God, where the very words of owre Lord and Savior do
work? For this Sacrament which thou receauest, is consecrated by the word
of Christ.

Yt were to long to rehearse all the examples and arguments that S. Ambrose
makes to prove this mutacion or change that we speak of. Wherefore but one
more of him, and then we will hear some other one. Thus he makes an other
argument. De totius mundi operibus legisti, Quiae ipse dixit and facta Amb. ibi.
sunt, ipse mandauit and creata sunt. Sermo ergo Christi qui potuit ex nihilo
facere, quod non erat, non potest ea quae sunt in id mutare, quod non erant?
Thou hauest readde of he works of all the world: that he said, and they were
made, he comau^ded and they were created. The word of Christ then that could
of nothing make that that was not, can yt not change these things that be into
that, that they were not? Non enim minus est nouas rebus dare, quam mutare
naturas. Yt is no less thing to give new natures to things, then to change
natures. I will not trauaill to open him, but leave him to the consideracion of
the reader,

Chrysostom says thus: Non sunt humanae virtutis haec opera. Qui tunc ista
in illa caena confecit, ipse nunc quoque operatur, ipse perficit. Ministrorum
nos ordinem tenemus Homil 83. in Matthew.
Qui vero haec sanctificat, and transmutat ipse est. These works be not the
works of man's power. He that then in that supper made or consecrated these
things, he now also woorketh, he perfecteth yt, we are in the place of
mynisters, but yt is he that does sanctify and transmute these things. Thus
of Chrysostom we learn also that in the Supper of Christ the bread and wine are
sanctified and transmuted, and that by the power of Christ, who sanctified and
transmuted them in that supper, which he did celebrate and keep for the
institucion of this, forsomoch as he is the dooer of this, as he was of that,
he is the woorker of both.

After Chrysostom follows Cyril, and teaches us the same lesson, saing thus.
Viuificatiuum Dei Verbum vniens seipsum propriae carni, fecit eam
viuificatiua^. Nunquid Cyrill. ad Calosirium
igitur, and cum in nobis vita Dei est, Dei Verbo in nobis existente,
viuificatiuum erit nostrum corpus? Sed aliud est secundum participationis
habitudinem nos habere in nobis Dei filium: aliud ipsum fuisse factum carnem,
id est, corpus sumptum ex alma Virgin proprium corpus effecisse. Decebat ergo
eum nostris quodammodo vniri corporibus, per sacram eius carnem, and preciosum
sanguinem, quae accipimus in benedictione viuificatiua in pane, and vino. Ne
enim horreremus carnem and sanguinem apposita sacris altaribus, condescendens
Deus nostris fragilitatibus, insluit oblatis vim vitae, connertens ea in
veritatem propriae carnis, vt corpus vitae quasi quoddam semen viuificatiuum
inueniatur in nobis. The living Son of God uniting himself to his own flesh,
made yt also living. Now then forasmoche as the life of God is in us (the
Son of God being in us) shall our body also be able to give life? But yt is
an other thing for us to have the Son of God in us, according to the order of
participacion: And another thing the same Son of God to have been made flesh,
that is to say, to have made the body taken of the pure Virgen, his own
body. Yt was need full that he should be united to our bodies by his holy
flesh, and preciouse blood, which we take in the lively benediction in bread
ad wine. For lest we should abhor flesh and blood put upon the holy altars,
God condescending

As of other we have learned that God by his power does change the substance
of the bread and wine into the substance of his body and blood: so do we learn
of this holy father the cause why yt pleases God so todooe. Yt is (says
he) that God condescending to our weakness, forasmoche as we abhor to eat
flesh and drink blood, yet that he would be united unto us by his flesh, and
therbie imparte life to us in manner convenient for us, as yt has by that yt is
united to the Son of God, he by his power woorketh in the bread and wine so,
that he turns them into his very flesh and blood, that in that manner taking
his very flesh and blood, we might have them as the seeds of life, and so
grow to life. Thus breiflie understanding the mind Euthym, in 26. Matthew
of Cyril, we go on to Euthymius, who says in this matter thus: Quemadmodum
super naturaliter assumptam carnem deificauit (si ita loqui liceat) ita and
haec ineffabiliter transmutat in ipsum viuificum corpus suum, and in ipsum
preciosum sanguinem suum, and in gratiam ipsorum. As he supernaturallie did
deifie (if yt be leefull so to speak) (mening the bread and wine) into his very
living body, and into his very preciouse blood, and into the grace of them.
Thus ye here also in this author ye see a transmutacion of the bread and wine
into the very body and Remig. in. 1. Cor. cap. 10.


A much like testimony gives Remigius saing: Caro quam Verbum Dei Patris
assumpsit in vtero virginali in vnitate suae personae, and panis, qui
consecratur in Ecclesia, vnu^ corpus Christi sunt. Sicut enim illa caro corpus
Christi est: ita iste panis transit in corpus Christi, nec sunt duo corpora,
sed vnu^ corpus. The flesh which the Son of God the Father flesh of the Son
of God and the consecrated bread one body.
took in the virgens womb in the unity of his person, and the bread which is
consecrated in the Church are one body of Christ. For as that flesh is the
body of Christ: so this bread passes or is changed into the body of
Christ, and yet they are not two bodies, but one body. Ye see yt also in this
author testified, that the bread consecrated in the church is the body of
Christ, ye see also how yt is done. For (says Remigius) the bread goes,
Plain sainges for M. Juell.
passes or is changed into the body of Christ, and that as adsuredlie as
the flesh which he took of the virgen was his very body: so is this bread
made his very body. If men would have plain speech and plain asseueracion of
matters of faith, I judge this to be so plainly spoken, that they will not

The like plainness shall ye find in Damascen, who says thus: Corpus secundum
Damasc. li. 4. ca. 14.
veritate^ coniunctu^ est diumitati, quod ex sancta virgin corpus est, non
quod ipsum corpus assumptu^ ex coelo descenderit, sed quod ipse panis and vinu^
transmutantur in corpus and sanguine^ Dei. Si aute^ modu^ requiris, quo pacto
id fiat, sat sit tibi audire, quonia^ per Spiritu^ sanctu^, quemadmodu^ ex
sancta Deipara, seipso, and in seipso Dominus carne^ sustentauit, and nihil
amplius cognoscimus, quam quod verbu^ Dei veru^ est, and efficax and
omnipotens, modus aute^ inscrutabilis. That body that is a body born of the
holy virge^, is in very deed joined to the Godhead, not that that assu^pted
body comes down Bread and wine transmuted into the body and blood fo God.
from heaven, but that that bread and wine be transmuted into the body and
blood of God. If thou require the manner how yt is done, let yt suffice thee to
hear that by the holy Ghost, even as of the holy mother of God our Lord by
himself, and in himself did make up a flesh, and we know no more then that
the word of God is true, and effectuouse, and the manner is inscrutable. Thus
much Damascen.

This author does not only testify to us that the very body and blood
Things spoken of God must be believed though the manner of doing be unknown.
declares that yt should be sufficient for us to understand that the bread and
wine be transmuted into the body and blood of Christ by the operacion of the
holy Ghost, and that as adsuredly as the same body was by him framed in the
virgens womb. And with this (says he) should we be contented, knowing that
the word of God is true, and omnipotent, and therefore effectuouse, adsuredly
woorking that that yt says, though the manner of the doing of yt be
inscrutable.

A testimony not much unlike to this gives also Theophilact, saing in this
manner. Theoph. in 6. Joan.
Non enim dixit Dominus: Panis que^ ego dabo figura est carnis meae, sed caro
mea est. Transformatur enim arcanis verbis panis ille per mystica^
benedictione^, and accessione^ sancti Spiritus in carne^ Domini. Et ne que^
conturbet, quod credendus sit panis caro. Etenim and in carne ambulante Domino,
and ex pane alimonia^ admittente, panis ille qui manducabatur, in corpus eius
mutabatur, and similis fiebat sanctae eius carni, and in augmentu^ and
sustentatione^ Bread. which Christ gave no figure but flesh.
co^ferebat iuxta humanu^ more^. Igitur and nunc panis in carne^ Domini
mutatur. Owr Lord did not say, the bread that I will give is a figure of my
flesh, but yt is my trooble any man that the bread is to be believed flesh. For
when owre Lord walked in the flesh, and took sustenaunce of bread, that bread
that he took was A plain saing for M. Juell.
yt gave increase and sustentacion according to the manner of man's nature.
Thersor now also is the bread changed into the slesh of our Lord.

Agreablie writes Paschasius, with whom we will end, being certain by the
supputacion of learned men, that he was an hondreth years before Berengarius,
and therefore before any public controversy in this matter of the Sacrament,
thus he writes: Spiritus sanctus, qui hominem Christum in vtero Paschasius li.
de corp. and sang. Dom.
virginis sine semine creauit, etiam ipse panis ac vini substantiam carnem
Christi and sanguinem inuisibili potentia per sacramenti sui sanctificationem
operatur, quamuis nec visu exterius, nec gustu saporis comprehendatur. Sed quia
spiritualia sunt, fide and intellectu pro certo, sicut veritas praedixit,
plenissime sumuntur. Quod in veritate corpus and sanguis fiat consecratione
mysterij, nemo qui verbis diuinis credit, dubitat. The holy Ghost who without
seed created the man Christ in the womb of the Virgen, he also No man that
believes the words of God doubts of the body of Christ in the Sacr.
with his invisible power by the sanctisicacion of his Sacrament, woorketh the
Substance of bread and wine into the flesh and blood of Christ, although
neither by the seight outwardly, neither by the taste of the sauoure That in
very deed the body and blood is made by consecracion of the mystery, non man
that believes the words of God doubts.

Having now alleged a good no^bre to testify that the substance of bread and
wine be changed or turned into the substance of the body and blood of Christ
(which turning of substance into substance the Church calls
Transubstanciaco^n) forasmoche Transubstantiacio^ what yt is.
as they are plain and evident testimonies, not encombred with dark speeches,
as I content my self to produce no mo: so, I trust, these may suffice any
man, considering how ancient they be, to cause him to setle and fix his
faith in the matter of the Sacrament, and not to waver or doubt.

In these doctors and authors this is to be considered, that Eusebius, S.
Howthe Fathers prove Transubstantiacion to be a miraculouse work of God Eusc.
Emis.
Gregory, and saint Ambrose, which be the first, do prove this turning of
substances by the great works of Gods might and power. As Eusebius by the
creacion of the high heavens, the huge and deep waters or sloudes, the great
and vast earth, and by the great work of God in changing a man

S. Gregory by that work of God that he caused bread and other natural food
to be changed into that merueilouse body conceived by the S. Gregory
holy Ghost, and joined to the Godhead in unity of person, which was not a
common body, but the body of God. And for that yt has God abiding in yt, yt
is exalted to the dignity of God, which in deed well weighed is a merueilouse
work of God.

S. Ambrose by the changing of the nature of a rod into a Serpent, and of
the nature of the serpent into the rod again, and by a great no^bre of other
S. Ambrese
works of God. which their manner of teaching gives us to understand, that this
turning or chau^ging wrought by God in the Sacr. is no small work, but soch
among those works that be myraculouse, that be wonderful, soche as

S. Cyrill in sitting forth this matter finds, (as yt were) a necessity, S.
Cyrill.
that this change a fore said should be because the flesh of Christ, which
is hable to give life to our natural flesh, might by the receipt of the same
in the Sacrament, make owre mortal bodies to live, being once raised up to
live everlastingly.

Remigius ioineth the work of the incarnacion with the work of God in
transubstanciaco^n. Damascen does the like, and with all teaches S. Remig.
Damascen.
that as the holy Ghost wrought in the womb os the virgen the incarnacion of
Christ, by turning her substance into the substance of Christ: so in the
Sacrament he woorketh the transubstanciacion by turning the substance of the
bread and wine into the substance of Christ's body Theophil. Paschas.
Theophilact and Paschasius do the like, with other good and necessary
instructions.

Thus ye may see that as they teach the thing certenlie to be done: so do
they asscribe yt to the power of God, to the work of the holy Ghost, they so
esteem yt, so magnify yt, that they account yt and enombre yt among the great
and miraculouse works of God. As merueilouse and miraculouse yt is in deed,
that the substances of bread and wine should be turned into the substance of
the body and blood of the Son of God.

But to appoint a thing to be a figure, to be a sign or token of remembrance
Appointing of figures is nospeciall miraculouse work of God.
there neadeth not soch special power of God, nor soch special work of the
holy Ghost. For many things have been appoincted to be signs and tokens of
remembrance of Gods benefittes, which the writers and learned men did never
acco^pte among the miraculouse and wonderful works of God. As the twelve
stones which God commanded Iosue that people should lay in an heap in
remembrance that the twelve Tribes passed under Iosue Hiericho. Though this
were a toke^ of the remembrence of a miraculouse and a wonderful work and
benefitt Iosue. 4.
of God doe^ to the people of Israel: yet the laing together of the xii stones
was never accounted as a miraculouse work of God.

To come to things that were figures of Christ, as to the Brazen Serpent,
Number. 21. Joan. 3.
which Christ applies to him self, as a figure of him self to be crucified,
though yt were both a token of the great benefitt of God to the people of
Israel in releiuing them of the plague that he had sent among them, and also
a sigure of Christ to be crucified, wherbie the faithful should be released
of the plague of everlasting damnacion: yet this serpent was not of learned men
in Christ's Church magnified and exalted among the great miraculouse works of
God.

The Paschall Lamb that was both a token of remembrance to the Jews of the
benefittes that they received in their passage out of Aegipt, and also Exodus
12.
a sigure of Christ, and that a notable lively figure: yet is there no
christian writer that accompteth the killing or eating of that lamb as a
miraculouse

To come nearer to the manner, the Catechumeni that is, the newly instructed in
christ's faith, but not baptized, of the which there were a great nombre in
the primitive Church, they received a bread which S. Augustine August. de
peccatormerit. and remiss. holy bread used in the primitive Church.
other meats, although yt be not (says he) the body of Christ. And yet this
bread accompteth he not (though yt be a Sacrament to them and an holy sign)
among the miraculouse works of God no more then the Church did the holy
bread, which the people received on certain days. Wherefore if the Sacrament
were but a sign or token only (as Oecolampadius says yt is) then yt should
be but as the bread of the Catechumeni the new converted to Christ, and as the
holy bread of Christian people, which S. Augustine accompteth but as an holy
thing, and yet referred yt not into the nombre of the miraculouse works of
God. No more would these holy and ancient Fathers, which I have alleged, so
have esteemed the Sacrament and set yt forth by the great works of God as a
miraculouse work requiring faith, to be believed to contein more than reason
can conceive or Figures co^tein what, reason can conceive, the Sacr. what faith
must believe.
senseis judge. And therefore the holy fathers have traueiled to stay and
confirm the faith of the Chrystians by examples of works done miraculouslie
by Gods power, accompting this as one of the same kind or sort.

This being well weighed and considered by the Fathers in the Lateran Council,
where were assembled no small nombre of learned men as well of the greek church,
as of the latin, as the Patriarchs of Jerusalem and Constantynople,
Archebishoppes 70. Bishops 400. of other Fathers 92. with the Ambassadors of
the Grecian and Romain Empire, and the Orators of Jerusalem, France, Spain,
England, and Cypres, for the declaracion and confirmacion of the faith in this
matteir according to the doctrine of the holy Fathers, and to the confutacion
of the wicked doctrine of Berengarius at that time yet lurking in corners, this
Canon was there agreed upon and set Council. Lateran. cap. 1. de fide cathol.
forth. Verum Christi corpus and sanguis in sacramento Altaris sub speciebus
panis and vini veraciter continentur, transubstantiatis pane in corpus, and
vino in sanguinem potestate diuina. The very body and blood of Christ are
verily and truly contained under the forms of bread and wine in the
Sacrament of the altar, the bread and wine being transubstanciated into the
body and blood by the power of God, Thus the Council, which was celebrated
above three hondreth years agone.

Now Reader thowe see the learning and faith of Christ's Church in this
matter of transubstantiacion. not only now in these days professed, taught
and believed through out all Chrystendome, but also above three hondreth years
agon in the great and general Council Lateran. and so by Fathers testified
before and vppewarde until ye come to the primitive church. Wherefore minding
here after to touch yt more as occasion shall be ministered, I think this for
this time sufficient to move any man to have a regard to his faith, that has
not sold him self over to live under heresy disobedience and sin. Now
therefore I return to my purpose.

THE TWO AND FIFTETH CHAP. OPENS
Think not (gentle reader) but that there be many left not here alleged, as
Optatus, Dionisius Alexandrius, Hilarious, Origin, and other, which give goodly
testimony for the verity of Christ's body in the Sacrament. But here we
allege none but soche as treacting of these words of Christ, This is my
body, This is my blood, do give us their doctrine, for the true
understanding of them. wherefore the other omitted, this order has brought us to
S. Basil in the greek church, and to S. Ambrose in the latin church.

S. Basil, to whom this question was moved: with what fear, what manner Basil.
quaest compend. explic. qu. 172.
of faith or assured certentie, and with what affection the body and blod of
Christ should be received, made this answer: Timorem docet nos Apostolus
dicens: Qui edit and bibit indigne iudicium sibiipsi edit ac bibit. At vero
certitudinis perfectione^ inducit fides verboru^ Domini, qui dixit: Hoc est
corpus meum, quod pro vohis datur: Hoc facite in meam co^memoratione^. The
Apostle teachethvs the fear, saing: He tht eats and drinks vnwoorthilie,
he eats and drinks unto himself judgment. But the perfection of certitude
induces the faith of the words of our Lord, who said: This is my body,
which is given for you. Do this in the remembrance of me. Thus much S.
Basil for answer to the question.

For the better understanding of which answer, consider that this question is
propownded as of them that were unlearned, and would be simply S. Basil how
he taught the simple to believe of the Sacrament
instructed in the faith of Christ, to the instruction of which kind of
people S. Basil appointed him self in the solucion of this question, and
other. Wherefore yt is to be thought that in this solucion he taught the simple
and plain truth. Now then teaching them that these words: This is my body,
do instruct them what faith they should have in the receipt of the Sacrament,
what does he but teach that these words must be taken as they sownde, and so
by them to have this faith, that Christ's very body is in the Sacrament,
according as the words do sownde? For consider, would Ca. 25. 37. 44.
understood Christ's words simply in propre sense, and taught therbie the
very presence of Christ's blessed body and blood in the Sacrament, as before
is said, and shall be plentifully declared in the third book. S. Ambr.
book of Sacr. rejected of Oecola^p. as S. lames epistle by Luther, for their
plaintrueth


Now follows S. Ambrose, in whom I find soche copy, and soche plenty of
plain and evident places to open and declare the right and true, understanding
of this scripture. This is my body: that as a man coming into a goodly
garden garnished, adorned, and pleasantly furnished with all delectable and
sweet flowers, can not tell which flower to take first. Even so and Veritas
odium parit, truth causes hatred: he got himself so much Oecolampadius, as
S. James, epistle had been by Luther, for his plain speaking for god works. But
God be praised, as by her both these were approved: so (God aiding) by her
they are conserved.

A mong soche plenty therefore as I have said, and as yt is well known to them
that be learned we will gather a flower or two, for the mainteina^ce of the
comfortable sinell of the truth, of the which this shall be the first: Ambr.
li. 4 de Sacr. cap. 5.
Antequam consecretur panis est, vbi autem verba Christi accesserint, corpus
est Christi. Denique audi dicentem: Accipite, and edite ex eo omnes, Hoc est
corpus meum. Et ante verba Christi calix est vini and aquae plenus, vbi verba
Christi operata fuerint, ibi sanguis efficicitur, qui plebem redemit. Before yt
is consecrate yt is bread, but when the words of Christ have comed to yt, yt
is the body of Christ, Hear him sainge: Plain sai^gs of S. Amb. for the
Procla.
Take and eat, this is my body. And before the words of Christ, yt is a
cup full of wine and water, but when the words of Christ have wrought,
there is made the blood that redeemed the people.

What can the Adversaries say to this place of S. Ambrose? What can the
Proclamer say, if he follow not his Father Oecolampadius and reject S.
Ambrose? Can they for shame say that the words of Christ are spoken by a
figure, where they be so plainly expownded by this notable Father of the very
thing? Do ye not hear that after the words of Christ be spoken upon the
bread, yt is the body of Christ, and again that after the woorking of the
words of Christ, there is made in the cup the blood that redeemed the
people? Here is no figure spoken of. He says not, that yt is a figure of the
body, and a figure of the blood, but he said, they be the body and the
blood, yea and that so verily, that he says, yt is the blood that redeemed
the people.

As yt is wonderful, so is yt pitiful, that men will still remain in blind
heresy, when the truth is so simply and plainly uttered, and that of so
excellent a Father, that they can not deny yt, but maliciously to contein
them selves in that miserable state, will refuse the work, and say yt is not

But let us return to S. Ambrose, and gather an other of his flowers. Thus he
says in an other place: Tu forte dicis, meus panis est visitatus. Sed panis
Ambros. ibid. li. 4. cap. 4.
iste, panis est ante verba sacramentorum, vbi accesserit consecratio, de pane
fit caro Christi. Thowe peradventure say, my bread is usual or common
bread. But this bread before the words of consecracion is bread, but when the
consecracion has comed unto yt, of the bread is made the flesh of Christ. And
Amb. ibid
again he says in the same chapter. Sed audi dicentem: Ipse dixit, and facta
sunt, ipse mandauit and creata sunt. Ergo tibi vt respondeam, Non erat corpus
Christi ante consecrationem. Sed post consecrationem, dico tibi, quod iam est
corpus Christi. Ipse dixit and factum est, ipse mandauit, and creatum est. But
hear one saing: He has said and they were made, he has commanded and they
were created. Therefore that What plainer words ca^ the Proclamer require.
I may answer thee. Yt was not the body of Christ before the consecracion,
but after the consecracion (I say unto thee) that now yt is the body of
Christ. He has said, and yt is made, he has commanded and yt is created.

I need not explane S. Ambrose in this place neither. For as the parents of
the blind born son said of him: Aetatem habet, ipse pro se loquatur. He
Ipse Ambr. ibid. ca. 5.
Dominus Jesus testificatur nobis, quod corpus suum accipiamus and sanguinem.
Nunquid debemus de eius fide and testificatione dubitare? Owre Lord Jesus him
self testifies unto us, that we receive his body and blood, shall we doubt
of his truth and testificacion?

Now let us compare the doctrine of S. Ambrose, with the doctrine of the
Adversaries. S. Ambrose says that Christ himself does testify that we S.
Ambr. doctrine and the Sacramentaries compared together.
receive his body and blood: The Adversaries says that we do not receive
the body and blood of Christ, But bread and wine the figures of the body
and blood of Christ. whom shall we here believe? Christ and S. Ambrose, or the
Adversaries? The choice aught soen to be made. And therefore yt is lamentable to
see how Satan has prevailed, and caused the Adversaries

But here to conclude this part, for as much as S. Ambrose says, that Figure
of the Sacrme^taries excluded from Christ's words.
Christ has testified by these words, This is my body, that we in the
Sacrament after the words spoken receive his very body, they are not to be
understood Consecracion the term of the Papists used of S. Ambr. serious^ie.
but embracing that let him fly the feigned figures.

In these sainges also of S. Ambrose, this is breiflie to be touched with a
note, that where the Adversary in skorne, when he happens to speak of this
word (consecracion) for the most part adds (as the Papists tear yt) yet
ye perceive that yt is used of S. Ambrose, and not sknorned. And how so ever
yt likes him to dally and trifle with that word, yet S. Ambrose lever be a
Papist wiht the one, then an heretic with the other. But yt is

THE THREE AND FIFTETH CHAP. CONTINVeth in the exposition of Christ's words
by Gregory Nissen. and S. Hierom.
AS a man permitted to come into a council chamber, and admitted, through
special favor, to talk with each of the counselours, and have their
senerall aduertisementes how he shall safely bear him self in the state that
he is called unto: or as a man desierouse to be resolved in a matter of
learning, enters an assembley of learned men, and gently received hears
their several judgments uttered with great and full agreement, to his full
resolucion, and contentacion, can not be but therewith much delighted: so I
trust, the reader being as yt were in Gods counsel chamber, or in Gods
School, and hearing the aduertisementes and judgments of Gods counselours

Of these auncientes that remain the first is Gregory Nissen. the brother of
S. Basil and therefore in the greek church meet next to follow him. This is his
judgment in this matter. Thus he writes. Qua ex cause panis in co corpore
mutatus in diuinam virtutem transiit, eadem de causa idem nunc fit. Vt enim
illic verbi Greg. Nissen anserm. catathetico de diuinis sacram.
Dei gratia sanctum efficit illud corpus, cuius firmamentum ex pane constabat,
and ipsum etiam quodammodo panis erat: sic panis, vt ait Apostolus, per verbum
Dei, and orationem sanctificatur, non quia comeditur, eo progrediens, vt Verbi
corpus euadat, sed statim per verbum in corpus mutatur, vt dictum est a Verbo.
Hoc est corpus meum. By what cause bread in that body changed passed into the
divine virtue, by the same cause that same thing is now done. For as there the
grace of the Son of God made that body, whose substanciall nutriment was of
bread, and yt also in a manner was bread, so also this bread (as the Apostle
says) is sanctisied by the word of God and prayer, not tending to this
poinct that because yt is eaten yt is the body of the Son of God, but that
furthwith by the word yt is changed into the body, as yt was said of the
Son, This is my body

By this author, who undoubtedly gives a notable testimony for the verity
of the Sacrament, be overthrown three heresies in the same matter. Three
heresies overthrown by one saing of Gregor. Nissen.
Of the which, Luther or at the least the Lutherans did settfurth one, which
was that the Sacrament was the body of Christ if yt were received, and to him
that received yt, yt was the body of Christ, otherwise yt was not. Another is
set forth both by Luther, and all the Lutherans, and by Oecolampadius and all
the Oecolampadians, and by this Proclamer, which is that the bread
Carolstadius, Oecolampadius and their disciples, and also by this Proclamer,
which is that Christ's substanciall body is not verily present in the
Sacrament. Against these three, this author teaches

And now for the first that the Lutherans do teach, where they say that in
the Sacrament is the body of Christ to him that receaueth the Sacrament,
otherwise yt is not the body of Christ, this author has direct What warrant
have the Luthera^s for this
words to the contrary, where he says. Hic panis sanctificatur per verbum
Dei, and orationem, non quia comeditur eo progrediens vt verbi corpus euadat.
This bread is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, not tending to this
poinct that because yt is eaten, therefore yt is the body of the Son of God.
So that yt is not receiving, or not receiving, eating or not eating that
causes the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, Receiving or
notreceauing causes nor presence, nor absence of Christ's body in the Sacr.
but the power of God with the word of Christ, as before is said. The cause
of so great a work as to make present the body of Christ, depends not of so
simple and weak cause as the will of man, which yt should do if yt should
depend upon the receipte. For if the

But to add somewhat beside the authority of this ancient Father, which is
more then sufficient to convince so vain and foolish an heresy, what appearance
have they of any scripture or holy writer (For substanciall grownde in ame of
them both they have none) to make some show or counteinance, for the
maintenance of their heresy? yt is certain that they have none. Now then shall
we not condemn them by their own judgment, Lutherans doctrine having no
apparent scripture is over thrown by there own argument.
wherewith they have travailed in many things to condemn the catholic
Church? What is defined, decreed or determined by the Church, if there be not
manifest scripture for the same, yt is condemned of them, as a tradicion of
man, and a doctrine of Satan. But this their doctrine has no manifest
scriptures. Wherefore yt is a tradicion of man, and a doctrine of Satan. Thus
as Aman was hanged upon the same Galowes Mardochaeus: So is their wicked
doctrine overthrown with their own judgment, and vanquissed with their own
swoorde.

But what shall I occupy the time, and trooble the reader in refelling this
fond heresy, seeing (as a little before is declared by Eusebius) that the
invisible priest, Christ, by his power with his word does turn the visible
creatures into the substance of his body and blood. Chrysostom also says,
that the preistes be in the place of the mynisters of God, but yt is Christ
that does sanctify, and change the substances of bread and wine. And
breiflie to say, saint Ambrose in the last chapter, Euthymius, Damascen, and
Theophilact in the chapter before, do testisie that the work of consecracion
is done by the power of God, by the accession of the holy Ghost, and by the
word of Christ spoken by the priest in the person of Christ. As yt is also
testified in the Florentine Concilium. Florent.
Council where yt is thus declared: Forma huius sacramenti sunt verba
Saluatoris, quibus hoc conficit Sacramentum. Sacerdos enim in persona Christi
loquens hoc conficit Sacramentum. Nam ipsorum verborum virtute substantia panis
in corpus Christi, and substantia vini in sanguinem conuertuntur. The form of
this Sacrament be the words of our Savior by the which he consecrateth this
Sacrament. For the priest speaking in the person of Christ For by the virtue of
those words, the substance of bread, is turned into the body of Christ, and
the substance of wine Tra^substa^tiacion.
into his blood. Thus the Council. By which words, as by the words of
them also before alleged, yt is manifestly declared that the power of the
consecracion of the body of Christ, is not depending of the will of the
receauer, but of the power of God, of the work of the holy Ghost, and of the
virtue of the words of Christ, spoken by the priest in the person of Christ.

And as this fond heresy seems to be mother of that heresy that impugneth
reseruacion: so that, that is before said for the defense of reseruacion, will
also impugn this heresy here now spoken of. Wherefore I refer the reader to
that place, where he findinge plenty of proof that the Sacrament may be
reserved, and being reserved, that yt still remains the body of Christ, this
wicked doctrine that teaches, that yt is but the body of Christ when yt is in
use, shall be overthrown, and proved (as it is) a false and a deuellish

The other heresy which is settfurth both by the Lutherans and the
Oecolampadians, is that the substance of bread and wine be still remaining in
the Sacrament, and not changed into the body and blood of Christ.

And yet here by the way understand this, that though they agree in this
poinct, yet here Satan is divided against Satan, and his kingdom also,
Division among the Protestants.
as kingdom against kingdom. For Luther grants the presence of Christ's
body: Oecolampadius denies the presence of Christ's body, and in this they
are more then enemies. But in the other (as is said) they do agree. And as in
this they agree among themselves: So in the same they disagree, from the true
faith, from the catholic Church, and from Gregory Nissen, whom we have now
in hand. For by express words he affirms that the substance of the bread
is changed into the body of Christ. These be his words speaking of the
bread before the consecracion. Hic panis statim per verbum in corpus mutatur.
This bread is by the word furthwith Greg. Niss. in vita Moiseos.
changed into the body. Who so lists may read the like saing of the same
author in his book of the life of Moses.

Neither does he here mien of soche a change as the Adversary dreameth of,
that yt is changed to be called the body of Christ, which proprely is no
change, but raither an addicion. But this author meeneth of a substanciall
change as his words do most plainly declare, which he uses to prove this
change. For thus he says: Qua ex causa panis in eo corpore mutatus in
diuinam virtutem transiit, eadem de causa idem nunc fit. By what cause bread in
that body changed, passed into the divine virtue: even so by the same cause
the very same thing is now done.

For the better weighing of this saing of the author, consider first, that
Christ was and is both God and man, consider that the body of man was so
joined to the Godhead in unity of person, that Christ God and man was one
person, one Christ. Consider then that this body by this merueilouse
conjunction is the body of God. Now this body living here upon Christ, was
changed in the body of Christ into the substance of the body

Now says Gregbrie Nissen by what cause the bread was changed into the
body of Christ, and became the substance of the body of God, As bread while
Christ lived was turned into his divine flesh: so now in the Sacr.
which (as I take yt) he meneth by these words (divine virtue) even by the
same cause, the same thing is now done. If the same thing be done now then
the bread is changed into the substance of the body of God for that is the
thing that was done then. Wherefore good reader, note this well, that he says,
the same thing is done now, wherbie the dream of the Adversary is dissolved,
that the bread is changed but in name. For that was but a cavil, and in deed
but a bare shifte to avoid the force of the truth. And what the thing is that
now is done, this author told when he said: Panis mutatur in corpus per
verbum. The bread by the word is changed into the body.

Seeing then this ancient Father teaches us, that in Christ's body the
Tra^substa^tiacion a nouched and what yt is.
and by example of that, teaches the like to be now done in the Sacrament
that as in the one there was a change of one substance into an other: so in
this there is a change of one substance into an other, that is, once again to
say, of the substance of bread and wine, into the substance of Christ's body
and blood: why may not this turning, changing or transmuting of substances
into substances be called transubstantiaco^n, saying yt is so in deed? Why, I
say, may not the same term by the Church be used lively to express a
treuth, and to avoid an heresy, as in the time of the Arrians, the Church for
the confutacion of that heresy, was enforced to use this term
(consubstantialitie) thereby to declare that God the Son was and is of one
substance with God the Father? A new mischief must have a new remedy As the
word Consta^tialitie in the time of Arius: so Tra^substa^tiacion in the time
of Bere^g. was taught by the holy Ghost
and for a new sore, a new salve must be fownde. So as for the Arrians,
which was then a new mischief and a new sore in the Church, these terms
(consubstanciall and consubstancialitie) were by the holy Ghost devised in the
same: So when Berengarius began this new mischief and sore against turning,
changing, mutacion, transmutacion, transumption, transelementacion) did not
suffice, but the Deuell would by his ministers dally with them to deceive
Chrystian souls, and impugn the holy Chrystian faith the Church I say, by
the holy Ghost devised to use this term (transubstanciacion) to declare
fully the thing that is done, which is the change of one substance into an
other, and so to open the true faith, by the same to defend the faith, and to
set yt for a salve and a remedy against that sore, and mischief, that the
Deuell had newely caused to spring.

And as in the time of the Arrians, there was no new thing devised in faith,
though a new term was set forth: so now no thing is newly devised but
only the term, fully to declare, and make us understand that thing that
was before. Wherefore the newness of the term abducinge men from an ancient
truth to a new invented falsheade and Audite Apostolum salubriter admonentem.
Prophanas, inquit, verborum A new term to express anold treuth used in the
primitive church and may so be now.
nouitates deuita, Multum enim proficiunt ad impietatem, and sermo eorum, vt
cancer serpit. Et non ait solum verborum nouitates, sed addit, Prophanas. Sunt
eium and doctrinae religionis congruentes verborum nouitates. Sicut ipsum nomen
Christia^orum, quando dict caeperat, sicut scriptum est (In Antiochia enim
primam post ascensionem Domini sic appellati sunt Discipuli, Sicut legitur in
Actibus Apostolorum) Et Xenodochia, and Monasteria, postea appellata sunt nouis
nominibus, res tamen ipsae and ante nomina sua erant, and religionis veritate
sirmantur quae etiam contra improbos defenduntur. Aduersus quoque impietatem
Arrianorum haereticorum nouum nomen patres (Homousion) condiderunt, sed non rem
nouam tali nomine signauerunt, Hoc enim vocatur Homousion, quod est ego Aug.
tract. 96. in Joan.
and Pater vnum sumus, vnius videlicet eiusdemque substantiae. Nam si omnis
nouitas prophana esset, nec a Domino diceretur: mandatum nouum do vobis, nec
testamentum appellaret nouum, nec cantaret vniuersa terra canticum nouum. Hear
the Apostle holsomlie admonishing: Profane novelties of words (says he)
avoid. They do much advance impiety, and their word fretteth like a
kanker. And he does not Some new words be agreeable to good religion
say only novelties of words: but he adds: Profane. For there be
novelties of words also agreeable to the doctrine of religion as the name of
Chrystians, when yt first began to be spoken of, as yt is written (For so first
in Antioche after the ascension of our Lord were the Disciples called, at yt
is redd in the Acts of the Apostles) And Hospitals and Monasteries after ward
were called with new names, the things them selves for all that were before
these their names, and are established with the verity of religion, and are
also defended against wicked men. Against the impiety or wickedness also of
the Heretics the Arrians, the Fathers made the new term (Homousion) but by
that name they did Homousion what yt signisieth.
not signify a new thing. For Homousion is called the same that this is: I
and my Father be one: that is to say, of one and the very same substance. For
Homousion against the Arrians: so this against the Sacramentaries is of all
faithful people to be accepted. But what do I tarry so long upon this matter
seeing much is said of yt allreadie, and more shall by way of note as
occasion shall be given.

The third heresy is also by this author refelled, in that he teaching the
bread to be changed by these words of Christ: This is my body. teaches
both the real presence, and also the words to be understand without figure
or trope, as the Adversaries would have them understood. That he so does yt
is easy to be perceived by his own words, which he utters in this manner.
Panis statim mutatur in corpus, vt dictum est a Verbo: hoc est corpus meum.
This is my body.

But what neadeth to tarry any longer to say more for the opening of this
author, where every part of yt is so open of yt self, that a child may see
yt? Hieron. ad He did. q. 2.
have in this place appointed to be. S. Hiero^, who writes thus: Nos autem
audiamus pane^, quem Dominus fregit, deditque Discipulis suis esse corpus
Domini saluatoris, ipso dicente ad eos: Accipite, and comedite, Hoc est corpus
meu^: and calice^ illu^ esse, de quo iterum locutus est. Bibite ex hoc omnes:
Hic est sanguis meus noui testamenti, qui pro multis effundetur. Iste est
calix, de quo in Propheta legimus: Calice^ salutaris accipia: and alibi:
Calixtuus The bread which our Lord gave was his body, and the cup his blood.
inebrians quam praeclarus est. Si ergo panis qui de coelo descendit, corpus
est Domini, and vinum quod Discipulis dedit sanguis illius est noui testame^ti,
iudaicas fabulas repellamus, etc. But let us hear that bread which our Lord
brake and gave to his Disciples to be the body of our Lord our Savior,
forasmoch as he said unto the^ Take and eat, This is my body. And the cup
to be that of the which again he said: Drink ye all of this. This is my blood
of the new Testament, which shall be shedd for many This is the cup of the
which we read in the Prophet: I will receive the cup of salvation. And in an
other place. Thy cup inebriating is very noble. If therefore the bread that
descended from heaven is the body of our Lord, and the wine which he gave to
his Disciples is his blood of the new Testament, let us

For the better understanding of this saing, yt is to be considered that a
certain virtuous woman named Hedibia sent to saint Hierom to be resolved in
certain questions. Among the which she desiered to be instructed how the saing
of Christ in S. Matthew, was to be understood, where he said: I will not from
hencefurth drink of this generation of the vine, until that day in which I
shall drink yt new with you in the kingdom of my Father. To the answeringe
whereof he declares unto her, first, the fond opinion of some that upon that
place invented a fable, that Christ should reign a thousand years corporally
in which time of his reign, he should drink wine and so should be fullfilled
his saing, that he would drink no more wine Heresy of the Millenaries.
until he drank yt in the kingdom of his Father, in the which he should
then reign. But saint Hierom well understanding how great and how weighty a
matter was spoken of in the place, where from these words were taken, namely
of the body and blood of Christ, and being grieved that yt being so great a
work of God, so great a benefitt to man, should be intermengled Hedibia that
all soche fantasies rejected and forsaken, she should regard the words of
Christ and credit them and that the bread and wine that Christ spoke of in that
place were no soch things as upon which soch vain fables should be grownded,
but they were the body and blood of Christ, forasmoch as he that can speak
but truth said: This is my body. This is my blood.

Now consider with me if Christ had given to his Apostles but Bread and wine,
S. Hierom his words weighed and conferred with the doctrine of the
Protesta^tes
as figures of his body and blood, would S. Hiero^ being required to give the
true understanding of the scriprure, and he taking upon him so to do, would he
(trow ye) have said, Let us understand that the bread which our Lord gave to
his Disciples was his body, and that the wine which he gave was his blood
except we should believe and understand the^, so to be in deed? Were this an
opening of the true understanding of the scriptures? Were yt not raither an
hiding or a darkning of the scriptures, to bid us to believe one thing, and the
scripture bids an other? He bids us believe that yt is the body and blood
an enemy to heresy, teach soche an heresy? Would not he raither (if the
truth had been so) have taught this virtuous woman the truth of the This is
my body, This is my blood, would he not (if they had been so to be
understood) have said, these words are spoken by a figure, they be
figurative speeches, and are thus to be understood: this is a figure of my
body, this is a figure of my blood? To instruct the^ that Nomencio^ of
figurative speech in S. Hiero^s words.
would learn the true understanding of this scripture (if yt were so to be
understood) this were the right way of teaching. But here is no soche
word: here is no soche manner of teaching. And yt is to be thought, that S.
Hiero^ was not ignorant how to teach, neither was he ignorant of the truth,
that in this place should be taught. Wherefore seeing he knew the truth, and
knew how to teach yt, and now he was in place to teach and had good
occasion, being (as is said) thereunto required, for somoche as he wills us
to understand that the bread and wine, which Christ gave to this Apostles,
were his body and blood, and the cause why we should so understand the^
This is my body, This is my blood: Let us think and believe that the truth
of this matter is, that his body and blood be present verily in the
Sacrament, and that the words of Christ are to be understood without
figure simply and plainly as they lie.

And that yt is the body of Christ, the words which S. Hierom uses as the
conclusion of the matter, does also prove. For thus he concludes: Si ergo
panis, qui de caelo descendit etc. If then the bread that descended from heaven
be the body of our Lord, and the wine that he gave to his Disciples be his
blood of the new testament, let us cast away Jewish fables, As who might
say, forasmoche as these words of Christ speak of no cheering nor
banqueting, that the Jews do dream shall be in Christ's worldly kingdom,
but they speak of the bread which Christ gave to his Apostles, which they say
to be his body, and of the wine, which they say to be his blood, therefore let
us cast away soche vain fables, and cleave to the true understanding of
Christ's words, and believe that the bread and wine be Christ's body and
blood. And therefore looking for no soche worldly kingdom, nor kingly palace
of Ascendamus cum Domino caenaculum magnum strastum, atque mundatum, and
accipiamus ab eo sursum calicem noui testamenti, ibique cum eo Pascha
celebrantes, inebriemur ab eo vino sobrietatis: Let us (says S. Hierom) go
up with our Lord into the great dining chamber allreadie prepared and made
clean, and there let us receive of him above, the cup of the new testament,
and there with him celebrating the Passover, let us be satisfied with the wine
of sobriety.

I can not here without sorrow and grief pass these last words of S.
Hierom, but note to thee (gentle reader) the maliciouse doing of the Proclamer,
who impugning the presence of Christ's body and blood The Proclaemer cutteth
of the words of Sain. Hierom, to deceive his auditorie.
in the Sacrament, trauaileth to prove that his wicked doctrine by some of the
holy fathers, whom he would wrest to make them say, that Christ is only to
be adored and honored in heaven, as wherbie yt might appear, that his
presence were only there. Among the which, full evil fauoredlie he brings
in these last words of S. Hierom, cuttinge and also that that soloweth,
which (as ye shall hear) does make against Non enim est regnu^ Dei, cibus
and potus, sed iusticia, and gaudium, and pax in Spiritu sancto. Nec Moses
dedit Hiero^ ibid
nobis pane^ veru^, sed Dominus Jesus, ipse conuiua and conuinium. ipse
comedens and qui comeditur. Illius bibimus sanguinem, and sine ipso potare non
possumus. and quotidie in sacrificiis eius de genimine vitis verae, and viueae
Sorec, quae interpretatur electa, rubentia musta calcamus, and nouum ex iis
vinum bibimus de regno Patris, ne quaquam in vetustate literae, sed in nouitate
spiritus cantantes canticum nouum, quod nemo potest cantare nisi in regno
Ecclesiae, quod regnum Patris est. For the kingdom of God is not meat and
Christ is the feaster and the feast whose blood we drink in his sacrifices.
drink, but righteousness and joy, and peace in the holy Ghost. Neither did
Moses give us the true bread, but our lord Jesus, for he is both the feaster;
and the feast, he is he that eats and is eaten. His blood drink we, and
without him we can not drink, and daily in his sacrifices of the generation
of the true Vine, and of the wine of Sorec, which by interpretacion is called
chosen, do we press ruddie new wines, and out of these we drink

Who in refelling of the Jewish fables declares that in the kingdom of Christ
shall be no matter of wordlie cheering. For (says he) the kingdom of God is
not meat and drink. And returning to the right cheer of Christ's kingdom, he
compares yt with the cheer of Moses, and says that Moses gave us not the
true bread, but our Lord Jesus. Why did not Moses give the true bread, seeing
that the bread that he gave was a miraculouse bread, a bread that came from
heaven, and the bread that Christ gave was no miraculouse bread, but yt was
common usual bread, made here by the hand of man upon earth? If ye say that
the bread of Christ was a figure of Christ: so was the other also, and more
lively the^ this for many causes, which in the third book shall be
declared.

But if ye will learn the true cause, why our Lord Christ gave the true
bread, and Moses did not, learn of S. Hierom, who teaches us that yt is Cap.
12.
because Christ gives unto us not an only figure of him self, but both the
figure and him self also. For in the feast that Christ makes, he is he, that
both makes the feast (as S. Hierom says) and also the meat of the feast. So
the^ he gives him self who in deed is the very bread of life, he gives us
the true bread that Moses could not give. For Moses gave the figure of yt,
but he gave not the thing, And therefore he gave not the true bread.

Note then that Christ is the feaster, for he bids us to the feast, and
says: Take and eat. He is the meat also of the feast, for appoincting the A
saing of S. Hierom. opened.
meat he says, This is my body. And thus ye may perceive that S. Hierom
ioineth with the words of Christ: And farther he says by express words,
coming to the poinct of the drinking of Christ's wine in the kingdom of his
Father: Illius bibimus sanguinem: We drink his blood But where drink we yt?
In sacrificiis eius: In his sacrifices. How come we by this wine Joan. 15.
of his, which is his blood? In sacrificiis eius de geminine vitis verae
rubentia musta calcamus, In his sacrifices we press out of the true vine the
ruddie new wine. Ego sum vitis vera. I am the true wine. How press we out
this new ruddie wine out of the generation of this true wine? By speaking the
words of Christ, as he has commanded, by which (as S. Ambrose says) that,
that is in the cup, is made the blood that redeemed the people. But in what
place must we drink this new wine? Amb. li. 4 de Sa. ca. 5
Nouum bibimus vinum in regno Patris: We drink this new wine in the kingdom
of the Father. For soche as be in this kingdom may be partakers of Christ's
wine dronken in his sacrifices. Other may not. Habemus altar, de quo edere
non habent potestatem, qui tabernaculo deseruiunt. We have an altar of which
they may not eat that serve the tabernacle. For they singe not a new song,
but remain in the old letter. None can sing this new so^g but they that be in
the kingdom of the Church, which is the kingdom of Hcb. 13.
the Father, says S. Hierom.

By this then ye may perceive not only the answer of S. Hierom to the
question of Hedibia: but also his assertion for the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament. For he says not in all this discourse that Christ gives us a
figure of the true bread, but the true bread yt self. We have not a figure of
the meat of Christ, but the meat yt self: we drink not a figure of Christ's
blood, but we drink his blood, says S. Hierom. And therefore this Proclamer
did seek to do to much violence to S. Hierom to cut of a piece of

THE FOUR AND FIFTETH CHAP. TESTIFIES the understanding of the same words by
Isichius and S. Augustine.
ALthough Isichius be in the phrase of words somewhat dark: yet I would not
omit him, both for that he is grave, ancient and learned, and his testimony
also very effectuouse Leuiticus writing on this text: Qui Leuit. 22.
comederit de sanctificatis per ignorantiam, addet quintam partem cum eo, quod
comedit, and dabit sacerdoti in sanctuarium. He that eats of the holy
things unwittingly, he shall put the fifte part thereunto, and give unto the
priest, the hallowed thing, thus he says: Sancta sanctorum sunt proprie
Christi mysteria, quia ipsius est corpus de quo Gabriel ad virginem dicebat:
Spiritus sanctus superueniet in te, and virtus Altissimi obumbrabit tibi, ideo
quod nascetur Isych. in Leuit. li. 6. ca. 22.
ex te sanctum, vocabitur filius Dei. Sed and Esaias, sanctus Dominus, and in
altis habitat, in sinu videlicet Patris. Ab hoc enim non solum alienigenas, and
inquilinos, and mercenarios, sacrificio prohibuit, sed nec per ignorantiam
percipere praecepit. Per ignorantiam autem percipit, qui virtutem eius, and
dignitatem ignorant, qui nescit quia corpus hoc, and sanguis est secundam
veritatem, sed mysteria quidem percipit, nescit autem mysteriorum virtutem. Ad
quem Salamon dicit, vel magis Spiritus, qui in eo est: Quando sederis vt
comedas cum principe, diligenter attend quae posita sunt ante te. Aperte and
ipse co^pellens, and cogens eum, qui ignorant addere quinta^ parte^. Haec enim
quinta addita, intelligere nos intellgibiliter diuina mysteria facit. Quid sit
autem quinta pars, ipse te verba legis latoris docere possunt, ait enim: Addet
quintam partem cum eo, quod comedit. Et quomodo eius quod iam comedit, and
co^sumpsit addere quis quinta^ potest? Neque enim aliud, aut aliunde, sed de
ipso, and cum eo, vel sicut lxx, super ipsum iubet addi quintam. Ergo quinta
eius super ipsum, sermo est, qui prolatus est ab ipso Christo super Dominicum
mysterium. Ipse enim liberat nos ab ignorantia, remouetque nos additus, carnale
quip piam and terrenum de sanctis arbitrari: sed divine ea and spiritualiter
accipi sancit, quod quinta proprie nominatur, quia qui in nobis est diuinus
spiritus, and sermo quem tradidit, qui in vobis sunt componit sensus, and non
solum nostrum gustum producit ad mysterium, sed and auditum, and visum, and
tactum, and odoratum, ita vt nil in eis minori rationi, and infirnae menti
proximum, de ijs videlicet, quae valde superna sunt, suspicemur. The most holy
things proprelie are the mysteries of Christ. For yt is his body, of
Receiving of the Sacr. by ignorance what yt is.
the which Gabriel said to the Virgen: The holy Ghost shall come upon thee,
and the power of the highest shall ouershadowe thee. Therefore that holy
thing, that shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. And Esaias
also: the Lord is holy and dwells on the heightes, that is to say, in the
bosom of the Father. From this Sacrifice he does not only forbid
strangers, and hired servants but he commanded also He receaueth yt by
ignorance, that knows not the power and dignity of yt, that knows not that
yt is the body and blood in very deed, but receaueth the mysteries, and
knows not the power of the mysteries. Unto who^ Solomon says or raither the
holy Ghost that is in him: When thowe sit to eat with a Prince,
diligently attend what things are set before thee: He also compelling and
constreigning him that is ignorant to putto the fifte part. This fifte part
putto makes us easily to understand, the divine and mystical things. What
that fifte part is, the words of the Lawgeuer can teach thee for he says:
he shall putto a fifte part with that that he has eaten. How can a man putto
a fifte part that that he has eaten and consumed? Neither may he putto any
other thing, or had from any other where, but he commands a fifte part to
be putto, of that, and with yt, or (as the seventy interpretours say) upon
yt. Then the fifte part of him upon him, is the word which was spoken of
Christ him self upon our Lords mystery. That word delivers us from
ignorance, and being putto, causes us to think no earthly or carnallthing of
the holy things, but makes them to Isichius.

In whom I find many things worthy to be noted, of the which some I shall
breiflie touch, leaving other to be weighed of the reader. First yt The
Sacrament a most holy thing and a sacrifice.
is certain, that he speaks here of the body of Christ in the Sacrament,
which he calls the most holy thing, and also a sacrifice. As of the holy
things sacrificed in the Leuicall law, strangers and hirelinges might not
receive: no more may they that be strangers to Christ receive of this holy
thing. Besides this, no man might eat of that sacrifice unwittingly or
ignorantly: no more aught any to eat of this owre sacrifice ignorantly. Who
does eat of this holy thing ignora^tlie? He (says Isichius) that knows
not the power and dignity of that, that he receaueth, who knowerh not yt to be
a very body, and blood in very deed.

Note well then these words, that the mysteries of Christ the Sacrament of
Christ, is his very body and blood in deed. If yt be the body and blood in
of Christ in deed, where is now the bread and wine that the Adversary so A
plain place for the Proclamer and issue joined with him thereupon.
fond, and without grownde. Here ye see in this ancient author that we have
good grownd. For he says yt is the body and blood in very deed. Let the
Proclamer bring one of like auncie^tie saing that yt is not the body and
blood in deed, and as before I have joined with him, so will I now again that
I will subscribe, If he can not, let him perform his promise and subscribe to
the catholic Church. For here is one that by express words says that
the Sacrament is the body and blloode in very deed. wherbie the only figure
of the Adversaries is excluded.

And here may the Proclamer and all that join with him in this matter see
their state, which is the state of ignorance. For he (says this author)
that receaueth this Sacrament, and knows not the power and dignity of yt,
and that yt is Protestants not taking the Sacr. to be the body and blood of
Christ in very deed, receive yt by ignorance.
the dodie and blood in deed (as the Proclamer and his accomplices do) he
receaueth yt in ignorance. I wish yt may please our merciful Lord God to
have mercy upon them, and to open their eyes that they may see their own
ignorance, and with humility mollify their stony hearts, that vain
singularity and pride forsaken, they may humbly receive the commandment of
God figuratiuelie spoken, and plainly expownded by this author, that their
ignorance may be removed from them. What is the commandment of God that they
should do? They must (says almighty God) putto a fifte part upon the
holy thing, and that will make them clerelie to understand Gods mysteries.
This sifte part (says Isichius) is the word that was spoken of Christ
himself upon the mystery of God. What word that was, yt is doubted of
neither party, neither of the catholics, neither of the adversaries to be
this: This is my body: This is my blood. Ipse liberat nos ab ignoratia: That
word (says Isichius) delivers us from ignorance.

Now remember that the ignorance is, that a man receaueth the Sacrament,
Ignorance of the Sacrament what yt is, and how yt is removed.
and knows not the power and dignity of yt, which power and This is my
body This is my blood. because this word simply without any trope or
figure, teaches that in the Sacrament is the body and blood. Ioin then the
words of this author to gother. He said before that the body and blood be
in the Sacrament in very deed, and he says that these words of Christ do
make us clearly to understand yt, wherefore these words are to be understood
as spoken of the body and blood of Christ in deed, and not of the figure of
them.

If ye will yet hear more, and be more fully certified of the truth of this
matter, this author, as other did that be allreadie alleged teaches who is
the woorker of yt, and by what mean yt is brought to pass. For proceading in
the exposition of the text, he says thus: Quicunque ergo sanctificata per
ignorantiam comederit, ignorans eorum virtutem (sicut diximus) addet quintam
eius super eo, and dabit sacerdoti in sanctnarium. Sanctificationem enim
mystici sacrificij, and a sensibilibus ad intelligibilia, translationem sieve
commutationem, ei, qui verus est sacerdos, videlicet Christo oportet dari, id
est, ipsi de eis miraculum cedere, and imputare. quia pen eius virtutem, and
prolatum ab eo verbum, qua videntur, tam sanctificata sunt, quam cunctum carnis
excedunt sensum. Whosouer therefore shall eat the holy things by ignorance,
not knowing their power (as we have said) he shall putto a fifte part of yt
upon yt, and shall give yt unto the priest into the Change of se^sible
things to intelligible in the Sacr. must begeue^ to Christ


See ye not here who is the dooer of this matter? perceive ye not who woorketh
this miracle? The doing of all this (says Isichius) must be referred, and
imputed to Christ. For he by his power, and the word spoken of Bread and
wine so sanctisied in the blessed Sacr. as yt passes ma^s wit.
him, sanctifies the visible bread and wine as yt passes man's wit to know.
Let us here then first understand, that if the bread and wine were but made
figures of Christ's body and blood, signifienge to us that as these feed the
body: so Christ feeds the soul, yt were not a matter passing man's wit.
But man's wit may well atteign to perceive that in soch sort, they may be
figures. Wherefore there is a greater matter wrought in the bread
Transubstantiacion proved by Isych.
the terms of this author be) a translacion or a commutacion from sensible
things to intelligible, that is ftom bread, which is perceived by senseis, to
the body of Christ, which is in this manner not perceived by senseis. Which
terms importe that, that the Church calls Transubstantiacion For when there
is a translacion commutacion or changing of things sensible to things not
sensible (which is a change of one thing of one nature or substance, into an
other thing of an other nature or substance) what should let that yt may not
be called Transubstantiacion?

But what do I tarry in these things fully and esfectuouslie testified by
this author. For he has thaught us that Christ's body and blood be in the
Sacrament in very deed: he has taught us that to be wrought by the
tra^slacion or commutacion of the bread and wine into the same body and blood
of Christ, he has taught us that Christ is the woorker of yt by his power,
and by the word spoken of him. Finally he teaches that by the words of
Christ we are clearlie taught the presence of his body in the Sacrament, and
so by consequent we are taught, that they be no figurative speeches.

Thus much being said of Isichius, and testified by him: let us also hear
August in Psalm. 33 concion.
S. Augustine, who at this time is joined with him. Thus writes he in this
matter upon the 33 psalm, treacting a story of king David, and applieng yt to
Christ. Et ferebatur in manibus suis. Hoc vero, fratres, quomodo posset fieri
in homine, quis intelligat? quis enim portatur manibus suis? manibus aliorum
potest portari Christ bare his body in his own hands, when he said: This is
my body.
homo, manibus suis nemo portatur. Quomodo intelligatur in ipso David, secundum
literam non inuenimus: In Christo autem inuenimus, ferebatur Christus in
manibus suis, quando commendans ipsum corpus suum ait: Hoc est corpus meum,
ferebat enim illud corpus in manibus suis. And he was carried in his own
hands. Brethren how this can be done in a man, who can understand? Who is
born is his own hands In the hands of an other, a man may be born: in his
own hands no man is born. how yt may be understand in David himself
according to the letter we find not: but in Christ we find yt. He was born in
his own This is my body. For he did bear that body in his hands, Thus
far he,

For asmoch as S. Augustiye by discussion did find that the words, which he
treacted of could not be understood literallie in David, even so as yt
could not be performed in him, that he being but a man should bear his own
body in his own hands, no more could yt, or can yt be performed in any
other pure natural man. Therefore enforced to make a farther search he had
recourse to Christ, who was more then a natural man, and in him at no other
time does he find yt performed and fullfilled according to the letter, but
when he gave forth his body to his Disciples, saing: This is my body. If then
yt was at that time fulfilled in him according to the letter, when he said.
This is my body. and if then he carried his own body in his hands, then this
scripture also must so be understood, or else what should yt make to the
purpose? For Christ did not carry his body

Wherefore the wresting that Oecolampadius makes upon these words of S.
Augustine: Ipse se portabat quoda^ modo cum diceret: Hoc est corpus meu^. He
did bear him self after a certain manner, when he said: This is my body: will
not Oecolamp. his wresting of S. Augustine will not stand
serve to prove that he did bear him self only in a figure. For if S.
Augustine had understand the words of bearing of a man's body in his own
hands, to be to bear the figure of his body, he would not have said that he
could not find yt in David. For who doubts but that David might have born a
figure of himself in his own hand, and so may any other natural man. And
Christ bare his own figure in his hand when he had the Paschall la^be in his
hand. And therefore in that manner of understanding, yt might be fownde to be doe^
in David, and in other me^. But this manner of bearing was soche as could not
be done in David, or any other being only a natural man, but only in Christ
God and man. Who above the power of man by his great divine power could
compass that, that man by no means can The true understanding of S. Augustine
power, and word saing: This is my body: he turned that bread into his
body, and so in that certain manner after S. Augustines words and mening, he
did bear his own body in his own hands. And so was this fullfilled in
Christ according to the letter. And therefore as to the verifieng of the letter,
yt must needs be that Christ carried verily him selfin his own hands: so to
the verifieng of that act yt must needs be, that these words: This is my
body: must be understood in their propre and literal sense.

Thus then yt is evident, that forsomoche as Christ bare him felf in his own
hands in giving forth the Sacrament to his Apostles, that this very body is
born also of his ministres now in the Sacrament given forth to his faithful
beleuers. For (as Chrysostom says) this table of Christ now used Chrysostom.
in 26. Mathom. 83.
according to his institucio^, is nothing inferior to the table that Christ
him self satte personally at. For as Christ did sanctify that table: so does
he this. And therefore we must otherwise think of this Sacrament, the^ we do of
other things, which do show forth Christ to us, to the which the adversary
of

For although the Apostles by their word and epistles did show forth Christ:
yet neither the one nor the, other is called the body of Christ but only
that that is consecrated by the words of Christ in the altar as Potuit
Paulus significando praedicare Dominum Iesum Christum, aliter per linguam suam,
aliter per epistolam, aliter per sacramentum corporis and sanguinis August. de
Trin. li. 3. cap. 4.
eius. Nec linguam quippe eius, nec membranas, nec atramentum, nec
significantes sonos lingua editos, nec signa literarum conscripta pelliculis,
corpus Christi and sanguinem dicimus, sed illud tantum, quod ex fructibus
terrae acceptum, and prece mystica consecratum; rite sumimus ad salutem
spiritualem in memoriam pronobis Dominicae passionis, quod cum per manus
hominum ad illam visibilem speciem, producitur, non sanctificatur vt sit tam
magnum sacramentum, nisi operante inuisibiliter Spiritu Dei. Paul might by
signifieng preach our Lord Jesus Christ, or else by his tongue, or else by
epistle, or else Bread and winearenos sanctified to be so great a Sacrament but
by the invisible work of God.
by the Sacrament of his body and blood, yet do we call neither his tongue,
nor his parchement, nor ink, nor the signifieng sowndes settfurth by the
tongue, nor the marks of the letters written together in skins, the body
and blood of Christ, but only that, which being taken of the fruictes of the
earth, and by the mystical prayer consecrated, we receive to our spiritual
health in the remembrance of our Lords passion suffered for us. Which thing
when yt is brought by the hands of men to that visible form, yt is

Of whom ye see that we are taught, that thoug Christ be by diverse means
settfurth and preached, as by scriptures, preachinges, and by the Sacrament:
yet these things be not all of like degree. For there is none of these called
the body of Christ, but only the bread that is consecrated by the mystical
prayer, that is, by the words of Christ: This is my body: that only is
called the body of Christ. Oecolamp. craftily abuses S. Augustine.


Now Oecolampadius would, that because saint Augustine says, that Christ is
preached by scripture, word, and Sacrament, that these three be of one sort,
no more being in the Sacrament, then in the other two. But note I pray thee
(gentle reader) how he abuses saint Augustine to prove that his wicked
sainge. Of this place of saint Augustine now alleged he takes only thus
much: Paul might by signifieng preach our Lord Jesus Christ, otherwise by
his tongue, otherwise by epistle, otherwise by the Sacrament of his body and
blood. And upon this Not tongue nor writing nor soche other showing forth Christ
be called his body but bread and wine consetrated.
his doctrine. But all the rest of saint Augustines words which follow,
which overthrow all his building he craftelie left out. For yt follows:
Yet do we call neither his tongue, neither his epistle, nor his writings the
body of Christ: but only we call that the body of Christ, that is taken of
the fruictes of the earth, and is by the mystical prayer consecrated, that do
we call the body of Christ. All this does he leave out. Soche was the
synceritie of the man in alleging the holy Fathers. So good is the cause that
he defended, that the doctors must be mutilated and brought out in piece
meall, or else yt could not stand.

Is yt not merueilouse, that he could bring this place of saint Augustine,
which although the first piece taken alone seems somewhat to sownde to his
purpose: yet the wholl taken together is altogether against him? Alas that
ever any man would so deceive the people of God, and by soche frawde and abuse
of the holy writers make them to embrace error in stead of truth, weigh the
place thoroughly, and you shall perceive written, nor the word spoken,
though Christ be preached by them, be called the body of Christ, but only the
Sacrament is called the body of (says he) by the hands of man yt is brought
to be a visible form, but because yt is sanctified and made so great a
Sacrament by the invisible woorking of the holy Ghost.

Note these two poinctes, that S. Augustine says that the bread is
sanctified, and made so great a Sacrament. And again that he says yt is so
sanctified and made by the invisible work of the holy Ghost. There is great
difference betwixt the sanctificacion of the Sacrament yt self, and the soul
of man, that receaueth the Sacrament.

Now Oecolampadius and Cranmer say that the Sacraments being dumb Oecolamp.
and Cranmer their heresies.
creatures receive no sanctificacion, but only the sowles of men. They say
also that the holy Ghost woorketh not in the things that be the Sacraments,
but in the men that receive the Sacraments. This they say because they would
avoid the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which is made there present by
sanctificacion of the bread. But against these their saings S. Augustine says:
that the same bread that is made by the hands of men is sanctified, S.
Augustine plain against Oecolamp. and Cranmer.


S. James thus: Spiritum tuum sanctissimum demitte nunc Domine in nos, and in
haec sancta dona proposita, vt superueniens sancta, and bona, and gloriosa sua
praesentia sanctificet, Diuus Iac. in Missa.
and efficiat hunc panem corpus sanctum Christi tui, and calicem hunc preciosum
sanguinem Christi tui. Send down now (o Lord) thy most holy Spirit upon us,
and upon these holy gifts settfurth, that he coming over them, may with his
holy good, and gloriouse presence, sanctify, and make this bread the holy
body of thy Christ, and this cup the preciouse blood of thy Christ. Thus S.
James. S. Basil and Chrysostom have the like words.

See ye not now then how the bread is sancti^ied? See ye not what is the
work of the holy Ghost? Perceive ye not how that S. Augustine upon good
cause called the Sacrament, so great a Sacrament? is yt not a great Sacrament
Bread sanctified contrary to Cranmers assertion and Oecolamp.
in which by work of the holy Ghost is made present the body of Christ? To
have hidden this truth Oecolampadius by piece meall brought in S. Augustine.
But now ye have seen the catholic faith well testified, the falshead of the
Adversaries detected, and (to return to our matter, and to conclude) ye
perceive this Sacrament by mystical prayer, which is by Christ's words, to be
consecrated, the effect of which consecracion being the body of Christ (as
is said) the words must needs be taken without figurative sense.

Thus, if my judgment faill me not, ye have heard two other noble men of
Christ's school, and Parliament house, very plainly testifieng the enacted
truth of the understanding of Christ's words, yea so plainly that yt cannot
but much confirm the good Chrystian, and confute the Pheudochristian.

THE FIVE AND FIFTETH CHAPTER
NOw among the learned Fathers of the greek church, we are descended to
Chrysostom, of whom I may say, as besore is said of S. Ambrose, that he is
so full of godly testimonies, testisieng to us the true understanding of
Christ's words, that as I know not which of them first to take: so do I
merueill that they being so many, the Proclamer could for shame say, that
there is not one ancient doctor that makes for the catholic faith of the
Sacrament. Thus Chrysosto^ expownding these words of owre Savior Christ in
the xxvi of Matthew, says. Credamus vbique Deo, nec repugnemus ei, etiamsi
sensui, and cogitationi nostrae absurdum esse videatur, quod dicitur, superet
and sensum, and rationem Chrysostom. in. 26 Math. hom. 83.
nostram sermo, quaeso, ipsius, quod in omnibus, and praecipue in mysterus
faciamus, non illa quae ante nos iacent solummodo aspicientes, sed verba quoque
eius tenentes. Nam verbis eius defraudari non possumus, sensus vero noster
deceptu facillimus est. Illa falsa esse non possunt, hic soepius ac soepius
fallitur. Quoniam ergo ille dixit. Hoc est corpus meum: nulla teneamur
ambiguitate, sed credamus, and oculis intellectus id perspiciamus. Let us in
Gods word even contrary to senses must be believed.
every place believe God, and let us not strive against him, although that that
he says, seem to our sense and thought unlikely. Let his word (I beseech
you) overcome both our wits and reason, which thing let us do in all
things, but cheiflie in the mysteries, not only loking on those things,
which lie before us, but also regarding his words. For by his words we
cannot be deceived our sense is easy to be deceived: they can not be false:
this our sense is often and often deceived. Forasmoche them as he has said:
This is my body: Let us be holden with no ambiguitie or doubt, but let us
believe, and with the eyes of our understanding, let us verily see yt. Thus
far Chrysostom.

In this saing yt is to be perceived how he labors, that in this matter of
the Sacrament we should discredit our senseis, and creditte Chrysts words. And
sorasmoche as he said. This is my body: thouh yt pass our reason to
comprehend But yt passes not reason tomake present a figure of his body.
our eyes do see yt, neither our taste discern yt, neither our feeling or other
senses perceive yt: yet (says Chrysostom) we may not doubt of yt, but
believe yt to be the body of Christ because he said yt was so.

Now consider with me, if the words of Christ had an other sense, the^ they
do outwardly purporte, as that they should teach us, that yt is but a
figure of Christ's body, and not the body yt self, would Chrysostom (trow ye)
in this his open sermon will the people to believe, and not to doubt of the
truth of the words, as they be spoken, and would not raither first utter the
true sense and understanding of them if any other were, and then persuade the
people of that sense not to doubt? Yt is an euel manner of teaching to will the
people to believe the words of scripture as they lie, and are not so to be
understood, but in a sense much different from that. Yt is not the Chryso.
wills Christ's words to be understood as they be spoken.
manner of Chrysostom so to teach, wherefore for so much as he wills them not
to doubt, but to believe the words as they be spoken (which he does in
that, that he teaches no other sense) yt is manifest that these words are to
be understood in their propre sense without the Adversaries figure.

And that Chrysostom himself did so understand them, this proves Real
presence avouched by Chryso.
of Christ: This is my body: he never adds this sense: This is a figure of
my body: But ever leaves them in the sense that they be spoken, and in some
place by express words, in some place by plain circumstance, he dcclareth
the very presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. By express words, as
where he says: Qui dixit: Hoc est corpus meum, and rem simul cum verbo
consecit. Jn 14. Marc. ho^. 51.
He that said: This is my body: He with his word made the the thing also.

I wish these few words of Chrysostom to be well marked, that they Christ
saing. This is my body. with the word made the thing.
never fall from memory, but may allwaies be retained as a rule to understand
him in all places where he speaks of the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood. For if Christ with his word made the thing also that he spoke of, and
the thing that he spoke of was his body, then with the speaking of his word
he made his body. This then being truth (as Chrysostom here teaches) yt can
not be denied, but that by express words he teaches the presence of
Christ's very body in the Sacrament.

And thus by Chrysostom is clearly wiped away the heretical figurative
Figure of the Sacramentaries wiped away by Chrysostom.
understanding of these words of Christ: This is my body. For the
Adversaries would have yt so a figure as of a thing absent. But Christ (as
Chrysostom says) made the thing together with the word. Wherefore as the
word was present: so was the thing present. If the thing be present, then the
figure of the Adversaries can not here be admitted.

Upon the certentie of which presence, the same Chrysostom in the same homely
thus taught his people. Quando igitur sacerdotem corpus tibi prebere Plain
places of Chrysostom for the Pooclamer Chrysostom. ibi.
videris, noli sacerdotis, sed Christi manum ad te porrigiarbitrari. Therefore
when thou see the priest give thee the body, think not the hand of the
priest, but the hand of Christ to be put forth to thee. And that the people
should give full creditte to this truth, he uses this persuasion in the same
homely: Qui enim maius, idest, animam suam prote posuit, quare dedignabitur
suum tibi tradere corpus? Audiamus igitur tam sacerdotes quam alij, quam magna,
quam admirabilis res nobis concessa est. Audiamus, oro, and perhorrescamus,
carnes suas nobis tradidit, seipsum immolatum nobis proposuit. Quam igitur
satisfactionem offeremus, cum tali pabulo nutriti peccemus? cum Agnum
comedentes in lupos conuertamur? cum ouinis carnibus refecti, vt leones
rapiamus? He that has given a greater thing for thee, that is to say, his
life, why will he disdein to deliver his body to thee? Let us therefore hear,
both preistes and other, how great and wonderful a thing is granted unto
us. Let us hear (I pray you) and let us fear. He has delivered unto us his
flesh: himself offered has he put before us. What satisfaction then shall we
offer, that being nourished with soch food, do sin? When eating the lamb,
we are turned into wolves? when satisfied with shepes flesh, we rauine as
lions? Thus far Chrysostom.

Note well this persuasion of his. If Christ has vouched saif to give his life
for thee, will he not vouche safe to give his body? he has given his life for
thee, which is a great matter, will he not give thee his body, which is not
so great a matter? After that we have considered this persuasion, let us
somewhat more deeply weigh this place of Chrysostom, and we shall find yt so
evident in declaring the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, that
Satan himself Terms to plain for figurative speeches.
can not well open his mouth against yt, much less his mynisters. For if
they will gloss this place of Chrysostom, they must bestow a great nombre of
figures upon yt. For here be many plain words and terms, as his body, his
flesh a great and a wonderful thing, himself offered settfurth before us:
soche food, the lamb, the flesh of the sheep, which do declare unto us the
presence of Christ's body. And therefore as is said, they must be darkened
with many figures and mystie gloses, if they shall be perverted to the
Adversaries corruption of the truth. And truly yt were wonderful that
Chrysostom preaching to the people would use so many plain terms, and leave
them as sownding in their own significacion, when in very deed (as the
Adversaries say, and would bear us in hand) they do all signify
figuratiuelie.

But let us yet a little deapelier consider the wholl place, and terms of the
same. And first as touching the persuasion, let us weigh the comparison that is
made in the same by this author to declare the great love, and mercy of
Christ toward us, wherein he compares the life of Christ, which he gave for
us, to his body which he gives to us. Now if the Adversary by the body,
will understand a figure of the body, how unmeet a comparison will he cause
Chrysostom to make, as to compare a bare figure to the life of Christ? Or who
will think that Chrysostom Figures be no wonderful things.
would use soche a great matter as the life of Christ given for us, to persuade
us to believe so small a matter, as that Christ gives us a piece of bread a
figure of his body after the sense of the Sacramentarie? But that yt can not
bear that sense, the words that follow do well prove. For he says, that
the thing that is given unto us, is a great and a wonderful thing. If yt be
but a figure yt is no great thing. For figures have been since the beginning,
and for the most part not esteemed as great things in the respect that they
were figures.

If the Adversary will say that Chrysostom speaks of the body of Christ
spirituallie received, which is a great thing: Yet yt will not help
wonderful what is proprelie.
him to wrest Chrysostom to him. For albeit the body of Christ spirituallie
received be a great thing: yet yt is not proprelie wonderful. For that is
proprely wonderful that is not in use, but rare, seldom, and almost not seen
(as says) saint Augustine. Now to receive the body of Christ spirituallie
is no rare matter, for yt has been in use from the beginning Spu^all receipt
only of Christ is not wonderful.
of the world, yt was common to the holy Fathers and Patriarchs Take, eat,
this is my body, at which time he did institute and ordein yt so to be
received. Before Christ did so by his word instite, the world never knew
this manner of receipt, yt was never in use, never in practice. And therefore yt
is a wonderful thing, not only for that yt exceadeth the compass of reason,
and passes the reach of the senseis that a natural body should in soche
manner be received, but also for that before Christ's institucion yt was never
in use.

But what needs me to trauaill so much in declaring this, when the Spu^all
and real receipt together of Christ's body is wonderful.
author himself opens what the great and wonderful thing is that he
speaks of hear, saing in the same place: Audiamus oro and perhorrescamus,
carnes suas nobis tradidit, seipsum immolatum nobis proposuit. Let us hear, I
beseech you, and let us fear, He has delivered to us his flesh, himself
offered has he set before us. This is the great thing that he spoke of, this
is the wonderful thing that is given to us, which he meneth of, the slesh of
Christ, Let us hear and fear, which kind of advertisement neaded not, if
yt were but a piece of bread.

And note here that Chrysostom to the intent the thing might fully be
perceived according to the truth, and his mening in the same, he did not
content himself only to say that Christ has delivered unto us his flesh:
but he adds, that Christ set himself offered before us, wherbie are removed
all the Satha^s seals can not be hanged to Chrysostomes words.
figures and tropes, which the Adversaries to the corruption of the truth,
would here have putto. For if Chrysostom had said no more, But that Christ
has given to us his flesh, then would Satan by his ministers hanged on one of
his common seals, as this word, figuratiuelie, or spirituallie, and so made
yt to have appeared, that yt is his evidence. But the holy Ghost, being a good
schoolmaster, has taught his scholar Chrysostom so to frame his words, that
if the enemy would go about to falsify them by putting to, one of his common
seals, yet his falhead should needs appear. himself has he setfurth before
us. By which words the matter is made plain for if Christ himself be set
before us, then is the bare figure taken away and denied. If he be set before
us, then is he not only spiritually received. For spiritual receipt is in us,
and not before us. Christ by the doctrine of the Adversary is within us, and
not in the Sacrament before us: but Chrysostom says that he is before us, and
speaks of the being of Christ in the Sacrament. Wherefore he himself is in the
Sacrament before us, and so is excluded the only spiritual manner, which is
the other seal of the Adversary, and the real presence is proved which is
the doctrine catholic.

The farther certentie also of this matter is added when he says, that we eat
the lamb, whereby he meneth the Lamb, that takes away the sins of the
world, Jesus Christ, that innocent Lamb figured by the old Paschall lamb.
Likewise saing, that we eat the flesh of the sheep, he meneth the flesh of Qui
tanquam ouis ad occisionem ducebatur, and tanquam agnus coram se tondente
obmutescebat, and non aperiebat os suum, who as a sheep was led to Esaias. 53.
be slain, and as a lamb before the sherer did hold his peace, and did not
open his mouth.

Finally that in this discourse he speaks of the very real presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, and that we verily and substanciallie receive
yt, and be nourished with yt, his last words do inuinciblie prove. Sinners
receive the body of Christ in the Sacr. not spirituallie, but yet reallie.
In which moving a question upon the words before said, he says: Quam
satisfact. etc. what manner of amends, or satisfaction shall we make to him,
that being in sin, do receive soche food? that being wolves do eat the
lamb? that being lions, do rauine the flesh of the sheep? Now certain yt is
both by the doctrine of the Catholic, and the Protestant, that the sinner
eats not the body of Christ spirituallie, wherefore yt must needs be, that
soche as being wolves and lions in wickedness of life, and do yet by the
doctrine of Chrysostom eat the flesh of the lamb, and devour the For this is
well known to the Adversary that the evil man

Thus, if my judgment fail me not, Chrysostom has by express words taught
us the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, Now we shall Real presence
auonched of Chrysostom, by circunsta^ce
hear him teach the same by circunstance, but so plainly and evidently that
yt can not be against said. The circunstance consists in the comparison of
the Paschall Lamb, and in the words of Christ the sixth of S. John by which
both he proves these words of Christ: This is my body: to be spoken in
their propre sense, and to teach us the real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament. The words be these: Praecipuam eorum solemnitatem dissoluit, and
ad aliam mensam horroris plenam eos conuocat, dicens: Accipite, and comedite,
Chrysostom. homil. 83. in 16. Math.
Hoc est corpus meum. Quomodo igitur turbati non sunt hoc audientes? quia multa
and magna de hoc antea audierant. He dissolueth their chief Solemnity, and to
an other table full of terriblenesse he calls them, saing: This is my body.
How then

In this saing two things breiflie noted, I pass to the next place. The first
is, that the other table whereunto Christ did call his Apostles was full of
terriblenesse or trembling, which shows that there was in that table, above
the table of the Paschall lamb, from the which they were called, some thing
that was of soche majesty, that yt was to be feared, which thing was Table of
the old Paschal lamb not terrible as only but a figure the table of Christ
is terrible and therefore more then a figure.
not in the other table. In the other table was the Paschall lamb a lively
figure of Christ our Paschall lamb, and in yt Christ was figuratively eaten.
And although yt were their chiefest solemnitic: yet Chrysostom does not call yt
a fearful table. If then in that solemn table there was the figure of Christ,
and Christ was there figuratively eaten, and yet that table was not terrible or
full of horroure: then in the table of Christ is not only a figure of Christ,
and Christ figuratiuelie eaten, but there is a great matter there that makes
this table to be fearful. What is that? Hoc est corpus meum. This is my body.
For Chrysostom says, that when Christ called them to this table he This is my
body. If these words This is my body, did no more but cause the figure of
Christ's body to be in the table of Christ, and so Christ to be eaten in a
figure as he was in the table of the Paschall Lamb, the^ this table had been no
more full of horroure then the other. But for so much as by that sainge of
Christ, the table was full of horroure, yt argues (as before yt is alleged
out of Chrysostom) that he so saing with the word made also the thing. so
that as he spoke the word presently, so the thing, that is, his body was
there presently. For the saing of the word, and the making of the thing went
jointly together. Whereby then as yt does plainly appear that the body of
Christ was present in that table: so also does yt appear that the body being
made present at the saing of these words: This is my body: that these
words are to be taken and understood in their propose sense.

The second note is, that where Chrysostom moves a question, saing: how were
not the Apostles troobled when they heard Christ say, Take, eat, This is my
body? He answers that they were not troobled because they had heard of his
flesh and his blood. Then if he speaks here of that, he spoke of there, then
he saing: This is my body, this is blood, speaks here of his

And here is to be remembered that the author of Cranmers book growndeth
Cra^mers argument agunst the Sacrament
an argument (as he supposes, upon a good grownde, but in very deed yt is
upon the sand) against the Sacrament, saing: that if Christ had made his body
in the Sacrament yt being so great a work, so great a mystery, yt should
have been declared either by Christ himself showing the very thing so to be, or
by the Evangelists in process of the story, or of the cirumstance: But for
somoche as the Gospel says no more but Sacramentaries deny the vi. of S.
John tospeake of the Sacr. that yt should appear a matter of no weight.
breiflie without all preuiall disposition to the doing of the thing, and
without all circumstance, that he took bread and gave thanks and brake yt,
and gave yt to his Disciples, saing: Take, eat, This is my body etc. Therefore
(says he) there is no soche thing of belief there. for about other things to
be believed, either Christ him self, or the Evangelists do stand in the
declaracion, as in the matter of the incarnacion and birth of Christ, of his
baptism, of his passion and death, of his resurrection of

But see how the spirit of error blinded this man, and whether he Crammers
spirit and Chryso stomes compared.
led him. If he had been led by the same spirit that Chrysostom was led by, he
should have seen that, that Chrysostom did sec. Chrysome (as ye have heard)
said, that Christ had spoken many and great things of this Sacrament before
to the Apostles, and therefore now when Christ went to the perfourmance of his
promise made before, and in few words said: Take, cate, This is my body:
Theie were mindful of his promise made before, and of his great instruction
given unto them for their belief in that behalf. so that being sufficiently
instructed, and therefore redilie prepared, when Christ spoke the word, and
commanded them to eat his body, they were not troubled, for their says was
stayed. So that Chrysostom could see many and great things that Christ had
spoken of this matter: But this other man blinded with the great mist of
heresy, could se nothing, where Chrysostom

Therefore you that be yet, or have been seduced, here by this great pillar of
that sect be advertised, that if he being a learned man, and yet the wicked
spirit so blinded him that where Chrysostom said, that Christ did speak many
and great things of this Sacrament, which yet this learned man could not see
one of them, you that be learned see one of yowr best learned me^ blinded, and
beware in time. But you that be unlearned, of this much more do you be
ware. Foryf the learned be deceived by the Deuell and blinded, and led out of
the way of truth, much more the unlearned may be deceived and blinded, as
was yowr first fownder in this our time, Luther by name, who said that the
sixth chapter of S. John, was wholly to be set a part, as in which there was
no syllable that spoke of the Sacrament. Yet Chrysostom. says Christ spoke
many and great things of the Sacrament. And in all the Gospel there is
noplace that speaks of yt before the supper, but the sixth chapter of S. John.
which thing also is by express words testified of S. Augustine, who Ioannes
de corpore and sanguine Domini Aug. li. 3* de Conseuse Euang. Christ spoke of
his body and blood plentisullie in the sixth of S. John.
hoc loco nibil dixit, sed plane alibi multo vberius de iis Dominum locutum
esse testatur. John spoke nothing in this place of the body and blood of our
Lord, But in an other place he plainly testifies that our lord very
plentifully spoke of these things. Where note breiflie by the way that S.
augustine says not, that S. John spoke of the Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood, but of the body and blood of our Lord by express and plain words,
and there with fignifieth the same body and blood to be spoken of both in the
sixth of S. John, and in the other Evangelists, where they treacte of the last
supper of Christ. And thus ye have perceived the author of that book not
only blinded, but also directly saing contrary to Chrysostom in these two
places jointly alleged, and also to S. Augustine, And therefore once again I
wish you to be warned, that seeing the sainges of your chief masters be clean
contrary to the sainges of the chief masters of Christ's Church, beware of
them, suspect them, fly far from them. Ye have

And now to yowr farther instruction in this poinct, and to the more confutacion
of the aduersaie and declaracion of the truth, I will crave yowr patience to
hear one other place of the same Chrysostom, wherein ye shall both more plainly
perccaue both that the vi of John, and also the words of the supper do
manifestly speak of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament. Thus he
writes: Hac de causa desiderio desideraui hoc Pascha vobiscum Chris. homil.
83. in. 26. Math.
comedere, qno vos spirituales faciam. Ipsequoque bibit ex^; ne auditis verbis
illis dicerent: Quid igitur sanguinem bibimus, and carnem comedimus? ac ideo
perturbarentur. Nam and quando prius de iis verba fecit multi solummodo propter
verba scandalum passi sunt. Ne igitur tunc quoque id accideret, primus ipse hoc
fecit, vt tranquillo animo ad commumcationem mysterioram induceret. For this
cause with desire have I desiered to eat this passover with you, by the
which I may make you spiritual. He also drank of yt, lest when they had
heard these words they should say, what therefore do we drink blood, and
cate flesh? And there for they should be troobled. for when he did first speak
of these things also, many

In which saing I will first note to you for the sixth of S. John, that after
I may the more at large open his mind to you for the presence: That Christ
spoke of his body and blood in the Sacrament Ioa^. 6.
Christ spoke of his body and blood in the sixth of S. John, these words of
this author do teach us where he says: Quando de iis prius verba fecit,
multi solummodo propter verba scandalum pasi sunt. When he first spoke of these
things many even alonely for the words were offended. Whereby you may
perceive that Chrysostom shows here that Christ spoke before of this
mystery of his body and blood in that place, where many only were offended
for the words. Where that was yt is clear to all men that can read the
Gospel, that yt was there, where they said, Durus est est hic sermo, quis
potest eum audire? This is an hard saing, who can abide yt? where yt is
manifest Joan. 6.
that they were (according to Chrysostoms saing) offended only for the he
shows the certain place.

This I thought good first to note, that being ioinctlie spoken of after the

There seems betwixpt these two places of Chrysostom to be a contradiction,
the dissolucion of which shall bringfurth some good matter meit for Two
sainges of Chrysostom. conferred and conciled.
this place. The contradiction is this: in the first sentence saing: Quomodo
igitur turbati non sunt discipuli hoc audientes? how were the disciples not
troobled hearing this? he gives us to understand, that the Apostles were so
stayed and confirmed, that when Christ spoke to them comaunding them to eat
his body, they were not, neither could be troobled. In this sentence he
says thatChryst did first drink of his blood lest they should say:
Wherefore then do we drink blood and eat slesh? and therefore should be
troobled. Whereby contrariwise he seems to insinuate that they were not
perfect, but would have been troobled.

But these two sainges well weighed, there shall be fownde no contradiction, but
raither strong evident matter for the opening of the truth now declared.
Wherefore this is to be noted, that in the sirst sentence Chrysostom spoke of the
faith of the Apostles as concerning this mystery. And as touching their says
they were not troobled at the strange sownde of Christ's words, who bid them
take and eat his body and drink his blood, who otherwise if they had not ben
stayed in faith, being fully instructed, and fully persuaded, they would have been troobled at the hearing of soche words, but they were resolved, and
therefore would not depart and go back from Christ, as other disciples did, but
when Christ asked them: will you also go away? They answered: Domine ad quem
ibimus? verba vitae aeternae habes. Lord to whom shall we go? Thowe hauest the
words of everlasting life. They had taken a good taste in the words of
Christ, though they were repugnaunt to their natural knowledge. Wherefore they
subdewed their natural The Apostles hearing Chystes words: Take, eat, this
is my body were not troobled in faith,
knowledge to the heavenly and spiritual knowledge, and so perceived Take,
eat, This is my body. Drink, this is my blood, that yt was so in deed, as
Chrvst spoke they believed most certenlie. And therefore in faith they were not
troobled. For if they had, they would have uttered their doubt with a
(Quomodo) how, as they did that were troobled and said: Quomodo potest hic
nobis dare carnem suam ad manducandum? How can this fellow give us his flesh
to eat? And as our men in these days trobled likewise in faith do show
their doubt with a (Quomodo) with an how, asking how can Christ be in the
Sacrament? with many soche like questions. But the Apostles were delivered
from this trooble. and therefore (says Chrysostom) they were not trobled, that
is, they were not troobled in faith. That he meneth they were not troobled in
faith, his words do declare, when he asks, how were not the Apostles
troobled hearing these words? So that their troble should be upon the
hearing of Christ's words. But forasmoche as faith is of hearing, and by
hearing Christ before they had conceived faith, therefore faith by the hearing of
these words, which before by hearing were believed, Quia multa and magna de
hoc ante disseruerat. Because he had spoken many and great things of this
before. so that by the hearing of these many and great things they were now
quieted

In the second sentence where he shows a thing to be done by Christ lest they
should be troobled, he does not speak of their trooble in faith, but of their
trooble that mighthaue happened in the execucio^ of their faith, that is, in
the receiving of that body and blood which they believed there to be reallie
present, and as very flesh and very blood to be received. The Apostles
believed the real presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacr.
Wherefore yt is to be noted that the Apostles believed in the Sacrament to be not
a bare figure, as of thing absent, but they believed the very body and blood
of Christ really present. The proof of this by Chrysostom is this: If they had
believed yt to be but a figure, and in very deed bread and wine, then in the
receipt of yt they would not have been troobled. For unto bread and wine they
were accustomed as their usual food. But forasmoch as they believed yt to be
the very flesh and very blood of Christ, the receipt where of being both
strange, and to our nature loathsome, and specially the flesh and blood of a
man (as Theophilact says) therefore as they were not troobled in the believing:
so that they should not be trobled in Christ to induce his Apost. without
lothsomnesse to eat his flesh, and drink his blood, did first eat and drink
the^ himself.
vt tranquillo animo (says Chrysostom) ad communicationem mysterioru^
induceret. That he might induce them with a quiet mind to receive the
mysteries. Consider with yowr self, if they had believed yt to be but bread,
why should they not receive yt with quiet mind? if yt were wine why should
they not drink yt quietly. And if they were soche things, what needed Christ
to drink before them, to induce them, and to quiet them? Did they never eat
bread before? Did they never drink wine before?

Perchance the Adversaries will say that they never eat bread, and dra^ke
wine in that sort before. For now they did eat bread, and drink wine as the
figures of Christ's body and blood. Is this a sufficient cause to trooble
them? Had they never before eaten any thing as the figure of Christ? Had they
not even a little before eaten the Paschall lamb, a very lively figure of
Christ? Had they not heard, that Melchisedech did eat and drink Christ did
drink first of yt lest, when they had heard the words of Christ, which were
these: Eat, This is my body. Drink, This is my blood: they should say,
what do we eat flesh and drink blood? and therefore they should be troobled.

Note that he says, that the Apostles would have said, whi do we eat flesh
Trooble of the Apost. should have been because they knew they should eat
very flesh.
and drink blood? In the which words he does plainly express their faith
that they believed yt to be flesh and blood. And because they did certenlie
believe yt to be flesh and blood, and that they should so have received yt, yt
might have been a cause to trooble them. Therefore Chrysostom adds: Ac ideo
perturbarentur. And therefore they should be troobled. Therefore, that is, because
they should eat the flesh, and drink the blood of a man. Fot that is the
cause that Chrysostom does assign, of their trooble.

That which follows also much helps the declaracion of this matter,
(says Chysostom) did speak of these things before many for the words
alonelie were offended. In that he says that they were offended for the
words alone, he gives us to understand, that the Apostles should not now
have be^ offended so, but for the doing, that where Christ before did speak of
the giving of his flesh, now he did both speak of yt, and give yt in deed.
And so in the receipt of yt in deed, they should have been offended. But
(says Chrysostom) that that might not happen, he drank first, that they
animated, and comforted by his example, might with a quiett mind, neither
thinking yt strange neither loathsome, receive the mysteries, in the which (as
a mystery requires) was hidden a thing not open to senseis, which was the
body of Jesus Christ. Now ye have heard the mind of Chrysostom upon the
words of Christ, and how he understands them you may perceive, and by
the same also you may know both how he did believe, and how also the
Apostles, who first took this mystery at Christ's hand, did believe.

And now forasmoche as I have tarried long upon Chrysostom (but not Sedulius,
who at this time is joined to Chrysostom, Sedul. in 11 prim. Cor.
as his yockefelowe, to testify the true understanding of Christ's words in
the latin church, as Chrysostom has done in the greek church. Thus he
says Accipite, hoc est corpus meu^. quasi dixisset Paulus: Cauete ne illud
corpus A plain place for M. Iuell.
indigne comedatis, du^ corpus Chisti est. Take, this is my body, as though
Paul had said, Beware that ye eat not that body unworthily, forasmohe as
yt is the body of Christ. Thus mochehe.

Who expownding the words of Christ uttered by S. Paul to the Corinthians
does by express words give us to understand the^ in their propre sense, as
speaking of the very body, and of no figure or trope. For if they were so to
be understood, this learned man taking upon him the office of an expositoure,
and so to expownde the words of Christ, and the mening of S. Paul, in the
alleging of them, would have taught now that theie are to be understood by
a figure, as an expositour aught to do. But forasmohe as he teaches that they
are vndestanded of Christ's body, as in opening S. Sedulius commended.
of Christ are to be taken simply, as teaching us that Christ and S. Paul
spoke of the very body and not of the bare figure of yt. This man was both
learned and ancient, not much above four hondreth years after Christ who as
by learning he was not void of good knowledge: so by auncientie he was not
void of true faith. Wherefore we must needs confess, that this doctrine is
according to the true faith, and so consequently acknowledge that yt is the
true faith to believe Christ's very body in the Sacrament.

Thus, Reader, thowe hauest heard these two noble men of Christ's Parliament
The Procla^er must subscribe to the catholic doctrine of the Church if he will
keep promise.
house openinge to us the enacted truth of the understanding of Christ's
words, both of them testifieng the presence of Christ's body by the same
words, and no one title of the Adversaries figures and signs, and that so
plainly and evidently, that methinke the Proclamer shall do me wrong if he
subscribe not to this truth, for somoche as he has promised so to do upon
the seight of any one plain place in scripture, Council able with all his
engines, and false shifts that he had to withstand his force.

THE SIX AND FIFTETH CHAP. ABIDES, in the exposition of the same words by
Theophilus and Leo.
NOw (gentle Reader) coming toward the end of these famous and noble men of
Christ's higher house, of Parliament, I mien of soche as were within six
hondreth years after Christ, I trust thowe wilt not fainte to proceade and see
the end. And to thy more ease, I also, as a man travailing in iourneie and
coming toward the end, being desierouse of the same takes courage to him,
and makes the more have to atteign his desire: Even so I now drawing to the
end, will be shorter then I have been, and so make have that I may obtein
that, that I desire.

And now of those fathers that remain Theoplnlus Archibishoppe of Alexandria,
Origin his heresic.
shall be the first that in our matter shall give his testimony. This man
writing against Origin, for that he said that the deuells shall be saved at
Theop. Alexand. li. 2. pasch.
the last, says thus. Consequens est, vt qui priora susceperit, suscipiat and
quae sequuntur. Et qui pro Doemonibus Christum dixerit crucifigi, ad ipsos
quoque dicendum suscipiat, Hoc est corpus meum, and accipite, Hic est sanguis
meus. Si enim pro Daemonibus crucifigitur (vt nouorum dogmatum assertor
affirmat) quod erit priuilegium, aut quae ratio, vt soli homines corpori eius
sanguinique communicent, and non Daemones quoque proquibus in passione
sanguinem fuderit: Yt is consequent, that he that receaueth the first things,
should also receive those things that follow. And he that does say Christ
to be cruicified for Deuels, allow also to be said unto the^: This is my body,
and Take, this is my blood. For if Christ shall be crucified also for Deuells,
as the auoucher of new doctrines does affirm, what shall be the privilege,
or what reason that only men should communicate the body and blood of him,
and not Deuells also for the which in his passion he did shed his blood?
hitherto Theoph.

Who improuing the opinion of Origin before mentioned, says that if the body
of Christ should suffer for Deuells, and his blood should be shed for the^,
then unto the^ he should have said, as he has to his Apostles, and all
faithful men: Take, eat, This is my body, Take and drink, This is my blood.
Which argument, as yt does confute the error of Origin, for that yt is meit
that all they that be partakers of the redemption purchaced by the body and
blood of Christ, should also be soche, as to who^ in time convenient, yt
Deuells be not redeemed by Christ's passion, but if they might receive him
spirituallie they should be partakers of his merittes.
might be said: Take eat, This is my body. Take drink, This is my blood.
Which thing to Deuells is not said: so also yt does impugn the error of our
Adversary in that that no mention being made of figures and tropes, the words
of Christ be left in their own propre sense, teaching us that we must take and
eat, his very body, and drink his very blood.

And that they do so teach us by the mind of this author, the words that
follow in his second argument do well prove. For the better perceaving
whereof, understand first (as the truth of the catholic faith is) that
Deuells be not redeemed by the passion of Christ, neither be they, nor can be
partakers of the virtue and benefitt of the same. Now to receive Christ blood
excludes an other, and the legal solemnity, when yt is changed,

For the better understanding of this saing of the author, yt is to be
observed that he does compare the solemnity of the old judicial Passover to
the new Passover solemnly begone by Christ in his last supper. Which thing
may well be perceived by the last words of the author, where he says as
the conclusion of all that he had before spoken: and legalis festiuitas, dum
mutatur, impletur: And the legal solemnity, when yt is changed, is
fulfilled. The legal solemnity, was the feast of the Paschall lamb. This
feast was changed and then fullfilled, when Christ in stead of that lamb
being the figure, made his solemn feast, and gave his own body and blood,
the body and blood of the right, and very true lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the world, of which matter more is said in the first
book. In the which feast (says the author) that the shadows should give
place to the body, and the images should cease in the presence of the
truth, the old observance is taken away with a new sacrament. Mark then,
in the legal solemnity was the shadow: in Christ's supper the body, in the
legal solemnity were the Images: in Christ's feast was the presence of the
truth, that is,

See ye not now then what is in Christ's supper? Is there not the body of the
shadow, and not the only shadow? Is there not the very thing and not the
image? Is not the body of the shadow In Christ's supper is the very body
and not the shadow.
and the very thing of the image the body and blooode of Chrysts Then the
very body and blood of Christ be in his supper. Thus may ye perceive what
he meant, when he said that Christ did ordein the Sacrament of his body and
blood, not a Sacrament void of his body and blood, but a Sacrament
containing his body and blood.

Will ye see this again plainly taught? This author says, that the old
observance is taken away with a new Sacrament. But what is this Sacrament? Yt
is a sacrament, that is a sacrifice removing and ending the sacrifice of the
Paschall lamb, and others of that nature. Yt is a Sacrament wherein is blood
excluding the blood of legal sacrifices. Hostia in hostiam transit, sanguis
sanguinem excludit, one sacrifice passes into an other sacrifice: one blood
excludes an other blood. The sacrifice of the old law passes into the
sacrifice of Christ's body and there ends, and the blood of Christ excludes
and puts away the blood of the sacrifice of the old law, and so is the
sacrifice of that blood ended. Christ in his supper did not institute a bare
Sacrament only


Thus may you perceive, that when this author said, that Christ ordained
the Sacrament of his body and blood, that he meant not only the institucion
of a bare Sacrament, but also the consecracion of the body and blood of
Christ lieng hidden under the forms of bread and wine in the same Sacrament.
Which ordeinance and consecracion was done by the words of Christ, when he
said: Take, eat, This is is my body. And Take, drink, this is my blood.
And so the words teach the very presence of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament, and not a naked figure.

If thus much satissie not the reader forsomoch as is here said of and upon to
the beginning of this process upon the words of the Supper, and he

THE SEVEN AND FIFTETH CHAP. PROceadeth in the exposition of the same words
by saint Cyrill and saint Gregory.
THough yt be much that is already said upon these sewe words of Christ,
and may well suffice to teach the truth of this matter: yet that the
arrogancy of the Proclamer may be beaten down, and his untruth against gods
truth well perceived, we shall yet bring in one or two cooples mo of the
higher house of Christ's Parliament, and then descend to other of the lower
house.

Of the higher house there yet remains holy Cyrill, whose faith in the
Sacrament, although yt may well be known to us by his many and sondrie
sentences both in the first book, and in this upon the vi. of S. John
alleged: yet that the faith of the catholic Church may be discerned from
error and heresy, with which titles some heretics would defame the same, we
will hear him teach us the faith that ought to be had and given to the words
of Christ, and how we shall understand them, even as he taught Calosyrius, to
whom he wrote upon the words of Christ in this manner: Non dubites, an hoc
verum sit, eo manifest dicente. Hoc est corpus meum: sed potius suscipe verbum
Cirill ad Calosyriu^. Christ's words manifest and without doubt.
saluatoris in side. Cum enim sit veritas, non mentitur. Doubt not whether this
be true or no, seeing that he manifestly says: This is my body: But raither
receive the word of our Savior in faith. For lie forasmoch as he is tureth,
he lies not.

Weigh these few words of S. Cyrill well (gentle Reader) and first that he
wills Calosirius not to doubt whether this that Christ manifestly said:
This is my body: be true or no. For in that he willed him and by him all
chrystians not to doubt, what clls wills he but that al error, heresy,
opinion, This is my body, S. Cyrill she weth the Proclamer plain words.
which words he says be manifest. If they be manifest, then they have no
obscure sense: then they must be taken in the sense that manifestly lies open
before us. That sense is the gra^maticall sense. Then the figurative sense is
taken away. For that sense, as the words be now spoken, is not manifest,
but obscure. Then also must the Proclamer subscribe. For by the judgment of
S. Cyrill the words of Christ be manifest. If they be manifest, as
undoubtedly they be, then there is one scripture that manifestly teaches the
presence of Christ's body.

Again saint Cyrill says, that forasmoche as Christ is the truth, he lies
not: but he taking the bread and wine, said: This is my body. Therefore he
being the truth and lieng not, the things were as he said, then were they
his body and blood. For so said he that they were. If the bread and wine, he
saing, This is my body. This is my blood: were not made by his almighty
power and word the body and blood of Christ (these words being spoken by
demo^stracio^ of certain singular things in nature remain still in their nature
and substances, and be but figures of Christ's

Forasmoche as my cheef purpose is to help and stay them in their faith that
be unlearned, to whom quiddities in learning be raither trooblesom then
pleasant or profitable, I have determined not to dispute with the Proclamer in
any quidditie, or else I would somewhat have said to him, for The Proclamer to
disgrace our faith plaieth with indiuidu^ vagum.
that yt likes him to dally, and to ask where we find that this word (hoc)
in english (this) poincteth not the bread, but indiuiduum vagum. For if yt
shall be his fantasy to disgrace the truth before the common people by plaing
with some quidditie, that they can not understand, he may so soen disgrace our
faith in the holy and blessed Trinity. For if he list so to play, he might
move matter of the distinction and relacion of the persons, and by soche toieng
bring the people to stagger in their faith in the blessed Trinity, as by this
mockery of the demonstracion, he would make them fall from their People are
simply to be taught not with Quiddities.
full Christ, God and man, after the consecracion, which (as before is
declared) is done by the secrett power of God, by the work of the holy Ghost
at the pronunciacion of Christ's words by his sufficient mynister, is
verily, reallie, substanciallie, and naturally present in the Sacrament, and
not to be troobled with demonstracions with accidents, with substances, with
placing of that body circumscriptiuelie, definitiuelie, by the manner of
substance, or by the manner of quantity. For these matters are for learned men
to This is my body, yt must needs be as he said, and so simply we must
believe the body and blood of Christ, according Cyrillus ibidem.
to his word to be present in the Sacrament.

Which thing, as he said here that Christ manifestly said: This is my
body: So he manifestly in the same epistle after a few lines, does open and
Christ turns the bread into his own very flesh.
declare to be true, where he thus writes: Ne horreremus carne^ et sanguine^
apposita sacris altaribus, co^descende^s Deus nostris fragilitatibus, instuit
oblatis vim vitae, co^uerte^s ea in veritate^ propriae carnis, vt corpus vitae
quasi quodda^ seme^ viuificatiuu^ inueniatur in nobis That we should not loath
flesh and blood set upon the holy aultars, God condescending to our
fragilities has powered into the things offered the converting or turning them
into his very own flesh, that the body of life may be fownde in us, as a
certain quickening seed.

For that I have upon this place of Cyrill said something allreadie, I will
now no more but note unto you, how manifestly, how apertlie, and how
plainly he teaches us not only that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament:
but also the means how yt is there, which is that God turns the bread set
upon the holy aulanrs into his very flesh. After this he renders to us two
Two causes why the substance in the Sacr. being flesh appears not.
causes of the goodness of God toward us, and showed in this Sacrament the
one is, that though yt be flesh in deed: yet (as Euthymius, and Theophilact
also do say) God considering or condescending to our infirmities, makes yt
not to appear unto us that that yt is in deed, but yt appears still to us as
yt was before, as bread and wine. The other cause why we receive the very
flesh of Christ (though not in the form of flesh) is, says Cyrill, that the
body of Christ, which in an other place he calls the body of life, might
be in our bodies, as the seed of life, to communicate life unto us, and

Now if the Sacrament were but a figure, and not the body of Christ, as the
Adversary says, how could Cyrills saing be true, that God turns the
offered things into his flesh? Again if in the Sacrament we receive The flesh
of Christ received in the Sacr. is the seed of everlasting life.
not the body of Christ, how then stands Cyrills sainge, that the body of
Christ, to the intent yt may be the seed of life is fownde in us? Yt may then
well be perceived, that the doctrine of the Adversary teaching that Christ's
body and blood be not in the Sacrament, is pestilent, perniciouse and untrue,
not only in that yt is repugnant to the doctrine of this holy Father, and
others before alleged, but also to the very word of Christ, who plainly
says: This is my body, and the Adversary says, yt is not his body But a
figure of his body.

But yt is time that we hear S. Grogorie whom we have appoincted to ioin with
S. Cyrill, to declare what was the faith of the latin church in his days. Thus
he writes: Debemus itaque praesens seculum, vel quia iam conspicimus de
fluxisse, tota mente contemnere, quotidiana Deo lachrimarum sacrisicia,
quotidianas carnis Grog. li. 4 dialog. ca. 58.
and sanguinis eius hostias immolare. Haec namque singulariter victima ab
aeterno interitu animam saluat, quae illam nobis mortem Vnigeniti per mysterium
reparat. Qui licet resurge^s ex mortuis iam non moritur, and mors ei vltra non
dominabitur: tamen in seipso immortaliter, atque incorruptibiliter viuens, pro
nobis iterum in boc mysterio sacrae oblationis immolatur, Eius quippe ibi
corpus sumitur, eius caro in populi salutem partitur, eius sanguis non iam in
manus infidelium, sed in ora fidelium funditur. Hinc ergo pensemus, quale sit
pro nobis hoc sacrificium, quod pro absolutione nostra passionem Vnigeniti
filii sui imitatur. Quis enim fidelium habere dubium possit in ipsa
immolationis hora ad sacerdotis vocem caelos aperiri? Daily sacrifice of
Christ's body and blood is to be ofred.
in illo Jesus Christi mysterio Angelorum Choros adesse? summis ima sociari:
terrena coele stibus iungi? vnum quoque ex visibilibus, and inuisibilibus
fieri? We aught therefore, forasmoche as we see this present world to have comed
to nothing, with all owre mind to contemn yt, and to offer unto God the
daily sacrifices of tears, the daily sacrifices of his flesh, and blood.
This singular sacrifice saves the soul from everlasting destruction, which
renews unto us by mystery the death of the only begotten Son. Who
allthough rising from death, dies no more, and death shall never There truly
his body is received, his flesh to the health of the people is given abroede:
his not blood is now shed, not into the hands of the unfaithful: but into
the mouths of the faithful. By this the^ let us weigh what manner of sacrifice
this is for us, which for our deliverance does allwais follow the passion of
the only begotten Son. What faith full man can doubt in the time of that
sacrificing, at the word of the priest, the heavens to be opened, in that
mystery of Jesus Christ? companies of Angels to be present? unto high
things low things to be coopled? to heavenly things earthly things to be
joined? one thing also of invisible and visible things to be made? Thus much
S. Gregory.

Yt may perchance be said, that though this place of S. Gregory does much
prove the very presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, yet yt teaches
not the understanding of Christ's words: This is my body: which is the
matter that I now take in hand to declare, Truth yt is, that the words of
Christ be not here recited by express words, but they are hear understood
and the true understanding of them is also here settfurth for the understanding
whereof I first note unto you this sentence What faithful man (says he) can
doubt in that time of immolacion at the voice of the priest the heavens to be
opened etc. what voice of the priest yt is at which the heavens be opened, the
companies of angels be present: high things are coopled to low things: but
that voice of the words of Christ spoken by the priest, in the person of
Christ: This is my body, This is my blood? For unto that time (says S.
Ambrose) the priest uses The heaue^lie body of Christ is io^ned to the
earthly forms of bread and wire at the pronouincing of the words of Christ
his own words, but then he uses not his own words but the words of
Christ. at the which voice all these wonderful things are done. S. Gregory
then by this voice of the priest understands these words of Christ uttered
by the priest. The true understanding of which words he teaches when he
says: that at the speaking and pronunciacion of them, unto high things, low
things are coopled: unto heavenly things, earthly things are joined What be
these high things and heavenly things coopled and joined to low things and
eartlie things, but the heavenly and gloriouse hodie and blood of our Savior
Christ? which by his divine power turning the substances of bread and wine
into the substance of the same his body and Jrenaeus li. 4. ca. 34.


After this manner the holy martyr Irenaeus did settfurth the holy Sacrament
for he says: Qui est a terra panis precipiens vocationem Dei iam non communis
panis est, sed Eucharistia, ex duabus constans rebus, terrena, and coelesti.
The bread, which is of the earth, receiving the vocacion of God (that is the
words of consecracion) is now not common bread, but (Eucharistia) a good
grace of God being Amb. ora. prepar. ad Missam.
compact of two things, earthly and heavenly. S. Ambrose also has even the
same words, that S. Ghregorie has, saing: vbi summa imis iungu^tur. Where
high things be joined to low things. Heavenly and earthly things os the
Sacr. discussed what they be, by conference of thaduersar. doctrine,


Yt shall much help the setting forth of the truth, if we may, conferring
with the doctrine of the adversaries, discuss what is this heavenly or high
thing that is joined in the Sacrament, with the eartly thing, And here we
must according to the doctrine of Irenaeus, first confess and agree, that
these two things, of the which the Sacrament is made, are two permanent

Now the adversaries doctrine seking by all means to displace and remove
Christ from the Sacrament feigneth many things to be the heavenly part of
the Sacrament, which in deed will not stand with the doctrine of Irenaeus. In
some place yt says that the grace of God which comes to the Grace is not one
of the parts of the Sacr. but the effect.
receauers of the Sacrament, is the heavenly part of the Sacrament. This can
not stand as part, for grace is the effect of the Sacrament, and not the part.
And grace therefore must be and is in the receauer and not in the Sacrament, as a
part thereof. For if grace were in the Sacrament as a part of the Sacrament,
then either unworthy men receiving the Sacrament, receive grace also, (which
is not to be said) or else yt must be said, that forasmoche as they receive
not grace, they receive no Sacrament: for a thing is received when yt is
wholly received. And thus shall they be uncertain when the Sacrament is
ministered.

Of some yt may be said that because the Sacrament is called the bread of
thanks giving, that thanks to God is the heavenly part of the Sacrament.
Thanks giving is not the one part of the Sacr.
This also can not be. For this is well known to all men that have but reason,
that thanks giving is either in him that gives them, or in him that receaueth
them, and not in the bread, for yt neither gives nor receaueth thanks.

If they say, because, S. August. says, Accedit verbu^ ad elementu^, et fit
Sacramentu^, that is, the word comes to the element, and yt is made a
Sacrament: The word is not that one part of the Sacrament.
that therefore the word is the heavenly part of the Sacrament. That also can
not be said of the Sacrament allreadie consecrated for the word is raither
the cause of the Sacrament, then the part, because the word is not a
permanent thing but these parts of the Sacrament must be two permanent or
constant things as Irenaeus says,

If they will flee to this shifte and say, that though the word be not a
Sanctificacion of the creaturs cannot be the heavenly part of the Sacram. by
the doctrine of the aduer.
permanent thing: yet the sanctrification that is done in the bread by the
word remains, and that is the heavenly part of the Sacrament. This also
even by their own learning can not stand. For Oecolampadius and Cranmer, and
all the rabble of that Sect teach constantly that dumb things be not
partakers of sanctificacion.

Now what else they can feign to maintein their evil matter I can not devise
but of these no one will serve. Wherefore leaving them, we will hearewhat the
catholic faith teaches to be the heavenly part of the Sacrament that Jesus
Christ living in himself immortallie, and incorruptiblie, is offered for us in
the holy mystery, where The heaue^lie part of the blessed Sacrament what yt is
his body is received, where his flesh is given abroad to the people, where the
blood is not shed upon the hands of the unfaithful, but into the mouths
of the faithful. Here may you see the heavenly part of the Sacrament what
yt is. Yt is very body and blood of Christ that is given in the holy
mystery to the people yt is the high thing coopled to low things: yt is the
heavenly thing joined to earthly things: yt is that one invisible thing that
is made one with visible things.

And here note that this place of S. Gregory can not be wrested to the only
spiritual receiving of Christ's body, but yt must be understand of the
corporal receipt. For he says, that the blood of Christ in the Sacramen
Corporal receiving of the body and blood of Christ avouched by S. Greg.
is powered into the mouths of the faitfull, which manner of receipt is
corporal, even the receipt of Christ's very real and substanciall blood.
The other receipt is only in the soul, and can not be received of all one
blood that was shed upon the hands of the unfaithful, and into the mouths
of the faithful. That, that was shed upon the

But of both parts distinctlie saint Bernarde, whom only at this time I will
produce, does very learnedly speak, treacting of the Sacrament in this manner
Quemadmodum species ibi videntur, quorumres, vel substantiae ibi esse non
creduntur: sic res veraciter, and substantialiter creditur, cuius species non
cernitur. videntur enim species panis and vini, and sabstantia panis and vini
non creditur. Creditur autem substantia Bernar. de Coen. Dom.
corporis, and sanguinis Christi, and tamen species non cernitur. As the forms
be there seen whose things or substances be not believed, there to be: so a thing
is verily and substanciallie believed, whose form is not seen. For the form
of bread and wine is seen, and the substance of bread and wine is not believed:
Form of bread seen, the substance not believed substance of Christ's body
believed, the for me not see^.
the substance of the body and blood of Christ is believed, and yet Quod aute^
videmus species est panis and vim, quod autem sub specie illa credimus, verum
corpus est, and verus Christi sanguis. quod pependit in cruce, and qui fluxit
de latere. That that we see is the form of bread and wine: but that we believe
under the form is the very body and very blood of Christ, that did hang
upon the cross and that slowed out of his side. Thus he,

Now ye have seen the two parts of the Sacrament so plainly expressed, as
nothing can be desired more plain. In the Sacrament (says S. Bernarde) be the
forms of bread and wine, and the substance of the body and The body and
blood of Christ the heaue^lie part, the forms of bread and wine the earthly
part of the Sacr.
blood. These two things be the two parts of the Sacrament. The body and
blood of Christ be the heavenly part: the forms of bread and wine be the
earthly part. The body and blood of Christ be the high things the forms of
bread and wine be the low things. These heavenly and high things of
Christ's body and blood, and the low and earthly things of the forms of
bread and wine joined together make the Sacrament according to the sainges of
the holy martyr Irenaeus, of S. Ambrose, and S. Gregory.

And now supposing that the minds of these two noble men of Christ's
Parliament house, I mien S. Cyrill and S. Gregory, be fully opened, and
declared as touching the understanding of the words of Christ's supper,
which in all poinctes agrees with the rest, I will leave them, and call in
the last coople of this company of the higher house.

THE EIGHT AND FIFTETH CHAP. ENDS the exposition among the eldest Fathers by
Euthymius, and Isidorus.
THough yt has been a painful work for me to gather so many authors of the
eldest Fathers of Christ's Church, upon this one text of Christ: yet yt
comfort me and releiueth me of my pains to see and behold the mercy and
goodness Ismaell would persecute, and vex the childeren of Sara and Isaac,
did in time of peace provide weapons, and in time of Sara the children of the
Church might have plenty of weapons, and provision to withstand the
adversaries and defend their mother.

In the time of peace as concerning the matter of the holy Sacrament, when no
controversy was moved upon yt, his holy Spirit directed the pens of a
nombre of holy men then to write that, that now (as ye have perceived and yet
more shall) defends the holy faith of Christ and his spouse the Church. of
the which there yet remains one named Euthimius, a famous man in the Greek
Church, who as he is ancient, learned and holy: so is his weapon very
sharp against the Adversary, yt will in deed perce the false patched coat of
Christ's enemy in this matter of the Sacrament Euthym. in 26. Math.
Thus he writteh: Sicut vetus testamentum hostias and sanguinem habebat: ita
sane and nouum, corpus videlicet et sanguine^ Domini. Non dixit autem: Haec
sunt signa corporis mei, and sanguinis mei: sed, Haec sunt corpus meum, and
sanguis meus. Oportet ergo non ad naturam eorum quae proponuntur respicere, sed
ad virtutem eorum. Quemadmodu^ enim supernaturaliter assumptam carnem
deificauit (si ita loqui liceat) ita and haec inessabiliter transmutat in ipsum
vinificum corpus suum, and in gratiam ipsorum. Habent autem similitudmem
quandam, panis ad corpus, and vinum ad sanguinem. Nam and panis and corpus
terrea sunt: vinum autem and sanguis aerea sunt and calida. Et quemadmodum
panis confortat: ita and Christi corpus hoc facit, ac magis etiam, corpus and
animam sanctificat. Et sicut vinum Laetificat: ita and sanguis Christi hoc
facit, and insuper praesidium efficitur. As the old testament had sacrifices
and blood: so truly has the new testament also, that is, the body and
blood of our Lord. He did not say: These be signs Plain sainges for the
Proclamer
of my body and blood, but these things be my body and blood. We must
therefore not look to the nature of those things that be settfurth but to the
virtue of them. For as he did supernaturallie deifie (if a man may so speak)
the slesh that he took upon him: Even so does he vnspeakeablie transmute
these things into the same his quickening body, and into his own preciouse
blood, and into the grace of them. The bread has a certain similitude to the
body, and the wine to the blood. For both the bread and the body be of the
earth. But the wine and blood be of the aier and hot. And Euthym.

I will not now trooble you with many notes here, the author is so plain of
himself that he neadeth not to be noted. And yet every sentence is worthy to
be noted. But for that that is to the purpose of our process here, namely
for the having of the true understanding of Christ's words I can not pass,
but wish thee (good reader) if thowe hauest noted yt, yet to turn back and
note yt again, that the wicked exposition of the Adversary is by express and
direct words denied and rejected. So sownd and good Figurative gloss of the
Sacramentaries flatly demed.
is that doctrine that an holy father writing above a thousand years past by
the computacion of some does flatly deny yt. The Adversary confowndeth the
text of Christ, and says this is a figure of my body: This learned Father
expowndeth the words of Chyst, and says: Christ says not these be signs
of my body and blood, but these be my body and blood. And to remove all
cauills (says this author) did supernaturally deifie the flesh that he took
upon him: even so vnspeakeablie does he transmute these things into his own
very body, and into his own very preciouse boode.

O merciful God what is the maliciouse blindness of these men, that see their
doctrine confuted a thousand years agon, and yet arrogantlie persist in yt, and
to the increase of their damnacion, labor to draw many souls with them to
withstand so manifest a truth. If the Proclamer will not Enthymius with a
plain negative denies the proclamers assirmatiut.
say that this is a plain sentence, which by a plain negative denies his
affirmative, and teaches that the sacrament is not a sign or a figure of
Christ's body, but the body yt self, where the Adversary says yt is a
figure and not the body: I can not but say that his seight fails him, being
corrupted with a very evil humor, so that he can not judge betwixt rough
and plain, crooked and straight.

And here again consider that this holy father Euthymius writes these words
upon the words of Chyrst, expownding them to give us the true mening, sense
and understanding of them. Wherefore we may very well conclude, that the
words of Christ are to be understood without figure or trope, accordingly
as this learned ancient has taught.

Perchaunche the Proclamer will say that although this author denies a
figure in Christ's words: yet he does not as by him is requested in his
proclamacion, say plainly by express words that Christ's natural body is
in the Sacrament. To see the vanity of this shift, let us search how many
things be called Christ's body, and by applicacion we shall perceive, that yt
can not otherwise be but that this author speaks of the natural body of
Christ.

There be four things that be called the body of Christ: The figure, the
Church, the meritt, fruit, or virtue of his passion, and his body natural.
Four things called the body of Christ.
S. Paul calls the body of Christ. For to all men yt is evident, that the
Sacrament is not the Church, other wise then because the Sacrament is a figure
of the Church.


To be short, where a thing is spoken of and if yt can not be applied to the
figure of the thing, yt must needs be applied to the thing yt self, specially
Plain terms for proof of real presc^ce.
when the circumstance shall also fully prove the same, as here yt does. For
the transmutacion of the bread and wine into the thing, and these terms: his
own very body, and his own very blood, with the comparisons of the
propreties of the bread and wine to the propreties of the body and blood of
Christ, makes the matter so plain, that yt can not be but confessed so to be
but as a man in a bringht Sun shining day will maliciously say that the
Sun shines not.

But what do I stand so long upon so clear a place? Yt is time that the other
that shall declare the faith of the latin Church be produced, who shall be
Isidore. This Isidore, although he be not with in six hondreth years of
Jsidorus commended.
Christ: yet he is very near, For he lived the year of our Lord 626, I have
yet produced him to make up the coople with Euthymius, both that he is the
eldest of the latin Church of them that remain, and treact of the Isydor. de
offic. eccle. cap. 18.
was risen in the matter of the holy Sacrament. Wherefore I might produce him
as a sufficient and a meet witness in this matter. this is his testimony.
Sacrificium quod a Christianis Deo offertur primum Christus Deus noster and
magister instituit, quando commendauit Apostolis corpus and sanguinem suum
priusquam traderetur Christ instituted the sacrifice of fred of the Chrystia^s.
sicut legiturin Euangelio: Accepit Jesus panem and calicem, and benedicens
dedit eis. The sacrifice that is offered of the chrystians unto God, Christ our
Lord and Master did first institute, when he gave to his Apostles his body
and blood, before he should be betrayed, as yt is redd in the gospel: Jesus
took the bread and the cup, and blessing them gave them unto them. Thus
Isidor.

In this brief saing of this author ye learn not that Christ gave unto his
Apostles a figure of his body and blood, but that he gave them his body The
blessing of Christ of great force and power.
and blood. We be here also advertised of the time, that yt was before he
should be betrayed (as yt is readde in the Gospel) which was in his last
supper, at which time (as this author makes mention) he took the bread and
the cup, and blessing them, gave them to this Disciples. Great Matthew. 14
Joan. 6. Matthew. 15
effect answerablie great. He blessed the five loaves, and two fishes and by
that blessing they so multiplied as they fed five thousand people. And when
they were satisfied there were gathered up twelve baskettes full of the
fragme^tes that they had left. He blessed vii loaves and a few fishes, and by
the Effect of Christ's blessing of the bread
power of his blessing they were sufficient not only to feed and satisfy
four thousand people, but also to fill seven baskettes after they had done.
Great therefore, I say, is the power of Christ's blessing. Wherefore taking in his
last supper the bread and the cup and blessing them, he wrought there by
soche and so great an effect, the he said: This is my body: This is my
bloooe. This great effect is aunswerable to so great a power. If by this
blessing he had made the bread and wine only figures of his body and blood,
and not his very body and blood, the effect in respect had been very small.
For many Joan. 3. To say Christ made but a figure of his body by blessing
the bread is a derogacion of his power and honor
things were figures without the express blessing of God: The lambs the
calves, the oxen that were slain in the law of Moses. The brazen Serpent, as
Christ him self testifies, was a figure of himself exalted upon the Bishopp
Isidore, let us say as he says, that Christ gave to his Apostles after he
had blessed the bread and wine, not now bread and wine in substance, but the
body and blood of himself, according to the truth of his own saing: This is
my blood. As who might say, before I blessed yt, yt was bread Amb. li. 4 de
Sac. c. 4 Ang. de verbis Do. sermon. 28. Consent of doctrine among the holy and
ancient sathers.
and wine: but now that I have blessed yt, and by my blessing changed yt now
I say to you: Take and eat: This is my body: Take and drink this is my
blood.

This like manner of understanding (as is before declared) has both S. Ambrose,
and S. Augustine, when they said: Non eraet corpus Christi ante consecrationem,
sed post consecrationem dico tibi, quod iam corpus est Christi. Yt was not the
body of Christ before the cosecracion: but after the consecracion, I sai to

Thus now ye see the consonant testimony of this Father of the latin Church,
with Euthymius of the greek Church, and of these two with all the rest, and of
all among them selves, which all as yt were with one mouth, as Tertullian only
excepted, who yet so does not after the manner of the Adversaries doctrine, but
after the manner of the catholic doctrine, which (as there at large is
declared) teaches that the Sacrament is both the figure and the thing yt self.

Now therefore (Reader) seeing thowe see so great consent and agreement of so
many ancient learned Fathers, even of the eldest of the Church of the which
diverse have testified their faith by their bloodes, and be holy Let all the
Protesta^tes bring forth if they can, when any contrie did wholly ope^lie and
quiethe profess soche religon as they now preach.
man, or French man, Germain, Flemming or Saxon. that when thie contrie first
received Christ, yt received this faith, in this yt has continued, in this thy
fathers were baptized, in this they lived, in this the most part of them died,
and in this, hope is, that they be saved. Bring forth if thou can, if ever
(till now of late days) thy contrie professed soche faith (if yt may be
called faith) if ever yt used soche manner of religion, if ever they did so
often change their profession. If no soche president can be showed, if this
way be a way Be not carried away with diverse and strange doctrines. Forgett
not that when Luther first began his pestilent heresy, he acknowleged the
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, so did his disciples Heb. 13
Diversities of religion in these days how they began.
also, till within few days his Disciples Carolstadius, Zuinglius, and
Oecolampadius, fell from him, and began a new way, and taught that Christ's
body was not in the Sacrament. Besides these, out of Luther came the
Anabaptists, and a nombre moo of other sects so that in diverse contries, so
many free cities: so many Dukedomes, so many lordships, almost so many
faithes, or raither opinions, and so many diverse countenances of religions.
In England in the time of King Henry the eight, there began a new countenance
of religion: In the first year of the reign of Mutacions of religion in
England.
his Son King Edward, an other countenance: within two years after ter
even in the time of the same king his reign, an other countenance.

Perceive then that the doctrines that be now settfurth by the Proclamer, as
they be straung, so be they diverse, so be they variable, so be they Europe.
Remember again that (as S. Paul says) God is not the God 1. Cor. 14.
of dissension but of peace. Where then thou seist peace, thither diuerte, there
setle thy self: there abide: among these holy Fathers thou seist peace in this
matter of the Sacrament: among the other, there is discord as thou hauest
perceived in the xli. chapter of this book, leave the one and cleave to the
other, and the God of peace be with thee.

THE NINE AND FIFTETH CHAPTER begins the exposition of the same text by the
fathers of the later
I Have hitherto used the testimonies of the auncientes and Fathers of Christ's
Church, naming them noble men of the higher house of Christ's Parliament, for
that they be all within or very near sixth hundredth years of Christ, which
the Proclamer, can not refuse, except he will say, as the great heresiark
Luther Luthers proud contempt of holy fathers.
said. Non curo mill Cyprianos, nec mill Augustmos: I care not for a
thousand Cyprians, nor a thousand Augustines. By the testimony of all which
the words of Christ are delivered from the mystie and clowdie figures of the
adversaries and are placed and adourned with the auouching of the bright and
clear presence of Christ's blessed body and blood. And so is the Proclamer
plentifully confuted by soche holy fathers as he himself can not refuse. And
the faith of the catholic Church by the same is as fully maintained and
declared.

And although the Proclamer by Luciferance pride, seems (as yt is in the
english proverb) to correct magnificat, I mien, to correct the Church, and the
faith of the same, and to be a judge upon all the learned men, that have been
these nine hundredth years, and by his judgment without any sufficient
Commission to condemn them, to deface them, and not to esteem their sainges,
learning or authority, wherein he follows the Manichees and other, which for
the mainteinaunce of their heresieswolde accept soche scriptures as they liked,
and soche as they liked not they would refuse. Yet forasmoche as the Church
has allowed them, and their doctrine is agreeable to the elder Fathers: I will
call a company of them, both that their doctrine may be conferred with the
elders before alleged, and so to be approved and also that by them we may
know the enacted truth of the true understanding of The Proclamer mocketh
holy and learned fathers.
Christ's words, in the lower house of Christ's Parliament, whereby the
Aduersarles heresy may be more manifestly confuted, and the faith of the
good Chrystian more confirmed and stayed. And although yt liked the Proclamer
in his high pride to solace himself with the mocking of the learning Siluester,
Isidore, Innocentius the third, Gerson, Durand, Holkot, S. Thomas, Dunce,
Fisher, and other, and made their arguments as foolishlie as he listed,
therbie to commend himself and his doctrine to soche as were light, which yet
was and is discommendable to them that be grave, sobre, A lamentable time to
see preachers in pulpittes mock Saints in heaven.
forsaken. For who is he that is wise, and, as the wiseman says, has his
eyes in his head, that seith not to much arrogancy in that man, that takes
upon him in open audience to deride mock and skorne holy ancient learned
men? of which some of them be Saints in heaven, some of them lived with great
fame of learning above a thousand years agon, some eight or nine hundredth
years agon, some three hundredth years agon or there about. All which are but
babes and punies in his seight.

But I will not intermedle this work of the heigh and great matter of the
Sacrament, with soche vain toies of mockeries, but they shall be reserved to
some other more meit place, as either to a Christenmasse skaffold, and so a
plaier by a plaier, or else to the Paruise in Oxforde, a paruise toie, by a
paruise boie to be answered. Wherefore converting my self to the matter, I will
produce Damascen, as the first and eldest of this company of the lower house,
Propositionis panis, vinum and aqua per inuocationem, and aduentum sancti
Spiritus, supernaturaliter Damascen li. 4 ca. 14.
transmutantur in corpus and sanguinem Christi, and non sunt duo, sed vnum, and
idem. The show bread, the wine and the water by the innocacion and the coming
of the holy Ghost are supernaturallie transmuted into the body and blood of
Christ, and they be not two, but one and the very same.

And after a few words of exhortacion in the same matter, he says thus of
the same bread and wine. Non est figura panis and vinum corporis Bread and
wine not a sigure of the body and blood of Christ
and sanguinis Christi (absit enim hoc credere) sed ipsum corpus Domini
deificatum, ipso dicente, Hoc est meum (non mei corporis figura) sed corpus,
non figura sanguinis, sed sanguis. Et ante hoc, ipsis Iudaeis: Quoniam nisi
manducaueritis carnem filij hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem, non
habebitis vitam in vobis. Caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere est
potus. Proinde omni cum timore and conscientia pura, and indubitabili fide
accedamus. The bread and wine is not a figure of the body and blood of Christ
(God forbid we should believe that) but yt is the very body of our Lord
deified, himself saing: This is, not a figure of my body, but my body, not a
figure of my blood, but my blood. And before this he said to the Jews, that
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
have no life in you. My flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily
drink. Therefore with all fear and pure conscience, and undoubted faith let us
come unto yt.

In these few words of Damascen ye see four things taught: The
transubstanciacion: The presence of Christ's very body and blood, with a
plain denial of the adversaries figure: The applicacion of the sixth chap. of
saint John to these words of Christ: And finally an exhortacion for owre
due coming to the receipt of the same body and blood. Of transubstanciaco^n we
have allreadie spoken, and that by the authority yet the learned Fathers
according to the catholic faith of Christ's

For the which I wish yt to be well noted, that this Author expownding the
words of Christ: This is my body (the seking of the exposition of Figuratine
expositions of the Sacr. slatlie denied.
which words is our trauaill) does plainly by express words deny,
refuse and reject, the fond exposition of the Adversary, and teaches that
these words are to be understood in their propresense. And therefore says,
that yt is not a figure, mening that yt is not a bare figure of a thing absent
in substance, and only present in figure, but yt is (says he) the very
body. And this is not to be ouerpassed, that to this exposition he God
forbid that any man should so believe, which manner of words we use in
matters that be perilouse, daungerouse, and horrible, and matters to godwarde,
where the thing is much offending God, and provoking his heavy displeasure,
ire and indignacio^. Wherbie may be perceived the great danger that is
ensewing to them that so believe, and the great necessity of the right belief,
that is, to believe that the Sacrament is not a bare figure, but the very body
of Christ.

Thus once again to advertise you, ye see that where the Adversary says,
This is my body, that is (says he) a figure of my body: This learned
author says, God for bid you should so believe. Yt is not (says he) a
figure of the body of Christ, but his body: not a figure of the blood of
Christ but his blood in deed. This exposition as yt is dissonaunte and
repugnaunte to the exposition of the Adversaries: so is yt consonaunte and
agreeable to the doctrine and exposition of the elders.

In the next chapter before this, you saw the exposition of Euthymius upon
these words of Christ, not unlike unto this, but altogether like Euth. in 26.
Matt. Doctrine of the Sacramentarie contrary to the sathers.


The third note also makes for the declaracion of this matter that he
alleging the sixth of saint John, refers yt to the Sacrament in the same
sense that he understood Christ's other words, which is, as Theophilact also
upon the same sixth of saint John says, Non figura carnis, sed caro med est.
Not a figure of my flesh but yt is my flesh. So that by these authors the sixth
of S. John pertains to the Sacrament, notwithstanding the contrary saing of
Luther and Oecolampadius, and other of that rabble. In which chapter is promised
the giving not of a figure of his flesh, but his very flesh, And as yt was
there promised verily to be given: so was the same to the accomplishment of

The fourte note also, which is for the due receiving of the Sacrament, gives
also light to the understanding of the presence of Christ's

We have now seen a goodly, and an evident testimony testifieng how
Christ's words were understood in the greek Church: we will likewise hear
one that shall declare the understanding of them in the latin Church. Who shall
be Haymo, who upon these words of Christ writes thus: Expletis solemnijs
veteris Paschae, transit Dominus ad sacramenta noui Paschae demonstranda, Haymo
in 26. Matthew
Postquam coenauit dedit eis panem, and vinum in mysterio videlicet corporis,
and sanguinis sui: Quia enim panis cor hominis confirmat, and vinum anget
sanguinem in homine, merito idem panis in carnem Domini mutatur, and idem vinum
in sanguinem Domini transfertur, non per figuram, neque per vmbram, sed per
veritatem. Credimus enim quia in veritate caro est Christi, similiter and
sanguis. The Solemnities of the old passover being fullfilled, our Lord goes
to show the sacraments of the new Passover. After he had supped he gave them
bread and wine in mystery, Breadchau^ged into the body, and wine into the
blood of Christ not in figur but in truth.
that is of his body and blood. Because bread does make strong the For we
believe that in very deed yt is the flesh of Christ, and likewise that yt is
his blood. Thus much Haymo.

You see now here in the latin Church, also a goodly testimony, and a clear
exposition of Christ's words, so clear and plain, that I shall not need to
trauaill to open the same, but only I have thought good to note to thee,
Reader, the goodly order that this author observes in his exposition. First
he ioneth our new Passover to the old, as the very truth to the figure,
which being in place the figure vanishes away. Wherbie yt is consequent,
that if the Passover which Christ did institute were the truth, which the
old passover did prefigurate, that the new Passover was a true thing in
deed, and not a bare figure. For otherwise should the figure be the figure of
a figure, and not of a truth, which is against the nature of a figure.

And when he had thus joined the truth to the figure, he declares when yt was
done, saing that after he had supped he gave them bread and wine in the
mystery of his body and blood. Then proceading he gives a cause why Christ
used bread and wine in this mystery of his body and blood because (says he)
the material bread comfort the heart, and the material wine increases the
blood, therefore to signify that as these two things do A change in the Sacr.
in truth not in figure.
work there effects in our material bodies: so thy being transmuted and
changed into heavenly bread and wine of Christ's body and blood the bread of
the life, they work the like effect spirituallie in our souls. And
forasmoche as he had said that the bread and wine be turned and changed into
the body and blood of Christ, he immediately teaches how yt is changed.
They are changed (says he) not by figure, nor by shadow, sed per veritatem,
but in very deed, which is asmoche to say, as yt is changed or turned into
the very flesh and blood of Christ in very deed, and not into a bare
Sacramental bread as the Adversary terms is.

Now as I have done with Damasce^, so will I with this author first co^ferr
this dictrine with the doctrine of the elders to see how they agree, and
after, the doctrine of the adversary, both that yt may appear which of the^
Greg. Nissen. sermon. cathec. de diuinis Sacramen.
says that the bread is changed into the body of our Lord, and the wine
into his blood, does not among the elders, the great elder Gregory Nissen
use the like words? Quamobrem (says he) recte nunc etiam Dei verbo
sanctificatum panem, in Dei Verbi corpus credimus immutari. Wherefore we do now
also very well believe the bread that is sanctified by the word of God, to be
changed into the body of the son of God.

See ye not then that the doctrine which Haymo here teaches of the
transmutacion, changing, or turning of the bread into the body of Christ
Tra^substa^ciaco^n, that is, change of bread and wine into the body and
blood of Christ, a matter of faith.
which now the Church terms, Transubstantiacion, is an ancient doctrine
and if you will confer them diligently, ye shall have occasion to think
that this author Haymo did in this matter follow Gregory Nissen, their
sainges be so like. For as Gregory makes this matter of the changing of the
bread into the body of Christ no matter of doubt, or an opinion, but a sure
and certain matter of faith and belief. for he says, Credimus immutari, we
Haymo, when he had said that the bread is changed into the flesh of Christ,
and the wine into his blood, says, Credimus quia in veritate caro est
Christi, similiter and sanguis, we believe that in very deed yt is the flesh of
Christ, and likewise his blood. So that ye may perceive not only a concord
and consent of doctrine betwixt them, but also an imitacion.

And here I wish these wooordes well to be noted, that the unstableness Faith
how yt is decayed in these days.
of men in their faith might be taken away. For the more is the pity, so much
has the Deuell gotten by the work of his ministres, that diverse men in these
days be not ashamed to say, we can not tell what to believe. Other some will
say, I will believe none of them all, until they agree better. as though yt
were sufficient for them to live without faith, and that they might be saved,
without the profession of their faith, forgetting the saing of S. Paul: Sine
fide imposibile est placere Deo. without faith yt is not possible to please
God. And again: Cord creditur ad iusticiam, ore autem confessio fit ad
salutem. The heart believes unto righteousness, but the confession of faith by
Hebr. 11. Romans 10.
Non credimus immutari, This time a time of probacion.
we believe not the bread and wine by the word of God to be changed into the
body and blood of Christ, yet turn yowr eyes to the old ancient church,
have you recourse thither, and see Gregory Nis sen and after him Haymo saing:
Credimus immutari, We believe that the bread and wine be changed into the body
and blood of Christ, and they be now in very deed the flesh of Christ, and
likewise his blood. and so abide in the faith of the ancient church, what
soever is now taught you to the contrary.

By this conference ye may perceive, that Haymo agrees with the ancient
elders, as concerning the changing of the bread and wine into the
Sacramentaries deny that the fathers affirm and affirm that they deny.
body and blood of Christ. If ye will confer him in that he says, that
this change is not done by figure, or shadow, but in very deed: you have
Euthymius and Damascen at hand, which both deny the Sacrament to be the
Adversary denies, and what the Fathers deny, the Adversary affirms. The
holy Fathers affirm that the bread and wine be changed. the

But to conclude for the matter that is here sought, this author speaking
these words as an exposition upon the words of Christ and teaching us, that
the bread and wine be changed into the body and blood of Christ, and that by
no figure, nor shadow, but in very deed, yt is manifest that these words of
Christ, be to be understood without figure, and that they teach us that in
the Sacrament is the very body, and the very blood of Christ in very
deed. Wherefore leaving this as a most plain matter, we will call an other coople.

THE SIXTETH CHAP. PROCEADETP IN the exposition of the same text by
Theophilact,
OF this coople that shall now give there testimony for the true understanding
of Christ's words, Theophilact, as he is the seniour so shall he be the first
that gives testimony Expownding the words Theoph. in 26. Math.
of Christ, thus he writes upon the same words: Dicens: Hoc est corpus meum,
ostendit quod ipsum corpus Domini est panis, qui sanctificatur in altari and
non respondens figura. Non enim dixit. Hoc est figura, sed hoc est corpus meum.
Ineffabili enim operationc transformatur, etia^si nobis videatur panis. Quonia
infirmi, sumus and abhoremus The bread sanctified on the altar is the very
body of Chrysta^d not only a figure.
crudas carnes comedere, maxim hominis carnem, ideo panis quidem apparet, sed
caro est. Saing: This is my body, he does declare that the bread which is
sanctified in the altar is the very boodie of our Lord, and not a figure
answering to yt. For he did not say, This is a figure of my body: but this is
my body, For yt is transformed by an unspeakable operacion, although yt
appear bread. For asmoche as we be weak, and do abhor to eat raw flesh
specially the flesh of a man, therefore yt appears bread, but yt is flesh.
Theophilct.

As they that be obstinate in this heresy against the blessed Sacrament when
they read this exposition, their consciences be, I dare say, touched Four
things plainly avouched by Theoph. against the Sacram.
and pressed with the same to their great grief: even so do I merueill that
they be so sold over to voluntary and maliciouse blindness in heresy, that
seeing not only the true faith and exposition taught so clerelie and
evidently, that they be not able with any good apparent answer to avoid,
will yet stubburnlie to their greuouse damnacion, persist and abide still in
their heresy. But let us veiue the saing of Theophilact. In him we find these
four things taught: First the presence of Christ's very body in the
Sacrament. For he says that the bread that is sanctified in the altar, is
the very 1. Real presence affirmed.
body of our Lord.

The second is a flatt and a plain denial of the figurative speech, that the
Adversary would have in the words of Christ. For this author says 2.
Figure denied.
that Christ did not say: This is a figure of my body: but my body. and so

Thirdelie here is taught how the sanctified bread is made the body
Tra^substa^tiacion anouched.
yt appear bread unto us. In these few words he teaches us three things:
first that the bread is trasformed, which is all one as if he had said
transubstanciated. for in the bread there be two forms, the in ward form, and
the outward form. Now this author says that the outward form of bread
remains still. For he says that yt appears unto us as bread. Yt is
consequent then that seeing here is a transformacion, which is a change of a
form, that the inward form of bread is changed. The inward form of the
bread is the substance of yt ( Substantia and forma being all one) wherefore he
saing that yt is transformed, says that the Church says, that yt is
transubstanciated. The second that he teaches The work of the Sacr. is
miraculouse.
is that transformacion or transubstanciacion is done, ineffabili operatione
with an unspeakable manner of woorking, by which he does both teach that this
change of the bread into the body of Christ is against Oecolampadius, a
wonderful and a miraculouse work, so miraculouse that though we believe

The fourth that is here taught, is why the bread being transformed, yt Form
of bread why yt remains.
does yet still appear bread, as though yt were still bread in substance. yt
is (says the author) because we are weak, and do abhor to eat raw
flesh, cheislie of a man, therefore yt appears bread. So that by this we are
warned of the great goodness of God and mercy toward us, in that he so
mercifully considers our weak state and condescendeth to our infirmity,
and yet as touching the Sacrament, though for gods merciful

Now to keep our order, for that Theophilact is of the lower house, and with
in the compass of the time, that the Adversary prescribes against, Let us
also confer his doctrine with the doctrine of the Fathers, which ca. 55.
be of the higher house to make proofihowe they agree. Where he says that ca.
57.
the bread which is sanctified in the altar is not a figure, but the very
body of Christ, although the Adversary him self may confess that
Chrysostom, by that that is alleged out of him in this book and in many
other places, does likewise plainly and fully confess the same presence of
Christ in Cyrill. ad Calosir.
the Sacramunt: yet that I may he short and with one author show you all
that Theophilact says, I will conferrehim with S. Cytill. whom ye hear de but
late alleged, who uses almost the lame words that S. Cyrill did, so near
that in this place I may raither call him the imitatour of Cyrill, then of
Chrysostom. Thus ye have him there alleged: Ne horreremus carnem and Janguinem
apposita sacris altaribus, co^descendens Deus nostris fragilitatibus, insluit
oblatis vim vitae, conuertens ea in veritatem propriae carnis. That we should
not adhorre flesh set upon the holy aultars, God co^descending to our
fragilities powers into the things offered the power of life, turning the^
into his very own flesh. Thus Cyrill.

Now if you will confer them, where Theophilact says that the body Cyrill
says that flesh and blood is on the holy Theophilact, and S. Cyrill,
compared in their doctrine of the Sacr.
altars. where Theophilast says that the bread is transformed by the vnspeakea
ble work of God: Cyrill says that God turns yt into his very own flesh.
Theophilact says that because we are weak, God considering our weakness
sussreth the outward forms of bread to remain: Cyrill says that leest we
should abhor flesh and blod upon the holy aultars, he put into the bread
and wine which be the things offered. the power of life, which is the flesh of
Christ, which he calls the flesh that has power to give life. Thus ye see
a goodly agreement, be twixt Theophilact and Cyrill. Soche was the constant
faith of this learned author that not only upon the sixth of S. John, and the
x x v i of S. Matthewe, as ye have now heard, he does teach the presence,
and deny the Sacrament to be a figure, and confesses the transformacion of
the bread into the flesh of Christ, but also he does the like upon S. Mark,
Whose saing I will asscribe, not only for that yt makes for the matter of
the Sacrament as the other do: but also that soche cavil as the Quum
benedixisset, hoc est gracias egisset, fregit panem, id quod etiam nos facimus
preces Theophil. in 14. Matthew.
adiungendo, Hoc est corpus meum, hoc (inquam) quod sumitis. Non enim figura
tantum and exemplar Dominici corporis panis est, sed in ipsum co^uertitur
corpus Christi, Dominus enim dieit: Panis, quem ego dabo, caro mea est, non
dixit figura carnis mea est, sed caro mea est. Et iterum: Nisi ederitis
carnemfilii hominis. Et quomodo (inquis) caro non videtur? O honio, propter
nostram infirmitatem istud fit, quia enim panis and vinum ex iis sunt quibus
assueuinius, ea non abhorremus. Idcirco misericors Deus nostrae infirmitati
condescendens speciem quidem panis and vini seruat, in virtutem autem carnis
and sanguinis transelementar. When he had blessed, that is, when he had given
thanks, he brake the bread, which thing also we do, adioining prayers: This
is my body, this I say, that you receive. For the bread is not only a
figure and Figure of of the Sacr. slatlie deuied.
an exemplar of owre Lords body, but yt is turned into the very body of
Christ. For our Lode said: The bread that I will give you is my flesh. He
did not say, yt is a figure of my flesh, but yt is my flesh. And again except
ye eat the flesh of the Son of man etc. But thowe say, how is not the he
keeps the form of bread and wine, but he does transelementate them into the
virtue of his flesh and blood. Thus Theoph.

Yt were superfluouse, to make any notes upon this place, since every part is
so plain, and therewith so like the other before alleged, that what is said
there, may be applied to this, and soche notes as be there may be referred also
to this. Only I shall remove the cavil of the Adversary, which Cauille of
the Sacramentaries upon the word (virtue)
he would grownde upon these words of Theophilact, where he says, that God
tra^selementated the bread and wine into the virtue of his flesh and blood. By
this sentence, and specially by this word (virtue) would the Ad uersarie
wrest all the sainges of this Author, that where he says, that God
transmuteth, transformeth, turns or changes the bread and wine into his
flesh and blood, they are (says the Adversary) to be understood of the
virtue of his flesh and blood, and not of the flesh and blood them selves.
Oecol. de verb. coena Dom.
For this is his saing: Panem and vinum conuertuntur digne comedentibus non in
corporalem presentiam, sed in virtutem carnis and sanguinis Christi. The bread
and wine are turned, to them that woorthilie eat, not into the corporal
presence, but into the virtue of the flesh and blood of Christ.

Let us now weigh this their violent exposition. They say that the bread and
wine be turned into the virtue of the flesh and blood of Christ. yt
Sacrame^taries teach contrary to their own rules.
is a pretensed rule among them, that nothing may be taught without
scriptures. What scripture have they to prove this their saing? Where find they
in all the scripture that the bread is turned into the virtue of Christ's
flesh? Certain I am, they have no one title. and yet they teach nothing, they
say, but the sincere word of God. but under soche coolour of sincerity they
utter many untruths, as we shall prove this to be one. First their own
doctrine is (as before is said) that these dumb and insensate creatures are
not partakers of sanctificacion or holiness. But the virtue of Christ's flesh
is not only an holy thing, but also the cause of sanctificacion and
holiness. wherefore bread and wine being insensate creatures, are not partakers
of yt much less can they be turned into yt.

To prove this we will open someparte of the virtue of Christ's flesh. for yt
is great and large, and has many parts, But the bread and wine ca^ Virtue*
of Chrysts flesh
be turned into none of them. The virtue of Christ's slesh is to unite us to
Hilar. li. 8. de Irini.
makes us members of Christ's body, as says Irenaeus. The virtue of the
same flesh, which is quickening and making to live, or giving power of life,
makes our flesh after the resurrection to live everlastingly, as says S.
Cyrill. Iren. li. 5. aduers here is.
Chrysostom rehersing the virtues of Christ's blood, among a great nombre,
which were to long to rehearse, says thus: Hic sanguis facit vt imago in nobis
regia sloreat: hic animarum nostrarum salus: hoc lauatur, hoc ornatnr, hoc
incenditur, hic igne clariorem mentem nostram reddit, and auro splendidiorem.
This blood causes Cyrill in 15. Joan.
the Kings image to flourish in us: this blood is the salvation of our souls,
with this she is washed, with this she is beautified: with this she is
enkindled: Chriso. ho^. 45 in Joan.
this blood makes our mind more clear, and more glistering then gold. To be
short the virtue of the flesh and blood of Christ is our redemption,
iustificacion, and salvation. Be the bread and wine turned into these virtues,
or into any one of the^? if the bread and wine can receive no holiness, can
they receive these virtues?

As by this ye may perceive that their doctrine is neither consonant and
agreeable within yt self, nor yet sownde and good: so shall yt be made plain
Sacramentaries doctrine conferred with Theophilact.
to you that yt will not agree with Theophilact. whom they labor to wrest.
They say that the bread and wine be turned into the virtue of Christ's flesh
and blood, and not into the flesh and blood yt self: if the bread be turned
into the virtue, and not into the flesh, then stands this proposicion of
theirs, that the bread and wine be still but figures. But how stands that
their saing with the sainge of Theophilact, who by express words says: Non
est figura. Yt is not a figure? Again, saing that the bread is not turned into
the flesh: how agree they with Theophilacte, who says also by express
words: Panis conuertitur in ipsum corpus Christi. The bread is turned into
the very body of Christ. or into the body of Christ yt self? Which words
have great force, and limite this turning of the bread solie and only into
the flesh of Christ. I mien wholl Christ him self, and no other thing for
him. Again, if the bread be not turned into the flesh of Christ, how agrees
yt, with that Theophilacte says, that although yt appear bread: yet

Tus then is may perceive that this Author by express words denied the
bread to be a figure, and also affirmed the same bread to be turned into the
body of Christ yt self, and that the Sacrament is flesh, though yt appear

But that we may once end this matter, and let you perceive the true
understanding of this word of Theophilact. which the Adversary abuses: ye
shall understand that the word (Virtue) in that place is taken for the flesh
of Christ, and not for the virtue as divided from the flesh of Christ. Which
thing first the process of Theophilact does well prove, and among

Besides this the holy doctors use this word ( Virtus, virtue) and this
Virtue and power taken for the flesh of Christ Tractatu 26. in Joan.
word (Vis power) for the flesh of Christ in the Sacrament. As for the first
yt appears in S. Augustine, and the other in Cyrill. S. Augustyn says thus:
Aliud est sacramentum, aliud virtus sacramenti, quam multi de altari accipiunt,
and moriuntur, and accipiendo moriuntur. The Sacrament is one thing: the virtue
of the Sacrament is an other which virtue many do receive from the altar and
do die, and in receiving do die. By the death that S. Augustine here speaks
of he meneth da^nacion everlasting. For immediately he says: vnde dicit
Apostolus: Iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. Wherefore the Apostle says: he
eats and drinks his own damnacion.

In which his words this partickle (the Virtue of the Sacrament) is not taken
for the virtue of Christ's flesh as distincted and divided from the flesh of
(Virtue) in S. Augustine, as not signifieng the flesh of Christ, but only the
merittes and benefittes of Christ's flesh, which be grace, remission of sins,
iustificacion and salvation, then yt shall follow that a man may at one time
receive grace and displeasure, iustificacion and condemnacion. salvation and
damnacion. For S. Augustine says: that many in receiving the virtue of the
Sacrament do die. that is be damned. Now if in receiving the virtue of
Christ's flesh, which is salvation they also receive death which is damnacion,
then they receive at one time both salvation and damnacion, which is
impossible. Wherefore (Virtue) in this place neither is nor can be taken as the
adversary would have yt, but for the flesh of Christ, which being
vnwoorthilie taken and received causes in deed damnacion, as the text of S.
Paul by S. Augustine alleged does teach. of the which we shall treact more at
large in his own place in the third

The other also used by S. Cyrill signifies not the power of life, as
separated from the flesh of Christ, which is (as S. Cyril says) Caro vitae,
the flesh Corpus vitae, the body of life: but yt signifies that lively flesh
yt self. For when saint Cyrill (as a little before ye have heard) had said
that God powers into the offered things (mening the bread and wine) the power
of life, how that is done, or what he meneth by that, he immediately
declares saing: turning those things into his own very slesh and blood: As
who might have said: He powers into the offered things the power of life,
when he turns them into his own flesh and blood.

Thus trusting that Theophilact is fully delivered from the wresting of the
the Adversary, and that the falhead of the same Adversary, is here detected
Plain places of Paschasius against the Sacramentaries.
and the catholic truth opened and defended: I will end with him, and call
in Paschasius, who is of the other side of Christ's Parliament house, who will
very aptelie come in this place to answer the Adversary, who would in stead
of Christ's body place the virtue of his body. For he upon Christ's words
says thus: Coenantibus autem illis, accepit Jesus panem, benedixit ac fregit,
deditque Discipulis suis and ait: Accipite and comedite, Hoc est corpus meum.
Audiant qui volunt extenuare hoc verbum (corpus) quod non sit vera caro
Christi, quae nunc in sacramento celebratur in Ecclesia Christi, neque verus
eius sanguis. When they were at Paschasiut li. de corp. et sang. Dom.
supper Jesus took bread, he blessed yt and brake yt, and gave yt to his
Disciples and said: Take and eat, this is my body. Let them hear that will
extenuate or abase this word (body) that yt is not the very flesh of Christ,
that is now celebrated in the Sacrament in the Church of Christ, neither that
yt is very blood,

And a little before he says upon the same text: Nec ita dixit, cum fregit and
dedit eis panem: Haec est, vel in hoc mysterio est quaedam virtus, vel figura
corporis mei, sed ait non fite: Hoc est corpus meum. Et ideo hoc est, quod
dixit, and non quod quisque fingit. Neither did he say, when he brake the
bread, and gave yt them: This is, or in this mystery is a certain virtue or
figure of my body: but he says plainly, This is my body. And therefore yt
is yt, that he said, and not that that every man feigneth.

And yet again after a few lines he says: Vnde miror quid velint nunc quidam
dicere non in re esse veritatem carnis Christi and sanguinis, sed in
sacramento, virtutem quandam carnis, and non carnem: virtutem sanguinis, and
non sanguinem: figuram, and non veritatem: vmbram, and non corpus. Wherefore I
wonder what some men do mien to say that there is not in deed the verity of
the flesh and blood of Christ: but in the Sacrament, to be a certain virtue
of the flesh and not the flesh, the virtue of the blood and not the blood, a
figure and not the verity, a shadow and not the body.

What shall I trooble the reader with doing of that, that is allreadie done? As
Euthymius, Damascen, Haymo, and Theophilact, do auouche the presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, and as you have heard them deny the
Sacrament to be only a figure: so does this author agree with them, and
denieng with them the Sacrament to be a figure, shadow or virtue or Christ's
body, teaches as they do, the very presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, and that by virtue of Christ's words, Paschas. ibid.
who said (This is my body) Whereupon again he says: Hoc est corpus meum,
and non aliud quam quod pro vobis tradetur. Et cum calicem porrigeret: Hic est
(inquit) calix noui Testamenti, qui pro vobis effundetur in remissionem
peccatorum. Nec dum itaque erat fusus, and tamen ipse porrigitur in calice
sanguis, qui fundendus erat. Erat quidem iam in calice, qui adhuc tamen
fundendus erat in precium. Et ideo ipse idemque sanguis iam erat in calice, qui
and in corpore, sicut and caro, vel corpus in pane. This is my body, and none
other but even the same that shall be delivered for you. And when he gave them
the cup, he said: This is the cup of the new Testament, which shall be
shed for you in the remission of sins. Yt was not yet shed, and yet the same
blood was given in the cup, that was to be The same blood in the cup, that
was to be shedd.
shed. Yt was truly now in the cup, that was to be shed in redemption. And
therefore even the very same blood was now in the cup, that was in the
body, even as yt was the same flesh or body that was under the bread. Thus
far Paschasius.

As this author agrees with other above named, for that he there said: so for
this that he here says he agrees with saint Augustine. For as this man
says that the body and blood, which was given to the Apostles, was even the
same that was to be delivered to death, and to be shed for the remission of
sin, and so all one with his own body sitting among them in visible form:
so (as ye have heard) saint Augustine said, that Christ carried himself in his
own hands, when he gave forth his body to his disciples, Take eat, this is
my body. And so the body that did carry, and the Aug in Psalm. 33. conc. 1.
body that was carried, was all one body of Christ. So now to conclude, yt
is manifest, that as saint Augustine in that place taught the very presence
of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and the words of Christ to be
understood without figure in their propre sense: so does this author also.
Wherefore this being plain I end, and go to an other coople.

THE ONE AND SIXTETH CHAP. Continues the exposition of the same words by
Oecumenius, and Anselmus.
Now of the lower house we have heard two cooples, which although they be so
placed, yet are they both of good antiquity (the youngest of them, which is
Paschasius, being almost seven hundredth years agon) and also soche as aught to
be received for that they Berengarius began the controversy of the blessed
Sacrament. These that follow be soche as were after the controversy was moved
by Berengarius: yet soche as have been in estimacion, price and reverence both
in the greek Church and in the latin Church, and soche, whose doctrine the
Church has approved, and received. Wherefore reason and good order would
(notwithstanding the arrogancy of the Adversaries, who have appointed them
selves judges upon the Church, to which they aught to be subjects, and so
refuse soche as they list) that they that love the Church of Christ, and wish
to be, or be members of the same, should accept, whom the Church accepts,
and approve, whom the Church approoueth, The testimony then of these we will
hear, that to the confutacio^ of the enemy, yt may appear that they are
unjustly rejected of the^, when they teach as the fathers do. And
therwithall we shall see the truth of the Sacrament setfurth and commended
unto us, to the great comfort (I trust) of soche as love the catholic faith,
and the honor of that blessed Sacrament. Oecum in (...) Prim. Corr.


Among these therefore that yet remain, Oecumenius, one of the greek church, who
is accounted to have lived about four hondreth and seventy years agon,
writes thus upon Christ's words: Erant quoque in veters testamento pocula in
quibus libabant vbi etiam, postquam victimas immolassent, sangulnem
irrationabilium excipientes poculis libabant. Pro sanguine igitur
irrationabilium, Dommus proprium Our Lord gives his own blood in a cup.
sanguinem dat, and been in poculo, vt ostendat vetus Testamentum antea hoc
delineasse. There were also in the old Testament cups in the which they did
sacrifice, wherein also after they had offered their sacrifices, receiving the
blood of unreasonable beasts, they did sacrifice yt in cups. Therefore for
the blood of unreasonable beasts, our Lord gives his own blood. And well in
a cup, that he might show the old Testament to have delined this before.
Thus Oecumen.

Besides the aptacion and applieng of the thing figurated to the figure, in the
which this author meneth, that as verily as the blood of unreasonable
beasts was received in cups, so verily also have we the blood of Christ in
cups, besides this I say, his speech and manner of words are to be
weighed. The figure of Christ's blood is not his own blood. Wherefore sainge
that Christ gives us his own blood, he remoueth the adversaries figure. For
the one imports proprely the thing yt self: the other a figure or token of
the same.

And yet farther to consider the very words of this author, where gives
Christ's blood ysnot contained. in cups spirituallie
Christ his own blood unto us He says: In poculo. In the cup. If then yt
be given us in the cup, yt is not the blood of Christ spirituallie, for that
is not received in cups, but in the soul of man. Being than Christ's own
blood, and received in a cup, yt must needs be the blood of Christ reallie,
to the which yt well apperteineth, for so much as Christ has so appointed yt,
to be received in a real cup, for that yt self is a real thing. Besides
this, the author says that yt answers the figure very well, that the
blood of Christ is in a cup, because the figure had so, as yt were foresaied
that yt should so be, in that that the blood of beasts was offered in cups.
Then Christ giving his own blood in the cup to his Disciples, and saing:
Drink ye all of this. This is my blood: did speak these words in their
propre sense. And as he did them, so did he undoubtedly these, This is my
body. And thus by this author we have like testimony, as by other before
alleged.

We shall now likewise see what agreeable testimony Anselmus will give,
Oecumenius has Ansel. li. de of sic. dini.
done for the greek church. Thus he writes: Sic enim habemus in euangeliis.
Accepit Jesus panem, benedixit, fregit, deditque Discipulis suis dicens:
Accipite, and manducate ex hoc omnes. Hoc est enim corpus meum, quod pro vobis
tradetur. Quando in manus accepit panis erat, sic enim dixit: Accepit panem,
and per illam benedictionem panis factus est corpus Christi, non tantum
significatiue, sed etiam substantive. Neque enim ab hoc sacramento figuram
omnino excludimus, neque figuram solam admittimns. Veritas est, quiae corpus
Christi est: figura est, quiae immolatur, quod incorruptibile habetur.
Consideremus ver ba Domini. Manducate (inquit) ex hoc omnes. Hoc enim, quod
vobis trado ad manducandum est corpus meum. Et vt certi essent, quod reuera
esset corpus Christi, signa expressit, quibus hoc dignoscerent. Hoc est,
inquit, corpus meum, quod pro vobis tradetur. Si hoc corpus, corpus Christi non
substantive, sed significatiue tantum fieret, hoc figura corporis Christi
tantum existeret. Nihil ad figuram, quod sequitur: Quod pro vobis tradetur. Nec
panem nominauit postquam panem benedixit, sed corpus: nec vinum nominauit
postquam vinum benedixit, sed sangumem. Igitur, sicut fides catholica credit,
panis qui offertur sacerdoti ad ad consecrandum, per sacerdotalem
consecrationem fit corpus Christi non significatiue tantum sed substantive.

Thus have we in the Gospells: Jesus took bread, he blessed yt, he brak yt,
and gave yt to his Disciples, sainge: Take and eat of this all. For this is my
body, which shall be delivered for you. When he took yt into his hands
Bread how yt is made the body of Christ.
the bread is made the body of Christ, not only significatiuelie, but also
substantiuelie. Neither do we from the Sacrament altogether exclude the
figure, neither do we admit the sole figure. Yt is the verity, because yt
is the body of Christ: Yt is a figure because yt is offered in sacrifice, that
is incorruptible. Let us consider the words of our Lord: He says: Eat ye
all of this. For this, which I deliver you to eat, is my body. And that
they should be certain, that in very deed yt was the body of Christ, he
declared certain tokens, by which they should perceive yt. This is my body
(says he) that Circumstances in Christ's words declaring the Bles. Sacr. to
be his very body.
shall be delivered for you. If this body should be made the body of Christ
figuratiuelie and not substanciallie, yt should be only a figure of the
body of Christ, that that follows, pertains nothing to a figure, which is
this, that shall be delivered for you. Neither did he name yt bread, after
that he had blessed the bread, but his body: neither did he after he had
blessed the wine, name yt wine, but his blood. Therefore, as the catholic
faith does believe, the bread that is offered to the priest to be consecrated by
the preistlie Anselmus.

Whom ye see to draw by the same line, that all the rest of the fathers have
done. Ye see in this exposition, as yt should be among soche as be of the
house of God, an uniformity, a consent, and a goodly agreement in the
utterance of this one truth, being a weighty matter of our faith. Ye see not
here as among them that have separated them selves from the house of God, as
the Lutherans, the Zuinglians or Oecolampadians and Caluinistes, who so contend
strive and dissent among them selves, that that the one side affirms the
other side denies. So among these there is yea and naie, yt is, and yt is not.
Sacramentaries dissent among them selves tholse fathers agree in one doctrine.
But among all them that be produced out of Gods Parliament house, among these
that learned their lessons in Christ's school, there is no soche dissension.
What one affirms, the other denies not. And what one denies, the other
affirms not. For where other before have taught, that in the Sacrament after
consecracion, there is the body and blood of Christ, as saint Ambrose, and
saint Augustine so does this author say, that by the Euthymius, Damascen,
Haymo, Theophilact, and Paschasius; that the Sacrament is not a figure only.
This author teaches us even so, and withal gives us the plain catholic
understanding of these fathers (which thing is also declared upon the place of
Tertullian) that the Sacrament contains both the body of Christ verily,
reallie, and substanciallie and also the figure of the same body.

Whereunto to add also something at this present, saint Augustine gives a
goodly, and a most plain testimony thereof, saing: Corpus Christi and veritas
and figura est: Veritas dum corpus Christi and sanguis in virtute Spiritus De
consec. did. 2. ca. vtrum
sancti ex panis and vini substantia efficitur: figura vero est, quod exterius
sentitur. The body of Christ is both the verity and the figure. Yt is the
verity for that the body and blood of Christ, by the power of the holy
Ghost, is made of the substance of bread and wine: but that is the figure, that
Both figure and verity in the Sacr.
is outwardly perceived.

Agreablie to this says Hilarious, Bishop of Rome next unto Leo the first.
Corpus Christi quod sumitur de altar figura est, dum panis and vinum videntur
extra, veritas autem, dum corpus and sanguis Christi intorius creditur. The
body of Christ

Where then these fathers say that the Sacrament is not a figure of the body
of Christ but the body yt self: they understand that yt is not only a
sigure. A figure yt is, but yt is the body also, which thing this author
Anselm, does very well in few words utter when he says: Neque ab hoc
sacramento siguram omnino excludimus, neque figuram solam admittimus. We do
not from this Sacrament exclude altogether a figure: neither do we admit
only a figure. This then is the catholic faith, that the holy Sacrament is
both a figure, and also the very body of Christ.

By this author also, who does expownde Christ's words is the trifling M.
Pilkintons sophistical argument in thopen disput acto^ holden in Cambridgie
against the blessed Sac.
sophistical argument solued, which an Adversary made against Christ's
presence in the Sacrament, upon these words of Christ. The argument was this:
Christ took bread, he blessed bread, he brake bread. Wherefore

In this argument the Adversary uses the words, as though by the acts,
which the verbes express, nothing had been done. He says Christ did take
bread, and blessed bread. By that that Christ did take bread, is declared one
act, and when he did bless the bread, he did an other act, which the
Adversary passes over, as though Christ in blessing had done nothing. By
which Sophisine he may as well prove Christ to have delivered no sacrament,
as no body. For (as they say) he delivered that, which he took: but he took
bread no sacrament: therefore he delivered bread no sacrament. But what did
Christ when he blessed the bread? Though the Adversary would so ouerpasse yt:
yet this author tells us what he did. For he says: Accepit panem, and per
illam benedictionem panis, fit corpus Christi. He took bread, and by that
benediction the bread is made the body of Christ. Now then Effect of Christ's
blessing of the bread.
where the Adversary reasons and says: Christ took bread, and blessed
bread, and brake bread, and therefore gave bread, he hides what act Christ

THE TVO AND SIXTETH CHAP. ABIDES
WIshing that the reader should fully perceive the descent of the faith of the
Sacrament, how yt is deduced from Christ to the Fathers, and so from age to
age, and from time to time, even unto this our time, and therewith how the
words of Christ are to be understood, even from Christ's time of the
speaking of the^ until this our time: forsomoch as I have passed so near to
our time, I will with thy patience (gentle reader) go on, until I bring the
within a very little of this our time. In Gods name then let us proceade and go
to the time of Rupertus, who is thought to have lived the year of our Lord
MCCXXiiii. and so about CCCCXXXViii. agon, of whom we shall learn what faith
was in the latin Church in his time Coenantibus, id est, sedentibus adhuc in
coena Rup de operib. lib. 3.
qua manducauerant carnes agni, carnes Paschae veteris, accepit panem, and
benedixit. Panem communem accepit, sed benedicendo long in aliud quam suerat
transmutauit, vt veraciter diceret sic: Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis
tradetur. Item vini substantiam accepit, sed itidem gratias agendo, vel
benedicendo sic in aliud vertit, vt diceret veritas, quae non mentitur: Hic est
sanguis meus noui Testamenti, qui pro multis effundetur. Sed non videtur oculis
carnis, non sentitur gustu oris, quod panis ille caro factus sit: quod vinum
illud in sanguinem versum sit. Nimirum si videretur color, aut sentiretur sapor
carnis, and sanguinis humani, homini non plus salutis, sed plurimum adferret
horroris. Being at supper, that is, sitting yet at supper in the which they
had eaten the flesh of the If Christ blessing the bread transmuted yt into a
better thing, M. Pilkintons argument healteth.
lamb, the flesh of the old Passover, he took bread and blessed yt, he took
common bread, but blessing yt, he did transmute yt into a far other thing,
than yt was, that he might truly say: This is my body, which shall be
delivered for you. He did also take the substance of wine, but likewise giving
thanks or blessing, he did so turn yt into an other This is my blood of the
new Testament, which shall be shed for many. But yt is not seen with the
eyes of the body: yt is not perceived by the taste of the mouth, that, that
bread is made the flesh of Christ, that that wine is turned into blood. For
truly if the cooloure of the flesh and blood of man should be seen, or the
taste should be perceived, yt should bring no more health to a man, but yt
should bring much loathsomeness. Thus much Rupertus.

In this author as in Anselmus, who went last before him in the last chapter,
is declared the virtue and power of the benediction of Christ when he Effect of
Christ's blessing of the bread.
blessed the bread and wine in his holy supper. For as Anselmus said, that by
the blessing of the bread and wine, they were made the body and blood of
Christ: So this author says, that Christ blessing the bread, did transmute
or change yt into a far better thing, Which thing was soche that Christ
might truly say by yt: This is my body, which is given for you. Neither
let this seem strange to the Adversary, that these two authors say, that by
the blessing of Christ the bread and wine be changed or turned into the thing?
how large a discourse does he make of yt? treacting of the blessed Amb. li. de
imit. mist. cap. 9.
He says thus. Quantis igitur vtimur exemplis, vt probemus non hoc esse, quod
natura formauit, sed quod benedictio consecrauit, maioremque vim esse
benedictionis, quam naturae, quia benedictione etiam natura ipsa mutatur? How
many examples have we to prove, that this is not yt that nature formed, but
yt that the blessing has consecrated, and that the power of the blessing is
greater then the power Power of blessing greater the^ power of nature.
of nature. Because that by the blessing nature yt self is changed. And after
many examples there produced to that purpose, he makes this conclusion Quodsi
ta^tum valuit humanabenedictio, vt natural co^uerteret, quid dicimusde ipsa
co^secratione diuina, vbi verba ipsa Domini saluatoris opera^tur? If the^ the
blessing of man were of so great force that yt might turn or change nature:
what say we of the divine consecracion, where the very words of owre savior
do work them selves? Thus S. Amb.

And thus may we perceive the great power of Christ's blessing to be
Transubstanciacion avouched.
the very nature of the body and blood of Christ, verily and
substanciallie. And therefore this change wrought and done by the blessing of
Christ for somoche as yt is a turning or changing of one nature or substance
into an other nature or substance, yt may very well bear the name of
Transubstanciacion. For that name does lively declare the act that there is
done.

Holy Cyrill also considering that the great work of God, which makes
present in the Sacrament the body and blood of Christ, is done by the
denediction of God, does commonly in his works call the blessed Sacrament
the mystical benedictio^. As then this author has taught no other wise then
he heard his Fathers speak before him, of the power of Christ's blessing: no
more does he in teaching the presence of Christ's body and blood, although
our senseis can not perceive the same presence. For (says he) though the
bread be made the flesh of Christ, and the wine be turned Cranmers gross
sensual heresy improued.
rebuked the gross manner of Cranmer, who says that faith teaches nothing
against the senseis, and therefore for somoche as we see no flesh nor blood, nor
taste none in the Sacrament, there is none in the Sacrament. But I will not now
tarry to refell that gross and sensual error of the senseis, forasmoche as
I do more at large speak of yt in an other place. Therefore I will no more do
here, but by conferring of the doctrine of this author, with the doctrine of
the Fathers, so by that way improoue the doctrine of Cranmer. Yt is not says
this author, see^ with our eyes, nor tasted by our mouths, that the bread is
made flesh, nor that the wine is turned into blood, for if yt should so be,
yt should nothing encreace our salvation, Cyrill. ad Calosyr. Christ's own
very flesh in the Sacrament
but yt should bring much loathsomeness. And therefore yt is so the flesh and
blood of Christ. as yt may be meit for our use, and sufficient also for life,
turning the same into the treuth of his own flesh. Here ye see Christ's own
Theophilact in diverse places. but one of the^ Theophil.
shall suffice for all. Because we are weak and loath to eat raw flesh,
specially the flesh of man, therefore yt appears bread, but yt is flesh Note
this last part of Theophilactes saing, yt appears bread but yt is flesh. Are
we not taught by this that faith teaches us one thing, and the senseis teach
us an other thing? Yt Faith teaches one thing and senses an other.
appears bread: What is that? Owre seight judges yt to be bread, owre taste
judges yt to be bread, owre taste judges yt to be bread and so forth of
other senseis, But yt is flesh. For owre faith grownded upon the certain and
infallible truth of Christ's word, believes and knows yt (because he
says: This is my body) to be his flesh. Now our senseis teach yt to be
that, that yt is not. For they teach that yt is bread, where faith teaches that
yt is flesh in deed. Vain therefore is Cranmers sainge, vain also be they that
say because they see not, nor taste no flesh nor blood, they will believe none
to

And now to our purpose you have seen a conference and a plain agreement,
betwixt this author and other in these two poinctes. Finally he expowndeth
the words of Christ of the very presence. for (says he) the bread is
changed into that thing, that Christ may truly say: This is my body. And
so the wine is turned into that thing, that he may truly say by yt: This is
my blood. These words with that that is above said, prove most
sufficiently that the words of Christ are to be understood without figure
metaphor, or trope.

This being thus plain we will see what his fellow will do. who is Nicolaus
Methanensis. Thus he writes: Quis ille qui conculcat filium Dei? Nonne qui
sanguinem Nicolaus Methan.
eius ingratus abrogat, nec admittit? and veracis ab omnique mendacio alieni
oris trrditionem and mandatum nihili facit, Hoc est corpus meum dicentis, and
hic est sanguis meus, and, nisi manducetis carnem filii hominis, and bibatis
eius sanguinem, non habetis vitam in vobis? Quid haesitas? Quid omnipotenti
impotentiam attribuis? Nonne ipse est, qui ex nihilo omnia vt essent fecit?
Vnus trium personarum diuinitatis, qui postremis incarnatus est, and panem in
suum corpus transmutari iussit. Quid requiris causam and ordinem naturae panis
transmutationis in Christi corpus, and aquae vinique in sanguinem cum supra
natural, rationem mentem and cogitationem ex virgin sit natus? Non credes
itaque nec mortuorum resurrectionem, nec in caelos eius assumptionem, and alia
Christi miracula supra naturam me^tem, and cogitationem eminentia. Who is he
that treads under foot the Son he treads under foot the Son of God,
that believes not his body and blood to be in the Sacr.
of God? is yt not he that as an ingrate and unkind man, does abrogate his
blood and will not allow yt? and sets nothing by the commandment and
tradicion of that true mouth, which is all wide from all untruth, saing: This
is my body: And, this is my blood, And except ye eat the flesh of the Son
of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you? What do thowe
doubt? What do thowe attribute impotencie to the omnipotent? Is yt not he
that made all things of nothing? one of the three persons in god head, who in
these last times was incarnated, and commanded the bread to be transmuted into
his body. What do thou require the cause and order of the transmutacion of
the natuae of bread into Christ's body, and of heaven, nor other miracles of
Christ being above the reach of nature, understanding

Ye have now heard an other witness, but not telling you an other tale
diverse from him that he is coopled with, or from any here before alleged. In
the manner of the utterance of his testimony he does somewhat, like unto
Chrysostom, speak with wonder and admiracio^ that men should doubt of the
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, seeing that Christ's own mouth
has spoken yt. Wherein he well declares that this faith in this matter was so
firm, so sure, and so stable, that yt was a matter of wonder to him, that any
man could not believe yt, that had been brought up in Christ, in somoche that
he reputeth the misbeleuers of this Sacrament, of the nombre of those that
tread Christ under foot, upon whom, as S. Paul says, shall come heavy and
greuouse punishments.

He teaches us, as Gregory Nissen, Chrysostom and many mo have taught that
the bread is transmuted or changed into the body of Christ. In the setting
forth whereof he uses almost S. Ambrose sentence and words. S. Ambr. li. de
mist. c. 9.
Ambrose says: Quid hic queris naturae ordinem in Christi corpore, cum preter
naturam sit ipse Dominus Jesus partus and virgin? What do thowe here seek
the order of nature in the body of Christ, since the same Lord Jesus Christ
was beside nature conceived of a virgen? This author says, what do thowe
seek the cause or order of the transmutacion of the nature of bread, into the
body of Christ, and of the wine and water into his blood, since he above
nature, and reason was born of a virgen? So far wide was yt from the mening
of this author to vary from the minds of the ancient fathers, that he uses
their words. To end, yt is easy to perceive that this man teaching
transmutacion, or transubstancion, and soche creditte to be given to the plain
word of Christ for the very presence of his body in the Sacrament,
understands Christ's words without figure, as also Rupertus did?

THE THREE AND SIXTITH CHAP. TARIETH IN the exposition of the same words by
Innocentius, and Germanus.
IN this proceasse we are descended to Innoce^tius the third, who lived the
year of our Lord. 1300. and therefore about 362 years agon. In this matter he
writes thus: Agnus Paschalis sieve dubio figurabat Jnnocen. de offic. Miss.
Dominicum corpus: sed panis azimus sincerum opus. Sicut autem Ioannes Baptista
qui dixerat: Ecce agnus Dei, per adiunctum determinauit: Ecce qui tollit
peccata mundi: Sic and Christus qui dixerat, Hoc est corpus meum, per adiunctum
determinauit: quod pro vobis tradetur. Sicut ergo corpus Christi veraciter
tradebatur: sic vere demonstrabatur, non in figura, quaeiam cessauerat, sed in
veritate quae iam aduenerat. The paschall lamb without doubt, was a figure of
our Lords body, but the unleavened bread signified a sincere work As John
the Baptist The body of Christ both delivered and demonstrated not in figur
but in truth.
who said: Behold the lamb of God, by a clause adioined did determine yt
saing: Behold him that takes away the sins of the world: So Christ, who
had said, This is my body: by a clause adioned determined the same, saing:
which shall be delivered for you. Therefore as the body of Christ was verily
delivered: so was yt verily demonstrated, not in a figure, which now had
ceased,

This author minding to expownde Christ's woods, does first declare that the
Paschall lamb, whereof we have at large spoaken in the first book, was
undoubtedly a figure of Christ's body wherbie the gives us to This is my
body. That he spoke yt by his own natural and substanciall body, he
proves by the determinacion that he put to yt, which was this: Which shall be
delivered for you. This particle added determines his sainge to be of his
natural body. For he delivered not his siguratiue body, neither his
spiritual body, nor his mystical body. Wherefore yt was spoaken of that
body, which might be delivered for the sins of the world, which was
only his own natural body.

Then he concludes upon these two parts, that as Christ's body was verily
delivered to death: so was yt verily spoken of Christ in the supper not in a
figure, which is now past and hoen, but in verity, which is comed. To be
short, as he breislie concludes the truth: so with asmoche brevity Figure
of the Sacramentaries flatly denied.
he excludes the untruth. He sends the empty figure, to the old Law: he
appoints the fulness of the verity in the new Law. Thus the Adversaries
figure being also denied by this author, as yt has been by many other, the
conclusion may be made, that Christ's words are to be understood not
figuratively, but in their propre sense simply and literallie.

Now on the other side shall give testimony the holy man Germanus, Germanus
epis. Constantin.
Bishop of Constantinople, who did write an exposition upon the Mass of the
greek church, where in he writes thus: Ipse dixit: Hoc est corpus meum: hic est
sanguis meus. Ipse and Apostolis iussit, and illos vniuersae Ecclesiae, hoc
facere. Hoc enim ait, facite in meam commemorationem. Non sane id facere
iussisset, nisi vim inditurus fuisset, vt id facere liceret. He says, This is
my body: this is my blood: He also commanded the Apostles, and by them the
wholl Church, this to do. For says he, This do ye in the remembrance of me.
Truly he would not have commanded them so to do, except he had given them
power that they might do yt.

What is their power afterward he declares saing: Spiritus sanctus, qui semel
egressus est, and in posterum non dereliquit nos, sed est nobiscum and erit in
perpetuum aeuum, haec per manum sacerdotum and linguam mysteria conficit. Ac
non sanctum Spiritum dumtaxat misit Dominus noster vt maneat nobiscum, sed and
ipse policitus est se mansurum nobiscum vsque ad consummationem seculi. At
Paracletus inconspicuus adest, quia ipse corpus non gestauit: Dominus vero, and
conspicitur, and tangi se patitur per tremenda and sacra mysteria, vt
quinostra^ natural acceperit, eamque gestet in secula. The holy Ghost, The
holy Ghost consccrateth the Sacr. by the hand and tongue of the preistes.
who once came forth to us, and never hereafter does forsake us, but shall be
with us for ever to the worlds end, does consecrate these mysteries by the
hand and tongue of the preistes. And our Lord has not sent his holy
Spiritte, that he only should abide with us: But he himself also has
promised to dwell with us, unto the end of the world. The holy Ghost is with
us, but not seen, because he had no body. But our Lord is both seen, and
suffers himself by the fearful and holy mysteries to be touched, as one that
has taken our nature upon him, and will bear yt for ever.

The power the^ of the ministres of Christ is that they be the instruments of
he meneth at the pronunciacion of Christ's words by the mouth of Li. 4. de
Sacr.
spoken by the priest in the person of Christ, saing: This is my body. For
until that time (says S. Ambrose) the priest uses his own words, but
now (says he) he uses not his own words, but the words of Christ,

That the holy Ghost woorketh this consecracion of the body and blood of
Christ yt is not a few times testified before. But Damascen by most plain
words declares the matter, saing: Quemadmodum quaecunque fecit Deus, Spiritu
sancto cooperante fecit: sic and nunc Spiritus sancti operatione, haec super
naturam operatur, quae non potest capere nisi sola fides. Quomodo fiet mihi
istud, dicit sancta virgo, quoniam virnm non cognosco? Respondit Gabriel
Archangelus Spiritus sanctus superueniet in te, and virtus Altissimi obumbrabit
tibi. Et nunc interrogas, quomodo panis sit corpus Christi, and vinum and aqua
sanguis Christi. Respondeo tibi and ego: Spiritus sanctus obumbrat, and haec
operatur super sermonem and intelligentiam. As all that god has The woork of
the holy Ghost in the Sacr is above nature, and understanding
by the work of the holy Ghost he woorketh these things (mening the
co^secracion of the body and blood of Christ) above nature, which things
nothing can perceive but only faith. How shall this be done to me (says
the holy Virgen) for I know not a man? The Archangell Gabriell answers: The
holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the hieghest shall ouershadowe
thee. And now thowe ask how the bread is made the body of Christ, and the
wine and water the blood of Christ. And I also answer unto thee, The holy
Ghost ouershaddoeth and woorketh these things above that can be spoken, and
above all understanding.

Agreablie to this S. Augustine also speaking of the Sacrament, and of the
work of the holy Ghost therein says: Quod cum per manus hominum ad illam
vibilem August. li. 3. de Trin. cap. 4.
speciem perducitur, non sanctificatur vt sit tam magnum sacrame^tum, nisi
operante inuisibiliter Spiritu Dei. Which thing (mening bread) when by the
hands of men yt is brought to that visible form, yt is not yet sanctified
that yt may be so great a Sacrament but by the invisible work of the Spiritte

In this then that this author says that these mysteries of the body and
blood of Christ be wrought by the holy Ghost, ye perceive that he teaches
none otherwise then the other holy Fathers of the Church. And by this also by
the way may we learn reverently to speak of this blessed Sacrament, for
somoche as yt is no trifeling toie of man's inuencion, but yt is the work of
the holy Ghost, who woorketh no trifles but matters of weight agreeable to his
majesty. Which thing this author also after the manner of Chrysostom does
very well teach in the later part of his saing, The Sacraments of Christ's
body and blodbe holy and fearful my steries.
when he calls the Sacraments of Christ's body and blood, Tremenda and
sacra mysteria. fearful and holy mysteries. They are not fearful and holy,
except something be in them that is of yt self fearful and holy. Bread and
wine being figures of Christ's body and blood, be no more fearful, then the
bread and wine of Melchisedech, or the show bread in the temple, which was
eaten of David and his men without any fear. There is therefore in this holy
mystery more then a figure, which else can be nothing but the Timete Dominum
omnes sancti eius. Fear yowr Lord all ye Saints.

In the end this author declaringe the difference of the being and abidinge
(says he) for that he had no body, for he was not incarnated, there
Difference of the being of Christ with us and of the holy Ghost.
for though he be with us, yet he is not seen: Christ for that by his
incarnacion he took a body upon him, he is both seen, and also suffers
himself to be touched, but how? By the holy and fearsull mysteries. Then by
the bolie and fearful mysteries Christ is both seen and touched. Yt is so,
For so says Chrysostom: Ipsum vides, Ipsum tangis, Ipsum comedis. Thowe
seist him, thowe touchest him: thowe eatest him, thowe desierest to see his
garments, but he delivers himself to thee, not that thowe should only
see him: but also that thowe may touch him and also have him with thee.

But here labors the Adversary to lay a snare to entrappe the reader, and
to make him mistake Chrysostom. For (says the Adversary) we touch A Cavil
of the Sacramentaries
and eat Christ in the Sacrament as we see him. But wet see him only by
faith, wherefore we touch and eat him but by faith. And so is the presence of
Christ merely spiritual and not corporal.

If this argument were good, he might prove by the same that there were no
creature. And thus he might, frame his argument. Every creature as An answer
concerning his being is as yt is seen. But no creature is seen to have
corporal Substance, wherefore no creature has corporal Substance. Or thus, to
come nearer to him in his own terms: We touch and eat our meat at the table
as we see yt: But we see no substance of meat. Wherefore we eat no substance of
meat. Thus one fond argument may be perceived by an other. And so perceived to
be fond, to let yt so go as sufficiently answered.

But for the contentacion of the reader this shall be said: As natural
knowledge teaches that every creature has a substance: so yt teaches that
that substance is invisible. Therefore though we see no substance, but the A
thing p^saied to brseen, when the outuard forms are only seen, because the
substance is invisible
outward forms of creatures: yet being assured by this knowledge, that there
is under those forms a substance, we say that we did see or touch this or
that creature, and the saing is true: Even so when spiritual knowledge, which
is faith, teaches us that the holy Sacrament has a substance, and
Spiritual knowledge teaches the substance of Christ's body and blood to be
under there forms of bread and wine as well as natural knowledge the substances
of natural things under their forms.
manner after that the consecracion is done, faith giving us certain and assured
knowledge of the being of Christ's substance under those forms as natural
knowledge does for the substances of natural creatures under their forms.
And therefore now where the Adversary says, that we eat Christ as we see him,
though in natural things yt be not proprely true, for their we eat both the
substance and the outward forms, yet see but the out ward forms, in manner
above said: yet for that the substance is certainly under those forms, by a
mean yt is truly said, that we see and eat soche a thing: so in this
heavenly matter of the Sacrament, we both eat and see presently the very
presence of Christ's body in substance, our senseis subiecting them selves as
well to the knowledge of faith, as they do to the knowledge of nature, and
truly say that we see and eat the substance of the body say we have seen a
man, a woman, a beast, a tree, an herb, when we have

But to protracte this disputacion no longer, I will end yt with the argument
of this author, which may be uttered in this manner. Christ is continually
Difference of the being of Christ with us, and of the holy Ghost.
with us, and so is the holy Ghost, but they be after diverse manners, the one
to be seen, the other not to be seen, wherefore the one corporally, the other
spiritually. The proof may be this: If Christ be with us but spirituallie in
the Sacrament, then is he with us no otherwise, than the holy Ghost is. But
Christ is with us in an other diverse manner then the holy Ghost is, in soche a
manner as he may by his fearful and holy mysteries be seen, which diverse
manner to spiritual manner must be the corporal manner. Wherefore he is with us
corporally. And this most undoubtedly was the mening of this author. For
there is no doubt of the spiritual presence of the holy Ghost in the
mynistracion of the Sacraments neither yet of Christ. But there must be an
other manner of

THE FOUR AND SIXTETH CHAPTER Shows the exposition of Petrus Cluniacen. and
Bessarion upon the same.
Now that our process is comed so near to our time we will end with this
coople, that shall be produced of the which the first is the good and
virtuous learned man Petrus Cluniacensis, of whose virtue and learning not
only his writing is a good witness, but also holy saint Bernarde in
sondrie epistles Dic Domine testator noui and aeterni Testamenti, vtrum
Testamentum hoc vnius diei (sicut isti dicunt) esse volueris, an potius
aeternum esse decreueris. Petr. Cluniacen. contra. Petrobrufianos.
Audiant isti, non me, sed te, vt conuertantur non ad me, sed ad te. Quid ergo?
In coena vltima, quam cum Discipulis tuis votus Pascha nouo commutans
celebrasti, accepisti panem, gratias egisti, fregisti, dedisti Discipulis tuis.
Sed quid dixisti? Accipite, hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis tradetur. Et
quid addidisti? Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Similiter and calicem
postquam coenasti: Hic est sanguit meus noui Testamenti, qui pro vobis and pro
multis effundetur in remissionem peccatorum. Audistis? Nolite fieri simulachra
quae oculos habent and non vident, aures habent, and non audiunt. Audistis hoc
non a quolibet doctore, sed ab illo, de quo Pater clamans praecipit: Ipsum
audite. Audistis eum dantem corpus, sed quod corpus? Sunt enim corpora
coelestia, and terrestria. Et quicquid visui, auditui, olfactui, gustui, hic
subiacet, corpus est. Vnde ne putaret quis animalis cuiuslibet hoc esse corpus,
aut hominis cuiuslibet, ad excludendum omne aliud sensibile vel insensibile
corpus, postquam dixit: Accipite, hoc est corpus, adiunxit, meum. Suum ergo non
alterius corpus Discipulis dedit. Rursus ne alicui cogitatio occulta
subreperet, potuisse creare in mambus suis, corpus, quod suum quidem esset, sed
tamen, quod ipse erat, non esset, addidit. Quod pro vobis tradetur. Ac si
diceret, nolite dubitare, nolite hoc vel illud vobis fingere, nolite, nolite
aliud and aliud cogitare, quia hoc est corpus, non alteruns, aut alterius sed
meum, non permutatum vel nouiter creatum, sed quod pro vobit tradetur, pro
vobis crucifigetur, pro vobis morietur. Sic and de calice: Hic est ait sanguis,
non bouis, aut arietis, non agni aut cuiuslibet hominis, sed meus, non alius,
aut noua creatione productus, sed qui pro vobis fundetur, stagellis prouocatus,
clauis extortus, lancea excussus. Say therefore, o Lord, the testatour of the
new and everlasting testament, whether this testament be of one day, as these
men say, thowe would yt to be, or whether thowe hauest decreed yt to be an
everlasting Testament. Let these men hear, not me, but thee, that they may be
turned not to me, but to thee, what then was done? In the last supper which
thowe did celebrate, with the Disciples, changing the old passover for the
new, thou thookest bread, thowe gave thanks, thowe brakest yt, and gave yt
to the disciples. But what saidest thowe? Take this is my body, which shall be
delivered Christ gave to his Apost. not the body of an other, or his body
newly createdbutthat same body that should be delivered.
for you. And what did thowe add unto yt? This do ye in my remembrance.
Likewise the cup also after thowe had supped, saing: This is my blood of
the new Testament which shall be shed for you, and for many in the
remission of sins. Have you heard? Be not made dead images, which have eyes
and see not, ears and hear not. Ye have heard this not of every teacher, Take
this yt a body, he adioined this word (mine) he gave then his own body to
his Disciples, and not the body of any other. Again least any privy thought
should come to any man, that he might have created in his hands a body that
should be his in deed, but not that should be yt that he was himself: he
added: Which shall be delivered for you As who should say: doubt you not,
feign you not this or that to yowr self, think not an other thing, and an
other thing. For thisys the body, not an other, or of an other, but mine, not
permuted, or newly created, but that which shall be delivered for you, shall
be crucified for you: shall die for you. So like wise also of the cup: This
is, says he, but which shall be shed for you, provoked by skoorges,
extorted with nails, thrust out with a speer. Thus much this author.

To this exposition to add any thing as therbie to make yt plain to the
reader, I think yt superfluouse. Yt is allreadie so plain as no man in my
judgment, can make a more plain exposition. Only I will open the cause, why
he wrote this. There was afect of heretiquesbegonne by one Peter de Bruys, and
one He^ricus, whose disciples were called Petrobrusions and He^ricians. These
had invented a new fantastical heresy, as yt is propre to all soche men, to
make Phansies of Heretics called the word of the Lord.
their fantasies matters of faith, and cuerie of their fantasies is the pure,
and sincere word of the lord. These had (I say) invented this fantasy that
Christ alone at his last supper did consecrate his body and blood, and gave yt
to is disciples, and they al received his body and blood. But since that time
was yt never, nor yet is received of any man. Against these men did this holy
father write, against whom taking the sword of the Spiritte, which is the
word of God, he fought with them with yt, and overthrew rhe^ by the the
word of Christ that said: that the blood which he gave in the cup

An other argument he makes also of the commandment of Christ, who said:
This do ye in the remembrance of me. Whereby Christ giving them commandment
to do that that he had done, and he by their own confession consecrated his
body (wherein theye are more gentle to Christ, the^ the Adversaries and the
Proclamer) The argument is good that soche, to whom the authority is derived
do that that Christ did, that is, do consecrate his blessed body and blood.
I write thus much, that ye may perceive into what variety and diversity of
fantasies men do fall in, that begin to withstand Gods holy faith, of
which variety I have allreadie spoken in the xli. chapter of this book,
whereunto if ye add this fantasy, then shall This is my body. And can, as is
said, utter the^ all to the people for the pure word of God.

But to return to this author, as by these arguments he has overthrown the
heresy of the Petrobrusians: so with these and the plain exposition of
Christ's words, he conuinceth all the other wicked fantasies, and leaves
Christ's words in their propre and native sense, figures and tropes not
remembered. I shall not need to confer him, with the ancient and elder
Fathers, the conference of other saing as he does, makes good that he has
said, as yt did theirs which were co^ferred with him. Wherefore omitting that
conference with his seniours, I shall bring in his iuniour to be conferred with
him, who is Bessarion Patriarch of Constantinople and Cardinal, who lived the
year of our Lord. 1471. Wherefore not fully one hondreth years agon. And yet
(as his disputacion in the Florentine Council against the greeks, and his
book against Marcus Ephesinus do prove) he was an excellent learned man, in
this matter thus he writes: Nemo est quem lateat, quemadmodum panis and vini
in corpus and sangumem Christin instanti facta transubstautialitas, humanam
Bessarion li. de Sacr. Euchar.
omnem excedit facultatem, ingensque opus est and certe diuinum: it a etiam
huius Sacramenti efficientia verba instar ipsius Sacramenti, eximiae cuiusdam
virtutis esse debere. Christ's vero dtuints verbis nihil esse potentius, nihil
ess^ acius esse posse manfestum est. Quamobrem fateri necesse est, Dominicis
illis verbis, and nullis aliis dtuinum hoc sacramentum confict posse. Nec enim
diuinissima per diuinam potentiam confict negauerit quispiam, nec verbis
Christi nihil effiacius esse, cum non modo homo, verumetiam Deus sit,
creatorque omnium, qui solo nutu cuncta produxit, qui verbo aegros curauit,
mortuos suscitauit, caeteraque miracula fecit, quae in Euangelio recitantur.
There is no man but knows how that the tra^substanciacion of the bread and
wine, done in an instant into the body and blood of Christ, does excede all
power of man, and is a great and very work of God: Even The Sacrament may be
consecrated by noother words then with these: Hoc est cor. etc.
so also the efficient words of this Sacrament should be of some great
power, like as the Sacrament is. Now yt is manifest that nothing can be more
mighty, more effectuouse then the divine words of Christ. Wherefore we must
needs confess, that this divine Sacram. may with no other words be
consecrated, the^ with those words of our Lord, Neither will any neither that
any thing is more mighty in work then the words of Not the merits of
man, but the power of God consecrateth the Sacr.


And within a few words he says thus: Panis and vini in corpus and
sanguinem transmutatio non petentium meritis, sed eius potentia, qui ex nihilo
cuncta produxit, per sacerdotem tanquam per instrumentum quoddam efficitur. The
transmutacion of the bread and wine into the body and blood is done not
through the merittes of the peticioners, but by the priest as by a certain
instrument, through the power of him that brought out all of nothing.

Of this author, as of all the rest, we learn the power and mighty work of
Christ's words, God and man, by which the bread and wine be transmuted and
changed into the body and blood of the same owre master and Savior Jesus
Christ. And where transmutacion and transubstanciacion is confessed and taught
(as this author confesses both) there is the Adversaries

But we shall hear him with his own words declare himself. Thus he says:
Corpus est duplex: Verum alterum, alterum mysticum. Et verum quidem est, quod
in hoc diuino Eucharistiae sacramento consecratur, atque conficitur, sub
visibili specie panis The true body of Christ under the form of bread.
ac vini. Hoc idem est cum eo corpore, quod fuit ex beata Virgin Spiritus
sancti obumbratione conceptum. De quo ipse Dominus in exhibitione sacramenti,
cum nobis sensibile^ panem vinumque ostendisset, ait, Hoc est corpus meu^: and
hic est sanguis meus. Deinde addidit: Quod pro vobis traditur, and qui pro
vobis effunditur in remissione^ peccatoru^. Mysticu^ aute^ eius corpus est
Ecclesia, and congregatio fideliu^. Christ has two bodies. A true body, and a
mystical body. The true body is yt, that is consecrated and made in this
divine Sacrament, under the visible form of bread and wine. This is all one
with that body, that was by the ouershadowing of the holy Ghost, conceived of
the blessed virgen. Of which body our Lord himself in the giving forth of the
Sacrament, when he had showed to us sensible bread and wine, said. This is my
body, and this is my blood. Then

And afterward by express words denieng the Adversaries figure, says thus:
Cauendum autem, ne quis propterea quod Eucharistiae mysterium figura esse
dicitur, A great blasphemy to say or think the Sacr. is not the body of our
Lord.
dicere aut omnino suspicari audeat, non esse verum Domini corpus. Absit tanta
blasphemia a fidelium mentibus. Yt is diligently to be taken heed unto, that
no man, because the Sacrament is called a figure, be so bold to say, or by
any means to think that yt is not the very body of our Lord. God forbid
so great a blasphemy, from the minds of the faithful. Thus far he. In
which saing (as before diverse times is said) the author according to the
catholic faith, teaches that the Sacrament is both a figure, and the body
of Christ. But because yt is a figure therefore (as the Adversary says) yt is
not the body of Christ? That blasphemy (says this good man) God keep from
the minds of the faithful. Behold Chrystian reader) that to say, that the
Sacrament is a figure, and not the very body of Christ, matter, and call
again soche as have, that his heavy indignacion fall not

I see I have tarried long upon these few words of Christ. And therefore
although I might have brought forth many moo of the lower house (as the
learned know there be many) yet I have of them taken but six cooples,
remembering that I had a good nombre of the higher house, and they mynistred
much occasion of matter, upon which I had better will to tarry, because the
Proclamer aloweth their authority. Who in deed, if he will look well upon
himself, and will think no more of himself then is meet, nor take more upon
him then becomes him, should not with skorn and contumely reject any of
these of the lower house, nor disalowe soch learned men, as he does, and soche
a nombre and of so long time, and so many years, except Misundersta^ding of
Christ's words mother of all the heresies of the Sacramentaries.
he does yt upon like policy, as some men do, who mystrusting their cause,
refuse many to go upon their questes, because they shall be fownde guilty. I
have, I say, tarried long upon this short text, and few words of Christ,
because the misunderstanding of them (which is the mainteinance of their
heresy, and the mother and damme of all the wicked opinions in

Now ye have heard, first the three holy Evangelists and S. Paul reporting
in one manner those words of Christ: ye have heard eleven cooples of Christ's
higher house of parliament of each side, that is, both of the greek Church,
and latin Church, men not obscure, but most famous among all writers that
have written upon these words of Christ, not only in learning, but in
auncientie, Catholics how they understand Christ's words
in holiness, and in gravity: ye have heard six cooples of Christ's lower
house of Parliament, chosen also of both sides of the house, men also in their
times famous both in learning, in Sacramentaries how they understand them.
which follows upon that, that Christ spoke of his very body. The
Adversaries contrary wise have two sainges: the one that Christ's words are
to be understood with a figure: The other that Christ did not speak these
words of his very body. The catholic, upon his sainges growndeth this
truth, that Christ's very body, and very blood after the co^secracion, be
reallie and substanciallie in the Sacrament, and so given to the receauers. The
adversary upon his sainges growndeth his error, that Christ's very body
and blood be not reallie and substanciallie in the Sacrament, but in the
Sacrament is only a figure of the body, and is given to the receauers easy
to be said: first for the first part of yt that neither the holy
Evangelists, neither saint Paul, nor any of all the holy Fathers of the
higher house, An Epiloge of authors denieng the Sacramentaries figure.
words are to be understood figuratiuelie, I mien, that the Sacrament is
only a figure, I say not one. But contrary wise a nombre of them by
express words deny that Christ's words are so to be understood, and
that the Sacrament is a figure only. And for the better memory to be had of
them, I shall make a brief epiloge of their sainges: Chrysostom upon the the
sixth of saint John says that Christ did not speak these words: My
Chrysostom. in 6. Joan.
flesh is verily meat: obscurelie or in parables. If not so: the^ plainly and
without figure. Euthymius upon Christ's words said: He did not say, these
be signs of my body and blood, but these things be my body and blood.
Damascen said: The bread and wine is not a figure of the body and blood of
Christ. God Euthy. in 26. Math.
forbid that any man should so believe. Haymo said: That same bread is
changed into the flesh of our Lord, and the wine is transferred into the
blood of our Lord, not by a figure, nor by a shadow, but by truth or in
Damascen li 4. cap. 14
very deed. Theophilact said, that the bread that is sanctified on the altar
is the very body of our Lord, and not an aunswering figure. For Christ did
Haim. in 26. Math.
not say, this is a figure, but this is my body. The like says he upon
saint John, that yt is not a figure but the body. Paschasius said, that he
meruciled what they meant that said, that in the Sacrament was not in very
deed the Theophilact in 26. Math.
flesh of Christ and his blood, but the virtue, the figure and not the verity,
the shadow, and not the body. Anselmus said, Christ took bread, and by his
blessing of yt, the bread was made the body of Christ, not only
significatiuelie, or by significacion, but substantiuelie or in substance.
Neither do Paschasius lib. de corp and sang. Domini.
we (says he) from this Sacrament, altogether exclude the figure, neither
do we admit the only figure. Innocentius said: As the body of Christ was
verily delivered: so was yt verily demonstrated, nor in a figure, which now
had ceased: but in truth which was now comed. Bessarion said: that we be
not so bold, that because the Sacrament is called a figure, that we either
Ansel. li. de offic. diui.
say or think that yt is not the very body of Christ. God keep (says he)
so great a blasphemy from the minds of men, by which words he denies
Innocent. 3. li de offi. Miss.
the only figure to be in the Sacrament without the presence. All these stand
directly against the Adversary. For where he says, that the Sacrament is a
Bessario^. li de sacra. Eucha.
figure, and the verity, may they not be adnombred to this company, as
denienge the only figure, for asmoch as with the other they affirm as well
the presence as the figure. And in that they do so, they deny the only
figure. August. Hilar.


Thus ye see the first proposition of the Adversary by so many witnesses
denied, and the proposition of the catholic Church affirmed. If the
Adversary for all these can bring any one catholic writer that is ancient,
and approved, that does say, as he says, that the Sacrament is only a
figure, I for my part shall confess the truth to be on his side. If he can
not bring one, as I am sure he can not, and the catholic Church for the
truth An Epiloge of authors assirming the real presence.
that she teaches brings so many, what madness is there in him that will
still persist in his fantasy, for the maintenance whereof he has no
authority.

But let us gather as brief an epiloge for the proposition of the catholics
which is, that Christ in these words: This is my body: spoke of his very
body. Although yt be allreadie sufficiently proved and declared by that yt
is Just. apolog 2.
the matter may be plentifully plain before yowr face, I shall take the like
pain in this, as I have done in the other. Justinius, who is the first, said:
that as Jesus Christ our Savior had flesh and blood for our salvation: even
so we are taught, the food, where with our flesh and blood be nourished by
alteracion, when yt is consecrated by the prayer of his wood, to be the flesh
Iren. co^trahaeres. li. 4. ca. 32.
and blood of the same Jesus incarnated. Irenaeus said, that Christ took
bread, which is a creature, and gave thanks sainge: This is my body. and the
cup likewise, which is a creature as we be, he confessed to be his blood,
and of the new Testament taught a new oblacion. Tertullian said, that the
bread which Christ did take and give to his disciples, he made yt his body.
Tertulli. 4 cont. Marcion. Cypr. de caena Dom.
Cyprian said: after our Lord had said, This do in the remembance of me.
This is my flesh and this is my blood, that substanciall bread and cup, as
often as yt is doe^ with these words, and this faith, that substancial bread
and cup consecrated by the solemn benediction does profitt to the health and
life of the wholl man, being also a medicin and a sacrifice to heal
infirmities and Iuuencus said, when Christ took bread in his hands and had
given thanks, he divided yt to his Disciples, and taught them, that Juuenc.
li. 4 bisto, eua^g.
he delivered unto them his own body. And that he took the cup and
sanctified yt, and gave yt to them to drink, and taught them, that he gave
them his blood, and says drink this blood. Eusebius Emisenus said, The
invisible priest turns the visible creatures into the substance of his body
Eusebius Emis. hom. 5. Pasch.
and blood, by his secret power with his word, saing: This is my body. And
the sanctificacion repeted, take and drink (says he) This is my blood.
Again he says: when the creatures are set upon the holy aultars to be
blessed with the heavenly words, before they be consecrated with the
inuocacio^ of the most high name there is the substance of bread and wine, but
after the Amb li. 4 de sacr. ca 5
words of Christ the body and blood of Christ. S. Ambrose said, before yt
is consecrated yt is bread, but when the words of Christ have co^med to yt,
yt is the body of Christ. And before the words of Christ yt is a cup full
of water and wine, but when the words of Christ have wrought, there is made
the blood that redeemed the people. Gregory nissen (mening Christ) This is my
body. And again he says: we do believe that the bread sanctified by the
word of God, is changed into Greg. Niss. ser. cathec. Hier. ad Head. qn. 2
Isich. in Leuit li. 6. ca. 22.
the body of the Son of God. S. Hierom said: Let us understand that the
bread which our Lord gave unto his Disciples, is the body of our Lord and
Sauionre, forasmoch as he said: This is my body. and that the cup is that,
of the which again he said: Drink ye all of this, This is my blood of the
new Testament. Isichius said: he receaueth the sacrifice by ignorance, that
knows not the power and dignity of yt, that knows not that yt is his body
and Ang. in Psalm. 33. con. 1. Chrysosthom. 83. in 26 Math. hom. 51. in 14 Marc
Cyrill. ad Calosyriu^.
blood in very deed, but receaueth the mysteries, and knows not the power
of the^. S. Augustine said: that Christ was born in his own hands, when
giving forth that same his body he said: This is my body. For he did bear
that body in his hands. Chrysostom said: Forasmoche as he has said: this
is my body, let us be holden with no doubt, but let us believe, and with the
eyes of our vderstanding let us verily see yt. Again he said: He that said:
This is my body, altogether with his word, he made the thing S. Cyrill
said: Doubt not whether this be true or no, since he manifestly says: this
is my body, but raither receive the word of our Saiouur in faith. For he
forasmoche as he is the truth, he lies not. S. Gregory said: Christ is
offered for us in this mystery of the holy sacrifice. There truly his Grego.
li. 4. Dial. ca 58
blood is now shed, not upon the hands of the unfaithful, but into the
mouths of the faithful. And again: which of the faithful can doubt in that
time of the sacrifice, at the word of the priest the heavens to be opened in
that mystery of Jesus Christ companies of Angels to be present, unto high
things low things to be coopled, unto heavenly things earthly things to
be joined, one thing also of invisible and visible things to be made. Isidor
said: The sacrifice that is offered of the Chrystians unto God, Christ our
Lord and master did first institute, when he gave to his Apostles his body
and blood before he would be betrayed, as yt is read in the Gospel: Jsidorus
de ^ffi. ^ccl. ca 1^.
Jesus took bread and the cup, and blessing them gave, them to them.

Thus have I breissie tocuhed so much as may serve to prove the second
proposition of the catholics: If any desire to see any more of these
authors, let him repair to their chapters and there shall he see them at large.
And now ye see that as by many witnesses the figure in the first proposition
was denied: so by all these, that Christ in his words spoke of his very once
again I say (as thereby with The brag of the proclamer.
boldecountenance to bear out his fall shood and untruth) that of all the
words of the holy scriptures: of all the examples of the primitive Church:
of all the old fathers, of all the anncient doctors in these causes, they
have not one,

Now judge whether he be true or no, and what credditte is to be given unto
him in other matters, that so shamelessly speaks in this. To the farther
proof of the truth of Christ's substanciall presence in the Sacrament also,
beside that that is said of many of the authors severally, I have treacted
of tansubstancion, wherefore I remitte the reader thither, and now having but
one scripture in the Evangelists to speak of, I will breiflie touch yt, and
so finish this second book.

THE FIVE AND SIXTETH CHAP. TREACTETH of the bread blessed and given by Christ
to the two disciples in Emaus, and proves by Theophilact and Bid that yt was
the Sacrament.
IN the gospel after saint Luke we read that Christ ioining him self to two
of his Disciples goinge to Emaus, when he came thither Luc. 24.
he satte down with them, And took bread and blessed, and brake yt, and gave
yt to them, and their eyes were opened and they knew him. And these Disciples
returned with joy to Jerusalem, and told the The bread given to the
Disciples in Emaus was Christ's blessed body.
Apostles, what was done in the way, and how they knew him in the breaking
of bread. This bread that was here blessed, and broke, and given to the
Disciples, the holy learned men do testify not to be common bread, but to be
by the blessing of Christ made the bread of life, even his own body.

And at this time to ascend, I will begin with Theophilact, who writes
Insinuatur autem and aliud quiddam, nempe quod oculi little, qui benedictum
panem assumunt, aperiuntur, vt agnoscant illum. Magnam enim Theophil. in 24.
Luc.
and indicibilem vim habet caro Domini. An other thing also is given us to
understand, that is, that the eyes of the^, which do take the blessed bread,
are opened, that they may know him (mening Christ) For the flesh of Christ
has a great and vnspeable power. Thus he.

By this author yt does not only appear that Christ gave unto the two
disciples his body, but yt is also evident. For when he had first said that
their eyes were opened that received the blessed bread, so well that they might
know Jesus, immediately opening what this blessed bread was, he says: For
the slesh of Christ has an unspeakable power. The blessed bread then blessed
of Christ to be given to the Disciples was so of him blessed by the testimony
of Theophilact that yt was made the flesh of Christ. Which he proves by the
effect. For although Christ had walked with them somoche way, and had
conferred with them, and had rebuked their slacknesse The Disciplis in Emans
kuewe not Christ until they had eaten of the blessed bread.
his blessed and mighty voice, which sownding in the ears of the Jews, that
came with Judas to apprehende him, did throw them down to the grownde, did
not make these Disciples to know him as Christ, until they had eaten of the
blessed bread, which he blessed for them and gave to the^, and their eyes were
opened, and they knew him. By this great effect then yt is manifest, that yt
was a great thing, that was given them, a thing of much power and virtue,
even that same flesh in substance, that anoincted the eyes of him that was born
blind, and gave him his seight. That same flesh now opened their eyes, that
now they might know him, whom before by other diverse means (as is said)
they did know.

To this grecian we shall ioin Bid, one of the latin Church, who upon Beda in
24 Luc.
the same place says thus: Certi mysterij causa factum est, vt eis in illo
alia ostenderetur effigies, and sic eum non nisi in fractione panis
agnoscerent, ne quisquam se Christum agnouisse arbitretur, si eius corporis
particeps non est, id est, Ecclesiae, cuius vnitatem in sacramento panis
commendat Apostolus, dicens: Vnus panis, vnum corpus multi sumus, vt cum eis
benedictum panem porrigeret, aperirentur oculi eorum, vt agnoscerent eum.
Because No man knows Christ except he be a member of his body, that is, of
his Church.
of a certain mystery yt was done that an other likeness or form should be
showed to them in him and so they should not know him but in the breaking of
bread, leest any man might think him self to have known Christ if he be not
partaker of his body, that is, of his Church. The unity whereof the Apostle
sets forth in the Sacrament of bread, saing: All we being many are one
bread, and one body: that when he gave to them the blessed bread, their eyes
should be open, that they might know him. Thusfarre Bid.

Of whom we learn that yt was not done as a matter to no purpose, that Christ
showed him self unto them in a strange likeness, but to open a mystery,
which is, that no man can know Christ, except he be a membre of his Church,
and be in the unity thereof. And that they might be in that unity, he gave
them the blessed bread, which is the Sacrament of unity, and then were their
eyes opened, and they knew him. Thus as Theophilact said by express words,
that Christ gave them his flesh wherbie to open their Theophilact calls the
flesh of Christ, which (says he) he gave them and then their eyes were
opened. Of both these then we are taught, that Christ gave unto the two
Disciples Emaus not common and bare bread, but the Sacrament.

THE SIX AND SIXTITH CHAP. PROOVETH the same by saint Augustine and Chrysostom.
AS Theophilact is the follower of Chrysostom so is Bid of S. Augustine.
Wherefore as we have heard the minds of these two as disciples: so will we hear
the minds of the other as masters. S. Augustine writing of the consent and
agreement of the Evangelists August. de consens. Euang. li. 3. cap. 25.
says thus of this matter: Non enim incongruenter accipimus hoc impedimentum
in oculis eorum a Sathana fuisse ne agnosceretur Jesus, sed tantum a Christo
propter eorum sidem ambiguam facta permissio vsque ad sacramentum panis, vt
vnitate corporis eius participata, remoueri intelligatur impedimentum inimici
vt Christus posset agnosci. We do not incongruentlie take this impediment in
their eyes to have The bread that Christ blessed and delivered to the disciples
in Emaus was the B. Sacram.
ben done by Satan, that Jesus should not be known. But of Christ yt was
only permitted for their doubtful faith until they came to the Sacrament of
bread, that the unity of his body being participated, yt might be perceived
that the impediment of the enemy was removed, that Christ might be known.
Thus much S. Aug.

Of whom this is without difficulty to be learned that the bread that Christ
blessed, and gave to the Disciples was the Sacrament. For so by that name does
he call yt. Whereunto when he adds the effect, that after the receipt of that
Sacrament, the impediment of Satan was removed, their sight was illumined, and
Christ before unknown, was then well known: he does signify unto us that
they there received him that is the true light, that lighneth every man that
comes into the world. Which thing more plainly Chrisostom does open, upon
Matthew thus saing: Quia de sanctis coepimus dicere, non est tacendum, quin
aliud est sanctificatio, aliud sanctificatum. Sanctificatio Chrysostom. hom. 17.
in Matthew.
enim est quod alterum sanctificat. Sanctificatum autem alterum sanctificare
non potest, qua^uis ipsum sit sanctisicatum. vt puta signas panem tuum quem
manducas, sicut ait Paulus, Sanctificatur enim per verbum Dei and orationem.
Sancttificasti eum, non fecisti sanctificacionem. Quod autem sacerdos de manu
sua dat, non solum sanstificatum est, sed etiam sanctificatio est, quoniam hoc
solum non datur quod videtur, sed etiam illud quod intelligitur. De
sanctificato ergo pane licet animalibus iactare, and infidelibus dare, quia non
sanctisicat accipientem. Si autem tale esset, quod de manu sacerdotis
accipitur, quale est quod de mensa manducatur, omnes de mensa manducarent, and
nemo de manu sacerdotis acciperet. Vnde Dominus non solum in via benedixit
panem, sed de manu sua dedit Cleophae and socio eius. Et paulus nauigans non
solum benedixit panem, sed de manu sua porrexit Lucae and caeteris Discipulis
suis. Because we have begone to speak of holy things, yt is not Sanctificacio^
and the thing sanctified be diverse.
to be left unspoken, but that sanctificacion is one thing, and the thing
sanctified is an other. Sanctificacion is that sanctifies an other thing, but
the thing sanctified can not sanctify an other thing, allthough yt be
sanctified, as for example, thowe make a cross upon thy bread, which thowe
eatest, as S. Paul says, Yt is sanctified by the word of God and prayer:
Towe hauest The blessed Sacr. a sanctified thing and sanctificacio^ also.
sanctisied yt, but thou hauest not made sanctificacio^. But that the priest
gives from his hand, yt is not only a sanctified thing, but also yt is
sanctificacion. For not only hand of the priest were soche a thing as that,
that is eaten of the boorde, all Cleophas and his fellow. And Paul sailing did
not only bless the bread, but also with his hand gave to Luke and his other
Disciples. Thus far he.

In this place of Chrysostom three things are, as concerning the matter of
the Sacrament to be noted. The first is, that he says, that yt that the
priest A plin place for real presence against M. Iuell.
gives with his hand is not only a sanctified thing, but also sanctificacion
yt self, that is, both a thing made holy, and also the thing yt self that
does make holy. In that he says that the thing that the priest gives with
his hand, is yt that sanctifies other things, or makes other things holy,
what else can be understood but Christ's blessed body, who is our
sanctificacion, iustificacion and redemption, as says S. Paul, who being
there, sanctifies the worthy receruers? Forasmoche now as Chrysostom says
that this sanctificacion, this thing, that makes other things holy is given
by the preistes hands and yt can not be understood of Christ spirituallie
received, Exodus 31.
saing: Ego Dominus qui sanctifico vos. Yt is I yower Lord, which do
sanctisie you. So that the priest does not the act, he sanctifies not, but
he delivers the sanctificacion. If in the Sacrament were nothing but bread
(as the adversary teaches) this sanctificacion could not by his own
doctrine be in yt. For the bread being a dumb creature is not apt to receive
sanctificacion, as he says. Then yt remains that the Adversary must of
force confess, that since there is a thing given by the hand of the priest, in
which rests this sanctificacion, and yt is proved that yt neither can be
the preiste, nor the bread, yt can be none other but the body of Christ in the
Sacrament, which never being separated from the God head

And this is not to be ouerpassed that Chrisostom says that that, which the
priest gives is both a sanctified thing, and the sanctificacion also, whereby
Both parts of the* Sacr. opened.
he does fully open both parts of the Sacrament, namely what yt was as bread
and wine, which now being sanctified, are thereby turned into sanctificacion
yt self, that is, into the body and blood of Christ, Of the which thing in
effect S. Augustine says: Qui cum per manus hominum ad illam visibilem
speciem perducitur, non sanctificatur vt fiat tam magnum sacramentum, nisi in
visibiliter operante Spiritu Dei. When the bread by the hands of men is
brought to that visibile form, yt is not sanctified, that yt may be made so
great a Sacrament, but by the invisible work of the holy Ghost.

In that he says yt is sanctified, he opens the first word of Chrysostom,
who calls yt sanctificatum, a thing made holy. In that he says that yt is
made so great a Sacrament by the invisible work of the holy Ghost: he openeeh
the other word of Chrysostom calling yt sanctificacion. For by the work of
the holy Ghost yt is sanctified to be the body of Christ,

But if yt be laufull for us to follow every act of Christ done for our
example and instruction, then we may receive under both kinds, and we
Preistes doing the solemn action of the memorial of Christ's passion in their
masses aught to receive under both kinds.
both men and women was great, yet he called none to this manner of ministracion
but the XII. Apostles who were preistes, signifieng thereby that all preistes,
that should in his Church do this solemn action before his people for the
memorial of his passion and death, should do yt under both kinds, as thereby
to signify unto the faithful, that in the passion of Christ, the blood of
that blessed body was separated and divided from that body, and ran out
plentiful to wash away our filthy sins: Even so they that be preistes, and
according to the office of preistes, do this public ministry in the
setting forth of this memorial of Christ's death, must according to Christ's
institucion have and receive the blessed Sacraments

In the other time of Christ's ministracion of the Sacrament of his body to
the two disciples, as the Gospel makes no mention that yt was done as a
solemn action of or for the remembrance of Christ's passion or death, but
raither as a mean to work them a benefit, to remove the impediment of Satan,
which lets them to know Christ, and so to open their eyes that they might
know him, and therefore received the Sacrament but under Private psons sor their
spiritual cosort may laufullie receive under one kind as the disciples did
in Emans. Bishops preistes and all of the clergy not doing the public
action, receive under one kind.
one kind: Even so private persons that for their spiritual comfort in
Christ, for the enkendling of the fire of Gods love in them, for the godly
exercise of their faith, for their incorporacion into Christ, for their
strenght and defense against the assaults and temptacions of the enemy, or in
extremes for their voyage meat the better to walk there iourneie, do receive
the blessed Sacrament, may very well, according to Christ's example receive

As Christ by his doings has left us an example what we may laufullie do as
concerning the receipt of the blessed Sacrament, by which the Proclamer is
answered, for that part of his objection, that obiecteth Christ's institucion:
So shall we now answer for that he objected of Saint Paul, He says that
the words of Saint Paul are sufficient also to prove that the Sacrament
aught to be received of all men under both kinds. Yt is a plain matter that
Saint Paul makes no special institucion of the Sacrament, but only makes
a Proclamers (...) of S. Paul for receiving under both kinds anuswered.
rehersall of Christ's institucion, then this part of his objection may be

Wherefore understand that although S. Paul did deliver to the Corynthians the
institucion of Christ as then delivered under both kinds: yet S. Paul
teaches not, that of necessity yt must allwaies be used in both The scope of
S. Paul touching the Sacra. 1. Cor. 11.
in the remembrance of Christ's death: And that yt be received woorthilie.
Wherefore I say, that so far wide yt was from the mind of S. Paul, by his
doctrine there taught to forbid the receipt of the Sacrament under one kind,
that as Christ did to his two disciples in Emaus, so did S. Paul to Luke and
his fellows in the ship (as Chrysostom witnesses) give the Sacrament under
the one kind of bread. Although these acts of Christ, and Saint Paul are
sufficient to prove that the receipt of the Sacrament under one kind is
laufull and good, in manner above said: yet the same may also appear by the
other place of the acts alleged in the last chapter. Where also mention is
made that the Sacrament was ministered under one kind, namely of bread, no
title of mention made of the other kind. And beside the good catholic men
that do understand this place of the Sacrament, the Waldenses also did so
understand yt.

Then since the multitude of the faithful even immediately after the coming
Acto. 2.
of the holy Ghost, did receive the Sacrament under one kind, yt is manifest
that yt may without offense be done and used now in Christ's Church, and
may not be reputed, as yt is of the Proclamer, for an unlawful fact. For he
that impugneth the Church for doing of that, that the scripture shows the
example, and says that the act of the Church is unlawful, impugneth the
scriptures, and imports that they be unlawful.

These acts of Christ and Saint Paul, and the doing of the multitude in the
second of the acts, do not abridge the first institucion of Christ, or take
yt away, as his second ordeinance in sending his Apostles to preach Acto. 2.
takes away the first: but they do raither teach, that out of the solemn
action of Christ's memorial, which must be done under both kinds of him that
does that action, other may very well receive the Sacrament under one kind.
And as yt may be done because the scriptures say, yt has

In the catholic faith yt is taught, that after the consecracion, as by many
yt is allreadie testified, in the Sacrament under the form of bread is the
very body of Christ, and under the form of wine the very blood of Christ,
not in this, blood without a body: nor in that, a body without blood. For
Christ, as Saint Paul says, rising from the dead, now dies not, death
shall no more have lordshippe over him. Now if the body were without blood,
yt could not be living and so should death be in the body of Christ again,
wherefore yt is a body with blood, and so a living and a perfight body, as the
holy Martyr Cyprian testisieth yt to be, sainge: Panis iste communis in carnem
and sanguinem Domini mutatus procurat vitam This Cypr. de coena Dom, Under
form of bread both flesh and blood of Christ. Iren lib. 5. Under form of
wine the body of Christ.
common bread changed into the flesh and blood of our Lord procures life. The
bread then changed into the flesh and blood of Christ, teaches us that yt is
not flesh alone, but yt is both flesh and blood: So likewise under the form
of wine is not the blood of Christ only but the body Irenaeus, who says
thus: Calicem qui est creatura, suum corpus consirmauit. He affirmed the cup,
which is a creature to be his body. So that under each of the kinds is
verily and substanciallie the body and blood of Christ: For where a lively
body is, there must be blood also: And where blood is, there must be slesh and
veins also, as Irenaeus says: Sanguis non est nisi a venis, and carnibus,
and a reliqua, quae est secundum hominem, substantia. Blood is not but of the
veins and slesh, and the other substance, which is as man. Wherefore I say
that Iren. ihid.
under each of these kinds is the body of Christ.

Which thing also S. Bernarde teaches by express words in his sermon of
the supper of our Lord, sainge: Idipsum, o Christian, de vino sentias, id
Bern. sermon. de coen.
honores in vino, quod scilicet de panis specie sensisti, and in ea honorasti.
Understand even the same (o chrystian) of the wine honor that in the wine,
that thowe did understand of the form of bread, and did honor in yt.

And where Melancton says, that this necessity that where the body is, there
must be blood, and where the blood is, there of necessity must be the body:
is but men's inuencions and tradicions having a contenance of truth, but not
the thing: Thowe see (Reader) that we stand not upon fantasies, but we
stand and stay upon the authority of the great ancient Fathers, and holy
Martyrs. Saint Irenaeus, S. Cyprian, and S. Bernarde, who teach what in this
poinct is to be said. And therefore Melancton, and his

But we sainge Vale to Melancton and his inuencion we cleave to the
substanciall, and ancient doctrine of the Fathers, and by that we conclude,
Wholl Christ being under each kind, the people be not defrauded receiving but
one kind.
that the body and blood of Christ is necessarelie under each kind, as
wholly and perfectly under the one as under the other. And forasmoche as the
Godhead joined to Christ in unity of person is inseparable from the manhead,
therefore yt follows of necessity also that the body being under each kind
the godhead that has taken to yt self the same body, is with the same body
under each kind, and so under each kind is wholl Christ God and man. And
being so, he is there with all his gifts, graces, merittes, and virtues.
Wherefore he that receaueth the Sacrament under one kind, receaueth woll Christ,
God and man. And if he receive yt woorthilie, receaueth

Now then perceauing what is done in the receipt of the Sacrament, under one
kind, namely that there is received wholl Christ God and man with all his
gifts and graces as fully and perfectly, as if both kinds were received, so
that the receauer is nothing defrauded of the effect of the Sacrament: yt may
be perceived that so to receive is well done and laufullie done. If yt be then
asked, why Christ did institute the Sacrament under both kinds, if yt be
sufficient to receive the one: the answer is made why Christ instituted the
Sacr. under both kinds
before, that he did institute the Sacrament under both kinds to be
frequented as the solemn memorial of his passion, and death, in the presence
of his Church yet he himself ministered under one kind to declare that to
private men he leaves yt indifferent to receive under one or both. Thus

THE EIGHT AND SIXTETH CHAPTER,
AS the enemies of Christ's Church in the subversion of Boemia, reioiced that
they had sownde out (as they thought) some notable error in the Church,
which is (as they would have yt understood) directly against the
scriptures, namely the receiving of the Sacrament under one kind, against
this sainge of Christ in Saint John. Except ye eat the slesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have life in you. So the Adversaries of
Christ's Church in these our days likewise rejoice, and in their own conceit
triumph against the same, saing that yt erreth, and does directly both
against the plain institucion of Christ, who did institute the same Sacrament
under two kinds, and so gave yt forth to be received: and also against the use
and example of the

Among these the Proclamer sings a part, and says, that the Communion under
both kinds was used throughoute the wholl Church six hundredth years
Proclamers objection of the practice of the primitive church.
after Christ's ascension without exception. But for the proof of this his
sainge he brings in but a little fragment of Gelasius an old Father of the
Church, and a Bishop of Rome, which is this: Diuisio vnius eiusdemque
mysterij sine grandi sacrilegio non potest peruenire. The division of one very
mystery, can not be done without great sacrilege.

But as the one part of their wicked slander is allreadie declared to be
untrue, for that to receive the Sacrament under one kind, as is said, is not
against the scriptures: So shall yt be made as plain that the other is as
untrue, for that ye shall evidently see the practice and examples of the
primitive Church in diverse ages to have used the Sacrament under one kind.

But first we shall answer the objection, that the Proclamer makes by
Gelasius. For the which yt is to be understood, that the heresy Gelasius
his meening opened.
of the Manicheis, which began in the time of Belix the five and twenteth
Bishop of Rome after Saint Peter, in the year of our Lord two hundredth,
seuenteth and two: continued to the time of Gelasius, who ruled the Church of
Rome, the year of our Lord four hundredth, neinteth and four which heresy,
as Saint Augustine did with great labor, and like learning impugn: so did
diverse holy Fathers, and rulers of Christ's Church trauail, for yt did much
vex the Church, to repress and utterly to extinguish yt.

Now in the time of Gelasius, there were many of them in Rome, who vsinge
dissimulacion to cloak their heresy, came among the Chrystian Manicheis how
they dissimuled in receaui^g the Saer.
people to the receipt of the Sacrament. But for that they believed that Christ
had no very natural body of man born of the Virgen Marie, but a
fantastical body, therefore they contented them selves to receive the them
selves away, because, they believed that the body of Christ, which as is
said, they did take to be fantastical, had no blood. And therefore Eutychians
their heresi
denieng the humane nature to abide in Christ, and therefore to have any
perfect natural body in the Sacrament, joined at that time with the
Manicheis, and with like dissimulacion contenting them selves to receive the
Sacrament under the form of bread, as the Sacrament of a certain divine, and
heavenly body, they, as the other did, sledd from the receipt of the other
kind, phantasieng no blood to be in soche a body.

Of which their wicked doings, Gelasius having intelligence to the intent
they might be discerned and well known from the true Chrystians, and so to be
deprehended, he made a like decree, as before him, for the same purpose, and
against the same men, did the holy Father Leo the first, Bishopp of Rome not
many years before Gelasius. The very words of which Leo to the better
understanding of the matter, I think very necessary to asscribe, and they be
these: Abducant se Sacramento salutis humanae and Christum Dominum nostrum,
sicut in veritate carnis nostrae denegant natum, Leoser. 4. de quadr.
ita mortuum vere, and resurrexisse non credunt, and ob hoc diem salutis
nostrae, and laetitiae nostrae sui ieiunij moerore condemnant. Cumque ad
tegendum infidelitatem suam nostris audeant interesse mysterijs, ita in
Sacramentorum communione se temperant, vt interdum tutius lateant. Ore indigno
Christi corpus accipiunt sanguinem autem redemptionis nostrae haurire omnino
declinant. Quod ideo vestram volumus scire sanctitatem, vt vobis huiusmodi
homines and ijs manisestentur indicijs, and quorum depraehensa fuerit sacrilega
simulatio, notati and proditi, a sanctorum societate, sacerdotali authoritate
pellantur. They with draw them selves from the Sacrament of the health of man.
And as they deny Christ our Lord to be borne in the verity of our nature: So
do they not believe him to have been verily dead, and risen again. And therefore
do they condemn the day of our health and gladness, with the sadness of
their fasting. Manichies fasted on the sundaie
And when to cover their infidelity, they are so bold to be at the
ministracion of our mysteries, to the intent they may be the longer unknown,
they tempre themselves so in the communion of the Sacraments, That with
unworthy mouth they receive the body of Christ, but to drink A plain place
for real presence against the Proclamer
the blood of our redemption they utterly refuse. Which thing we will your
holiness to understand, that these manner of men by these tokens may be
known, and whose sacrilegall dissimulacion is perceived being disclosed, and
noted they may be by the preistlie authority banished from the so cietie or
fellowship of true Chrystian people.

In these words ye may learn the heresies of the Manicheis, ye may perceive
their wicked dissimulacion, ye may understand the very cause why they would
not receive the Sacrament under the form of wine, finally ye may perceive to
what purpose both kinds were commanded to be received, namely that soche
cloaked heretics might by soche means be disclosed and known.

Now Gelasius succeading this man, and finding this of spring of vipers
Comperimus Gelasius.
autem, quod quidam sumpta tantum sacri corporis portione, a calice sacrati
cruoris abstineant, qui procul dubio (quoniam nescio qua superstitione docentur
astringi) aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur, quia
diuisio vnius eiusdemque mysterij sine grandi facrilegio non potest peruenire.
We certenlie find, that certain men, when they have received the portion of
the Portion of the holy body and cup of the holy blood.
witholden, let them without all doubt either receive the wholl Sacraments,
or else let them be forbidden from the wholl. For the division of one very
mystery can not be done without great sacrilege. Thus he,

Now if ye will refer this sentence of Gelasius to the sentence of Leo, ye
shall perceive that Gelasius writes not against the doing of the catholic
Church receiving the Sacrament under one kind. But against the Manychies, who
by their heresy divided the blessed mystery of Christ, and teaching that he
had but a fantastical body, denied any very blood to be in yt, And therefore
in their dissembling manner receiving one kind as a Sacrament of soche
fantastical body, as they phantasied him to have, they refused the other
kind as a Sacrament of his blood, and so in their conceat they divided the
blood from the body, and so divided the mystery, which (as Gelasius says)
can not be done without great sacrilege, which thing every good catholic
affirms and

For if ye will call to remembrance, yt is declared in the last chapter that
the catholic Church teaches that the very body and blood of Christ, even
wholl Christ, God and man is under each kind, so that we Doctrine of the
catholic church touching each kind of the Sacr.
make no division of the body from the blood, or of the blood from the
body: or of the godhead from the manheade, or of the manhead from the godhead,
but we teach the wholl very body, and the wholl very blood, whole God, and
wholl man iointelie to be in these Sacraments of Christ's body and blood,
albeit the one is more principally the Sacrament of his body, and the other
more principally the Sacrament of his blood.

Weigh then therefore that these sainges were not spoken against Catholics, but
against heretics, that by their wicked heresy divided the blood of Christ
from his body, phantasieng him a body without blood, which in deed is a
great sacrilege: Seeing then yt is spoken against

But will ye besides all this wresting of this Author see also the synceritie
or raither the false sleight of this Proclamer, who to deceive his audience,
would not faithfully bring in the whole saing of the Author, as I have now
done. But brought in half a skore of the last words, and left out (I think
I may say) of very purpose an wholl skore that go before, because they made
so much against him, that he durst

For in the former words be two things very plainly taught against
Gelasius truncatlie alleged by the Proclamer avouches two things against
him, which he concealed.
him. The first is the very real presence of Christ's body and blood, in
that he so reverently calls the Sacrament under one kind the portion of the
holy body, and the other he calls, the cup of the holy blood. As this
is spoken reverently: So is yt spoken plainly. For when he says that they
abstein from the cup of the holy blood, he plainly teaches that the
content of the cup is holy blood, which holy blood is not mere spiritual.
For that, as yt is diverse times said, is not contained in extern or outward
material vessels, but in the inward spiritual vessels.

And although this one part of the Authors sainge, which the Proclamer left
out, does prove the real presence: Yet mark an other as affectuall as
this, which is, that he says, that these wicked men, these Manychies,
against whom he pronownced this sentence, did receive the holy body. Of the
which men also Leo said: Ore indigno Christi corpus accipiunt. They with
unworthy mouth, receive the body of Christ. If they received the holy
body, forsomoche as they did not, being evil men, receive the holy body
spirituallie, yt argues inuinciblie that they received the holy body
corporally.

The second thing, that he teaches is, the he calls not these two kinds,
Sacramentum, a Sacrament: But Sacramenta, Sacraments, in the Each kind an
wholl Sacram.
plorall nombre: Signifieng therbie that each of them is an wholle Sacrament.
And by this be answered the fond sainges of the Adversary, which he uses
against the catholic Church sainge, that her preistes give unto the people
but half a Sacrament, or a piece of a Sacrament, a truncate Sacrament, and
soche like. Where by this Proclamers Author, at the least by him produced, yt
is manifest that the people receiving one kind receive an wholl Sacrament, and
not a piece: They receive wholl Christ and not half, or a piece of Christ.

By this then yt may be perceived that the Author which the Proclamer has
truncatelie alleged against the catholic Church, being wholly produced
and truly understood makes all together against him. Soche is the
synceretie of the man in the handling of the doctors, that bringing in ten
words that seemed, but in deed made nothing for him, he left out thirty that
directly made so much, and so plainly against him, that I dare say, he was
ashamed, and his conscience much rebuked to bring them in. But why should not
he use his false shelft in them now as well as Melanchton did his false
corrupcion before?

He than being thus fully answered: we will now see the practice of the
Church for the receiving under one kind, that his truth may as well be
perceived in this, as his falsheade is in the other. For introduction people in
the primitive church earned home the Sacr. to receive yt in their houses
secretly.
where unto yt is to be understood, that in the primitive Church were many,
and great persecucions moved against the Chrystians, their common assemblies,
yet they might secretly at home receive yt by their own hands. And this
could be none other, but the Sacrament under

The plain practice whereof we find declared by Tertullian, who writing to his
wief, and dissuading her from the marriage of any infidel after his deceasse,
uses her private receipt of the Sacrament, as a thing to dissuade her bie,
saing: Non sciet maritus, quid secreto ante omnem cibum gusles? and si
sciuerit, Li 2. ad vxorcia. Practices of the primitive church proving as well
real presence, as reseruacion and private or sole receipt of the blessed Sac.
panem, non illum credit esse qui dicitur. Shall not thy husband, know what
thowe do eat secretly before all meat? and if he do know yt, he will not
believe yt to be that bread, that yt is said to be. As who might say. where ye
use in the morninges secretie, and fasting to receive the Sacrament, which I
being a chrystian man, and your husband ye may very well do, but if I die
either by natural death or by persecucion for my faith, which in this time is
like, if after my deceasse, ye marry with an infidel, will not he (think
you) perceive what you do secretly receive when ye be fasting, and so
perchance forbid ye so to do, or if he suffer you: yet this incommoditie
and grief ye shall have, that where ye take yt, and believe yt (as yt is in
deed) a great mystery, he will not regard yt, neither

For this private manner of the receipt of the Sacrament Saint Basil gives a
notable testimome. Who writing to a godly woman, that for the reverence that
she bare to the blessed Sacrament feared to receive the same into her hands,
as then the use was, and to carry yt home (as yt is said) in a fair linen
cloathe, and to reserve yt to receive when devotion should move her, without
the ministracion of the priest, says thus. Illud autem in persecutionis
temporibus necessitate cogi quempiam, non praesente sacerdote, aut ministro
Communionem proprta manu sumere, nequaquam esse grave superuacaneum Bas Epist.
ad Cas pat.
est demonstrare. Propterea quod longa consuetudine hoc ipso rerum vsu
confirmatum est. Omnes enim in eremis solitariam vitam agentes, vbi non est
sacerdos, Communionem domi servants, a seipsis communicant. In Alexandria vero
and in Aegypto vnusquisque eorum, qui sunt de populo, plurimum habet
Communionem in domo sua, Semel enim sacerdote sacrificium consecrante, and
distribuente, merito participare, and suscipere, credere oportet. Etenim and in
Ecclesia sacerdos dat partem, and accipit eam is, qui suscipit cum omni
liberate, and ipsam admouet ori propria manu. Idem igitur est virtute sieve
vnam partem quis accipiet a sacerdote, sieve p'ures parts simul. As for that
not to be a greuouse thing in the times of persecucion, any In Alexandria and
Egypt people had the Sac. in their private houses reserved
man to be enforced, with his own hand to receive the Communion, the priest
or Deacon not being present, yt is more then neadeth to prove, for because the
same thing is by along custom, and by the very use of things established and
confirmed. For all they that in the wilderness Lead a solitary life,
reserving the Communion in their houses, where there is no priest, they
communicate them selves. In Alexandria participate the same. For in the Church
also the priest gives part, and he that receaueth yt, takes yt with all
liberty, and with his own hand

Omitting to note unto you here in Saint Basil. how the Sacrament was
reserved in the houses of the Chrystian people to receive as their devotion
moved them, which inuinciblie and most plainly affirms and proves that the
Adversary denies, namely that the Sacrament ought to be reserved: I wish you
to note for that that is before said, that Saint Basil says, that in the
times of persecucion the people received the Sacrament at home by them selves,
when they had once received yt at the preistes hands. And this Saint Basil
wishes to be taken as no strange thing, for that they in Alexandria and
Egypt, yea and all soche as lived solitarelie in wilderness had the Sacrament
at home with them, and did communicate them selves. Which thing was not lately
practiced, but yt is a thing established and confirmed by ancient use and
custom long before the time of

If you desire a more plain testimony for this receipt under one kind harken
to Saint Cyprian, who writes thus: Praesente ac test meipso, accipite quid
euenerit. Parents forte fugientes, dum trepidi minus consulunt sub nutricis
alimento Cypr ser. 5. de lapsis.
par^ulam siliam reliquerunt. Relictam nutrix detulit ad magistratus. Illi ei
apud idolum quo populus consoluebat, quod carnem necdum posset edere per
aetatem, panem mero mixtum (quod tamen and ipsum de immolatione pereuntium
superat) tradiderunt. Recepit siliam postmodum matter. Sed facinus puella
commissum tam loqui and indicare non potuit, quam nec intelligere prius potuit,
nec arcere. Ignoratione igitur obreptum est, vt sacrificantibus nobis, eam
secum matter inferret. Sed enim puella mixta cum sanctis, precis nostrae and
orationis impatiens, nunc ploratu concuti, nunc mentis estu sluctuabunda
iactari, velut tortore cogente, quibus poterat indicijs conscientiam sacti in
simplicibus adhuc annis, rudis anima fatebatur. Vbi vero solemnibus adimpletis
calicem Diaconus offerre praesentibus coepit, and accipientibus caeteris, locus
eius aduenit, faciem suam paruulainstinctu maiestatis diuinae auertertere, os
labijs obturantibus premere, calicem recusare. Perstitit tamen Diaconus, and
reluctanti licet, de Sacramento calicis infudit. Tunc sequitur singultus, in
corpore atque ore violato Eucharistia permanere non potuit. Sanctisicatus in
Domini sanguine potus de pollutis visceribus erupit. Hear what happened my
self being present and witness. The parents of a child flienge Of a child
that received of the wine offered to idols, and afterward the B. Sac.
by chance, while in their fear they took not good adwisement, left their
little daughter at nourcing. The nource brought the little one so left unto the
officers. They before an idolle, where the people were gathered, did deliver
unto the same little one, because yt could not as yet for lack mother brought
her in with her. But truly the girl being among holy people, and not able to
abide our supplicacions and prayers, sometime was The Sacr. was ministered to
this child under one kind.
of the divine majesty, turned away her face, stopped her mouth with holding
her lips together, and refused the cup. The deacon notwithstanding
persisted, and even against her will powered in to her of the Sacrament of the
cup. Then ensewed boakinge and vomit. The Sacrament could not abide in that
desiled body and mouth, The sanctified drink in the blood of our Lord,
brust out of the polluted bowels. Thus far he.

For the better understanding of S. Cyprian observe that in his time, and so to
the time of S. August. yt was in use to ministre the Sacrament unto infantes
being chrystened, as to other of perfight age? And yet yt was to this child
ministered not under both kinds, but under the form of wine only. For if

Of this manner of ministracio^ under one kind we find a goodly testimony
also of the practice of the Church in the time of Chrysostom, reported in the
history of Sozomenus in this manner. Ioanne Constantmopolitanam Ecclesiam
optime gubernante, vir quidam e Macedoniana haeresi, vxorem eiusdem opinionis
habebat. Eccl. hist. li. 8. cap. 5.
Hic, cum Ioannem quomodo de Deo sentiendum esset, docentem audisset, dogma
illius laudabat, and vxorem quoque vt secum sentiret hortabatur. Cum vero illa
magis nobilium mulierum sermonibus, quam illius consuetudini obtemperaret, and
post frequentes admonitiones vir illius nihil effecisset: Nisi (inquit) in
diuinis consors fueris, neque in vitae communione posthac eris. Mulier hoc
audito, and consensum simulate policita, rem eam famulae cuidam communicate,
quam fidam sibi esse iudicabat, illiusque opera ad fallendum virum vritur.
Circa tempus autem mysteriorum (sciunt initiati quid sit quod dico) illa quod
accepit continens, quasi oratura procumbit. Famula astans clanculum illi dat,
quod secum in manu attulerat. Hoc cum dentibus admoueretur in lapidem
congelascit. Mulier perterrefacta, metuens ne quid sibi mali propter eam rem,
quae diuinitus acciderat, contingeret, ad Episcopum cursu contendit, ac seipsam
prodens lapidem ostendit, adhuc morsi vestigia habentem and materiam
incognitam, coloremque admirabilem ostendentem, simulque veniam cum lachrimis
petens, viro suo consensuram se policetur. Quodsi hoc cuipiam incredibile
videtur lapis iste testis est, qui etiamnum inter clinodia Ecclesiae
Constantinopolitanae asseruatur. In the time of the good government of the
church of Constantinople by The history of a woman that for the Sac. received
a stone.
John Chrysostom, a certain man of the heresy of the Macedonians had a wief
of the same opinion. This man when he had heard John Chrysostom teaching what
was to be thought of God, he commended his doctrine, and exhorted his wief,
that she also should be of his mind. But when she did more regard the
words of noble women, then his conversation or manner in says, and after
many admonicions her husband had done no Except in the matters of God thowe
be a companion with me, thowe shall not hereafter be a partaker of living with
me. The woman when she had heard this, and had dissimulatelie promised to
consent unto him she told the matter to a certain woman servant whom she
judged to This woman recaaued under one kind only
Her woman servant standing by her gives unto her priueily, that she had
brought in her hand: which thing when she had put to her teeth yt congealed
into a stone. The woman being astoined, fearing least some evil should happen
her for that thing, which by Gods power had chanced, she goes with speed to
the Bishop, and accusing her self, she shows the stone, having yet the
marks or printes of her bitinge, and showing an unknown matter and a
merueillouse color, and withal desiering with tears forgiveness she
promises to agree to her husband. If this thing seem to any man incredible,
this stone is witness of the matter, which until this day is kept in the
Church of Constantinople.

As this history is notable: so for the purpose yt is evident that the
Sacrament was ministered under one kind, that was under the form of bread.

To be short, as of the learned yt is testifies, the manner of receiving under
one kind, which is used in all the latin Church upon good fridaie, on The
manner of receaui^g under one kind upon good fridaie used in the primitive
Church.
which day the priest receaueth the host consecrated upon Mawndie Thursdaie,
has been so used from the primitive Church. Wherbie as by that that is before
said also, yt does well appear, that the receiving under one kind, has been
practiced in the primitive Church, notwithstanding the false report of the
Proclamer. Wherefore, Reader, be not deceived with soche bragges of untruth.
For though he has said yt, he neither does nor can prove yt, but stand
thowe to the doctrine of the catholic Church, who what she teaches, she
proved to be true, as by this matter thowe do perceive.

Thus having now ended the scriptures of the Gospel, with thanks to God, we
end this second book, praing that yt may be to his honor, and to the
profitte of the Readers. Amen.

THE THIRD BOOK.
THE FIRST CHAPTER ENTERS BY PREface into the first text of saint Paul
that touches the Sacrament and expwndeth yt according to the letter.
DIdymus, of whom, for that he was a famous learned man, saint Hierom
desiered to be taught and instructed, in his first book of the holy Ghost
(which work is translated by saint Hierom) considering how great a matter
yt was to treacte of li. 1. de Spiritu sancto. Divine things are with
reverence anc diligence to be handled.
divine things, and that therefore they aught with reverence to be used, he
says thus: Omnibus quidem, quae diuina sunt, cum reuerentia, and vehementi
cura oportet intendere. We must with reverence and great care, diligently
look unto all things that be divine. Wherefore mindinge by Gods aid, to
proceade in treacting of the blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, and of the presence of the same our Savior Jesus Christ, werie God and
very man in that Sacrament, with other matters thereunto apperteining, which
be in deed divine matters, I wish not only unto my self in the writing, but
also to the reader in the reading, that reverence, that to each of us
apperteineth. Before in the beginning of the first book.


And for my part considering what I have allreadie written as concerning the
holy scriptures, that they be hard and dark, so that (as saint Hierom
says) Sine praeuio and monstrante semitam ingredi non possumus, without a
fore guide and a shewer, we can not enter the right path of them. And for
somoche also as there is (the more pity) so great controversy of the matter to
be treacted of: I will not be so rash and irreuerent to the scriptures, Jre^.
li. 3. ca 4.
to handle them, wrest them, and abuse them after mine own fantasy, but I
will (as Irenaeus aduertiseth) have recouerse to the eldest churches, and learn
of them the truth, and true mening of soche scriptures, as be called Doubts in
controversies where to be dissolved.
shall now treacte. Quid enim? and si quando de aliqua quaestione modica
deceptatio esset, nonne in antiquissimas oportet recurrere ecclesias, in quibus
Apostoli conuersati sunt, and ab eis de praesenti quaestione sumere, quod
certum, and rei liquidum est. What? if at any time there be a deceptacion of a
little matter, must we not run or have recourse to the eldest churches in the
which the Apostles were conversant, and of them to take that that is certain
and plain? This Ibidem.
holy Father gives so much unto the ancient Fathers, that if there were no
scriptures he says, we should follow the order of tradicion, which the
Apostles have delivered unto them. Quid autem si neque Apostoli quidem
scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat ordinem sequi traditionis, quem
tradiderunt his quibus committebant ecclesias? What (says Irenaeus) if neither
the Apostles had left us scriptures, did yt not behoue us to follow the order
of Tradicion yt to be followed.
tradition, which they delivered unto those, to whom they committed the
churches? Thus Irenaeus.

In which sentence of this holy Martyr we are not only taught, for the
report of which, as well as for soche as be in the scriptures, we must creditt
the Fathers. So that yt is of this holy martyr to be learned, how Which
fathers are to be co^sulted with in controversies.
for certain knowledge of things that be in doubt and controversy they must
be consulted with, which were in the ancient church before the controversy
was ever moved. Of the which matter we read a like counsel in the tripartite
history. Therefore as heretofore I have not used mine own judgment or
fantasy in the exposition of soche scriptures as Li. 9. ca. 19
do speak of this mystery by me treacted of: No more will I hereafter in
soche as shall be brought out of S. Paul for the proof and confirmacion of
the truth of the matter of the blessed Sacrament and the mynistracion thereof.

And first, to take the places and sentences here to be handled, in order as
they are written by saint Paul, we will begin with this: Nolo enim vos 1.
Cor. 10.
ignorare fratres, quontam patres nostri omnes sub nube fuerunt, and omnes mare
transieru^t, and omnes in Moyse baptizati sunt in nube and in mari, and omnes
eandem escam spiritualem manducauerunt, and omnes cundem potum spiritualem
biberunt, bibebant autem de spirituali consequente cos petra, Petra autem erat
Christus. Brethren I would not that ye should be ignorant how that our fathers
were all under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all
baptized under Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and did all eat of one
spiritual meat, and did all drink of one spiritual drink, and they drank
of that spiritual rock that followed them, which rock was Christ.

Yt shall not be without profit, for the better understanding of this
scripture, if we do search the cause why saint Paul makes rehersall of soche
benefittes, as the Jews received at the hand of God, at their departure out
of Egypt, and in the desert. The cause is both breiflie and clerelie Homel.
in dictu^ Apostli Nolo vos ignor.
declared by Chrysostom, who asks the question, and solueth yt thus: Quare,
and vnde incidit in hanc historiam? Increpabat eos qui temere, and non
requisiti ad Idola ingrediuntur, pollutam comedentes mensam, and tangentes
Idolothyta. Et cum ostendisset, quod duplex damnum illi inde sustinerent, nam
and insirmiores offendebant, and ipsi Daemoniorum participes erant, and cum per
praedicta satis spiritus little humilasset, and docuisset: ostendit fidelem
spectare, non solum quae sua sunt, debre, sed and quae multorum. Volens eis
incutere timorem, veterem historiam eis recenset. Siquidem and illi magna de se
sentiebant, quasi sideles, and ab errore liberati, and scientiam assecuti,
ineffabilium sacramentorum participes effecti, necnon and ad regnum coelorum
vocati. Volens ergo declarare quod illorum nulla sit vtilitas, nisi adsit vita
tantae gratiae respondens, ex veteri historia ipsos erudit. Wherefore, Why S.
Paul reherseth the benefittes that the Jews received, 1. Cor. 10.
and from whence fell he into this story? He did rebuke them which rashly,
and not being required, did enter in to the Idols, eatinge the defiled table,
and touching things offered to Idols: And when he had showed that they by yt
did suffer double harm. For they both offended the weak, and thy themselves
were partakers of Deuells. And when by the forsaied things he had sufficiently
humbled their spirittes, and had taught them. He declares that the faithful
aught not only to look to those things that appertein to himself: but also
to things that appertain to other many. Now willing to strike fear into
them, he reherseth good religion without good life not auaiable.
the old history unto them. For they also did think much of themselves,
Willing therefore to declare, that of these things there is no prositte

In which sentence ye perceive the cause of the rehersall of the benefittes
given to the Jews, and so in that place recited by saint Paul to be to put
the Corinthians in fear, and to diswarde them from evil by the example of the
Jews, who notwithstanding the receipt of so many benefittes, for that they
were ingrate and disobedient, not seking by an aunswerable life to please their
Lord God, as he by soche benefits did pleasure Benefits of the Jewesas they
were figures of our benefits, so their plagues of our plagues.
them, God in them had no pleasure, but plagued them, and ouerthrewe them in
the desert. Even so the Corinthians, who had received the very things and
true benefittes, as the Sacrament of Baptism, the holy Ghost, and had eaten
the body of Christ, and dronken his blood. Which benefittes were figured by
the benefittes given to the Jews, that if they would be proud, unthankful,
and disobedient, and would not lead a life wourthie their vocacion, that God
would after the gift of so many benefittes and so great, as their demerittes
required, have no pleasure in them, but plague In 10. 1. Cor. hom 23.
of our plagues and punishments, as Chrysostom says: Quemadmodnm enim dona
figurae sunt, ita and supplicia. Wherefore saint Paul says: Haec autem
infigura facta sunt nostri, vt non simus concupiscentes malorum sicut and illi
concupierunt. These are figurs or examples unto us, that we should not lust
after evil things as they lusted. Faith with out woorks sufficethnot in
persons of discretion.


Here by the way to note, by these scriptures is overthrown the wicked
heresy of them which have taught, that if a man believe in Christ, and have
received his sacraments, how wicked so ever his life be, he shall be saved.
For here ye perceive that though the Corinthians had received the faith and the
sacrament annexed to the same: yet if there life and conversation were not
agreeable and aunswerable, that they should fall into Gods displeasure, and
neither faith, neither sacraments should auaill them as Chrysostom does
expownde.

The cause thus known why saint Paul recited these things, yt were Four
benefits of the Jews nombred.
not amiss to know what things they were, and what commodity or benefitt
happened unto the Jews by these. These things in nombre be four: The cloud,
the Sea, Manna, and the water that flowed out of the rock. Of these four
Esdras, reciting unto God his benefittes showed and done, says thus: And the
readde Sea did thowe divide before them 2. Esd. 9.
in sundre, so that they went through the midst of the Sea dry shooed, and
their persecutours threwest thowe in to the depth as a stone in mighty waters,
and leddest them on the day time in a clowdie pillar, and on the night season
in a pillar of fire, to show them light in the way that they went. Thowe
gave them bread from heaven when they were hongrie, and broughtest forth
water for them out of the rock, when they were thirsty.

The division of the read sea, whereof Esdras first makes mention, The read Sea.
shall be perceived to be a great wonderful work of God, and a great benefitt
to the Israelites, if the history of the same be considered. In the book of
Exodus we read, that when Pharao king of Egypt, Exodus 14.
had, according to gods commandment sent unto him by Moses, prepared to
follow them, and to persecute them. Whose mighttie army, and great nombre of
horses and chariettes, when the Israelites saw poursewing Pharao and his host
behind them at their back, and the readd sea before them: So that there
appeared unto them nothing but woeful distress, and inevitable peril of
death, they were sore afraied and carried out to God. And Moses stretched out
his hand over the read Sea, and God carried away the Sea, by a very strong
east wind all that night, and made the Sea dry land, so that the children of
Israel went through the midst of the Sea with dry feet, having the waters
as a wall unto them, both on the right hand, and on the least. And the
Egyptians followed after them into the midst of the Sea, and God caused the
waters to return upon them, and drowned them with their horses, and chariettes.
For which great wonder Moses sange in praise to God: Flauit spiritus tuus,
and operuit cos mare, submersi sunt quasi Exodus 15.
plumbum in aquis vehementibus. The wind blewe, and the Sea covered them, they
sanke like lead in the mighty waters. Filij autem Israel ambulauerunt per
siccum in medio ^eius. But the children of Israel went on dry land in the
myddest thereof.

As ye may perceive by this, what a great work of God, and how great a
benefitt to the Jews yt was that saint Paul in these few words spoke The
cloud.
(that all passed through the red Sea) So was yt likewise that he said, that
all the Fathers were under the cloud. Of the beginning of this clowd we read
also in Exodus that when the children of Israel departed out of Egypt, that
their journey should not be uncertain, and they wander without Exodus 13. and 14.
order, the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them
the way, and by night in a pillar of the fire to give them light, that they
might go both by day and by night. The pillar of the cloud departed not by
day, nor the pillar of sire by night out of the sight of the people.
Benefits of the Cloud.
This clowdie pillar was not only a guide and a leader unto the people: but
yt was also a bullwarke of defense. For when Pharao with his army did
persecute the children of Israel, the angel of God, which went before the
host of Israel, removed and began to go behind them. And the clowdie pillar,
that was before the face of them began to stand behind the^, and came between
the host of the Egyptians, and the host of Israel. Yt was Number. 9.
not at the other. This cloud did not only now serve for the commodity of
the Israelites: but further on their journey in the wilderness, yt was a great
benefitt unto them, as we read in the book of Nombres, where we learn that yt
covered the Tabernacle allwaie by day, and the similitude of fire by night.
And yt happened that when the cloud abode upon the tabernacle from even unto
the morning, and was taken up in that morning then they iourneied. Or if the
cloud tarried two days, or a month, or a long season upon the tabernacle, and
remained thereon, the children of Israel abode still and iourneied not. And as
sooen as the cloud was taken up they iourneied. Of this cloud also speaks
the Prophet David in the psalm, reck ninge yt among other as a great
benefitte of God given to the Israelites, Expandit nubem in protectionem eorum,
and ignem vt luceret eis per noctem. Manna.
He spread out a cloud to be a covering, and fire to give them light in the
night season. Exd. 16.


Thus this goodly benefitt somewhat opened and declared, we shall do the like
about the next, which is Manna. Of the which we read, that the xv. day of
the second month, after the departing of the children of Israel would to God
we had died by the hand of the Lord in the land of Egypt, when we set by
the flesh pottes, and when we did eat bread our bellies full. For ye have
brought us out into this wilderness to kill this wholl multitude with honger.
Then said the Lord unto Moses: Be hold, I will rain bread from heaven to
you, and the people shall go out and gather day by day.

And in the same chapter yt follows: And in the morning the dew lay rownde
about the host, And when the dew was fallen, behold yt lay upon the grownde
in the wilderness small and rownde, and when the children of Israel saw yt,
they said every one to his neighbor: yt is Manna. For they wist not what yt
was. And Moses said unto them this is the bread, which the Lord has given
you to eat.

Thus God fed the children of Israel in the wilderness, where they did
neither sow ne reap with this bread from heaven, of the which they had no
lack. This is the meat that saint Paul speaks of that all the Et Psalm.
77.
pluit illis Manna ad manducandum, and panem caeli dedit eis. He rained down
Manna also upon them for to eat, and gave them food from heaven. Of the
wounders of this bread more shall be said in the next chapter.

The last benefitt recited of saint Paul in this place is, that they all
drank Matter of the Rock.
of one drink that came out of the rock. Of this miraculouse drink we read,
that when the children of Israel were in Raphadim where was no water, the
people thirsted, and thereupon murmured against Moses and said: Exodus 17 Number.
20.
Why hauest thowe brought us out of Egypt, to kill us, and our children, and
our cattle with thyrst? And Moses and Aaron at the commandment of God
gathering the people together, Moses took the rod where with he smote the
river in Egypt and the redd Sea, and smott the rock twice, and the water came
out of the rock abundantly, and the multitude drank, and their beasts also.
And this was a miraculouse work of God, and a great benefitt to the Jews.
David the Prophet enombreth yt so among other the benefittes of God, done for
his Interrupit petram in eremo, and adaquauit eos velut in abysso multa. Psalm.
77.
Et eduxit aquam de petra, and eduxit tanquam flumina aquas. He claue the hard
rock in the wilderness, and gave them drink thereof as yt had been out of the
great deapth, he brought waters out of the stony rock, so that yt gushed
out like the rivers. Now these four things contained in saint Paul's
sentence being opened and known what they be, and how they were miraculously
wrought for the commodity and benefitt of the children of Israel, and wherefore
saint Paul did enombre them: the letter of the said sentence may be
perceived.

THE SECOND CHAPTER SHOWS what these four things done in the old law
did figure in
AS these four things before rehearsed, were verily done in the old law: So
are they figurs of things verily do in the new law. The figure must be like
the thing figured in some poincts, but not in all. Neither must yt be in all
poinctes unlike, For then yt can not be a sigure, as Chrysostom says: Neque
omnino alienum oportet esse typum a veritate. Alioqui non esset typus: Neque
omnino adaequari veritati, quia alioqui and ipsa veritas foret, sed oportet
manner in suo modo, and neque comprehendere Homilia indictu^ Apost Nolo vos
ignor.
omnem veritatem: neque omni veritate destitui. Nam si totum contingat, iterum
ipsa est veritas: Si autem a toto destituatur, and nulla sit similitudo
consequenter non potest esse figura. Neither must the figure altogeter be
unlike or not agreeable to the truth, or else yt should not be a figure.
Neither may yt altogether be like unto the truth, for then yt should be the
truth yt self. But yt must abide in his own manner, and neither in all things
answer the truth, neither in all things be A figure what a thing yt must be.
unlike the truth. For if it answer al, yt is again, the truth yt self: but
if yt

In seking therefore of what things in the new Testament, these things be the
figures: yt shall be necessary to observe, with what things they will most
aptly agree in similitude, and yet not in all parts. This shall be the better
done, if we first lay before us soche things as be in the figure. And for
somoche as saint Paul in the rehersall of these figures, makes first mention
of the cloud saing that all our Fathers were under the cloud, we also shall
first speak of that.

As touching the which, I wish that you call to yowr remembrance that
Commodities of the Cloud.
that was spoken in the last chapter, yt was there declared, that the clowd was
a leader of the people in their journey, so that they wandered not in vncerte^
ways but following the cloud they walked the right way, even both in their
flight out of Egypt, and also in the wilderness. Yt also defended them from
the tyranny of Pharao, and his host, standing betwixt them and their enemies,
so that their enemies might not come to them to hurt them. A cloud also
defends from the violent heat of the sun, and mitigateth the

Among all to no one thing may they better agree, than to the holy Ghost, as a
learned writer says, expownding this place of saint Paul: Quod enim illis
nubes protegens, conducens, ac refrigerans: id nobis Spiritus sanctus, actionum
nostrarum Dux, and protector, libidinumque moderator, and extinctor. That that
the cloud defending, conducting, and refreshing was unto them, that unto us is
the holy Ghost, the guide and protector of our doings and the temperer and
extinguisher The clowd applied to the holy Ghost, as the sigure to the thing
sigured.
of our unlawful lusts.

By the cloud the children of Israel were led in their way out of Egypt
through the wilderness to the land of promise: By the holy Ghost we are guided
out of the servitude of the Deuell, and sin, holy ghost we are preserved and
defended, from the army of sins and wickedness.

The second benefitt that S. Paul reherseth is that the fathers, did pass
Tract. 45. in Joan.
through the red sea. The red Sea (as S. Augustine declares) signifies
Baptism: Mare rubrum signficat baptismum. Moses ductor per mare rubrum,
significat Christu^. Populus transiens, significat fideles. Mors Aegyptiorum
significat abolitionem pectorum. The read Sea a figure of Baptism.
The red sea signifies Baptism. Moses the leader through the red sea
signifies Christ. The people passing through yt signifies the faithful. The
death of the Egiptians signifies the abolishing of sins. Thus he.

In which saing of S. Augustine, we perceauing the things done in the old
Testament to signify things done in the new Testament, may also by
applicacion of the one to the other, perceive how answerable the one is to the
other, Which yet in some part S. Augustine more clearly opens in an other
place: Rubet mare rubrum: Baptismus vtique Christi sangnine consecratus. Hosts
sequentes a tergo moriuntur: peccata praeterita. Ducitur populus per desertum:
Co^t. Faust.
baptisati omnes nondum perfruentes promissa patria, sed quod non vident,
sperando and per patientia^ expectando tanquam, in deserto sunt. The red Sea
is redd, likewise Baptism consecrated with the blood of Christ. The enemies
following die be hind their back: the sins past are destroyed. The people is
led through the desert: all the baptized not yet enioieng the promissed
contrie, but hopping, and through patience looking for that they see not, they
are as in the desert. Thus much S. Augustine.

Chrysostom also most manifestly sets forth this figure, applieng yt to
baptism, as to the thing by yt figured. And first he diligently notes how
S. Paul to every of these figurs, which the fathers received adds this
word (all) saing: all our fathers were under the cloud, and all did pass
the Sea, and all were baptized under Moses, and all did eat of one spiritual
meat, and all did drink of one spiritual drink: In the which he notes a In
dictum Apost. N^olo vos ignor.
great similitude and answearablenesse of the things figured to the figures,
and afterapplieng yt to the purpose says: Volens enim declarare, quod sicut
in Ecclesiano^ est discrime serui and liberi, neque ciuis and aduenae, neque
senis and adolescentis, neque insipientis and saptentis, neque priuati and
principis, neque mulieris and viri, sed omnis aetas omnis dignitas, and
vnaquaeque natura in Baptismum descendit, etiam Rex and pauper eadem
purificatione vtuntur id quod maximum nostrae praesertim nobilitatis est
argumentum. Nam similiter and mendicus, and purpuram gestans ad mysteria
admittuntur. neque in sacramentis mayor istius quam illius est respectus. sic
and in veteri conuenienter, omnes posuit. Neque enim dicere potes quod Moses
per arida^, Iudaei per mare transierunt, neque quod abundantes per vnam, and
indigi per aliam viam, neque mulieres sub sereno, viri sub nube fuerunt, sed
and sub mari omnes, and sub nube omnes, and in Moysen omnes,. Nam transitus
ille futuri Baptismi tipus erat. Oportebat igitur primum figuram illam been
omnia figurare, quo omnes ipsam tenerent, sicut and hic omnes ex aequo
participes sunt. He willing to declare, that as in the Church there is no
difference of bond man and free man, neither of contrie man and
straungerneither of old man, and young man, neither of unwise man, and wise
man, neither of private man and prince, neither of woman and man: but every
age, every dignity, and every nature equally descends into the font: both
king also and poour man use one purificacion, The which thing is a great
argument cheiflie of our nobility. Baptism is received of all in different he
both rich and power.
For both the beggar and he that wears purple be in like sort admitted

Whom as ye perceive to affirm that the passage through the red Sea was a
figure of baptism: so have ye also perceived the one very lively applied to
the other, for that part, and for so much as they were compared together. For
which afterward coming to the very poincte of the thing, he directly applies
the figurs to the things figured in the^selfs. Et poterimus te docere quomodo
vetus ad nouum Testamentum habeat cognationem, and ille transitus ad nostrum
baptisma. Nam ibi aqua: and hic aqua. Lauachrum hic: and ibi pelagus. Omnes hic
in aquam ingrediuntur, and ibi omnes. Iuxta hoc similitudo est. Postea vis
cognoscere colorum veritatem? ibi quidem liberati sunt ex AEgipto per mare: hic
autem ab Idololatria. and ibi quidem Pharao submersus est: hic autem Diabolus.
Ibi AEgyptii submersi: hic autem vetus homo peccatis defoditur. And we can
teach thee (says Chrysostom) how the old Testament agrees to the new,
and that passage with our baptism. For there was water and here is water. Here
a wishing place, and Baptism and the read Sea compared together.
there the Sea: All here enter into the water, and all there. According to this
here is similitude. Wilt thowe afterward know the truth of the colors? There
they were delivered out of Egypt by the Sea, here from Idolatry. There Pharao
was drowned, here the Deuell. Their Egiptians were drowned, here the old man
with his sins is buried.

In this although Chrysostom has sufficiently showed the agreement and
similitude of the figure of Baptism with Baptism yt self: Yet he staieth not,
but proceadeth by like applicacion to show the excellency of the effect or
operacion of the one above the other, sainge thus: Vide cognationem figurae ad
veritatem, and veritatis excellentiam. Vbi igitur est affinitas figurae ad
veritatem? Omnes ibi, hic omnes. Per aquam sunt ibi, and hic per aquam. A
seruitute liberati sunt illi, and nos a seruitute liberati sumus, sed non ab
eadem omnes. Nam illi quidem a seruitute Aegytiorum, nos vero a seruitnte
Daemonum. Illi quidem a seruitute Barbarorum, nos vero a seruitute peccati. ad
libertatem venerunt illi, and nos, sed non ad eandem. Nam nos ad The goodly
effects of Baptism.
multo clariorem. Behold (says he) the likelihood of the figure to the
truth and the excellency of the truth. Where then is the affinity of the
figure to the truth? All there, and all here. By water there, by water here.
They are delivered from servitude, and we are delivered from servitude, but not
all from one or the same servitude. For they were delivered from the servitude
of the Egiptians: but we from the servitude of Deuells. They from the servitude
of barbarouse people, but we from the servitude of sins. They came to
liberty, and we also, but not to all one. For we came to a much more
honorable liberty. Thus far Chrysostom.

Now that ye have heard him speaking so much and so plainly declaring this
figure of Baptism, I think yt for me vain and superfluouse to add any
thing to his sainges as to make the matter more clear and plain, where all is
already so manifest, except I would attempt to put some more light to the
bright sunnie beams, which were mere folly.

Wherefore leaving this figure sufficiently opened and declared we shall do our
endeavor to make that plain that follows in S. Paul, where he says: Et omnes
in Moyse baptisati sunt in nube, and in mari. And all were baptized under
Doubts that may rise of S. Paul's words.
Moses in the cloud and in the Sea. These words be somewhat obscure and
dobtfull. For if the cloud (as before is said) were a figure of the holy
Ghost, and the red Sea of Baptism, and Moses of Christ: How then be they
baptized in all these three? Again, seeing that the red Sea only in this
scripture is appointed as the figure of Baptism, why now does he seem to
ioin all three as the figure of baptism? Moreover if this be but a figure of
Baptism, why does he teach, that the childeren of Israel were baptized, as
though yt were very baptism in deed, and not the figure? Yt seems also to
have some scruple that he says they were baptized in Moses, as though that
Moses were the institutour of Baptism.

These doubts will be solued, if yt be remembered that to baptism, besides The
same doubts solued. Three things necessarelie to be had in Baptism.
the party to be baptized and the virtues in him requisite, there be three
principal things necessarily to be had: that is, Christ the institutour and
Exibat ad eum Hierosolima, Math. 3.
and omnis Iudaea, and omnis regio circa Iordanem, and baptisabantur ab eo in
Iordane. Jerusalem and all Iewrie and all the contrie about Iordane, went
out to him, and were baptized of him in Jordan. Yt is true that John did
baptize before Christ, but he baptized not then with the baptism of Christ
of the which Christ was the institutour: but he baptized with the baptism
which was called the baptism of John, as yt is in the Acts of the Apostles.
So that Act. 19.
there were two Baptismes: the Baptism of John, and the Baptism of Christ The
distinction of the which the said John makes sainge: Venit fortior me post
me, cuius non sum dignus procumbens soluere corrigiam calceamentorum eius. Ego
Mar. 1.
baptiso vos aqua, ille baptisabit vos Spiritu sancto. There comes one
stronger then I am after me, whose shoe latchett I am not woourthie to stoop
down and unloose. I have baptized you with water, but he shall baptize you

This distinction appears also in the Acts of the Apostles: where we read
that Paul came to Ephesus, and fownde certain disciples and said unto Act.
19. The baptism of Christ and of John distincted.
them: Have ye received the holy Ghost, since ye believed? And they said unto
him, we have not heard of the holy Ghost, whether their be any or not.
Wherewith then were ye baptized? And they said, with John's Baptism. Then said
Paul, John verily baptized with the baptism of penance, saing unto the
people that they should believe on him, which should come after him, that is
on Christ Jesus, when they heard this they were baptized in the name of our
Lord Jesus,

Thus then yt does manifestly appear that the Baptism of John was not the
very Baptism, but raither a figure or a preparacion to the very baptism
which is the Baptism of Christ (as Chrysostom says) Vide igitur quam
diligenter Homil. 12. in Matthew.
haec expresserit. Cum enim dixisset, quia venerit praedicare Baptisma
poenitentiae, intulit: in remissionem peccatorum, quasi diceret: Ego illis
confiteri peccata sua, and poenitentiam agere persuasi, non vt castigarentur
omnino, sed vt dignius postea remissionis dona susciperent. Nisi enim se ipsos
ante damnassent, neque sane gratia^ requisissent. Non quarentes vero gratiam,
neque remissione^ profecto assecuti fuissent. Ita istud Baptisma alterius, id
est, Christi Baptismatis praeparatio est, and idcirco dicebat vt crederent in
aduenie^tem post eum. See therefore how diligently he has expressed these
things, When The Baptism of John preached remission of sins, and prepared
men to the baptism of Christ.
he had said, that he came to preach the Baptism ofpenance, he inferred: in
remission of sins. As who should say: I have persuaded them to confess
their sins, and to do penance, not that they should be all together amended
but that they might more wourthilie afterward receive the gifts of remission.
For except they had before condemned them selves they had never sought for
grace, and not seking for grace, truly they had never obtained remission. so
this Baptism was the preparacion of an other Baptism, that is of the Baptism
of Christ. And therefore he said that they should believe in him, that was
coming after him. Thus he.

In this saing of Chrysostom two things are to be observed: first that he
says that the Baptism of John was a preparacio^ to the Baptism of Christ.
The second (which is a proof that yt was not very Baptism, but a figure or
a preparacion) that yt did not remitt sins, Which thing although Qua vero de
causa ad baptisandi est missus officium? Et hoc nobis idem Baptista declarat,
dicens: quoniam venerit in regione Iordanis praedicans Baptisma poenitentiae in
remissionem peccatorum. Et certe remissionem peccatorum non habebat. Hoc enim
munus illius baptismatis erat, quod postea Christus instituit. in hoc enim
vetus noster homo crucisixus est, ac sepultus. and ante crucem nunquam prorsus
extitit remissio peccatorum. siquidem vbique ipsius hoc sanguini deputatur.
Idem enim istud Paulus affirmat: Sed mundati The baptism of Christ gave
remission of sins the baptism of John not so, which over throws the
doctrine of Calvin.
estis, inquit, sed sanctisicati estis, non per Baptisma Ioannis sed in nomine
Domini nostri Jesus Christi, and spiritu Dei nostri. Et alibi ipse dicit:
Ioannes quidem praedicauit baptismum poenitentiae, and non ait remissionis, sed
vt crederent in aduenientem post cum. For what cause was John sent to the
office of baptising? Thus also the same Baptist declares, saing: that he came
in the region of Iordane preaching the Baptism of penance in remission of
sins. And truly this Baptism had not remission. For this gift apperteineth
to the baptism, which Christ afterward did institute. In this baptism our
old man was crucified affirm: But ye are cleansed: but ye are sanctified, not
by the baptism of John, But in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the
Spirit of our God. And in an other place he says: John did preach the
baptism of penance, and he does not say of remission: but that they should
believe in him, that was coming after him. Thus far Chrysostom.

By all this that is said of Chrysostom yt is easy to be perceived that
Christ is the institutour of Baptism, that is auailable before God for the
remission of sins. And that John Baptized to penance, thereby to prepare men,
that they baptized with the Baptism of Christ, might receive remission
Differences of the Baptism of John, and of Christ.
of their sins, for somoche as they were penitent. Of these woourdes may be
gathered these differences of these two baptismes. The baptism of John was a
figure and preparacion of and to the very effectual Baptism of Christ: The
baptism of Christ the thing prepared for, and the true thing by figure
signified. The Baptism of John was in water: The Baptism of Christ in water
and the holy Ghost. The Baptism of John was in water to penance: The
baptism of Christ in water and the holy Ghost to the remission

Christ then the institutour of this Sacrament who leads us from the
Tirannie of the Satanicall Pharao, and the servitude of sinful Egipte, and
brings us through the miraculouse fowntain, to walk through the desert of
this world to the heavenly land of promise is as necessarily required as
Moses was to lead the people out of Egypt through the sea into the deserte,
to journey to the earthly land of promise, who was the figure of Christ, as
S. Austen has testified. Wherefore the thing figured must needs answer the
figure.

As Christ the institutour is necessarily required: so also is the holy Ghost,
and the water, Christ him self testifieng: Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and
Spiritu sancto, non potest introire in regnum Dei. Except a man be born a new
of the Joan 3.
water and the holy Ghost, he can not enter into the kingdom of God. Now

The Jews under Moses were baptized in the cloud and the sea in the dark
manner of a figure: The Chrystians in the holy Ghost and the water in the clear
manner of the truth, as Origin says. Antea in enigmate fuit Baptismus Homil.
7. in Numer.
in nube, and in Mari: Nunc autem in specie regeneratio est in aqua and Spiritu
sancto. Before Baptism was in a dark manner, in the cloud and in the Sea: But
now in clear manner regeneracion is in the water and in the holy Ghost. This
the^ that is said well weeghed and considered the doubts before moved are
clearly solued, and the text thus far expounded.

THE THIRD CHAPTER EXPOWNDETH the resideu of the text: Et omnes eandem escam
IT is to be retained in memory, that (as in the first chapter is said) S.
Paul in this sentence did rehearse certain benefittes of God bestowed upon the
Jews, as figures of greater benefittes, that God has and does bestow upon
the chrystians. What the cloud and the sea did to the commodity of the Jews,
yt is there declared: Likewise what Manna, and the water flowing out of the
rock.

The second chapter began to declare what these great works and wonders of
God in the old law, did figure in the new law, and finished three of them,
that is, what Moses, and what the cloud, and what the read sea did signify.
Now there remains to be declared what Manna and the water of the rock did
signify, and of what things in the new Testament

In this declaracion yt apperteineth to me to member, that in the first book
in the 22 chapter, where by order these two should have been declared, upon
consideracion that S. Paul did make mention of them, and that I would not be
greuouse to the reader with the reading of one matter twice: I differed yt, and
reserved yt to this place. Wherefore I must, I say, remember in the declaracio^
of these two, to keep soche order, as I would have done there, and as I did with
the rest of the figures there declared. The order was by scriptures of the new
Testament and doctors to declare what things the figures did prefigurate.
That done, to declare what prophecies were of the same, and them according to
the mind of the holy Fathers to apply to the thing prophesied.

Omnes (says S. Paul) eandem escam spiritualem manducauerunt. All did eat of
one spiritual meat. What this one meat was, of the which they did all eat,
yt is before declared, that yt was Manna. Which thing also Chrysostom does
testify: Quia dixit de mari, et de nube, and de Moise: Adiecit preterea: Et
omnes eundem spiritualem cibum comederunt. Sicut tu (inquit) a lauachro aquarum
ascendens, ad mensam curris: sic and illi a mari ascendentes, ad mensam venere
nouam, and admirabilem. De Manna loquor. By cause he had spoken of the cloud,
and of Moses: He also added: And they have all eaten of one spiritual meat.
As thowe (says he) cominge up from the wasshing place of the waters, do
have the to the table: so they also cominge up from the sea, came to a new
and a wonderful table, I speak of Manna.

In these words ye perceive Chrysostom to expownde this same one meat,
which all the Fathers did eat of after they had passed through the red Sea,
to be Manna. Agreablie whereunto S. Augustine also speaking of this text of S.
Paul, which we have now in hand says thus: Quando aute^ manducauit Manna
populus Israel? Cum transisset mare rubrum. When did the people of Tract. 11.
in Joan.
Israel eat Manna? When they had passed through the red sea. And a little
after he says: Si ergo figura maris tantum valuit, species Baptismi quantum
valebit? Si quod gestum est in figura, traiectum populum ad Manna perduxit,
quid exhibebit Christus in veritate Baptismi sui traiecto per eum populo suo?
If then the figure of the led and co^ducted by him? Manna then, as by the holy
Fathers we are taught Tho. Aqui Jn. 10. 1 Cor.


But yt is to be considered why saint Paul did call yt spiritual meat,
seeing yt was sensible and corporal, and did corporally feade: He does so
call yt, because yt was miraculouslie given unto them, as saint Thomas in the
exposition of this same text says: Vocat came spiritualem, cum esset
corporalis, and miraculose fuit data. He calls that meat spiritual, when yet
yt was corporal, because yt was miraculouslie given. The like cause why yt was
called spiritual, Jn. 10. 1. Cor.
does Chrysostom also assign: Quamuis quae dabantur in sensu perciperentur,
spiritualiter tamen dabantur, non secundum naturam consequentium, sed secundum
muneris gratiam. Although those things which were given were perceived in
sense or sensibly: yet they were given spirituallie, not according to the
course Manna why it was called a spiritual meat.
of nature, but after the gift of grace: For although Manna were a corporal
thing: yet yt was made by God in the clouds by his especial work causing yt
to fall, as yt were dew upon the earth, which thing we see not to be done by
common course of nature, for that the like is not now

As their meat which God sent them in the desert was spiritual: so was also
there drink in the desert spiritual. Wherefore saint Paul says: Et omnes
eundem potum spititualem biberunt. And all drank of one spiritual drink. This
Water of the rock. why yt was called spiritual drink.
drink is called spiritual, because yt was miraculouslie given them out of
the rock, by the power and work of the spiritual rock which was Christ, as
S. Paul immediately declares: Bibebant despirituali consequente eos petra:
Petra autem erat Christus. They drank of that spiritual Rock that followed
them. The Rock was Christ. Yt is much against nature that an hard and a dry
stone should bring forth streams of water, that is both soste and moist. So
is yt against nature, that the great rock, which once gave them water should
follow them, through the desert, and give them drink sufficient for so great a
multitude of people, at all times and places. But as the spiritual Rock
Christ by his great power and work gave them gusshing streams of water in
great plenty to serve their necessity in that place out of a Bibebant de
spirituali consequente eos petra. They drank of the spiritual rock that
followed them, Petra autem erat Christus, but that Rock was Christ. Note that
saint Paul says not, they drank of that material rock: but they drank
of a spiritual rock, which followed them, which spiritual Rock was Christ.

I wish this to be well noted here because Oecolampadius the Archenemie
Oecola^p. abuses S. Paul's words: The rock was Christ
of the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, affirms this text of
saint Paul (the rock was Christ) to be a figurative speech. And uses yt
for his probacio^ to prove the saing of Christ (This is my body) to be also a
figurative speech. Now forsomoche as this text is here to be expownded being
now in handling, yt is meet that yt be not only expownded in the native
sense, but also delivered from all adulterine and violent expositions Oecolamp.
in Expsitio^ Hoc est. Corpus
which the said Oecola^padius would wrest yt unto, for a further mischief.
Let Te^pus est vt probemus verba caenae Dominicae eode^ tropo dicta, quo illa
quae Apostolus dixit: Petra aute^ erat Christus, hoc est petra significabat
Christum, vel erat figura Christi. Yt is time (says he) that we prove the
words of the Lords supper, to be spoken by the same figure, by the The rock
was Christ, that is to say, the rock fignified Christ: or the rock was a
figure of Christ. Thus he.

If Oecolampadius will have the words of Christ, This is my body,
understood with the same sense that these words of S. Paul, The rock was
Christ, are to be understood, I shall ioin with him. For the words of S.
Paul are to be understood without trope. And by that part of his argument,
so are These words: The rock was Christ cannot be expownded by a Trope.
the words of the Lords supper (as he terms them) wherein I say, I shall
ioin with him. That the words of S. Paul are to be understood without
trope, yt is manifest, for he calls not Christ the material rock, but the
spiritual rock, saing, that they drank all of the spiritual rock, which is
Christ. So that this sentence: Christ is the spiritual rock, of the which
the Jews did drink neadeth no tropicall or figurative sense to be expownded
by. Neither in this place and manner as S. Paul speaks yt, can yt bear a
figurative Oecolampaduis would patche and piece one to yt, but the plain
literal sense.

To this understanding of this text, as the scripture yt self enforces us, so
is also Chrysostom a witness, writing upon this text thus: Cum dixisset
Chryso. in 10. 1. Cor.
quod potum spiritualem bibebant, addidit: Bibebant enim de spirituali
consequente eos petra, and adiunxit: Petra autem erat Christus. Non enim ipsius
petrae natura aqua (inquit) scaturiebat. Siquidem any etiam scaturiisset, sed
alia quaedam spiritalis petra, omnia operata est, hoc est Christus, qui
praesens vbique omnia fecit miracula. Ideo dixit, consequente. When he had
said that they drank spiritual drink, he added: They drank of the
spiritual rock, that followed them, and joined to yt: That rock was Christ.
For not the nature of that stone (says he) flowed out water, for then yt
would have flowed out before that time, but an other certain spiritual
Christ was the spiritual not the material rock. and therefore no figure is in
S. Paul's saing.
stone wrought all these things, that is, Christ being present every where did
all the miracles, and therefore he said, that followed. Hitherto Chrysostom
Whose words give plain testimony to the words of saint Paul: Christ was
the roke, not the material rock, for than Oecolampadius trope must Ideo
dixit, Consequente: Therefore said Paul, which followed:: as who might say,
for so much as saint Paul says that the Jews drank of a spiritual
rock, which spiritual rock was soche one as did follow them. But no other
rock did follow them save Christ: wherefore Christ was the spiritual rock,
so that we may conclude that this proposition is to be understood
grammaticallie or literallie, and not tropicallie or figuratiuelie. If then
Oecolampadius lay his fundacion of his building to prove the words of the
Lords supper to be figurative upon a wrong understanding Scriptures alleged
by Oecola^p. to prove his figurative speech.
of the scriptures: will he not (trow ye) make his building of the same
nature, that is, that these words of Christ shall be wrong understood also?
Which thing (I doubt not) but ye will credit, when ye shall perceive how well
he frames other scriptures to his building.

Proceading in his proof he says: that yt is common in the scriptures that the
Baptism. The breathing of Christ upon his Apostles: and the saing of Christ

Where first note how he abuses the scripturs, and labors to blind
Oecolamp. his abusing of the scriptures opened.
and deceive the reader. For where he, pretending to prove this saing of Christ
(This is my body) to be figuratively spoken, brings in these rehearsed
places: there is not one of them that has the like enunciacion or manner of
speech, as the saing of Christ has. Neither is the fiery tounges, the dove,
or the breathing of Christ named in the scriptures to be the holy Ghost, as the
other thing is named to be the body of Christ. And that this may manifestly
appear, I will simply bring in every of the scriptures of these places

The first is in the Acts of the Apostles where we read thus: Factus est
repent de coelo sonus tanquam aduenientis spiritus vehementis, and repleuit
totam domum Act. 2.
vbierant sedentes, and apparuerunt illis dispartitae linguae, tanquam igms,
seditque super singulos eorum. And suddenly there came a sownde from heaven, as
yt had been the cominge of a mighty wind, and yt filled all the house where
they satte. And This is the text. Note now what Chrysostom shall say upon
this this text Visae sunt (inquit) illis dispartitae linguae, velut igneae.
Recte vbique Jn. 2. Act.
additum est, velut, ne quid sensibile de Spiritu suspicareris, velut igneae
(inquit) and velut flatus. Nec enim ventus erat simpliciter per aerem diffusus.
Ac tamen cum Ioanni deberet innotescere Spiritus velut columbae specie in caput
Christi venit. Nunc vero cum tota Fiery tounges are not said to be the bolie
Ghost.
multitudo conuertenda esset ad fidem, venit in specie ignis. And there were
seen (says he) to them cloaue^ tounges as fiery. Yt is in every place added
(as) that thou should suspecte nothing sensible of the spirit. As fiery
(says he) and as a wind. Neither was yt the wind simply diffused by the
aier. And also when the holy Ghost would be known to John, he came in the form
of a dove upon the headde of Christ, but now when all the multitude was to be
converted to the faith, he came in the shape or form of fire. Thus Chrysostom.

Now albeit he has in the end of his sentence resolved us for the manner of
the coming down of the holy Ghost in the likeness of a dove: yet will we
hear the scripture, that the agreement of the doctor and the scipture Jesus
baptisato, and orante apertum est coelum, and descendit Spiritus sanctus
corporali specie sicut columba in ipsum. When Jesus was Luc. 3.
baptized, and did pray, the heaven was opened, and the holy Ghost came down
in a bodily shape like a dove upon him. In this text, as ye perceive that the
holy Ghost came down like a dove, but neither that the dove was the holy The
doueys not said to be the holy Ghost.
Ghost, neither the holy Ghost the dove: so ye perceive that Chrysostom
agrees, and says nothing co^trario to the scripture. But as the scripture
says that the holy Ghost came down like a dove: and that the sownd was, as yt
had be^ the coming of a mighty wind, and the cloaue^ tou^ges as they had be^
of fire: So Chrysostom notes in every place to be this word (as) wherbie is
taught raither the likelihead of the things there to be, then the very things
the^selus.

The third thing that Oecolampadius reherseth is the breathing of Christ: upon
his Apostles: In the Gospel of S. John we read that Christ thus said to Joan.
23.
his Apostles. As my Father sent me, even so I send you also. And when he had
said those words, he breathed on them, and said unto them: Receive ye the
holy Ghost. In which fact of Christ, although the holy Ghost to the
fulness of his gifts Nisi abiero Paracletus non Ibid. 16.
veniet ad vos, si autem abiero mittam eum ad vos. Except I go the comforter
shall not come to you: but if I go away I will send him to you. At the
which coming he promised them saing: Accipietis virtutem superuementis
Spiritus sancti in vos. Ye shall receive power after the holy Ghost Acto. 1.
is comed upon you: yet now they received certain gifts of the holy Ghost
as Chrysostom wittnesseth: Non erraret quispiam si tunc eos potestatem quandam
and gratiam spiritualem accipisse diceret, non tamen vt mortuos suscitarent,
and virtutes In. 20. Joa^.
ostenderent, sed vt peccata dimitterent. Differentes enim sunt gratiae
Spiritus. Quare addidit: Quorum remiseratis peccata remissa sunt, ostendens
quod virtutis genus largiatur. A man should not err if he said, that they
did receive a certain power The holy Ghost was given by Christ's breathing.
and spiritual grace, not yet that they should raise the dead, and show
wonders, but that they should forgive sins. The graces of the Spirit are
different wherefore he added: Whose sins ye remitte, they are remitted,
declaring that he granted a kind of power. Thus Chrysostom. By this then yt
is manifest that at that breathing Christ gave unto his Apostles the holy ghost.

Let us now examine the fourth scripture, which Oecolampadius alleges to
prove a trope in Christ's words, which is that Christ said of John the
Baptist, that he was Helias. The words be these: Omnes Prophetae ac ipsa lex
vsque ad Ioannem prophetauerunt, and si vultis recipere, ipse est Helias, Iqui
venturus erat. All the Prophets and the law yt self has prophesied unto
John. And Math 11
if ye will receive yt: This is Helias which was for to come: For the better
understanding of this text yt is to be noted that the Jews upon the prophecy
Opinion of the Jews of the coming of Helias.
of Malachie, which prophecieth that Helias shall come before the Judgment of
Christ, mistaking and mysvnderstanding the same, that he should come before
his coming into flesh, were in doubt whether John the Baptist were Helias, and
therefore sent Messengers unto him asking, whether that he was Helias or no.
Where in deed the prophecy speaks of the coming of Helias before the second
coming of Christ, which shall be to judgment, as the words do declare.
Behold (says almighty God by the Prophet) I will send you Helias the
prophet before the coming of the great and fearful day of the Lord. He shall
turn the hearts of the fathers to their children, and of the children to there
fathers Mala. 4.
that I come not and smite the earth with cursing.

Two things in this prophecy there be, which do teach us, that Helias shall be
the percursour of the judgment of Christ, and not of his nativity. The Rex
pacificus, a king a peacemaker: he came as Zacha. ^.
Rex mansuetus, as a lowly king, as Zachary prophesied that he should do:
Rejoice (says he) greatly, thowe daughter of Syon, be glad o daughter
Jerusalem. Forlo, Math. 21. Mar. 11. Luc. 19. Jbid. 2.
thy king comes unto thee, even the righteouse and savior, lowly and simple
is be, he rides upon an ass, and upon the fool of an ass. This to be
fulfilled in Christ the holy Evangelists do witness. At his birth also, as
the prophet wills Syon, and Jerusalem to rejoice: so the Angel appearing to
the sheperds, said. Behold I bring you tidinges of great joy, that shall
come to all people. And streit way there was with the Angel a multitude of
heavenly soldiers pray sing God and saing. Glory to God on hight and peace on
the earth, and unto men a good will. By this yt does well appear that the
first coming of Christ is not fearful but peaceable, lowly, and Joyful. The
first coming of Christ was ioifull. the second shall be terrible.


The second thing be noted is that the Prophet, shall come to turn the hearts
of the fathers to the Sons, etc. Lest when that Lord comes he smite the
earth with cursing. Christ at his first coming, came Non veni vt iudicem
mundum, sed vt saluificem mundum. I came not to judge the world, but to save,
the world. Again: Venit filius hominis quaerere, and saluum facere, quod
perierat. The Son of man came to seek and save that that had perished. In so
much that when his Disciples moved him, that Luc. 19.
fire might descend from heaven to consume the Samaritanes, that would not
receive him, he said: The Son of man came not to destroy, but to save men's
life's. All which places declare, that Christ at his first coming, came not to
Luc. 9.
judge, nor to punish, but to seek, and save.

But his second coming in deed shall be fearful and terrible. For then he
shall come to judgment, at which time if the hearts of the people be not
turned, he shall then be a severe judge, and shall greuouslie smite the wicked
nesse of men, and shall pronunce the sentence of cursing upon earthly men
saing: Go ye cursed into the everlasting fire, which is prepared for the
Deuell and his Matthew. 25
Angels. Of this judgment ye may read in saint Matthew more at large.
Forsomoche then as Christ at that his second coming shall be a fearful Lord,
and shall smite the earth with cursing: yt must needs be that Helias must be a
precursour of that coming and not of the first. Now for that the Si vultis
recipere ipse est Helyas, qui venturus erat. If ye will receive yt, this is
Helias which was for to come. Which words. Euthymius expowndeth thus: Si
vultis recipere, quod futurum esse dictum est, de boc tempore, ipse est Helias,
Jn 1. Math
qui venturus erat, vtpote ipsum illius ministerium perficiens. If ye will
receive that that is spoken to be done hereafter, to be of this time present:
He is Helyas which was for to come, as one perfourming even his very
mynisterie and office. As who might say, Where as ye think that Helyas (who
shall be the percursour of my second cominge to prepare the hearts of the
people, that they may eschape my terrible judgment) is the precursour of this
my first cominge, to prepare the hearts of the people to receive me and my
faith, as touching that office, if ye will so take yt, John is Helias. For to
that office is he by the prophets appointed, as Helyas is to the other.

So that in this manner of speech Christ did but answer the opinion of Christ
did not assertiuelie say that John was Helias
with a circumstance: if ye will receive yt. which thing also is noted of
Chrysostom: Significauit autem Ioannem Heliam esse, and Heliam Ioannem.
Vtrique enim vnam administrationem susceperunt, and praecursores ambo
constituti sunt* Quare non dixit: hic est profecto Helias: sed si vultis
suscipere, hie est. He signified John to be Helias, and Helias John. For both
they have taken one administracion, and both be made percursours. Wherefore he
did not say this is verily Helias. But if ye will so take yt, this is he.
Thus Chrysostom.

Neither is yt the propre sense or understanding of this proposition, that John
is a figure of Helias, or John is a sign or token of Helias: as by this he
would prove the other saing of Christ: This is my body to be understood, for
that this is spoken with a circumstance, and as yt were with a condition, and
not simply as Christ said: This is my body.

Now to apply all these other scriptures, which Oecolampadius has brought in:
Mark dilige^tlie, I beseech thee, good Reader, if any of them all be of like
speech as these words: This is my body. The scripture says not: The dove
is the holy Ghost: neither does yt say that either the breathing into the
Apostles, or the fiery tounges be the holy Ghost, But far otherwise, as is
allreadie said, and far unlike to this manner of speech: This is my body:
For the one is spoken by a liklihead, and therefore used with this term, as,
the other by the very substance, and therefore expressed with this word, is.
Balaams Ass Occola^p. likned to balaams ass.
to speak to the reproach of her master: so yt pleases him to work in this
man, who, through malice made dumb to speak the truth, willingly, but yet
unwittingly has broughtin these scriptures, which being considered and
weighed make nothing against the truth, but much for the truth.

And first where he began his building with our text. Petra erat Christus. The
rock was Christ: which he said was a figurative speech: yt is proved that
there is none but a plain speech, for the spiritual rock was Christ.
Therefore yt stands well to be applied to the catholic truth, that as the
rock was not figuratiuelie, but verily Christ: so the substance of the
Sacrament of the altar is not figuratively, but verily the body of Christ.
And as the holy Ghost was verily under a corporal form like a dove, and
verily present with the fiery tounges: and also verily given to the Apostles
with the breathing of Christ: so is the body of Christ verily, and truly
under the corporal forms of bread and wine, Presence of the holy Ghost under
the form of the dove with the fiery tounges and breath of Christ, conferred
with the presence of Christ in the Sacr.
as the holy Ghost under the form of a dove: and verily also given to the
faithful, as the holy Ghost to the multitude. And under that corporal form
as truly received of the Chrystians, as the holy Ghost was by the breathing of
Christ, received of the Apostles. So that there is a conformity and great
likelihead betwixt these scriptures, and moves the Chrystian very strongly to
believe the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. For as we are taught to
believe that the holy Ghost was under a corporal form, because the scripture
says, that the holy Ghost descended in a corporal form: so are we taught to
believe, that Christ's body is under the form of bread, because the scripture
says, that Christ blessing the bread said: This is my body, and so of the
rest. And as the scripture says not that the dove, or the tounges were the
holy Ghost: No more does yt say that the form of bread is the body of
Christ. But as the scripture teaches that with these forms the very things
be given, and not the bare signs only: so are we taught that with the the
form of bread is given the very thing sanctified which is the Take, eat,
This is my body.

Thus may ye perceive, how goodly God has set forth his mysteries, that
one may aptly be conferred with an other, as that thereby the faith of the
weak may be much helped, and the faith of the strong much comforted and
delighted, and the more when they may see how God turns the weapons of the
enemies upon them selves, and so with their weapons defends us.

THE FOVRTH CHAP. BEGINS TO DEclare
Now this text of S. Paul being truly expownded, according to the minds of
the holy catholic fathers, and delivered from the violent wresting of the
Adversary: yt is time and place convenient, that we seek of what things these
two yet not applied that is Manna, and the water, be figures of. That they be
figures yt is most certain: but of what things yt is in controversy. The
Adversary affirms Manna to be only of the word of God a figure, as whereby
the soul of man is fed, as the Jews were in desert: But the good catholic
teaches that yt is not only a figure of the word of God, but also of the
body of Christ in the Sacrament, wherewith man is fed to everlasting life,
and made strong to walk through the desert of this world, to the heavenly
land of promise. And for further openinge Irenaeus wrote an epistle to S.
Ambrose asking why God did not rain Manna from heaven as he did to the Jews.
S. Ambrose answering him, treacteth not only of Ma^na yt self, but also of
that which was figured by yt. And so in that process, declares, that not
only Ad Jrenaeum epla 62
the word of God is a spiritual Ma^na, but also the body of Christ in the
Sament is Manna. Thus writes S. Ambrose: Quaeris a me cur Dominus Deus
Mannapluerit populo patrum and nunc non pluat. Si cognoscis, pluit. and
quotidie pluit de coelo Manna seruientibus sibi. Et corporeum quidem illud
Manna hodie plerisque in locis Qua^to praestantiora sunt haec superioribus.
iuuenitur. Sed nunc non est res tanti miraculi quia venit quod perfectum est.
Perfectum autem panis de coelo, corpus ex virgin, de quo satis Euangelium te
docet. Quanto praesta^tiora sunt haec superioribus: Illud enim Manna, hoc est,
panem illum, qui manducauerunt, mortui sunt. Hunc autem panem qui manducauerit,
viuet in aeternum. sed est spirituale Manna, hoc est plumia spiritualis
sapientiae, quae ingeniosis and quaerentibus de coelo infunditur, and irrorat
mentes piorum, and obdulcat fauces little. Thowe ask me, why the Lord God did
rain Manna to the people of the Fathers, and now he does not rain. If thou
know, he raineth now, and daily he raineth Manna from How much more
excellent are these then the other above rehearsed?
which is the body born of the virgen, of the which the gospel sufficient
lie teaches. How much more excellent are these, then the other above
rehearsed? Who soever did eat that Manna, that is, that bread, they are dead.
But this bread whosoever eats, shall live for ever. But this is a spiritual
Manna, that is the spiritual rain of wisdom, which is powered into them from
heaven that be witty, and do seek yt, and yt does dew the minds of the
Godly, and makes sweet their Jaws. hitherto S. Ambrose.

Of whom we may learn as is before said, that not only the word and
Oecolap. his sha^ful abusing of the ancient Fathers, namely of S. Ambr.
wisdom of God is called Manna, but also the body of Christ which was born
of the virgen, which he calls perfect Manna. And here yt is not to be
ouerpassed that Oecolampadius the enemy of this Sacrament, who of indurate
malice, wrote a book against the same, in the which to the intent he but so
that sometime he does wrest them shamefullie, some time he falfifieth them,
sometime he corrupts them: sometime he truncateth them: sometime (trow ye)
reprehend him when he did yt? Is not he the child of his father Satan, that
sees

I have thought good (reader) here to advertise thee of their impostures, that
though they set out their doctrine with never, so good a countenance of
holiness, learning, and consent, or testimony of holy Fathers: yet be well
assured that under the fair countenance of the enemy of mankind tempting
our mother Eve there was a mortiferouse serpent, under his sweet words, which
to well liked the hearer, was most bitter falsehood and untruth. Under the
sweet words of Heretics lies bitter poiso^ of falshead
In that goodly pleasant and delctable aple was cruel and horrible death and
damnacion: so in their fair countennance ye shall find serpentine infection,
in their words falshead, error, and heresy, and in the taking of their
doctrine or consenting to yt plain damnacion. But now that ye may perceive
how much this sentence which denelishlie he cut of, does impugn his
doctrine, and make for the truth, I will somewhat open the same, and so shall
ye perceive that of set purpose, and of very malice

S. Ambrose answering Irenaeus, says, that Manna now a days, though yt be
fownde in many places, at this present time yt is not a thing of so great
miracle. He adds the cause: because (says be) that is now comed that is
perfect. as who might say: The figures of the law, though many of the^, when
they were in use, were great things, and seemed to be merueilouse: yet when the
things came, of the which they were figures, they were not so merueilouse:
like as the light of a torche in the night time, seems to be a great light a
very perfect light: yet in the day the brigth beams of the Sun shining, and
glistering, yt is but an imperfect and almost no light: so the figures of the
old law compared to the things figured in the new law. Wherefore Manna being
but a figure of that perfect thing the body of Christ: when that once came in
place Manna appeared to be but an imperfect thing.

When S. Ambrose had made this comparison of the figure to the thing figured,
and saw the perfection of the one, and the impefection of the other
Oecola^padius left out: Quanto sunt praesta^tiora haec superioribus: How
much more excellent are these then the other above rehearsed? how much more
excellent is the body born of the virgen, our very Sacrame^taries to maintein
their heresy deny the excellency of the Sacraments of the new law.
again (gentle reader) that this wicked man, and other his accomplices, who deny
(as ye perceive) the presence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament do also as
wickedly teach, that the Sacraments of the new law give no grace. And to
maintain these two evil and wicked opinions, they take the third against the
truth, that all Christ's Church received, which is that the Sacraments of
the new law are of no more excellency, then the Sacraments of the old
law. For if they should grant that they were more excellent, then must they
needs also admit the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood to be more the^ a
bare sign, figure or token of his body. And so must be enforced to grant the
presence. Now by cause, Oecolampadius impugneth that presence, and fowde in S.
Ambrose, that he taught, that the Oecolamp. his best soli^cion to S. Amb.
argumet.
things of the new testament, are more excellent, then things of the old,
and saw that he was pressed with the weight of S. Ambrose his argument, he had
no better solucion then clean to leave yt out, and so to ship

I trust ye perceive, that this little sentence of S. Ambrose, left out by
Oecolampadius, does not a little impugn his pestilent doctrine, which he
maintained against the presence of Christ's body in the blessed Sacrament, and
also overthrows by plain words his heresy against the excellency of the
Sacraments of Christ's Church, wherbie I think yt may well appear of what
wicked purpose he left yt out. And as in this he is deprehended to be a
falsarie: so I doubt not but he shall be fownde the like herafter in the
sentences, and sainges of other holy fathers.

Now to proceade with S. Ambrose, yt is evident, that he calling the body of
Christ born of a virgen the perfect thing in comparison of Manna, Manna, a
figure of the body of Christ.
which he meneth to be the imperfect thing, (as every figure is, in respect
of the thing figured) that he does understand Manna, to be the figure of our
true Manna, the body of Christ, our heavenly food, and very bread given from
heaven: which is not meant of the body of Christ absolutely, as the body
only born of the virgen, but of the body born of the virgen, and given
Oecolampadius would not meddle, but could ouerpasse yt as yt were a thing in a
mist which he could not see. Orient autem iusticiae Sole, and plendidioribus
Christicorporis and sanguinis sacramentis refulgentibus cessarent inferiora,
and perfecta illa sumenda populo forent. The Sun of rightwisnesse appearing,
and the bright Sacraments of Christ's body and blood shininge, the inferior
things should cease, and those perfect things should be taken of the
people. Thus S. Ambrose.

By which he does not only teach us, that the sacraments of Crystes S.
Ambro. his magnifieng of the blessed Sa. argues it to be more the^ a figure
body and blood are the perfect things, and the figures thereof inferior
things: but also that the body and blood of Christ, as in Sacraments (which
Sacraments for the presence of that body and blood are bright and shining
Sacraments) is the clear light, of the which Manna, was the figure and the
shadow. In which manner of speech yt is notable how S. Ambrose does magnify
this most wrouthie and excellent Sacrament, I wish yt of the Reader to be
considered. If that blessed Sacrament were but a bare sign or figure (as they
term yt) why should yt be called of S. Ambrose the bright and shining
Sacrament above Manna? where as if yt were not for the presence of him that is
the light of the world Manna in and hundredth parts were more wonderful more
excellent and far surmounting the figure or sign

Never the less the same S. Ambrose teaches us that the word of God, which
he calls the rain of spiritual wisdom, is also a spiritual Manna, which
undoubtedly well and dewlie taken feadeth the soul. Non in solo pane viuit
homo, sed in omni verbo, quod procedit de ore Dei. Man lives not by bread
only, but by every word which proceadeth from the mouth of God. Dent. 8.
Matthew. 4. Three kinds of Manna.
So that of S. Ambrose yt may be learned, that there be three kinds of Ma^na.
Manna which God rained from heaven to the people in the deserte, which is the
figure: Manna the body of Christ in the Sacrament, which duly taken feadeth
both body and soul to everlasting life. And Manna the word of God. which
illumineth, nourishes and feadeth the soul, and moysteth yt with the dew of
gods wisdom, and makes man wise in God. This Patres nostri Joan. 6.
manducauerunt Manna in deserto. Owre Fathers have eaten Manna in the desert.
To whom Christ, minding to bring them from the bread Manna which did but
nourish the body to the mainteinance of the corporal life, which bread and
life in respect of the heavenly bread and everlasting life, be no true bread
and true life, to him self the true bread, and geuer of true life, said: Non
Moises dedit vobis panem de coelo, sed Pater meus dat vobis panem de coelo
veru^. Moses did not give you bread from heaven: but my father gives you
the true bread from heaven. This text Euthymius very lively and plainly
expowdeth: Quia putabant Manna esse panem ab eo, quod coelum proprie
appellatur, eo quod scriptum esset, Panem de coelo dedit eis, corrigit erroneam
eorum opinionem. Nam ibi scriptura improprie aerem vocauit coelum. Quemadmodum
etiam dicuntur, volucres coeli In. 6. Joan.
Et rursum: Intonuit de coelo Dominus. Ait ergo: Non Moses dedit tunc nationi
vestrae panem, qui de coelo proprie sit: sed Pater meus nunc dat vobis panem ab
eo quod proprie coelum appellatur. Nam sicut Pater proprie dicitur coelestis:
ita and filius coelestis, and proprie panis, vtpote cor hominis confirmans.
Because they thought Manna to be Heaven taken for the aier.
bread from that that is proprelie called heaven, because yt is written: He
has given them bread from heaven: He does correct there erroniouse opinion.
For the scripture there called the aier vnproprelie heaven. as also the birds
be called the birds of heaven. And again: The Lord thondered out of heaven.
He says therefore, Moses did not give then unto yower nation bread which is
from that which is proprelie called heaven: but my Father gives you now
bread from that is proprely called heaven. Eor as the Father is called
heavenly: eue^ so the Son is heavenly, and called bread as co^firming the
heart of Man. Thus Euthymius. In which exposition this is first taugh, that
where the scripture says, that God gave the Jews bread from heaven yt is not
the examples yt is showed, and diverse other places may likewise be produced.
Manna was from the aier Christ our bread is from heaven.
the figure. For where the bread of the Jews was but from the aier, our bread
Christ is from heaven in deed, and not from heaven as a common heavenly thing,
but from heaven as a thing heavenly, as the Father is heavenly and withal not
as a common bread, but as a bread that is proprelie called. and is heavenly
bread in very deed, because yt confirms and makes strong the heart of man.
And yet immediately by express words this author declares as a cause why
that Ma^na was not the true bread, and speaks yt in the person of Christ:
Siquidem panis ille siguratiuus erat, me (inquit) praesigurans, Manna a figure
of Christ our bread. In 6. Joan. hom. 44.
qui sum ipsa veritas. For that bread was a figurative bread, prefigurating me
(says Christ) which am the treuth yt self. Here unto agreablie also says
Chrysostom: Panem autem simpliciter, and non verum illum appellat, non quod
falsus esset in Manna miraculum, sed quod figura esset, non veritas. He calls
yt only bread and not the true bread, not that in Manna was a false miracle,
but because yt was a figure and not the verity. Now then as in the words

If now the adversary will obiecte and say, that Manna was a figure of the
Godhead, but not of his Manhead, and so consequently not of his body, for
that these textes and scriptures speak of the deity or God head of John. 6.
Euthim. ibidem.
Christ, and not yet of his humanity, as Euthimius, whom we have alleged,
does also testify, expownding this saing of Christ: Ego sum panis vitae. I am
the bread of life. Panis viuificans, and qui, vt dictu^ est, dat vita^
aeterna^. Na^ ea proprie dicitur vita quae aeterna est. Quae enim ad te^pus
durat, no^ vita est, sed vitae imago. Panem aute^ vitae sua^ vocat diuinitate^.
Siquide^ ipsa panis est, quae de caelo descendit. I am the bread of life, the
bread that makes to live, and which (as yt is said) gives eternal lif. For
that proprelie is called life, which is everlasting. That that endures but for
a time yt is not life but an image of life. The bread of life he calls his
Euthim.

Yt is true that all that Christ has spoken of him self hitherto, sithen he
began to speak of Manna, is spoken of his Godhead. For so does Chrysostom
also witness. And therefore we accept that that Euthimius says, and grant
the same. But then I would ye went to the next line of Euthymius, and read
Euthim.
what he adds to this sentence, that is now out of him alleged. Yt
follows there immediately: Tandem vero etiam corpus panem vocat. Afterward
also he calls his dodie bread. Which he does when he says: And the bread
Christ called bread two ways.
which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.
upon the which text he says: Duobus modis Christus dicitur esse panis,
secundum diuinitatem scilicet and bumanitatem. Postquam ergo docuit de modo,
qui secundum Diuinitatem est, nunc etia^ docet de modo, qui est secundum
humanitate^. Two manner of ways Christ is said to be bread, that is to say,
after his Godhead and after his Manheade. Therefore after he has taught of the
manner which is after his Godhead, now also he teaches of that manner which
is after his Manhead.

Thus then yt is manifest, Christ him self teaching, and Euthimius,
Chrysostom, that name yt aunfwereth the figure: And also as Manna fed the
Jews so in a more excellent manner the body of Christ feadeth the Chrystians
Qui manducat Joan. 6.
hunc panen, viuet in aeternum. He that eathe this bread shall live for ever.

And here I can but merueill at the maliciouse blindness of Oecolampadius, who
trauaileth by all means to prove that the body of Christ feadeth not the
soul, and so would make Christ contrary to him self both in this sentence
last alleged, and also in this sentence where he faieth: Caro mea vere est
Jbid. ^
cibus, and sanguis meus vere est potus. My flesh is meat in deed, and my
blood is drink in deed. But Oecolam. would have that the soul is fed only
whith the word of God, and faith and therefore speaking of the flesh of Christ,
he says: Neque opus est carnem in ipsam ingredi animam. Quod ne imaginaremur
satis cauerat Dominus, dicens: Caro non prodest quicquam. Neither yt is
needful that the flesh enter into the soul. which thing that we should not
imagen the lord did diligently provide sainge: The flesh profitetb nothing:
And yet Christ says: Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you.

I am loath (as in the proverb yt is said) Actum agere. to do that thing In
the xxxvi. chap. etc.
that is done all ready, and so with prolixitie and tediousnes to grieve the
ready. Wherefore all these scriptures of the sixth chap. of S. John being
sufficiently declared in the second book, and among other, this text which
Oecolampadius brings, inwhiche is (The flesh profits nothing) there truly by
S. Augustine. Chrysostom Theophilact and other expownded and declared to be of
an other manner of sense, then he deuilishlie would wrest yt to: and there also
being showed how the flesh of Christ feadeth and profits the soul very
much: I shall referr the reader thither, where he shall find Oecolampadius
fully answered, and matter sufficient, I trust, wherewith he him self shall be
satisfied. Wherefore now I will but touch a word of Oecolampadius where he
says: that the inward man is fed by faith. Yt is a manner of feed that I
have not redd in any autentike author. But this may be, and is red that
Christ and his word received by faith, does feed the soul, but not faith yt
self. Neither have I red any catholic author that Jnward man is fed by
^aith the gloss of Oecola^p. touched.
teaches that the flesh of Christ enters in to the soul, as yt likes
Oecolampadius whith his feigned speech to dally, or raither as a man in
darkness goes he can not tell whether: so he in this darkness of heresy
speaks he can not tell what, and wandereth he can not tell whether.

But to conclude this part that the sixth chapter of S. John, or raither
Christ in that chapter teaches, that Manna is a figure of his body in the
Sacrament, as before yt is taught to be a figure of his God head, Mark what
Christ says in that part, where (Chrysostom says) he speaks of his body:
Joan. 6.
He that eats me, shall live by the means of me, This is that bread, which
came down from heaven. Not as yowr fathers did eat Manna and are dead. He that
eats this bread shall live ever. In which words of Christ is made a just
comparison of him self the thing figured to Manna the figure. of the which (as
Chrysostom says) he often makes mention, as yt were by yt to allure them to
the faith. Homil. 46. in Joan.
This is his sentence: Frequenter autem Mannae meminit, and differentiam
conferendo ad fidem allicit. Nam si possibile fuit, vt quadraginta annos, sine
messibus, and frumento, and aliis ad victum necessariis viuerent. long magis
nunc cum ad maiora venerint. Nam si in illis figuris sine labor expositum
colligebant, nunc profectomagis, vbi nulla mors, sed vaere vitae fruitio. Often
he makes mention of Manna and conferring the difference, allureth them to
faith. For if yt were possible that they should live forty years, without
harvest, and corn and other necessaries to their living: Why Christ made so
often mention of Ma^na 90. 6.


In whose saing as yt first offreth yt self* so yt is first to be noted, that
Christ often makes mention of Manna, but to what purpose? that by conferring
of himself and Manna, as the thing, and the figure, he might allure the^ to the
faith of him, unto whom the law, and all the figurs of yt did lead them.
Another that Chrysostom by express words calls yt a figure. For (says
he) if in those figurs they without labor did gather that, that was ready
laid before them: much more now, etc. By which he meneth Manna, which God
raining from heaven, and so being prepared without their labor, they did but
gather yt, and had sufficient to serve their necessity. Thus, I trust, yt is
manifest that Manna is a figure of the body of Christ, both by the words of
Christ himself in the sixth of S. John, and also by holy learned

THE FIFTE CHAP. TEACHING THAT MANna and the water of the stone were figures of
the body and blood of Christ by Origin, and S. Ambrose.
AS our Savior Christ has taught, that Manna was a figure of his body: And
as he labored with the Jews by yt to make the^ to understand him, and from
yt the sign and figure of him, to lead and bring the^ to him the thing
signified and figured: so S. Paul trauaileth with his Corinthians by figures
to understand the verities as well of very benefits by figurs of benefits,
as of very plagues by the figurs of plagues, that they should not be puffed
up with pride,

In this process Origin for that he is right ancient shall first be heard:
Modo Origin. homil 7s in Number.
enim cum Moses venit ad nos and coniunctus est nostrae Aethyopissae, lex Dei
iam non in figuris, and in imaginibus sicut prius sed in ipsa specie veritatis
agnoscitur. Et quae prius in aenigmate designabantur, nunc in specie and
veritate complentur. Et ideo ille qui species figurarum, and anigmatum
disserebat, dicit: Scimus quonia^ patres nostri omnes sub nube erant, and omnes
mare transierunt, and omnes in Moyse baptisati sunt, in Nube, and in mari, and
omnes eandem escam spiritualem manducauerunt, and omnes eundem potum
spiritualem biberunt, biberunt autem de spiritali consequente eos petra, Petra
autem erat Christus. Vides quomodo aenigmata legis absoluit Paulus, and species
aenigmatum docet. Now when Moses came unto us, and was joined to this owre
Ethyopisse, the law of God is not now known in figurs and images as before yt
was, but in the If Christ be now received in figure, he is received as in
Moses law in dark manner.
plain form of truth. And soche things as before were appoincted in a dark
manner, now they are fulfilled in plain forma^d truth. And therefore he, who
declared the plain forms of dark things, says: We know that all our
Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and all were
baptized under Moses in the cloud and in the Sea, and all have eaten one
spiritual meat, and all have drunk one spiritual drink. They drank of that
spiritual rock that followed them. The rock was Christ. Thowe see how
Paul opens the dark things of the law, and teaches the plain forms of
the dark things. And after he had showed of the rock, the cloud and the
sea, he comes to Manna and says. Tunc in Acnigmate erat Manna cibus: nunc
autem in specie caro Verbi Dei est verus cibus, sicut ipse dicit: Caro mea vere
est cibus, and sanguis meus vere est potus. Then in a dark manner Origin.

In the which saing of Origin there is nothing (as me thinks) to be desiered,
either for the express manner of affirming Manna to be a figure of the body of
Christ, or else for the presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. For if the
Jews in eating Manna did figuratiuelie receive Christ, that is, did eat
Manna as a figure of Christ, which Origin calls the dark manner, then yt
must needs be that the Chrystians, who receive Christ in plain manner (as Origin
terms yt) must receive Christ verily, that is, not figuratiuelie only,
Christ is not now received of the chrystians as he was of the Jews: for then
in figure now in verity.
which is the dark manner, but verily, that is, substanciallie, and reallie,
which is the true and very manner, or else yt were all one to Origin, and there
were no difference betwixt a clear manner and a dark manner, which were to much
absurdity to affirm. Yt can not therefore by the mind of Origin be said that
the Chrystians in receiving the Sacrament receive but a sign or a figure of
Christ. For they should them receive him in a dark manner only, and so Origin
alleges: My flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. And so is
yt true that the very flesh and blood of Christ is reallie and verily
received in the Sacrament.

To Origin shall be joined that the holy reverend Father saint Ambrose, who
declaring how the Chrystian people rejoice and glory in the excellency and
honor of the table of Christ, gives to this matter a goodly testimony.
Ille ergo ante despectus, iam praeferor, iam anteponor electis. Ille ego ante
despectus populus peccatorum, iam babeo coelestium sacramentorum veneranda
consortia, Ambro. in psalm. 1 10.
iam mensae coelestis honor suscipior. Epulis meis non pluuia vndatur, non
terrae partus laborat, non arborum fructus. Potui meo non flumina quaerenda,
non fontes. Christus mihi cibus est: Christus mihi potus. Caro Dei cibus mihi,
and Dei sanguis est potus. Non iam ad satietatem mei annuos expecto prouentus:
Christus mihi quotidie ministratur. Non verebor ne quae mihi coeli intemperies,
aut sterilitas ruris immineat, si pij cultus diligentia perseuerat. Non iam
coturnicum pluuias mihi opto descendere, quas ante mirabar. Non Manna, quod
ante cibis omnibus praferebant, quia qui Manna manducauerunt patres,
esurieru^t. Meus cibus est, quem qui manducauerit, non esuriet. Meus cibus est,
qui non corpus impinguat, sed confirmat cor hominis, fuerat mihi ante mirandus
panis de coelo. Scriptum est enim: Panem de coelo dedit eis manducare, sed non
erat verus ille panis, sed futuri vmbra. Panem de coelo illum verum, mihi
seruauit pater. Even I (says S. Ambrose in the person of the new become
faithful Chrystians) before despised now I am preferred, now I am set before
the chosen. Even I before a despised people of sinners, now I have the
woorshippefull companies of the heavenly sacraments. Now I am advanced to
the honor of the heavenly table. The reign is not powered down for my meat,
the spring of the earth labors not, neither the fruicts of the trees. To my
drink neither rivers are to Plain sainges of S. Ambrose for the Proclamer.
be sought, nor wells. Christ is my meat, Christ is my drink. The flesh of God
is my meat, the blood of God is my drink. Now for my satietie, I look not
for yearlie profittes. Christ is every day mynistred unto me. I will not fear
leest any way the vntemperatnesse of the heaven, or the barennesse of the
earth come upon me, if the diligence of Godly tillage do continue. I desire
not now the raynes of quaills to descend unto me, the which before I wondered
at: Not Manna, which before they preferred before all other meats. For the
fathers which have eaten Manna, have hungered. My meat is which fatteth not
the body, but yt makes strong the heart of man. Before the bread from heaven

Of whom first, that is here to our purpose we may learn, that Ma^na was
Ma^na was a figure of Christ's body in the B. Sacram.
a figure of Christ's body in the Sacrament, for he says, that yt was a
shadow of the true bread, which true bread the Father of heaven has kept for
him. What this true bread is he also shows, saing: Christ is my meat, Christ
is my drink. And that these his words should not be misvndersta^ded by the
simple, or wrested by the wicked, he adds as yt were an exposition what he
meneth by Christ, and says: The flesh of God is my meat, the blood of God is
my drink. And yet for that yt was forseen by the holy Ghost, that the
Adversary would wrest these words, though they were thus plainly spoken, to
eschew yt he adds where the flesh of the Son of God, and the blood of the
The fleshof God our meat, the blood of God our drink, and that on the table.
Son of God, be his meat and drink, saing: Iam habeo coelestium
sacramentorum veneranda consortia. Iam mensae coelestis honor suscipior. Now
(says he) have

In this brief opening of S. Ambrose words (which may as well be perceived of
the unlearned Chrystia^, as of the learned) I have not, Iam sure, dissentet
from the mind of S. Ambrose, no more have I gone from his words, that the
truth might as yt is appear. Oecola^padius, Whose conscience was cawtherised
having a pretense of sincerity in handling, of the scripturs, and the Fathers,
but not in deed, as ye perceived before: so shall ye now again, perceive how
wickedlie he Oecol. his wresting of S. Ambrose opened.
has abused S. Ambrose in wresting him to his wicked purpose.

In this fame sermon where these words be written, which as yeperceaue be very
plain, and of that force, that they could not well be wrested by the crafty
engines of Oecolampadius, immediately after follow other words, which he
perceauing that he might wrest, left out all this that is before alleged,
(Reader) whether yt be not violently wrested from the true mening of saint
Ambrose or no. Thus he alleges: Mihi ille panis Dei descendat de coelo, qui
dat vitam huic mundo. Non Iudaeis, non Synagogae descendit, sed Ecclesiae
descendit, sed populo minori. Nam quomodo Iudaeis descendit Ambr. ibid.
panis, cum omnes qui illum manducarunt, hoc est, quem Iudaei putarunt Manna,
in deserto mortui sunt? Quomodo Synagogae descendit, cum omnis Synagoga
interierit, and aeterno ieiunio fidei defecerit? Denique si accipissent panem
verum, non dixissent: Domine, semper da nobis panem hunc. Quid petis Iudaee vt
tribuat tibi? Panem, quem dat quotidie, dat semper, in teipso est vt accipias
hunc panem. Accede hunc panem, and accipies eum. De hoc pane dictum est: Omnes
qui se elogant a te peribunt. Si elongaris ab eo peribis. Si appropinquaris
viues. Hic est panis vitae. Qui vitam manducat, mori non potest. Quomodo enim
moritur, cui vita cibus est? Quomodo deficiet, qui habet vitalem substantiam?
Accedite ad eum, and satiemini, quia panis est. Accedite ad eum and potate,
quia fons est. Accedite ad eum and illuminemini, quia Lux est. Accedite ad eum
and liberemini, quia vbi Spiritus Domini, ibi libertas. Accedite ad eum and
absoluimini, quia est remissio peccatorum. Qui sit iste quaeritis? Audite ipsum
dicentem: Ego sum panis vitae, qui venit ad me non esur^et, and qui credit in
me non sitiet vnquam. Audistis eum, and vidistis eum, and non credidistis ei
ideo mortui estis. That bread of God descend unto me from heaven which gives
life to the world. He has not descended to the Jews, not to the Synagoge:
but he has descended to the Church: he has descended to the inferior people.
For how has that bread descended to the Jews, seeing that all that have eaten
yt, that is, whom the Jews thought to be Manna in the wilderness, are dead?
How has he descended to the Synagog, seeing that all the Synagog has
perished, and with the hungar or fast of faith has failed or decayed? If they
had received the true bread, they had not said: Lord give us allwaie this
bread. What do thowe ask, O Jew, that he should give unto thee? The bread
which he gives to all, which he gives daily, which, he gives always, yt
is in thy self, that thou may take that bread Come unto this bread, and thowe
shall receive yt. Of this bread yt is said: All that make themselves far
from thee, shall perish. If thou make For where the Spirit of God is, there is
fredome. Come unto him and be absolved, for he is the remission of sins. Who
this is do ye ask? Hear him saing: I am the bread of life, he that comes to
me shall not bungar, and he that believes in me shall not thirst at any time.
Ye have heard him, ye have see^ him, and have not believed him. Therefore ye are
dead

Thus much of S. Ambrose is alleged of Oecolampadius, which for that yt has
none of those express words, which be in the rest of S. Ambrose, which I
have before alleged. Therefore he took this part of S. Ambrose, that he might
the better wrest yt, and left that which I have alleged, because he could not
so well blind the eye of his reader with the wresting of yt.

Now what would ye think of a man that so uses any holy author, as to
bring him against a matter, or raither as seming to speak against a matter,
who in deed speaks nothing against yt, but in the next line speaks

Now I wish that if the reader be learned he would read these two allegacions
in saint Ambrose: if he be not learned read them as they be here
Oecolampadius alleges follows in saint Ambrose immediately after that,
that I alleged, even as yt does here. Now ioin them together as one (as they
be in deed) and then judge if they teach not the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, and Manna to be a figure of the same, how soever Oecolampadius
would wrest yt to the contrary.

This also by the way is to be noted, that where this and the rest of the
Adversaries of Gods truth, teach that there is no difference betwxit the
Difference between Manna and the blessed Sacrament
Sacraments of the old law and the new, as touching any more excellency
or worthiness in the one then in the other, but that the one signified Christ
to come, the other as comed: that saint Ambrose here notes a more difference,
saing that Manna was not the true bread, but our bread is the true bread, that
was a shadow, our the very thing: that gave not life, our gives life. Be not
these differences showing the one more excellent then the other? Did not Origin
also in his saing signify much difference when he said that Manna was meat
in dark manner, and now the flesh of the Son of God is true meat in a plain
manner? If the balance be in a true man's hand,

Thus ye have heard the mind of Origin and S. Ambrose in these three points,
that is, that Manna is a figure of the body of Christ: that the body of
Christ is present in the Sacrament: and that the things of the new Testament
are of more excellency, then the things of the old Testament. In particular,
I mien of that thing that they have spoken of. A place shall be had that they
shall be spoken of universally. In the mean while as I do pass through the
Authors, as they do touch yt, so yt shall be noted, and so likewise of the
other two.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER DECLARES THAT Manna was a figure by the testimony of
saint Cyprian,
THe holy Martyr S. Cyprian, whose faith is well to be perceived in the matter
of the Sacrament by his plain and manifold godly sainges in the first and
second book alleged, will also be a notable witness for the same here. In
the first book he has most clearly declared unto us, the figures that were
there spoken of, as of Melchisedech and the Paschal la^be: so here also as
plainly as breiflie he touches this figure saing: Huius panis figura fuit
Manna, quod in deserto pluit. Sicvbi ad verum panem in terra promissionis
ventum est, cibus ille defecit. Of this bread, Ma^na was a figure, which rained
in the desert. So when we came to the true bread Cyprian. de caena. Do.
in the land of promise, that meat ceased. That the bread which he speaks
of here, of the which he says that Manna was the figure, is the holy bread
of the blessed Sacrament, yt is more manifest, than that yt can be denied. For
this his Sermon, wherein these words be written, being of the supper of our
Lord, he only treacteth of yt.

This will also be proved not only by the sentence on the which this
depends Ibid.
Sed and nos ipsi corpus effecti. Sacramento and re Sacramenti capiti nostro
connectimur, and vnimur. Singuli alter alterius membra ministerium dilectionis
proinuicc^ exhibentes, communicamus charitate, participamur The one meat and
drink that we fead on is our Lord Jesus Christ.
solicitudine, eundem cibum manducantes, and eundem potum bibentes, qui de
spiritali prosluit petra, and emanauit. Qui cibus and potus est Dominus noster
Jesus Christus. But we our selves also (says Cyprian) being made his body by
the Sacrament and the thing of the Sacrament, we are connected and united to
our head, every one being members one of an other, we communicate in charity,
we are partakers of one care, eating of one meat, and drinking of one drink,
which did flow out of the spiritual stone. Which meat and drink is ower
Lord Jesus Christ. Thus much S. Cyprian. In this saing yt is manifest that he
alludeth to the same text of S. Paul, that we have in hand, for he uses the
very words of S. Paul saing: that we eat all of one meat, and drink all of
one drink, which drink did flow out of the spiritual stone. I need not to
confer the one to the other, for he that knows the one does well perceive
the A plain saing for the Procla.
with expowndeth and says: Which meat, and drink is our Lord Jesus Christ. A
more plain speech can not be desired.

As the Jews did eat of one Manna, and drank of one water flowing out of the
stone: so all we Chrystians eat one meat, and drink one drink the body and
blood of Christ. The body of Christ being the one meat figurated by the one
meat of the Jews, which was Manna. The blood of Christ being the one drink
of the Chrystians, figurated by the one drink of the Joan. 19.
Jews, which did flow out of the stone, as the blood flowed out of the
spiritual stone, the body of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus. For as the
Evangelist says, vnus militum lancea latus eius aperuit, and continuo exiuit
sanguis and aqua. One Sacramentaries gloss of spiritual lie impugned.
of the soldiers with a spear thrust him into the side and furthwith there came
out blood and water.

This clear testimony of S. Cyprian can not be darkened with the common meat,
and that we feed upon him spirituallie, and we wish and pray that all Non
negamus Cyrill. in 15 Joan. Christ's body is received both spirituallie and
reallie.
nos recta fide, charitateque sincera Christo spiritualiter coniungi: sed
nullam nobis coniunctionis rationem secumdum carnem cum illo esse, id profecto
pernegamus, idque a diuinis scripturis omnino alienum dicimus. We deny not but
that we are joined to Christ spirituallie by right faith, and sincere charity:
But that we have no manner of conjunction with him after the flesh, that in
very deed we utterly deny, and say yt to be far wide from the scriptures.
And a little after: An fortassis putat ignotam nobis misticae benedictionis
virtutem esse? quae cum in nobis fiat nonne corporalliter quoque facit
co^municatione carnis Christi, Christum in nobis habitare? Does he think
peradventure that the virtue of the mystical benediction is unknown to us?
which when yt is done in us, does yt not make also by the co^municacion or
receiving of Christ's flesh, Christ corporally to dwell in us?

Now therefore with S. Cyrill confessing both manners of receiving and feading

And that S. Cyprian so meneth yt will without all scruple appear manifestly
to the reader, if he will consider, and understand, where he speaks these
words. They are spoken in a sermon that he made of the supper of our lord,
which sermon being made to setfurth that thing that yt was made for, must, and
does seth yt furthe as yt is. And so by the figure of the Paschall lamb, and
by the figure of Melchisedech he declares the verity A short solucion of the
Sacramentaries.
of Christ in the Sacrament, of the which much is said before, both in the
first book, and in the second, whereinuinciblie by S. Cyprian is proved the
presence of Christ in the Sacrament. In the which matter S. Cyprian is so
plain in this sermon that the Adversary has no better evasion

But that the unlearned reader may not be referred to a place unknown
Effects of the blessed Sacr. and the means to atteing them.
to him, or enforced to suspend his judgment in this matter, yt shall upon
this present sentence of S. Cyprian be manifested and declared unto him. This
is in this saing of S. Cyprian to be considered, that he teaches the effect
and comoditie of the Sacrament, and by what mean we atteing to yt. The effect
is that we be made the body mystical of Christ, we be knitte and united to
him, as to our head, we be made members one of an other in this mystical
body. These effects which happen unto us by the receipt of the Sacrament, if
they be well considered and weighed, they be very excellent and great. The
mean to atteign to them S. Cyprian Sacrament is, and what is the difference
betwixt them both, S. Augustine teaches us saing: Hoc est quod dicimus, quod
modis omnibus approbare contendimus, sacrificium Ecclesiae duobus modis
confici, duobus constare, visibili elementorum specie, and Li. senten. Prosper.
vide sup. cap. 19.
inuisibili Domini nostri Jesus Christi carne, and sanguine, and sacrame^to, and
re sacrame^ti, id est, corpore Christi etc. This is yt (says S. Augustine)
that we say, that by all means we labor to prove, the sacrifice of the
Church to be made two ways, to be of two things: of the visible form of the
elements, and the invisible Aplain place for the Proclamer
flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: both the Sacrament, and the thing
of the Sacrament, that is to say, the body of Christ. Even as the person of
Christ is of God and man, for as much as he is very God, and very man. For
every thing contains the nature and verity of those things, of which yt is
made. The sacrifice of the Church is made of two things, of the Sacrament and
the thing of the Sacrament, that is to say, of the body of Christ. Yt is
therefore the Sacrament and the thing of the Sacrament, the body of Christ. Thus
much S. Augustine.

Of whom ye have heard (except my judgment faill me) a very plain Sacrifice
of the Church avouched.
yt to some other more mete place, we will only speak of that that this
place requires, that is, for so much as S. Cyprian says, that we be
connected, knitt, and united to Christ our head by the Sacrament, and the
thing of the Sacrament, to mark and learn by S. Augustine, what is meant thereby.
The sentence of S. Augustine is plain therein, that the Sacrament is the visible
form of the elements. As for example: Even as the visible form of the
element of water, when the word comes to yt, is the sacrament of Baptism:
So be the visible forms of bread and wine, when the word is Sacrament and
thing of the Sacr. what they be.
comed to them, the Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ. Beside this
there is also the thing of the Sacrament. Which S. Augustine says, is the
body and blood of Christ. Now when S. Cyprian says that we be knitte and
united to Christ our head by the Sacrament, and the thing of the Sacrament:
What is yt else, but we are united (as S. Cyrill says) by the Sacrament and
the body and blood of Christ, and that (as ye

If of S. Cyprian we ask how we are knitte to Christ our head by his body
and blood, which is the thing of the Sacrament: He also answers like unto
S. Cyrill, sainge: Edentes, and bibentes, eundem cibum and potum, qui cibus and
potus est Dominus noster Jesus Christus. Eating, and drinking the same meat,
and drink, which meat and drink is our lord Jesus Christ. Now then ye
perceive that S. Cyprian takes the meat and drink, that S. Paul speaks of,
not for the figures of the body and blood of Christ, of the which we have the
very presence in the Sacrament. which as yt is declared by him very plainly:
So I doubt not but Chrysostom will as plainly declare yt, so that there shall
be no place for the enemy to lurk in. Chrysostom Homil. in dictum. Apost.
Nolo vos ignor.
making a special homely upon the words of S. Paul, which be now in
hand, declares both the figures and the things figured by express words,
saing thus: Dixi enim quod oportet veritatem habere excellentiam quanda^ supra
figuram. Vidisti de baptismate quae figura, and quae veritas. Age, ostendam
tibi and mensas, and sacramentorum communionem ibi delineari, si non iterum
petis a me totum, sed sic requiris, quae facta sunt, sicut par est in
adumbratione and figuris videre. Igitur quia dixit de mari, and de nube, and de
Moyse, adiecit preterea: Et omnes eundum spiritualem cibum comederunt. Sicut tu
(inquit) a lauachro aquarum ascendens ad mensam curris: sic and illi a mari
ascendentes ad mensam venere nouam, and admirabilem, de Manna loquor. Et iterum
The truth must have an excellency above the figure.
sicut tu admirabilem habes potum salutarem sanguinem: sic and illi admirabilem
habuerunt poculi naturam. I have said (says Chrisostom) that the truth must
have a certain excellency above the figure. Thowe hauest see^ of Baptism,
which is the figure and which is the verity. Go on I shall show thee the
tables and the communion of the sacraments there to be in a dark manner set
forth, if thowe do not again ask all of me, but so requirest those things
that be done, as yt is mete in the shadowing and figures to see. Therefore
because he had said of the Sea, and of the cloud and of moses, he added
fardermore: And all have eaten one spiritual meat. as thowe (says he)
ascending from the bathe or washing of waters do run to the table. So they
also going up from the sea, came to a new, and a merueilouse table, I speak
of Ma^na, and again as thou hauest a wonderful drink, the wholesome blood: so
they also had a wonderful nature of drink. Hitherto Chrysostom. Who has
declared every part of these matters, that here are to be set forth.

In the beginning of his saing he confowndeth the Adversary in that he the
verity must have a certain excellency above the figure. The^ forasmoche as
Baptism is the verity, and the sea the figure, Baptism is more excellent
then the sea: Likewise Manna and the water being the figure of the Sacrament of
the body of Christ, and of his blood. then the Sacrament of the body and
blood of Christ is more excellent then Manna, for the verity is more
excellent then the figure. That Manna and the water be figures of the
Sacrament, he does most manifestly declare when he Our drink the wholesome
blood of Christ.
says: I will show thee the tables, and the communion of the Sacraments
there to be in figurs set forth. And proceading to show what Sacraments be
settfurth there, he does apply the one to the other saing: As thowe coming
up (says he) from the font of baptism, runnest to the table. So they from
the sea to Manna. As thowe hauest a wonderful drink, which is the wholesome
blood of Christ: so they the water of the stone.

In this is plainly taught, which be the figures, which be the verities. The
Sea, Manna, and the waters be the figures: Baptism, Christ's body and
Christ's blood be the verities. For although Chrysostom in the applicacion As
thowe drinkest wonderful drink the wholesome blood, So they the water. Whereby
as in this by express words he declares the blood to be the verity of the
water being the figure: so by the table wherein that holy Sacrament is
ministered, he meant the body of Christ, which after a few lines he openly
speaks saing: Sicut autem dixit, quod omnes per mare transierunt: Sic
nobilitatem Ecclesiae praefigurauit cum dixit: Eundem cibum spiritualem
comederunt. Hoc idem rursus insinuauit: Sic enim in Ecclesia, nou aliud corpus
dives, aliud vero pauper, neque alium quidem sanguinem ille, alium autem iste.
Sic and Itunc non aliud quidem accipiebat Rich and poor eat all one body,
and drink all one blood.
dives Manna, alium vero pauper, neque alterius fontis iste particeps erat,
alterius vero in digentioris ille. As he has said that all have goen through
the sea: so he has perfigurated the nobility of the church when he said:
They have eaten all one spiritual meat. he has insinuated the same again, for
so yt is in the Church For the rich man receaueth not one body, and the,
poor man an other, neither he one manner of blood and this an other. So also
then the rich man

In this saing Chrysostom making an other comparison betwixt the figure and
the verity, he shows what he meant by the table in the place first alleged.
Lazarus was in the bosom of Abraham when the great rich man was in torments.

But to return to our matter. Chrysostom yet in the same homely declaring why
S. Paul makes mention of these things. says: Sed cuius gratia horum
memoriam adsert beatus Paulus? Ob causam quam principio Chry. Jbid.
vobis dixi, vt discas, quod neque Baptisma, neque peccatorum remissio, neque
scientia, neque sacramentorum Communio, neque sacra mensa, neque fruitio
corporis, neque participatio fanguinis, neque aliud horum prodesse nobis
poterit, nisi vitam rectam, and admirabilem, and omni peccato liberam habeamus.
Neither the fruitio^ of Christ's body nor the partaking of his blood avails
without good lif
But wherefore does S. Paul make mention of these things? for the cause which
I told you in the beginning, that thowe should learn, that neither
Baptism, neither remission of sins, neither knowledge, neither the communion
of the sacraments, neither the holy table, neither the fruicion of the body,
neither the partaking of the blood, neither any thing of these can auaill us,
except we have a life right and come^dable, and free from all sin. Thus
Chrysostom.

In which his saing ye perceive how plainly he teaches the receipt of the
body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament reallie and in very deed and not
figuratiuelie or spirituallie. And this is the proof of yt. Christ's body
may be (...).
For he says that the receipt of the body and blood of Christ profits
nothing, except we have a godly life withal. Now the spiritual receiving of
Christ includes a godly life with all. For to receive Christ spirituallie is
having the remembrance of Christ's passion and death to receive him Judas, he
being then a wicked man: so may yt be received of other that be wicked, and
not of holy life, but then (as Chrysostom says) yt profits nothing, but
yt raither hurts much, as here after shall be said. In 10. 1. Cor. hom. 23.
Chrystians eat the body of Christ as the Jews did Manna.


All though ye have had here clear testimony of Chrysostom in this matter:
yet he is more plain in an other place, expownding the same scripture and
applieng yt to the verity, thus: Quae autem sequntur sacram mensam
significant. Nam quemadmodum tu corpus Dominicum manducas: ita and illi Manna
manducauerunt. Et sicut tu sanguinem bibis: ita illi aquam de petra biberunt.
These things that do follow do signify the holy table. For as thowe do
eat the body of our Lord: so they also have eaten Manna and as thowe
drinkest blood: so they have drunk the water of the stone. Qui enim illa
illis prebuit (inquit) hic and hanc praeparauit mensam. Et ipse idem, and illos
per mare, and te per baptisma adduxit. Et illis Manna, and aquam: and tibi
corpus and sanguinem dedit. He that prepared (says he) those things to the^,
to these has he also prepared this table. And even the very same has brought
them through the Sea: and the through Baptism. And unto them he gave Manna and
the water: and unto thee, the body and blood.

What can the Adversary once say against these so clear and manifest
testimonies for the truth? What blind gloss or maliciouse interpretacion can
he bring to make these sainges any thing look toward him? If the Jews
received the figure, and we the verity: what baser or lower thing is yt the^
the body of Christ? If the Adversary say, that we receive Christ
spirituallie, If the christian receive Christ but in figure spirituallie, as
the Jew did where is the^ the verity.
well. What then receive we more now in, or with the verity under Christ in
the Gospel, then they did with their figures under Moses in the law? If they
proceade and say that we receive the Sacramental bread as a figure of Christ:
so received the Jews Manna as a figure of Christ. If in every place the
figure, where is the verity? If there a figure and here a figure, if there Christ
spiritually, and here spirituallie, and no more in the one, then in the other,
what then fignifieth the verity? and where is the verity?

Farther (as ye heard Chrysostom before say) the verity must have
excellency above the figure, if then we have the verity (as Chrysostom also
says) then of necessity yt must follow, that if the Jews had the figure of
Christ in Manna, and if the good receauers with the figure Manna, received
also Christ spirituallie, that we must have a certain excellency with our
verity, which be none other, but the presence of him that is the verity in
deed, which is Christ. For we have a figure with the Jews, and a spiritual
which is the body and blood of Christ.

Of these two authors then, as of the other, ye perceive these three things
avouched, which were before mentioned, that is Manna, and the water, to
befigures of Christ's body and blood, and that same body and blood be in the
Sacrament, and that there is an excellency in the things prefigured above the
figures. as to the verity yt apperteineth above the figure.

THE SEVENTH CHAP. PROCEADETH TO Declares the same by saint Hierom and
saint Cyrill.
WHen I consider with my self, how long the verity of the presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament has been received and believed: how not in one
corner of the chrystian orb (as now the Adversaries of this truth do
occupy) but throughoute in all places, where Christ was professed, as well in
the east Chruch, as the west church, in the greek church, as in the latin
Church, this truth was embraced, the Sacrament much reverenced, Christ God
and man there truly and highly honored: the same also by the greatest,
grauest, and holiest learned men taught and preached, and in their books by
the testimony of their hands testified, and to all the world commended: I can
not cease to merueill how men of this our time be bewitched and infatuated to
leave so sure an anchor, while they be in the trooblesom sea of this world, and
take Protestanres compared to the dog in the fable.
suddenly without consideracion leaving his good bone, snatched at the
shadow to have caught yt, and so lost for the shadow, the substancial thing:
So these men swimming through the trooblesome water of his world, and having
in their mouths the substanciall word of truth that was able to feed them,
seeing the shadow of this vain doctrine, which like a shadow appears to be
somewhat, but is nothing in deed, they let the catholic and substanciall
doctrine fall from their mouths and catch the shadow. But as long as they
have but the shadow their feeding will be so bare, or raither nothing, that
their souls which should be fed with the true word of God, shall perish
with famine, yt increases my merueilling and woondering, that they seeing these
grave fathers, and learned writers so manifestly teaching the truth, yet as
men addicted to swear to the Quamdiu sum gentium Apostolus, ministerium meum
Romans 11.
honorificabo, si quomodo ad aemulandum prouocem carnem meam, and saluosfaciam
aliquos exillis. As long as I am the Apostle of the gentiles I will magnify
mine office if by any mean I may provoke them which are my flesh, and might
save some of them. God grant the charity of S. Paul to all, whom God has
called to the office of teachers, that they may magnify their office, and
call upon the people continually, that some may be saved, though damnacion to
them that be called, and will not hear be the more greuouse. Wherefore although
these two coople in the chapiters before alleged, might suffice to certify us
of the true understanding of this scripture of S. Paul, and of the matters
depending upon the same: yet to the intent I may by a nombre of worthy
witnesses, all with one consent, and as yt were with one mowthe testifieng the
ancient received treuthe, provoke some to follow: I will by

The first coople of these shall be S. Hierom and S. Cyrill, whose fame and
auncientie, I need not now to set forth. For I have of yt already said Et
omnes eandem spiritualem escam manducauerunt etc. Manna figura corporis Christi
Hieron. in 10. 1. Cor. ^
fuit. And all did eat of one spiritual meat. Manna was a figure of the
body of Christ. Although these words be full enough and teach that that is
here sought, for saing that Manna was a figure of the body of Christ they
teach, that as the Jews did eat Manna as the figure: So now the figure
being gone we eat the body of Christ as the verity of that figure, yet more
at large he opens the wholl matter somewhat after saing: Omnia enim quae in
populo Israel illo tempore facta sunt in figura, nunc in nobis in veritate
celebrantur. Sicut enim illi per Moysen ex Aegipto liberati sunt: Sic nos per
quemlibet sacerdotem vel doctorem de seculo liberamur. Deinde christiani facti,
ducimur per deserta, vt per exercitium contemptus mundi and abstinentiae in
obliuionem nobis eant Aegypti voluptates, ita vt nesciamus ad seculum repedare.
Cum vero Baptismi mare transimus; tunc nobis Diabolus cum suo exercitu tanquam
Pharao demergitur. Deinde Manna cibamur, and potum accipimus de Christi latere
emanantem. Claritas quoque scientiae tanquam columna ignis in nocte seculi
demonstratur, and in tribulationis aestu, diuinae consolationis nube
protegimur. All things (says S. Hierom) which in that time were done in the
people of Israel in figure, now they are celebrated in us in verity. As they
by Moses were delivered out of Egypt: So we by every priest and doctor are
delivered from the world. Then being made Chrystians we are led through the
deserts, that by the exercise of the contempt of the world, and of
abstenence, the sleshlie pleasures of Egypt may be of us forgotten so that we
shall not know to go back again into the world. When we pass through the
sea of Baptism then the Deuell with all his army, even like as Pharao was, is
drowned. The^ we are fed with Manna, and take drink flowing out of the side
of Christ. The brightness also of knowledge is showed in We drink^ drink
flowing out of the side of Christ.
the night of the world, as the pillar of fire, and in the heat of
tribulacio^, we are defended with the cloud of divine consolacio^, Thus much
S. Hierom.

In whom we see the wholl applicacion of the figurs mentioned in Saint Paul
to the things figured, which things as by other before, so by him they are
called, veritates, the verities. And therefore he says in the beginning of his
sentence thal all things done in the Jews in figures, are fulfilled in us in
verity. So that soche things as we have, which were prefigured in the Jews,
As we have not now Moses but Christ in deed, not a figure of Baptism, but
Baptism in deed, not the holy Ghost in figure but in deed. So not the figure
of Christ's body, but his body in deed. Hiero. ibi.
they be not with us bare signs or figures as they were with them. But
although they be figures in some respect: yet they are also verities, and the
very things in deed. Wherefore as Moses was a figure of Christ, and now again
we have not a figure of Christ, but Christ himself as the verity, or very
thing of the figure: and as the sea was the figure of Baptism, and now we
have not an other figure of Baptism, but Baptism yt self in very deed: And as
the cloud was a figure of the holy Ghost, and now we have not an other figure
of the holy Ghost, but the holy Ghost in very deed: so Ma^na, as S. Hiero^
says here, being the figure of the body of Christ, of like consequence yt
must follow, that now we having the verity of the figure, have not an Ma^na,
and drink verily the water as the figures of the body and blood of Christ.
So as Chrysostom. said in the last chap. thowe do verily eat his body and
drink his blood. Wherefore also S. Hierom, in this applicacion of the figures
to the verities, coming to Manna, says: Cibamur Manna, et potum accipimus de
latere Christi emanantem. We are sedde (says he) with Manna, but that ye
should understand him of And we take drink slowing out of the side of Christ.

What drink slowed out of that blessed side? yt is well known to be the
preciouse blood of our Savior Christ. So that ye see that Saint Hierom, as
he does yt godly, and learnedlie: So also simply and plainly, and
faithfully confesses and teaches, that as the Jews did eat Manna, and
drank the water of the stone: So we eat the verity of that figure, and
drink the verity of that figurative water, which be the very body and
blood of the spiritual stone Jesus Christ. And note that the masters of
figures can not place their figure in Saint Hieroms words. For he contented
not himself to say only the blood, but to declare the realitie and
substance in deed, he said: the blood that flowed out of Christ's side, not
a figure, but that blood in deed.

But peradventure the Adversary will reiecte this authority, because yt is
doubted of some, whether yt be Saint Hieroms work or no, that this authority
is taken out of. Whether yt be or no, two things move me

But that the Adversary shall not cavil that we allege Saint Hierom, where
in deed yt is not Saint Hierom: we will allege Saint Hierom, that he shall
not refuse to be Saint Hierom. And this is his saing: Si panis, Hieron. ad
Hedibiam. quest. 2.
qui de caelo descendit, corpus est Domini, and vinum, quod Discipulis dedit,
sanguis illius est noui Testamenti, qui pro multis effusus est in remissionem
peccatorum, Iudaicas fabulas repellamus. If the bread that descended from
heaven be the body of our Lord, and the wine, that he gave to his disciples,
be his blood of the new Testament, which was shed for many in remission
of sins: let us cast away Iewishe fables. And again a little after: Nec
Moses dedit nobis panem verum, sed Dominus Jesus, ipse conuiua, and conuiuium,
ipse comedens and, qui comeditur. Illius bibimus sanguinem, and sine ipso
potare non possumus. Neither has Moses given us the treu bread, but our Lord
Jesus. He is both the feaster and the feast: He is both the eater, and he
that is eaten. We drink his blood, and without him we can not drink. Thus
S. Hierome.

For that both these places do apply the figure to the thing figured, that is,
Manna to the body of Christ the true bread, which Manna in the sixth of
Saint John is called the bread from heaven, and likewise in diverse places,
therefore I thought them meet for this place. In the first under a condicionall
term, he teaches a plain assercion, that the bread that descended from
heaven is the body of our Lord, and the wine that he gave to his Disciples is
his blood, which is a plain manner of speech affirming the presence of
Christ, and not a figurative speech signifieng his absence. In that he says
that our Lord Jesus body is the bread that descended Non Moses dedit vobis
panem de coelo, sed pater meus dat vobis panem de coelo veru^. Moses has not
given Joan. 6.
you bread from heaven. But my Father gives you the true bread from heaven.
And after speaking of the bread which is his body, and applieng yt to Hic est
panis qui de caelo descendit. Non sicut manducauerunt patres vestri Manna, and
mortui sunt. Qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum. This is the bread that
descended from heaven, Not as your Fathers have eaten Manna in the desert and
be dead. He that eats this bread shall live for ever.

Now then Saint Hierom saing that the bread that descended from heaven, is
the body of owre Lord Jesus: He teaches against the Adversary, that the
sixth of Saint John speaks of the Sacrament, and also avouches that the
verity of the figure Manna, is the body of Christ.

The like also he does in the next sentence, saing, That not Moses, but our
Lord Jesus gave us the true bread. And that by this true bread, which Christ
gave us, he meneth his body in the blessed Sacrament, yt is inuinciblie proved
by that that he adioined: He is the feaster and the feast, yt is he that eats
and is eaten. As Christ in his last supper was both he that prepared the feast
(as Cyprian said) Et consumpto agno quem antiqua traditio proponebat,
inconsumptibilem De caena Domini.
cibum magister apponit Discipulis. And when the lamb was consumed which the
old tradicion did set forth, the master set before his disciples Ipse In 26.
Ma. Hom. 83.
quoque bibit ex eo, ne auditis verbis illis, dicerent: Quid igitur sanguinem
bibimus, and carnem comedimus? ac ideo perturbarentur. He also drank of yt
himself, lest when they had heard those words, they should say: What then
do we drink blood and eat slesh? and therefore should be troubled. So was he
the feast himself, I mien the meat of the feast, which as he then gave yt
sitting at his last supper with his Apostles: So gives he yt now. For, as
Chrystome Hom. 30. de prodit.
says, he is now present, and sanctifies. So that this table that is daily
ministered is in nothing inferior to that table of his last supper: Haec enim
illa, non alia mensa est: haec nulla re minor quam illa est. This is even the
same table Hom. 83 in Matty.
and not an other: this is in nothing less then that.

And as Saint Augustine says, that he is the priest that does offer, and De
ciu. Dei li. 10. ca. 20
the offering, or oblacion that is offered: So is he, he that eats, as Saint

Thus Reader, thowe do not only perceive the evident and strong testimony
of Saint Hierom against the Adversary: But also thowe perceauest the goodly
concord and agreement of the Fathers together, so mightily knit together in
the plain confession of Gods truth, that if a legion of enemies were conspired
together they could not by all their pulling and wresting draw them into
their part.

And yet to fortify this truth, not for yt self, but for the Reader, we will
now hear Saint Cyrill, whom we promissed to ioin with S. Hierom. Cyr. ca,
19, in 6. Joan,
Thus he says: Non enim prudenter quae ad breue tempus sufficient hoc nomine
appella buntur, nec panis erat ex Deo, quem maiores Iudaeorum comederunt, and
mortui sunt. Nam si de coelo, and ex Deo fuisset, liberasset a morte
participantes. Contra vero corpus Christi panis de coelo est, quia aeternam
comedentibus vitam largitur. Those things which suffice but for a short time,
shall not well be called by this name. Neither was yt bread from God, which
the elders But contrary wise the body of Christ is the bread from heaven, for
yt grants everlasting life of the eaters. Thus he.

Thisys a brief and a plain testimony, in the which mention is made of the
figure, that is, of the bread which the elders of the Jews did eat, which
Quoniam saluatoris caro Verbo Dei, quod naturaliter vita est coniuncta, Cyr.
ca. 14 in 6. Joan. When we eat the flesh of Christ we have life in us.
viuifica effecta est, quando came comedimus, tunc vitam habemus in nobis, illi
coniuncti, quae vita effecta est. Forasmoche as the flesh of our Savior being
joined to the Son of God, who naturally is life, is made hable to give life.
When we eat the same flesh, then we have life in us being joined to yt that is
made able to give life. Thus S. Cyrill.

In this saing ye perceive that the flesh of Christ is hable to give life, Ego
sum via, veritas, and vita. Joan. 14.
I am the way, the truth and the life. Therefore we eating the same flesh that
has life, we also have life.

In this here is no void word of figure, he says not that we shall have
life, if we eat the figure of his flesh, for the figure has no life in yt,
but if we eat the flesh. And if ye will weigh yt, ye shall perceive no
consecucion nor dependence to be in the saing of S. Cyrill, if proving the
flesh of Christ to give life, he should will us to eat the figure of his
flesh, and so by yt to have life, for that is not proved. For what consequence
is this, the flesh of Christ gives life, ergo we eating the figure of yt have
life? Naie, the consequence of Cyrill, as he speaks and meneth yt, has a
good consecucion after this sort. The flesh of Christ is quickninge, or
making to live, therefore he that eats yt shall be made to live: So that yt
can not be denied, The flesh not the figure g^eth ^ife, wherefore we eat the
very flesh to have life
but he speaks of the very real flesh of Christ to be eaten, and not of the

THE EIGTH CHAP. PROCEADETH IN DECLAracion of the same by Saint Augustine and
Oecumenius.
Saint Augustine whom all good chrystians have in great reverence for his
singular gift of knowledge, which God by his holy spiritte had exceadinglie
powered into him, as by the same gift of Cathecumeni iam credunt in nomine
Christi, sed Jesus non se credit eis, id est, non eis impertit corpus and
sanguinem suum. Erubescant ergo quia nesciunt. Transeant per mare rubrum.
Manducent Manna vt quomodo crediderunt in nomine Jesus, sic se ipsis credat
Jesus. The learners of Christ's faith now believe in the name of Christ, but
Jesus commits not himself to them, he does not impart or give to them his
body and blood. Let them be ashamed therefore because they know not. Let them
go through the read sea. Let them eat Manna, that as they have believed in the
name of Jesus, so Jesus may commit him self to them. Thus much Saint
Augustine.

For the better understanding of whose saing, yt is to be known, that in the
primitive Church, soche, whose hearts god had touched to receive the holy
faith of Christ, were for a time under the hands of teachers to be instructed
in the principles of faith. During which time, as they were not baptized
until they had sufficient knowledge of faith, and believed according to their
knowledge: no more did they receive the blessed body and blood of Christ.
Now (as yt may appear) some of these learners, that believed in Christ, did
not encreace and profitte so well in faith that they might be admitted to be
baptized, and to receive the body of Christ. Of the which S, Augustine therefore
to quicken them, said that they believed in Jesus Christ, that Jesus did not
commit him self to them, he immediately opens when he says: That is
(says he) he gives not them his body and blood. Wherefore rebuking them he
says: Let them be ashamed that as yet they be no better learned in Christ.
Let them so believe that they may pass through the read sea, and may eat
Manna.

Now to apply this saing directly to our purpose, this is without al doubt
that S, Augustine in the end willing the Cathecumeni to pass through the read
sea, and to eat Manna, moved them to be baptized, and to receive the holy
Sacrament. Wherbie yt is evident that he by Manna understanding the blessed
Sacrament accompteth Manna the figure of yt. For yt is common by the name of
the figure to understand the thing figured. As Christ is called the lamb that
is slain from the beginning of the world and so yt is in other figures. But if
you will know what our Manna is

When he had showed how Saint Paul, expownded the stone to be Christ, he
proceadeth to enquire what the other things did signify. Iam ergo lumine
illato, quaeramus quid coetera significent. Quid sibi voluit mare, nubes Manna,
August. de vtilit. paen.
haec enim non exposuit. Sed Petra quid ostendit. Per mare transitus, Baptismus
est. Sed quia Baptismus, id est salutis aqua, non est salutis, nisi Christi
nomine consecrata, qui pro nobis sanguinem fudit, cruce ipsius aqua signatur,
and vt hoc significaret, ille Baptismus mare rubrum fuit. Manna de coelo aperte
ab ipso Domino exponitur. Patres vestri (inquit) manducauerunt Manna in Eremo,
and mortui sunt. Quando enim viuerent? Figura enim pronuntiare vitam posset,
vita esse non posset. Manducauerunt (inquit) Manna and mortui sunt, id est,
Manna, quod manducauerunt, non illos potuit de morte liberare, non quia Manna
mors eis fuit, sed quia a morte non liberauit. Ille enim a morte liberaturus
erat, qui per Manna figurabatur, de coelo certe Manna veniebat. Attend quem
figurabat. Ego sum (inquit) panis vinus qui de caelo desce^di. Now, says S.
August. the light being brought in, let us seek what the other things do
signify. What the cloud the sea, and Manna do mien. For these things he has
not expownded. But what the stone was he has showed. The passing through the
sea is Baptism. But because Baptism, Manna from heaven is plainly expownded
of our A figure gives not life, but the blessed Sac. gives life. ergo, yt is
more then a figure.
Lord himself: Your Fathers (says he) have eaten Manna in the Wilderness,
and they be dead. When should they live? A figure may prenunciate life, but
yt can not be life. They have eaten (says he) Manna and be dead, that is to
say, Manna, that they did eat, could not deliver them from death, not that
Manna was death unto them, but because yt delivered not from death. He should
deliver from death, who was figurated by Manna. The Manna truly came from
heaven. Mark whom yt figured: I am (says ^e) the living bread which came
down from heaven. Thus far S. Augustine:

In whose words ye see a goodly applicacion of the figures to the things
figured. How well and aptelie the red sea figured Baptism, which is made
read in virtue by the blood of Christ, Saint Augustine most godly has
declared. And he has done no less in the applicacion of Manna Manna did
figure. Yt figured him, who said: I am the bread of life, which came down
from heaven.

That Christ spoke these words there is no doubt. But whether he spoke them
of his body in the Sacrament the Sacramentarie will make a doubt. But that S.
Augustine meent that the body of Christ in the Sacrament is the thing figured
by Manna, he himself does so plainly open in an other place, that we are
delivered from doubt thereof. Thus he says.

Manna typus est escae spiritualis, quae resurrectione Domint veritas facta est
in Eucharistiae mysterio. Manna is a figure of that spiritual meat, which in
the resurrection Lib. quest. (...). test quest. 65.
of our Lord, was made the verity in the Sacrament. In which words ye see
the just applicacion of the figure to the thing sigured. Manna is the figure:
the body of Christ in the Sacrament is the thing figured and the verity.

Let yt not trooble the Reader, that he calls yt the spiritual meat, as
though thereby were not affirmed the very real presence. But remember that
Ma^na how yt was called a spiritual meat and the water of the rock a spiritual
drink
S. Paul calls Manna a spiritual meat, although yt were corporal, and the
water also he calls spiritual, althoug yt were likewise corporal, not that
he would so teach them to be spiritual, that they were not in very deed
corporal, but because they were miraculouslie and wonderfully, not by the
ordinary power and work of God, which he daily works in the producing and
conseruing of his creatures, but by a special, and unwonted manner, given to
the people of Israel. Wherefore yt liked S. Augustine, as he might very well, to
call yt, being the verity, a spiritual meat, as Manna the figure was called
spiritual meat. Whereby the one better answers the other. And in deed as
Manna was sent to the Jews beside the course of nature: So was Christ sent to
us beside the course of nature. And as yt was made meat to them merueillouslie:
So is the body of Christ in the Sacrament made meat for us merueillously. And
thus both these be spiritual The body of Christ in the Sacr. how yt is
called a spiritual meat.
meats, although the body of Christ more spiritual, both for that after his
resurrection his body was glorified and indewed with the gifts of
immortality, agilitie, impassibilitie, subtilitie, and claritie: and also for
that in the Sacrament yt is beholden by faith, and not by senses which is a
spiritual manner. Thus then yt appears very manifestly, that the body of
Christ is and may be called for diverse consideracions a spiritual meat, and
yet be never the less a corporal substance.

That thus in this place, yt is to be understood to be a spiritual meat and
not after the manner that the Adversary would have yt wrested, the very words
of Saint Augustine enforce: For he said that this spiritual meat is in the
mystery or Sacrament. The spiritual manner that the Adversary would here
violently intrude and thrust in, is not, nor can not be in the Sacrament, but
in the receauer, who by faith and charity receaueth after that spiritual
manner, which faith and charity be not in the Sacramental bread (as they
term yt) but in the man the receauer of yt. Of the which spiritual meat the
bread is a sign or a figure as they teach, saing, that as they receive that
bread to nourish the body: So they spiritually receive Christ to nourish the
soul: So that that spiritual meat of the which they speak, is not in the
Sacrament. Therefore yt is to be concluded, that he speaks of the natural meat
of Christ's body, which is, according to the mind of this holy Father, and
the doctrine of the catholic Church verily, really, substanciallie in the
Sacrament and yet never the less spirituallie, in manner above declared.

In this matter diverse other places might be brought in, but for that I would
not weary the Reader, but raither delight him with the hearing of some other,
and that convenient place might be had for Oecumnnius, we shall cease with
thus much of Saint Augustine, and hear the said Oecumenius Oecumen. 1. Cor
10.
upon the same text of Saint Paul. Thus he writes. Comederunt nempe Manna,
sicut nos corpus Christi. Potum spiritualem, hoc est, aquam e rupe sieve petra
seaturientem biberunt, quemadmodum nos sanguinem Christ. They have (says A
plain saing for the Procla.
Oecumenius) eaten Manna, as we the body of Christ: They heave drunk a
spiritual drink, that is, water running out of a rock or a stone, as we the
blood of Christ. Thus he.

This is but a brief exposition, but yet wonderful weighty, and mighty to
overthrow the enemy. Methinke I should nothing say here to open the matter,
where all is so plain, but to declare that I wonder that men will or can be so
deluded in a matter so clearly taught, as yt is here. I merueill also how
malice can preuaill; or how yt self against so many fast

But to come to the purpose, this is first to be noted in this Author, that
he applies the figure to the verity in both parts, that is Manna to the
body of Christ, and the water to the blood of Christ. In the which ye may
perceive how well he agrees with Saint Augustine, with whom he is here
joined, and how both they agree with them, that be before alleged, which
all have taught that Manna and the water be figures of the body and blood of
Christ, and that not of the body and blood of Christ absolutely without
respect, but of the body and blood of Christ as eaten and dronken, which
is only in the Sacrament, as touching the corporal eating of his body.
Observe also for the presence of Real presence and corporal receipt of
Christ's body anouched.
Christ's body in the Sacrament, how this Author speaks without tropes,
without figures, or any soche like speech, and in most plain manner says.
That they did eat Manna, as we the body of Christ: they drank of the water
of the rock, as we the blood of Christ.

In the which comparaison I would learn of the Adversary how this aduerbe of
similitude should agree with his spiritual manner, as concerning the eatinge
of yt, as this Author speaks yt, taking as they be in deed Manna for the
figure, and the body of Christ for the verity. If the body of Christ the
verity be eaten but spiritually, then Manna was not eaten

This is the heretical pure, and sincere doctrine, and yet this manner and No
catholic doctor teaches the Sacr. to be only a figure.
form of doctrine, if yt be fownde in any one of all the holy Fathers, that
have taught since Christ in any time or age, I will lose my credit and give
the victory. So pure is there doctrine and spiritual that yt comes not under
our senseis, either to be seen, or heard, as the doctrine of the Fathers. But
the Fathers teach that we receive the very body of Christ, and they put no
trope nor figure to yt, Wherefore they expownding the Scriptures are to be
understood as they speak.

When Chrysostom expowndeth this text of Saint Paul, he uses no other manner
or phrase of words in his exposition, but this: Ille illis Manna and aquam,
and tibi corpus and sanguinem dedit. He (mening God) gave unto

If God gives not unto us the body and blood of Christ verily, as the
words in their true significacion do purporte, why does he not by plain
words so say unto us, in an exposition, which should be all clear and
plain?

Saint Hierom also said not, we are fed with the figure of Christ's Note
well these plain sentences, reader for thy state.
blood, which if yt had been none other, there is no doubt but in his
exposition of the scripture he would so have spoken yt. But he said: Et potum
accipimus de latere Christi manantem. And we receive drink flowing out of the
side of Christ. Whereby what else can be meant, but that we receive the very
blood of Christ that flowed out of his side, and not the bare figure? Which
might much better have been expressed by other words, then by so plain
lively words as these be, which utters the very

So also this Author expownding the scripture thereby to give us the true
understanding, does not teach that we take but a figure. Which he should
have done if the truth were so. But by plain words signifieng the very
thing he says, that the Jews did eat Ma^na, as we the body of Christ. And
they drank water of the stone as we the blood of Christ. What shall we now
then doubt of the matter? Could not these holy men and learned Fathers
Oecolampadius, Zwinglius, Bullinger, Bucer, Peter Martyr, Cranmer or Iuell?
Were yt not to strange that if yt were but a figure, that none among so many
should so expownde yt, and declare yt? If there were no more but this yt might
sufficiently stay any man not destitute of grace to believe that the
Sacrament is not only a figure, but yt contains also the very body and
blood of Christ, as the words of these Authors be, which body and blood
be the verities of there figures Manna, and the water of the rock.

THE NINTH CHAP. PROCEADETH IN the declaracion of the same by Haimo, and
Theophilact.
HItherto we have been busied in the testimonies of soche as be of the most
ancient. Now we will descend to some of later time: and yet not yester day
born, but soche as were well toward Berengarius time, before the time of
controversy in the Sacrament. Whom as their time does nothing discommend: So
their learning joined with holy life has gotten them much estimacion. The
coople we mien here to produce be Haimo, and Theophilact. which both have
travailed to expownde the epistles of Saint Paul. Wherefore we can not
mistrust, but that they will give us that exposition, and understanding of
them, that the holy Church had in their times, as the other ancient Fathers
before alleged have done. For how soever yt be in this our time, yt was
reputed and accounted with the holy men, a great and an horrible offense to
dissent or depart from any thing, that the Church had received, accepted,
approved or allowed. And therefore they would not by any means, admit that,
whereby they should be fownde to vary from the faith of the Church.

Now then being sure that they report to us the faith of the Church, as

He expowndeth the text of Saint Paul now in hand, on this wise: Haimo 1.
Cor. 10.
Et omnes eandem spiritualem escam manducauerunt. Et omne eundem potum etc.
Manna, quod de caelo, id est, de isto aere eis datum est: Et aquam, quae de
Petra sluxit, dicit spiritualia esse, vel quia spiritualiter intelligenda sunt,
significabant enim corpus and sanguinem Domini, quod modo consecratur, and
percipitur in Ecclesia, vel quia non mundana lege, and consuetudine parata
sunt. Manna which was given The body and blood of our Lord are co^setrated
in the church
them from heaven, that is from this aier, and the water which flowed from the
stone he says to be spiritual, either because they are spirituallie to be
understood. For they signify the body and blood of our Lord, which is
now consecrated, and received in the Church: Or else because they were
prepared not after the law and custom of worldly things. Hitherto Haimo.

In whose exposition ye have to perceive two causes which he assigns wherefore
the Apostles called Manna and the water spiritual meat, and spiritual drink.
The one was, that they be spiritually to be understood. What the spiritual
understanding of them is he declares. They did signify (says he) the body
and blood of Christ. In the which he agrees with the rest before alleged,
that Manna and the water were figures of the

But now to come to the poinct of the controversy, of what body of Christ
were they figures, of his body corporal, or spiritual? Attend, and mark
well what he says. They signified (says he) the body and blood of our
Lord, which is now consecrated, and received in the church. In this saing
the doubt is dissolved, and the matter is opened. For yt is the very body of
of Christ reallie and substanciallie in the Sacrament, that was figured by
Manna. And this is proved by the word Consecrated, which he uses saing the
body and blood of Christ, be consecrated in the blessed Sacrament.

Although this word (Consecracion) be a word that the Adversaries can not
abide: yet yt is more manifest then that they can deny, that yt is a word
from whose use the grave and ancient Authors did not alhorre, but did use yt,
as yt is beforesaied, and declared out Consecracio^ what yt is.
of Chrysostom, Saint Ambrose and other, where also yt is taught by
Chrysostom, what consecracion is, which (to use his terms) is

As touching him that does consecrate, he says yt is not man, but Christ
himself, who was crucified for us. By what words consecracion is done he
shows thus. Hoc est, ait, corpus meum. Hoc verbo proposita consecrantur. De
pro. Iu. Hom. 30.
This is (says he, mening Christ) my body. With this word (says
Chrysostom) the things settfurth, that is the bread and wine are consecrated.
But where unto are they consecrated? into the body and blood of Christ, as
Chrysostom has said.

And hereunto also Saint Ambrose is a witness who says. Non erat Lib. 4. de
Sac. cap. 4.
corpus Christi ante consecrationem, sed post consecrationem, dico tibi, quod
iam corpus est Christi. Ipse dixit, and factum est, ipse mandauit and creatum
est Yt was not the body of Christ before the consecracion. But after the
consecracion,

And leest the Adversary should cauille, and say, that the bread after The
cavil of sacrame^tall bread impugned.
the words come to yt, is Sacramental bread, and therefore yt may take upon
yt the name of the thing, of which yt is a Sacrament, and so meneth Saint
Ambrose. To this may be said, that that gloss is to violent for so plain
words. For yt is to be thought that Saint Ambrose would not have said with
soche a vehement manner of speech, that yt is the body, if yt should be but
called the hodie, and not be the body in deed. For this manner of speech (I
say unto thee, that now yt is the body of Christ) imports an other manner
of force of the thing that is spoken of to be so in deed, then to be so called.

And that he meant no less then he said, his own words in the same Tu forte
dicis, meus panis Amb. ibid.
est vsitatus: Sed panis iste, panis est ante verba Sacramentorum, vbi
accesserit consecratio, de pane fit caro Christi. Thowe perchance say: Yt
is my usual bread, But this bread before the words of the Sacraments is
bread, but when the consecracion comes to yt, of the bread is made the flesh
of Christ. In these words of Saint Ambrose, yt may well be perceived, that
he Panis quem Dominus Discipulis edendum porrigebat, non effigy sed natura De
coena Domini. The bread changed in nature is made flesh.
mutatus, omnipotentia Verbi factus est caro. The bread which our Lord gave
to his disciples to eat being changed notin outward form, but in nature, by
almightinesse of the word is made flesh. Saint Ambrose says the flesh of
Christ is made of the bread: Saint Cyprian says, that the bread by the
allmightinesse of the word is made flesh.

And that this should not seem impossible, though yt be wonderful.
Theophilacte makes a very apt similitude: sainge: Et ne quem conturbet quod
credendus sit panis caro. Etenim and in carne ambulante Domino, and ex pane
alimoniam admittente, panis ille qui manducabatur, in corpus eius mutabatur,
etc. And let yt not trooble any man, that the bread is to be believed flesh.
Why there appears not flesh in the Sacr.
like unto his holy flesh, and yt auailed to his augmentacion, and
sustentacion, after the manner of man. Therefore now also the bread is changed
into the flesh of our Lord. And how, says he, does yt not appear flesh,
but bread? That we should not abhor from the eating of yt.

What can be said against these so manifest and so plain testimonies? May we
not, or raither aught we not to say as these holy famous, and learned men
do, raither then to say as a few fantastical heretics, and Apostaties do?
Let us believe these pillars of Christ's Church, and believing them, seek to be
saved as they be.

Thus have ye heard enough, I suppose, to declare unto you, that by
consecracion, which Haimo spoke of, the body of Christ is in the Sacrament.
And therefore Manna, as he said, signifieng the body of Christ consecrated, Vt
enim nos aqua Baptismi perfusi corpus dominicum manducamus: Sic and Manna illi
mari traiecto, in esum sunt vsi: Et quemadmodum ipsi Domini sanguinem bibimus;
Sic illi erumpentem e percusso lapide aquam biberunt. As we washed A plain
saing for M. Iuell.
with the water of Baptism, do eat our Lords body: So they having passed
through the sea, used Manna for their food. And as we drink the blood of our
Lord: So they drank the water that gushed out of the smitten Rock. Thus
Theophilacte.

These two testimonies be so like in sense and phrase, that they might raither
be judged to come out of one mind, and out of one mouth them from two men,
different in time, distant in place, and contrie. But God, who is not, as
Saint Paul says: Dissentionis Deus, sed pacis, and 1. Cor. 14. The spirit
of unity among catholics.
vnitatis. The God of dissension: but of peace and unity: who by his holy
spirit wrought that Multitudinis credentium erat cor vnum, and anima vna. The
multitude that believed were of one heart, and of one soul, made them being of
one faith to speak one thing, as he did his four holy Evangelists Who
although they did write in diverse times and places: yet they agreed

But they that can not content them selves with that order and condition that
God has placed them in, but being puffed up with the spirit of pride, go
about to buyll the tower of Babell to get them a name, The spirit of division
among Protestants.
God by his spirit of humility and unity not working with them, their
tounges are divided, and dissension is among them, they agree not, they speak
not of one thing: as yt is easy to see in the school of confusion, even an
other Babell the Tower of the wicked name of Luther. Among whose disciples was
nor is the spirit of unity, neither were nor be yet that multitude of one
heart, nor of one soul, but of diverse. Luther he spoke with one tongue, and
said, the very body of Christ was in the Sacrament reallie and
substanciallie: Oecolampadius he spoke in an other tongue contrary to his
Master, and said that Christ's body was not there, but as in a sign. Some
other of Luthers disciples said that Magistrates and rulers must be obeyed:
Some of them had other tounges and said that we are called to liberty, and
therefore we be all equal, and owe no obedience to

But God ( qui facit habitare vnius moris in domo. Who makes men to Psalm. 67.
be of one mind in the house) makes men that dwell in his house of his holy
Church to be of one tongue, of one mind, to believe one thing, and to say one
thing. Therefore let these men of Babell go, these men of confused tounges, and
let us hear the people of agreement.

Ye see I say, how Theophilacte agrees with Haimo, and if ye ascend to
Oecumenius, to Chrysostom and other, ye shall see soche agreement in sense,
soche liknesse in words that a man might say, that they were all

I shall not need to trooble thee with many words to open the saing The Jews
eat Ma^na we our Lords body. They drank water: we the blood of Christ
of Theophilacte, for yt is so evident and plain that yt need no expositour.
Only I wish, that for the purpose that he is alleged, that ye note first,
that he compares Manna, and the water to the body and blood of Christ as the
figures to the verities, in that he says: As we eat our Lords body. So
they Manna. As we drink the blood of our Lord. So they drink the water of
the Rock.

That by the body and blood of Christ, he meneth the body and blood in the
Sacrament, which he most manifestly affirms, and by express words
denies the only figure of the Adversary so wickedlie avouched, Cap. lx.
yt appears in his exposition of this saing of Christ, This is my body, in
the six and twenteth of Saint Matthew, and in the fourtenth of Saint Mark,
which both be alleges in the second book in the exposition of the same
saing of Christ.

Likewise also does he upon the vj. of Saint John where he says thus.
Theoph. in 6. Joan.
Mark that the bread, which is eaten of us in the mysteries is not only a
figure of the body of our Lord but the flesh yt self of our Lord. For he did
not say the bread, which I will give, is a figure of my flesh. But yt is my
flesh.

In this sentence yt perceive Theophilacte not only auouching the very
substanciall presence of Christ's flesh in the Sacrament, which is the Real
presence avouched, and the heretical figure denied.
catholic doctrine: but also denieng the figure which is the heretical
doctrine. What wicked obstinacy is this, that where this Author denies yt to
be a figure, they affirm the contrary: and where he affirms the substanciall
presence of Christ's flesh, they deny yt? If the Adversaries had, but one
soche place to deny the presence (as certain I am they have none) they would
triumph much against the truth. But having none to deny that, that they
deny, but many to deny that they do affime, yt is most deuellish arrogancy
to stand in yt.

But let us hear Theophilact in an other place, treacting of Manna, and the
Sacrament. Patres vestri comederunt Manna in solitudine. Hoc saepe and multum
In 6. Joan.
versat in ore, vt persuadeat hominibus. Nam si possibile fuit quadraginta
annis sine mess and semente pasci homines, and conseruari illorum vitam, multo
magis nunc nostram spiritualem meliori pane Dominus carne sua, quae absque
semine viri, ex virgin constituta est. Your Fathers have eaten Manna in the
Wilderness. This

In this ye perceive the comparaison of the figure to the thing figured, which
thing figured is not a piece of bread, of no better sort, condition or
dignity then Manna. But yt is a better bread says Theophilacte, that is the
thing figured, which is not an only figure of the flesh, as the Adversary
would gloss yt, but yt is the flesh of Christ in very deed. For yt is the same
flesh that was born of the virgen without seed of man. Albeit more might be
said out of Theophilacte, who is both plain and plentiful in in this matter:
yet trusting that this may suffice a Christen reader, I will

THE TENTH CHAP. PROCEADETH upon the same text by Rupertus, and Rich. Holkot,
and ends with Gagneius.
PErceauing that in these former allegacions, I have been somewhat long, being
desierouse that the Reader should well perceive the faith of these auncientes,
and learn the truth of them to the condemnacion and vanquishing of the
falshead of heresy, in the opening of these three, for that they be not of
great auncientie, but yet of most substanciall truth, I shall to end this
text make with them a short conclusion.

Rupertus, who is a learned writer, and so reputed and accepted of learned men,
writing upon Exodus, and treacting of Manna says thus upon Rupert. in Exodus
this text. Nec qui plus collegerat habuit amplius, nec qui minus parauerat
reperit minus. Hoc pro virtute cibi and spiritualis potus, id est, corporis and
sanguinis Christi sciendum and firmiter tenendum est, quia non pro quantitate
portionis, quam ore percipit secundum visibilem speciem panis and vini, alius
plus, alius minus consequitur de gratia spiritus viuificantis: sed singuli
iuxta id quod possunt edere congregant, id est, quod possunt credere,
remissionem peccatorum percipiunt, and vitam aeternam. Sicut enim pater qui
primus peccauit, cuius nos iniquitatem portauimus, non pro quantitate morsus
sui, sieve pomi quod momordit, sententiam, vel damnationem instam accepit,
tantumque illi valuit pomum vnum momordisse, quantum quicquid pomorum in arbore
illa fuit deuorasse, ad condemnationem infidelitatis, and inobedientiae: Sic e
contrario quisque nostrum, non pro quantitate portiunculae viuisici panis quae
frangitur illi, quam ore sumit, aut dentibus terit, gratiam vel vitam accipit,
sed tantum illi valet ad consequutionem Iustitiae exiguum quid percipisse, quam
valeret, si totum quod oblatum est, proprio solus ore perciperet. Recte ergo
sancta Christi Ecclesia panes non valde grandes, sed exiguas ad consiciendum
corpus Christi componit similas and valde tenues. Neque vini multum sed exiguum
quid insundit, quia sicut iam dictum est, nec qui plus collegit habuit amplius,
nec qui minus parauerat repperit minus. Unto him that had gathered much there
remained nothing over: and to him that had gathered little, there was no lack.
This is to be known and firmly to be holden for the virtue of the spiritual
meat, and drink, that is to say, of the body and blood of Christ, that not
for the quantity of the portion which any man takes with his mouth
according to the visible form of bread and wine one gets more, an other
less of the grace of the quickening spirit: but every one acording to that,
that they can eat, do gather, that is, according as they can believe, they
receive remission of their sins, and life everlasting. As our Father which
first offended, whose iniquity we have borne, not for the quantity of his
bitte or morsel, or else of the apple which he bitte, has he received
sentence, or just damnacion. For yt had been as much for him to have bitten one
apple to the condemnacion of his infidelity and disobedience, as to have
devoured all the apples on that tree: So contrary wise every one of us
receaueth grace or: life, not for the quantity of the little portion of the
quickninge bread which is broken unto him which he receaueth with his mouth,
or bruseth with his teeth. But asmoche yt shall auaill him to the obteining of
righteousness to have received a little portion, as yt should Rupertus.

Who expownding the sixtenth Chapter of Exodus, in the which is declared the
feding of the children of Israel with Manna, expowndeth in the same the
miraculouse work of God, which Moses declares to be done in the gathering of
the same Manna, which was that where they were commanded, that they should
every Man gather a certain measure called a Gomer, which should suffice a
man, if any gathered for

This Author applieng this work and miracle of God in Manna to the Sacrament,
as to the thing figured, he declares how answerablie, God woorketh now in
the thing figured, to the figure, teaching as great a miracle in the one, as in
the other in that respect of having more or less. Allthough as touching the
substance of them, the one so far exceadeth the

That he believed Christ to be in the Sacrament he does well open in this his
applicacion where he says, that the receipt of the virtue of the spiritual
meat, and drink, which is the body and blood of Christ, is not to be
proporcioned, according to the quantity of the visible forms of bread and
wine. In the which words, he plainly declares, that the meat of the
Sacrament figured by Manna, is the body and blood of Christ.

But here the Adversaries will say that this Author is on there part. For he
calls yt spiritual meat and drink, whereby he meeneth the spiritual
Objection of spiritual meat and drink answered.
receipt of Christ's body spirituallie, and not corporally. Call to
remembrance, what is said of this in the eighte chapter of this book where
there be causes assigned upon the saing of S. Augustine, why the body of Christ
is called spiritual meat, and yt shall answer the Adversary

And yet I shall add the saing of Saint Ambrose to the utter discomfiting of
the Adversary, which teaches the body of Christ to be in the Sacrament. For
he declaring Manna to be the figure of yt, proves by that, and by an other
excellent reason, that the body of Christ in the Sacrament is a spiritual
body: In Sacramento Christus est, quia corpus est Christi: Auibr. de mist. ca.
9.
Non ergo corporalis esca, sed spiritualis est. Vnde Apostolus de typo eius
ait: quia patres nostri escam spiritualem manducauerunt, and potum spiritualem
biberunt. Corpus enim Dei, corpus est spirituale. Corpus Christi, corpus est
diuini spiritus. In the Sacrament is Christ, for yt is the body of Christ, yt
is not therefore corporal meat. Wherefore the Apostle also says of the figure of
yt, that our Fathers have eaten spiritual meat, and dronken spiritual drink?
The body of God is a spiritual body. The body of Christ, is the body of
the divine spirit. Thus much Saint Ambrose.

First teaching the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, he contenteth not
himself so to say, but to prevent the objection of the Adversary, who Christ
is the substance of the blessed Sac.
will elude this, and say that Christ is in the Sacrament as in a sign, he
says not only that Christ is in the Sacrament, but he says also that the
body of Christ is the Sacrament, the substance of bread and wine being
changed into the substance of the body and blood of Christ, the only
forms of bread and wine remaining. And after he has thus taught, he
infers, that therefore yt is no corporal meat, but spiritual meat. And to
prove this, he makes as yt were two arguments: The first is that forasmoche
as the figures of yt were by Saint Paul called spiritual meat, and
spiritual drink, much more may yt be called spiritual meat, and spiritual
drink. The second argument is that the body of God is spiritual, and the
body of Christ is the body of God, wherefore the body of Christ is spiritual.

Thus ye see that as Saint Augustine (as yt is before in the eight Chapter
alleged) calls the very real and substanciall body of Christ in Totum
corpus viuifica spiritus virtute, plenum esse ostendit. In 6. Joan.
Spiritum enim ipsam carnem nuncupauit, non quia naturam carnis amiserit, and
in spiritum mutata sit: sed quia sum cum eo coniuncta, totam viuificandi vim
hausit. Nec turbari propter hoc decet. Nam qui Domino conglutinatur, vnus cum
eo spiritus est, quomodo igitur caro sua vna cum eo non appellabitur? He
shows that all his body is full of the quickening power. For he calls his
flesh the The flesh of Christ called a spirit, and so a spiritual flesh.
spirit, not that yt had lost the nature of flesh, and is changed into the
spirit, but because yt is so nerelie joined with him, yt has taken into yt all
power to make to live. Neither is yt decent any man to be troubled for this.
For he that is fast joined with God, is one spirit whithe him. How then shall
not his flesh be called one with him? Thus much Saint Cyrill.

Of whom we may learn that Christ him self called his flesh a spirit, and
therefore yt may well be called spiritual, and yet says Saint Cyrill,
though yt be so called, yt has not lost the nature of flesh, but is both flesh
and spirit. And therefore well called of these Authors a spiritual flesh, a
spiritual body, a spiritual meat, and yet allwaies being a very
substanciall body, and a natural flesh.

By these Authors yt is made manifest to you, that when they or other do call
the body of Christ in the Sacrament, a spiritual body, or a spiritual
Rupertus does, a spiritual meat: yt is not furthwith after the Adversaries
mind, to be made so spiritual, that there shall remain neither body, nor
meat, but that by a spiritual understanding by faith we must understand yt a
very body, very flesh, and yet spiritual for many causes here and before
declared. And that this Author meant even so yt appears well. For when he had
called yt spiritual meat, he furthwith expownded yt and said, that is to
say, the body and blood of Christ. which body and blood he would so to be
spiritual, not that yt should be absent from the Sacrament, but raither to be
the substance of the Sacrament, which he does well insinuate, when he says,
that we receive not the spiritual meat of the body and blood of Christ
according to the quantity of the visible form of bread and wine. He says
not according to the quantity of bread and wine, which words might include
their substances, but says after the manner of the speech of the catholic
faith, according to the quantity of the visible forms of bread and wine
signifieng the substa^ces Quomodo verbum a summo demissum caro factum est, non
mutatum in carnem, sed assumendo carnem. Sic Rupert. in Exo. ca. 10
panis and vinum, vtrumque ab imo subleuatum fit corpus Christi and sanguis non
mutatum in carnis saporem, sed assumendo inuisibiliter vtriusque diuinae
scilicet and humanae, quae in Christo est immortalis substantiae, veritatem.
Proinde sicut hominem qui de virgin sumptus in cruce pependit, recte and
catholice Deum confitemur: Sic veraciter hoc quod sumimus de sancto altari
Christum dicimus, agnum Dei praedicamus. As the Son of God coming down from
the high was made flesh, not being changed into flesh, but by taking flesh
upon him, So bread and As rightly as we confess Christ to have been
crucified, so rightly we confess him to be in the Sacr.
wine both lift up from the lowest is made the body and blood of Christ
not changed into the taste of flesh, or into the horriblenesse of

This saing needs no commentary. Wherefore briefly note, gentle Reader, that he
says, that the bread and wine be made the body and blood Aultars holy.
holy altar to be Christ, and the lamb of God. Also if the aultars be holy,
as this Author says they be. Yt can be no holy deed to pull them down with
despite as Germany and England have done.

This I trust, suffices to open this Authors faith as concerning the presence
of Christ in the holy Sacrament. Wherefore now leaving him, his follow shall be
heard, who is Holkot an english man, who writing upon the book of wisdom
says thus. Per Manna in sacra scriptura figuratur signanter Holkot in li sap.
cap. 16
Eucharistiae Sacramentum. Sicut enim filij Israel transeuntes per desertum
versus terram a Domino promissam cibi refocillabantur alimento, ita nos per
mundum ad coelum pergentes corporis and sanguinis Christi quotidiano viatico
recreamur. By Manna in the holy scripture, the Sacrament is notably figured.
For as the Manna a notable figure of the Sacrament
children of Israel going through the desert toward the land promised unto
them of God they were recreated with the food of that meat: Even so we

Of this Author though he be of the later days, we learn no other thing in
this matter, but even the very same that the great auncientes have before
taught and avouched. So that I can not perceive why the masters of wickedness,
should reject him and soche other, but only of malice for there plain
testimony. As all that before be alleged have taught Manna to be a figure of
the Sacrament: So does this Author likewise. As they have avouched the
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. So does this Author also. For he
saieththat we are fed in this world in our iourneie to heaven ward with the
body and blood of Christ.

Now ye have had these matters reported and testified to you by twelve
witnesses, which be sufficient by the laws if were in matter of life and
death, as in deed this is, for they that believe this, as they have

Now finally to conclude and shet up the exposition of this text: I have
thought good to add the thirtenth witness, who shall be Gagneius a ma^n of
the later days, but not to be contemned but woorthilie for his Admonet hoc
capite Paulus Corinthios, ne de donis a Deo perceptis efferantur. Futurum enim
vt per elationem Gagneius in Paulum 1. Cor. 10.
hanc atque alia peccata, ijs donis excidant, and a Christo eijciantur idque
exemplo Iudaeorum docet. Quos, licet in figura, similibus tamen donis ab eo
affectos probat, sed hinc tamen ob sua delicta excidisse. Sicut enim Corinthij
in spiritu sanclo and aqua baptisati, very Pharaonis seruitutem excusserunt,
Christi carne pasti, and eius sanguine potati sunt: It a patres Iudaei excussa
Pharaonis seruitute, and transgresso marirubro, quodam modo in mari and nube
baptisati sunt, similitudinarie scilicet: Quod enim illis nubes protegens,
conducens, ac refrigerans, id nobis spiritus sanctus actionum nostrarum dux and
ptotector, libidinumque moderator and extinctor. Quod illis mare, hoc
Corinthijs aquae Baptismatis. Corinthij Christi carnem manducabant: illi
figuram eius Manna, quam spiritualem vocat escam, quod miraculose coelitus
descenderit. Corinthij Christi sanguinem bibebant. Iudaei spiritualem potum,
quem miraculose petra sudit, biberunt, neque tame ntot affecti beneficijs
praeter duos tantum, in terram promissionis peruenerunt, sed in deserto
prostrati sunt ac mortui. Qua in re sigura nostri fuere, vi scilicet a vitijs
illorum abstineamus, alioquin in deserto perpetuae vastitudinis perituri, neque
veram promissionis terram ingressuri. Paul does admonish the Corynthians in
this chapter that they be not proud of the gifts which they have received
of God. For yt may come, that by this pride and other sins, they may fall
from these gifts, and be cast out from Christ. And that he teaches by the A
notable conference, of the figures and the thirges figured. and of the
benefittes of both
example of the jews, whom he proves to have had the like benefittes although
in figure: and yet by their sins to have fallen from them. For as the
Corynthians baptized in the holy Ghost and water brake of the servitude of the
very Pharao after they were fed with the flesh of Christ, and had dronken
this blood: Even so the Fathers the Jews, having broken the servitude of
Pharao, and passed through the read sea, after a certain manner they were
baptized in the sea and the cloud, that is to say, similitudinarelie. For what
the cloud was unto them, defending, conducting, and refreshing them: that unto
us is the holy Cost, the guide of our doings

Whom ye see not only applieng Manna and the water of the Rock as figures of
Christ's body and blood, and affirming the very presence of the^

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER, Declares
ALthough of this blessed Sacrament there be many prophecies, as in the first
book yt is declared yet of yt, as aunswerable unto this figure there be not
many. The prophet David in the psalm makes mention of yt saing: Et mandauit
nubibus desuper, and ianuas caeli aperuit. Et pluit illis Psalm. 77.
Manna ad manducandum, and panem caeli dedit eis. Panem Angelorum manducauit
homo. He commanded the clouds above, and opened the doors of heaven. He
rained down Manna also upon them for to eat, and gave them food from heaven.
So man did eat Angels food. Of this also he speaks again: Et pane celi
saturauit eos. Dirupit petram, et sluxerunt aquae, abierunt in sicco flumina.
And he filled the^ with the bread of heaven. He opened the Rock of stone, and
the waters flowed out, so that rivers ran out of dry places. These
wonderful factes done by the hand of God for his people the Applicacio^ of
Manna and the water to the blessed Sac.
Romans 4.
And as unto them water flowed out of the Rock: So unto the Chrystians out
of that stone, upon whom the Church is builded, which stone God did strike
for our sins, as Saint Paul says, flowed water and blood, of the whicch
there is soche plenty, that yt suffices for all the world to drink of yt, if
they will.

Upon this text S. Hierom says: Sed and fontem Baptismi, atque martyrij eadem
In psai. 77.
petra ostendit. De latere enim eius cum percussus est, sanguis and aqua
processit. Quod Baptismum and martyrium, figurauit, But the same stone also
shows out the fountain of Baptism, and of martyrdom. For out of his side,
when he was stricken, came forth blood and water, which did figure Baptism
and martyrdom. And upon the other text of David, applieng that as a prophecy,
he says Panem caeli dedit eis, panem Angelorum manducauit homo. Ipse homini
Psalm. 77. Hier. ibid.
cibum praebuit, qui dixit: Ego sum panis vitae, qui de caelo descendi, qui
manducauerit ex hoc viuet in aeternum. He gave them food from heaven, so has
man eaten the food of Angels. He himself has given meat to man who said: I
am the bread of life, which came down from heaven. He that shall eat of that
bread shall live for ever.

In the which words S. Hiero^ expownding the Prophet declares to what end
the words of the Prophet did tend, namely that there should be an heavenly
Manna given to the spiritual children of Israel, which Manna was Christ the
bread of life, which thing S. Hierom upon the Prophet Pane caeli saturauit
eos. Psalm. 104.
With the bread of heaven he filled the^: And S. Hierom says. Sicut enim illi
de coelis flue^te Ma^na refecti sunt: Ita nos hodie in ecclesia corpore agni
accepto reficimur. Disrupit Petram and fluxerunt aquae, etc. Percussus est enim
lapis ille pretiosus angularis, and immensos nobis protulit fontes, qui nostros
errores abluunt, and ariditates irrigant, As they were fed with Manna flowing
from heaven: So we now in the Church, are fed with the body of the lamb
being received. We be sed with the body of the lamb.
He brake the stone, and the waters flowed out. For that preciouse corner
stone was smitten, and he brought forth to us unmeasurable fowntaines, which
wash away our errors, and water our dryness.

Saint Augustine also upon the same psalm gives a much like exposicion.
August. in psalm. 77.
Qui enim mandauit nubibus desuper, and ianuas coeli aperuit, and pluit illis
Manna ad manducandum, and panem coeli dedit eis, vt panem Angelorum manducaret
homo. Qui cibaria misit eis in abundantia, vt satiaret incredulos, non est
inefsicax dare credentibus verum ipsum de coelo panem, quem Manna significabat,
qui vere cibus est Angelorum, quod Dei Verbum corruptibiles, incorruptibiliter
pascit, quod vt manducaret homo, caro factum est, and habitauit in nobis. He
that commanded the clouds above and opened the doors of heaven, and rained
down Manna to them to eat and gave them bread from heaven, that man might eat
the bread of Angels, who sent to them meat in abundance, to fill the
unbelievers, he is not unable to give unto the beleuers the true bread

As Saint Hierom and Saint Augustine be well agreing in the exposition of the
sainges of the Prophet David: So also Cassiodorus, a man well toward their
time, in nothing dissenteth from them, expownding the same psalm of David. Et
pluit illis Manna ad manducandum. Pluit dixit, vt Cassiod. in Psalm. 77.
ostenderet escae mmiam largitatem, quae tanquam pluuia de caelo descendit. Et
ne dubitares, quae fuerit illa pluuia, sequitur. Manna manducare. Manna
interpretatur, quid est hoc? quod sanctae communioni decenter aptamus quia dum
admirando cibus iste perquiritur, corporis dominici munera declarantur.
Addidit: Panem coeli dedit eis. Quis est alter panis coeli, nisiChristus
Dominus, vnde coelestia spiritualem escam capiunt, and deleclatione
inestimabili perfruuntur? Denique sic sequitur: Panem Angelorum manducauit
homo. Panis ergo Angelorum been dicitur Christus, quia aeterna ipsius laud
pascuntur. Neque enim corporalen: panem Angeli manducare credendi sunt, Sed
illa contemplatione Domini, quia sublimis creatura reficitur, verim hic panis
in coeloreplet Angelos, nos pascit in terris. And he rained down Manna unto
them to eat. He said (rained) that he might show the great plenty of the
meat which like unto rain came down from heaven. And that thowe should not
doubt, what that rain was, yt follows. To eat Manna. Manna is interpreted,
what is this? Which we very well Manna what yt is by interpretacion.
apply to the holy communion. For while this meat is gotten with woondering,
the gifts of our Lords body be declared. He added: He gave them bread from
heaven. Who is the other bread from heaven, but Christ our Lord, of whom
heavenly things do receive spiritual meat, and ioifullie use inestimable
delectacion. Then yt follows thus: Man has eaten the bread of Angels: Christ
than is well called the bread of Angels, because they are fed with his
everlasting lawde and praise. Neither are Angels But this bread fills
Angels in heaven, yt feadeth us in the earth. Thus far Cassiod.

The testimonies of these Authors, which here be produced upon the Prophet
David, are so consonant and agreeable that I dissere to make any note of them
until we hear one mo, who shall be Titelman, a writer upon the Psalms not to
be contemned, though he be of the later days. Whom I ioin with the better will
to these auncientes, that yt may well appear Panis Angelorum, the bread of
Angels, in the Hebrew, as Saint Titell in annot super Psalm. 77.
Hierom, and other do translate yt, is called Panis fortium and robustorum. the
bread of strong and mighty men. And giving two causes why yt is so called, he
puts this for one: Aut forte propter significationem panis viui illius
tempore gratiae mundo descensuri desuper, cuius non dubium est, Manna corporeum
fuisse figuram, panis fortium aut robustorum dictus intelligatur, quia is,
cuius typum gerebat, panis viuus de coelo mittendus, confortaturus erat corda
sumentium in vitam aeternam, inxta quod apud Ioannem Saluator testatur, dicens:
Qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum, and qui manducat me, and ipse viuet
propter me. Or else this bread may be understood to be called the bread of
the strong and mighty, for the significacion of that lively bread that should
descend from above to the world, of the which bread without doubt He that
eats this bread shall live for ever. And he that eats me, shall live
through me. Thus much this Author.

Now ye have heard these Authors with great concord expownding the Prophet
David. And forsomoche as their sainges, here, be even like to them that before
are said upon Saint Augustine, to avoid prolixitie, I shall raither give a
brief note upon their sainges then long to stand upon them This is to be
observed in them all, that they apply this Prophecy to Christ, as the food
of heaven, the very living bread, that gives soche strengh to them, that duly
eat thereof, that they live for ever, which food is received in the Sacrament
of his body and blood. For Saint Hierom applieng yt to Christ, as the food
of man's soul, alleges the

And thus considering how long, I have been upon this one text of Saint Paul,
and remembering how many mo there remain likewise to be expownded, I shall leave
the rest of the Authors here alleged, to be weighed by the Reader and in the
next chapter make an end of that that upon this scripture is to be said.

THE TWELTH CHAPTER, PROVES BY
FOrasmoche as all the Anthours alleged for the exposition of the text of
Saint Pa^ule now last handled and treacted of, do all together conspire and
agree in this truth, that Manna was the figure, and the body of Christ,
which we receive in the Sacrament, the verity: and the verity allwais is
more excellent in good things then is the figure, eue^ as much more
excellent, as the body of a man is above the shadow: Yt must needs then of
necessity follow, that the Sacraments of the new law, which be the things
figured by the figures of the old law, must as far excel them, as the
verity does the figure, and as the body does the shadow. For further proof
of this consider, as yt is declared at large in the first book and yt is S.
Augustins rule also, that all evil things figured by figures of Good things
figured better then the figures.
the old law, are much worse, then the figures by the which they are

And because this shall not be declared, and proved by examples, that be
strange to our matter, we will bring forth an example with in the limits of
our matter, even of Manna yt self, the figure of our Sacrament. What great
miracles and wonders were in that Ma^na, the book of Exodus does declare,
Twelve wonders in Ma^na declared Roff. lib. 1. cap. 12.



As these miracles be contained in the scriptures, as in Exodus, Numeri, and in
the book of wisdom: So they are also setfurth by holy writers, to Exodus 16.
Number. 11. Sap. 16. Chrysostom. indictum Apost. Nolo vos ignor.
the settingfurth of Gods glory in his wonderful works. Of diverse of these
Chrysostom makes mention saing: Et hoc vtique mirabile: Tentauerunt tunc
aliqui per tempus illud, plus quam opus fuerat, colligere, and nullum auaritiae
suae fructum accipiebant. Et quamdiu aequalitatem colebant mansit Manna, quod
Manna erat. Postquam autem auari plus habere desiderauerunt, auaritia mutauit
Manna in vermem. Quamuis hoc non cum detrimento aliorum faciebant. Non enim
rapiebant exalimento proximi, cum plus colligerent, attamen cum plus
desiderarent condemnati sunt. Nam tametsi neminem alium iniuria affecerunt,
tamen sibi ipsis maxim nocuerunt, hoc colligendi modo auaritiae students,
atque sic simul erat cibus, and diuinae agnitionis instructio, simul and
pascebat corpora and erudiebat animam. Neque pascebat solum, sed a laboribus
liberabat, non enim opus eratiungere bones, neque trahere aratrum, neque sulcos
secare, neque ad annum expectare: sed mensam habebant subito appositam, semper
recentem, and quotidie nouam, rebusque ipsis discebant Euangelicum illud
praeceptum, non debere solicitum esse in crastinum. Nulla enim vtilitas ipsis
ab hac solicitudine proueniebat. Nam qui plus colligerat corrumpebatur and
peribat, and auaritiae argumentum solum dabat. Insuper ne putarent illum imbrem
iuxta naturae consuetudinem esse, nihil talium in die Sabbati fiebat, Deo duo
illa ipsos docente, quod prioribus diebus ipse mirabilem, and priorem pluuiam
operabatur, and per diem illum abstinebat, vt inuiti etiam discerent illo die
feriari. And this also was merueilouse. that they should not think that
shower or rain to be according to Manna githered, more (...) was n^ede
corrupted.
the custom of nature, upon the Sabbath day there was none soche. God teaching
them these two things, who was the worker of that merueilouse rain in the
other days, and that he upon that day absteined, that they should learn
whether they would or no to keep holy day. Thus far Chrysostom.

In this he has declared that Manna was no natural effect of natural custom
and order, but by the special work of God, who caused yt, as yt pleased him
to rain down from the clouds to them. He says also that upon the Sabbath
day, God rained not Manna to the people, signifieng that every other day he
did. For the manner of the gathering of yt he teaches that they that gathered
more then was need, they had no profitte af their covetousness, which is, as
the text of Exodus says, that he that gathered much to him their remained
nothing, how much so ever through gredie desire he gathered, he had no more
but his measure. As touching the order of the keeping of yt, if they kept yt as
yt should be kept, as upon the Sabbath day Ma^na kept upon the Sabbath day
remained good, upon other dates not.
they might keep yt, then as Chrysostom says, Manna did abide Manna.

S. Augustine also, to omit the rest, speaks in one place, of one miracle of
yt mentioned above, that is, that yt tasted to them according to their desire:
In primo populo vnicuique Manna secundum propriam voluntatem in ore sapiehat.
August* ad Januar.
In the first people Manna tasted in every man's mouth according to his own
will.

By this ye perceive how many miracles God wrought in Manna, so that yt might
very well be called a merueilouse thing. And truly for the great works that
God wrought in yt, and for the nombre, which also is great, as being done in
one thing, yt may well be reputed and esteemed an excellent thing.

Compare now our Sacrament with this figure, as the Adversary does call yt a
Sacrament, which then is but bread taken to signify or to be a token Manna
far excels the Sacramentaries Cerame^tal bread
or figure of Christ's body, and the^ what is yt? is yt any more then a plain
piece of artificall bread made by man's hand? is yt in any respect wonderful?
is there any one miraculouse work of God in yt like as in Ma^na? is not Manna
by all means more excellent, and far exceadinge this Sacrament? Certainly yt
far excels, and exceadeth yt, where the catholic faith teaches that the
law had but shadows, and the Gospel the very things. If the highest, the
chiefest, the excellentest Sacrament that is in the Gospel which as Saint
Dionyse Areopagita says, is the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
be so base and bare and may no better compare with his figure, than that yt is
a sign or token of Christ's body: then must Saint Paul his doctrine to the
Hebrews, and the doctrine of the catholic Church be turned into the
contrary saing, that is, that the Gospel has the shadows, and the law the
very things. For as our Sacrament is far excel owers. For the excellency
of a sacrament or a figure stands specially Thexcelle^cie of Sacr. stands
in three poinctes.
in three poinctes, in the excellency of the thing that yt signifies or
figureth: In the fullness and liveliness of the significacion: And in the work
of God about the same figure.

As touching the first, yt is very plain that king Pharao was a figure of the
Deuel the Egyptians his people were figures of sins: the servitude that the
children of Israel were in under this king and his people, was a figure of the
servitude of man under the Deuell and sin. These three, although they be
figures, and justly do figure the things by them figured: yet they be not
accounted excellent figures, because the things by them figured be not
excellent* Contrariwise Melchisedech for that he is a figure of Christ, as S.
Paul declares to the Hebrews, is accounted and reputed an excellent figure,
because the thing figured is excellent. A figure is as the image of a thing. An
image (as common experience teaches) is regarded and esteemed according as the
thing is, whose image yt is. As the image of a king, of the subjects of the
same King is much regarded, for that yt is the image of their King.
Melchisedech being the figure and image of Christ, is an excellent, figure
because Christ is excellent.

The second poinct much commends the excellency of the figure also. For
although Isaac were a goodly figure of the passion of Christ: yet the Paschall
lamb is reputed the more excellent figure, for that yt more lively does
declare the thing therbie signified, then the other did. For although Isaac was the
only Son of his Father, as Christ of his Father, and bare the wodde to the
place of sacrifice, as Christ his cross to the place of his death: yet the
lamb because yt was slain in deed, and the blood of yt cast upon the posts
of the doors defended the inhabitants from the hand of the Angel that
struck the Egyptians, and for that, upon the death of the lamb the people
departed out of Egypt, and were delivered from the servitude of King Pharao,
and his people, which figured the death of Christ in deed, and the effects of
the same. For as the innocent lamb died and shed his blood without gilt or
offense: so the innocent lamb Christ died Isaac.

The third poinct also must of necessity be admitted. For where the works of
God be and specially miraculouse works, the mo they be, and the more
miraculouse, the more excellent the thing is about the which soche works be
done. Yt was a miraculouse work that Elisabeth being an old woman, and past
child birth, in her age should conceive and bring forth John the Baptist: but
yt was more miraculouse, co^ceptio^ was conceived God and man: in the other man
only. But that this excellency may appear betwixt two figures, I shall
bring example of two figures Comparison of the B. Sacr. to the figure Manna.
order. Wherefore Manna is the more excellent figure in that respect. For the
one was made by man, the other was wrought by God. About the one also was no
miracle, about the other were many miracles, and therefore in that respect yet
more excellent.

In these three poincts if comparison be made betwixt our Sacrament and Ma^na,
if our Sacrament have not the presence of Christ's body, then Manna far
excels. For first our Sacrament being a figure of Christ, and not containing
Christ, as the Adversary says, nothing exceadeth Manna: For Manna

In the second poinct, which is the lively significacion and full figuracion of
the thing signified, and figured, Manna much excels the Sacrament. For as
Christ was a bread from heaven: so was Manna a bread from heaven. As Christ
descended from heaven that his people might feed upon him to everlasting life:
so Manna descended from heaven, that the people might feed upon yt, to the
mainteinance of their life. As Christ is above natural order sent unto us by
God the Father: so was Manna above natural order sent to the Israelites from
God, as by Chrysostom yt is before testified.

Now yt comparison be made betwixt the Sacrament and Christ, the Sacrament is
nothing so lively a figure so fully figuring Christ, as Manna has done. For
Christ is a bread from heaven: the Sacrament a bread from the earth as Irenaeus
says, and as our common knowledge testifies. Christ is our food to
everlasting life the Sacrament (in respect that yt is a Sacrament) feeds us
not to the sufficient mainteinaunce of this life, as Manna did the Israelites.

As touching the third poinct, there can be no controversy, but that Ma^na was
altogether miraculouse our Sacrament in no poincte miraculouse, if yt contein
not the presence of Christ's body and blood. About Manna were many miraculous
works of God, about our Sacrament not one. Manna was from heaven: our
Sacrament from the earth. Manna wrought by the especial work of God: our
Sacrament by the common work of man. Manna besides natural order: our
Sacrament, by natural and artificial order. Manna tasted in every man's mouth
as he listed: our Sacrament but as bread and wine. Ma^na although yt putrified
being kept more then one day in the weke days: yet yt remained vnputrified
upon the Sabbath day. And although being reserved after the Sabbath day yt
would putrify: yet of the same reserved in the golden

Yt is then a most plain matter, that if our Sacrament be robbed of the real If
our Sa. have not the real presence of Christ's body and blood, yt is much
baser figure then Ma^na
excellent then yt, as by that that is said, yt does manifestly appear.
Wherefore the Adversary must of necessity grant one of these two: that either
in the Sacrament is the presence of Christ's body, and so is yt more excellent
then the figure Manna: or else denieng the presence, grant that our Sacrament
is not equal but a baser and inferior Sacrament, to Manna. But to grant that
a Sacrament of the new law is inferior or baser, then a Sacrament of the
old law, is a plain absurdity: wherefore so is that likewise, that yt flows
out of: that is, that there is no presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Yt must
then of very necessity be concluded, that Christ's body is verily in the
Sacrament.

THE THIRTENTH CHAP. PROVES THE the same by scriptures and doctors.
SOche has been the malice of Satan against God and his Christ, Cerinthus,
Ebion, Sabellius, Paulus Samosatenus. Marcion, Arrius, Ne storius, Eutiches,
and a great nombre mo of like rabble. By some of the which he impugned his
Godhead, and by other some he impugned his manhead, and Luther allowed two
sacraments Mela^ctho^ three The Saxons four. Postellus six Suenckfeldiut
never one.
withal miserably tormented and divided his church, to the loss of many a
soul: So now in these days he has invented some other engines: as where
Christ had instituted sacraments by the which as by certain instruments or
conductes the merit of his passion in sondrie sorts should come and be
applied Luther, Oecolampadius, Calvin. Zuinglius, Bucer, Brentius Cranmer,
Radley, Iuel, and a filthy no^bre of soch like, by the which he has not only
by some of the^ labored to take away three of the^, by other some four of
them, by other some five of the^, by other some all of the^: but also soch
sinall nombre as some of the^ do suffer to remain, they be by the^ so robbed,
and so spoiled, that neither are they greatly to the honor of God and Christ,
neither to the profect or comfort of his people. For when generally they teach
that the sacraments give no grace to the receauers of the^, little is God
honored in his sacraments, little is his people helped by receapt of the^. As
when specially they say, Baptism wasiheth not or takes not away original
sin, and that the Sacrament contains not the very substanciall body of
Christ, but only a bare sign or token of yt, what commodity, or advantage can
come to us out of soch spoiled sacraments left so bare and so poor that
Luther. in assert. art. 2.
they can give a man nothing. But yet though these sacraments be so through
the merit of Christ's death, has appointed to be given to them that
faithfully, and woorthilie receive them. For as Manna tasted in every

Of the high and most noble Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, I merueill
that the Adversaries feared not so blasphemously to abase yt, as to say that
yt is a Sacrament no more excellent the^ the Sacraments of the old law. In so
saing note with me I pray thee, ga^tle reader, what opinion or estimacio^ he
has of Chrystia^ religion. As before is said, S. Paul calls the ceremonies
of the old law, weak and unprofitable ordinances. If then the ordinances of
the Chrystian religion be of no more excellency, then the ordinances of the
Mosaycall religion, then where no difference of excellency is,

If they will say that as long as the things were not co^med which they
figured, so long they were not unprofitable: but when Christ was once co^med
Oiection.
and they ceased any longer to figure or signify, the^ their office being
done and expired, they were vain and unprofitable, and so S. Paul meant of
them: But as for our sacraments they do their office still, for they figure
and signify things done by Christ that is comed, as the other did of Christ
to come. And therefore they be not unprofitable ordeinances.

Although this solucion has some color, yet if the Adversary will look in
S. Paul to the Hebrews he shall find him calling the law, and the
ordeinances of the same weak and unprofitable even when they did their office,
Hebrae. 7.
to perfection. The commandment that went before (says S. Paul) is
disalowed, because of weakness, and unprofitableness, for the law brought
nothing to perfection. To the which purpose he says again. The law having
the shadow of good things to come, and not the very facion of the Ibid. 10.
things themselves, can never with these sacrifices which they offer, make the
co^mers thereunto perfect. So then the cause why S. Paul calls the
ordeinances of the law weak and unprofitable was because they brought not the
obseruers of the^ to perfection and not because they ceased to signify and to
figure. And what difference betwixt weak and unprofitable, as here S. Paul
calls the^: and weak and beggarly as he terms the^ to the Galathians? The^
if these ordeinances in the time of their use, before the coming of Christ were
weak and unprofitable, or weak and beggarlie, and our sacraments be no
better then they, then our sacraments be as they be weak and unprofitable or
weak and beggarly.

That our Sacrament of Christ's body and blood is no better then the Paschall
la^be Oecolamp. by express words does confess, saing: Panis aute^ nosteragno
illorum spiritualium est praeciosior. Propterea non magis praedicandus. Owre
bread is not Oecolamp. in Exposi verbor. Cana Dom.
This then being the wicked doctrine of the Adversary, this wicked conclusion
is deduced out of the same that our Sacraments of the new law, be but weak
and unprofitable, as the Sacraments and ordeinances of the old law were. O
wicked blasphemy, o detestable saing, giving occasion of contempt of the wholl
religion of Christ. A saing more like to overthrow the honor of God, the
deuocio^ of man, the comfort and hope of all Chrystia^s and so consequently
all the whole religion, then to edify any one of these.

If the Adversaries had not minded the plain subversion and destruction of the
Chrystian religion, though they had robbed the holy sacraments of their
efficacy, and made the^ (as they do) as bare as the ordinances of the law:
yet they might have commended the^ justly and truly above the other, because
these did signify Christ present, and were instituted by Christ himself.

Esaie was an holy Prophet, and an holy martyr, who so lively, so plainly
and clearly preaches of Christ's nativity, and passion that of some he is
Ecce agnus Dei, ecce qui tollit, etc. Behold Joan. 1.
the lamb of God, behold him, which takes away the sins of the world.

Chrysostom also assigns an other cause, why Christ called S. John more then
a Prophet: Quum dixisset Prophetis illum esse maiorem, quare mayor sit
oste^dit. In Matthew. homil. 38.
Cur igitur mayor Prophetis Ioannes? quoniam propinquior erat Christo venturo.
Mitta^ enim (inquit) Angelu^ meu^ ante facie^ tua^. Qui autem ante faciem est,
is proximus est. Nam quemadmodum maiori dignitate hi sunt, qui proxime Regibus
deambulantibus ordinantur: sic and Ioa^nes in ipso aduentu constitutus, maiore
gratia fulsit. When he had said that he was more then a Prophet, he shows
why he is more. Therefore then is John more For I shall send (says he) my
Angel before thy face. He that is before the face, is nearest. For as these
are in greater dignity, which are nearest placed to kings when they walk: so
also John appoincted in the coming of Christ, is more honorable.

Oecumenius treating the same text says much like, adding also an other
cause: Sed quid existis videre? Prophetam? vtique dico vobis, and
excellentiorem propheta excellentiorem, hoc est, maiorem. Deinde dicit in quo
maiorem, videlicet in eo quod venerit circa Christi aduentum. Nam maiores aliis
inter praecones sunt hi, qui prope Regem praecedunt. Potest etiam dici
excellentior propheta, quia eum quem vidit prophetabat, quod nulli contigit
prophetarum. Nec vidit tantum verum etiam baptisabat. But what went ye forth to
see? a Prophet? yea I say unto you, and one more excellent the^ a Prophet,
more excellent, that is greater. Then he says in what he is greater, that is,
in that, that he came about the coming of Christ. For among the foregoers
these be the greater, which go next before the King. He may also be called the
more excellent Prophet, because he prophesied him, whom he saw. Which
happened to none other of the Prophets. Neither did he law, forsomoche as
some of them, were figures of Christ present, and other of them figures of his
benefits wrought by his passion and blood shedding Oecolampadius compares yt,
and says that yt is no more preciouse, neither more to be praised then yt,
which figure was immediately instituted by Moses, allthough mediately by God,
and figured Christ to come, whereas this Sacrament figured Christ present, and
was immediately of him instituted.

Now if John the Baptist was counted more then a prophet, because (as
Chrysostom says) he was nearer to Christ then other prophets, then by that
respect, this Sacrament must be more excellent then the Sacraments of the as
Oecumenius says) because he saw Christ present whom he prophesied then
likewise this Sacrament must be a more excellent sacrament, because he was
present whom yt figured.

Christ says to the Jews: Abraham pater vester exultauit vt videret diem
meum, vidit, and gauisus est. Abraham yowr father reioiced that he might see my
day he saw yt and was glad. Exultauit (says Oecumenius) sine concupiuit,
he reioiced Joan. 8.
or desiered to see the day of Christ. The day of Christ that Abraham
desiered In Joan ca. 8.
to see, was the day of his passion (as Chrysostom says) in the which he
reioiced to see the redemption of mankind. He saw yt in the oblacion of the
ram that supplied the place of his only Son Isaac, and he was glad. For
(as Oecumenius says) Didicit quod sicut ipse non pepercit In Ioa^ca 8.
filio suo dilecto propter Deum: ita neque Deus parciturus esset filio suo
dilecto propter hominem. Et quemadmodum ille portauit ligna holocausti sui: ita
and ipse portaturus esset lignum mortis suae. Vernntamen sicut illo non passo
suppositus est aries: ita and hoc manente impassibili, humanitas eius occisa
est. He learned, that as he did not spare his (mening his Godhead) abiding
impassible his manhead was slain.

As Abraham did see Christ: so no doubt many other holy fathers and Math. 13.
prophets did see him, and yet thinking themselves more happy and blessed if
they might have seen Christ in the flesh, did earnestly desire the same, as
Christ says: Multi prophetae and iusti eupierunt videre, quae videtis, and
non viderunt, and audire quae auditis, and non audierunt. Many prophets and
righteouse men have desiered to see those things which ye see, and have not
seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them.
But above them all. Vestri beati oeuli, quia vident, and aures vestri, quia
audiunt. Blessed are yowr eyes, for they see, and yowr ears, for they hear.

In these words Christ declares the beleuers in him, and the seers of In 13.
Math. homil. 46.
him, to be more happy, then they that only believed, and saw him not, Multi
prophetae and iusti cup. etc. Aduentu^ scilicet meu^, praesentia^, miracula,
voce^. Hic enim non solum perditis illis eos anteponit, verum etiam prophetis
ac justice praestantiores eos asserit, atque beatiores. Quare ita? Quoniam non
solum ista aspiciunt, quae illi non viderunt, verum etiam quae illi videre
cupierunt isti oculis cernunt. Nam fide illi etiam intuiti haec fuerunt, sed
isti multo clarius omnia perspexerunt. Many prophets and righteouse men have
desiered to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to
hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them, that is to say
(says he in the person of Christ) my coming, my presence, my miracles, my
preaching Here he does not only prefer them before those lost or damned men,
but also he affirms them to be more excellent and blessed then the prophets,
and the righteouse men. And why so? for that they do not only see those
things which the other saw not, but also those things which they desiered to
see, these men saw with their eyes. For they also by faith did behold these
things, but these much more clearly did see all things. Thus Chrysostom.

If then they that saw Christ in the flesh, were much more blessed, and
excellent, then the prophets which saw him only by faith: how then should
not the Sacraments instituted by Christ in the flesh, and used of
Oecalampadius, who wickedly travailed In expas. verborum Caenae.
almost in all points to make the old law and the Sacraments thereof,
nothing inferior to the new law, and the sacraments thereof, saing: Absit vt
spirituales, qui sub lege era^t Messiamque expectabant, fide pauperiores nobis
fuerint, quibus manifestatus est. God for bid, that they which were
spiritual under the law, and did look for Messiah in faith, should be
poorer then we, unto whom he is manifested? And how again stands this saying
of Oecolampadius, which within a few lines follows, with the saing of Christ
before mentioned? Neque Patriarchis fideles nostri beatiores sunt, quos
aequauit fides, non reddunt inferiores sacramenta. Neither be our faithful
more blessed then the Patriarchs, for those whom faith makes equal,
sacraments can not

Christ says they are more blessed: Oecolampadius by express contrary
Oecola^p. denies that Christ affirms.
words says naie. What heretical impudency is this, to deny that that
Christ affirms? That the holy Patriarchs were excellent in faith, and as
constantly believed that Messiah should come, as they that saw him in the
flesh believed that he was comed, no man of sownd mind will deny And yet
although in that part they might be equal: yet yt is no good argument, that in
other things and respects the faithful Chrystian should not excel. For as
Christ has taught, that they that believed in him, and bodily saw him, were
more blessed, then they that only believed him to come: so they that receive
the sacraments in faith presently, which Christ has instituted, are in that
respect more blessed then they, which in faith only believed that soche
should be instituted and never saw them, nor received.

But see how this matter carries me away? by this yet yt may be perceived,
that though the sacraments of the new law did not confer grace (as the
Adversaries would have yt) but were bare signs, and that the fathers blinded
the fight of this his scholar, and other his likes, he and they might well have
seen, that both the sacraments of the new law excel the sacraments

THE FOVRTENTH CHAP. PROCEADETH IN the proof of the same by the scriptures and
doctors.
ANd now that the sacraments of the new law do excel the sacraments of
the old law, yt shall by most manifest testimony be proved. And first for
that our special disputacion is of the blessed sacrament of Christ's body and
blood we shall first deliver that from the maliciouse blasphemy of the
Adversaries, and prove the excellency of yt above other of the old law. And
so generalie prove the excellency of all our sacraments. For the fundacion of
(but he proves yt not) that the sixth chap. of S. John is not to be
understood of the Sacrament, before I produce the authority of Christ in
that place, understand (gentle Reader) that I do not only say yt, but in the
second book, yt is avouched, and inuinciblie proved by the testimony of a
nombre, namely by Origin, Cyprian. Eusebius Emiss. Hierom, Chrysostom, Hilarie,
Ambrose, Damascen, Augustine, Cyrille, Euthimius, Gregory, Theophilact, Petrus
Cluniacen. Guitmundus, Dionisius Carthusian. Lira, and in few words to
comprehend a greater nombre then all these, by the Ephesine Council, in the
which were two hondreth learned Fathers. By the testimony of these yt is there
proved that in the sixth of S. John Christ speaks of the Sacrament of his
body and blood.

To this also may be added the common and uniform consent of the chrystian
Church, before this scissure was made in the time of Luther, and Oecolampadius,
and the other like Angels of Satan, which with one mouth as yt were, taught
that chapter to be understood of the Sacrament. This also makes good proof
of the same, that when the heresy of the Comunion under both kinds was first
raised in Bohemia, they grownded the necessity Joan. 6.
of that matter upon this text of that chapter: Except ye eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you. For the
repression of which heresy, as the heritiques understood that chap. of the
Sacrament: so did no Catholic impugn the same, but granted and accepted yt
as a true understanding. Which then they would not have done if yt had been
otherwise to be taken: if yt had, as that heresy was condemned De consensu
Eunngelist. li. 3. c. 1 The vi. of S. John speaks of the body and blood of
Christ.
by a general Council: so should that understanding have been condemned
likewise.

To end this proof, that the reader may see some authority, in this place
presently, and not to seek far for yt, we shall hear S. Augustine, who
speaking Ioannes de corpore and sanguine Domini hoc loco nihil dixit. Sed plane
alibi multo vberius de iis Dominu^ locutum fuisse testatur. John said nothing
in this place of the body and blood of our lord. But plainly in an other
place, he testifies that our lord has spoken of yt very plentifully.
(says he) he speaks plentifully of yt, We read in no place of S. John's
Gospel that he speaks plentifully of Christ's body and blood in the
Sacrament but in the sixth chapter, Wherefore S. Augustine understands the sixth
chapter of S. John to speak of the body and blood of Christ.

In these words also of S. Augustine yt is not to be ouerpassed, but by the
way to be noted, that he says not that S. John speaks of the Sacrament,
figure or sign of the body of Christ, but plainly he calls yt the body and
blood of Christ, and says that S. John speaks of them in the sixth chap.
This then being certain, and evident, that the words of Christ in the sixth of
S. John, as by Chrysostom and Euthymius, by S. Augustine and Teophilact they are
distincted, be spoken, and understood of his body and blood, according to
the distinction: we shall bring in the words of Christ, for the proof of this
that is here to be proved.

Thus Christ says: Non sicut manducauerunt patres vestri Manna, and mortui
sunt. Qui manducat hunc panem, viuet in aeternum. Not as yowr Fathers did eat
Joan. 6.
Manna, and be dead, he that eats this bread shall live for ever. In the
which saing of Christ we are taught two things. The first that Manna is a
figure of our heavenly Manna (I mien of Christ in the Sacrament our most
pleasant food) as the comparison of the one to the other made by Christ him
self does well prove, and as at large yt is testified by the testimony of
many Fathers in the. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. and tenth chapiters of this book.
Thexcelle^cie of the B Sacr. above Manna.
The second thing is the excellency of our Manna the body of Christ in the
Sacrament, the thing figured by the other Manna. Which excellency Christ very
manifestly declares when he says that the eaters of Manna are dead: but the
eaters of this Manna in the Sacrament, shall not only live, but they shall
live for ever.

As life in natural things is much more excellent then death: so that which
gives natural life is much more excellent, then that which gives yt not
life. As betwixt life and death there is no just comparison, both for that inter
ens, and non ens nulla est comparatio, betwixt some thing and nothing
Temporalis vita aeternae vitae comparata mors est potius dicenda, quam vita.
The temporal life compared to the eternal life is raither Gregorius.
to be called death them life. Then the eternal life so far passing the
temporal life, as life does death: how much then surmounteth the Manna Ma^na
the figure gave but temporal life: Ma^na the thing eternal life
of the chrystians the Manna of the Jews, where as this gives but temporal
life, the other eternal, as says S. Augustine: Manna de coelo aperte ab ipso
Domino exponitur. Patres vestri (inquit) manducauerunt Manna in deserto and
mortui sunt. Qua^do enim viuerent? Figura vitam praenunciare posset, vita esse
non posset. Manducauerunt (inquit) Manna and mortui sunt, id est, Manna quod
manducauerunt, non illos potuit de morte liberare, non quia ipsum Manna mors
eis fuit, sed quia a morte non liberauit. Ille enim liberaturus erat a morte,
qui per Manna figurabatur. De coelo certe Manna veniebat. Attend A figure may
fore the we life but yt can not be life.
quem figurabat: Ego sum (inquit) panis vinus, qui de coelo descendi. Manna
from heaven is plainly expownded of our lord himself. Yowr fathers (saieh he)
have eaten Manna in the wilderness and are dead. for when should they They
have (says he) eaten Manna and are dead, that is to say, Manna which they
have eaten could not deliver them from death not that, that Manna was death
unto them, but because yt delivered them not from death. He should deliver
them from I am (saiethe he) the living bread, which descended from heaven,
Thus far S. Augustine.

Seeing then that Manna the figure, which rained to the Jews could not
deliver from death, as here you have heard S. Augustine testify: and Manna the
body of Christ, the thing figured, and contained in our Sacrament does Our
Sacr. giving lise sarre excelteth Ma^na that gave got life.
deliver from death, and therefore of consequent gives eternal life, as Christ
him self also avouches in the text alleged: yt can not otherwise be
concluded, but that our Sacrament of Christ's body and blood is incomparably
excelling Manna and any other sacrament that in the old law did figure
Christ. As here by the comparison which Christ has made betwixt Manna and his
body, the excellency of the one above the other is easy to be discerned: so
now shall we see the like handling of the figure, and the verity by the holy
fathers.

Holy Cyprian sheweing the meting and applicacion of the old Paschall la^be
which was a figure of our new Paschall la^be declares most plainly the Caena
disposita inter sacramentales epulas obuiarunt sibi instituta noua, and
antiqua. Et consumpto agno, quem antiqua traditio proponebat, Cyprian de cana
Do.
inconsumptibilem cibum magister apponit Discipulis. Nec iam ad elaborata
impensis and art conuiuia populi inuitantur, sed immortalitatis alimoniae
datur, a comunibus cibis differens, corporalis substantiae retinens speciem,
sed virtutis diuinae invisibili efficien tia probans adesse praesentiam. The
supper being ordined, among the Sacramental The inconsumptible (...) given to
the Apostles both contained the presence of divine power, and also retained the
form of corporal substance.
meats, there met together the new and the old ordinances, and the lamb
which the old tradicio^ did set forth being consumed, the master set before
his disciples inconsumptible meat. Neither are the people bidden to feasts
prepared with charges and conning: but the food of imortalitie is given,
differing from common meats, reteining the form of corporal substance but
proving by invisible woorking, the presence of the divine power to be present.
Thus S. Cyprian.

As in this sentence ye see the applicacio^ of the ordinances of the old law
to the new: so may ye easily perceive that the one far excels the
other. The meat which was given according to the old ordeinaunce was
consumed: Finiti ad infinitum nulla est comparatio, of a thing finite to a
thing infinite there is no comparison. Wherefore the inconsumptible meat of our
lamb in our Sacrament so far excels (being infinite) that the
consumptible meat of the old law (being finite) may not stand with yt in
comparison.

Again S. Cyprian calls our Sacrament the food of immortality, the Paschall
lamb of the Jews was none soche. Wherefore our Sacrament by all means
excels that sacrament of the Jews. S. Cyprian also applieng our Sacrament
to the figure of the same used by Melchisedech, does most plainly Cyprian
ibide^ vide sup. li. 1. cap. 39.
declare the excellency of yt: Significata olim a tempore Melchisedec prodeunt
sacramenta, and filiis Abrahae facientibus opera eius summus sacerdos pane^
profert, and vinum: Hoc est (inquit) corpus meum. Manducauerant, and biberant
de eodem pane secun dum formam visibilem. etc. The sacraments signified in the
old time, from the time of Melchisedech come now forth, and the high priest
to the children This is (says he) my body. They had eaten, and dronken after
the visible form of the same bread. But before those words that common meat
was profitable only to nourish the body, and did ministre help to the
corporal life. Sacrifice propitiatory.
But after yt was said of our lord. This do ye in the in the remembrance of
me. This is my flesh, and this is my blood, as often as yt is don with these
words, and this faith, this substanciall bread and cup consecrated with the
solemn benediction, yt does auail to the health and life of the wholl man, and
is both a medicin and sacrifice, to heal infirmities and to pourge iniquities.
Thus much S. Cyprian.

But forasmoch as these two sainges are handled in the first book, where the
figure and the thing figured be at large opened: I think yt not meet any
more of them here to say, then touches this present matter, which they do
wonderfully set forth. Yt is more then manifest that the sacrifices Hebr. 10.
The blood of bulls and goats in the old law did not take away sins: but
the sacrifice of the new law pourgeth iniquities.
of the old law were not of that force, power, and virtue to pourge or take
away Impossible est sanguine taurorum, aut hircorum auferri peccata. Yt is
impossible sins to be taken away with the blood of bulls and goats. But
this owre sacrifice of the new law, which is the flesh and blood of Christ,
is auailable to the wholl man, that is to the health both of the body and
soul of man. For yt is a medicin to heal infirmities and a sacrisice to
pourge iniquities. If this then be not a notable excellency, which the holy
martyr Cyprian gives unto this gloriouse and blessed Sacrament above the
excellency of these figures, I know not what excellency is. But the matter
requires to have other holy Fathers to speak what they think in this matter.

S Ambrose, for that he speaking of this matter, affirms the like operacion
and effect of this Sacrament, as S. Cyprian did, he shall be joined unto him.
Thus he says: Ipse Dominus Jesus testificatur nobis, quod corpus suum
accipiamus and sanguinem. Nunquid debemus de eius fide and testificatione
dubitare? Iam redi me cum ad propositionem meam. Magnum quidem and venerabile
quod Manna Iudaeis pluit Li. 4. de sacram cap. 5
e coelo. Sed intellige quid est amplius, Manna de coelo, an corpus, Christi?
Corpus Christi vtique, qui author est coeli. Deinde Manna qui manducauerit,
mortuus est, qui manducauerit hoc corpus fiet ei remissio peccatorum, and non
morietur in aeternum. The Lord Jesus him self (says S. Ambrose) testifies
unto us that we receive his body and blood, awght we of his testificacion and
truth to doubt? Now come again with me to my proposition. Yt is a great
thing truly, and venerable Manna ae creature from heaven much inferior to
Christ the author of heaven.
that he rained Manna to the Jews from heaven. But understand, which is the
greater, Manna from heaven, or the body of Christ. The body of Christ truly,
who is the author of heaven. Farther he that has eaten Manna has died: he
that eats this body, he shall have remission of sins, and shall not die
for ever. Thus far S. Ambrose.

Do thowe not, Reader, in this goodly saing see the great excellency of the
Sacrament above Manna, as thou did in S. Cyprian above the Paschall lamb,
and the sacrifice of Melchisedec? Do thowe not also note the goodly
argrement, of these two, in commending unto us the great and worthy Effects
of the S. Sacr. proving the excellency of yt.
effects of this Sacrament? by the which yt does without all controversy,
woonderfully excel all the sacrama^tes and sacrifices of the old law. saieh,
that though Manna came from heaven, Yet Christ who is the author of heaven is
more excellent. As S. Cyprian called the body the

If thowe ask why, or how these effects be in this Sacrament: I answer,
because he is there verily substancially, and reallie in quo inhabitat omnis
plenitudo diuinitatis corporaliter, in whom dwells all the fulness of the
deity corporally: Colloss. 2.
and unto whom Non ad mensuram dat Deus Spiritum. God gives not his Spirit by
measure: Et cui data est omnis potestas in coelo, and in terra. And to who^
Joan. 3.
is given all power in heaven, and in earth, whose flesh coniuncta ei, quae
naturaliter Math. 28.
vita est, viuifica effecta est, being joined unto that, which naturally is
life, is made also able to give life, as S. Cyrill says. Cyrillus.


Of this his presence in the Sacrament, for that that Christ him self says,
and testifies unto us that we do receive his body, we should not, neither we
aught (as S. Ambrose says) to doubt of his witness and truth. Of the
which, as also of farther testimony to the proof of the excellency of the
Sacrament, he says in an other place: Considera nunc, vtrum prestantior sit
panis Angelorum, an caro Christi, quae vtique est corpus vitae. Manna illud e
coelo: hoc supra coelum. Ambrosius De initiand mist ca. 9.
Illud coeli: hoc Domini coelorum. Illud corruptioni obnoxium, si in diem
alterum seruaretur: hoc alienum ab omni corruptione, Quod quicunque religiose
gustauerit, corruptionem sentire non poterit. Illos ad horam satiauit aqua: te
sanguis diluit in aeternum. Iudaeus bibit, and sitit: tu cum biberis, sitire
non poteris. Et illud in vmbra: hoc in veritate. Et post pauca. Cognouisti
praesta^tiora: potior enim lux, quam vmbra, veritas, quam figura, corpus
authoris, quam Manna de coelo. Consider now whether the bread of Angels is
more excellent or the flesh of Christ, which is also the body of life. That
Manna was from heaven: this above heaven. That of heaven: this of the lord of
heavens. That subject to corruption, if yt were kept till the next day: this
free from all corruption, which whosoever shall taste deuoutely shall Manna
proved much inferior to the B. Sacr. by S. Amb. his comparison.
unto thee blood out of Christ. Them did water satisfy for a little time:
thee does blood wash for ever. The Jew drank, and thirsts: thowe, when
thowe hauest drunk, can not thirst. And that was in shadow: this in treuth.
And after a few words he says: Hauest thowe known the more excellent? The
light is more excellent the^ the shadow. The verity, then the figure. The
body of the author, then Manna from heaven. Thus S. Ambrose. Need we any
plainer testimony, for the proof of this our matter in hand? I think the
holy Ghost directed the pen of S. Ambrose, to answer and confute the wicked
assertion of Oecolampadius. for this so overthrows his heresy, as though yt
had been now written in these days to confute him.

But perchance the Adversary will say, that this makes nothing against him,
for here S. Ambrose speaks not of the Sacrament, but of the body of Christ,
as suffering for us, to work our redemption. To this there may be manifold
answers made. First that Manna is not proprely a figure of Christ as suffering,
but of Christ as feeding us. For Manna descended from heaven Objection.
to feed the Israelites, and not to suffer for them. so Manna being the food
from heaven of the people of God, is a figure of owre heavenly food Thanswer
Christ in the Sacrament. Farther also yt is well known that S. Ambrose in that
book treacteth of mysteries and sacraments, wherefore in this place yt Forte
dicasialiud video, quomodo tu mihi asseris, quod Christi corpus accipiam? Et
hoc nobis superest adhuc vt probemus, quantis Ambr. ibid. vide sup. li. 2. ca
51.
igitur vtimur exemplis, etc. Perchance thowe may say: I see an other
thing, how do thowe say unto me, that I receive the body of Christ? And
this remains yet unto us to prove. How many examples may we therefore use?
Let us prove this not to be that thing, which nature has formed: but that
the blessing has consecrated, and the power of the blessing, to be greater
then of nature. For by the blessing nature yt self is changed. Moses did
hold a rod, he cast yt down, and yt was made a serpent. Again, he took the
taill of the serpent, and yt returned into the nature of the rod. Thowe see
therefore even by the prophetical grace, The B. Sa. is not that, that nature
has formed, but that the blessing has consecrated.
nature to be twice changed, both of the serpent, and of the rod. The
Consecracion of the B. Sacr. of what force yt is.
power then nature. And if man's blessing was of soche force that yt might turn
nature, what shall we say of the divine consecracion, where the very

In this answer as pithie and plain, as yt is long, the Adversary is not one
Three notes out of S. Ambr.
ly fully answered, but we are also instructed in three things: The first
that concerns this matter is, that in the applicacion of the verity to the
figure, he understands the verity of the figure Manna to be the body of
Christ in the Sacrament, by the which he takes the Sacrament to be much more
excellent then the figure, which although in every part of The light is more
excellent then the shadow: the verity, then the figure. And expownding which
is the light and verity, which is the shadow and figure, he adds: The body
of the author, than Manna from heaven.

The second thing that he teaches, is how, and by what means the body of
Christ is in the Sacrament, which he declares to be in two poinctes: The one
is that yt is done by consecracion, which is done by the word of Christ.
Wherefore he says: We perceive grace to be of greater power then nature. For In
the consecracion of the B. Sac. the words of our Savior do work.
if the benediction of a man was of so great power, that yt might turn nature:
what shall we say of the divine consecracion yt self, where the very words
of our Lord and Savior do work? As who might say. If Moses did cast down
the rod, and yt was turned into a serpent, and took yt up again and yt was
turned into a rod: and soch like. If Helyseus did make the axe against his
nature to swim above the water: If Helyas by his word caused fire to
descend from heaven. If the word of these men but servants did woork soch
wonders: how much more may the word of the Lord and master of these men
work? The second poinct is, that he shows by what means the word of Christ
woorketh the presence of his body in the (says he) by the changing of the
natures of the creatures, into the nature of his body and blood, which he
signifies when he says If the word of Helyas was of soch power, that yt
might bring down fire from heaven, shall not the word of Christ be of soch
power, that yt may change the natures of the elements? And again: the word
of Christ that could of nothing make that that was not: can yt not change
those things that be, in to that thing that they were not? The mea^ then by
the which the word of Christ makes the body of Christ present in the
Sacrament is by changing the natures of bread and wine into the nature of his
body and blood, which because the changing of natures, is the change of
substances, Transubstanciation what yt is.
therefore the Church does call yt Transubstanciacion, forsomoch as the nature or
substance of one thing is changed by Gods power into the nature or substance
of an other thing.

The third thing that we are taught of S. Ambrose (which also is diduced of
these two) is the very presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Which so being (as
most certainly yt is) we may conclude, that this is in comparablie

And although S. Augustine says, that Sacramenta in signis diuersa, in re
tamen quae significatur paria sunt, Sacraments in signs being diverse: in the
thing yet that is signified they are like: Yet that takes not away the
excellency of Difference betwe^ Ma^na and the blessed Sac.
this Sacrament. For although Manna and the Paschall lamb did signify the
same Christ that our Sacrament does, and so in that respect of significacion be
like: yet for that the other sacraments did but signify, and this Sacrament
does both contein and give that yt does signify, therefore yt does far excel
them.

To this that is said, although yt be sufficient to prove that that is here
intended: yet if the reader will add the saing of S. Ambrose in the eight
chapter of the book last; alleged (which to avoid tediousness I ouerpasse)
and will remember what the said S. Ambrose says in the fourth chapter of this
book, and Chrysostom in the sixth chapter, and Theophilact and Haymo in the
ninth chap: and other treacting of Manna and the body of so repugnant to the
catholic faith, and so direct contratie to the sainges

THE FYFTENTH CHAPTER PROVING
AS ye have heard by sufficient testimony, that the blessed Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood is more excellent, then Manna and the Paschall lamb,
the figures of the same, of the which I have specially treacted, because this
wholl rude woork is chiefly settfurth for the commendacion of the truth of the
same Sacrament: Now that the other sacraments be not left in the hands of
the enemies, and by them spoiled and over much wronged, somewhat also shall be
breiflie said, whereby they may be known as they be, and be delivered from
the hands of their enemies, who falselie report of them, and deuellislie
trauaill to dishonor them.

Among all the sacraments next unto this blessed and most honorable Sacrament
of Christ's body and blood, yt is to be merueiled that they could Baptism
instituted by Christ and commended by the wholl Trinity.
This is my well beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: heaven was opened,
and the holy Ghost was seen in the form of a dove descending from heaven and
abiding upon Christ. So that in the ministracion of this sacrament was present
the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost. Which noble presence seems to bring
with yt some more noble gift than a bare sign, or token, as the wicked say
that yt is. But what shall I need to stand to declare the worthiness of this
sacrament against these enemies of God, seeing that heaven and the wholl
Trintie, testifies against them.

Wherefore leaving to speak any more of this sacrament specially, or of the
other particularly for fear of prolixitie, and for that yt is spoken of here
but by occasion, we shall hear saint Augustine speaking of Aug. co^t. Faustu^
li. 19 cap. 13.
them generally: Prima sacramenta quae obseruabantur, and celebrabantur ex
lege, praenunciatiua erant Christi venturi, quae cum suo aduentu Christus
impleuisset, ablata sunt, and ideo ablata sunt, quia impleta. Non enim venit
legem soluere, sed adimplere. Et alia sunt instituta, virtute maiora, vtilitate
meliora, actu faciliora, numero pauciora. The first sacraments, which were
observed and celebrated of the old law Sacraments of the new law be
greater in power, better in profitte, easier to be done then the sacr. of the
old law.
had fulfilled, they were taken away, and therefore taken away because they
were fullfilled. For he came not to break the law, but to fulfill yt. And
other were instituted greater in power, better in profitt, easier to be done,
and fewer in nombre. Thus S. Augustine.

Observe gentle reader, these words. He says that after the sacraments of
the old law were taken away, there were other instituted, which were greater
in power, and better in profitte. Where in be they greater in power, but in this
that the sacraments of the old law had no power but to signify only: our
sacraments have power not only to signisie, but also to give that that they
signify? As the Sacrament of Christ's body signifies the same body, and yt
gives also to the receauer the same body that yt signifies. And as Baptism
signifies by the washing of the body, the clensing of the soul: so yt gives
remission of sins both original, and actual, by taking away of of which,
the soul is pourged, cleansed, and washed from all her filthiness. And so in
other Sacraments, what they signify, that they give, if there be

To the confirmacion also of this matter makes much the common consent of
learned men upon the difinition of a Sacrament. Thus do they define yt:
Sacramentum est sacrae rei signum, ita vt imaginem gerat, and causa existat. A
Sacrament what yt is.
Sacrament is a sign of an holy thing in soche manner that yt may bear the
image, and be the cause. In the which definition are put the two offices of a
Sacrament of the new law. The one office is to be a sign, but not only a
sign, but an evident, or a lively sign, having some properties or conditions
like to the thing that yt signisieth, so that yt may signify yt evidently as
the Two offices of a sacrament.
image of a man signifies a man. The other office is that yt be the cause of
the thing that yt signifies not a cause of the being of yt, but a cause of the
effectual woorking of yt, in him that receaueth the Sacrament. As for example.
Baptism is an evident sign of the washing of the soul, and being ministered
is a cause that the washing of the soul is effectually wrought and done. For
if Baptism be not either in fact, or in vow, how much soever otherwise the
party believes, the soul is not cleansed from sin. Whereby yt is evident that
Baptism is a cause effectual.

But here is to be noted, there be (as to the purpose suffices) two causes
effectual, one principal, the other isntrumental. As for example. The soul
is the principal cause efficient of the seight of man: The eye is Two
effectual causes one principal, the other isntrumental.


Now where the Adversaries make exclamacion for that we say, that the
sacraments of Christ give grace, and say that we rob Christ of his
Sacraments of the new law how they give grace.


And this manner of speech is common, to asscribe the effect of the cause
principal, to the cause isntrumental. For Christ himself abhors not from
yt, but uses yt. As when he says: Vestri beati oculi, quia vident, and
aures, quia audiunt. But blessed be yowr eyes, for they see, and your ears for
they hear. Christ was not ignorant, that their souls did see and hear, as
the cause principal, and yet he asscribeth the effect to the eye and to the
ear, by the which as by her organs, she does see and hear.

The scripture also uses both these manner of speeches. Saint Paul says:
Secundum suam misericordiam saluos nos fecit per lauacrum regenerationis and
renouationis spiritus sancti. According to his mercy he has saved us by Tit.
3.
the fowntain of regeneracion, and the renouacion of the holy Ghost. In the
which manner of sainge, saint Paul declares that our salvation comes from
God, as from the cause principal, and by Baptism, as the cause isntrumental.
Saint Peter speaking of the Ark of Noah, in the which Noe and his children
were saved, as the figure of Baptism Nunc similis formae saluos vos facit
Baptisma. Now in like manner baptism saves you. In which manner of speech
does 1. Pet. 3.
not saint Peter asscribe salvation to Baptism? Yet was not he ignorant who
was, the principal cause of our salvation. Now what is yt to say that
baptism saves us, but that baptism gives us grace of remission of our

If then (as S. Paul says) we be saved by Baptism, and (as S. Peter says)
Baptism saves us: and by the sacraments of the old law no man was saved,
neither did they save any man ( Nam neminem ad perfectum adduxit Lex, for the
law brought no man to perfection) then yt may be concluded, that our
sacraments are more excellent, then the sacraments of the old law.

Neither can Oecolampadius his wicked gloss stand to pervert the true
definicion Oecola^p. his wicked gloss of the word cause confuted.
of a sacrament. Causa non ad efficientiam, sed ad significantiae euidentiam
referri debet. Cause (says he) ought to be referred not to the efficiencie,
or woorking of the effect, but to the evidence of significacion. For as
Roffensis both well and learnedlie says against him. This word cause is not
referred to (says he) this particle of the definicion (and causa existit, and
is the cause) were superfluouse. For by that particle that the definicion has
(vt imaginem gerat, that yt bear the image) the evidence of significacion is
sufficiently expressed. To have any thing superfluouse in a definicion is a
great inconvenience among learned men. R^ss^n. li. 2 adversus Oecola^p. cap. 29.
Wherefore nothing in this definicion being superfluouse, yt must needs stand
that the sacraments be causes effectual, and being so they excel the
sacraments of the old law. For where they were but only signifieng, owre
are (as the definicion teaches) both signifieng and effectual. Nam efficient
quod significant, For they bring that to effect which they signify. Aug. in
prolog. psalm. 73


But let us hear saint Augustine teaching the difference of these
sacraments, for he nothing dissenteth from this that is said, but much
consirmeth yt. Thus he says Oportune non ex nostra, sed Dei dispensatione
factu^ est, vt modo audiremus ex euangelio, quia lex per Moysen data est,
gratia and veritas per Iesum Christum facta est. Si enim discernimus duo
Testamenta, nec eadem promissa, eadem tamen pleraque praecepta. Nam non
occides. Non moechaheris. Non furaberis. Honora patrem and matrem. Non falsum
testimonium dixeris. Non concupisces res proximi tui, and non concupisces
vxorem proximi tui, and nobis praeceptum est, et quisquis ea non obseruanerit,
deuiat, nec omnino dignus est qui accipere mereatur montem sanctum Dei, de quo
dictum est: Quis babitabit in tabernaculo tuo, aut quis requiescet in monte
sancto tuo? Innocens manibus and mundo cord. Haec dicimus, fratres charissimi,
vt omnes de nouo testamento discatis, non inhaerere terrenis, sed coelestia
adipisci. Discussa ergo praecepta, aut omnia Comparison of the law and the
gospel and of their sacraments.
eadem inueniuntur, aut vix aliqua in euangelio quae non dicta sunt a
prophetis. Praecepta eadem, Sacramenta non eadem, promissa non eadem. Videamus
quare praecepta eadem: quia secundum haec Deo seruive debemus. Sacramenta non
eadem, quia alia sunt sacramenta dantia salutem, alia promittentia saluatorem.
Sacramenta noui Testamenti dant salutem: sacramenta veteris testamenti
promiserunt saluatorem. Quando ergo iam teneas promissa, quid quaeris
promittentia saluatorem iam habens? Haec dico teneas promissa, non quod iam
accepimus vitam aeternam, sed quia iam venit Christus, qui per Prophetas
praenunciabatur. Mutata sunt sacramenta, facta sunt faciliora, pauciora,
salubriora. In good season yt is done, not of owre, but of the dispensacion of
God, that now we testamentes, there be not the same promises, but there be
many of the same Who shall dwell in thie tabernacle, or who shall rest in thy
holy hill? He that is innocent of his hands, and of a clean heart: These
things we say (derely beloved brethered) that all you that be of the new
testament may learn not to cleave to earthly things: but to get heavenly
things. The co^maundentes therefore discussed, either they are all fownde to be
the same or else scarce any in the Gospel, which were not spoken of the
Prophets. The commandments be all one: The sacraments be not all one. The
promesses be not all one. Let us see why the commandments be all Sacraments
of the new law give salvation.
one. because according to these we aught to serve God. The sacraments be not
all one. For they be other sacraments giving salvation, and other promising
(hold the promesses) not because we have now received eternal life: but
that now Christ is comed, which was spoken of before by the Prophets, the
sacraments are changed, they are made easier, fewer, holsomer, and better.
Hitherto S. Augustine.

Is yt not wonderful that ever men can be so impudent, so shameless to
speak the contrary of so manifest a matter, so clearly, and so plainly
uttered and spoken by soche an notable father, as S. Augustine is? He has used
no circumlocution, no figures, no dark manner of speech, but as yt is
learnedly, so is yt truly and plainly commended unto us. Let me, I beseech
thee gentle reader, with thy patience, (although yt be as I said, so plainly
spoken Assertion of the Adversary touching the Sacraments co^ferred with S.
Aug. his indgement of them.
of S. Augustine, that except a man will be a trunk, he can not but perceive
yt) a little more to the confusion of the Adversary, weigh the parts of this
The sacraments of the new Testament give salvation: The sacraments of the
old Testament have promised the Savior.

O merciful God is there no difference betwixt these sacraments, more then the
Adversary has said? Is the one sort no better then the other? Among
scholars, a pettite, if he be asked, will answer that there is great difference.
Yt is a great difference betwixt giving and not giving, And that that gives
salvation is in many degrees better then yt that does but figure Wherefore our
sacraments be better. If better, then more excellent. That they be better S.
Augustine by express words affirms afterward saing: The sacraments are
changed, they are made easier, fewer, holsomer, and better.

What now can the Adversary say? Is there no difference, where the sacraments
of the new law are holsomer, and better then the other sacraments? Is there,
I say, no difference betwixt these sacraments but Oecolampadius difference?
Yes, they are better and holesomer then the other, and therefore more excellent,
yea so much our sacraments excel the other, that S. Augustine in that same
prologe, comparing the sacraments together, calls the sacraments of the
old law childrens plays or games in respect Aug. ibid
of our sacraments. For this is his saing: Numquid quoniam puero dantur
quaeda^ puerilia ludicra, quibus puerilis animus auocetur, propterea
grandescenti non excutiuntur e^ manibus, vt aliquid iam vtilius tractet quod
grandem decet? Non ergo quia illa quasi ludicra puerorum Deus per nouum
testamentum excussit de manibus filiorum vt aliquid vtilius daret
grandescentibuus, propterea priora illa non ipse dedisse putandus est. For so
much Sacraments of the old law compared to childrens t^ifles: Sacraments of
the new law to things of profit.
as unto a child there be given certain childesh plays or trifles, by the
which

In this saing S. Augustine likeneth the sacraments of the old law in respect
of the sacraments of the new law unto childrens games, and our sacraments
he likeneth to the things of more profett, which are to be given to the sons
of God, when they wax of more age, knowledge, and ripeness. And is not this a
great difference? Are not then the sacraments of Christ much better and more
excellent, then the sacraments of Moses?

Now being testified that they be better, yt is to be inquired in what thing,
how, or by what mean they be better: as before yt is said, they are

I will now out of this that is said, gather the condition of both these
kinds of sacraments, and lay them before thy face (Reader) and so salvation:
the new sacraments do give salvation. The old sacraments virtute maiora,
vtilitate meliora, salubriora, faeliciora, greater in power, better in profett,
holsomer, and better. And now as of a matter treacted of beside my pourspose
this may suffice.

THE SIXTENTH CHAP. PROCEADETH TO the next text of saint Paul which is.
Calix cui Bened.
Having intended to set forth in this book the exposition of soche
scriptures as be in the epistles of S. Paul, which speak of the Sacrament of
Christ's body and blood, to search out the understanding Calix
benedictionis, cui benedicimus, nonne co^municatio sanguinis Christi est? Et
panis, quem frangimus, nonne participatio corporis Domini est? is not the cup
of blessing which we bless partaking of the blood of Christ? is not the
bread which we break partaking of the body of Christ.

For the better understanding of this text yt is to be observed, that S. Paul
travailing to abduce the Corinthians from certain vices and euells, which he
has remembered unto them, to have been in the Jews, and for the which
Sacrifice of the church proved by S. Paul.
they were punished of God, enombring the^ particularly, and among other,
noting Idolatry, dehorteth them from yt sainge: Fugite ab Idolorum cultura.
Idolathites, they thinking that for asmoche as they had learned that unto the
chrystian all meats are clean, that they might do so, S. Paul does not only
dehorte them from yt, but also by argument taken of the sacrifices of the
Jews, and of the partaking of the same, which might not stand with the
partaking of Idolathites, proves that they may not be partakers of the
sacrifice of the chrystians, and of the sacrifice of Idolaters.

And here entering to speak of an high mystery of the chrystian religion,
which is not to be spoken to the weak and the carnal, but to the wise and
spiritual, as in this epistle he testifies saing: Animalis homo non
percipit^ea quae sunt Spiritus Dei. The natural man perceaueth not the things
that belong to the spirit of God. Where of the one he says thus: Et ego
fratres, non potui 1. Cor. 2.
loqui vobis, quasi spiritualibus, sed quasi carnalibus, tanquam paruulis in
Christo, lac vobis potum dedi, non escam. Nondum enim poteratis. And I could
not speak unto Jbibid. 3.
Christ, I gave you milk to drink, and not meat for ye were not the^ strong
And of the other he speakith thus: sapientiam loquimur inter perfectos. We
speak wisdom among them that are perfect. Even so now entending to speak vt
prudentibus loquor. vos ipsi iudicate quod dico. I speak unto them that are
wise, or have discrecion. Judge ye yowr selves what I say. Is not the cup of
blessing, which we bless, she partaking of the blood of Christ? Is not the
bread, which we break partaking of the body of our Lord. As who might
say: For as much as ye are called to the chrystian religion, and be made
partakers of the mysteries of the same, and are now becomed wise in Christ
Judge ye as wise men, what I say: do not ye, drinking of our Lords cup in
our sacrisices, partake of the blood of our Lord Christ, and eating of that
bread of the chrystian sacrifice do ye not partake of the body of our Lord?
yt must needs so be. For all that be partakers of sacrifices, are partakers of
yt, to whom the sacrifice is offered.

This I prove unto you: Consider and remember the sacrifice of the carnal
Israelites: Aare not they which eat of the sacrifices, which were offered
among them partakers of the aultars? even so you partaking of the sacrisices
of Idols, which sacrifices are offered to deuells. But I would not Beliall
dwell together. And as he that believes has no part with the infidel, neither
righteousness fellowship with unrighteousness, no more does the temple of God
agree with Idols,

As in this manner of periphrasis the wholl mind of S. Paul in this place is
settfurth and made clear and plain, how and by what persuasion he labored to
diswade the Corinthians from Idolothites: So also yt is manifest that in

If yt be not so, what awaileth, or of what force is the argument, diduced from
the sacrifices of the Jews? For if the eating of the sacrifice of the Jews
makes them partakers of the altar, what proves that that either Idolothites
of the table of Idols, or the cup and bread of our Lord his table does make
either the receauers of the one, or of the other partakers of the^ if that
both the one, and the other be not sacrifices, as that is, from the which the
argument is diduced, and upon the which yt is grownded? yt is an evil

To make the matter plain, what is the cause that the Israelites were made As
the Israelites and infidels had their sacrifices, so the chrystians have their
sacrifice eue^ the bread and cup of blessing.
What is the cause then? That, that is like the other which is this: Because
the chrystians do eat of the sacrifice, therefore they be partakers of the
sacrifice, which is the very body and blood of Christ. For so sainge, there
is a good argument to be made from the liklihood of the causes in each of the^
to the like effects of each of them. As thus to say: The Israelites, because
they did eat of the sacrifice, they were partakers of the Altar: So the
Corinthians because they did eat of Idolathites which were sacrifices of
Idols, they were partakers of Idols. Of like manner the christians because
they eat of the sacrifice of Christ, they be partakers of the body and blood
of Christ And thus the disputacion of S. Paul is of force, and prouerh well
his intent. Idolathites, of the Corinthians to be the sacrifice of the
Infidells, even this does strongly prove yt. that he sets the table and the
cup of our Lord, against the table and cup of deuells. Ye can not (says
he) drink of the cup of our Lord, and the cup of Deuells. Ye can not be
partakers of the table of our Lord, and of the table of Deuells. In the which
manner of speech as by the cup, and table of Deuells he understands the
sacrifice done to Deuells: so must yt needs be, that by the table and cup of
our Lord, he understands the sacrifice done to our lord. As yt might in
plain manner thus have been said: Ye can not eat and drink of the sacrifice
that is offered unto God, and of the sacrifice that is offered to Deuells. For
except they were both sacrifices, the setting of the one against the other were
of no great force.

And again, if S. Paul did not as well take the cup and table of our The
cup and table of our Lord taken for the sacrifice of our Lord
Lord to be a sacrifice, as the cup and table of Deuells to be a sacrifice,
he would not have used like terms to them both, but as he had understood

In this opening of the text (gentle Reader) thowe perceauest two things Real
presence and sacrifice proved by S. Paul.
to be here learned of S. Paul. The one is the presence of Christ's body and
blood in the Sacrament: the other is that the same body and blood be a
sacrifice.

But that yt may appear to you that this is not my own dream, or fantasy
in thus understanding S. Paul, but the common sentence of the Fathers of
Christ's Parliament house, we shall for trial thereof, and for better setting
forth of Gods truth and the faith catholic hear the sainges of a In, 10. 1.
Cor.
good nombre of them, And first of the ancient Father Chrysostom. who
expownding this text says thus: Maxim his sibi verbis, and fidem facit, and
horrorem. Eorum autem huiusmodi est sententia. Quod est in calice, id est, quod
a latere fluxit, and illius sumu^ participes. Calicem autem benedictionis
appellauit, quoniam cum prae manibus cum habemus, cum admiratione, and horrore
quodam inenarrabilis doni, laudamus benedicentes, quia sanguinem effudit, ne in
errore permaneremus. Neque tantum effudit, sed nos omnes eius participes
effecit. Itaque si sanguinem cupis (inquit) noli Idolorum aram brutorum
animalium coede, sed meum altar, meo sanguine aspergere. Quid hoc
admirabilius? Dic quaeso, quid amabilius? Hoc and amantes faciunt, cum amatos
intuentur, alienoru^ cupiditate allectos propriis elargitis suadent vt ab illis
abstineant. Sed amantes quidem in pecuniis, vestibus, possessionibus hanc
ostendunt cupiditatem: in proprio sanguine nemo vnquam. Christus autem and in
hoc curam and vehementem in nos dilectionem ostendit. With these words he
does get greatly unto him self both creditte and fear. Of those words this
is the mening: That, that is in the chalice is yt, that flowed from the side,
and we are partakers of yt. But he has called yt the cup of blessing. For
when we have yt before our hands, with admiracion, and certain A plain saing
of Chrysosto^ for the Proclamer.
horror of the unspeakable gift, we laud blessing, that he has shed his
blood, that we should not abide in error. Neither has he only shed yt,
but he has made us all partakers of yt. Therefore if (says he) thowe do
desire blood, do not sprenkle the altar of Idols with the slaughter of brute
beasts, but sprenkle mine altar with my blood. Say I pray thee:

God for ever and allwaies be praised, who, although yt be his pleasure, Note
here that this is the meaning of St Paul's words, that that is in the
chalice, which flowed out of Chryctes side.
that his church shall be vexed and tried with the fire of tribulacion (as at
this present yt is miserably afflicted, shaken, and torn) yet he leaves yt
not destitute of sufficient stay and comfort of truth, whereby yt may both
defend yt self, and impugn the enemy, as in this author expownding this
scripture we may well perceive. Doste thowe, reader, mark the exposition of
the text? S. Paul says: Is not the cup of blessing, which we bless, a
partaking of the blood of Christ? Chrysostom says: of these words this is
the meaning: That, that is in the cup is yt that flowed out of the side, and
of yt we are partakers. If this be the meaning of S. Paul, why then walk we
in error in this matter? Why wander we in the mistes, and dark clouds of
tropes, and figures and significacions? where Chrysostom expownding the
scripture and minding to show us the very understanding and plain mening of
yt, teaches, that not a trope, figure, or sign of the blood of Christ is in
the cup, but the blood of Christ that flowed out of his side.

In the which exposition we may in clear manner see and behold the very,
truth even the right catholic faith so set forth, that there is no help for
the adversary to cloak his heresy withal. The proclamer requires one plain
sentence, to prove the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament: what more
plain speech would any man desire to be spoken in this matter, as wherbie to
give him perfect instruction in the same, than to say: that, that did flow
once of the side of Christ, is in the chalice.

If the adversary with forced violence would thrust into Chrysosto^ words
his common gloss, that the figure of yt, that did flow out of Christ's side is
in the cup, then should he make Chrysostom an untrue man. give us the true
meaning of S. Paul, which is not to be thought, or else

What is a mening, but a simple and plain opening and declaracion of a word
or sentence of a man's conceit, or speech doubtfullie or darkly conceived or
spoken before? Wherefore Chrysostom saing that this was the mening of S Paul's
words, did by plain words simply declare the same

This then being the true mening of S. Paul's words, what truth was there in
the saing of Cranmer or the Author of that book, who alleging S. Paul's
words abused by Cranmer.
this text abused yt to a clean contrary understanding? Thus he says:
Neither that wine made of grapes is his very blood, or that his blood is
wine made of grapes, but signify unto us, as S. Paul says, that the cup
is a communion of Christ's blood. How wickedlie and untruly this is spoken,
and how this scripture is drawn to a false understanding, this exposition of
Chrysostom does well

That he would have no soche mening upon these his words, as the Adversary
would ill fauouredlie piece and patche upon them, his like manner of speech in
an other place declares, where he says: Reputate salutarem sanguinem
Chrysostom. ser. de Euch in Enceniis The blood of Christ. in the Sacr. how yt is
to be esteemed.
quasi e diuino, and impolluto latere essluere, and ita approximantes labijs
puris accipite. Regard or esteem the wholesome blood, as to flow out of the
divine, and undefiled side, and so coming to yt, receive yt with pure lips
Which words forsomoch as he spoke them in a sermon to the common people, he
spoke them in plain manner, in that sense, as they sownded to the hearing of the
people, which was that they should account the cup of our Lord to be his
blood. And therefore they should come and drink yt even as out of his side,
as who should say, yt is all one. In this also that he wills them to take yt
with pure lips, he teaches the real presence. For the spiritual manner of
Christ's blood is not to be received with lips, but with heart and soul.
Whereby yt is plain; that Chrysostom would his Chrysostom. in 10. 1. Cor.


As by this we are taught the truth of the presence of Christ in the
Sacrament: So in the rest of his sainges upon the same text, he teaches us,
that yt is a sacrifice: Thus he says: In veteri testamento cum imperfectiores
essent quem idolis offerebant sanguinem, cum ipse accipere voluit, vt ab idolis
eos auerteret. Quod etiam inenarrabilis amoris signum erat. Hic autem multo
admirabilius, and magnificentius sacrificium Christ commanded himself to be
offered,
praeparauit, and cum sacrificium ipsum commutaret and pro brutorum caede
scipsum offerendum praeciperet. In the old Testament, when they were more
imperfect, to the intent he would turn them from Idols, that blood, which
they offered unto Idols he himself, would accept, which also was a token of an
inenatrable love. But here he has prepared a much more wonderful, and
magnificall sacrifice, both when he did change the said sacrifice, and for
the slaughter of brute beasts commanded himself to be offered.

In this saing of Chrysostom, there be two notable notes to be observed, which
as they do much declare and confirm the catholic doctrine: God prepared a
much more wonderful and magnificall sacrifice for the new Testament then was
in. the old.
beasts, as they offered to their Idols, when he comes to the sacrifice of
the new law, he says that here he has prepared a much more wonderful,
and magnificall sacrifice. What I pray thee, Reader, could be spoken more
plainly against the wicked assertion of the Adversary, teaching that the
sacrifices of the new law are nothing more excellent, then the sacrifices of
the old law, then to say that Christ here in the new law has prepared a
much more wonderful and magnificall sacrifice? Which words Chrysostom
speaks setting the sacrifices of both laws together, and therefore they were
spoken, in comparison of the sacrifices, of the old law.

And to the intent that the Adversary being here sore pressed with the words
of Chrysostom shall not with his common gloss cloak him self, and get a
subterfuge, saing that Chrysostom spoke of the sacrifice of Christ upon the
cross, which he grants to be much more excellent then the sacrifices of
the old law, the second note of the said Chrysostom shall clearly wipe
away his gloss, and disapoint him of his cloak. Wherefore observe that when he
said that Christ prepared this wonderful sacrisice, he opened the time also
when he did prepare yt. He did (says he) prepare this wonderful sacrifice,
when he did change the sacrifice of the old law and when he commanded A
plain saing for M. Juell.
himself to be offered. When did he these two things? Reader if thowe mark,
here be two things: the one is that Christ changed the sacrifice: the other
that he commanded himself to be offered. When did he these two things? In his
last supper when (as saint Cyprian says) obuiarunt sibi instituta noua and
antiqua, and consumpto agno, quem antiqua traditio proponebat, inconsumptibilem
Cyp. de Cae.
cibum magister apponit Discipulis. The new and the old ordeinaunces met
together and the lamb, which the old tradicion did settsurth being De
prodition Iudae.


So that for this lamb of the old tradicion he gave now inconsumptible meat
to his Disciples, which was his body and blood, which was the verity of
that shadow as Chrysostom says: Ille agnus futuri agni typus fuit, and ille
sanguis, Dominici sanguinis monstrabat aduentum, and ouis illa spiritalis ouis
fuit exemplum. Ille agnus vmbra fuit: hic veritas. Sed postquam sol iusticiae
radiauit, vmbra soluitur luce, and ideo in ipsa mensa, vtrumque Pascha, and
typi, and veritatis celebratum est. That lamb was the figure of the lamb to
Blood of the Paschall la^be figure of the blood of Christ in the Sacr.
come. And that blood showed the coming of the blood of our Lord, and that
sheep was an example of the spiritual sheep, that lamb was the shadow: this
the verity. But after the Sun of righteousness did shine with beams, the
shadow was taken away with the light. And therefore in that table both the
passover of the figure, and of the truth was celebrated. Thus he.

In which saing is declared, that the old lamb was a figure of our lamb
Christ, which were together in the table, as two passeouers, the old away,
and this placed in the stead. Then was the old sacrifice changed, Aliud Cont.
literas Petilia
est Pascha, quod Iudaei celebrant de oue, aliud autem quod nos in corpore. and
sanguine Domini celebramus. Yt is an other Passover that the Jews do celebrate
with a sheep: and an other, which we celebrate in the body and blood of
Christ.

Yt ca^ not be said that Christ did chaung the sacrifice of the old lawvpo^
the cross, for that sacrifice was after the manner of the sacrifices of the
order of Aaron, a bloody sacrifice, as they were. But this change of
sacrifice must needs then be, when the showing of the change of preisthead
was. For (as S. Paul says) Necessarium fuit secundum ordinem Melchisedec
alium surgere sacerdotem, and non secundum ordinem Aaron dici. Yt was
necessary, that an other priest, Heb. 7.
should rise to be called after the order of Melchisedech and not after the
order of Aaron. Christ never showed himself a priest after the order of
Melchisedec but in the last supper, in the which he sacrificed after that
order. Wherefore then was the old sacrifice changed, when this new priest
after Hoc facite: This do ye. By which words he gave commandment to all to
who^ commission of this holy ministracio^ should be given, that they should
do that that he had doe^.

In that high and wonderful institucion he did three things, that is, he
Three notable things done by Christ in the inst it ^cion of the B. Sacr.
consecrated his blessed body and blood, he offered yt in sacrifice after the
order of Melchisedech, and received yt with his Apostles. Wherefore saing and
commanding that his preistes should that do that he then did, forsomoch as
among other his doings he did then offer sacrifice. Therefore he commanded
that he himself should be offered. And thus yt may be perceived that Chrysostom
looked to this place when he said that Christ commanded himself to be offered.
Li. 4. ca. 32


Of this same sentence and mind be a nombre of the holy Fathers. Irenaeus
says: Eum qui ex creatura panis est, accepit, and gratias egit, dicens: Hoc
est corpus meu^: Et calicem similiter, qui est ex ea creatura, quae est
secundum nos, suum sanguinem confessus est. Et noui Testamenti nouam docuit,
oblatione^, etc. He took the bread ( says Irenaeus speaking of Christ) which
is a creature, and gave thanks saing: This is my body. And the cup
likewise, which is a creature as we, he confessed to be his blood. And of the
new Testament, he taught a new oblacion, etc. Jn primaoration. praepar.


S. Ambrose also in his prayer says: Ego enim Domine memor venerandae
passionis tuae, accedo ad altar tuum licet peceator, vt offeram tibi
sacrificium, quod tu instituisti, and offerri praecepisti in commemorationem
tui pro salute nostra. I Lord mindful of thy woorshippefull passion, come
unto thy altar, although a sinner, to offer unto thee, the sacrifice, which
thou hauest instituted and commanded to be The Proclamermaie her learn that
Christ commanded his body to be offered in sacrifice.
offered in the remembrance of thee for our health.

Ye see these two grave and ancient witnesses testifieng with Chrysosto^ that
Christ commanded this sacrifice which he instituted to be offered. What the
thing is that we offer Chrysostom by most plain words By this latter part
then of Chrysostom his saing, the two other parts before for the slaughter of
beasts, be commanded himself to be offered. So that he commanded himself to
be offered, when the sacrifices were changed. But the sacrifices were changed
in the last supper, wherefore in the last supper he commanded himself to be
offered.

THE SEVENTENTH CHAPTER PROCEAdeth upon the same text by the exposition of
Chrysostom and saint Hierom.
ALbeit this text is very plainly expownded by Chrysostom, and that, that by
me was affirmed by the same his exposition fully

The rest of the text is: Et panis quem frangimus nonne communicatio corporis
Christiest? And the bread which we break, is yt not a communicacion of the
1. Corin. 10
of the body of Christ? Although the vulgar english bibles does otherwise
Quare non dixit participatio? quia amplius quiddam significare voluit,
Chrysostom. in 10. 1. Cor.
and multam inter has conuenientiam ostendere. Non enim participatione tantum
and acceptione, sed vnitate communicamus. Quemadmodum enim corpus illud vnitum
est Comunicacion is a nearer coniu^ction the^ participacion, therefore the
translacion of the english bible is to be misliked
Christo: ita and nos per hunc panem union coniungimur. Sed quare addit, quem
frangimus? Hoc in Encharistia videre licet: in cruce autem minime, sed omnino
contra. Os enim eius (inquit) non conteretur. Sed quod in cruce passus non est,
id in oblatione patitur, and propter te srangi permittie. Is not the bread
which we break, a communicacion of the body of Christ? Why did he not say a
particpacion or partaking? Because he would signify some more thing, and show
a great agreement betwixt these things. We do not communicate by partaking
and receiving only, but also by unity. For as that body which we break?
This may you see in the Sacrament: in the cross not so, but altogether
contrary. For (says he) his bone shall not be broken. But that he suffered
not in the cross, that he suffers in the sacrifice, and permits for thee
to be broken. Thus he.

In this lively exposition of Chrysostom, which so I call because he leaves
no word vnquickned and made as yt were alive to man's understanding, he gives
us three worthy instructions. And first, he gives a cause why Three not able
instructions out of Chrysostom.
S. Paul calls this a communicacion raither then a participacion, because
(says he) by the receipt of this mystery we are joined together in one with
Christ, as his body was joined unto him. Which union neither participacion
nor receiving do express or signify. For we may partake or receive a thing,
and yet not be made one with yt. But duly communicating the body of Christ,
we are made one with yt. For communication is either Communicacio^ what yt is.
a making of one thing common to many, or to make many to be one thing, and
all one with yt, and yt one with them. Of this more in the exposition of the
next scripture.

The second note is that where he says, that as that body was united to
Christ: So by this bread we are joined together in an union. Where he
instructs us again of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, before by his
blood, here by his body, and yet in each part full Christ. That this may
appear plain unto the reader, as yt is true in yt self, understand this, that
the body of Christ is united to him reallie, verily, and substanciallie, and
not spituallie. If then there be an union of Christ and us, as of him and his
body, then yt must be an union real, but this manner of union can not be but
by a real communicacion, wherefore we do reallie communicate with the body of
Christ. This is confirmed to us by the saing of Chrysosto^, when he says,
that we be joined together in union by this bread. A bare piece of bread can no
more make us one substanciallie with Christ, than a piece of beof, or any
other victual. Wherefore this bread that he speaks of is the bread, and the
food of his very body which duly received, makes us to be in Christ, and
Christ, as S. Hylary says, naturally, and as S. Cyrill says,
substanciallie in us.

The third note also both confirms this that here is said of the presence,
Real presence and sacrifice both avouched.
and also that is before said of the sacrifice. For here by express words
he does so term yt. For he says thus: that, that he suffered not in the
cross, that he suffers in the sacrifice, and permits to be broken for
thee. In the which words he declares two distinct beinges of Christ: one
upon the cross: the other in sacrifice. For he makes no difference either of
Christ, or of his substance, or of his being. But even the same that suffered
not to be broken upon the cross, even the same suffers in the sacrifice, and
permits to be broken for thee. If the very same be in this sacrifice, that
was upon the cross, then we must needs confess him to be as verily present,
in the sacrament, as upon the cross. And the same so present, for that he is
our only and everlasting sacrifice, to be our sacrifice. If we ask where he
is a sacrifice, Chrysostom answers, there to be a sacrifice, where he
permits to be broken. He is broken in the Mass upon the altar, wherefore he
is their in sacrifice.

But here understand that although Chrysostom says that Christ suffers, an
impassible body, and what violence soever any cruel heart would infer
Take, eat, This is my body, which is broken for you. For although he so
said: yet in giving out of his body, he suffered no violence nor pain. And as
that breaking wrought no grief to his blessed body then: no more does yt now.
For the same wounds that he bare in his passible body passiblie, he bears
the same after his resurrection and now still impassiblie.

And now that ye have heard. Chrysostom declaring unto you the
understanding of this scripture in the which he has in no dark speech, but
in plain manner with express words taught the presence of Christ's body and
blood in the Sacrament, and yt also to be a sacrifice, and that by this
scripture: we shall now leave him for this place, and hear S. Hierom. Who for
this time shall be joined with Chrysostom, that one verity may Hieron. in
deci. 1 Cor.
be testified on both sides of Christ's Parliament house S. Hierom is but
short, and this is his exposition. Calix benedictionis, ideo primum calicem
nominauit, vt possit de pane latius disputare, nonne communicatio sanguinis
Christi est? sicut ipse saluator dicit. Qui manducat carnem meam, and bibit
sanguinem meum, in me m^aet, and ego in eo. The cup of blessing which we
bless: therefore has he first named the cup, that he may more at large
dispute of the bread: is yt not a communicacion of the blood of Christ? As our
Savior himself says: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
dwells in me and I in him. Thus S. Hierom.

This is his brief exposition upon this first part of S. Paul's text, which
is not so bare and hungry, but that yt brings good food with yt, to nourish
and comfort the faith of a Chrystian man in this matter of the Sacrament. For
when he comes to the pith of the sentence which is this: is yt not a
communicacion of the blood of Christ: he adds this for an exposition to yt:
as our Savior himself says: He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood
dwells in me and I in him: as who might say: yt is soche a communicacion of
the blood of Christ, that who so does communicate of yt shall have that
benefitt, that Christ himself spoke of saing: He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. That he alleging this
scripture of Christ to expownde the saing of S. Paul does signify unto us,
that S. Paul Jn psalm. 109.
the mind of saint Hierom. Thus he says upon the psalm. Quomodo enim
Melchisedech Rex Salem, obtulit panem and vinum: sic and tu offeres corpus
tuum, and sanguinem tuum, verum panem, and verum vinum. Iste Melchisedec ista
mysteria quae habemus dedit nobis. Ipse est qui dixit: Qui manducauerit carnem
meam, and biberi^ sanguinem meum: secundum ordinem Melchisedec tradidit nobis
sacramentum suum. Sacrisice of Christ in his supper and Melchisedecs compared.
For as Melchisedec King of Salem has offered bread and wine: so shall thowe
offer thy body and blood, the true bread, and true wine. This Melchisedec
has given us these mysteries which we have. Yt is he that has He that shall
eat my flesh, and drink my blood: according to the order of Melchise dech be
has delivered unto us his sacrament. Hitherto S. Hierom.

Do ye not see that our Melchisedech does offer the true bread and true he
that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood dwells in me, and I in him? By
this then yt is evident that the saing of S. Paul referred and expownded by
this, is understood, of the true wine, the blood of Christ, as this is.

The other text also is but breiflie touched and followed thus: Et Panis que^
Hieron. Ibid.
frangimus nonne co^municatio corporis Domini est? Ita and panis Idololatriae,
Doemonum participacio esse monstratur. And is not the bread which we break a
communicacio^ of the body of our lord? Even so also the bread of Idolotrie is
a partaking of Deuells. Albeit this exposition in the first seight and face
seems not much to say to the maintenance of the catholic faith, as
touching the matter of the Sacrament: yet if yt be well weighed, yt shall be
fownde to make much. And for the better weighing of yt, yt shall be necessary,
that yt be called to memory, that before is said in the last chapter, that
the cause why me^ be made partakers of Deuells, is that they do eat of soche
meats as be offered

Now then, when in the exposition the probacion is that as the eating of the
bread, which is broken is a communicacion of the body of Christ: So the bread
of Idolatry is a participacion of Deuells: must not both these be understood
of the things offered in sacrifice? if not, what avails the applicacion of
the one to the other? How can S. Paul prove the Corinthians to be partakers
of Idols, but by the partaking of Idolathites? Wherefore this expositour
following S. Paul brings his argument from the sacrifice of Christ as a
thing clear and manifest to the Corinthians. As who might say: As the
partaking of the bread of Christ in sacrifice makes us partakers of the body
of our Lord: So the partaking of meats offered in sacrifice to An argument
grownded upon the sacrifice by S. Hierom.
Deuells, makes us partakers of Deuells. And thus there must be a sacrifice
understood in both sides, as well in the one, as in the other. Which being so,
yt must needs be confessed, that the bread which S. Paul speaks of here

THE FICHTTENTH CHAP. PROCEADETH IN the exposition of the same text by saint
Augustine and
Saint Augustine opens the mind of S. Paul thus: Nolo vos socios
Daemoniorum fieri: eos quippe ab Idololatria prohibebat. Propter quod eis oste^
dear volebat, ita illos fieri socios Daemoniorum, si Idolothita sacrificij
manducauerint, Aug. co^t. immie. legis and Prophet.
quomodo Israel carnalis socius erat altaris in templo, qui de sacrificiis man
ducabat. Hinc enim caepit, vt boc diceret: Propter quod, dilectissimi mihi,
fugite ab idolorum cultura. Deinde secutus ostendit ad quod sacrificium debeant
iam pertenere, dicens: Quasi prudentibus dico, iudicate vos quod dico. Calix
benedictionis quem benedicimus non ne communicatio est sanguinis Christi? Et
panis quem frangimus, nonne communicatio est corporis Domini? etc. I will not
that ye be made fellows of Deuells. He did truly forbid them from Idolatry.
For the which thing he would declare unto them, that they should even so be
made fellows of Deuells if they did eat Idolathites of the sacrifice, as the
carnal Israel, which did eat of S. Aug. c^lleth the bread and cup of the
B. Sacr. a sacrifice.
the sacrifices in the temple, was fellow of the Altar. By occasion of that he
began, that he would say this: wherefore my most beloved, flee from the
honoring of Idols. Afterward following, he shows to what sacrifice they
aught now to pertein saing: I speak as unto wise men, judge what I say: is
not the cup of blessing which we bless a co^municacion of the blood of
Christ? And is not the bread which we break a comunicacion of the body of our
Lord? Thus far S. Austen.

This exposition if yt be well marked, and compared to the exposition of this
text of S. Paul which is in the xvi chap. of this book, yt shall be perceived,
that yt does justly agree with the same, and much also confirm yt. But leaving
all other things therein contained, and only to touch that, that to this matter
apperteineth this is here to be noted in S. August. that he says this to be
the mind of S. Paul, that he laboring to bring the Corinthians from
Idolothites, by the which they were made felows of deuells, he willed them to
flee from them, as (now being of the calling they be of) having nothing to do
with them. And therefore leaving the sacrifices of Idols (says S. Augustine)
he

By the which words who seith not that the mind of S. Paul is after the
Sacrifice avouched by S. Paul after the vnstanding of S. August.
mening of S. Augustine, that the Sacrament of Christ's body and bold is a
sacrifice, unto the which, as he would the^ the Corinthia^s: So aught al
Chrystia^s to pertein? For S. Augustine saing, that S. Paul by these words: is
not the cup of blessing, which we bless a partaking of the blood of Christ
etc. did show the^ the sacrifice unto the which they did now pertein, what
can be said but that he meant yt to be a sacrifice? That S. Augustine takes yt
to be a sacrifice, as yt is most plainly showed in the first book, So in this
also hereafter yt shall be made so evident, that yt shall not be denied.

Damascen, whom here we will ioin with S. Austen, although he does not by way
of exposition follow the letter of S. Paul: yet treacting of the Sacrament, he
expowndeth the terms, namely participacion and co^municacion, as whether he
meant that the Sacrament were a bare sign of the body

And where as this holy Sacrament, for that yt is of infinite virtue can not
sufficiently be expressed: devout and godly men, minding, as the measure of
our weakness in the capacity of so great mysteries would permit and suffer
to signify some part of yt, have called yt by sondrie and diverse names. of
the which Damascen remembering some does thus say of them. Damascen li. 4. ca.
14
Et si quidam exemplaria corporis, and sanguinis Domini panem and vinum
vocauerunt vt deifer vocauit Basilius: non tamen post sanctificationem dixit,
sed priusquam sanctificaretur ipsa oblatio, ita vocabant. Participatio etiam
dicitur. Nam per ipsam Jesus dininitatem participamus. Dicitur and co^munio, and
est reuera, quia co^municamus per ipsam Christo, and participamus eius carne
and Diuinitate, and quia co^municamus, and vnimur inuice^ per illa^. Although
some have called the bread and wine exemplaries of the body and blood of our
Lord, as the godly man Basil has called yt: yet they Bread and wine called
exe^plaries of the body and blood of Christ before sanctificacion, but not
after.
did not so after the sanctificacion, but before the oblacion was sanctified
they did so call yt. Yt is also called a partaking. For by yt we partake the
God head of Jesus. Yt is also called a Communion, and yt is in very deed, for
This man says that we partake both the flesh, and Godhead of Christ.

And that we should not think him to favor the heretical exposition of the
Adversary, he declares the catholic faith, and also rejects the contrary
opinion in that he dissolueth that, that of the Adversary might be An argument
of the Sacramentaries soluted by Damascen.
taken for an argument against the truth. For although (says he) some have
called yt the exemplaries of the body and blood of Christ, that is (says
he) before the consecracion or sanctificacion, not after the sanctificacion:
signifieng This is my body, he says thus: Hoc est meum, non figurae
corporis, sed corpus. and non figura sanguinis, sed sanguis. This is not the
figure of Damasc. ibid.
my body, but my body and not the figure of my blood, but my blood, whereby
he plainly denies the Deuells exposition settfurth by the Adversary. And yet
in the end of the same chapter he calls the Sacrament exemplaries, but in
soche sort and manner, as he affirms withal the very presence. For this is
his sainge: Exemplaria autem futurorum dicuntur, non vt non existentia vere
corpus and sanguis Christi, sed quoniam nunc quidem per ipsa participamus
Christi Diuinitatem: tunc autem intellectualiter per solam visionem. They are
called Damascen ibidem.
the exe^platies of things to come, not as not being the body and blood of
Christ verily: but that we now thereby partake the God head of Christ: but
then intellectuallie by only vision.

By which sainges, as the reader does clerelie see, that damascen so
constantly does teach and affirm the presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
that he utterly rejects the figures of the Adversary: So may he well
understand,

THE NINETENTH CHAP. CONTINVETH
Saying that of necessity I must be shorter, for that much is yet to be
said, as the one of the witnesses in the last chapter has directly
affirmed the presence the other the sacrifice: So will we hear two breiflie
auouching the like. The first shall be Isidorus who speaking of this text now
in hand gives a brief and clear exposition of Isidor. li. of fic. ca. 18. The
bread that we break us the body of Christ etc.
the same in this wise: Panis quem frangimus corpus Christi est, qui dicit: Ego
sum panis vinus, qui de coelo descendi, vinum autem sanguis eius est. Et hoc
est, quod scriptum est: Ego sum vitis vera. The bread that we break is the
body of Christ, who says: I am the bread of life, which came down from
heaven. But the wine is his blood, and this is yt, that is written. I am the
true vine.

In this exposition that the text might be plain to the reader, where S. Paul
said: The bread which we break is a communicacion of the body of Christ:
that the bread which we break is the body of Christ. And that he would have
yt taken for the very body: he says, that yt is the body of Christ, who
said: I am the bread of life. And who he was, the sixth chap. of S. John
declares that yt was very Christ. no figurative Christ. And what the cup
of blessing does contein he fully declares when he says: The wine is his
blood. which manner of speech is so plain, and stands so directly against
the saing of the Adversary, that as for the plainness of yt I neither can nor
need to say any thing to make yt more plain: so can I but wonder, that men
can err that either know or have readde these holy fathers except they be
puffed up with soche pride, and be brought to soche singularity in there own
conceat, that they contempn all men's judgments, sainges, and learning besides
their own of what faith, truth, auncie^tie, holiness or learning so ever
they be, as this Isidore, who lived well near a thousand years ago^, and was
famous in all the chrystia^ orb, and as a strong pillar stood against the
Arrians which then were mighty in Spain, and has left learned works

And although for his learning and auncie^tie he is to be credited: yet he is
the more so to be for that to each part of his saing he alleges the
scripture. I am the true vine. For in deed as he is the true vine: so comes
out of him the true wine. The earthly wine helps to maintein the earthly
life, which Joan. 15.
as S. Gregory says, compared to the eternal life, is raither to be called
death then life. But the heavenly wine that comes out of the true vine
nourishes to everlasting life, which is the true life. And because we be by
faith inserted, and griffed into Christ, this blessed wine, which is the Juice
of that true vine, is of us, as of branches of the same vine, received, and so
Cyrill in. 16. Joan.
makes us his lively branches, not only spirituallie by faith: but also by
nature, which thing holy Cirill does very lively open and declare. Annon
conuenienter dici potest, vitem humanitatem eius, and nos palmites, propter
identitatem We are branches of the vine Christ both spirituallie and
corporally.
naturae. Eiusdem enim naturae vitis and palmites sunt. Ita and spiritualiter,
and corporaliter nos palmites, and Christus vitis est. May not the manheade of
Christ be very well called the vine? and we the branches, for that we be all of
one nature?

Wherefore Isidore to prove that, that is in the cup, to be the blood of
Christ, as the wine or juice which should be received of us the natural
branches of Christ the true vine, did very well allege the sainge of Christ:
I am the true vine. And by this also you may perceive the mind of S. Cyrill,
that we be not only of one Spirit with Christ by faith, but we be also of one
nature with him. not only that he has taken our nature upon him, whereby he is
one with us, but that we receive his natural flesh and blood, whereby we are
of one nature with him. This his natural flesh and blood we receive not but in
the Sacrament. Wherefore the Sacrament contains the natural flesh and blood
of Christ.

And now that we have heard Isidore, who was of the latin church, so briefly
and plainly expownde this text: we will also hear Oecumenius, who was of the
greek church, how he briefly expowndeth the same. He says: In. decins. 1
Cor.
Poculum voeat benedictionis, poculum sanguinis Christi, quod benedicimus, quod
prae manibus habentes benedicimus eum, qui gratiose sanguinem suum nobis
largitus est. He calls the cup of the blood of Christ the cup of
blessing which we bless, which having before us we bless him, who has
granted us his blood, The cup of blessing is the cup of the blood of
Christ.


Is not this as plain an exposition, as yt is brief? is yt not wonderful that
any man would open his mouth against a truth so plainly uttered as this is?
Here may ye see what manner of cup yt is that S. Paul calls the cup of
blessing. Yt is (says this author) the cup of the blood of Christ. And
when he has expownded to you what yt is, than he gives you a cause why yt
is called of S. Paul the cup of blessinge, being in deed the cup of
Christ's blood. Yt is so called (says he) because having yt before us, we
bless and give thanks to him that has granted us his blood* and woorthily
we bless him, both for that he has commanded us that as often as we eat of
that bread and drink of that cup, we should show forth his death until
he come: and also for that besides an infinite nombre of blood contains his
blood, who has wrought us so great mercy, and The cup of the blood why yt
is called the cup of blessing.
lawde, praise, and bless him, by whom these mercies were wrought, and therefore
yt is very well called the cup of blessing, that is to say, the cup that
moves stirs, and provoke to bless Christ our Savior, whose blood yt is.

And here, Reader, to commend this truth better to thee, I mien, that the
cup which S. Paul calls the cup of blessing, that yt is (as this author
says) the cup of Christ's blood, call to thy remembrance the saing of
Chrysostom what he said expownding this text: does not he say this is the
meening of S. Paul, that, that is in the cup, is yt that flowed out of the
side? Now this is a common manner of speech, that the vessel is named by the
thing that yt contains, as a cup containing wine, is called a cup of wine
a cup containing water is called a cup of water. Now when Chrysostom
says, that the blood that flowed out of the side of Christ, is in the
cup: and Oecumenius says, that yt is the cup of blood, what difference
is there in the thing, that they speak of* is yt not all one? Therefore thowe
may see that these authors agree and have consent bitwixt the^. Isidorus and
Oecumenius let not the Adversary attempt to corrupt them with his wicked
gloss, for they be allreadie alleged, and again shall be with soch evident
and strong sentence declaring their faith, that they can not be altered.

THE TVENTETH CHAP. PROCEADETH upon the same text by Haymo, and Theophilacte.
THis being true that our Savior Christ says, In the mouth of two or three
witnesses stands all truth: these that be alleged might suffice to
testify this truth that I have taken in hand to settfurthe, Nevertheless for
that yt has pleased him who is the very truth him self, who neded no
testimony, to call twelve,

But to go a boute that, that here is intended, that the rest of this nombre
which remain may give also their testimony, and show their minds in the
understanding of S. Paul, we shall first hear Theophilacte, whose exposition
Theoph. in to. prioris ad Corin.
of this text is this: Calix benedictionis, hoc est, gratiarum actionis. In
manibus namque habentes, gratias ei haud dubie agimus, qui nostri gratia
sanguinem sum effuderit, dignatutque nos sit, bonis ineffabilibus. Non enim
participatio dixit, sed vt plus alialiquid exprimat, summam scilicet
coniunctionem. Quod autem dixit, tale est. Sanguis enim iste, qui calice
continetur, ille est, qui Christi e latere profluit. Hunc ipsi cum sumimus
participamus, Communication used of S. Paul to express a nearer coniu^ction
between Christ and us then participacion ca^ signify.
hoc est, Christo coniungimur. The cup of blessing, that is, of
thankesgeuing. For having him in hands, we give undoubtedly thanks unto him,
who for owre sake has shed out his blood, and has esteemed us worthy of
unspeakable gifts. He did not say participacion but communicacion, that he
might express somewhat more, that is to say, a most near conjunction. But that
that he has said is after this manner. This blood which is contained in the
cup, is the same that flowed out of the side of Christ. This when we take
we participate, that is to say, we are conioined to Christ. Thus Theophilact.

If thou, reader, desierest to be instructed how this text is to be
understood, and what is the very mind of saint Paul, if ever man did
clearly expownd yt, no man more plainlier then this, although Chrysostom and
Oecumenius, as plainly and almost by the same words. Consider therefore
Theophilact commended.
this exposition well and credit yt, and thowe shall atteign to the true sense
and mening of saint Paul. There is nothing to be desiered in this man, that is
necessarily required to one to whom creditte should be given. Berengarius.
And after the council of Sisimius in the tripartite history they are to be
called li. 9 ca. 19.
to the decision or dissolucion of a controversy, which wrote before that
controversy was risen, and forsomoche as this author did so, therefore he may
well be called to this matter. That he is uncorrupted, I suppose, the
Adversary will depose. For yt is known to all men learned that Oecolampadius
did translate him owte of greek into latin, whose sincerity and dexterity in
the doing of any soch matter, they that be of that side, can not asmoche as
once suspect. And although he has in other places offended, and vitiated him:
yet here he has not. Learning there lacks none in this author for that he
does is by imitacion of Chrysostom, whose sentences and matters being setfurth
at lenght, this man does collect, and in a brief manner settfurth. By which fact
as we be sure that that is setfurth is learned matter: So be we sure that the
setterfurth is without all doubt learned, for soch a Theophilact. Therefore
seeing all things be in him, that are required to be in an author, he is
without all exception worthy of creditte, and in this matter as a witness
may justly be produced. The same blood that flowed out of the side of
Christ, is in the cup, even by the mind of S. Paul.


In this exposition then where no tropes, no signs, no figures of the blood of
Christ be admitted, but the presence of the very blood taught to be in the
cup, yea and the very same that flowed out of the side of Christ what can
we or may we else do but so take yt, that is, that saint Paul, when he
said: The cup of blessing, which we bless is a partaking of the blood of
Christ, spoke of no figure, nor by no figure: But of the substanciall blood of
Christ to be verily in the cup of blessing, which we also take and And here
is to be noted that Theophilact, does not here speak as showing his own mind
but opening unto us the mind and meaning of saint Paul, Quod autem dixit tale
est. That he said is this, or after this manner, as who should say, this is yt
that he said. So that this exposition is to be taken as the words of S.
Paul, for that yt does declare the mind Peter Martyr. his wresting of
Theophil. upon the word. (virtue)
and meaning of S. Paul.

Neither is Peter Martyr to be heard, who would pervert all the negatiues of
Theophilact, wherbie he denies in sondrie and diverse places, that the
Sacrament is only a figure of Christ's body, as in the xxvi of S. Matthew, in
the xiiii. of saint Mark, in the vi. of saint John, and there avouches the
very real presence by express words: The said Peter Martyr would I say,
taking a small occasion of a word upon the xiiii. of S. Mark by violent
pressing, even turn the face of theophilact backwarde, and make him look Vide
ca. 60. li. 2.
an other way, and to speak a direct contrary sentence to that, that he
spoke within ten lines before.

In the xiiii. of S. Mark to prove the words of Chyst: This is my body, to
be no figurative speech he brings in the saing of Christ in the vi. of S.
John, and says thus: Dominus enim dicit. Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est,
non dixit Theoph. in 14. Marci.
figura est carnis meae, sed caro mea est. Et iterum: Nisi ederitis carnem
filii hominis, and quomodo, inquis, caro videtur? O homo propter nostram
infirmitatem istud fit. Quia enim panis and vinum ex his sunt, quibus
assueuimus, ea non abhorremus. Idcirco misericors Deus nostrae infirmitati
condescendens speciem quidem panis and vini seruat in virtutem autem carnis and
sanguinis transelementat. Owre Lord says: The bread that I will give is my
flesh* He said not yt is a figure of my flesh, but yt is my flesh. And The
flesh of Christ in the B. Sacrament appears not for our infirmities sake.
again: Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man. And how (say thou) is
not the flesh seen? O man this is done for our infirmity. For because bread
and wine be of these things, unto the which we have been accustomed we do not
abhor them. Therefore our merciful God condescending to our infirmity, does
keep the outwardes forms of bread and wine, but he turns the substance into
the virtue of flesh and blood.

Here would Peter Martyr (as is said) wrest Theophilact that he would have no
real presence, and therefore that we receive not the very flesh and blood of
Christ in the Sacrament, but the virtue of them. But, Reader, I have ascribed
the full sentence of Theophilact, to the intent that thou may see,

And for proof of this, first observe and note, that Theophilact brings in,
the saing of Christ to prove that there is no figurative speech, and therefore he
says, that Christ did not say, that the bread which he would give was a
figure of his flesh, but his flesh. If Theophilact will not have yt the figure
of Christ's flesh, but his flesh in deed, how stands Peter's exposition, who
would no flesh, but the virtue of the flesh, and so denieng the very flesh,
would have yt a bare figure, which Theophilact has so often denied? And think
you Tra^seleme^tacion used of Theophilact. more fully to express the change
in the Sacrament.
that soch an author would in so few lines deny a figure and grant a
figure? Secondly note that Theophilact says that for our infirmity our
merciful God does transelementate into the virtue of the flesh and blood,
where I would learn of this man what is the propre significacion of this verb
(transelementare) and if yt be to change, then what is changed? As I can
perceive, this verb comes (Elementu^) which signifies an Element, and so yt
should signify to change Elements. As the philosophers do teach, the
natural constitucion of natural things that be compownded is of the four
elementa Elements As in learning the letters of the Alphabete be called
Elements. Likewise in religion as saint Paul says to the hebrews. Etenim
cum deberetis magistri esse propter tempus, rursum indigetis vt vos doceamiui
quae sunt elementa exordij sermonum He br. 5.
Dei, and facti estis quibus lacte opus sit non solido cibo. For when as
concerning the time ye ought to be teachers, yet have ye need again that we
teach you the first Elements or principles of the word of God, and are
become soch as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. In which sentence
where he says that they had need to be taught the elements of the word of
God he meneth the principles of religion. And thus the beginninges of all soche

Now to apply this to our purpose, what be the principles of bread and wine?
be they not their substances? Then, when Theophilact says that he does
transelementate, is yt not to be said that he does change their principles,
or elements? But their principles be their substa^ces, wherefore he does change
their substances.

Although (if I be not deceived) this is spoken according to the rule of An
earthly creature can not be transeleme^ted into spiritual virtue.
learning: yet if this should mislike the Adversary: yet he must needs grant
that some thing there must be, that must be changed. And then I would learn of
him what this is that is changed into the virtue or grace of the flesh of
Christ as the Adversary here takes this word (virtus) to be understood?
Yt was never readde that ever any thing earthly could be primarelie changed
into the virtue or grace a quality spiritual. Wherefore no soch change ca^ here
bemade as the Adversary would feign to be. But that an earthly substance may
be turned into the substance of Christ not only we are taught yt by that that
he took flesh of the virge^ Mary: but also as our Theophilact, to prove Of
this matter see more in the second book cap. lx.
flesh. Wherefore where Theophilact says here that this transelementacion is
into the virtue of the flesh and blood of Christ, he meeneth into the very
flesh, as though yt had been said: In veritatem carnis and sanguinis Christi,
into the verity or truth of the flesh and blood of Christ.

And that this was his mening this proves: first that in the same sentence he
says, that God condescending to our infirmity, keeps the outward forms of
bread and wine, signifieng that the forms remaining the substance is changed.
For if the outward forms remain, and the substance (as they say) be not
changed, what then is transelemented, or changed? The second proof is, that
Theophilact, speaking of the very same matter upon the sixth of S. John, does
by open and plain words prove this that I have said, for better declaracio^
whereof I will bring in his wholl sentence. Non enim dixit panis quem ego dabo
figura est carnis, sed caro mea est. Transformatur enim arcanis verbis panis
ille per mystica^ benedictione^ and accessionem sancti spiritus in carne^
Domini. Et ne que^ co^turbet quod crede^dus sit panis caro. Etenim in carne
ambula^te Domino et ex pane alimonia^ Theoph. in 6. Joannis.
admitte^te, panis ille qui ma^ducabatur, in corpus eius mutabatur, et similis
fiebat sa^ctae cius carni et in augme^tu^, et sustentatione^ co^ferebat iuxta
humanum more^. Igitur et nu^c panis in carnem domini mutatur. For he has not
said, the bread which I will give, is a figure of my flesh, but yt is my
flesh. For that bread by the mystical blessing Arguments of Theophilact to
prove the bread in the Sacr. to be made flesh.
into the flesh of owre Lord. And leest yt should troble any man, that the
bread is to be believed flesh: when owre Lord walked in the flesh, and took
food of bread, that bread that was eaten was changed into his body, and was
made like unto his holy flesh and yt went unto the increasing and sustentacion
after the condition of the nature of man. Therefore now also the bread is
changed into the flesh of our Lord. Thus Theophil.

In this saing, ye see not the figure only of Christ's flesh denied in the
Sacrament, but withal the very flesh affirmed, and the wholl matter how yt
comes to pass declared. In the setting forth whereof, where as upon S. Mark he
said, that the bread was changed into the virtue of the flesh of Christ, he
expownding the same says, yt is transformed into the flesh of Christ. And
that yt might appear to you, that this change was a change of the substance
of bread into the substance of the flesh of Christ, he brings in a similitude
of the food which Christ did take being conversant here upon the earth after
the manner of men, which food was substanciallie changed

In this process of the declaracion of the mind of Theophilact, is not only
Peter Martyr his gloss as plainly overthrown, as yt was maliciously devised.
overthrown the wicked wresting of Peter Martyr, but also the verity of the
Sacrament so sensibly as yt were opened, that, as I suppose, there is no place
of doubt left to make a Chrystian to doubt in. For if ye will confer the
exposition of S. Paul now here brought in, with the other sainges, yt alone
will sufficiently teach a man the perfect catholic faith about the
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood.

Wherefore so much being spoken of the mind of Theophilact, in the which I have
tarried longer then I intended, I will now have me to infer. Haymo,
Theophilact, to declare the faith of the latin In. decim. 1. Cor.
Church in his time. This haymo thus expowndeth this text of saint Paul: Et
panis quem frangimus in altari, nonne participatio corporis domini est? vtique,
primum consecratur, and benedicitur a sacerdotibus and spiritu sancto, and
deinde frangitur: cum iam, licet panis videatur, in veritate corpus Christi
est. Ex quo pane quicu^nque communicant, corpus Although there seem baead in the
Bl. Sa. yt is the body of Christ.
Christi edunt And the bread which we do break in the altar, is yt not a
partaking of the body of our Lord? Yt is so. First yt is consecrated, and
blessed of the preistes and the holy Ghost, and afterward yt is broken. And
although now yt seems bread, in very deed yt is the body of Christ, of the
which bread whosoever do communicate, they do eat the body of Christ. Thus
Haymo.

Here ye see an other exposition of S. Paul his text, which although yt
differ from the other in words: in the thing that they speak of, they fully
Haimo and Theoph. their saings conferred.
agree. Theophilact said that the blood that is in the cup is the same that
flowed out of the side of Christ, so that he teaching the presence of the
very of the body of Christ by the same, teaches also the presence of the
very Theophilact. For he said that the bread is tra^sformed by the mystical
benedictio^, and the access of the holy Ghost: This man says, that yt is
consecrated and blessed of the preistes and the holy Ghost. Theophilact says,
that God changes the bread into the flesh of Christ, the outward forms
remaining still: This man says, that allthough yt seem bread, in very deed
yt is the body of Christ. Whereby we may see the goodly consent, and
agreement, that the God of unity and peace woorketh in them that do love and
embrace his truth. Theophilact, also says that the blood of Christ is in
the cup: This man says, that the body of Christ is in the altar. Which
both manner of speeches prove a real presence. For the spiritual presence is
neither in the altar, neither in the chalice, but in the soul of man.

Hitherto by all these auncientes, we can learn none other but that saint
Paul in this scripture spoke of the very real and substanciall presence of

THE ONE TWENTETH CHAPTER PROceadeth yet upon the same text by Anselmus, and
Bruno.
Now that we have heard S. Paul expownded by the ancient elders, and learned
writers, that be of all students of the Chrystian faith, to be reverenced and
so received: to bring the matter even home to our time, for that the later
writers be so contemned and without just cause of the adversary rejected, some
Anselmus in Deci. 1. Cor.
of them shall be produced, that trial may yet be made, whether they agree
with these elders, or dissent from them. And first Anselmus his exposition
shall be heard, thus he writes: Panis quem frangimus est participatio
corporis Domini, quia ipse panis quem multis diuidimus, est verum corpus
Domini. Et qui de illo accipiu^t de corpore Domini accipiunt, atque fiunt etiam
ipsi, quod accipiunt. The bread that we The bread divided to many is the body
of our Lord.
break is partaking of the body of our Lord, for that bread, which we divide
to many is the very body of our Lord. And they that do take of yt they
receive the body of our Lord, and they also be made that, that they receive.
Thus Anselmus.

This exposition dissenteth not from the expositions of the elders, but as they
taught that S. Paul speaks here of the very body of Christ, so does this
man also. For says he, the bread which we divide to many is the very body
of our Lord, wherefore they that receive yt, receive the body of our Lord. And
with S. Augustine expownding yt that S. Paul says, that yt is a
communicacion of the body of our Lord, he says that they that receive the
body of Christ, are made that, they receive. For they, that receive yt duly,
are made members of the mystical body of Christ.

But in this exposition the reader is to be advertised that this author, saing
that the bread which we give to many is the body of Christ, meneth, not as
Luther does, that the material bread in the Sacrament, is the very body Joan.
6.
Ego sum panis vitae. Et panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est, quam dabo pro mundi
vita. I am the bread of life, and the bread which I shall give is my flesh,
which I

Not minding to trooble the reader, with long declaracion where the authors
for their plains in sentences need none soch, I shall leave Anselmus, and call
the good holy man Bruno, who was more then four hundredth years Bruno in dec. 1
Cor.
agon. who upon this text makes this exposition: Calix benedictionis, id est,
quem ipse Deus benedicit, and consecrat, and cui nos benedicimus per officium
nostrum. Deus enim hoc efficit per sacerdotem ministrum. Hic itaque calix,
nonne est communlcatio sanguinis Christi? id est, nonne per fanguinem assumptum
vnimur Christo, ipsique conformamur? Et panis, id est, verum corpus Christi,
qui sub specie sola panis accipitur, panis dico, quem nos in altari frangimus,
vt quod vnum est in veritate, licet ita videatur, scindi tamen non potest, hic,
inquam, panis quem frangimus, nonne est participatio corporis Domini? id est,
nonne per hoc corpus, Deum in nobis capimus? eumque nobis incorporamus? Ideo in
duabus substantiis, corporis scilicet and sanguinis, sacrificium Deus hoc
instituit, vt per carnem in altari traditam ostenderet se redimere carnem
nostram per haec sacramenta in incorruptionem quando que transferenda^: and per
sanguine^, que^ tradit, insinuaret se similiter redimisse anima^ nostra^. Ad
quod de anima insinuandu^, quia re incorporali vti non potuit, digne per
sanguinem, qui seeds animaedicitur, anima^ sigurauit. Haec in duas parts
distribuit, vt diuersas parts eius. Qui enim vel sanguinem tantum, vel corpus
solum, totu^ accipit. Qui vtrumque accipit, no^ magis per vtru^que qua^ per
altera^ accipit. Quod corpus sicut vera caro Christi est sub specie panis, ita
per sola^ speciem atteritur, diminuitur, in parts diuiditur, cum in veritate
incorruptibile, indiuisibile, impotens diminui permaneat. The cup, of
blessing, that is to faie, which By the body of Christ received in the B.
Sac. we be incorporated to him: and by his blood we are united to him.
God himself does bless, and which we by our office do bless (for God does
this by his mynister the priest) there for this cup, is yt not a communicacion
of the blood of Christ? that is, are we not, by the blood received united to
Christ and conformed to him? And the bread, that is to say, the body of
Christ, which is taken under the form of bread alone, the bread I say, which
we break in the altar, as which is one in very deed, although yt seems so
to be, yet yt can not be divided, this bread I say, which we break, is yt not
partaking of the body of our Lord? that is to say, do we not by this body
receive God into us? and incorporate him unto us? Therefore God has instituted
this sacrifice in two substances, that is, of his body and his He that
receaueth only under one kind, receaueth as much as he, that receaueth both*
Christ being perfectly in both.
(which is called the seat of the soul) he has figured the soul. These
things he has distributed into two substances, that he should understand his
diverse parts. For he that receaueth the blood only, or the body, he takes
all. He that receaueth both receaueth no more by both then by one. Which
body as the very flesh of Christ is under the form of bread so by the only
outewarde form is yt bruised, diminished, and divided into parts, when in
very deed yt does abide incorruptible, indivisible, and not able to be
diminished. Thus far Bruno.

In this exposition both catholic and learned are many things, worthy of
note, which if I should all touch, I fear I should tarry the reader of the
which first to speak of the bread, which S. Paul says, that we that yt is
the body of Christ, taken under the form bread. And of the cup of blessing,
he says: that we receive the blood by the which we are united to Christ In
that he teaches, S. Paul by the bread and the cup to signify the body and
blood of Christ, as he agrees with the old fathers before alleged, as by
conference ye shall easily perceive: So in that he teaches that we receive
Doctors teaching the body and blood of Christ to be under the forms of bread
and wine.
the same body and blood under the forms of bread and wine, though not in
their sentences, here upon this text alleged, yet in other places, they are in
this matter very plain. S. Ciprian says: The bread which our Lord gave
unto his Disciples, changed, not in outward thape, but in nature, by the
allmightinesse of the word is made flesh. If the nature of the bread be
changed, and by the all mightiness of the word of God made flesh: the
outward forms remaining still, what is yt, but that there is the flesh of
Christ under the outward form of bread, that remains unchanged.

S. Augustine also says under the forms of bread and wine, which we see, we
honor things invisible, that is to say, the flesh and blood of Christ.
Again he says: Li. Senten. Prosperi. Jbidem. In 26. Matthew.
Yt is his flesh which we receive, covered under the form of bread. And yt is
his blood, which we under the form and taste of wine do drink. And
Theophilact says: Yt does appear or seem bread, but yt is flesh. All which
what do they else but plainly teach that the body and blood of Christ be in
the Sacrament under the forms of bread and wine, So that in this poinct this
author teaches nothing diverse or different from the ancient Fathers.

Again where he says that God has instituted this sacrifice in two
substances, that is of the body and blood of Christ, as diverse other have
before done, teaching that S. Paul in this process, does take the body and
blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as a sacrifice: so does this author also.
Wherefore seeing in these poinctes he swarueth nothing from the doctrine of the
Fathers, I see not why any man, upon wilful arrogancy should reiecte him,
but receive him as a witness of the catholic faith declaring unto us the
faith of the Churhe in his time, which is none other but soche as was in the
time of the Fathers, as the comparison or conference of this authors

Now where the Proclamer by an article of his proclamacion imports, Here may
he see moo then one or two, if he list to see affirming the body of Christ to
be under forms of bread and wine.
that we can not show one doctor, that says that the outward shows or
forms of bread and wine remain without their substances: Although yt has been
sufficiently proved in that place, where we have treaicted of transubstancion:
yet here by occasion of these authors alleged we may note the same again.
For when S. Cyprian says, that the bread is changed in nature, but not in
outward show, what does he say, but that the outward show remains, and
that the substance of bread is changed. And when S. Austen says of the
Sacrament that yt is the flesh and blood of Christ that we receive under the
forms of bread and wine, does he not say the same that S. Cyprian said?
except the Proclamer will say, that under the forms of bread and wine, there
be both the substances of the body and blood of Christ, and also the
substances of the bread wine withal, which is to great an absurdity. And to
be short, when Theophilact says that yt does appear bread, but yt is flesh:
And Haymo says, that yt seems bread, else teach but that there be in the
Sacrament the outward shows of bread and wine, and the substance of Chrysts
body and blood, and not the substance

See ye not the^, how great a smooke the Proclamer would make without any
fire? See ye not how great reproache he would lay to the Church See the
malice of the Prorcl. see in what deep sleep of heresy he lies, that can
not, or will not see all these doctors.
without just cause? See you not how greatt bragges he makes without any
grownde to buill then upon? Or raither see ye not how he has provoked matter
to be showed to his shame? So that every man that reads this may well say
yt is a shame for him to say that the catholics have nothing to show for
that they teach: when there is soche plenty produced to prove and confirm
that they say. But as for him self he has nothing that is of any substanciall
authority, to maintein his sainges, but rests only upon his bare bragges,
and his own private authority. Neither do I doubt, but the Proclamer him
self knows yt. Many mo may in this matter be produced. Fear not then,
Reader, neither be thowe cast in doubt, to continewe the old ancient saing
of the church, that thowe hauest seen in the

THE TWO AND TWENTETH CHAP. ENDS the exposition of this text by Dionise, and
Gagneius.
YT shall auaill to declare the continuance of consent of doctrine in all ages,
if we also hear the exposition of Dionise the Carthusian, who was somewhat
nearer to our time then the Calix benedictionis. id est, contentum in calice,
vt pote sanguis Christi, per quem sanguinem benedicimur, id cst, dona gratiarum
consequimur, cui calici seu Dionisius Carthu. in 10. 1. Cor.
sanguini benedicimus, id est, quem consecramus, cum per prolationem sacrorum
verborum, a nobis conuertitur vinum in sanguinem Christi. nonne communicatio
sanguinis Christi est? id est, nonne veraciter est sanguis Christi, nobis
comunicatus seu datus, faciensque nos comunicationem habere cum Christo,
incorporando nos ei, and faciendo nos participes meriti suoe of fusionis. Et
panis quem frangimus, id est, corpus Christi consecratum ex pane, quem panem
consecratum cuius dimensiones seu species frangimus porrigendo eum fidelibus:
nonne participatio corporis Christi est? id est, nonne vtique est corpus
Christi vere acceptum a nobis, faciens nos vnum cum Christo, qui ait: Qui
manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet, and ego in ^eo?
The cup of blessing, that is, the thing contained in the cup that is to
wit the blood of Christ by the which Co^municacion of the blood, is when the
blood of Christ is verily given to us.
blood we are blessed, that is, we obtein gifts of graces, which cup or
blood we bless, that is, we consecrate, where by the prolacion of the holy
words, the wine is turned into the blood of Christ, is it not a
Communicacion his effusion? And the bread which we break, that is, the body
of Christ Participacion of the body is likewise as of the blood is said.


In this as in the other expositions, as ye see much plainness: so ye se no
part of S. Paul his sentence left vnexpownded. But yet as truly: as simply
and plainly. That in the cup S. Paul meent to be the very blood of Christ,
yt is so plainly here spoken, as yt needs no addicion, for better
declaracion. In the which his exposition, that he agrees with all that
hitherto have been induced, the matter being so clear, I trust, ye will be
easily persuaded, for any futher proof to be made by me for the same. And
therefore leaving this author to the discrecion of the reader farther to be
considered, we will descend a little lower to one of this our time, and there
end the exposition of this text of S. Paul.

This shall be Ioannes Gagneius, who treating of this text, does thus open
Ioann. Gagneius in decim. 1. Cor.
Calix benedictionis. cui benedicimus. id est, quem cum gratiarum action
sumimus, noune communicatio sanguinis Christi est? id est, nonne calicem
Christi sumentes, ac sanguinem illius bibentes, cum illo communicamus, and cum
illo commercium nobis esse declaramus? Et panis quem frangimus, id est, corpus
Christi quod sub speciebus panis sumimus, nonne participatio corporis Domini
est, id est, nonne declarat nos partem bahere cum corpore Domini, and in illud
consentire? The cup of blessing which we bless, that is, which we receive
with thanks giving, is yt not a Commucacion of the blood of Christ? that is,
do not we taking the cup of Christ and drinking his blood communicate with
him? and declare us to have an entredoing with him? And the bread which we
break, that is, the body of Christ, which we under the forms of bread do
receive, yt is not a participacion Communicacion and participation of Christ's
body and blood what they be,
of the body of our Lord: that is, does yt not declare us to have part with
the body of our Lord, and into yt to consent? Hitherto Gagneius Who although
he wrote but last day: yet he agrees in the expownding of S. Paul with them
that wrote above thousand years agon. And teaches (as they did) that S. Paul
in this place spoke of the very real presence of the

Now, reader, if thowe wilt gather together the expositions of all these
famous Fathers and learned men, which to show thee, the understanding A brief
rehersall of the doctors alleged for this text.
of S. Paul upon this text* I have here alleged, and lay, them in a brief
before thy face, thowe shall, I suppose, see soche a plain declaracio^ of the
truth so evident, so manifest, so clear, so consonant, so agreing, and so
consenting one with an other, although spoken in diverse ages, in sondrie
churches, and in much difference of times, that I think, thowe wilt wonder
with me that ever men could be so stubbornlie blind that they will not see an
open treuth which can not be so covered, and hidden, with their deuelish
glooses, but yt will allwaie lie above of all men ready to be seen. Chrysoste.


Chrysostom says that this is the meening of S. Paul, that that which is in
the cup, us yt that flowed out of the side. S. Hierom says, that we
partake of the blood of Christ, as he him self says: He that eats my flesh
and drinks my blood etc. Hieron
Which saing of Christ (as there is declared) is spoken of the eating of the
very body of Christ and drinking of his very blood. wherefore. S. Hierom so
Damascen, who can not abide these words of Christ Damascen
(This is my body) to have a figurative sense, says, that in the
participacion, and the communion of the bread we partake the flesh of Christ
and his Godhead also. S. Augustine says that S. Paul speaking this text did
show them to August.
what sacrifice they should pertein, which was to the sacrifice whereby they
should be partakers of the body and blood of Christ. Oecumenius says that
S. Paul calls the cup of the blood of Christ, the cup of blessing. So
that he Oecomen.
takes yt for a cup of Christ's blood. Isidore says that the bread which
we break, is the body of Christ. He says not yt is called, but yt is the
body. Theophilact says that the blood which is contained in the cup, is
the same that Isidorus. Theophil.
flowed out of the side of Christ. Haymo says, that the bread which we
break in the altar, although yt seem bread in very deed, yet yt is the body
of Christ? Anselmus says, that the bread which we brake, and divide to many
is the very body of our Lord, Bruno says, are we not by the blood
received, united to Christ Haymo. Anselm. Bruno.
and is not the bread, that is, the very body of Christ, which seems to be
broken, and is not in deed, do not we by this body receive God into us? and
incorporate him to us? Dionise says, that, that is contained in the cup is
the blood of Christ. by the which blood we are blessed, So that yt is verily
the blood of Christ Dionys.
given unto us, making us to have communion with Christ, and to be partakers of
the merittes of the effusion of the same his bloodd. And last Gagneius says:
that the bread which we break that is to say, the body of Christ Gagneius.
which we receive under the form of bread, does yt not declare us to have
part with the body of our lord?

Does any of these twelve find any trope or figures in the saing of S.
Paul? No, they do all teach yt to be a plain speech, and a plain assercion of
the very body of Christ, and not a bare sign of yt. And here to conclude this
matter, and to make an end of this exposition of this text, I have thought
good to hear the mind of the right godly, and learned Father Roffensis, who,
as all things that he did, so does he handle this text learnedly and pithilie.
Roffen. in proem. li. 5
Thus he says: Poculum benedictionis cui benedicimus, nonne communicatio
sanguinis Christi est? Panis quem frangimus, nonne communicatio corporis
Christi est? Quid hic audimus? figuras ne corporis, and sanguinis Christi?
Nequaquam. sed veritatem corporis and sanguinis, quibus nos vere communicare
Paulus asserit. Profecto si figuram solam hic indicasset Paulus, non adeo
frequenter haec (nulla vspiam figurarum habita mentione) vocasset corpus, and
sanguinem Domini. Sed nec arbitratur Oecolampadius, nos per panem et vinum
suum. communicare corpori and sanguini Christi, sed fidem solam buius
communicationis causam esse contendit. Et certe qui fieri potest vt merus
panis, aut vinum eam efficatiam habeat, vt nos very corporis and sanguinis
Christi reddat participes? Quare consentaneum est vt quum huius panis esu, and
liquoris eius, qui in poculo est potatione, vere corpori, and sanguini Christi
communicamus, eiusdem corporis, and sanguinis veritatem hic adesse, ceu
compertissimum habeamus. The cup of blessing, which we bless, yt is not a
communicacion of the blood of Christ? the bread which we break, is S. Paul
in all his process of the Sacra. makes not one title of mention of any
figure.
yt not a communicacion of the blood of Christ? What hear we here? Figures
of the body and blood of Christ? Not so, but the verity of the body and
blood of Christ, which Paul affirms us verily to communicate. Truly if
Paul had judged hero to be an only figure he would not so often have
Oecolampadius does think, that we by his bread and wine do communicate with
the body and blood of Christ, but he does earnestly affirm that faith
alone is the cause of this co^municacion. An argument grownded on S. Paul to
auouche the real presence:
may have that efficacy, that yt may make us partakers of the body and
blood of Christ? Wherefore yt follows agreablie, that saying by the eating of
this bread, and drinking of that liquor which is in the cupp we do verily
comunicate the body and blood of Christ, that we have yt for most assured
knowledge, that here is present the verity of the same body and blood. Thus
far Roffensis.

I pray thee, reader, weigh well the saing of this reverend Father, and thowe
shall perceive that here is made an argument so pithie and so strong that all
the Adversaries power can not stand against yt. For seeing the Adversary him
sellf affirms that by the receipt of his Sacramental bread, we be not
partakers of the body and blood of Christ, which is true, and S. Paul says,
that by this bread and this drink, we be made partakers of the^, yt must needs
be that this bread, and drink, which the Apostle speaks of, is the very
body and blood, which duly received make us verily partakers of Christ: If
the Apostle had not meant this bread and this drink to

THE THREE AND TWENTETH CHAP. BEGINnith the exposition of this text: Quoniam
vnus panis etc.
IIn the text of S. Paul yt follows; Quoniam vnus panis and vnum corpus multi
sumus, omnes, qui ex eodem pane, et eode^ calice participamus. 1. Cor. 10.
By cause that though we be many: yet we are one bread and and one body, in
asmoche as we all are partakers of one bread and of one cup. Forasmoche as
this text depends upon the Communion with Christ is two ways.
taken for bare figures of the body and blood of Christ, but for the things
them selves, the very body and blood. And where the Apostle speaks of our
communion with Christ, yt is to be noted that we have a double communion with
him. One is spiritual, which we come unto in baptism through the work of
the holy Ghost. of the which S. Paul speaks to the Corinthians, saing: In
vno spiritu omnes nos in vnum corpus baptizati sumus, sieve 1. Cor. 12.
Iudaei, sieve gentiles, sieve serui, sieve liberi. By one spirit are we baptized
to make one body, whether we be Jews, or gentiles, whether we be bond or
free. And again to the Romans: Multi vnum corpus sumus in Christo. singuli
autem alter alterius membra, We being many, are one body in Christ, and every
man emonge us, Romans 12.
one and others members.

And other corporal: which we come unto by the receipt of his body and
blood in the Sacrament, of which S. Paul speaks here. By the first we are
admitted, and as yt were gaffed into the mystical body of Christ, to be
members of the same: by the other we are nourished as with an necessary Nec tu
me mutabis in te sicut cibum carnis tuae: sed tu mutaberis in me. Neither shall
thou change me into thee, as a meat of thy body: but thowe shall be changed
into me.

As there is then a spiritual communion, where by we are joined to Christ, We
have a spiritual communion with Christ by baptism and a corporal by the
Sacr. of his body and blood.
the which we are joined to Christ, and corporally made one with him. If yt
were not so, why then has the Apostle taught us the communion that we have
with Christ by the holy ghost, and Baptism, and now teaches us of an other
communion which we have with Christ, by the receipt of his body and blood?
If they will say that yt is no other neither of any other effect, then the
other by Baptism and the holy ghost: then we may say to them, that then yt
is vainly instituted, for thar yt is supersluouse, seeing that this communion is
done before and is sufficient for the wholl life of man. But that may not be
said. for God woorketh nothing in vain. Wherefore seeing that S. Paul does say
that all we, that do eat of that one bread, and drink of that one cup be
made one bread and one body, there is an other union in the which we are
joined all together, than yt, that we were joined in before by faith, and
Baptism. Holy bread received instead of the B. Sacrament.


For yt is to be thought that none comes to receive this Sacrament, but soche
as be perfect in faith and be baptized. Wherefore in the primitive church,
Cathecumeni, that is, the young scholars or learners of faith, were not
suffered to receive this Sacrament, but instead thereof they received other bread
blessed, as our people now do, when they do not communicate, they receive
holy bread. And the^ being baptized, and having faith, the Adversary will not
deny, but that they be members of Christ's mystical body, and have that
spiritual communion that is done by faith. Wherefore (as before is said) either
by the receipt of the body and blood of Christ, they come into an other
communion: or else they receive that that they had before. But here the Reader
is to be advertised, that as they that receive the spiritual union by
Baptism, receive yt not but with condition: So none can receive this corporal
vnio^ to Christ, but with condition. The Sacraments be received of many, but
not profitablie, as touching the final effect to all that receive, but to some.

Christ has died not only for our sins, but for the sins of all the
world, yet all atteign not remission of sins, which is the effect of the
in the Sacrament, we be as yt is said united and incorporated to Christ, yet
Si ambulauerimus in luce, sicut and ipse est in luce, societatem habemus
adinuicem, 1. Joan. 1.
and sanguis Jesus Christi filii eius emundat nos ab omni peccato. If we shall
walk in light, as he also is in light, we have fellowship together, and the
blood of Jesus Christ the Son of him cleanses us from all sin. Eternal
life is given to us by Christ, but there is a condition annexed. Si vis ad vitam
ingredi serua mandata. If thowe wilt enter into life keep the commandments.
Unity with Christ, as that Christ shall dwell in them, and they in him, that
do eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, is promised to them that so
do, but not without a condition, that is, that they do eat yt woorthilie.
Judas eat the flesh of Christ, and drank his blood, as hereafter shall be
showed. But yet he obtained not the promise, he enioied not the effect, for
not Christ, but Satan abidde in him as the Gospel testifies. Wherefore S.
Paul said not, that you all be one bread, and one body, but many. For
indede as many as shall woorthilie receive that one bread, and drink of that

This also is not to be ouerpassed, that saint Paul says, that we all eat
of one bread, and drink of one cup. Which in my judgment proves very
much, that he took not this bread for bare material bread (as the Adversary
does) for then yt were not true. For all do not eat of one bread. For the
greeks eat leauened bread, and the latins fine and unleavened bread. In the
catholic Church is given to every communicant a sondrie bread. In the
scismaticall church they have not throughout all one bread, but in every
conuenticle a sondrie bread, and sometime in the same conuenticle diverse
breades. For yt were a meruailouse bread that should suffice them all in all
their wicked congregacions. And as before is noted, their bread has no soche
virtue, as saint Paul does attribute unto this bread, and this cup, which
is to make us one body with Christ. Wherefore yt can have no other
understanding but that the bread which S. Jnsermone Decana.
for all. For he is not so received in one altar, that he is not, nor cannot
be in an other. But (as saint Bernarde says speaking to Christ in the
Sacrament) vnius horae momento, ab ortu solis, vsque ad occasum, ab aquilone
vsque ad austrum, praesto es omnibus, vnus in multis, idem in diuersis locis.
In the moment of one hour from the rising of the Sun to the going down of
the same, from the North to the Sowthe thowe art at hand, which art one in
many places, and the very same in diverse places.

For (as Chrysostom says) Quoniam in multis locis offertur, multi sunt
Christi? Nequaquam. Sed vnus vbique est Christus, and hic plenus existens, and
illic plenus, vnu^ corpus. Jn deci. ^. Corn. hom. 17.
For that Christ is offered in many places, be there many Christ's? not so, but
every where one Christ, being full here, and full there, all one body. So that
where S. Paul says, that they are one body, and one bread, that does partake
of that same one bread, and that same one cup, yt is not very fied, nor can
be verified of any other, but of Christ the true bread, which here full, and
there full, of the which one all do partake, and so by that one they all are
made one, I mien as many as do duly receive yt, as is before

THE FOUR AND TVENTETH CHAP. PROceadeth upon the same text by Chrysostom, and
S. Augustine.
AS among philosophers yt is unseemly to auouche any thing without reason:
so among divines specially in matters of controversy, yt is unseemly to
auouche any thing without authority, wherefore to do that, that to a divine
is seemlie, and withal to give advertisement to the Proclamer, who in his
sermon powers out many of his heretical devises in matter of controversy
without authority, although, I have not hitherto without authority, but with
authority expownded this text of S. Paul yet returning to my former order
Quoniam vnus panis, and vnum corpus multi sumus. Quid enim appello, inquit,
communicationem? Idem ipsum corpus sumus. Quid nam est panis? Corpus Christi.
Quid autem fiunt, qui accipiunt? Corpus Christi, non multa. sed vnum corpus.
Nam quemadmodum panis ex multis grauis vnitur, vt minime grana appareant, sed
tamen grana sunt, verum incerta discretione coniuncta: sic and inuicem and
Christo coniungimur. Non en^m ex altero corpore tu, ex altero illeeducatur, sed
ex eodem omnes. Ideo subdit: omnes qui de vno pane participamus. For being
many we are one bread and one body. What do I (says he) call co^municacion?
We are the very same body. What is the bread? The body of Christ* what be
they made that receive yt? the body of Christ, not many but one body. For as
bread is made one of many corns, though they do not appear corns, but yet
they be corns, yet without certain difference joined together: So we both
within our selves, and with Christ are joined together. For thowe

In these words ye see the mind of Chrysostom upon saint Paul, and
therewith ye may see the mind of S. Paul himself. For in the first entry of
the exposition Chrysostom moves not the question in his own person, but in
the person of saint Paul. For after this manner he moves Three things
learned out of S. Paul.
yt: What do I call (says he) communicacion? mening saint Paul, so that,
that is here spoken, is after the mind of saint Paul.

Therefore of saint Paul we may here learn three things, as he is opened of
Chrysostom. The first is, what is communicacion. What yt is we are taught, for
yt is to be all one body. For when S. Paul had said, is not the bread which
we break a communicacion of the body of our Lord? And showing that yt is a
communicacion, and withal what a communicacion yt is, added: For we being
many eating of one bread, and drinking of one Chrysostom says, that
co^municacion, is, we be all one body.

The second thing, what that is, by the eating whereof we are made one body.
Chrysostom expownding S. Paul asks this question: What is the bread that S.
Paul here speaks of. He answers that yt is the body of Christ Note then,
Chrystian Reader, that by Chrysostom yt is evident that S. Paul here by the
bread meant not material bread, but the true bread, the very body of Christ,
which is even that one bread, of the which though we be many, we may all
receive, and by yt being one, we all may be made one both with yt, and within
owre selves, which can not be done by material bread.

And here this is not to be ouerpassed, that some one either of malice, or
ignorance has corrupted and falsefied Chrysostom in this place, that wherein
Chrysosto^ corrupted by the tra^slatour.
the greek Chrysostom asks: what is the bread he altered yt in translation
saing: what does the bread signify? For the trial of this I have not only
seen diverse books in the which this question is thus corrupted, but other
also in which yt is corrected, and besides I have conferred with diverse well
what is the bread? and not what signifies the bread? Soche is the falshead of
Satan and his Angels to corrupt the doctors to maintein their heresy. And
yet if yt might so have been iuggled in, the deuell had been begiled. For yt
could not bear the sense that S. Paul should ask what material bread did
signify, but what the word bread did in that place signify. Whereunto when S.
Paul's answer had been added that that word bread did signify the body of
Christ had yt not made against Satan still? But now that the truth of the
question is: what is the bread? and the answer is, that yt is the body of
Christ, is not Satan now laid flatt upon his back, and Christ's presence
in the holy Sacrament most plainly taught, so plainly, that the Proclamer,
if he will open his eyes, may here see a plain place to induce him into the
plain truth, which truth Chrysostom in that, that follows in this
exposition does very clerelie commend and Christ's flesh of one nature with
our, but free from sin but full of life is mingled with us to deliver us from
sin and to make us immortal.
setfurth?

Thus yt follows there Non enim simpliciter corpus suum tradidit sed cum prior
carnis natura, a terra formata, a peccato mortalis facta, a vita deserta esset,
aliam (vt ita dicam) massam, and fermentum induxit hoc est carnem suam, natura
quidem eandem, verum a peccato liberam, and vitae plenam, quam omnibus tribuit,
vt participes fierent, vt ea nutriti, and priore abiecta, quae mortua erat, per
hanc mensam viuentem, and immortalem, comisceremur. He has not simply
delivered his body, but where the first nature of the flesh, being formed of
the earth, was by sin made mortal, and of life forsaken, he brought in (as I
might say) an other lump and leaven, that is, his flesh, in nature the same,
but free from sin, and full of life, which he has given to all, that they
may be made partakers, that being nourished The immortal table is the
immortal food of the table, that is Chrictes flesh wherewith we are nourished
to immortality.
with yt, and the first, which was dead cast away, by this living and
immortal table, we should be mixed together. Thus Chrysostom.

Do thowe not see here Reader what bread yt is that we be partakers of, by
the which we be mixed together, to be this one body? Chrysostom has plainly
taught that yt is the flesh of Christ in nature all one with our flesh, but
that yt is free from sin, and full of life, which Christ has brought in an
gives to us to the intent we should be partakers of yt. And that there other:
he does by express words declare, that he speaks of the flesh of Christ on
the table. For (says he) he has given us this flesh, that webeing (as
Chrysostom terms yt) which is the flesh of Christ, of which he spoke
before, saing, that yt was free from sin, and full of life. Calling yt then
before full of life, and here living and immortal, there saing, that of yt we
are made partakers, and here by yt, we are mixed together: there that by yt we
are nourished, and here calling yt the meat of the table, argues besides the
continuance of the sentence (which proves the same) that he spoke of one
thing, which is the flesh of Christ, which is on the table, by the nutriment
of which we are partakers of that one bread, and so be made one body and one
bread. And now reader, that thowe hauest heard Chrysostom so plainly
expownding saint Paul, we will leave him and hear saint Augustine, for he
also gives an understanding of this text on this wise: Quia Christus passus
est pro nobis, co^mendauit nobis in isto sacramento corpus and sanguinem suum.
Quod etiam fecit and nos ipsos. Nam and nos ipsius corpus facti sumus, and per
misericordiam ipsius quod accipimus nos sumus. Because Christ has suffered for
us he commended unto us in this Sacrament his body and blood, which also he
has made our selves. For we also are made his body, and August. feria. 2.
Pasch Christ has co^me^ded to us his body and blood in the Sacr.
by his mercy that we receive we be. In this short saing he has declared both
the mean by the which we are made the body of Christ, and that we be the body
of Christ. First he opens the mean saing, that because Christ has suffered
for us, he has commended unto us in this Sacrament his body and blood. Note
the speech of saint Augustine, he says not that Christ has commended unto
us, because he has suffered for us, a figure for a memorial of that his
passion: but he says by plain words, that Christ commended to us his body
and blood. And applieng the cause to the effect afterward he says: By his
mercy we be that we receive. Which in plain speech is, that because we
receive the body of Christ, therefore by his mercy we be the body of Christ.
And to move us to abide in this body of Christ, he proceadeth: Dic mihi, quid
est, ex quo viuit? Spiritus tuus viuit de corpore tuo, an corpus ex spiritu
tuo? Respondet omnis qui viuit: Ex spiritu viuo. Qui autem hoc non potest
respondere, nescio an viuat. Quid respondet omnis qui viuit: Corpus vtique meum
viuit de spiritu meo. Vis ergo viuere et de spiritu Christi? In corpore esto
Christi. Nunquid enim corpus meum viuit de spiritu tuo? Meum viuit de spiritu
meo, et tuum de spiritu tuo. Non potest viuere corpus Christinisi de spiritu
Christi. Inde est quod exponens Apostolus Paulus hunc panem, vnus panis
(inquit) vnum corpus sumus. Tell me, what is that of the which thou live?
does thie spirit live by thie body, or thie body by the spirit? Every one
that lives answers: I live by my spiritte. He that can not this answer, I
can not tell whether he lives. what does every one answer that lives? My
body lives by my spirit. Wilt thou also live by the Spirit of Christ? Be in
the body of Christ. For does my body live by thie spiritte? My body lives
of my spirit, and thy body of thie spirit. The body of Christ can not live
but by the Spiritte of Christ. Therefore yt is that the Apostle Paul expownding
unto us this bread, says: we conversation. But not to be tediouse to the
reader, S. Augustine shall be left

THE FIVE AND TWENTETH CHAPTER proceadeth upon the same text by Damascen and
Haymo.
AS the Adversary uses all the craft subtletie and falshead that he can, to
deceive the simple, and to abduce him, to lead him away and to carry him a
far from the flock and fold of Christ to the intent he shall not desire to
come home again, and if he do: yet for the distance, he shall not find the
way to come, as a sheep, if he be carried but a little way from the flock,
that he went in, he will make great shift to return to yt again: if he be
carried far of, he neither The Adversary leads the simple into many
errors that holden by them he shall not find the way home again.
lead him a great way out of the right way, by many steps, and many
passes, that is into many errors and heresies. For seldom has yt ben seen,
that the Deuell brings a man into one only heresy, but into Diverse,
wherewith that common enemy oftentimes will so delight him, that he shall have
no desire to return home again, or else through plain simplicity, not
perceauing the falshead of heresy, or by malice blinded, he shall be as yt
were plainly ignorant, not able to find the way to return: but so shall
remain in a straung place, and then (which is the woorst of all) he shall
think himself at home, when he is fardest of. Therefore, I say, seeing the
Adversary has so much falshead to bring men to soch great blindness, in to
so great calamity and misery of their souls, yt is our part to seek all the
help of truth to reduce them that be straied, and to stay them that be at
home, that they perish not in that lamentable danger, neither suffer them to
come to

Quia ex vno pane participamus omnes, vnum corpus Christi, and vnus sanguis,
and inuicem Damasce^. li. 4. ca. 14.
membra efficimur, concorporati Christo existentes. Omni igitur virtute
obseruemus, ne participemus participatione haereticorum, neque tribuamus.
Nolite enim sancta dare canibus, inquit Dominus noster, neque seminare
margaritas vestras ante porcos, vt non participes erroris, and malae fidei
eorum efficiamur, atque condemnationis. Si enim omnino vnio est ad Christum,
and ad inuicem: omnino and omnibus comparticipantibus nobis secundum electionem
vnimur. Nam ex electione vnio ipsa fit, non sine nostra sententia, ac
deliberatione. Omnes enim vnum corpus sumus, quoniam ex vno pane participamus,
etc. Bcause we do all partake of one bread, we are made one body of Christ,
and one blood, and members one of an other, being co^corporated unto Christ.
Let us therefore Give not the holy things to dogs, neither sow preciouse
stones before hogs, that we be not partakers their error, and evil faith
and condemnacion. For if the union be wholly to Christ, and wholly one to an
other, we be also united to all that after our

Although occasion be here given to note many things: yet for that I will not
trooble the reader with mo notes then be necessarily appertinent: I will here
make but only two notes. The first is that this author, according to the text
of saint Paul's epistle, says: that because we partake of one bread, we are
one body of Christ. Wherein the Adversary still is impugned. For although this
author with all good catholic men confesses, that we be united to Christ by
faith: yet with them also he affirms that we be nevertheless united to
Christ by a corporal union, for that we do partake his very body and blood.
Which he notes when he says that we be concorporated unto Christ. Which
concorporacion he does not attribute to faith,

Of which co^corporacions, this author makes a plain distinction in an
Damasce^. li. 4. ca. 13.
other place saing: Non simpliciter, and fortuito ad orientem adoramus, sed
quia ex visibili, and inuisibili, id est, intellectuali and sensibili constati
sumus natura, duplicem adoratione^ conditori nostro offerimus, vt and mente
psallimus, and corporalibus labiis: and baptizamur aqua and Spiritu: and
dupliciter Domino vnimur, mysteriis participantes, and gratia spiritus. We are
united to our Lord two ways.
Not simply, and by chance we do adore unto the east: But because we are made
of a visible and invisible, that is to say, of an intellectual and sensible
nature, we offer unto our maker a dooble adoracion, as we do both with mind
and corporal lips sing: and are baptized both with water and spirit: and to
manner of ways we are united unto our Lord, partaking of the mysteries, and by
the grace of the spirit. Thus Damascen.

Do ye not see that we are two ways united to our Lord? Are we not united to
him by the participacion of the mysteries (which mysteries be the Sacraments
of Christ's body and Christ's blood) and by the grace of In. 6. Joan. ca. 14.


For as S. Cyrill says: Oportuit enim certe, vt non solum anima per spiritum
sanctum in beatam vitam ascenderet, verumetiam vt rude, atque terrestre hoc
corpus cognato, sibi gustu, tactu, and cibo ad immortalitatem reduceretur.
Truly yt behooved, that not only the soul by the holy Ghost should ascend
into the blessed life: But that also this rude and earthly body with a taste,
touching, and meat of his nature, should be reduced to immortality. Thus S.
Cyrill.

As both the visible, and invisible, the mortal and immortal parts of man
Both body and soul of man releiued by Christ, and how yt is done.
had need of releif, and both these most conveniently might be releiued by
his like in nature, therefore Christ, having the likes of these two in his
person, that is to say, the immortal nature of the Godhead and the
imperfection of our two parts. For where the soul had infirmity by sin,
Remittuntur tibi peccata tua. Thy sins be forgeuen thee.

By this part where the soul was spoiled of spiritual gifts, and
impouerished for lack of the same, he was able to enriche her, and adorn her,
with the first and chiefest gifts, as with faith, hope, and charity.

As touching our other part, yt received great and singular benefittes by the
like part of Christ, I mean by his body. For by his body be cured many
diseases, he raised the dead, and wrought great woo^ders, by his body now
immortal he makes our mortal bodies duly receiving the same, to In 6. Ioon
ca. 14.
come, at the time by him assigned, to immortality, as S. Cyrill says: Non
verbo solum, sed and tactu mortuos excitabat, vt ostenderet corpus quoque suum
viuificare posse. Quod si solo tactu suo corrupta redintegrantur, quomodo non
viuemus, qui carnem illam and gustamus, and manducamus? Reformabit enim omnino
ad immortalitatem suam, participes sui. Ne velis iudaice (quomodo) quaerere,
sed recordare quamuis aequa naturaliter frigidor sit: aduentu tamen ignis
frigiditatis suae oblita aestuat. He did not by his word (how) but remember
that although the water be naturally cold, yet by the coming to of fire,
forgetting her coldness yt waxes hot. Thus S. Cyrill. So then according as
Damasen said, as to our duty yt apperteineth to honor God with the two
parts of our compownded body, both spirituallie, and corporally: So God of
his mercy helps both these parts, geuinge to each of them gifts uniting
us spirituallie to him by faith and charity, and corporally by his body and
blood received in the Sacrament, By the which (as S. Cyrill has said) he
will reform this mortal body of our to his immortality.

Therefore, Reader, look to thie self, and be not seduced with the heresy of
the Adversary. Weigh well the sainges of the holy and ancient Fathers,

But yt is time that I show the second note in the saing of Damascen. The
Communion aught not to be had with heretics.
second note is his admonition that we beware with all diligence that we do
not communicate with heretics. neither ministre the Sacrament unto them, For
if we do we partake of their evil faith and condemnacion. This admonicion, as
yt is good: so is yt necessary to be kept. For yt is agreeable to the
scriptures. For as this place of S. Paul to the Corinthians, does forbid
them, that they should not be partakers with Idolaters in their Idolathites,
for then they should enter into fellowship with Deuells: so does yt forbidd
us to be partakers with heretics. For if we do we enter into fellowship with
them, we seem to consent to their wicked heresy, and so to be 2 Joan.
partakers of the same, wherefore S. John gave streict charge, saing: Si quis
venit ad vos, and hanc doctrinam non adfert, nolite eum recipere in domum, nec
aue ei dixeritis:

So far wide was yt from the mind of the Apostle that we should enter into
the house of God with heretics, and their to ioin with them in the partaking
of sacraments, that he would that we should not receive them For he that
bids him God speed is partaker of his evil deed: And to the intent this his
admonicion should be the better regarded, and the danger of the breach thereof
well known to them, and feared, he concludes thus: Behold I have told you
before, that ye should not be ashamed in the day of our Lord., In this saing
of S. John yt is easy to perceive that yt is daungerouse to ioin with
heretics, and specially in the communion of sacracmentes. For if we do, we
shall be confownded in the day of our Lord.

If S. Paul did earnestly require the Thessalonians and that in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, they should with draw them selves from every brother
that did walk inordinatelie, and not after the tradicion which 2 Tessalo^ 3.
they had received, should we not withdraw our selves from them, which do not
only walk inordinately but do with all that in them lies labor

S. Paul wills that with fornicators, adulterers, dronkers, and idolaters we
should not asmoch'as eat meat. Therefore with the other yt is without 1 Cor.
5.
doubt, that we should have no fellowship, nor meddle with them, and
specially in the communion of sacraments. And as yt is not laufull for the
true chrystian to communicate with them in the sacraments of the catholic
Church: no more is yt laufull for him to communitate with any in the new
forged sacraments of the congregation of heretics, for like peril enseweth
upon both.

But let not the reader take me that I mien that they, which ignorantly
Heretics how, they must be avoided.
not knowing them to be soche, incur any soche danger, if they communicate
with them: But I mien of them who knowing soch to be heretics, will yet
communicate with them. They undoubtedly incur the danger. Haereticum
hominem post vnam and alteram admonitionem deuita, sciens quia subuersus est,
qui eiusmodi est, and delinquit, cum sit proprio indicio condemnatus. A man
that is an Heretic after the first and second admonicion Tit. 3.
avoid, knowing that he who is soch is perverted, and sins eue^ damned by
his own judgment.

According to this rule the people knowing Macedonius to be a, notable Eccl.
hist. tripar. li. 4. ca. 39. and li. 5. ca. 30
heretic did both men and women so avoid him, that they would not, although
enforced with great and cruel torments, once communicate with him, as in the
Tripartite history yt is more at large declared.

In the primitive Church this matter was so straightly observed, that by the
Canons of the Apostles is was ordained, that Bishop, priest or Deacon, Can.
45.
which did but only pray with heretics, should be put from the comunion.
if they suffered them to do any thing as clerks, they should for their soche
permission be deprived from their office. Although there be many Damascen,
which although breiflie, yet with dumb scilence I could not ouerpasse yt,
perceauing In. 10. 1. Cor.


And now here shall be place for Haymo, whom I have thought good to ioing with
Damascen because his sentence is but short, and yet does plainly express the
mind of S. Paul. Thus he says, Diuinitas Verbi, quae implet coelum and
terram, and omnia quae in eis sunt, ipsareplet corpus Christi, quod a multis
sacerdotibus per vniuersum orbe^ sanctificatur, and facit vnu^ corpus Christi
esse. Et sicut ille panis et sanguis in corpus Christi transeunt: ita omnes,
qui in Ecclesia digne comedunt illum, vnum The God head silleth the body of
Christ, which is sanctified of the priest.
corpus Christi sunt, sicut and ipse dicit: Qui manducat carnem meam, and bibit
sanguinem meum, in me manet, and ego in eo. The Godhead of the Son which
fills heaven and earth and all that in them is, that same fills the body
of Christ, the which is sanctified of many preistes, throughoute all the
world, and makes one body of Christ to be. And as that bread and blood do
pass into the body of Christ: even so all that in the Church do woorthilie
eat yt, they are one body, as he himself says: He that eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood, dwells in me and ^n him. Thus much Haymo.

Do ye not in these few lines see these two things, that is, that in the
Sacrament is the very body of Christ and his very blood: and also that all
The excellency of the blessed Sacrament.


And if they will reject this author so sainge, by cause he was (as some
account) Haymo his doctrine co^ferred with the elder fathers.
within the compass of these thousand years: In deed if he were not a full
thousand years agone, he is very near. But who gives this wicked In deci. 1.
Cor. homil. 24.


Among other Chrysostom most plainly does say yt even upon this chapter, in
this manner: Absterge ab omni sorde animam tuam. Praepara mentem tuam ad horum
mysteriorum perceptionem, Etenim si puer regius purpura and diademate ornatus
tibi ferendus traderetur, nonne omnibus humi abiectis eum susciperes? Verum
nunc cum non hominis regium puerum, sed vnigenitum Dei filium accipias, Dic
queso, no horrescis? and The only be gotten Son of God is received in the
B. Sacr.
omnium secularium rerum amorem abiicis? Make clean thy soul from all
filthiness, prepare thy mind to the receipt of these mysteries. For if the
kings child decked with purple and diadem were delivered to thee to be born,
would not thowe, all other things cast down on the grownde, receive him? But
now when thowe take not the child of a king a man, but the only begotten
Son of God, tell me, I pray thee, art thowe not afearde?

In this sentence Chrysostom being in exhortacion that men should prepare
them selves woorthilie to receive the blessed Sacrament, does he not by plain
words tell them, that they receive the only begotten Son of Qui Christi
carnem manducat, vitam habet aeternam. Habet enim haec caro Dei Verbum quod
naturaliter vita est. He that eats the flesh of cap. 15. in 6. Joan. The
flesh of Christ in the Sacr. has the Son of God joined to yt
Christ, has everlasting life. For this flesh has the Son of God, which is
life naturally. As the sentences of these two Fathers be, that the Sacrament
contains and has the body of Christ, and the Godhead also, and so very
Christ God and man: so is the concord sentence of all the rest of the holy
ancient fathers. But to show that Haymo is agreeable to the catholic and
ancient faith, these two may suffice.

Now yt were a meruailouse kind or manner of teaching, if these fathers meant,
that in the Sacrament were no presence, but that yt is a bare sign or figure,
that they would teach that yt is the very only begotten Son of God, as
Chrysostom does. And that yt is the flesh of God, that has the Godhead joined
to yt (as S. Cyrill saieh) and never as much as once to teach that yt is not
Christ in deed, or only a figure of him. Can any man

THE SIX AND TWENTETH CHAP. PROCEAdeth upon the same text by S. Cyrill, and S.
Thomas.
THough the plenty of testimonies may, and (as I am sure) does offend the
Adversary, (for the more testimony against him, the more confusion) yett I
doubt yt not, but on the other side yt does as well delight and also comforth
the catholic chrystian. Therefore we shall not refuse to hear S. Cyrill, how
he understands S. Paul in this text. In diverse places he makes mention of
this text, very plainly declaring how he understands yt, but most plainly
upon the xvii. chapter of S. John where he says thus: Cum trinitas vnum natura
sit, consideremus quomodo etiam nos ipsi inter nos corporaliter, and cum Deo
spiritualiter Cyril. in 17 Joan.
vnum sumus. Ex Dei patris substantia, vnigenitus prodiens, and totum in sua
natura genitorem possidens, carofactus secundum scripturam est, seque ipsum
naturae nostrae, ineffabiliter coniunxit atque vniuit. Qui enim natura Deus
est, vere homo factus est: non Theophorus, id est, Deum in se per gratiam
habens, vt mysterii vim ignorantes contendunt, sed verus deus simul and homo
est. Sic quae inter se plurimum distant secundum naturam in vno seipso
coniunxit, and naturae diuinae nos participes effecit. Communicatio enim
Spiritus and (vt ita dicam) mansio, primum in Christo fuit, and ab eo in nos
penetrauit, cum homo factus, ipse templum suum proprio spiritu perunxit, atque
sanctificauit. Origo ergo and via qua Spiritu sancto participamus, and Deo
unity sumus, Christi misterium est. Omnes enim in illo sanctificamur. Vt igitur
inter nos and Deum, singulos vniret, quamuis corpore simul and anima distemus,
modum tamen adinuenit consilio Patris, and sapientiae suae congruentem. Suo
enim corpore credentes per Communionem mysticam benedicens, and secum, and
inter nos, vnum corpus effecit. Quis eos qui vnius sancti corporis vnionem in
vno Christo vni tisunt, ab hac naturali union alienos putabit? Nam si omnes
vnum panem manducamus, vnum omnes corpus efficimur: Diuidi enim, atque seiungi
Christus non patitur. idcirco etia^ Ecclesia corpus Christi facta est, and nos
singuli membra Christi, secundum Paulu^, vni enim Christo per corpus suum
coniuncti, quoniam in nobis illum, qui est indiuisibilis, accepimus, ipsi
potius, quam nobis membra nostra accommodantur.

Forasmoche as the Trinity in nature is one, let us consider how we ourselves
among our selves corporally, and with God spirituallie are one. The By the B.
Sacrament Christ makes us one body in his body and among our selves
and the way by the which we participate the holy Ghost, and be united to God
is the mystery of Christ. For in him we are all sanctified. Therefore that he
might unite every one betwixt our felfes and God, (all though both in body and
soul we differ much) yet he fownd away agreing to the counsel

Ye have heard the long saing of this worthy Father, and yet in my
judgment, as pleasant and profitable, as yt is long. For he has made a full
discourse of the union of us to God. For plain declaracio^ whereof, this if you
have marked may be perceived, that first he has taught the unity of God the
Son in nature with God the Father. Secondarelie, the union of the nature of
God, and the nature of man, in the person of Christ, which although men
senerall and distinct in persons, which although they be distante and By
receipt of the body of Christ all worthy receauers are made one.
union of his holy body in a natural union, and so they become one body.
And to prove this he takes this text of S. Paul, which is now in hand, saing.
Nam si omnes vnu^ pane^ manducamus, vnu^ omnes corpus efficimur. For if we all
eat of one bread, we are all made one. So that as he gave the cause of the
unity of the Father and the Son in Godhead, which was for that they be one
in nature. And as he showed the mea^ of the vnio^ of the naturs of God and man,
which was brought to pass by the mystery of the incarnacio^: So he taught
the communion of us among our selves, and with Christ to be by that, that we
all receive that his one body. And that there should be no invention added to
pervert the truth of his intent and purpose, he says: that we are all with
his body by the mystical communion made one body. By which his saing yt is
most evidently to be perceived that he teaches not only a communion by a
bare sacrament, but a communion by the very body of Christ in the sacrament.
Which communion also is not a spiritual communion only, but a natural
communion by the receipt of the natural body of Quis enim cos, qui vnius
sancticorporis union, in vno Christo unity sunt, ab hac naturali union
alienos putabit? Who shall think them strange from this natural communion,
which by the union of one holy body are united in one Christ?

I trust, I shall not need any more to note upon this allegacion, but that by
this yt may well be perceived how he understands the text of S. Paul to be
spoken of communion of Christ's body and blood, by the which, besides the
communion spiritual, which is by faith and charity, we communicate
naturally with Christ, by the receipt of his natural body in Communion and
union both spiritual and natural by the B. Sa.
the Sacrament.

And that S. Paul meant that we do so communicate yt appears most evidently
by this holy father, who reasoning against one that said the contrary whose
heresy the witnesses of iniquity, the new masters of our time, have neuely
skoured, and set abroad as sale ware to the world, as they have a nombre mo,
did thus write: Verum quoniam nulla nos ratione, humanitati Christi posse
tribuere ista, arbitratur, quonia^ fide ac dilectione non carne, illi
coniuagimur: Cyrill. in 15 Joan. ca. 6.
Age pauca de hoc dicamus, ac perverse ab eo sacrarum litterarum sensum exponi
ostendamus. Non tamen negamus nos recta fide, charitateque sincera Christo
spiritualiter coniungi: sed nullam nobis coniunctionis rationem secundum carnem
cum illo esse, id profecto pernegamus, idque a diuinis scripturis omnino
alienum esse dicimus. Quis enim dubitauit Christum etiam sic vitem esse, nos
vero palmites, qui vitam inde nobis acquirimus? Audi Paulum dicentem, quia
omnes vnum corpus sumus in Christo: Quia and si multi sumus, vnum tamen sumus
in eo. Omnes enim vno pane participamus, But sorasmoche as he supposes that we
by no means can apply this to the humanity of Christ, for that we are
conioined to him by faith and charity, and not by flesh. Go to, let us say a
few words of this matter, and let Conjunction of us to Chrysse by faith and
charity spirituallie, by his flesh naturally both avouched.
us show the sense of the holy scripturs peruersly to be expownded of him.
Yet for all that we deny not that we be joined spirituallie to Christ by right
faith and sincere charity, but that we have no manner of conjunction with him
after the flesh, that truly, we utterly deny, and we say that to be
altogether contrary to the divine scriptures. For who has doubted for
alltho we be many: yet we are one in him. For we do all partake of one

Do ye not here see that S. Cyrill brings in this text of S. Paul, to prove
that we have not only a communion spiritual with Christ, but also a
communion after the flesh? What plainer exposition can be desired for the
understanding of the scripture, then that sense in the which yt is alleged
in argument to convince an heresy? And if saint Cyrill did judge him
per^erslie to expownde the scriptures that said, that we had no corporal The
Proclamer and his fellows setfurth that for a truth now, which S. Cyrill
reputed an heresy.
communion with Christ, but only spiritual, what shall we say of the
fautours of the like untruth? Shall we not say, that they also peruerslie,
expownde the scriptures? And shall we not woorthilie repute them as corrupters
of Gods truth, and deceauers of his people, which settfurth that to them for
a truth which was so many hondreth years agon reproved as a falsheade, and
so of all catholics, and good Chrystians holden and esteemed? no doubt but
God will so declare yt, when yt shall please him to take his time to overthrow
their building. Endure veritas vincet. The truth shall overcome, and veritas
Domini manet in aternum. The truth of our Lord abides for ever. Yt may be
impugned, but overthrown yt can not be. What the truth is in this matter, I
trust yt may easily be perceived, and yet there lack no witnesses for the
better declaracion of the same.

S. Thomas a man approved as learned and holy of all the church, has
travailed in the exposition of the scriptures, and that not without his
immortal laud and praise. He is a worthy witness in this matter. And for
the fuller understanding of him, we will hear his exposition on both the
textes jointly as they lie one depending of the other. Thus he says: Et
panis quem frangimus, id est, sumptio panis fracti in altari noune participatio
corporis Domini est? faciens no^ vnum cum Christo? quia sub specie panis,
sumitur corpus S. Thomas Aqui. in deci. 1. cor.
Christi. Deinde cum dicit: Quoniam vnus panis, etc. ostendit quod omnes sumus
vnum in corpore eius mystico, and tangit duplicem vnitatem: primam
incorporationis, qua in Christum transformamur, aliam vitae and sensus, quam a
Christo capite accipimus, quasi diceret: Per hoc patet quod vnuni sumus cum
Christo, quoniam vnus panis union fidei, spei, and charitatis, and vnum corpus
multi sumus, per subministrationem operum charitatis: Corpus seilicet illius
capitis, qui est Christus. Multi dico: scilicet omnes qui de vno pane, id est,
corpore Christi, and vno calice, id est, sanguine participamus, digna
participatione scilicet spirituali, non tantum sacramentali.

And the bread which we break, that is to say, the receiving of the bread
broken on the altar, is yt not a partaking of the body of our Lord Under the
form of bread is received the body of our Lord.
making us one with Christ? For under the form of bread is received the body
of Christ. The^ when he says: For we are one bread, etc. he shows that we
are all one in his mystical body, and he touches a double unity: The first
is the unity of incorporacion, by the which we are transformed into Christ.
The other is of life, and feeling, which we take of Christ our head. As who the
subministracion of the works of charity, that is to say: the body of that
head, which is Christ. I say, many, that is to say, all we that do partake

In whose exposition we find nothing dissonant from the elders, but in all
consona^t. The elders before alleged have expownded the bread and the cup
which we partake of, to be the body and blood of Christ: so does S. Thomas
his doctrine consona^t to the elders.
this S. Thomas. They have taught that S. Paul's mindeys, that by that
participacion we are made one body with Christ: and the like teaches he also.
Thus as God is the God of peace and concord: so in his house is agreement and
consent, in the substanciall poinctes of our faith and religion: And this is a
truth hitherto constantly, as yt were, with one mouth taught that the bread
broken in the altar or table of Christ, is his body, and all we woorthilie
receiving yt, are by the same incorporated to Christ and made one body with
him. Wherefore, we shall now leave these, and hear

THE SEVEN AND TVENTETH CHAPTER proceadeth upon the same text by Euthym. and
Hugo.
AS God has builded his church upon a Mount to be seen of all men: so has he
caused his truth to be professed of many, that yt might be known to all men.
He sent his Apostles into all the woorlde to preach the Gospel to every
creature. He has appointed learned men in every part of the world to give
the true understanding of the same to every creature. Praised therefore be his
holy name, that where now Satan has sent his wicked mynistres to corrupt the
truth of the Gospel, and to lead us from the true understanding of the same,
our merciful Lord God has prouidentlie before provided soche teachers, by
whom we may not only see the falshead of the wicked: but also have
sufficient knowledge and testimony to rebuke, detect, and convince

Of all these that remain first comes to hand the learned grecian Euthymius,
who without all dark manner of speech opens to us the true understanding
Euth. in 26 Matthew.
of S. Paul's saing. Thus he writes: Quemadmodum panis confortat: ita and
Christi corpus hoc facit, ac magis etiarn, corpus and animam sanctificat. Et
sicut vinum taetificat: ita and sanguis Christi hoc facit, and insuper
praesidium efficitur. Quodsi de vno corpore and sanguine omnes fideles
participamus, omnes vnum sumus per ipsam horum Flesh united to the Son of God
by assumption, the same united to us by participacion.
mist eriorum participationem and in Christo omnes, and Christus in omnibus.
Qui edit (inquit) meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet, and ego
in eo. Verbum siquidem per assumptionem carni vnitum est, baec rursus caro
vnitur nobis per participationem. As bread does comfort, so does the body of
Christ also this, and more, yt sanctifies both body and soul. And as wine
does make glad: and Christ in all, he that eats (says he) my slesh, and
drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him. For truly the Son of God is
united to the flesh by assumption. This flesh again is united to us by
participacion. Thus Euthym.

I need not (as to me yt seems) to say any thing to the opening of this
authors mind. For he is both plain in himself, and also plainly does open
the mind of saint Paul unto us. Whose sentence he sets forth in the plain
terms, and leaves the tropes. For where saint Paul says, that we that
eat of one bread, and drink of one cup are one body. He says that we
that partake of one body and blood are made one. So that where the text
calls Bread and cup in S. Paul mee^ the body and blood, etc.
yt bread: the expositour calls yt the body, and what the text calls the
cup, that this author calls the blood. Wherefore the true mening must be
taken, as the expositour does expownde yt. For somoche then as the expositour
does expownd the bread and the cup, calling them the body and the blood: yt
can not be avoided but that yt is so, except the Adversary will say that the
text expowndeth the exposition. For unto that sense that he would wrest all the
authors unto, the text is more nearer then the exposition. The adversary
would have yt bread, and the text calls yt

But thowe, Reader, be thowe sure that Christ who has promised his holy
spiritte to his Church, which is the pillour of the truth, has not left yt
contratie to his promise destitute of this guide of truth these thousand
years, but yt was that Spirit, that did lead the mind and the pen of
these holy Fathers to understand and perceive the true sense of the scriptures,
and so to write yt to us.

God has left unto us bread, even the holy scripture to feed us withal: but
as he bid his Apostles to break the bread, that he had Joan. 6. Bread of
the word of God how yt is broken.
blessed for the sieve thousand people: so by his mynistres in the church

This also is not to be ouerpassed, that this Author leaves yt not untaught
how we are made all one in Christ, because (says he) we do all partake of
one body and blood, we are all made one by the participacion of the
mysteries. So that although he well knew that we are all made one in Christ by
faith and charity: be perceived what manner of union this is, of the which he
speaks He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I
him: mening thereby to prove this union, he by most plain words opens the
same, saing. The Son of God is united to the flesh by assumption: this flesh
again is united to us by participacion, whereby yt is very manifest that we are
united to Christ by the union of his flesh. For that flesh unto the which the
Son of God was united, that same is united to us. Christ was united to us by
his incarnacion, we be united to him by participacion etc.
So that, as Christ was united to us by taking of our flesh in his incarnacion,
and so was made one with us: In like manner, we are united to him by the taking
of his flesh in the Sacrament, and are thereby made one with him. Wherefore note
that he says not, that we are in the receipt of the Sacrament united to
Christ by faith, but by participacion of his flesh. And yet this author was
not ignorant, that we are also united to Christ by faith. But minding to open
the peculiar commodity of this mystery he teaches that by flesh we are
united to Christ.

Consider therefore, Reader, that where the Adversary trauaileth to obscure and
hide the benefittes of God which he gives to the worthy receauers of his
blessed and honorable Sacrament: we on the other side labor to (which only
union the Adversary teaches) but also the union by the flesh of Christ, by
the which thou art verily united to him, being now of his flesh, as he by
his incarnacion is of thy flesh, as this author has said.

These two poinctes then, I trust, be made clear, that in the Sacrament is The
natural flesh of Christ in the B. Sac. couseth natural unity of us to Christ.
the very substanciall and natural body of Christ, and that the worthy
receauers of yt are united and incorporated to Christ, spirituallie by faith:
and also naturally by the flesh of Christ. Which conjunction is taught of
saint Cyrill to be so necessary, that he thinks that our mortal body
could not atteign to immortality if yt should not be so joined to this
living and immortal flesh of Christ. Non poterat aliter corruptibilis haec
natura corporis ad incorruptibilitatem and vitam traduci, nisi naturalis vitae
corpus ei coniungeretur. This corruptible nature, of the body (says he)
could not otherwise be brought to incorruptibilitie and life, except the body
of natural Cyrill. 15. cao. in 6. Ioac.
life should be joined to yt. And (says he) if thowe beleuest not me saing
these things, I beseech thee believe Christ, saing: verily I say unto you,
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
have no life in you.

Whether that saint Cyrill here speaks of this natural conjunction of the
natural body of Christ, to our natural and corruptible body yt is more
manifest then yt needs either probacion or declaracion. As for Euthymius if
the Adversary would wrest him, and corrupt him, yt can not be suffered. For
where he speaks these words here alleged, within a very few lines before
he speaks of the transmutacion of the bread and wine into the body and
blood of Christ, and therewith expownding the words of Christ: This is my
body: denies by express words, any figure to be in these words of
Christ. Wherefore as he is a his assertion. But the Adversary may wax red for
shame, when he shall see

And now that this grecian has so notably testified the truth, and opened
the very true faith of Christ's Parliament house, what yt was in his time, and
before: Behold here comes one of the latin church, being of these later
days, which, to try concord and consent in faith to be in both their sides,
and in both their times and ages, shows what was professed throughoute the
latin church in his time, who in the exposition of this text of S. Paul says
thus: Dico quod vnum sumus cum Christo, per sumptionem sacramenti Eucharistiae,
Quoniam omnes quidem participamus, id est, participes efficimur, vel quoad
speciem, vel quoad effectus co^mumonem. vnde been dicit participamus, propter
diuisionem, quae fit aliquando in specie panis, vel propter effectus diuersos,
quos habent ipsi sumentes. Altam enim gratiam recipit ille, aliam ille sumendo
digne Sacramentum illud. Qui de vno pane, id est, de corpore Christi and de vno
calice, id est, de sanguine Christi, licet multi sumus participamus. Non dicit
omnes, quia non omnes, qui sumunt hoc sacramentum effectum Hugo Card in Dec. 1.
Cor.
illius recipient, and ideo non sunt vnus panis, quo reficiatur Dominus, nec
vnum corpus cum Christo. Licet (inquam) multi, tamen sumus vnus panis per
vnionem fidei, spei, and charitatis. Quae unto initiatur in fide, and
consummatur in charitate. Et vnum illius capitis, quod est Christus. I say
that we are one with Christ by the receipt of the Sacrament of the altar. For
we do all partake, that is to say, we are made partakers, either as touching
the form or else as touching the effect of the communion. Wherefore he says
well, that we partake, for the division All we partake of one bread. that is
the body of Christ and of one cup that is the blood of Christ.
which is done sometime in the form of bread, or else for diverse effects
which the receauers have. For he receaueth one grace, and he another,
receiving the Sacrament woorthilie, which although we be many, do partake of
one bread, that is to say, of the body of Christ, and of one cup, that is,
of the blood of Christ. He does not say, all, for all that do receive this
Sacrament do not receive the effect of yt. And therefore they be not one bread,
with the which our Lord may be fed, neither one body with Christ.
Although (I say) we be many: yet we are one bread by the the union of faith,
hope and charity, which union is bego^ne

In this author as in the rest before alleged owre two chief poinctes,
which are here sought, are plainly taught. For he does both teach the
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament: and also that by the receipt of
that body, we are made one with Christ. As touching the first, as the other
author last before alleged, expownded these words (The bread, and the
cup) to be the body and blood of Christ: so this author likewise
expowndeth the bread and the cup to be the body and Blood of Christ:
Wherefore betwixt them is goodly consent, soche as although they were so far
distant in time and place: yet in this they be not a finger breadeth a sondre,
but even jointly together. I need therefore no more to trauaill in this, the
matter is clear in yt self.

The other poinct is likewise as plainly settfurth to us. For in the first
entry he says, that by the receipt of the Sacrament, we are made one with
Christ, if by the Sacrament, then not by faith only: if by the Sacrament, not
by And all Chrystians can not be made one, but by that that is one thing to us
all, of the which all we be partakers. And in the Sacrament can nothing be

In this union we are not only one bread: but also, by S. Paul, one body.
Which distinction of union, this author seems to refer or apply to the
several unions before treacted of: as to the union spiritual by faith, and to
the union natural of us to the natural body of Christ. As touching the
first, he says, that although we be many: yet we are all one bread, by the
union of faith, hope and charity. As for the second, he says that we are
one body of that head, which is Christ. The fitst is mere spiritual, and is
and may be done without the Sacrament, although not so certainly, nor so
perfectly.

For Dionysius Areopagita says: this Sacrament is omnium sacramentorum
consummatissimum, Dionys. Areop. Eccle. Hielar. 1. part. ca. 3.
so perfect in yt self, and also for that yt perfecteth all other Sacraments,
as the same Dyonise also more at large says: Dicimus ergo caetera sacrarum
rerum signa, quorum nobis societas indulgetur, huius diuinis profecto,
consummantibusque muneribus perfici. Neque enim ferme fas est saccrdotalis
muneris mysterium aliquod peragi nisi diuinum istud Eucharistiae
augustissimumque sacramentum complete. We say therefore, that the other signs
of holy things, the society of the which is given to us, to be perfected by
these divine and consummating gifts. Neither is yt laufull almost any
mystery of the preistlie office to be full done, except this divine Sacrament
and most full of majesty do finish or perform yt.

Wherefore as by Chrysostom and other yt may be perceived, in the primitive
church they that were baptized, were brought from baptism to the receipt of
the blessed Sacrament of Christ's body as therbie to be perfected in Christ,
and certainly to be united to him both by faith, and also by his blessed body.
Although then by faith we be spirituallie united to Christ

Now as touching the second union, which this author speaks of, yt is not
likewise mere corporal as the other is mere spiritual, but yt is so
corporal, as yt is nevertheless spiritual. According as the body of Christ
is, which we receive, which although yt be a very true and perfect body, Amb.
de init. myste. cap. 9.
yet yt is spiritual, as S. Ambrose says: Corpus enim Dei corpus est
spiritale. Corpus Christi corpus est diuini spiritus. The body of God, is a
spiritual body. The body of Christ is the body of the divine spiritte. Yt
is also spiritually received for that yt is done only by the knowledge of
faith, and not of any sense. Although the office of senseis, and also of the
body be required to the receipt thereof.

So then as the body of Christ is so corporal, as yt is also spiritual, and
the receipt of the same body so corporal, as yt is nevertheless spiritual:
Receipt of Christ's body both corporal and spiritual.
so also the union brought to effect by the same receipt, yt is verily
corporal, union he says that we be one body. For proof whereof that he so
plainly Ephesians declares which he brings to open the true sense and mening
of S. Paul here. For (says he) we are members of his body, of his flesh and
of his bones* which words that they be understood of our corporal union
with Christ, yt is more manifestly declared by Iraeneus, then by the
Adversary yt can Li. 5. aduers. here is.
be denied.

Thus hitherto of so many ancient and learned authors, ye have heard no
dissonante, but a consonante voice, all sownding one thing, that by the receipt
of the blessed body of Christ in the Sacrament we be united to Christ, and
made one with him.

THE EIGHT AND TWENTETH CHAP. PROceadeth upon the same text by Oecumenius, and
Anselmus.
I Read in the fourth book of the Kings, that the King of Syria, 4. Reg. 6.
Eliseus the Prophet disclosed to the king of Israel the secrett counsels,
intentes, and pourposes of the said King of Syria, that he sent an army of
men to the city where the Prophet lay to take him. And when the seruante of
the Prophet went forth in the morning and saw so great a multitud with horses
and chariottes compassing the city rownde above, he cried, and said, Alas
master, what shall we do? The Pprophete said unto him: Fear not, here be mo
with us them with them. And when the Prophet had prayed, the eyes of his
seruaint were opened, and he saw the mowntain full of horses, and chariottes
of fire rownde about the Prophet.

As the Prophet was thus strenghtned with so great a multitude, that his
enemies were not able to preuaill against him, though his seruante knew yt
not, and therefore feared and cried: Even so the very prophet of God in the
Church of Christ, who has given him self over to the service of God, Syria
has now moved war against the King of Israel: that is, Satan against
Christ the King of very Israel, and his catholic kingdom his Church: and
has for the better expedicion of his purpose sent an army to kake away the
prophet and godly learned man, that he should not warn the people of
Israel of the assaute of Satan, which he entendeth to move by heresy,
schism, division, and subversion of all good order in the Church of Christ:
He does, I say, well see, that the proud and cruel king is not able to
carry him away out of the kingdom of Christ, into his kingdom. For he is
compased abowte with a most mighty army of the noble soldiers of God, all the
holy catholic fathers, godly writers, and noble Martirs, which stand by him
mightily in the confession of Christ's holy faith, which nombre being
infinite, he may (as every learned catholic also may) unto the unlearned
faithful man, the seruante of God, say, Fear not, there be mo with us, then
with these enemies of Israel, with these Adversaries of Christ's Churhe. And
for that these Adversaries when they knew the truth, would not abide in the
truth: and when they knew God, would not glorify him as God, but they have
vanished away in their own thoughts, and saing them selves to be wise, they
are become very fools. So that as their likes the people of the host Syria,
were stricken with blindness: so, obscuratum est insipiens cor eorum. their
Romans 1.
foolish heart is blinded. So that now blinder then Molls, they say, light is
darkness, and darkness light. And thus being blind are contented to be
carried in to the hands of their enemies, as the Syrians were.

But God of his mercy work mercifully with them, that they perish not in
the hands of their enemies in the end, but that yt may please him, that they
may be delivered by the charitable mean of the Prophet of God, by the
ministry of the catholic preacher, and that for his persecuco^ they may
sustein no other affliction, but that they may eat in the midst of the
city, the bread of the Israelites, the bread of the true chrystians the body
of Christ in the holy Sacrament, and so cease any more to persequute
Israel, but to become one with the^, in that sort, that Multitudinis
credentium fiat cor vnum, and anima vna in Domino. Of the multude of them that
believe, Acto 4.
there be but one heart, and one soul. An end they shall have, for to

Wherefore, Christen reader, be of good cheer, and fear not. For though they
have worldly might and power on their side: yet they can not preuaill against
us. For there be mo on our side, then on theirs. All the holy writers be with
us, of which thowe hauest heard a good nombre, and yet thowe shall hear moo,
which shall not speak in dark manner, so as thowe may be doubtful what they
mien, or how they be to be taken and understood, thowe shall hear them in
so clear manner testify the truth, that yt shall be easy to say,: this is
their meening, and thus they are to be understood.

And for trial hereof, here is first the testimony of Oecomenius to be heard.
Which is this upon the text of S. Paul now treacted of. Vnus panis, and vnu^
corpus sumus. Nam ex vno pane omnes participamus. Ratiouem addit, quomodo
corpus Christi efficiamur. Quid enim (inquit) est panis? corpus nempe Christi.
Quid autem efficiciuntur Oecum. iudeci. 1 Cor.
hi, qui participant? Corpus sane Christi. Nam participantes corpus Christi nos
quoque illud efficimur. Quoniam vnus panis est Christus. Ex multis namque
grauis (vt exempli gratia loquamur) vnus panis factus est, and nos multi, ex
ipso vno participantes, efficimur Note how Oecum. follows the words of
Chrysostom before alleged, saing what is the bread, and answers, the body
of Christ.
vnum corpus Christi: Quontam enim vetus nostra caro corrupta est sub peccato,
opus nobis fuit noua carne. We are one bread, and one body, for we do all
partake of one bread. He adds a reason ( says Oecumenius) how we are made
the body of Christ. What (says he) is the bread? Verily the body of
Christ. And what are they made that do partake? truly the body of Christ.
For we partaking the body of Christ, are also made the same. For Christ is one
bread. for of many granes (As for example we maiespeake) one bread is made.
and we being many partaking of that one, are made one body of Christ,
forasmoche as our old flesh was corrupted under sin, we had need of a new
flesh. Thus he.

In my judgment I need not any thing upon this exposition to say, as whereby
to make yt clear or plain, for that yt is so plain of yt self: but yet in
consideracion that I write not to the learned, but to help the unlearned, we
break is a communicacion of the body of our lord. by the which Herehe
gives a reason how we are made the body of Christ.

Among philosophers yt is accounted unseemly to affirm any thing without a
reason. the scripture also wills us to be ready to give an answer to every
one that asks us a reason of that hope that is in us. So when S. Paul (as
this author implies) had taught, that we be made the body of Christ, here he
gives a reason, how we be made the body of Christ. And that this reason of
S. Paul may the better appear unto us: the author first opens the parts
of yt to us. For where S. Paul in his reason says: that we do all eat of one
bread: to open what that bread is, he asks a question, saing: what is the
bread? he solueth the question furthwith and says: verily yt is the body
of Christ. 1. Pet.


Note this then, Reader, that the bread which S. Paul speaks of here, is
the body of Christ. And note farther that he says not yt is a figurative
body, but he says yt is the body of Christ verily. Wherbie the Adversaries
signs and figures are cut of, and in this sentence of S. Paul there is no
place for them. For if yt be verily the body of Christ, yt is not
figuratiuelie his body.

If the Adversary would seek some shifte to help to hide and cover his
falshoode and wickedness, and say that the bread, which this author asks
this question of, and solueth yt to be the body of Christ: is the congregation
of the faith full, which he will grant to be the very body of Christ
mystical. This gloss will not serve him, but raither declare him to be The
real body of Christ partaken: the mystical body the partakers.
a violent wrester of this author, as he is of many other mo. For this
author speaks of the bread that is partake^ and received, and not of us
which do partake and receive yt. For when he had declared the bread to be the
body of Christ, then immediately he asks: what be they made that dopartake
yt? So that yt is most manifest that he speaks distinctlie both of
Catholiqus fathers agree all in one.
in the Sacrament. Oecolampadius, Zwynglius, Carolstadius, and that rabble, they
have not only ben impugned, but also their wicked heresies in this poinct,
have been in many and sondrie Counsels condemned erthey took upon them by the
mocion of Satan, to pull them out of that filthy and stinking pit, where
they and many other heresies lay buried. And now yet again they and their
heresies against the blessed Sacrament, have been newly by a general Council
condemned. This author stands upright, clean untouched and undefiled.

Consider that he expownding the text of S. Paul last before this treacted of,
that there he called the cup of blessing, the cup of the blood of Christ So
that as there he taught the presence of Christ's very blood. so

In the mouth of Luther, Oecola^padius, and other, there is both yea, and naie,
yt is so, and yt is not. For Luther has not only preached and taught the
presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, as the catholic Church does but
has also written yt even so: Again he has preached, taught, and written much
against that that the catholic Church does teach. In this he agrees with
the catholic church, that he teaches the very real presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament: But in this he varieth, that he says, the bread is
the body of Christ, and the wine is his blood.

And here note that heretics falling from the catholic church, as they
Heretics dissent from the church and among them selves
dissent and vary from yt: so do theye among them selves. For as heresy is
election so they though they take occasion by some one or other to follow some
deuelish doctrine: yet they will have in diverse things a special choice,
neither agreeable with the catholic Church, neither with these heresiarkes
who^ they follow. As Luther, who is a great follower of Wicleff. has not Luther.
the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but denieng transubstanciacion,
taught, that the bread remained with the body of Christ, so that there was both
the substance of bread, and the substance of the body of Christ in the
Sacrament. But Luther varieth from this, and choosing to follow his own
inuencion, so affirms the presence of Christ, that he would auouche the bread
to be the body of Christ.

Now Oecolampadius the disciple sometime of Luther has in this mouth
Oecola^pad
both yea and naie. For he sometime both taught and preached, yea also did
write, that Christ's body was reallie present in the Sacrament, even as the
catholic Church does teach. Afterward being by his own election the
disciple of Luther he began to have a piece of a naie in his mouth to that,
to the which before he had said yea. And finally, as his master Luther
choose to vary from his Master Wicleff, and to follow his own fantasy: so
this Oecolampadius chose to vary from his Master Luther, and to follow his
Wicleff would fantasy as they did, but all together the contrary, teaching
that there was no presence of Christ in the Sacrament, but as in a sign or
figure. In the which he was so vehement, that he wrote against his master
Luther, and that very earnestly. So that in these men's mouths ye may
perceive there has been yea and naie: Their mouths were soche of the which S.
James speaks that out of them comes both blessing and cursing. They are
soche springes as out of the which come waters both salt and fresh: bitter
and sweet: So that as there is no stay in them selves: so can no man be stayed
by them, in any good certentie.

The masters whom God has appointed in his catholic Church, they be not
inconstant, they be not double tunged, with yea and naie in one matter, they
say not now this, and then that. The master says not one thing, and the
scholar an other. The pestilence and destruction of common wealths which be
discord, contencion, and division, is not among them, But Leui. Lex veritatis
Malach. 1.
fuit in ore eius. and iniquitas non est inuenta in labiis eius. In pace and
aequitate ambulauit mecum. The law of truth was in his mouth, and there was
no The office of a persight priest. in three poinctes.
being the description of the office of a persight priest, agrees very well to
these holy preistes of the stock of spiritual Leui, our ancient Fathers and
writers, in whose mouths was the law of truth and they walked with God in
peace and equity, and turned many from their sins.

This being the office of a perfight priest, and Luther, and his accomplices
taking upon them to reform the state of the wholl Church, as though they were
the masters of perfection: let us make a proof how yt will agree with them.
Oecolampadius writing against Luther, and so his wholl sect of Sacramentaries
against the sect of the Lutherans, wherein the one conuincing Havoc made in
the churchs by heretics.




these three poinctes be well applied, as in whom they were fownde.

But I see how I am digressed, I will recall my self back, and go forward

Ye have heard the author before alleged clerelie testifieng the presence of
Christ's body, which he so opened because the reason of S. Paul might the
better appear unto us how we be made the body of Christ. And therefore that
done, he enters to the opening of S. Paul's reason with this question saing:
What be they made that do partake? He answers: Truly the body of Christ.
And giving the reason why they be so made, he says: For we partaking the
body of Christ, are also made the same.

Note then what ye do partake, and what by the same partaking ye are made. Ye
partake the body of Christ, not a piece of material bread, and by Our
natural flesh corrupted by sin is repaired by the ioining of Christ's
natural flesh there unto.
body of Christ, yt is corporal a vnio^. Which corporal vnio^ this author
does manifestly declare and prove to us by his last sentence, when he
says: For somoche as our old flesh was corrupted under sin we had need of
a new flesh. Where without all controversy he speaks of our natural flesh
that was corrupted. Wherefore then to repair this natural flesh corrupted, yt
was necessary to have a natural flesh uncorrupted and soche there is none in
that respect but the flesh of Christ. Wherefore yt is that flesh that must be
joined to owre flesh, to releive the need of yt, and so uniting us to yt reduce
us (as S. Cyrill says) to incorruption and immortality, which shall come to
our flesh by that uncorrupted and immortal flesh.

But of this author upon this scripture here is enough, yt is time now
breiflie to hear his yockfelowe of the latin church, which shall be Anselmus
Dominus corpus and sanguinem suum in eis rebus commendauit, quae ad vnum
aliquid rediguntur ex multis. quoniam aliud in vnum Auselm. in deci. 1 Cor.
ex multis granis conficitur: aliud in vnum ex multis acinis confluit. and ob
hoc communicatio corporis and sanguinis Christi societatem sanctorum designat,
and facit, vbi pax erit, and vnitas plena, atque perfecta. Propter qua omnia
recte dicimur omnes vnus panis, and vnu^ corpus, quia and omnes de vno pane
corporis Christi participamus. Quod enim quisque sua^ partem ex hoc pane
percipit, significat quia vnusquisque iuxta mensuram suam, particeps fit huius
gratiae. Steut autem vnus panis Dominici sacramenti, vnum corpus Christi
efficit in ecclesia: sic panis Idolatriae Daemonum participatio est. Et sunt
omnes, qui de vno pane, ac de vno calice Domini sumimus, vnum corpus efficimur^
ita si cum idolatris de sacrificio little sumimus, vnum corpus efficimur. Qui
comedit idolothitum vnum cum Daemone fit, sicut qui comedit corpus Christi, fit
vnum cum Christo. Owre Lord has given forth his body and blood in those
things, which of many things are brought into one certain thing. For the
one is made of many granes into one thing and the other out of many grapes
into one thing, And therefore the co^municacion of the body and blood of
Christ, does signify and make also one does take his part of this bread, yt
signifies that every one Anselmus.

In whom may be perceived, a most godly concord, and agreement, with his
yockfelowe Oecumenius. For as he taught that we partaking the The one bread
that many be made one by is the body of Christ.
body of Christ, are made one body in Christ: So does this Author teach
also. For declaracion whereof as also for a note for the better vnderstandinding
of Saint Paul, observe that where Saint Paul says. All we are one bread,
and one body, which do partake of that one bread. This Author expownding what
that one bread is, does not say that yt is material or Sacramental bread,
but with express words he says that yt is the

And let not the Adversary think that he may wrest this saing to the
spiritual body of Christ, after his wicked manner and custom. For neither the
evident and plain sentences of this Author which are before alleged, in the
which is declared the very real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, neither
this exposition will suffer yt. For where he expowndeth, The one bread, in
Saint Paul's saing to be the body of Christ: afterward he calls the same
the bread of our Lords Sacrament, So that the bread of the body of Christ
being the bread of our Lords Sacrament, we are plainly taught that he
speaks of the body of Christ in the Sacrament. For the spiritual manner
which the Adversary speaks of, neither is, neither ca^ be in the Sacrament
but in the receauer, Wherefore the other before spoken of must needs be true.

And for our vnio^ to Christ agreablie as before is taught, he teaches here.

THE NINE AND TWENTETH CHAPTER, treacteth of the same text by Theophilact and
Dionyse, and ends with Remigius.
Now to finish the exposition of this text in hand comes the last matter
now called in controversy by evil men, which of yt self is a most plain
matter, and so has been accepted these fiftene hundredth years, althought

But to speak in the boldness of faith with S. Paul. Deus pacis conteret
Satanam sub pedibus vestris velociter. The God of peace shall tread Satan
under your feet shortly. Romans 16.


And therefore Reader, be strong in faith, and fear not though the Adversary
glory a little while, thowe shall see yt come to pass, that thowe may say
with the Prophet David. Vidi impium superexaltatum, and eleuatum sicut Psalm. 36.
Cedrus Libani, and transiut, and ecce non erat. Quaesiui eum, and non est
inuentus locus eius. I my self have seen the ungodly in great power, and
flowrishing like a green baie tree, and I went by and lo, he was gone, I sought
him but his place could not be fownde.

Holofernes was mighty over the people of God in Bethulia. He gloried Indich.
13.
much, and spoke great words, but how soddein and short was his
destruction? Goliath defied the host of the living God, he reviled and railed
1. Reg. 17.
upon Israel, and God suffered him a certain time: but yet was he by little
David, whom he contemned soen overthrown, and Israel that day had great and
ioifull victory upon Goliath and all the Philistines. Therefore let neither
their glory dismaie thee, or put thee in doubt, neither fear put thee from
this faith, but remember the saing of S. Paul, Oportet haereses esse vt qui
probati sunt, manifesti fiant in vobis. There must be herseis or sects among 1.
Cor. 11.
you, that they, which are perfect among you, may be known. Not (as
Sedulius says) quod haereses Deo placeant, sed quod per eas fideles
exerceantur, vt qui Se dulius in Dec. 1. Co.
Deo noti sunt, hominibus manifestentur. Not that hereseis please God, but that
the faithful may be exercised, and that they which be known to God may
also be known to men. Stand therefore strongly in the battaill of thie Lord
God, abide pacientlie his pleasure, abide thie trial in this exercise, and God
will turn yt to thie glory. And for thie better stay, and conforth read the

Let us now therefore procead, and hear how Theophilact understands Saint
Paul. Thus he says upon this text. Cum itaque vnum sumus, In Dec. 1. Cor.
quopacto inter nos charitate seruata, non in vnum inuicem cohaeremus,
praesertim cum Paulus dicat, co nobis Dominus proprium corpus impertitur, vt
sibi nos copulet, and nexu quodam mutuo, nos reddat propinquiores? At vbi prior
illa carnis natura prauis est facinoribus corrupta, and vitae caelestis est
effecta expers, suam nobis Deus contulit, nostrae assimilem, quae and peccato
careret, and vitam largiretur, vt eius effecti participes, and sibi
admisceremur, and vitam duceremus innoxiam, vtpote qui vnum essemus cum Christo
corpus adepti. Forasmoche therefore as we be one, why by keeping of S. Paul
says that our Lord imparteth to us his own body
charity among us, do we not cleave together in one? specially seeing that
Paul says, that our Lord therefore imparteth to us his own body that he
might coople us unto him, and make us nearer together by a band or knotte

Among other things worthy of note in Theophilact, to trooble the

As for the first, this Author persuading us to the unity of love and
charity, induces for his chief and great argument for that purpose that we
should so be, because our Lord has imparted his own body to us, to the
intent we should be one. And if the Adversary would blind the simple reader,
that this Author meneth, that he gave us his own body upon the cross for
our redemption, yt is true in deed that our Savior Christ gave his body for
us to the death of the cross. But that this Author meant here of that his
giving of his body, that is most false. For he speaks of that manner of the
giving of the body of Christ, that S. Paul speaks of in this scripture,
which he expowndeth. And here Saint Paul speaks of the

And here by the way note, that he says not this as of him self, but says
that Saint Paul says so. Wherhie he signifies that this text of Saint
Paul speaks not of material bread signifieng or figuring the body of
Christ, but of the very real body of Christ, and therefore says, that he
Argument upon the word (bread) in S. Paul refelled.
imparteth to us his own body. He gives us not his own body if we have but
a piece of bread. For the bread is but a sign or figure of the body of Christ,
not present to be given, but absent. So that where the Adversary buyldeth (as
he thinks) his strong towers and bullwarkes against the verity of this
blessed Sacrament upon this and other places of Saint Paul, Panis quem ego
dabo, caro mea est, quam dabo pro mundi vita. The bread which I will give
Joan. 6.
is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world. This sentence, as
Chrysostom, Theophilact, and many mo (as yt is declared in the second book)
do testify, is spoken of the Sacrament, and then would I ask the Adversary,
whether Christ calls him self material bread here or no. If he should
answer that he did so, then the saing of Christ must needs have this sense:
that material bread, which I will give is my

If he say, yt that is not taken there for material bread, but in the
general Panem caeli dedit eis, panem Angelorum manducauit homo. He gave them
bread of heaven, Man has eaten the bread of Angels. Of the which in the Psalm.
77.
same significacion Christ says: Non Moses dedit vobis panem de coelo.
Moses did not give you bread from heaven. Why then may not Saint Paul
Joan. 6. S. Paul calls the body of Christ bread, as Christ called himself
in the 6 of S. John. 1, Cor. 2.
speaking of the Sacrament, use the same term in the significacion, that his
master Christ did, when he spoke of the same Sacrament, and yet the same not to
be taken for material bread, but for food, as yt was in the sense of his
master? Saint Paul was no soche disciple to vary and change the
significacion of a word, whereby he should vary from his master in sense.
For he well knew the mind of his master, as he said. Nos sensum Christi
habemus. We understand the mind of Christ. If then Christ used this word
Panis, not for material bread, but for food, when he spoke of the Sacrament,
that he would give forth, and leave to us: will not (trow ye) his chosen
vessel, who understands the mind of his master, when he speaks of the
same thing that his master panis, for material bread. For then this great
mystery of our incorporacion to Christ, and this gteat benefit of the
incorruptibilitie and immortality of our flesh and body, which comes to us
by the partaking of Christ's flesh, should be attributed to a piece of
material bread. Which thing what is yt but plain idolatry, giving the divine
honors of Christ to a creature, a dumb piece of bread? Wherefore to ioin with
this learned Author we must say (for that otherwise we can not truly say)
that Saint Paul says here that Christ imparteth to us his own body, And
so Saint Paul speaks here of no material bread, but of that high and
godly food, the body of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Where then now is the force of the herculeouse argument of the Adversary, who
by this process of Saint Paul would prove that the Sacrament The argument of
the Sacrame^tarie over thrown, for S. Paul speaks not of material bread.
is but bread. because Saint Paul calls yt bread after the consecracion.
For he speaks (says he) of the bread broken to the use of the communion,
which is after consecracion. Wherefore seeing Saint Paul calls yt bread after
the consecracion, yt is after the consecracion but bread.

If this word bread were not used in the scripture in an other significacion
then for material bread, and were not also of our Savior Christ him self
speaking of this Sacrament otherwise used, as yt is declared, the argument
might seem to have force but now yt is to vain: yt is as good an argument as
the heritique might make that denied the Son of God to be incarnate, because
the scripture says directly against him. Verbum caro factum est, The word
was made flesh: that because, Verbum, signifies

Wherefore now leaving this note in this Author as which mightily destroieth

Note therefore that thus he says: And where that first nature of our slesh was
corrupted, and was made void of that heavenly life, be gave us his nature of
slesh, being like unto owers, the which did both lack sin, and should give
life, that we being made partakers of yt, we should be mixed with him.

Do thowe not Reader, see here that he says, that Christ has given us the
nature of his flesh, not the figure of his flesh, but the nature of yt, the
substance of yt, but to what purpose has he given us his natural flesh? he
declares, to this purpose that we should be partakers of yt. If we procead
and ask, what commodity or profitte have we by the partaking of his What
profitte we have by partaking Christ's flesh.
flesh? He answers by the partaking of his flesh we are mixed with him in
soche sort that we receiving his body, and now being joined to the same

Neither let the gross Capharnait say, that if all faithfulll and worthy
partakers of the Sacrament be one body of Christ, that then Christ has an
huge great body: but let him remember that the natural man having twenty
children, every one of them is his flesh and blood, and yet the Father is
never the greater: So, many of the faith becoming the flesh of Christ by
partaking of the Sacrament, yet the flesh of Christ is nothing bigger of the
person of Christ. And how soever this Adversary lists grossly to dally
in soche divine mysteries: yet this is the truth, as by this Author ye have
perceived yt clerelie to be testified, and the like shall you see in him that
follows: who is Saint Dionise, who expowndeth this text of Saint Paul,
almost word by word in this manner. Quoniam vnus panis per proprietatem, and
vnum corpus mysticum vnitate fidei, spei and charitatis, Dionysius Carthus.
cuius corporis caput est Christus, multisumus, videlicet, omnes qui de vno
pane, and de vno calice participamus: id est, de singulari and vero corpore,
and sanguine reficimur, and Sacramentum tantum digne recipimus. For we are one
bread by property and one body mystical by the unity of faith hope and
charity of the which body Christ is the head, we being many, that is to
say, all we which do partake of one bread and one cup, that is, all we
which be refreshed of the singular, and very body and blooode of Christ, and
worthily receive so great a Sacrament-Thus Dionyse.

In this exposition let this be diligently noted against the Adversary, that
the bread which all we receive, and by the which we are made all one bread and
one body: yt is not material bread, but the singular, and very body and
blood of our Savior Christ, and so did Saint Paul mien yt, as this Author
agreablie with all other before alleged, does testify, expownding and
declaring the mind of Saint Paul.

Where then is the great argument that the Sacrament should be nothing Argument
of the word (bread) overthrown
but bare bread, Because Saint Paul calls yt bread? What bread yt is, and
what the cup contains not only this Author, but also one, many hondreth
years elder then he does declare. Which ancient Author shall end the
exposition of both these last textes, and ioin them together. Thus he says:
Calix benedictionis cui benedicimus, Remigius in 1. Cor.
nonne communicatio sanguinis Christi est? Idcirco primum calicem nominauit,
quia de pane posteaplus erat disputaturus. Calix autem benedictionis dicitur,
qui benedicitur a sacerdotibus in altari. Appellatur and ipse calix
communicatio, quasi participatio, quia onmes communicant ex illo partemque
sumunt ex sanguine Domini, quem continet in se. Et panis quem frangimus in
altari, nonne participatio corporis Domim est? vtique, primum consecratur, and
benedicitur, a sacerdotibus and spiritu sancto, and deinde frangitur, cum iam
licet pants videatur in veritate corpus Christi est. Ex quo pane quicunque
communicant, corpus Christiedunt. Quoniam vnus panis, subaudis Christi, and
vnum corpus, Christi, multi sumus qui comedimus illum panem. The cup of
blessing which we bless, is yt Cup of blessing how yt is called.
not a communicacion of the blood of Christ? Therefore did he first speak of
the chalice, because he would afterward more at large treacte of the bread. Yt
is called the cup of blessing because yt is blessed of the preistes on the
altar. The same cup also is called the co^municacion, for that yt is a
participacion, because all do communicate of yt, and do partake of the blood
of our Lord which the cup contains in yt self. And the bread, which we
break in the altar is yt not a partaking of the body of our Lord? Yt is
Remigius Who being about the year of our Lord 511. lived before this our
time about 1050. Whose confession yet of the verity of the presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, is as plain as if yt had been made in this our
time. What can be more plainly spoken then to say that the cup contains
the blood of Christ? Who can better open the truth then to say, although yt
seem bread: yet in very deed yt is the body of Christ? and so much he
says therbie not only declaring his own faith, but also the faith of the
Church he lived in. Now reader when thowe see so ancient and with all so
evident testimony of and for the truth, lay hand to yt and be not

THE THIRTETH CHAPTER BEGINS THE exposition of this text. Ye can not drink
of the cup of our Lord, and of the cup of Deuells, By S. Cyprian and
Chrysostom.
FOrasmoche as in the sixtenth chapter of this book. Where I began the
exposition of this disputacion of Saint Paul with the Corynthians, the
dependence of these scriptures, the one of the other and also the mind of
Saint Paul is opened, what he here intends: I will not trooble the Reader
with that argument again in this place, but remitte him thither. Only this I
wish him to observe that Saint Paul diswading the Corynthians from
Idolathites uses three means to do the

One is the declaracion of the greuouse punishment of the Jews which S. Paul
uses three means to diswade the Corynthia^s from Idolathites.
they sustained for Idolatric. Which being laid before their faces, they
might be moved to fly the like offense, for fear of like pain.

The second is upon the communion of the body and blood of Christ that where
by the communion of that, that they did communicate they were united to yt,
which they did communicate. And united they could not be

The third is (as Saint Thoms says) by the similitude of the legal
sacrifice, which Saint Paul brings in as an argument of like, to prove
this communion or participacion, when he says: Nonne qui edunt hostias,
participes sunt altaris? Are not they which eat of the sacrifice partakers of
the altar?

To ioin the parts of the similitude together, and to make yt fully to Thomas
Aqui. in dec. prima Cor.
appear, thus Saint Thomas does set yt forth: Are not they which eat of
the sacrifices, partakers of the altar, as they which eat of the flesh of
Christ are partakes of the body of Christ? Forasmoche as each of these be so,
and Christ and Baall can not dwell together, neither can we serve two masters.
Therefore as a perfect conclusion he infers and says. Non potestis calicem
Domini bibere, and calicem daemoniorum. Ye

That he teaches the bread and wine to be a sacrifice, yt shall be opened to
you, after the exposition of the doctors, although this is sufficie^tlie
testified Sacrifice avouched by S. Paul
before from the sixtenth chapter unto this place: yet that yt may well be
perceived of the Reader, that my saing is agreeable to the holy Fathers and
that this text was spoken of Saint Paul, as of the sacrifice of the body and
blood of our Lordre on the altar, the holy Fathers shall be brought forth as
before they have been upon the other scriptures, by whose testimony

And for that Saint Cyprian rebukes the same offense, that Saint Paul does,
and uses the same words that Saint Paul does, whereby the true mening and
understanding may the better be perceived, we shall first let his saing be
heard. This yt is. Contra euangelij vigorem, contra Domini, ac Cyp ser. 5. de
lapsis.
Dei legem, temeritate laxatur incautis communicatio, irrita and falsa pax,
periculosa dantibus and nihtl accipientibus prosutura, Non quaerunt sanitatis
paenitentiam, nec veram de satisfactione medicinam. Paenitentia de peccatoribus
exclusa est. Grauissimi, extremique delicti memoria sublata est. Operiuntur
morientium vulnera and plaga laetalis altis and profundis viseeribus infixa
dissimulato dolor contegitur. A diaboli aris reuertentes ad sanctum Domini,
sordidis and infectis nidore manibus accedunt. Mortiferos idolorum cibos adhuc
pene ructantes, exhalantibus nunc etiam fcelus suum faucihus, and contagia
funesta redolentibus Domini corpus inuadunt, cum occurat scriptura diuina, and
clamet and dicat. Omnis mundus manducabit carnem, and anima quaecunque
manducauerit ex carne salutaris Leuit. 7.
sacrificij, quod est Domini, and immundicia eius super ipsum and peribit anima
illa de populo. Apostolus item testetur, and dicat: Non potestis calicem Domini
bibere, and 1. Cor 10.
calicem' daemoniorum. Non potestis mensae Domini communicare, and meusae
daemomoru^. Against the force of the Gospel, against the law of our Lord and
God, through the rashness of some, communicacion is frelie genen to the
necligent, being a false peace and of no force, yet perilouse to the geuer, and
which shall nothing profitte the receauer. They seek not the penance of Penance
of health, and the medice^ of satisfaction S. Gp. terms.
health, neither the true medicen of satisfaction, penance is excluded from
sinners, the memory of the extreme and most greu ouse offense is taken away.
The wounds of them that be dieng be covered, and the deadly plague stricken
into the deep bowels is with a dissimuled sorrow hidden. Returning from the
aultars of the Deuell with filthy and infected hands with the sauoure they
come to the holy thing of our Lord. Theie yet almost breathing owte the
deadly meats of idols their chekes puffing out even yet their mischeuouse
deed, and smelling of the deadly infection, they violently come upon the body
of our Lord, When yet the scripture of God comes against them, and cries and
says Every clean person shall eat the slesh. But if any eat of the flesh
of the wholesome sacrifice, which belongs to our Lord having his uncleanness
upon him, the Leuit 7.
same soul shall perish from among his people. The Apostle also witnesses and
says. Ye can not drink the cup of our Lord, and the cup of Deuells: Ye
can not communicate of the table of our Lord, and of the table of Deuells:
Thus much Saint 1. Cor. 10.
Cyprian.

Who being much offended with the necligence of soche preistes, as did admit
them to the receipt of the holy Sacrament, which had defiled them selfs with
Idolathites, before they had sufficiently done penance, and made amends for
the same, rebukes them both, the preistes sor that they suffered yt, and the
receauers, for that they presumed to receive yt. Whose rebuke, if you mark, is
very sore, sharp, and terrible, which of so grave, and godly holy martyr
should not have been done, if the thing that they received had been but a piece
of bread. For soche grave men as holy Cyprian was did with much gravity and
godly wisdom rebuke offenses with just measure, a small fault gently and
easily, a great fault severely and sharply. Wherefore this rebuke of S.
Cyprian being sharp and sore, yt argues that their offense was great, and so
in deed yt was. For they being so filthilie desiled, presumed to come to
receive the blessed body of Christ: For they yet Table of our Lord, the body
of our Lord.
smelling of the deadly infection (says S. Cyprian of the eating of the
Idolatites) came violently upon the body of our Lord, to receive yt. By
which his words as Ye can not be partakers of the table of our Lord, yt is
asmoche to say: as ye can not be partakers of the body of our Lord. In this
then the one part heretofore in the former process taught, is confirmed
namely that S. Paul rightly understood, taught the presence of Christ's
body in the Sacrament.

I shall not need to make farther proof of this, seeing that yt is manifest,
that S. Cyprian correcting them that being defiled with Idolathites did presume
to receive our Lords body, does touch them with the saing of S. Paul: Ye
can not be partakers of the table of our Lord. Which text in deed should
nothing touch them, if the thing that S. Cyprian spoke of, were not the same
that S. Paul spoke of. And so contrary wise yt is manifest then that S.

The other part also, namely that he speaks of the body of Christ, as of a
sacrifice, is also easy in him to be pceaued. For to what purpose else
should Saint Cyprian allege that place of Leuiticus forbidding the unclean
person to receive any part of the sacrifice of our Lord, but that that
prohibition

But for that upon this text I find him not by express words speaking so
plainly as the matter may fully appear to the Reader, for the opening of
the matter that is here to be spoken of, I will produce him where he Quomodo
sacrum videbimus Pascha? quomodo sanctum suscipiemus sacrificium? quomodo
mirabilibus communicabimus mysterijs, lingua Chry. hom. 11. ad pop. Antioch.
illa, qua Dei legem conculcauerimus? lingua illa, qua animam contaminauerimus?
Si nemo namque purpuram regalem manibus accipere inquinatis auderet: quomodo
Dominicum corpus lingua polluta suscipiemus? Iuramentum enim maligni:
Sacrificium vero Domini: Quae igitur communicatio luci ad tenebras, vel quae
conuenientia Christo ad Belial? How shall we see the holy Easter? how shall
we receive the holy sacrifice? how Sacrifice plainly avouched with real
presence.
shall we communicate the wonderful mysteries with that tongue, which we have
contemned the law of God withal? with that tongue wherewith we have defiled our
souls? For if no man would be so bold, with defiled hands to take the kings
robe: how shall we with a defiled tongue receive the body of our Lord?
Swearing is of the wicked. The sacrifice is of our Lord. What folowshippe then
is there betwixt light and darkness? or what agreement betwixt Christ and
Beliall? Thus Chrysostom.

Who diswading the people from vain and superfluouse swearing (Whereunto
Swearing to much used.
wicked custom, has at these days also to much brought our people) says in
effect, that they can not receive, and become partakers of the body of our
Lord, with the same tongue, with which they blaspheme Gods holy name, and
contemn his holy law. Which is even the same that S. Paul says here: ye
can not be partakers of the table of our Lord, and of the table of Deuells.

And here note that as S. Paul by the table of our Lord understands the
sacrifice of our Lord, of the which the wicked can not be partakers: So here
Chrysostom by express words says, that the wicked blasphemour can not be
partaker of the sacrifice of our Lord: By the which sacrifice he
understands the body of Christ.

For the better perceauing whereof, note that he terms the holy Sacrament
with these terms. He calls yt, the holy sacrifice. He calls yt, the
wonderful Excellent titles of the blessed Sac.
mysteries. He calls yt, the body of our Lord: He calls yt, light: Yea he
Christ himself. By which terms he declares unto us the excellency of the
Sacrament, as in which is the very presence of Christ's body, verily and
substancially, which is also our sacrifice. These two parts we shall breiflie
open in this Author.

The very real presence he teaches when he says: How shall we with Real
presence proved by Chryso.
a defiled tongue receive the body of our Lord? Yt is manifest that with our
mouth and tongue we can receive nothing, but that that is substancial, and
corporal, but with these (says Chrysostom,) we receive the body of Christ.
Wherefore we receive the substa^cial and corporal body of Christ. And therefore
this being well known to the Adversary, he with might and main, denies that
we receive the body of Christ with hand or mouth, but only with heart. But
how shamefullie he does yt thowe may perceive, both by this famous and
notable Author, and also by Saint Cyprian, by Saint Ambrose, Saint
Augustine, and a nombre mo. Which do plainly by express words say, that the
body of Christ is received both with hand and mouth. But now to stay upon
our Author this one may suffice against the Adversary that he by express
words says, that we receive the body of our Lord with our mouth and
tongue.

For the other part also he teaches that the same body of Christ is
Sacrifice proved by Chrysostom.
a sacrifice: For he asks: Quomodo sanctum suscipiemus sacrificium? How
shall we receive the holy sacrifice? Now if ye compare these two sainges

By this saing of Chrysostom shall ye perceive how vain the general rule of
Cranmer (Or of him that settsurth that book in his name) is, who Cra^mers
general rule resuted.
in his fifte book treating of the sacrifice says, that the sacrifice of the
preistes, and the people, is only a sacrifice gratulatorie, that is of thanks
giving, and a sacrifice commemoratiue remembering the body of Christ, that
suffered, but not having Christ reallie, and substanciallie present. And this is
his answer to the Nycen Council, and to Petrus Lombardus

But now consider what is the nature of a sacrifice of thanks giving, or as
he calls yt gratulatorie. A sacrifice gratulatorie is not received of
Sacrifice gratulatorie, or of thanks giving.
us, but offered and given of us and from us. For we giving thanks to God our
hauenly Father, that he so loved us, that he spared not his own Son but for
our sakes delivered him to suffer most cruel death for us. And to that his
Son also we gauing thanks, that he has vouchedsafe to wash away our sin
with his blood, and to cancel the obligacion that was against us, whereby he
has made us free from sin, hell, and death, and has made us heirs to the
kingdom of his Father, and coheirs with him of the same kingdom? we offer a
sacrifice of thanks giving. But this manner of sacrifice aught to be given from
our hearts to our Lord God, and to our Savior Jesus Christ: And is so, if yt
be reverently and devoutly done of us.

This sacrifice of the altar is soche a sacrifice, that yt is received, of us,
says Chrysostom. Now there is a great difference betwixt these two things,
Sacrifice of the altar.
of the which the one we may in diverse respects both offer, and also
receive: The other we can only but offer. An other difference there is also.
The sacrifice of thankesgeuing, is no wonderful sacrisice. For yt is no
wonder, but a duty to give God thanks, for his manifold benesittes. But the
sacrifice of the altar (as Chrysosto^ says) is a wonderful sacrisice.

In an other place he calls yt also an holy, and a terrible sacrifice: This
sacrifice of thanks giving is holy but yt is not terrible. Many soche other
Homil. 30. De prodit. Iudae.
terms he gives to the sacrifice, which will not be applied to the
sacrifice of thanks giving. But to be short, by these few differences yt is
easy to perceive, that the general rule of Cra^mer, that he would all the
doctors, where they call the Sacrament, a sacrifice, should be understood to
have spoken only of the sacrifice gratulatorie, will not stand. For the
sainges of the holy doctors, can not bear that rule, as hereafter shall
appear more clear to you.

Whereunto even in this place also, the conclusion of Chrysostoms sainge gives
good light, and plain understanding. For after he had declared that the
blasphemouse mouth can not receive the sacrifice of our Lord: he sets
these two together, and says: An oath is of an evil, The sacrifice is of our
Lord. What folowshippe betwixt light and darkness, and what agreement betwixt
Christ and Beliall? In which manner of speech if you note, as blasphemy,
darkness, and Beliall be of one side, and signify one

This then being proved, that Chrysostom teaches here the presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, and that the very same is the sacrifice of
our Lord: Let is return to our text, and somewhat more open yt, for the better
understanding of yt in all the process that follows, and of the doctors also
that shall be produced for the exposition of the same.

Where Saint Paul says here: Ye can not drink of the cup of Owre Lord,
S. Paul's words here are to be understood, with a condicional negative, not
with an absolute.
and of the cup of Deuells: Ye can not be partakers of the table of our
Lord, and of the table of Deuells. He does not speak these as absolute
negatiues, but as condicionall. For he meneth not that they could not do so in
very deed, but that they could not so do, if they would do well. For he welll
knew that the Corynthians went both to the table of Christ, and also to the
table of Idols. And to diswade them from the table of Idols, he says that
they can not without the offense of God partake of both tables. There is a
saing: Hoc possumus, quod de iure possumus. That may we do, which we may do
by the law. Even so may yt be said on the other side. Hoc non possumus, quia
de iure non possumus. This we can not do, because we can not do yt by the
law. Which manner of sainge implies not an absolute negative, utterly
denieng the fact to be done: but (as is said) a condicionall negative, that
yt can not be done by the law.

For S. Cyprian, who rebukes them that impenitently came defiled with eating
of Idols meat, to eat of the meat of our Lords table, and says also to
them with Saint Paul's sentence. Ye can not be partakers of the table of our
Lord, and of the table of Deuells: Yet he accuses them, that they so were,
and in fact they did so: but to Gods pleasure, and the wealth of their souls,
they could not do so. For yt is proprely said, that we may do that, that we
may do well. And that we can not do, which we can not do well. To this
sense also Chrysostom by his interrogatiue including soch a negative said:
The blaspbemers of Gods name could not with the same mouth and tongue that they
blasphemed with, receive the body of our Lord, receive the sacrifice of our
Lord.

A like sainge is there ascribed to Origin, for yt is uncertain whether yt
Origenes.
be his work or no, out of the which yt is taken, and yt is this. Multa porro
and de ipso Verbo dici possunt, quod factum est caro cibusque verus, quem qut
comederit, viuet in aeternum, quem nullus malus potest comedere. Many things
also may be said of the Son of God himself, that yt was made flesh, and
very meat, which whosoever shall eat, shall live forever, which no evil
man can eat. Thus much Origin.

As S. Paul and S. Cypriane said, that they that were parteners of
Idolathites A place of Origin opened.
could not be partakers of our Lords table: And as Chrysostom said, that
vain swearers by Gods holy name, could not with the same mouth, and tongue
receive the holy sacrifice, which is the body of our Lord, which is the
table that S. Paul and S. Cyprian spoke of in which their sainges they have
made mention but of two vices, that should let

A lively argument whereof is declared in the first book of kings, where 1.
Reg. 5.
we read that the Azotyans having the Ark of God, put yt into the temple of
Dagon. And forasmoche as they accounted yt as the Arc of the God of Israel,
of whose great might and power they had heard much, they set yt by their Idol
Dagon. But in the morning when the Azotians came into the temple, they fownde
Dagod lieng grooueling upon the grownde. They

THE ONE AND THIRTETH CHAP. ENDS the exposition of this text by Theophilact
and Anselmus.
I Should not need to allege so many holy Fathers and doctors has not
one scripture nor doctor for them, but yt is and shall be made manifest, De
Iudaeis namque nil intulit, Theoph. in Dec. 1. Cor.
quod de eo participarent, sed Altaris sunt participes dixit, in quo, quod
immolandum suisset, impositum igni consumebarur. De Christi autem corpore haud
quaquam res ita se habet, sed Christi corporis fuit participatio. Non enim
altaris sumus, sed Dominici corporis ipsi participes. Of the Jews he said
nothing, that they should partake of yt (meninge the sacrifice) but he said
that they are partakers of the altar. We are partakers even of the body of
our Lord offered on the altar.
upon the which altar that, that was to be offered in sacrifice, when yt was
put upon yt, yt was consumed with fire, But of the body of Christ the matter
is not so: but there was a participacion of the body of Christ. For we are not
partakers of the altar. But we are partakers even of the body of our Lord.
Thus much Theophilact.

In whom this comes woorthilie to be noted that S. Paul speaking of Why S.
Paul said not, that the Jews were partakers of their sacrifices as the
chrystians of theirs.
the sacrifices of the Jews, does not name any thing by special name whereof
they should be partakers, but only uses the general term of the altar,
saing that they be partakers of the altar. And why? because in some of these
Sacrifices yt was ordained that they should be burnt, and consumed. And
therefore he said not that they should be partakers of the thing offered but of
the altar. But when he spoke of the body of Christ (says

Now in the disputacion of S. Paul yt is plain to see that speaking of the
sacrifice of the Chrystians, he names, whereof they are partakers. As when he
says: The cup of blessing, which we bless, is yt not a partaking of the
blood 1. Cor. 10.
of Christ? And the bread which me break, is yt not a partaking of the body
of Christ. Where by special words he names the things their received and
partaken. But speaking of the sacrifices of the Jews throughoute all the
disputacion he names no special thing, but uses (as I said) the general
term Non enim altaris sumus sed Domini corporis ipsi participes. We are not
partakers of the altar, but we are partakers of the body of Christ. If the
body of Christ were absent from the sacrifice, we should be by Theophilactes
judgment partakers of the altar: but because the body of Christ is present
in the sacrifice, and is the sacrifice yt self, that is offered, therefore are we
partakers The blood of Christ is not only in heaven, but also in in the
chalice.
Of this who can doubt, that remembers his exposition of the first text of
this disputacion of Saint Paul where he says, speaking of him. That, that he
said, is after this manner: This blood that is contained in the cup, is even
the same that flowed out of Christ's side. This blood when we receive, we do
partake, that is, we are joined to Christ.

Who can doubt of the faith of this man, and how he understands Saint
Paul, that so plainly expowndeth him? He says that we receive, not a figure
only, but the blood of Christ. And this blood is not only in heaven,
whether only, the Adversary says, we must by faith lift up our eyes and
heart, but yt is contained (says Theophilact) in the cup, where also by
faith we must behold yt. And this is not only a Sacrament of Christ's
blood, so called because Sacraments have the names

Now Chrystian Reader, judge if the Adversary have not plain authority
against him, that where he would that yt should be proved, that Christ's
natural and substanciall body is in the Sacrament. If that body upon the
croosse, out of the which for man's redemption did plentifully flow out
blood, were natural, forasmoche as this blood in the holy Sacrament is even
the same blood, yt must needs follow, that the natural body, and natural
blood of Christ, is in the Sactament.

Why stand I so long upon so clear a matter, seeing that Anselmus who is joined
with him to show the faith of the latin church, as Theophilact has done of
the greek church, is even as plain as he? Thus expowndeth he Saint Paul.
Non potestis calicem Domini, in quo sanguis est eius, bibere, and calicem
Daemoniorum, in quo vinum est sacrilegae superstitionis. Nec potestis mensae,
id est, altaris Ansel. in 10. 1. Cor.
Domini, in quo corpus eius est, participes esse, and mensae, id est, altaris
Daemoniorum. Ye can not drink the cup of our Lord, in the which is his
blood, and the cup of Deuells, in which is the wine of sacrilegall
supersticion. Neither can you be partakers of the table, that is of the altar
of our Lord, in the which is his body, and of the table, that is, of the
altar of Deuels. Thus he.

In this Author, who lived within xvi. years of five hundredth years agon, ye
see a very plain exposition, fully agreing, yea almost using the same words
that Theophilact did. Who was living almost three hundredth years before him.
Which Theophilact uses the words of Chrysostom, who lived more then four
hundredth years before Theophilact. Whose saing ye shall find in the xvi.
chapter of this book. I say in this Author here alleadhed, ye have a plain
exposition of Saint Paul's words. For first, he expowndeth what S. Paul
meneth by the cup of our Lord, and because the body of our Lord is upon
yt. I think these words be plain

Peradventure ye will say he expowndeth the table to be an altar, which A
proof of the use of aultars eue^ from the Apostles time. Dion. Are. eccles.
Hie. par. 3. ca. 3
comes in but of late days, and is a term not used among the ancient
doctors. That both the word and the thing, was in use in the time of the
ancient doctors, yt shall be made manifest to thee, gentle Reader, and that
even from the Apostles.

Saint Dionyse the disciple of S. Paul declaring the order of Christ's
Church in his time, among other declaracions of the blessed Sacrament, makes
mention of the same set upon the altar, saing thus: Sed and illud sacratius
intuere, quod impositis altari venerabilibus signis, per quae Christus signatur
and sumitur, adest protinus sanctorum descriptio. But reverently behold that,
that when the honorable signs be put upon the holy altar, by the which
Christ is both fignified and received, furthwith their is a description of

Of the altar and the use of the same also Saint Ambrose makes mention
saing: Ego Domine memor venerandae passionis tuae accedo ad altar tuum licet
Amb. orat. praepar. Altar and sacrifice both me^cioned by S. Amb. and used.
peccator vt offeram tibi sacrificium quod tu instituisti, and offerri
praecepisti in commemoratione^ tui pro salute nostra. I (o Lord) being
mindful of thy honorable passion

The name and the use of the altar is likewise declared unto us by his
disciple S. Augustine, who showing the godly zeal of his Mother lieng on her
death bed, and what she desiered to be done for her, says. Illa imminente
die resolutionis suae, non cogitauit corpus suum sum ptuose contegi, ant
condiri aromatibus, aut monumentum electum concupiuit, aut curauit sepulchrum
patrium. Non ista mandauit Aug. lib. 9. co^fes. ca. 13
nobis, sed tantummodo memoriam sui ad altar tuum fieri desiderauit, cui
nullius diei praetermissione seruierat, vnde sciret dispensari victimam
sanctam, qua deletum est chyrographum quod erat contrarium nobis. She, the day
of her death being at hand, was not mindful to have her body sumptuously
buried, or to be spiced with Altar served where facrifice was done.
spices, nor coueted to have a solemn monument, neither desiered to be buried
in her own contrie. These things did she not command us, but only desiered
she to be remembered at thine altar, which she without any days omission had
served, from whence she knew that sacrifice to be

Thus of Saint Augustine also ye hear the name of the altar and the use. The
use is like as ye have heard in S. Ambrose, that is, to offer sacrisice upon.
For S. Augustins mother knew that that sacrifice was despensed or given from
the altar which redeemed us and washed us from our sins in his blood,
which every true Chrystian will confess to be the body of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

The same S. Augustine also is a plentiful withnesse of this matter of the
altar, ad Casulanum. And in his sermon to the infantes, of which place also
The Proclamers false slight in his allegacion of S. August.
the Proclamer in his sermon makes mention: but with soche slight, and
crastie falsheade, as I can not ouerpasse yt, but note yt to the Reader. For
first, where S. Augustine uses the plain term or name of the altar, this man
not liking that name corrupted S. Augustine and puts in to the place of yt
the name of table. Secondly where S. Augusten plainly teaches the presence of
Christ's body and blood. He to deceive his audience brings three or four
words of the place to make them believe that S. Hoc quod videtis in altari
Dei, etiam transacta nocte vidistis. Aug. sermon. ad infant.
Sed quid esset, quid sibi velit, quam magnae rei Sacramentum contineret,
nondum audistis. Quod ergo vidistis panis est, and calix, quod vobis etiam
oculi vestri renunciant. Quod autem fides vestra postulat instruenda, panis est
corpus Christi, calix sanguis. Dominus noster Jesus Christus nouimus vnde
acceperit carnem, de virgin Maria, infant lactatus est, nutritus est, creuit,
ad iuuenilem aetatem peruenit, a Iudaeis persecutionem passus est, in ligno
suspensus est, in ligno interfectus est, sepultus est, tertia die resurrexit,
quo die voluit in coelum ascendere, illuc leuauit corpus suum, vnde est
venturus vt indicet viuos and mortuos, Ibi est modo sedens ad dextram Patris:
Quomodo est panis corpus eius? and calix, vel quod habet calix, quomodo est
sanguis eius? Ista fratres ideo dicuntur Sacramenta, quia in eis aliud videtur,
aliud intelligitur. Quod videtur speciem habet corporalem, quod intelligitur,
fructum habet spiritualem. This that ye see in the altar of God, ye did also
see yt the last night. But what yt was, what ytment, Where S. Aug. here names
the altar, the Proclamer a shamed of so honorable a name calls yt a table.
of how great a thing yt contains a Sacrament yet have not yet heard. That
then that ye have seen is bread and a cup, which thing also your eyes do
tell you: but that your faith requires to be instructed, the bread is the
body of Christ, and the cup his blood. Owre Lord Jesus Christ, we know
from whence he took flesh, even of the virgen Marie, being an infant he
sucked: he was nourced, he grew, he came to the age of a young man, he suffered
persecucion of the Jews, he was hanged upon the cross, upon the cross he
died, he was buried, the third day he rose, what day he would he ascended
into heaven: Thither did he cacrie up his body from whence he will come to
judge the quick and the dead: There is he now sitting at the right hand of God
the Father. How is the bread his body? and the cup, or that is in the
cup, how is yt his blood? These things brethren are therefore called
Sacraments, because in them one thing is seen, an other thing is understood.
That that is seen has a Quod videtis in mensa, panis est. That ye see in the
table, is bread.

In which his allegacion first ye may perceive, that where Saint Augustine
Altar of God.
altar with the mention and wholl remembrance of yt, he has labored to
deface, and utterly to wipe away. What ye may think and judge of the
doctrine of this man, that to maintein yt does so manifestly falsify the
doctors, and dare not allege them as they be written, but as he lists him
self, I leave to be considered. What synceritie also he uses so truncatelie
alleging Saint Augustine, that where he taught the two S. August. truncathe
alleged by the Proclamer to deceive the people and to rob the B. Sacr. of
the prefence of Christ.
parts of the Sacrament, namely the outward corporal form, and the inward
substance of Christ's body and blood: the one known by the eye of the body,
the other by the understanding of faith, this man snatcheth the first part,
and renneth away with yt, leaving the other part

As of these Fathers before alleged we have learned that in the primitive
Church the aultars werein use: So now learn withal what in those days was
thought of them that did abuse aultars. To give us understanding in this
matter, we will hear Optatus, the holy ancient Bishop, who lived before
Saint Augustine, Saint Hierom, or Saint Ambrose, and was almost xij.
hondreth years agon. This learned Father and Bishop writing against the
Donatistes who threw down the aultars, and spoiled the Churches, says thus:
Quid est tam sacrilegum quam altaria Dei, in Optatus li. con. Donatist.
quibus and vos abquando obtulistis, frangere, radere, and remouere, in quibus
vita populi, and membra Christi portata sunt, quo Deus omnipotens inuocatus
sit, quo postulatus descendit Spiritus sanctus, vnde a multis pignus salutis
aeternae, and tutela fidei, and spes resurrectionis accepta est? Alcaria,
inquam, in quibus fraternitatis munera non iussit saluator poni, nisi quae
essent de pace condita. Depone, inquit, munus tuum ante altar, and redi, prius
concorda cum fratre tuo, vt pro te possit sacerdos offerre. Quid est enim
altar, nisi seeds corporis and sanguinis Christi? Haec omnia furor vester, aut
rasit, aut fregit, aut remouit. Quid vobis secit Deus, qui illic inuocari
consueuerat? Quid vos offenderat Christus, cuius illic per certa momenta,
corpus and sanguis habitat? Quid vos offen. ditis etiam vos ipsi, vt altaria
frangatis, in quibus ante nos per longa temporum spatia, 3. Reg. 19.
sancte (vt arbitramini) obtulistis? Hoc modo Iudaeos estis imitati. Illi
iniecerunt manus Christo in cruce: a vobis pereussus est in altari, De quibus
apud Dominum Helias Propheta quaerelam deponit, ijs enim locutus verbis, quibus
and vos inter alios ab ipso accusari meruistis. Domine, inquit, altaria tua
confregerunt. Dum dicit tua, indicat quia res est Dei, vbi Deo aliquid a
quocumque oblatum est. What is so great sacrilege, as to bread See here the
use, the regard, the estimation and reverence of aultars in the ancient
church.
raze, and remove the Aultars of God, in the which yowr selves sometime have
the which our savior commanded the offerings of the brethren not to be Lay
down, (says he) thy offering before the Altar. and go first and agree with
thy brother, that the priest may offer for thee. What is the Altar but the
seat of the body and blood of Christ? But all these has yowr fury either
raced, broken, or removed and taken Altar what yt is, and the spoil of aultars.
away. what had God done to you, who was wount there to be called on? What had
Christ offended you, whose body and blood sometime dwells there? what do
you yowr selves offend yowr selves, to break those aultars in the which a
long time before us ye have offered, as ye think, godly. By this ye have
followed the jews. They smitte Christ upon the cross: of you he is smitten on
the altar, of whom the Prophet Heltas makes complaint to our lordre. For he
speaks soche words, where with you also are worthy to be blamed. Lord
(says he) they have broken down thine aultars. When he says (, Thine) he
declares that that thing is gods or belongs to God, where any thing of any
man is offered to God, thus much Optatus. Who was not born yesterdaie to tell us
the fashion of religion in the latter days. But he talleth us the religion of
the ancient Let the Proclamer and his folowes see and say how they agree in
their doings with the ancient church whereof in words they bragg somoche.
greater sacrilege then to break and pull down the aultars.

In those days (as by this author yt may be perceived) yt was religion to
say that the altar is the seat of the body and blood of Christ. Whereby as
the presence of the very body and blood in the Sacrament may evidently be
perceived to have been faithfully believed and taught: So may yt that the
aultars, for that they were accounted the seat of the body and blood of
Christ, were reverently used. Yt is easy also to perceive how that in those
days the use of the altar was to offer upon, as ye may perceive by his
allegacion of Chrysts sainge. If then to pull down and destroy aultars be so
heynouse and great an offense, that there is no sacrilege greater than yt, and
this was so thought above eleven hondreth years agon, I wish them that find
them selves guilty of soche facts to have consideracion of their doings, if
they have any regard to the judgments and aduertisements of the ancient
Fathers. If they will not creditte Lib. 6. cap. 23. The impudens fact of
Iulianus in possing against the holy altar.


In the tripartite history we read that in the tlme of Iulianus Apostata, one
called Iulianus being the ruler of the east parts under the same wicked Julian
then Emperor, entered in to a church, and pissed against the altar. The
words of Theodorete be these: Iulianus praefectus impudenter contra sacrum
altar minxit, quem cum Euzoius prohibere tentaret, eum ille percussit in
capite. Julian the president impudently pissed against the holy altar, whom
when Euzoius would have forbidden, he struck him upon the head. Here by the
report Iulianus, where by the way note that the author calls yt an impudent
fact, and also calls the altar an holy altar.

And now hear the punishint of this fact. The author reporting the wiked
doings of the said Iulianus, and of one Felix together, shewinge both their
punishiments says thus: Sed pro ijs impietatibus vesanisque praesumptionibus
non post multum paenas exacti sunt. Nam repent Iulianus saeuo morbo correptus
viseribus putrefactis interijt. and excrementa non per meatus egestinos
emittebat, sed scelestum os, quod blasphemijs ministrauerat, organum huius
excretionis est factum. But Abuse of aultars and spoilt of churches punished.
for all these wickednesses, and furiose presumptions, they within a little
while after, suffered pains. For Iulianus being suddenly taken with a sore
disease his bowels being putrifieddied, and he did not void the excrements by
the lower parts of his body. But the wiked mouth, that had been an instrument
to blasphemies, was now made an organ of excretion. Thus much the
ecclesiesticall history.

In which, as before we saw the offense of the man: So now perceive Arrius
his filthy death.
we the punishment. Arrius was a blasphemouse heretic whose heinouse offense,
was (by his death inflicted of God) declared to all the world, to be to God
very greuouse, and displeasaunt, and yet yt was not more grievously punished
then this. For that man though he in easing of nature, by gods

But once, to finish this matter, and to return to our text, and to Anselmus
whose exposition we alleged: ye may by this that is said well peceiue that
both the name of the altar, and also the use of yt, is comed to us from the
primitive church. So that this author Anselmus is not the first author

Neither only are we moved by the exposition of this author to understand
Altar wherefore yt serves.
S. Paul to speak of the aultars: but also to understand him to have spoken
of the sacrifice of the same altar of Christ. for that therein he implies the
sacrifice of Chrysts body and blood, by cause an altar generaly serves to
bear a sacrifice: wherefore particularly the altar of Christ serves to bear
the sacrifice of Christ. To this understanding of S. Paul the very letter
leads: S. Paul's own argument made to the Corinthians enforeth. For when he
says unto them: Ye can not drink the cup of our lord, and the cup of
deuells: ye can not be partakers of the table of our lord, and of the table
deuells. In both parts he calls yt indifferently the cup. So that to the
vessel of our Lords table he gives no other term

Thus then ye see that of the very letter, and of Saint Paul's argument, if
yt shall have any force by the comparison, which he here makes, that as he
spoke of the sacrifice of Deuells on the one side: so he spoke of the sacrifice
of our Lord on the other side. For as Hilarie says. Omnis comparatio ad
intelligentiae formam praesumitur, vt id, de quo agitur, secundum exemplum
propositum assequamur. Every comparison is taken to the form Hilar de Trinit
li. 8
of understanding, that we may atteign yt that is spoken of according to the
example that is proposed.

Now if Saint Paul making his comparison should in one part speak of one
thing, and in the other part of an other thing, how should

To this if ye add the sainges of Saint Cyprian and Chrysostom in the last
chapter, and the expositions of all the doctors upon these textes of Saint
Paul: The cup of blessinge, etc. and, The bread which we break, etc. Which
ye shall sinde before alleged in this book, which all so show the mind of
Saint Paul, as that he spoke not only in these places of the body and
blood of Christ in the Sacrament, as there verily present: But also as yt is a
sacrifice, ye shall if ye will, easily perceive and understand the truth of
the matter, that Saint Paul in this disputacion with the Corynthians,
treacted of the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament as of a sacrifice.
To the understanding of which truth much light is added by that is declared,
that the ancient Fathers of the primitive Church accepted both the name and
the use of an altar, which argues a sacrifice. For a sacrifice, and an
altar be (as yt were) Correlatiues: Altar and Sacrifice be correlatiues.
So that whether yt be extern or interne sacrifice, yt has answetablie removed
and took away aultars. But what soever the Adversary has

THE TWO AND THIRTETH CHAP. UPON OCCAsion that yt is proved, that the
primitive Church used the altar, and reputed the body and blood of Christ to
be a Sacrifice, begins to treact of the same sacrifice, which we commonly
call the Mass.
AS the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood is (as Dionysius Areopagita
says) of all Sacraments most excellent, and most honorable, perfecting and
consummating al other Sacraments: Even so is there none that Satan more
cruelly persecuteth by his minysters in these our days than this. For of all
the parts or members ^ this he leaves none untouched and not impugned: The
presence he utterly denies:

But forasmoche as S. Paul has taught us that the body and blood of Christ
be our sacrifice, and the Fathers of the primitive Church did so receive yt
and believe yt: by breaking and drinking of which in the altar of

As for the name, I can but merueill what they mien that so furiously rage
Mass the word how yt comes.
against yt, considering that yt was not yesterdaie begone or invented: but used
in the primitive Church, and from the primitive Church in the same
significacion as yt is at this present day. For this word, Mass, which is
used in the english tongue: And Missa, which to signify the same is used in
the latin tongue, be (as the learned in the tounges say) Hebrew words. In
the which tongue of this word (Mas) comes Missa, which in significacion is
all one with the greek word (Liturgia) insomoche that if a man would
translate or interpret this word (Missa) into greek, he can have no meeter
word, then this word (Liturgia) and justly done by the word (officium) as
yt signifies our duty in doing Missa. Liturgia. Officium.


And although these words, Missa, Liturgia, and officium, be of more large
significacion: yet have they ben by great ancient Fathers of Christ's Church
restreigned, and limited to signify only our sacrifice, and service to God.
Wherefore in the greek Church the Mass of Saint Basil war called Liturgia,
the Mass of Saint Chrysostom was called Liturgia. So is this word,
officium, used in Saint Lukes Gospel where he speaks of Zacharias the priest
and father of Saint John Baptist: Et factum est, vt impleti sunt dies officij
eius, abijt in domum suam. And when the time of his service was Luc. 1.
expired, he went home. In which sainge this word, service, is taken for the
sacrifice and divine service done in the time of his course in the temple. And
that this word Missa, which the latins have borrowed of the Hebrews, has been used of the Fathers of the latin Church, for the sacrifice and service of
God, which we call Mass, few that have used to readd those Fathers be
ignorant.

And here to begin with that holy Leo the first, who was, as ye have Necesse
est vt quaedam pars populi sua deuotione priuetur si vnius tantum Missae more
seruato Leo epi. 79
sacrificium offerre non possunt, nisi qui prima diei part conuenerint. Yt
must needs be that some part of the people shall be hindered of their devotion,
if the manner of one Mass only being kept, none can offer sacrifice, but they
that come together in the first part of the day. By this saing of Leo, we are
taught, two things: The one is, that Mass here is taken for the common
sacrifice and service of the people to God. Which is easy to be perceived by
that he says that a great part of the people should be hindered of their
devotion, and should not offer sacrifice, if there should be but one Mass. For
the Mass being a common service and sacrifice to God, is or ought by ioinct
affection and devotion of the people to the priest (who is the common ministre
of the Church, and offreth for them all) to be offered of them all. And
therefore the priest says plurallie, offerimus, we offer. And when he
obtulimus, we have offered. And this common offering or sacrifice is commonly
called Mass.

The other is that there may be mo Masses then one in a Church on one day.
Which nombre of Masses in one church, the Proclamer impugneth There may be mo
masses then one in one church and one day.
by a membre of his proclamacion, and charge the catholic Church with an
abuse in that there have been in one Church mo Masses than one in one day. If
he say that yt was done that the people might communicate: I content me, let
yt be so (though the truth is, is was done that all the people might
sacrifice) Then for communion there may be no Masses then one in one day. Then
if there be five ten, or twenty communions in one day there may be five, ten,
or twenty Masses in one Church in one day. For why not as well twenty as two,
and those as well for thoffring of sacrifice, as for communion? what scripture
has the Proclamer to the contrary? But thus much out of the principal
matter by occasion, as the like shall Telesphorus.

But now as touching the name of Mass, we find yt also used of Saint
Ambrose. For he says of him self: Ego mansi in munere, missam Ambrosius
epist. 33.
facere cepi, orare in oblatione Deum, vt subueniret. I did abide in my office:
I began to say Mass: to pray God in the sacrifice, that he would help.

So familiare was the name of the Mass, that as yt is thought, Saint Ambrose
making two godly prayers to be said before Mass, he entitled them: the
prayers preparatiue before Mass. Yt is not unlike that the name of Mass was
familiar in Saint Ambrose days, seeing yt was in use in the time of
Telesphorus. Who being the seventh Bishop of Rome after Saint Peter, was
wellnigh three hundredth years before Saint Ambrose. This man made a statute
that in the feast of the nativity of our Lord there should three Masses be
song. The first, at midnight, when Christ was born in Bethleem: The second,
in the morning, when he was seen of the shepards. The third, about the hour,
that Christ suffered his passion. And ye may perceive that yt was the Mass
now in use for a Telesphor. Three masses commanded to be done on Christ
maesse day. 140 years ago^.
Gloria in excelsis, commanded to be song before the sacrifice should be
offered. From this man's time who lived more the fourten hundredth years agon,
not only the name of Mass has been in the Church: But also on the day of
the Nativity of our Lord, three Masses have been used in the Church. For some
proof whereof we have Saint Gregory, who upon the Gospel of Saint Luke
readde that day in the Church, making an homely or sermon to the people
says thus. Quia missarum solemnia ter hodie celebraturi sumus, diude Greg.
hom,
Euangelica lectione loqui non possumus. Because this day we must sing three
solemn Masses, we can not long speak of the Evangelical lesson. That this
has been also observed in these later days, there is no doubt. Then seeing yt
has been solemnly observed so long time, to sing three solemn Masses upon the
day of Christ's birth, who can be so blind

Now here by the way note how true the article of the Proclamer is, where in
he avouches that yt can not be showed, that mo Masses then one were said in
one day. Yt is I suppose, laufull to have mo then one on a day, when first we
find yt by so ancient, and so holy a Martyr commanded, and that so nere to
the beginning of the Church. Secondarely, for that Leo gave order that in one
day, and in one Church mo Masses should be celebrated then one. Thirdly, we
may judge yt laufull, forasmoche as we find yt so observed to Saint
Gregory's time. In all which time, who can doubt the Church to have been in
good perfection. And if the Church did repute yt well done that time: If so
many learned men, as were in that flowrishing time, which was for the space
of four hundredth years, in the which time lived: Tertullian, Cyprian, Hylary,
Hierom, Ambrose, Augusten, and a nombre of men both famous in holiness of
life, and excellency of learning did practice the same, did observe, and
follow the same: What may we, or not fiftene, and so forth, where the nombre of
preistes and denocion of the people suffice and require. The Proclamer brageth
much of the primititi^e church, but his doings be against yt.


Thus ye may see how the Proclamer bragging of the primitive Church, is
confownded by the primitive Church. He would with words of the primitive
Church, bleer the eyes of men, when the doings of the same Church shall cause
them to see him overthrown. And thus by shameful speakinge against the truth
he gives occasion to his own shame, to have the truth showed, And here also
yt is to be observed, that this impugnacion of the nnmbre of Masses can not
procead out of any godly or virtuous principle. For if yt be godly, and to
our duty apparteining highly to esteem Christ's passion and death for our
redemption therein wrought, to render to God and our Savior Christ, most humble
hearty and often thanks, and often also to do that solemn memorial that
Christ himself has appoincted to be done, all which be done in the Mass,
what should let, or what likely or apparaunt dissuasion can this Proclamer
make that the Mass should be seldomer, and not raither oftener done? Soche
doctrine as moves to virtue, to the setting forth of Gods honor, is to be
The final mark that Satan shoots at.
may be coniectured, that where they beginue to diminish the memory of Christ
they will afterward clean extingnish yt. And so at the last altogether wipe
Christ from all memory.

But to return to our chief purpose: Although this suffices to prove the
name of Mass, the use of Mass, and the use of moo Masses then one in one day
and one place, to be right ancient, yet we shall ascend somewhat higher, and
come nearer to the Apostles time. Before Telesphorus, was Sixtus, who
commanded that when the priest began the solemn action of the Mass (whereby
is meant the prayers going before the consecracion) the people should singe
Sanctus, Sanctus etc. Which we see to this day observed Sixtus was Alexander
the Martyr, a Roman borne, and about the year of our Lord cxix. Bishop of
Sixtus in Decret. Alexan. in epist. ad orthodox.
Rome. Who made soche a decree, as I find yt in the sum of decrees. In
sacrificio missarum, panis tantum and vinum aqua mixtum offeratur. In the
sacrifice of Masses, let only bread and wine mixed with water be offied.

This man being a Roman borne, an ancient of the Church, and an holy Martyr
with his plain speech of Mass presses the Adversary so sore that he is fain
to sly to his common solucion. Which is to deny the Author. In which his
doing he does not degenerate from his fore graunde Fathers. Marcion for the
maintenance of his heresy rejected the old Testament and the Prophets, all
the Evangelists saving Saint Luke. The Manicheis also rejected the old
Testament. Martin Luther rejected the Epistle of Saint James. The
Sacramentaries reiecte Saint Ambrose books of the Sacraments. And why have
all these denied

But let us see what proof he has to prove that Alexander did not make
Because (says he) The charche in the time of Alexander, did not know this
word Mass. And therefore yt is like not to be his sainge.

This saing shall be divided in to two parts, and to answer the first part
of yt, I say, yt is a merueilouse thing, that he will say of him self
without all authority, yea eue^ against plain authority, that the Church did
not know Alexan. his authortie approved and delinered from the cauile of the
Aduers.
this word Mass, when by authority the contrary is proved. If he will
refuse yt, let him counteruaill yt with like authority, and then we shall
give him place. But naked words without proof in matters of controversy are
not of weight able to prove any thing. For the second part, where he says:
yt is therefore like not to be his sainge: I must say that out of a fainct
antecedent, comes but a weak consequent. Every likelihoode has not the
very verity, no more has his. And therefore in case yt were like (as he
says) yet yt proves not.

But to prove that this is the saing of Alexander, we will use neither bare
words, neither fainct likelihoods. But authority, and probable matter. Conc.
Constantine. 6.
which testifies this to be the saing of Alexander. and never yet against
said by any council that since has been celebrated, or by any famous
learned catholic man. Probable matter we have, that for asmoche as the name
of Mass was in use in the time of S. Gregory, as is allreadie testified. In
the time also of Felix the fourth who was before S. Gregory, in whose time the
use of the thing yt self with the name was so much in use, that he made a
decree that no priest without a great necessity should say mass but in
places hallowed and dedicated to God, where by yt is clear that yt Felixquartus
epistola. ad Episc.
was used also before his time. Now if the name of Mass or the thing were so
straung in that time, as the Adversary would bear us in hand, there should
no soch commandment have been made to will the preistes to celebrate only in
churches, For by this restraint yt may be coniectured, that yt was commonlic
used in profane places, I mien in their houses, no necessity enforcing them
thereto, but their own private devotion.

Now if I were in the Adversaries case and should perceive the use and
continuance of the Mass, and the name of yt to have continued but for so long
time as from Felix hitherto, which is almost a thousand year. I should be
ashamed to take upon me, to reprehende the doing of the wholl christian world
so long used, and the judgment of so many holy and learned men, as in so
much time have lived: And contemning all them to setfurthe mine own
phantafie. But pity yt is to behold, he does not only so, but (arcogancic so
leading him) he reproves the wholl christian world and all the Church and
learned men that have been these eleven hondreth, and three skore years and
more. For even by his own confession yt is evident that the name of Mass has been in use since four hondreth years after Christ For these be his words
toward the end of The Proclamer him self grants the name of Mass to have been used from four hundredth years after Christ.
his sermon: I assure ^owe Brethren, in the time of Peter and James, neither
was there any man that ever heard the name of Mass. For Missa was never named
until four hundredth years after Christ. And yet then was yt no Private Mass
neither. By which use within one hundredth and a few years after Christ. For
better declaracion whereof, we have showed the use of yt in the time of S.
Gregory Felix. But yet here is not the beginning of the matter. For as ye have
heard Leo, who was before this Eelix. and S. Ambrose, who was before, do make
express mention of yt. Thelesporus also and Sixtus that were very nere the
time of Alexander (as yt is before showed) made decrees for the Mass.

Seeing then yt is proved that the name of Mass was in use from owre time to
Sixtus, who was next Bishop of Rome to Alexander: is yt not a probable
matter, or raither does yt not prove in deed, that yt was in use in the time
of the same Alexander. For when Sixtus made the addicion of Sauctus to the
Mass, yt presupposes that the Mass was before his time. If before his time
then neades in the time of Alexander, who went next before him.

Now Reader thowe seist substanciall proof against the Adversary whereby is
proved this to be the saing of Alexander? as some account the fifte Bishop
of Rome after Saint Peter, whom the Adversary would

And now that we have driven the matter thus far, let us here rest with S.
Augustins rule and counsel, which is this: Illa quae per orbem vniuersa
obseruat Ecclesia, datur intelligi vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel a plenarijs
Concilijs, quorum Ad Ianua. epus. ^ 18
est in Ecclesia saluberima authoritas, statuta retineri. Soche things as the
wholl This his false assurance declares both vntreuth, and arrogancy.
vntreuth for yt was in use before four hondreth year: arrogancy that
confessing the use for Mc. years, he does now reject yt.
all the Church, For that which the Greeks call Liturgia, the Latins call
Missa, and in the english tongue both be called Mass, and that name was not
appointed by any general council, but was in use before the first general
council that was holden, we may say by S. Augustines rule, that yt comes
from the Apostles.

And now where is the great assurance that this Proclamer made unto you, wen
he said. I assure you Brethren, that the name of Mass was never named
until four hondreth years after Christ? And among us english men I would see
what other name either the Proclamer, or any other learned or unlearned man,
can show to have been in this realm generally used my heart I tell the cause:
The cause is that he rejects the faith that was Surgam and ibo ad patrem
meum, and dicam ei: Luc. 15.
Pater peccaut in coelum and coram te iam non sum dignus vocari filius tuus
etc. I will arise and go to my Father, and I will say to him: Father I have
sinned against heaven, and before thee: I am not woorthye to be called thy
Son. Which determinacion God grant shortly to come to pass.

THE THREE AND THIRTETH Chapter treacteth of the Mass yt self.
FOrasmoche as Mass has a larger and straiter acception or significacion:
Mass has two significations.
meet yt is that both be declared, that yt may be discerned which of them yt
is that proprely is called Mass. Of Mass in his large signification the
Proclamer, though more like a Sicophant, then a man of true and sincere
report, says, that yt consists in four parts. If he had added the fifte,
or if in the holy consecracion, he also understands holy oblacion he has
declared what Mass is in the large signification. For the holy prayers that
go before consecracion, oblacion, and receiving. and that follow them: holy
doctrine also as the epistle, the Gospel and other scriptures there placed and
readde, with all the Ceremonies thereunto apperteining added and putto of
diverse holy Fathers, to increase, nourish, and conserve the devotion of the
people, Mass prophelie what yt is.
and blood of Christ, the holy oblacion and offringe of the same, in the
memorial and remembrance of his passion and death with humble and lowly
thanks, lawdes, and praises for the same, and holy receiving, of that body
and blood so consecrated. This is yt that proprely is called the Mass,
because thus much is instituted of Christ him self. For he in his last Supper
when he had consecrated and offered his blessed body and blood, he said.
Accipite, comedite. Hoc in mei memoriam facite. Take and eat, do this in
remembrance of me. So that consecracion oblacion with thankful remembrance of
Christ's death, and holy receiving, of his blessed body be the things that
proprely be called the Mass. Nam per reliqua Ambr. de Sar. lib. 4. cap. 4.
omnia quae dicuntur, Laus Deo defertur, oratione petitur pro populo, pro
Regibus, pro caeteris. Vbi venitur vt conficiatur venerabile Sacramentum, iam
non suis sermonibus sacerdos, sed vtitur sermonibus Christi. For by all the
other things that be said (says Saint Ambrose) lawde and praise is given
to God, prayer is made for the people, for kings, and for other, but when the
honorable Sacrament shall be consecrated, then the priest uses not his own
words,

As baptism proprely is no more, nor proprelie extends yt self any farther
then to the washing of the body in the name of the Father, and Baptism used
in two significacions.
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost and to the washing of the Soul from sin
by grace given in the ministracion of the same Sacrament: yet the wholl
ministracion and prayers as well before batisme as after used in the same, by a
general significacion is called Baptism. So is the consecracion and oblacion
of the body of Christ with all prayers and Ceremonies either going before or
following the same, by general significacion called Mass.

This brief description of the Mass being made, let us examine the parts of
yt, which of them or how many of the^ be against the word of God,

The first part is consecracion. This part for that by yt is taught the Parts
of the Mass.
presence of Christ's body and blood, which the Proclamer can not abide, is
one cause why he rejects the Mass, But how justly he does it yt may be
perceived through out all this book, in which is proved the presence, which
the catholic Church teaches, and the figure is improued, which the
Adversary mainteineth.

An other part is oblacion or sacrifice, wherein the Church offreth Christ to
God the Father according to the commandment of the same own master Christ
in the memorial of his passion and death. That this part is not against the
scriptures, and the holy Fathers yt is already proved in the declaracion of
the prophecies of Melchisedech, Daniel, and Malachie in the first book,
whereunto is made an addicion, which thowe shall

An other part is receiving of the Sacrament. In the which two things do
offend the Proclamer: The one is that the people do receive under one kind:
The other that the priest receaueth alone. Whether the receiving under one
kind be against the Scriptures, or the practice of the Primitive Church, yt
is disputed, and the truth declared in the second book from the lxiiij chap.
to the. end of lxvijchap. As for the receiving which the Proclamer terms
private, yt shall be hereafter treacted of.

In doctrine, which is an other part, I know not what fault he can find. In
prayer the first and last part of the Mass he finds two faults. The one
that prayer is made to saints: The other that prayer is made for the dead,
for these two we shall have recourse to the primitive Church, and there

Now for the first part of the Mass which is consecracion, I will not much
otherwise here treact of yt, but only laing forth the practice of the
Apostolic and primitive Church therein, compare the doings of

As for the second part, which is the oblacion or sacrifice of Christ's
body, as before yt is declared, that yt is offered according to the will and
commandment or Christ himself, and that by the testimony of the Scripturs,
as they be understood of a nombre of the most ancient Fathers, and by
diverse other grave authorities: So shall yt be now set forth and commended to
you by the practice of the Primitive Church. Which we have differred to this
place.

And forasmoche as the Proclamer to extenuate and abase the honorable When
truth and learning serves not, mocking and skorning be their best arguments.
bring the matter in contempt ask by way of skorn, why raither we say not
that Christ him self said Mass, for that were the nearer way to bring the
Mass in creditte: I shall by good and sufficient authority show that not
only Saint Peter and Saint James, but also Christ him self did say Mass.
And so beginning at Christ descend to three or four hundredth years after
Christ, and show the practice of the Church. And for this time I will
ouerpasse the farther mock and skorn that he makes against the blessed Mass,
asking why we do not raither say that Aaron and his chapleins said Mass,
For in deed (says he) as yt has been used, the Church has had much more of
the Robes of the Ceremonies, and of the sacrifices of Aaron, then of the
institucion or ordeinance of Christ. For is I should touch him for that, I
should cause Arons garment worn for a Bishopporke, and the Communion
ministered in a cope.
Aarons garment for a Bishoppericke. So well agrees his doing and his
preaching together. And thus scoffing at the garments that be now yet used,
he seems to me not to like this order of Religion that he lives in, but
raither to reprove this as he does the other: For in this poinct by his
judgment they hold both of Aaron.

But letting this pass I will return to my matter, and wish the Reader to
remember, what this word Mass does signify, as yt is declared in the last
chapter and therewith to have in mind, as yt is said in this chapter,
Christ said Mass.
that Mass is the action of the consecracion, oblacion and receiving of the
body and blood of Christ, and so understanding Mass, I say that Christ did
say Mass. For he in his last Supper did institute Mass, and did there
consecrate his body and blood, and offered them in sacrifice, may satisfy a
man) let him read the Epistle of Saint Ciprian to Cecilius, Epist. li. 2.
Epist. 3.


First for the consecracion he says thus: Vt in Genesi per Melchisedech
Sacerdotem benedictio circa Abraham possit rite celebrari, praecedit ante imago
sacrificij in pane and vino scilicet constituta. Quam rem perficiens and
adimpleus Dominus panem and calicem vino mixtum obtulit, and qui est plenitudo
veritatem praesiguratae imaginis adimpleuit. That the benediction in Genesis by
Melchisedech the priest might be celebrated accordingly about Abraham, the
image of the Sacrifice appoincted in bread and wine goes before. Which thing
our lotde perfecting and fullfilling offered bread and the cup mixed with
wine, and he that is the fulness, has fullfilled the verity of the
presigurated image.

Holy Ciprian teaches here that the bread and wine offered by Melschisedechi,
were the prefigurated image of the verity fullfilled by Christ. What the
verity is he does in the same epistle declare when he says: Obtulit hoc idem
quod Melchisedec obtulerat, id est panem and vinum, suum scilicet corpus and
sanguinem. He did offer even the same that Melchisedech offered, that is to
say, bread and wine, that is to wit, his own body and blood. Christ then
fullfilling the verity of Melchisedechs bread and wine, made bread and wine
his body and blood, which fullfilling of the verity, and making the bread
and wine his body and blood, what is yt else, but that we call consecracion?
This body so consectated, is offered of us in sacrifice, as the same Saint
Ciprian disputing against them that used only water in the Sacrifice,
testifies and says: Quaerendum est enim ipsi quem sint secuti. Nam si in
sacrificio quod Christus est, non nisi Christus sequendus est: vtique id nos
obaudire, and facere oportet, quod Christus secit, and quod faciendum esse
mandauit. Yt must be asked, whom they have followed. The Sacrifice in the Maste
is Christ himself.
For if in the Sacrifice which is Christ, none is to be followed but Christ, we
must then obey and do that that Christ did, and that he commanded to be done.

Mark well these words: that in the Sacrifice which is Christ, In the
Sacrifice (says he) which is Christ.

That the Church is commanded by Christ to offer this sacrifice, in the
remembrance of him, the same Saint Ciprian by most express and plain words
does teach, saing: Quodsi nec minima de mandatis Dominicis licet soluere:
quanto magis tam magna r tam grandia, tam adipsum Dominicae passionis and
nostrae redemptionis Sacramentum pertinentia, fas non est infringere, aut in
aliud quam quod Diuinitus institttum est, humana traditione mutare? Nam si
Jesus Christus Dominus and Deus noster, ipse est summus sacerdos Dei Patris,
and sacrificium ipse primus obtulit, and hoc fieri in sui commemorationem
praecepit, vtique ille Sacerdos vice Christi vere sungitur, qui id quod
Christus fecit, imitatur. Et sacrificium verum and plenum tunc offert in
Ecclesia Deo Patri, si sic incipiat offerre, secundum quod ipsum Christum
viderit obtulisse. If then yt be not laufull to break the least of the
commandments of our Lord, how much more yt is not laufull to infringe or
break things so great, so weighty, so apperteining to the very Sacrament of
the passion of our Lord, and of our Redemption, or else by man's tradicion to
change yt into any other thing, then that that The same sacrifice that
Christ did is commanded to be offered in his church.
the high priest of God the Father, and he first did offer this sacrifice, and
commanded this to be done in the remembrance of him: that pressed does the
office of Christ truly, that does follow that, that Christ has done. And then
does he offer in the Church unto God the Father a true, and a full sacrifice,
if he so begin to offer, as he has seen Christ him self to have offered. Thus
much S, Ciprian.

Many things are in this saing of Ciprian to be noted which I shall breiflie
touch and passover First, yt is to be observed, that to alter the institucion
of Christ is a great and a weighty matter, which he accompteth to be altered,
when either water alone or wine alone is ysed in the ministracion, and not both
together mixed. Wherein I wish the Adversary to weigh whether he offend not in
a weighty and a great matter, when he breaks and alters the institution of
Christ, as Saint Ciprian says, in that he uses but wine alone in the
ministracion. And farther observe The Communions in England test ifie the breach
of these ordo^nances and mo to.
that if to take away wine or water from the ministracion be a great and

And here by the way to note, yt is merueilouse to behold how the Deuell
bewitcheth this man. For he sindeth great fault with the Church, and would make
those which he reputeth faults to be as Mowntaines in the seight of the
people, as the using and wearing of ornaments in the ministracion, the
speaking of the words of consecracion high or low, and soch other: And yet
the denial of the presence of Christ's body and blood to be in the
Sacrament, he accompteth yt but a small matter.

In the Apology of the Church of England, which seems an arrowe The
Appologie and the Proclamacio^ both like bolts.
that came out of the same quoiuer that this Sermon did, and to be both
feathered whith the feathers of one Goose, of like manner, and coolor, I mien,
of phrase and matter, so near and so like are they or raither the same, that a
man may well think, they be one man's boltes. In that Apology, I say, the
Author being so desirouse to hide and cloak the famous and notable
dissension in weighty matters of Faith betwixt Luther, and Zwinglius, says
that they were both good and excellent men, and they did not (says he) vary
in great matters of faith, as of iustificacion, and soche like, but they varied
in a little matter, a matter of no great weight. And yet that little matter was
the matter of the Sacrament. For Luther taught the presence of Christ's body
in the Sacrament. But Zuinglius denies yt, as this proclamer does. And so
that, which Saint Cyprian accompteth a great and a weighty matter: this man
being blind by this man not a little exclamed at. For here are we Papists:
here are

But how soever he judges, holy Ciprian judges him and all soche as he is
greuouse offenders and brakers of the institucion of Christ, that do so alter
Christ's institucion, that where yt pleased him of the abundant and unspeakable
love that he bears to us, to ordein his own blessed body to be ministered
unto us in the holy Sacrament, as a pledge of that same his love to our great
consolacion and comfort, and to our great benefitt both in body and soul:
they will ministre and give unto us not his body, but a piece of bread and a
cup of wine. But that Christ did give forth his own body and blood, and
not bread and wine ye have before heard yt declaretd. For Christ fulfilled
that in verity Melchisedeth did in figure. Melchisedech offered bread and wine:
Christ perfecting that figure offered bread and wine, that is (says holy
Ciprian) his body and blood. Note then that Saint Ciprian expownding the
fullfilling of the figure of bread and wine offered by Melchisedech says not
that Christ offered bare bread and wine, but bread and wine, that was his body
and blood. wiche blessed bread and wine of his body and blood being made
present by his almighty power, by the turninge of material bread and wine
into his body and blood is the right fullfilling of the figurative bread and
wine offered by Melchisedech. Ita nunc sanguinem suum in vino consecrauit, qui
tune vinum in sanguine Tertull. co^. Martione^. Consecracion the word used by
Tertul.
figurauit. So now (says Tertulian) he has consecrated his blood in wine,
who then figured wine in his blood. Thus then ye perceive that Christ did
consecrate his body and blood, which word of consecracion ye see that
Tertulian abhoreth not, although yt mislike many in these days, but uses yt
as the Church now uses yt, and says that Christ did

An other note we have which is this, that Jesus Christ our lord and God the
high priest of God the Father did first offer this sacrifice. In which words
we are taught not only that he did in his last Supper offer a Sacrifice, but
that he did then offer a Sacrifice, that was never offered before. Let us
therefore discuss and search what sacrifice that was. Yt was not a sacrificie
of figurative bread and wine, For that also was offered by Aarons preistes: yt
was not a sacrifice of thanks giving only, For that was both in the law of
nature, and by the law of Moises, and also by Christ diverse times done. What
sacrifice was yt then? was yt a sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech? Yt
was a sacrifice after the order of Melchisedech. But yt may be said that that
sacrifice was ofred by Melchisedech thousand of years before Christ, so that
Christ was not the first that did offer after that manner, wherefore yt should
appear, Melchisedech offered sacrifice in bread and wine, as yt is proved in
the first book. But Melchisedech offered bread and wine in figure, Christ
offered after the same order, bread and wine in verity. What did he offer in
verity? That that the bread and wine of Melchisedech did figure, what Christ
in his last Supper offered his body and blood in sacrifice.
Melchisedech and other did offer yt in figure. For as Saint Ambrose says:
Christus formam Sacrificij perennis instituens, hostiam se primus obtulit, and
primus docuit offerri, Christ instituting Ambro. in praesaction Miss in cana
Dom.
the form of the everlasting sacrifice, he first offered him self a sacrifice,
and first taught yt to offered.

And that Christ did offer his own blessed body in sacrifice Saint Ciprian
has taught us. For first he said that Christ offered bread and wine, that is
(says he) his body and blood, and now teaching how yt is offered, he
says that yt is offered in sacrifice. Thus, if I be not deceived, the matter
is plain that Christ did offer his body in his last Supper in sacrifice. And
if the Adversary can show what sacrifice yt was else that Christ did first
offer, yt may somewhat make for him. if he can not (as I am sure he can not)
let him give place to the truth taught by the holy Fathers in the ancient
Curche.

Thus much then for this note being said, let us farther consider what is
said of this holy Father. He says not only that Christ did first offer
this sacrifice, but he says also: Et hoc fieri in sui commemorationem
praecepit. And he commanded this to be done in the remembrance of him. Here I
would learn of the Adversary which shall be the substantive to the Pronowne
This, yt is manifiest to him and to all that have but their grammar rules, that
this word, Sacrificium, is the Substantive. Then must yt of necessity follow
that our lord and God Jesus Christ has commanded us to offer We acc
commanded by Christ to offer the same sacrifice that he offered.
this sacrifice in remembrance of him, that he offered in his last Supper,
which sacrifice is his blessed body and blood. Wherefore I wish this to be
well noted, that howsoever the enemies of Christ do rail at the catholic
Church, and at the ministres of the same, for that they do teach that in the
Mass they offer sacrifice to God: yet we are so commanded to do by the
authority of Christ, as here by holy Ciprian ye

Neither is this to be ouerpassed, but diligently to be noted, that where the
same enemies of Christ in their sondrie works do triumph against certain
learned catholic men, for that they say that power is given to Christ's
Church to offer sacrifice by these words of Christ, This do ye in the
remembrance of me: for asmoche as holy Ciprian says, that Christ has
commanded us to offer his body in sacrifice, and before him so said
Irenaeus, and after him so said Saint Ambrose, and diverse other holy
learned Fathers, I would learn of them, what place else in the scripture there
is whereupon these ancient Fathers, do grownde these their sainges. But let
them mock and skorn at Christ's truth as the Phariseis and Scribes did at him
self, yet as Christ remained, and remains, and shall for ever remain, and
shall condemn the wiked generation: So does and shall this truth remain to
their condemnacion.

And howesouer they will labor to obscure yt: yet the holy doctors, who
very well knew by the doctrine of the primitive Church, how the scripture
is to be understood, shall allwaies open the same, and make yt clear. As now
Saint Cyprian in declaring the commandment of Christ, does almost speak the
very words Hoc facite in meam comm^morationem. This do ye in the
remembrance of me. Ciprian says: he commanded this sacrifice to be done in
the remembrance of him. Saint Ambrose likewise growndeth himself upon these
saine words of Christ, when he said: I lord being mindful of thy honorable
passion, come unto thing altar, although unworthy and a sinner, that I may
offer unto thee the sacrifice, that thowe did institute, and commaundest to
be offered in the remembrance of thee. The Ambr. oratione praepar. ad Missem.
same allusion have other Fathers also. So that yt is as clear as the day
light among the ancient doctors, that Christ by these words commanded his
Church to offer his body and blood in sacrifice.

Now once to end the notes that may be made upon Saint Ciprian, and to
stop the mouths of them that speak wicked things, as says the spalmist:
Note well the last part of Saint Ciprians sainges, and ye shall see, that
both Christ did offer sacrifice in his last Supper and that we also do offer
sacrifice, if we do observe, and keep the institucion of Christ. For Saint
Ciprian says: Sacerdos vice Christi vere sungitur, si id quod Christus
secerit imitatur. and sacrificium verum and pleanum tunc offert in Ecclesia Deo
Patri, si sic incipiat offerre secundum quod ipsum Christum viderit obtulisse.
The priest does truly exercise the ministracion of Christ, if he follow
that that Christ has done, and then does he offer in the Chruche unto God the
Father a true and sull sacrifice, if he so begin to offer, as he has seen
Christ to have offered. In which sentence this may be noted, first that Christ
did offer sacrifice in the last Supper, which the Adversary denies.
Secondarely, that the Church following the institucion of Christ, offreth to
God, a full and a true sacrifice, which also the Adversary denies. By this
then ye perceive these two parts of the Mass, that is, holy consecracion,
and oblacion, to be done by Christ in his holy ministracion.

As for the third, which is holy receiving, there is no controversy betwixt
us and the Adversary. Yt is more then neadeth to be spoken of, that both
Christ him self, and all the Apostles present at the board of Christ, did eat
of that holy oblacion or sacrifice. These three being the substanciall

THE FOUR AND THIRTETH Chapter
THe Mass (as is said, and proved) being instituted by Christ, and by him
also commanded to be practiced and used of his Church: yt shall be expedient
and necessary that we see how and in what manner that his commandment was
executed, and his institucio^ practiced, first, by the Apostles, and after by
the holy Fathers of the primitive and ancient Chruche. For they well knowing
Christ's very mind, their doings are to us a perfect exposition and
declaracio^of the same. Wherefore minding to see them, they shall yet so be
seen, as both the practice of the Mass of the catholic Church now in use,
and the practice also of the Schismatic Church may be plainly laid forth
and compared to the former practices, that therbie trial may be made, whether
of these two agree or disagree with the Apostolic and primitive Church. If
we of the catholic

And before I enter to declare this practice. I wish the reader to be
advertised, and to have this for a general rule, that where in this Process we
shall treact of the Mass and call yt the Mass of S. Peter, of S. Andrewe, of
S. James, of S. Clement. or S. Dionise Mass, S. Basills Mass, Chrisostomes
Mass, S. Ambrose Mass, and soche other, that we do not neither is yt so to
be betaken, that these distinctions be upon the propre significacio^ of the
Mass that is, that these Masses be distincted in the substanciall parts of
Mass: as that Mass of the Apostles and Fathers, and that is used now in the
Church, all one in substance.
But all one, are not called S. Peter's Mass, nor S. James Mass and so forth:
But Christ's Mass. For these things be of his institucion, and not of theirs.
The diversity of Ceremonies, prayers, and other manners, is of the^ by the
magisterie of the holy Ghost instituted, and not of Christ. In this process
then be diligent to see the agreement in the substanciall matters of
ministracion, be yt either Mass or Communion, and if any be fownde to vary
in the substanciall parts from the doctrine of the Apostolic and primitive
Chruche, discredit them, and reject them: and soche as

And that the matter, as yt is confessed on either part, may clerlie appear,
and as yt were lie flat before you, understand, that the catholic, Mass
what yt is
Church reteining the name of Mass, confesses yt, as is said, tobe a
consecracion

To enter into this matter, let us first see the manners of the ministration of
the Apostles. And forasmoche os the Proclamer with a certain skof or skorn of
(some say) begins with the chief Apostle S. Peter, saing that some say, he
said Mass at Rome: I will also first begin with him. And albeit, as is
said, yt is spoken with skorn that he said Mass: yet if yt be well weighed,
the skorn turns to the Proclamers own head. For if some (though in skorn) he
has confessed more for the truth, then he is hable to bring to maintein his
untruth. For if we have some to say for us, and he none to say for him,
whose cause is best, yt is easy to judge.

That S. Peter said Mass at Rome I can not doubt, for that he and S. Paul
being the fownders of the Church there, as Irenaeus witnesses and Peter being
there Bishop resident xxv years, as both Eusebius, and S. Hierom do testify,
yt may not be thought of soche an Apostle, so fervently Irenaeus li. 3 cap.
3. Eusebius. eccl. hist. lib. 3. cap. 2. Hieron. li. eccl. scriptoru^. Hugo de S.
Vict. lib. 2. de Sac. part 8. cap. 14.
professing, and following Christ, for so long time to have neclected that part
of his duty. And that he thersaied Mass yt proves well, that before being
resident at Antioche he is of diverse testified so to have done. Wherefore yt
well follows that he saing Mass at Antioche, where he was first resident,
Irenaeus says) he fownded the church, and was all the rest of his life
resident.

That he said Mass at Antioche Hugo de S. Victorys a plain witness, who
says thus. Celebratio Missae in co^memoratione^ passionis Christi agitur,
sicut ipse praecepit Apostolis, tradens eis corpus and sanguinem suum dicens,
Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Hanc Missam beatus Petrus Apostolus primus
omnium Antiochiae dicitur celebrasse, in quae tres tantum orationes in initio
fidei dicebantur. The celebracion of the Mass is done in the commemoracion of
the passion of Christ, as he commanded the Apostoles, delivering unto them
his body and blood, saing: This doye S Peter said Mass at Antioche.
in remembrance of me. This Mass S. Peter the Apostle is said first of all to
have said at Antioche, in the which in the beginni^g of the faith there were
oneli three prayers said. Thus much he. In whom besides his testimony that
S. Peter said Mass at Antioche, yt is also testified and taught, that Christ
did institute the Mass, in the which he delivered his body and blood. And
that yt should not be left in doubt what Mass S. Peter said, this author
says that he said this Mass wherein is delivered the body and blood of
Christ, which is the Mass of the catholic Church.

A much like testimony gives Remigius. But yt shall suffice to hear the
testimony of Isi lorus, who is the eldest of these three, for he lived more
then Jsid. li. 1. de off. ecl. cap. 15.
nine hundredth years agon, who says thus: Ordo Missae vel orationum, quibus
oblata Deo sacrificia consecrantur, primum est a sancto Perro institutus. The
order of the Mass or of the prayers, with the which the sacrifices offered to
God are consecrated, was first instituted of S. Peter. Thus Isidorus. In which
his saing yt is to be noted, that he makes not S. Peter the institutour or
author of the Cap. vltim.
Mass. For (as yt is showed in the first book) he does attribute that to
Christ, but he makes him the author of a certain order of the Mass, and of
prayers to be said at the consecracion, oblacion, and mynistracion done in the
Mass, but not of the Mass yt self. Thus much being said to answer the
Proclamer for S. Peter's Mass, let us now procead.

Yt may perchance seem strange to the Proclamer, to say that S. Paul said
Mass: but that he did so, to the faithful Chrystian considering the weight of
that, that shall be said, yt shall be made manifest. Yt is therefore to S.
Paul said Mass
be remembered that Mass, as yt is taken in the propre significacion is no
more, but the consecracion oblacion, and receiving of Christ's blessed body
and blood. Mass largely taken is both the consecracion, oblacion, receiving,
and also a certain order of rites, ceremonies, prayers, and 1. Cor. 11.
That he made a certain order, his own words will prove yt. For when he had
travailed to reduce the Corinthia^s to the right institucio^ of Christ, that
is, to the honorable manner of the mynistracion of his body and blood, which
is the consecracio^, oblacio^, and godly receiving of the same, in the end of
all he says: Caetera cum venero dispona^. Other things I shall set in order
when I come, As who might say: I have now given instructions as touching the
substancial parts of the Mass about the well doing of the which lies drink
that blood: and that ye might perceive some foreshewe and feel (as

That thus S. Paul did mien, the expositours of the scriptures bear witness.
Hugo Cardinalis says thus: Caetera necessaria ad sumptionem Eucharistiae, et
ad ordinationem ecclesiasticam, cum venero disponam. Other things necessary
for the receipt of the Sacrament, and the ordeinance of the Church, I shall
dispose Hugo in 11 1. Cor.
and set in order when I come. But though this exposition may like the quiett
man: Yet yt is like not to please the contentiouse Sacramentarie. Wherefore we
will hear S. Hierom who breiflie says thus: Caetera de ipsius mysterii
sacramento, cum venero disponam. Other things as concerning the sacrament
Hiero^. ibid
of that mystery when I come. I shall take order for them. Thus

The necessary, substanciall, and weighty parts of the Sacrament being spoken
of in the, x. and xi. chapters, yt is easy to gather and perceive, that here
he speaks of the ordeinance of the rites ceremonies, and prayers tobe done
about the mynistracion. But that all cauille of the Adversary may utterly
Aug. ad Ianuar.
be removed, the plain exposition, and sentence of S. Augustine shall be heard
upon this place, who says thus. Vnde datur intelligi, quia multum erat vt in
epistola totum agendi ordinem insinuaret, quem vniuersa per orbem obseruat
Ecclesia, ab ipso ordinatum esse quod nulla morum diuersitate variatur. Wherbie
yt is given tobe understood, that yt was to much that in an epistle he
should declare all that order of mynistracion, which the universal Church
throughout the world takes to be ordained of him, forasmoch as yt is not by
any diversity of manners varied, or altered.

If then S. Paul delivered to the Corinthians both the substanciall parts of
the Mass, as is said, and also by this testimony of S. Augustine delivered
unto them the ceremonial part, that is, the order and manner of celebracion, Ad
Januar. epist. 118.
observes. But the universal Church observes the order of Mass. Wherefore yt
is the order of Mass that S. Paul speaks of. And what should we think but
that these two chief Apostles and the other also should setfurth the order of
the mynistracion of the Sacrament, the order of the Mass, since that Christ
instituting the thing, left the order and manner of the mynistracion to them,
Christ himself instituted the substanciall parts of the Mass, but left the
order of mynistracion to the Apostles.
as S. Augustine is a strong and a plain witness saing: Non praecepit quo
deinceps ordine sumeretur, vt Apostolis, per quos ecclesias erat dispositurus,
seruaret hunc locum. Christ gave no commandment after what order yt should
afterward be received, because he would leave that place to his Apostles, by
whom he would set his Church in order.

In this saing of S. Augustine note that Christ instituting the holy
mynistracion, did, as is said, only institute the substanciall parts of the
Mass the catholic Church for the rites and ceremonies used in the Mass.
For (says he) Christ commanded no crouching no kneelinge, nor no soche
dumb ceremonies as the, Papists do use. Yt is true he commanded none soche,
but he left the order of them to his Apostles, that they in those matters
should take order. Wherefore the Adversary may not draw the Church to do
nothing more in the holy mynistracion, then Christ did. For so, as by S.
Augustine yt may be perceived, Christ himself would not, but he would have an
order and manner therein, which he would should be made by his Apostles, and
Church, wherefore let not the Adversary use any more his vain argument:
Christ did not this, or, Christ did not that, therefore we should not do yt. For
soch doings he left to the order of his Church. And forasmoch as he so did we
must with reverent obedience accept and regard, that by her is ordained.

And now seeing that Christ has left soch order by other then by himself to
be made, what should yt offend the Proclamer to hear that S. Peter, and S.
Paul did make a certain order, and certain prayers to be used in the Mass,

As S. Peter and S. Paul are testified to have said Mass, So is S. Andrew
the S. Andre as Apost. ad Aegea^.
brother of S. Peter, who after he had with much trauaill and many miracles
preached Christ's faith in Scythia in Europe, which contrie happened to him
when the Apostles divided themselves to preach throughout the woorld He came to
Patras in Greece, where being resisted by Aegeas the Proconsull, and by him
apprehended, in giving an account of his doings, said thus to the same
Aegeas: Omnipotenti Deo, qui vnus and verus est Deus, ego omni die sacrifico,
non S. Andrew offered sacrifice daily.
thuris fumu^, nec tauroru^ mugientiu^ carnes, nec hircoru^ sanguine^ sed
immaculatu^ agnu^ qnotidie in altari crucis sacrifico, cuius carnes postqaam
omnis populus credentiu^ manducauerit, and eius sanguine^ biberit, agnus qui
sacrificatus est, integer perseuerat and vinus. Et cu^m vere sacrificatus
fuerit and vere carnes eius manducatae sint a populo, and vere sanguis eius sit
bibitus: tamen (vt dixi) integer permanet. and vinus. Unto the Almighty God,
which

Although in this saing of S. Andrew here is no mencio^ made of the word Mass
what yt is.
Mass: yet he has reported himself to have doe^ that thing that he should
have doe^, if he had said that he said Mass. For call to remembrance what we
have said Mass to be: yt is to consecrate the body and blood of Christ, to
offer the same in sacrifice, and to receive yt. These three S. Andrewe
reports himself daily to have done. For he says that in the altar he
sacrificed the immaculate lamb, etc. Wherbie declaring the blessed and
innocent lamb Christ to be on the altar, he declares the consecracion: and
saing

Now let not the Adversary reject the saing of S. Andrew as of none
authority, for yt has been in the Church received many hundredth years,
Achaia, of the passion of S Andrewe, and to this day of no catholic to my
knowledge reproved. To these three Apostles, we shall add one other Apostle S.
James by name, whom with the skoff of somsaie this Proclamer would have made
his audien ce believe that he had never said Mass at Jerusalem, as he would
have persuaded that S. Peter never did at Antioche, or at Rome. But afterward
correcting himself, as a man waking out of a sheape or dream, and better
advised, perchance not knowing when he preached his sermon that the Mass S.
James Mass allowed and praised by the Proclamer.
of S. James was a broad in print, but before he penned yt coming to knowledge,
he corrected his Some say spoken in his dream and unadvisedly, and being now
waking and better advised changes his phrase, and says that yt is
constantly affirmed that S. James said Mass at Jerusalem. And finally he
himself confessing the same and magnifieng and highly extolling yt by soche
comparison as yt likes him to make, he abaseth, depresseth, and

Let us now examen the Mass of S. James, and see whether his manner of
consecracion agrees with ours. Dominus Jesus ea nocte qua tradebatur, vel
potius seipsum tradebat pro vita and salute mundi, accipiens panem in sanctas,
immaculatas, inculpabiles and immortales manus suas, in coelum suspiciens, ac
tibi Deo and Patri ostendens, gratias agens, sanctificans, frangens dedit nobis
Discipulis suis dicens: Accipite, comedite, S. James directed his speech in
the co^secracion to God the Father
Hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis frangitur, and datur in remissionem
peccatorum. Our Lord Jesus the same night that he was betrayed, or raither in
the which he delivered himself for the life and salvation of the world, taking
bread into his holy, undefiled, innocent, and immortal hands, looking up
into heaven, and showing yt unto thee God and Father giving thanks,
sanctifieng, and breaking, gave yt unto us his Disciples saing: Take, eat,
this is my body which is broken for you, and given in the remission of Christ
mixed his cup with wine and water
sins. Then he took the cup and said: Similiter postquam coenauit
accipiens calicem, and permiscens ex vino and aqua, and aspiciens in coelum, ac
ostendens tibi Deo and Patri gratias agens, sanctificans, benedicens, implens
Spiritu sancto, dedit nobis Discipulis suis, dicens: Bibite ex hoc omnes. Hic
est sanguis meus noui Testamenti, qui pro vobis, and multis effunditur and
datur in remissionem peccatorum. Likewise he after he had supped taking the
cup and mingling yt with wine and water, and looking up into heaven, and
showing yt to thee God and Father, giving thanks, sanctifieng, blessing,
filling yt with the holy Ghost, he gave yt unto us his Disciples, saing: Drink
ye all of this. This is my blood of the new Testament, which for you, and
for many is shed and given in the remission of sins.

This was his manner of consecracion. And forasmoche as all the holy Apostles
preached one Christ, one faith one religion, and did all see Christ setting
forth this one institucion, yt is to be thought in so weighty a matter, Christ
before the consecracion of his body lifted up hiseies, and gave thanks to
his Father.
that they all used one form, which may well be proved to be this, for that
S. James being an Apostle would not in this high ministracion vary or dissent
from other Apostles, but use the same order and manner that they did. Now then
let the Mass of the catholics, and the Communion (as yt devout prayer, and
proceading in his purpose directs his wholl talk to The manner of the
Apostles and catholic priests inco^secracion.
almighty, and also giving thanks he blessed yt, etc. In the which words by
the way note, that as in the Mass of the Apostles these words were used as
directed to God the Father: He lifted up his eyes, and gave thanks to the God
and Father: So in the Mass of the catholic Church yt is said to the Father:
He lifted up his eyes into heaven unto thee God his Father almighty, and to
thee giving thanks blessed yt, etc. Wherein is made direction of words to God
the Father, as was in the Apostles Mass. And here also this may be noted that
the rule of the Apostles Mass was, that when the priest came to the
consecracion, following the example of Christ, who took the bread into his
holy hands, he took also the bread into his hands: So the priest of the
catholic

Now the mynister of the Schismatic Communion approaching to, I ca^ not tell
The manner of new mynisters in their Communion.
what (for that church not bearing the name of co^secracion, I know not how to
term their doings) hystorically reherseth the words of Chrysts supper, not
as Christ himself and his Apostles did directing his co^municacio^ to God the
father, but passes forth as one that would tell a tale, saing thus: Who in the
same night that he was betrayed, took bread and when he had given thanks, he
brake yt, and gave yt, to his Disciples, saing: Take, eat, this is my body,
which is given for you, do this in the remembrance of me. In these words ye
see no soch direction of speech to Words of the Comunion.
God the father, as Christ and his Apostles made, and as the catholic Church
uses following the^. The mynister says, not to the Father these words: he
looked up into heaven to thee, God and father, and giving thee thanks, but
only makes a bare rehersall of the history. Yt is evident then that in this
part, the schismatic church follows not the manner of the Apostolic

The rule of the Apostolic Church was to take the bread that should
Conference of the Apostles and new mynistres in consecracion of the bread.
be consecrated into their hands: The breach of rule in the Schismatic
Church that they take not the bread into hands, but let yt lie on the table,
as though they had nothing to do withal. In this also they fall not only
from the order received of the Apostles, but also from the doing of Christ, who
(as in S. James Mass yt is said) took bread into his holy immaculate
hands, etc. before he did consecrate yt. And allthough the words of the
Evangelists be not so full as to say that he took bread into his hands: yet
in that they, and S. Paul also say that he took bread, yt imports as much
as S. James says, that he took yt into his hands.

The conference thus far being made about the bread and consecracion of the
body of Christ: let us procead to make conference also about Conference of
the same in the consecracio^ of the wine.
the wine, and the blood. First, as touching the wine, yt is manifest that the
Apostles used to mixte yt with water. For yt is in the Mass of saint James
said, that Christ took the cup and mixed wine water with wine in the same
cup. The Schismatic Communion (if yt

The Evangelists say, that Christ likewise took the cup, that is, as he
took the bread into his holy hands: so took he the cup into his holy
hands. The priest in the catholic Church following Christ's example, and the
Apostles, and Fathers of the primitive Church takes the cup into his hands
before he consecrateth yt. The mynister of the Shismaticall Church herein also
follows not the doing of Christ, nor of the Apostles and primitive Church,
but lets the cup stand as a stranger to him, not taken into the hands.
Christ entering toward the consecracion of his blood continues his
communicacion to his Father with thanks giving. The Apostles beginning the
same direct their words to God the father, as yt is seen in the Mass of
saint James, where they speak to him saing. Giving thanks to the God and
Father. The primitive Church did the like. The catholic Church following
Christ, the Apostles, and primitive Words of the Mass.
Church enters the consecracion of the blood with these words: In like
manner after he had supped taking this cup into his holy and honorable
bands, giving thee also thanks, he blessed yt, and gave yt to his Disciples,
etc.

In which words yt is easy to perceive that the catholic Church
continues her prays to God the Father, and directs her speech to him, as
Christ the Apostles, and the primitive Church did. The late fownde Church,
as about their sacramental bread: so about their sacramental wine leaving
the manner used of Christ, the Apostles, and the primitive Church, proceadeth
only historicallie rehersing the words of Christ Words of the Communion.
thus: Likewise after supper he took the cup, and when he had given thanks
he gave yt to them, saing: Dirnke ye all of this, etc. In which manner how
much soever the Proclamer braggeth for himself and his Church, that they
follow Christ, and the primitive Church, yt may be perceived that these are
but words, For their doings do almost in nothing agree. But let us see more
of the consecration of the cup of our Lord.

The Apostles did not only say that Christ gave thanks to his Father, but
also that he did sanctify and bless yt. The catholic Church following them
says likewise that he gave not only thanks, but also that he blessed yt,
The Proclamers Church says no more but that he gave thanks, and likes not to
say that Christ blessed yt, or sanctified yt. And wot you why? Because they
feared that the truth might be sooner perceived, that by the blessing and
sanctificacion of Christ, his very body and blood were consecrated (as they
were in deed) which by all shifts and means they labor, to hide. But I wish
the wholl words of S. James Mass not only to be well noted, but also
continually to be remembered, that he says that Christ gave thanks, he
sanctified, he blessed, and filled the cup with the holy Ghost. For these
words not only impugn the wicked assertion of the Sacramentarie, but also
commend to us the excellency of the B. Sacrament, and Words of S. James.
Mass.
prove the presence of that blessed blood which the catholic Church
teaches there to be present. For who can say that after these great doings of
Christ, of sanctifieng, blessing and filling with the holy in his Mass, S.
Basil, and Chrysostom in their Mases, did not only make

Thus now ye have see^ the conference made, ye see the catholic Church
Conference of the catholeque authority of priests with the lack of
authority of new ministers.
in every poinct agreing with Christ, with Apostles, and with the pritiue
Church. Contrary wise ye see the new fownd Church almost in all points
disagreing. Finally I think yt expedient that as I have here spoken of
consecracion, and conferred the doing of the catholic Church, and of the
new Church, with the Apostolic and primitive Church: So to say a few
words of the priest of the one, and of the minister of the other. And here
not much to tarry the reader, yt is to be remembered that

The ministres of the new church not being of the catholic succession, as
they have no soche power, authority or commandment from Christ New
ministres have no authority to consecrate.
to consecrate his body and blood, and as their monstrouse heads neither can
give them soche, neither minds that they should do any soche thing, but
raither as they find yt bread and wine so to let yt remain, and so to receive
yt: they do not so rehersing Christ's words, consecrate his blessed body, no
more then they do that read those words upon the book in their common
studies. For if the history of Christ's supper rehearsed of a minister not
endewed with laufull authority, descending to him by catholic

And now although this might suffice to prove the Mass to have benvsed of the
Apostles, yet for thy better confirmacio^ (gentle reader) I shall add Addias
hist. Apost. li. 7.
the testimony of Abdias Bishop of Babylon, and a Disciple of the Apostles
who writes thus of the Mass and death of S. Matthewe. Cumque respondissent
amen, and misteria Domini celebrata and Missa^suscepisset omnis Ecclesia,
retinuit se vt iuxta altar, vbi corpus ab eo fuerat Christiconfectum, illic
martyriu^ Apostolicu^ exultaret. S. Matt hew said Mass.
And when all had said Amen, and all the Church had received the Mass, and
the ministeries that were celebrated, he stayed him sem self, that by the
altar, where the body of Christ was by him consecrated, there should will seek
to avoid, as put in by the translatour: yet he can not deny these

And here I wish these two things to be well noted, forsomoch as they were
written of one that was disciple to the Apostles, and did write diverse books
of their lives. The one is, that S. Matthew did celebrate at the altar: the
other that he did consecrate the body of Christ. If these two were to be
written as in use the^, yt may easelie be judged who does offend: he that does
use both in these days, or he that refuses both. And where the Proclamer as is
of late said provoke so much to the primitive Church, judge now again,
Reader, how well yt likes him to follow the order of the primitive Church,
when he aba^doneth and flies from these two things, as from a serpent, and
yet both used, as ye perceive, of the Apostles and the Primitive Church.

Having now said sufficie^tlie for the use of the Mass in the Apostles time,
to conclude this chapter, this may be said, that as yt pleased our Savior
Christ to commend to the world the truth of his holy Gospel principally
by

THE FIVE AND THIRTETH CHAPTER Shows the manner of consecracion used and
practiced by the Disciples of the Apostles and the Fathers of the primitive and
ancient Church.
Having now said of the consecracion used in the Apostles time, and to yt
co^ferred the manner of consecracion of the cathollque Church that now is, and
the disordred manner of the schismatical church: yt shall give good light to the
atteigning of the truth Nicolaus Methonen: by express words does testify
yt. Whose words for the clear declaracion of the matter I shall at large
allege. Thus he says: Offerimus panc^ perfectu^ viuum, sieve corpus Christi
quod perfectum etiam post passionem permansit and integrum. Neque enim os eius
contritum est, and a diuina vita inseparabile, plane quale ipse primus noster
ac magnus Pontifex and sacrificus victimaque suis ipsius Discipulis tradidit,
iique denuo, qui ab initio suis ipsis oculis verbum intuiti sunt, eique
ministrarunt, catholicae Ecclesiae ab extremis ad extremos vsque orbis terrarum
limits tradiderunt: Omnes quidem, Hierosolimitanae, vbi and D. Iacobus primi
magnique Pontificis frater ac successor mystica^ incruenta^que bturgiam
exposuit. Petrus autem et Paulus Antiochensi. Paulus vero peculiariter orbi
vniuerso. Marcus Alexandriae. Ioannes and Andreas Asiae and Europae. Omnesque
vniuersae Ecclesiae vbicunque sit per eam, qua^ S. Clemens conscripsit
hturgiam, tradiderunt, in qua haec ita ad verbum habentur: Memores igitur eorum
quae propter nos passus est, gratias agimus tibt omnipotens Deus, non quantum
debemus, sed quantum possumus, vt ^ius statutu^ adimpleamus. In qua enim nocte
tradebatur, accipiens panem in sanctas and unmaculatas suas manus and eleuatis
oculis ad te Deum and Patrem suum fregit, deditque nobis dicens: Accipite ex
eo, comedite, hoc est corpus meum, quod pro multis comminuitur in remisstonem
peccatorum. Similiter and calicem ex vino and aqua temperatum sanctisicauit
deditque nobis dicens: Bibite ex eo omnes. Hic est sanguis meus, qui pro multis
essunditur in remisstonem peccatorum. Hoc sacite in meam commemorationem,

We offer a perfect lively bread, that is, the body of Christ, which The
body of Christ ossred in the Mass.
remained also perfect and wholl after his passion, for there was no bone of his
broken, and plainly soche body as our high and great Bishop, who is both
priest and sacrifice, delivered to his own Disciples, was from the divine life
inseparable, and they again, which from the beginning did with their eyes see
the Son of God, and did wait upon him, delivered the same to the catholic
Church, even from one end of the world to an other: The Mass of S. Clement
the same that all the Apostles used.
wholl world. Mark at Alexandria. John and Andrew in Asia and Europe. And all
of them delivered yt to the universal Church, where soever yt be, by that same
Mass, which S. Clement setfurth, in the which these words be had word for
word Being mindful of those things, which he suffered for us, we give thee
thanks, Almighty God, not asmoche as we aught, but asmoche as we can, and we
fulfill his ordinance, In the night that he was betrayed taking bread into his
holy and undefiled hands, and lifting up his eyes unto thee God and his
father, he brake yt, and gave yt unto us, saing: Take of yt, eat, This is my
body which is broken for many in the remission of sins. Likewise also the
cup mixed with wine and water, he sanctified and gave yt to us saing drink
ye all of this. This is my blood, which is shed for many in the remission of
sins. This do ye in the remembrance of me. Thus much this author.

I have produced this part of the Mass setfurth by S. Clement under the
authority and testimouie of this man, both for that he being of the greek
church is not to be suppected of Papistrie by the evil brethren, and also
living some hundredth years agon is to be thought the freer from corruption. And
albeit I judge this that he says that Peter, Paul James and all the Apostles
said the same Mass that S. Clement afterward used and commended also to the
churches, to be a very notable saing, even so notable that both catholic and
protestant may well note yt, the catholic for joy seeing the catholic
religion well testified: the protestant for fury and grief seeing his untruth
impugned, and his falshed detected: yet I shall in consideracion that of this
matter much is said in the last chapter, ouerpasse yt, and apply my self to
that, that is in this chapter to be spoken of. This then in this place is to be
noted that the Mass that S. Clement used is even the same that Peter, Paul
and all the Apostles did use. This Mass uses not anhistoricall narracion in
the rehersall of the words of Christ at the consecracion, but entering into
yt by prayer made to the heavenly father, abides was not a cup of wine
only, but yt was a cup of wine mixed with S. Proclus tractatu de tradi.
diuina liturgy.


But perchance the Adversary will demand how we prove that yt is S.
Clements Mass God be praised we lack no proves, for besides this Grecian,
whom we have allreadie produced, we have an other Grecian Proclus Bishop of
Constantinople who lived about 1100 years agon testifieng that many did
setfurth the Mass in writing among which he no^breth saint Clement his
words be these. Multi quidem and alii diuini pastores, qui Apostolis
successerunt, ac Ecclesiae doctores sacrorum illius diuinae liturgiae
mysteriorum rationem explicantes, scriptis mandatam Ecclesiae tradiderunt. In
quibus primi and clarssimi sunt beatus Clemens, summi illius Apostolorum
Discipulus, ac successor, qui sacro sancta illa mysteria a sanctis Apostolis
sibi reuelara in lucem edidit, and D. Iacobus, qui in sortem Ecclesiae
Hierosolimitanae administrandae vocatus fuit, quique huius primus Episcopus a
primo illo and summo Pontifice Christo Deo nostro co^stitutus est. Many other
godly pastors also, which succeeded the Apostles and doctors of the church,
setting forth the order or manner of the Godly Mass of the divine mysteries

Now to proceade, to hear more of the manner of consecracion in the primitive
Church. S. Dionisius Areopagita Disciple to S. Paul, as S. Clement was to
Peter, that he said Mass yt is more evident, then need to be declared. His
book of the ecclesiastical hierarchy is extant, wherein the wholl order of
Mass is at lenght setfurth and declared. But forsomoche as that book to
Bassil. in Miss.
of Christ.

Debens enim exire in voluntariam and beatiss. and viuificam, suam mortem in
nocte qua tradebat seipsum pro mundi vita, accipiens panem in sanctis suis and
immaculatis manibus, and ostendens tibi Deo and Patri gratias agens,
benedicens, sanctificans, frangens, dedit sanctis suis Discipulis and
Apostolis, dicens: Accipite and manducate, hoc est corpus meu^, Christ took
the bread and cup mixed with wine and water in to his hands and blessed and
sanctified them.
quod pro vobis frangitur in remissionem peccatorum. Similiter and calicem de
genimine vitis accipiens, miscens, gratias agens, benedicens, sanctificans,
dedit sanctis suis Discipulis and Apostolis dicens: Bibite ex hoc omnes. Hic
est sanguis meus noui Testamenti, qui pro vobis and pro multis effundetur in
remissisnem peccatorum. Hoc facite in meam commemorationem. Willing to go forth
to his voluntary and blessed death giving life, in holy Disciples and
Apostles, saing. Take and eat, this is my body, which

Which if ye confer and compare to the consecracion used by S. James
Chrysostom in Miss*
and S. Clement, so much shall yt see them agree that ye shall iustilie say
that they be all one. Therefore leaving him to be considered with the notes made
upon S. James and S. Clement, we shall procead to see what manner of
consecracion was used in S. Chrysostoms Mass. Chrysostom (as the rest before
mentioned) enters into yt with prayer made to the Father, and coming to speak
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ instituting this most holy and noble
sacrament, says: Qui veniens, completo pro nobis omni mysterio, nocte qua
tradebatur, magis autem tradebat seipsum pro mundi vita, panem accipiens cum
sanctis suis and immaculatis and impolutis manibus, cum gratias egisset,
benedixit, sanctificauit, and frangens sanctis suis Discipulis and Apostolis
tribuit dicens: Accipite, and comedite, hoc est corpus meum, quod pro vobis
tradetur in remissionem peccatorum. Similiter autem and calicem postquam
caenauit dicens: Bibite ex hoc omnes. Hic est enim sanguis meus noui
testamenti, qui pro vobis and pluribus effundetur in remissionem peccatorum.
Who coming, when all the mystery for us was fullfilled, in the night in the
which he was be traied or raither in the which he delivered him self for the
life of the world, taking bread with his holy, undefiled and impoluted hands,
when he had heaven thanks, he blessed yt, sanctifieng yt, and breaking yt, gave
yt to his holy Disciples, and Apostles, saing: Take, and eat, this is my
body, which shall be delivered for you in the remission of sins. Likewise
also the cup after he had supped saing: Drink ye all of this. This is my
blood of the new testament. which shall be shedd for you and for many in
the remission of sins. Thus much in Chrysostomes Mass for the consecracion,
which that yt agrees with all before alleged, yt is easy to perceive. S.
Basil and Chrysosto^ not the first fownders of Mass but setters forth of
soche order there in as they had received by tradicion.


But that the Proclamer seem not with his skoff of somsaie to weaken or Proclus
witnesses, and the devotion of the people waxing short, and cold, these holy
Bishops Basil and Chrysostom were compelled to bring yt into a shorter form
of prayers and ceremonies (the substance allwaies standing and abiding) which
so being setfurth were called the Masses of Basil and Chrysostom, so that not
the lack of an ordeinance of Mass, as though there were none before, moved
Proclus vbi supra.
them to make this order, but the lack of devotion in the people, as you
shall perceive by the testimony of the ancient Father Proclus thus reporting.
Posteri, abiecta fidei firmitate and feruore, negotiis huiusce seculi and curis
mundi mancipati and immersi, Missae longitudinem (vt dixi) pertaesi, vix
conueniebat ad audienda Domini verba. Quare D. Basilius medica quadam ratione
vsus, breuiorem eam and concisiorem reddidit. Haud multo post Pater noster
Ioannes, cui aurea lingua cognomen dedit curam ouium, vt pastorem decet magna
alacritate animi suscipiens, ac hominum naturae socordiam, atque ignauiam
prospiciens, fibras omnes and radices huius praetextus sathanici prorsus
auellere voluit. Quare multa praecidit, and vt breuior esset constituit, ne
sensim homines libertatem and ocium maxim amplectentes fallacibus, and
furiosis Aduersarii sermonibus decepti ab hac Apostolica and diuina traditione
deficerent, quod multis saepe accidisse variis in locis ad hunc vsque diem
deprehendimus. Men of later days leaving the feruencie and sowndnesse of faith
being seruilelie given, and drowned in the business and cares of this world,
as I have said being weary of the lenght of the Note the decaie of devotion
the cause of the shortning of the Mass by S. Basil ad Chrysostom.
Mass, they skantlie assembled or came to hear the word of our Lord.
Wherefore S. Basil using the way of a good physician, made yt breifer and
shorter. Not long after, our Father John, whose golden tongue has given him a
Surname, taking upon him the charge of the sheep as yt becomes a good sheperd,
beholding the slacknesse and sluggishnesse of the nature of men, he would
utterly remove or pluck away all the roots and small stringes Tradicio^ of
the order of Mass observed from the time of the Apostles.


Last of all yt is to be noted, as well worthy yt is so to be, that the
Masses of these two holy Fathers, be not new Masses, but they be both even
that same Mass, that by the divine and Apostolic tradicion, was first
setfurth and commended to the catholic Church to be practiced, but that by
the se men, the small devotion of the people there unto enforcing them, they be
drawn shorter. Wherbie we may learn how the ancient Church did retein, and
abide in the tradicions of the Apostolic and primitive Church, Council.
Csta^tin. sext. ca^ 32.


Of these Masses as also of the Mass of S. James, we have yet not one or two,
or twenty witnesses only, but we have a nombre even the wholl, vi Council
of Constantinople, where the Fathers making a canon against the Armenians and
Hydroparastas, which seemed to misunderstand Chrysostom, for the true
vnperstanding of the matter say thus of Chrysostom: Non docet sanctus Pater
per solum vinum oblationem fieri, quandoquidem and suae Ecclesiae, vbi est illi
pastoralis administratio tradita, aquam vino miscendam tradidit, quando
incruentum peragi sacrificium oportet, and precioso and honorando nostri
redemptoris sanguine and aqua contemperationem attendens, quae in totius mundi
viuificationem effusa est, and peccatorum redemptionem. Et in omni Ecclesia vbi
spiritalia luminaria refulserunt, hic ordo diuinitus Wine and water why they
were mixed in our Lords cup.
traditus seruatur. The holy Father teaches not that the sacrifice should be
honorable blood and water which was shed for the life of the world, and

In that the Council says that Chrysostom gave order to the Church where he
was Bishop, to mengle water with wine: they understand his Mass, wherein soch
order was used. And let the Proclamer and all his accomplices note this saing
well, that this order setfurth by divine tradicion was kept in every Church
where spiritual lights did shine: whereby may be gathered that in England where
this order is contemptuously banished, there be no spiritual lights, but
carnal and earthly smoking Turffes. Of S. James and S. Basil thus yt
follows in the same Council: Nam et Iacobus Domini nostri Jesus Christi
secundum carnem frater, et Basilius Caesariensis Archiepiscopus, cuius gloria
omnem terrarum orbem peruasit, mystico nobis in scripto tradito sacrificio, ita
peragendum in sacro mysterio ex aqua et vino sacrum poculum aediderunt, et qui
Cartagine conuenerunt ita aperte tradiderunt. James the brother of our Lord
Jesus Christ after the flesh, and Basil the Archbyshoppe of Cesaria, whose
praise is gone throughout all the

Here now in the whole, ye see that not only S. James, and S. Basil, and also
Chrysosto^ did se^surth the holy mynistracio^ in writing, but also taught that
the cup in the same mynistracion should be mixed with water and wine as a
divine tradicion coming from the Apostles, which tradicio^althogh used of the
Apostles, and received of the ancient Fathers, this Proclamer and his fellows
do reject And yet to bleer the eyes of me^ he is ever provoking to the
Apostles and the Primitive Church, when yet he himself will not come near yt.
And here, reader, consider, that if this Proclamer intended the restitucion of
religion to the manner of the Apostles and the primitive Church, why does he
not observe this, which he can not deny there to have been observed, and by the
Councels of Cartage, and Constantinople decreed accordingly to be received?
But yt is not the primitive Church that he trauaileth

This also is not to be ouerpassed that the Council of Constantinople
testifieng that S. James did setfurth in writing the holy mynistracion, does
call yt by the name of Sacrifice, saing that he did setfurth the mystical
sacrifice, Mass called a sacrifice by the Counc. of Consta^tin.
which name the Proclamer abhors. But what do I tarry so long about the
settingfurth of these witnesses, seeing there be diverse other that testify the
same? As Nicolaus Metbonen. S. Bernard. Algerus, Bessarion, and other whom for
brevity sake, I think yt sufficient to have named.

Now, Reader, where the Proclamer in the second place that he speaks of S.
James, says that we constantly affirm that S. James said Mass, I pray
thee, may we not so do, and do truly? And if he and his accomplices say the
contrary, shall they not say falselie? we have witness and good authority
to maintein that we say: He deskanteth voluntarily with many discordes all
out of tune. For he sings without his rule, having nothing well alleged to
maintein what he says. Thie part therefore shall be, Reader to

But yt is time that we also see the manner of consecracion used in the latime
Church in time of the ancient Fathers of the same, of the which one Vis scire
quia verbis coelestibus consecratur? Accipe quae sunt verba. Dicit sacerdos:
Fac nobis (inquit) hanc oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem and acceptabilem,
quod est Ambr. li. 4 de sac. ca. 5
figura corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus Christi. Qui pridie quam
pateretur, in sanctis manibus suis accepit panem, respexit ad coelum ad te
sancte Pater omnipotens aeterne Deus, gratias agens benedixit, fregit,
fractumque Apostolis suis and Discipulis tradidit, dicens: Accipite, and edite
ex hoc omnes. Hoc est enim corpus meu^, quod pro multis confringetur. Similiter
etiam calicem postquam coenatum est pridie quam pateretur accepit, respexit ad
coelum ad te sancte Pater omnipotens aeterne Deus, gratias agens benedixit,
Apostolis et Discipulis suis tradidit, dicens: Accipite, et bibite ex eo omnes:
Hic est enim sanguis meus. Wilt thou know that the Sacrament is consecrated
with heavenly words? Mark what be the words. The priest says: Make this
oblacion (says he) Confer this prayer with the Mass book and yt agrees
nere confer yt with the Communion and yt dissenteth far.
allowed, reasonable and acceptable, which is a figure of the body and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Who the day before he would suffer, took bread

Hitherto S. Ambrose has opened the prayer used in the Church immediately
before the consecracion, and the consecracion also. Which done he makes a
certain exposition of yt, and says thus: Vide, omnia illa verba Euange listae
sunt, ad Accipite sieve corpus, sieve sanguinem, inde verba sunt Christi. Vide
singula: Qui pridie (inquit) quam pateretur, in sanctis manibus suis accepit
panem. Antequam consecretur panis est, vbi autem verba Christi accesserint
corpus est. Christi: Denique audi dicentem: Accipite, and edite ex eo omnes,
hoc est corpus meum. Et ante verba Christi calix est vini and aquae plenus, vbi
verba Christi operata fuerint, ibi sanguis efficitur qui plebem redemit.
(says he) the day before he would suffer took bread in his holy hands.
Before yt is consecrated yt is bread: when the words of Christ have comed to
yt, yt is the body of Christ. For hear him saing: Take and eat ye all of
this, This is my body. And before the words of Christ yt is a cup full of
wine and water, when the words of Christ have wrought, there is made the blood
that redeemed the people.

Now of S. Ambrose ye have heard the prayer preparatiue to the co^secracion: Ye
have heard the co^secracion yt self, which be the words of Christ: Ye have
heard the effect of consecracion, as yt was believed of the holy catholic
Church before and in the time of S. Ambrose, and of S. Ambrose him self, as his
own words not only here, but in diverse and sondrie other places do
declare. Who among other expownding the Pater noster, says thus Memini
sermonis mei cum de sacrame^tis tractare^, dixi vobis, quod ante verba Christi
quod offertur, panis dicitur, vbi Christi verba depro^pta fuerint, iam non
panis dicitur, sed corpus appellatur. Ambr. in oratione dominica.


Now what the manner of consecracion has been among the Fathers of the All one
consecracio^ in the Mass used by the Apostles their Disciples, the Fathers of
the primitive Church, and of the Church now.
four Apostles, and S. Paul: so in this we have learned yt by four Fathers,
and S. Dionyse the Disciple of S. Paul, all which do well agree, that yt may
well be perceived that Proclus said: that yt is all one consecracio^ of one
Mass varied in shortness or lenght in some prayers or extern ceremonies or
gesturs only, for the variacion of the manners of the people, but not in the
substanciall parts. For proof whereof, note (gentle reader, as before is said)
that as S. James, and S. Clement direct their communicacion in prayer to God
the Father: so does S. Basil, Chrysostom, and S. Ambrose, so also does the
catholic Church: The schismatic Church of the Proclamer and his fellows
does not so, but reherseth historicallie the words of the scripture.

If yt should be asked why the Proclamer and his likes refuse to follow herin
the ancient manner of the primitive Church, the imitacio^, of which
Protestants why they follow not the manner of primitive Church.
they so much pretend, and so often have yt in their mouth: yt is easy to
answer that they so do, because innouacio^ (which delights yt self with
thown inuencions and desiereth novelties, and likes almost nothing that
before was fownded and settled by the Fathers, which also pleases the people
thursting

THE SIX AND THIRTETH CHAP. Declares what was the intencion of the Apostles
and Fathers in and about the consecracion in the Mass.
THe order by me appointed now requires, that we search what was the faith and
intencio^ of the Apostles and Fathers of the primitive Brentius and Calvin
contemn the words of the forms of Sacraments: The Proclamer mocketh and
skorneth the intencion of soch as mynistre the sacraments. Yet when these two
be taken away, what sacrament have you? But that I tread not out of my path,
leaving to enter the disputacion of intencion and faith generally in all
sacraments, I will only here declare the intencion of the consecracion of the
B. Sacrament by the practice of the Apostles and fathers. And without all
circumstances breiflie to enter into the matter, we will first see the intent,
and faith of S. James, what he thouht to be wrought in the consecracion of the
Sacrament. Which his goodly prayer wilfully declare wherein he prays thus:
Miserere nostri Deus omnipotens, miserere nostri Deus seruator noster, misere
nostri Deus secundum magnam misericordiam tuam, and demitte super nos, et super
haec dona proposita, Spiritum tuum sanctissimum, Dominum viuificum, S.. Jacobus
in Missa.
vna tecum Deo Patre, et vnigenito Filio tuo, assidentem, simul regnantem,
consubstantialem, ac coeternu^, qui locutus est in lege et Prophetis, et in
nouo tuo testamento, qui descendit in specie columbae super D. n. Iesum
Christum in Iordanis stuuio, and mansit super eum, qui descendit super
Apostolos tuos in specie ignearum linguarum in coenaculo sanctae and gloriosae
Syon in die Pentecostes: Ipsum spiritum tuum sanctiss. demitte nunc quoque
Domme in nos, and in haec dona sancta proposita, vt superueniens sancta, et
bona, et gloriosa sua praesentia sanctificet, et efficiat hunc panem corpus
sanctum Christi tui, et calicem hunc preciosum sanguinem Christi tui, vt sit
omnibus ex its sumentibus in remissionem peccatorum, et in vita^ aeternam. Have
mercy upon us, o God almighty, have mercy upon us, o God our Savior, have
mercy upon us, o God according to thie great mercy, and send down upon us,
and upon these proposed gifts thy most holy Spirit our living Lord sitting,
and reigning, and everlasting together with thee S. James believed by the work
of the holy Ghost, the bread and wine to be consecrated into the body and blod
of Christ.
God the Father, and thy only begotten Son, who has spoken in the law, and
in the Prophets, and in thie new testament, which came down in the shape of a
done upon our Lord Jesus Christ in the flood of Iordane, and abidde upon him,
who came down upon thy Apostles in the shape of sierie toungs in the parlour
of the holy and gloriouse Syon in the day of pentecost: The same thy most
holy Spirit o Lord send down also upon us and these holy proposed gifts,
that he coming upon them may with his holy good and gloriouse presence
sanctify and make this bread the body of thy Christ, and this

Allthough in this prayer of S. James many things might be fownd worthy of
note: yet yt shall suffice for this present that we observe that he upon the
consecracion had the same manner of intent and faith that the catholic Church
how has, that is, that the bread and wine set upon the altar, by the
miraculouse woork of the holy Ghost be made the body and blood of Christ.
Which thing is so lively and fully spoken and uttered, that yt needs no
farther declaracio^. This only may be added that if there were no more doe^ by
the consecracion, but that the bread and wine be made a sacramental bread and
wine, that is, only figurs and tokens of the body and blood of Christ, S.
James would never have so earnestly prayed for the coming down of the holy
Ghost to sanctify that bread and wine, he knowing that the bread and wine might
without the special sanctificacion of the holy Ghost very well be figurs of
Christ's body and blood, as many other things were in the old law. Neither
would he have prayed that the holy Ghost by his holy

As ye now perceive by S. James his prayer that his intent and faith was that
Christ's very body and very blood were consecrated on the altar: so shall
ye see that S. Clement came to the altar with, the same faith, and intent,
whereupon he prayed thus: Rogamus vt mittere digneris sanctum tuum Spiritum
super hoc sacrificium, testem passionum Dom. Jesus, vt efficiat panem hunc
corpus Christi tui, and ealicem hunc sanguinem Christi tui. We pray thee that
thowe wilt vouchsafe to send thie holy Spirit upon this sacrifice, a witness
of the passions of our Lord Jesus, that he may make this bread the body of
thie Christ, and this cup the blood of thie holy men may appear, that
should yt most cheiflie do in their holy prayers S. Clement beliu^ the bread
and were to be made the body and blood of Christ by the work of the holy
Ghost.
making his devout prayer in the holy divine mynistracion of this blessed and
gloriouse Sacrament, and desiering God that the holy Ghost might be sent to
make by his divine power the bread and the wine upon the altar the body and
blood of Christ, his intent and faith was that yt should so be. No man will
say that he prayed against or contrary to that, that he believed, and
intended. His faith therefore and intent was, that by consecracion there was made
present the body and blood of Christ. As in the last chapter I referred the
reader to S. Dionyse to see his mynistracion in his book: so do I here also
And therefore the practice of the Apostles perceived by S. James, and of their
Disciples by S. Clement, thinking that yt will do well to understand the like
in the Fathers, that by the receiving and continual practice of the same one
thing in diverse times, in diverse churches, and of diverse Fathers, the more
adsured and perfect knowledge may be had, and so occasion may be taken for
the reader to stay, and confirm himself in the verity of

And in this process we will first see what S. Basil intended, and what he
believed to be wrought in the Sacrament, what he intended and believed his own
prayer will lively and fully declare. Thus in his Mass, he prays:
Tepostulamus, and te obsecramus sancte sanctorum beneplacita tua benignitate
venire Spiritum sanctum super nos, and super proposita munera ea, and
benedicere ista, and sanctisicare, and ostendere panem quidem istum, ipsum
honorisicum corpus Dom. Dei, et saluatoris nostri Jesus Christi: quod autem est
in calice isto ipsum sanguine^ Dom. Det and saluatoris nostri Jesus Christi, qui
effusus est pro mundi vita. We beseech and desire thee, o most holy of al holy
that by thie wellpleasing goodness thie holy Spirit may come upon S. Basil
by the sanctisicacio of the holy Ghost believed the bread and wine to be made
Chrysts body and blood.
us, and upon these proposed gifts, and to bless and sanctify them, and to
show this bread to be the very honorable body of our Lord God and Savior
Jesus Christ. And that is in this cup the very blood of our Lord God and
Savior Jesus Christ, which was shed for the life of the world.

If ye call to remembrance the manner of S. James his prayer in his Mass, and
compare yt to this, so little difference is there between them, that they might be
thought all one, so well do they agree in words, so well in faith that as
they speak all one thing: so they believed all one thing, namely the
consecracion of Christ's body and blood to be wrought in the holy
mynistracion by the work of the holy Ghost. And yet thus much has S. Basil
more then S. James, that he does not only desire that the bread and wine may
be made the body and blood of Christ, but that the holy Ghost will make the^
ipsum corpus, et ipsum sanguine^ Domini, the very self same body and blood of
our Lord. So that there is no doubt, but that in the Mass, he believed by the
co^secracion, the body and blood of Christ to be made verily present. That
the reader be not long detained from the pleasure and godliedelight that he
may conceive and have by the heavenly harmony of the just consent and agree
me^t of the holy fathers breiflie laid together: we will also hear
Chrysosto^, and by his own words learn of him, what inte^cio^ and faith he had
about the Precamur et Chrysostom. in Missa.
supplicamus, vt mittas Spiritum sanctum tuum super nos, et super haec apposita
munera, et fac panem istum quidem preciosum corpus Christi tui, et quod in
calice, est preciosum sanguinem Christi tui, permutans ea sancto Spiritu tuo.
We pray and beseech

Yt is not hard to perceive either his agreement will other before alleged, or
his like intencion and faith when he uses the same manner of words that they
did, and the like request or prayer? saving that where they desiered Chrysosto^
believed the bread and wine by sanctificacio^ to be the body and blod of
Christ. Li. 4. de Sacram. ca. 5
the bread and wine to be made the body and blood of Christ by the high and
great work of the holy Ghost, he declares also by what mea^ the holy Ghost
does yt, saing: Permutans ea spiritu tuo sancto, changing them by thy holy
Spirit, mening that yt is done by the holy Ghost changing the bread and wine
into the body and blood of Christ.

To proceed by as many in this matter as we did in the other treacted of in
the last chapter, we must than also hear S. Ambrose, who declares the faith
and intent of the Latin Church about the consecracion saing thus: Vis scire
quia verbis coelestibus consecratur? Accipe, quae sunt verba. Dicit sacerdos,
Fac nobis (inquit) hanc oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem, and acceptabilem,
quod est figura corporis and sanguinis Do. n. Jesus Christi. Wilt thou know
that the Sacrament is consecrated with heavenly words? Mark what be the
words. The priest says. Make this oblacion (says he) allowed, reasonable
and acceptable which is a figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

As S. Ambrose wills you to mark the words of the prayer of the priest,
whereby ye may perceive, what intent and faith was in S. Ambrose and in the
holy Fathers, that mynistred and consecrated the holy Sacrament in those
days: So wish I you to mark them that ye may confer them, with the prayer
of the catholic Church that now is, declaring the intent and faith of the
same. The prayer of the Church is thus: Facere digneris hanc oblationem, tu
Deus omnipotens, in omnibus quesumus, benedictam, ascriptam, ratam
rationabilem, acceptabilemque, vt nobis corpus and sanguis fiat filii tui Do.
n. Jesus Christi. Vouchsafe, we beseech thee, o God Almighty, to make this
oblacion blessed, allowed, approved, reasonable and acceptable, that yt may
be made unto us the body and blood of thy beloved Son our Lord Jesus
Christ.

If ye note the first part of this prayer yt agrees almost word for word The
prayer in the Mass now used agrees with the Apostolic and primitive church.
with the prayer of S. Ambrose, if ye note the second part, where yt says and
desiereth that yt may be made the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ yt
agrees with S. James S. Clement. S. Basil and Chrysostom, all which desiered
the like. So that the prayer of the catholic Church declaring the intent and
faith of the same agrees fully with the Apostolic, primitive, and ancient
Church, every one of them desiering that the bread and the wine may be made
the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. But the intencion without
faith of the new feigned Church is sooen perceived to dissent and disagree
from all these princes, pillars, and Fathers of the Church for soch a
countenance of prayer they make. Hear us, o merciful Father, we beseech
thee, and grant that we receiving these creatures of bread and wine according
to thie Son our Savior Jesus Christ's institucion in remembrance of his death
and passion, may be partakers of his most blessed body and blood. Thus they.
Here first let us, before we have of other, make conference of this prayer with
the prayers of the Apostles, words of the Communion.
and primitive Church, and then after we shall examen the treuth of yt,

Remember, gentle reader, observe and note, that S. James, S. Clement. in
remembrance of his death. If any place be, yt must be the place of the The
prayer of the new Church varieth from all the prayers of the Apostolic and
primitive Church
after Christ, prayed not that they might receive the creatures of bread and
wine, but that the creaturs of bread and wine might be made the body and blood
of Jesus Christ. Wherefore the new Church making to them selves a new fownd
prayer, so far dissenteth here from the Apostolic and primitive Church,
that I can not proprelie make a conference between them, but raither show the
great difference of them. The Apostolic and primitive Church desire the
bread and wine may be made the body and blood of Christ: The new Church,
that the bread and wine may remain to be received, and so of consequent
contrary to the other church, desiereth that they may not be made the body
and blood of Christ. See ye not then how far these two prayers are
different? They are so far different as two contraries, even as yea and naie,
I will, and I will not: so neerlie and justly does this new fownde Church
follow the primitive Church, of the which this Proclamer so much braggeth. The
Apostolic and primitive Church desiereth not to receive the creatures of
bread and

And that they so do, this shall well prove yt, that never yet did any
catholic Father or author, greek or latin, young or old use this phrase The
prayer of the new Communion never used nor heard of before
of words of theirs, either in prayer, sermon or writing. Which if yt had been agreeable, yt must needs have been fownde in some of them, and learned of
some of them. But this new prayer of this new church is so new, that What
authority has the Proclaim or all the Protestants to show, that the eating
and drinking of bread and wine is of Chrysts institution


Thus much being said of the difference of the prayer of the new Church
from the prayer of the Apostolic Church: let us now examen the truth of
the same prayer. Their prayer has these words: that we receiving these they
creaturs of bread and wine, according to thy son our Lord Jesus Chrysts
institucion in remembrance of his death etc. I would learn of the masters of
this Church, where that institucion of Christ is, that we should eat the
creatures of bread and wine in remembrance of his death. The proclamer
requires some plain and express sentence of the Catholics to prove what
they affirm against his articles: I require of him and his company some plain
sentence in remembrance of his death. If any place be, yt must be the place of
the institucion of the Sacrament, in which place although yt be testified that
Take and eat, not a piece of bread, but my body, even the same that shall be
delivered for you. And likewise of the cup he said: Take and drink ye, this
is, not a cup of wine, but eue^ my blood that shall be shedd for yowr sins
and the sins of many. This eat ye, and this drink in the remembrance of me
What should they eat? That that he took unto them. what did he take unto
them? The Evangelists do testify: Take eat, this my body. They should
drink in the remembrance of him. What should they drink* That also that he
did take them. What did he take them? The Evangelists likewise declare. Drink
ye all of this, says Christ, for this is my blood of the new testament etc.
Here be the words of the institucion. Here is instituted that the body and
blood of Christ should be received in By Chrysts institucion we should
receive his body and blood in (...) etc.
the remembrance of his passion and death, that bread and wine should be so
received, here is not one title. Christ said not, eat this bread, and drink
this wine in my remembrance. Where then be we commanded to receive the creaturs
of bread and wine according to the institucion of Christ, if yt be not
commanded here? As touching the institucion of Christ, yt is at the full
treacted of in the second book, where be produced xii cooples of the higher
house of Christ's Parliament, and vi cooples of the lower house, of the which a
great nombre declare the very substance of Christ's body and blood to be
verily dispensed and given in the Blessed Sacrament The new church charge
Christ with an untruth.
and a good nombre of them deny the same Sacrament to be a figure only. If
yt be not a figure, then is yt not bread and wine: If yt be not then we eat
not bread and wine, as they say, according to Chrysts institucion. Behold
the^ the impudency of these me^ see their notable untruth, that fear not
before me^ only (which in so weighty a matter were to much) but also as yt
were) even to the face of God to make a stout lie against his only begotten
son charging him with that, that they be not hable to prove. Misericors Deus
dignum me fac gratia tua vt citra condemnationem particeps fiam sancti
corporis, and preciosi sanguinis in remissionem peccatorum etc. O merciful God
make me by thie grace wourthie that without my condemnacion, I may be made
partaker of thie holy body, and preciouse blood, to the remission of sins.
S. Basil thus: Nullum nostrum ad iudicium aut condemnationem facias accipere
sanctum corpus and sanguinem Christi tui. Make none of us to judgment or
condemnacion to receive the holy body and blood of thie Christ. S.
Chrysostom prayed thus: dignare potenti manu tua tribuere nobis immaculatum
corpus tuum and preciosum sanguinem, and per nos omni populo. Vouchsafe with
thy mighty hand to give unto us thie vndifiled body and thie preciouse

Yt is not to be doubted, but that all these, and the Church that they lived
in received the sacrament according to Christ's institucion. But these creaturs
of beead and wine omitted, they show the^ felues by express words, (...)
body the^ is here received, that may be received both to salvation and
damnacion. The spiritual body can be received but to salvation, the real
body both to salvation and damnacion, wherefore they receive the real body of
Christ, that may be received to condemnacion. The other is in Chrysostom, who
desiereth Christ that he would vouchsafe both to imparte unto him his body and
blood, and also by him and the priests to the people. Where upon we may thus
reason: That body was received of Chrysostom and the preistes, which by them
also might be delivered to the people, But thereall body of Christ, and not
the spiritual might by them be delivered to the people. Wherefore Chrysostom
and the priests received the real body of Christ. That the spiritual body
of Christ, or Christ spirituallie

To conclude then this disputacion upon the principal part of that, that here
is intended: S. James, S. Basil. S. Chrysostom received that, that was
according to Chrysts institucion to be received in the remembrance of his
death: But they received not the creaturs of bread and wine, but the very
real body of Christ: Wherefore they received according to Chrysts institucion
his very real body in the remembrance of his passion and death. Yt is
evident then that yt is not Chrysts institucion to receive the creaturs of
bread and wine in the remembrance of his death, wherefore we may conclude that
the pretensed prayer of the lare erected Church has a foul and a wicked
untruth in yt, and for the maintenance of an abominable heresy, does
untruly report and say of our Savior Christ, and that not only Of
inte^cio^ of the new ministres.
to the world, but even, as yt were to the face of God.

Now remains the last thing appointed here in this chapter to be spoken of,
which is the intencion and faith of the ministers of this new Church, in the
which a sewe words, may and shall suffice. The intencion and faith of this
Church is not only perceived by their common profession: Two sorts of
ministres of the Communion.
but also by this their prayer. Their common profession denies the presence of
Chrysts body in the Sacrament, their prayer confirms the same. For desiering
to receive the creaturs of bread and wine, they exclude the body and blood of
Christ, into whose substance (as Eusebius. Emis. says) the invisible creaturs
are turned. Understand that in this new fownded Church be two sorts of
ministres that do minister this Communion. One sort is of priests, which
lausullie consecrated in the catholic Church, have fallen to heresy, who
although they have authority by their holy orders to consecrate the body and
blood of Christ: yet now having neither right intencion nor faith of the
catholic Church, they consecrate not. The other sort is of ministres made
after the schismatic manner. These men though they thought) having neither
authority, nor due faith and intencion they neither

The condition of this matter being soche, what case be those priests in,
which having catholic authority and catholic faith, and think but well
of the catholic mysteries and religion, for fear, or for living sake, leave
The miserable state of catholic priests following the schism
that they know to be good, and do that they know to be evil? What
trembling hearts shall they have before the terrible judgment seat of God,
when their own consciences shall accuse them, saing: we were called to serve
the altar, we had authority given us to confecrate Chrysts body and blood
according to his holy institucion, we might have offered the same in sacrifice
to the memorial of Chrysts death, to the comfort of our own souls, and
releiff of many. We might have received that blessed food to the nutriment of
our souls to everlasting life. Thus might we have spent our time in the
service of God, thus might we have lived in our calling, where omitting

Thus having here to speak of intencion and faith, for that I see you in
countenance to decline form the excucion of that intencion and faith that
should be seen in you, and professed of you, I have a little digressed from
my principal intencion to ad monish you to return to yowr deutifull
intencion. And here to conclude with you as I do with schismatiques and
heretics, which is a grief to my heart that I may so do, I say that
having intent to receive the creatures of bread and wine in the Sacrament, ye
fulfill not Chrysts institucion, neither do ye follow the intencion and faith
of the Apostolic Church, neither of the primitive and ancient Church.

THE SEVEN AMD THIRTETH CHAPTER treacteth of the oblacion and sacrifice of the
Mass as yt was used of the Apostles and Fathers.
SO much being all ready spoken of the oblacion and sacrifice of the Mass, I
should not need, but that the special order here taken so requires, to speak
any more of the same. I mind therefore no otherwise here to treact of yt, but
only as I have done in the matters of consecracion and intencio^ to show
forth the practice of the Apostles and fathers used in their Masses. And here
first for the practice used among the Apostles, we will see what was done by S.
James being well assured that he did in this weighty matter of faith no
otherwise then all the rest of the Apostles did. For what he did, all they did:
and what they did he did Jacob. in Miss.
soche was their conspiracion, common consent, unity and agreement. In his
Mass immediately after consecracion, thus he proceeded: Memores igitur and nos
peccatores passionum eius viuificarum, crucis salutaris ac mortis, sepulchri
and resurrectionis a mortuis tercio die, ascensionis in caelos, and assessionis
eius ad dextram tuam Dei Patris, and secundi, glortosi, and tremendi eius
aduentus, cum veniet cum gloria ad indicandum S. James of fredsacrifice in the
memorial of Chrysts Death
viuos and mortuos, cum reddet vnicuique secundum opera euis, offerimus tibi,
Domine, hoc sacrificium verendum and incruentum, orantes ne secundum peccata
nostra nobiscum agas. We sinners also therefore mindful of his lively
passions, of his holsom cross and death, burial and resurrection from the
dead the third day, of his ascension into the heavens and of his sitting at
the right hand of God the Father, and of his second, gloriouse and fearful
coming, when he shall with glory come to judge the quick and the dead, when
he shall give to every one according to his works: We offer unto thee, o Lord,
this dreadful and unbloody sacrifice, praing that thowe do not with us
according to our sins.

In this part of S. James Mass we may perceive three things. The first that
Chrysts body is offered in sacrifice: The second, that yt is offered in
remembrance Three things notable in S. James Mass.
of his passion and death, resurrection, ascension etc. The third, (as is
said) having yt present he furthwith says: We offer unto thee, o lord, this
dreadful and unbloody sacrifice. This said S. James immediately upon the
consecracion, when nothing else was before him to offer but the body of
Christ. Wherefore he then offered the body of Christ.

To this understanding many things do enforce us in the words of S. James.
first, that he uses the demonstratiue (thus) saing this sacrifice, which
spoken at the altar upon the consecracion of Christ's body, which is the
very true sacrifice, signifies unto us, that he offreth yt. Farther, that he
calls the sacrifice which he offreth a dreadful sacrifice. What sacrifice,
that by man can be offered to God, is dreadful, but only the body of
Christ, the body of God and man? which for the majesty of Godhead, whereunto
this body is joined in unity of person is dreadful, other sacrifices what
soever, be not of themselus. Wherefore the dreadful sacrifice that he offered was
the body of Christ. Lastly, he calls yt an vnblooddie sacrifice. Which
very

Now the oblacion perceived in this holy Apostle, and by him in all the
Apostles: let us descend to the Disciple of the chief Apostle, to see in him
whether he and other Disciples did in the Mass make oblacion and offer
sacrifice as the Apostles did. This man (S. Clement I mien) even as S. James
did, immediately after the holy consecracion prayed thus: Memores igitur
passionis eius, mortis, resurrectionis, reditus in coelos, and futuri eius
secundi aduentus, in quo veniet iudicaturus viuos and mortuos, redditurusque
cuique secundum opera sua, offerimus S. Clemens in Missa vt refert Methon.
ibi Regi and Deo secundum eius institutionem panem hunc, and hunc calicem,
gratias tibi per eum agentes, quod nos dignatus fueris astare, coram te, and
tibi sacrificare. Being and will give to every one according to his works: We
offer unto the King and God according to his institucion this bread and this
cup, giving

Let not the good Chrystian be dismayed, nor the Sacramentarie triumph S.
Clement offered Chrysts body and blood in sacrifice.
that he says we offer this bread, but let them both understand, that as our
Savior Christ in the vi of S. John, and S. Paul in the x of the first to the
Corinth. which is allreadie declared, and in the xi of the same, which here
shall be declared, do call the body of Christ bread: So does S. Clement
here. For proof whereof have recourse to the prayer of S. Clement in the last
chapter before and see his faith what he believed to be in the Sacrament, where
ye shall find him desiering that the holy Ghost may be sent, who may make
the bread the body of Christ and the wine the blood of Christ. If then the
bread by the work of the holy Ghost be made the body of Christ, then there is
no other bread there after consecracion to be offered in sacrifice but the bread
of the body of Christ and the cup of his blood.

This being made plain, we shall descend to S. Basil and see what he did,
whether he offered in his Mass or no. He as S. Clement, immediately after S.
Basil offered the like sacrifice to S. Ja. and S Clem.
the consecracion continued his holy taulke to God, saing on this wise:
Memores ergo, Domine, and nos salutarium eius passionum, viuificae crucis,
triduanae sepulturae, ex mortuis resurrectionis, in caelum ascensionis, in
dextra tua Dei Patris sessionis, and gloriosae ac terribilis secundae eius
praesentiae, tua ex tuis tibi offerimus. We also therefore, o Lord, being
mindful of his holsom passions, lively cross, three days burial, his
resurrection from the dead, his ascension into haven, his sitting at thie right
hand, God and Father, and of his gloriouse and terrible second

See ye not here, as in S. James and S. Clement an oblacion of the body and
blood of Christ, which be things of God, consecrated of his creaturs bread
and wine, and so offered unto God? Hitherto then ye see the holy Fathers, to
have offered Christ's body and blood, and therefore in their words and writings
not to have abhorred the terms of offering, or making oblacion and sacrifice,
as the new brothers do.

But for farther proof of the practice of the Sacrifice we will proceed and see
what Chrysostom did in his Mass. For he keeping the order before mentioned
immediately upon the consecracion adds this prayer: Memores igitur salutaris
huius mandati and omnium eorum, quae pro nobis facta sunt, crucis, sepulchri,
Chrysostom offered sacrifice in Mass.
resurrectionis, ad caelos ascensionis, sessionis ad dextram, secundi and
gloriosi rursus aduentus, tua ex tuis tibi offerimus. Remembering therefore this
holy commandment and all those things that have been done for us as the
cross burial, resurrection, ascension into heaven sitting at the right hand,
the second and gloriouse coming again: we offer thine unto thee of thine own.
Thus there.

Yt can not be that they that so justly agree in words and sentence should
vary and dysagree in sense and understanding. Wherefore Chrysostom, as the other
did, did in his Mass offer sacrisice. I labor not here to seek the deapt of
this matter, for that I have done allreadie in diverse places of this S.
Ambrose and the church that he lived in offered sacrifice in the Mass.
they did offer sacrifice. What they offered, and to what effect, yt is and
shall be declared, and, as yt may for this place suffice, by S. Ambrose yt shall
be made evident, what he and the ancient Church in his time did offer. Whereby
also we shall be assured what the former Fathers did offer, this being certain
that holy Ambrose did nothing contrary to the holy faith of the primitive
Church. Thus he reports, of the practice of the ancient Church of his time
and before: Sacerdos dicit: Ergo memores gloriosissimae eius passionis, and ab
inferis resurrectionis, and in coelum ascensionis, offerimus tibi hanc
immaculatam hostiam rationabilem hostiam, incruentam hostiam, hunc panem
sanctum, and calicem vitae aeternae. Being therefore mindful of thie most
gloriouse passion, and resurrection from death, and ascension into heaven, we
offer unto thee this undefiled sacrifice, reasonable sacrifice, unbloody
sacrifice, this holy bread and cup of life everlasting. Note here what manner
of sacrifice was offered in the Mass.


Do ye not here see by the testimony of S. Ambrose that the priest did offer
sacrifice in the remembrance of Chrysts passion, resurrection and ascension? 1.
Joan. 1. Ibid. 6.
Christ his very body and blood. Which manner of understanding the later
words of this offering sentence does also enforce us to take, determining
this pure and undefiled sacrifice to be the holy bread on the altar lie^g
before the priest, in that he says: hunc panem sanctum, this holy bread, and
that he terms the cup to be the cupp of everlasting health. For as the
bread is holy, and the fountain of holiness, from whence to us flows all
holiness: so is the cup the cup of everlasting health. For sanguis Jesus
Christi emundat nos ab omni delicto. The blood of Jesus Christ does cleanse us
from all sin, and so pourging the gross and filthy humors of sin, which
make the soul sick gives us everlasting health, and where everlasting health
is, there Qui manducat meam carnem, et bibit meum sanguinem, habet vitam
aterna^. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has everlasting life.

Thus then may yt be perceived, that this holy bread and cup of life
everlasting, Chrysts body in the Sacr is the unbloody sacrifice of the Church
is the holy undefiled and unbloody sacrifice, which S. Ambrose testifies to
be offered in the Church, which (as is said) well considered and weighed, and
these terms: the undefiled and unbloody sacrifice, and the holy bread and
cup of life everlasting, compared and joined together as meening one thing
(as they do in deed) ca^ signify no other thing to us but the very body and
blood of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, offered as the undefiled and
unbloody sacrifice of his Church.

And Reader in case the Adversary would bleer thine eye, expownding this word
of S. Ambrose Mass, panem sanctum, holy bread, to be the sacrame^tall bread,
and the bread of their holy communion, so to delude thee, and to elude the
argument, and to avoid the presence of Chrysts blessed body in the Sacrament
yet the words adioined, which be, that the cup is called the cup Oecola^p.
and Cra^mer ca^ receive no holiness being a dumb creature, and the other will be
confessed of all men, if yt be but a cup

And now that by S. Ambrose yt is perceived that he and the Church that he
lived in did offer sacrifice, and that that sacrifice was the body and blood
of Christ, there remains now that we confer with him and the rest, the doing
of the catholic Church now in their Mass, and of the heretical Words of
the Canon in the Mass.
congregation in the Communion, as they untruely term yt. The catholic
Church as in the practice of all the Fathers yt was used, immediately after
the consecracion is done proceadeth thus saing: Vnde and memores nos Domine,
serui tui, sed and plebs iua sancta eiusdem Christi Filii tui tam beat
passionis, necnon and ab inferis resurrectionis, sed and in caelos gloriosae
ascensionis, offerimus praeclarae maiestati tuae de tuis donis ac datis,
hostiam puram, hostiam sanctam, hostiam immaculatam, panem sanctum vitae
aeternae, and calicem salutis perpetuae. Wherefore, o Lord, we thie servants,

Where ye perceive that as S. James. S. Clement S. Basil, and other did offer
sacrifice and that in the remembrance of Chrysts passion, resurrection, etc. So
does the catholic Church now likewise offer in this prayer, which forasmoch
as yt depends of something going before, understand, that as in the Mass of
S. James and the other, so in this Mass rehearsal is made of this commandment
of Christ: Do ye this in remembrance of me. Whereupon this prayer, wherein in
every of these Masses oblacio^ is made of the sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood, is furthwith added as the fulfilling of that commandment, and therefore
says: Wherefore we mindeful, o Lord, of the blessed passion, etc. Which is
asmoch to say, forasmoch as thie Son our Lord and Savior has commanded us
to offer in sacrifice his blessed body and blood in the remembrance

And here by the way let the Proclamer note, that where he would be certified,
where we be commanded to offer Christ in sacrifice, he may by all these Masses
be taught that we are so commanded by Chrysts own word, we be commanded to
offer Christ in sacrifice.
whereupon, if he will see, he may perceive that oblacio^ is made of the body
and blood of Christ in each of the^, even by his commandment as is allreadie
said

That the body and blood of Christ is the sacrifice that is here offered yt
may suffice to repete a few words of S. Sames our first witness, and of S.
Ambrose our last witness for the proof of the same, this being out of all
doubt Sacrifice of fred by S. James.
that the Fathers betwe^ the^ dissented not from the^. S. James said:
Offerimus tibi, Domine, sacrificiu^ verendu^, et incruentu^. We offer unto
thee, o Lord, this dreadful and unbloody sacrifice. This sacrifice being
dreadful and unbloody ca^ be none of the enemies of Chrysts everlasting
sacrifice, saing: that if he be offered in sacrisice, Offerimus tibi hanc
immaculata^, rationabile^, incruenta^, hostia^. We offer unto thee this pure
reasonable and unbloody sacrifice. And determining what this sacrifice is he
adds: Hunc pane^ sanctum, and calice^ vitae aeternae. This holy Sacrisice
was offered in Mass by S. Ambr.
blood, and cup of everlasting life. In that he calls yt a pure sacrifice,
he alludeth to the Prophet Malachie calling yt an unbloody sacrifice, he
follows S. James: in that he calls yt the holy bread, and the cup of the
everlasting life he perfectly determines yt to be the blessed bread of
Christ's body, and the cup of his blood giving everlasting life. Now the
catholic Church embracing the faith of the Apostles and Fathers, says as
they said, and does that they did. For as S. Ambrose said we offer this pure
sacrifice, so says the catholic Church now, we offer this pure sacrifice.
As S Ambrose said, we offer this holy bread and cup of life everlasting. So
says the Church, we of The catholic church now offering sacrifice in Mass
follows Christ his holy Apostles, and the primitive Church the new Church
offering none do contrary to them all.
fre the bread of everlasting life and the cup of everlasting salvation. Thus
ye see how justly he catholic Church in this our time follows in this point
the faith and doing of the ancient Church. But now the degenerating church
makes no one title mention of offering Christ in sacrifice, neither would that
her mynisters should have soch intent, therefore can therbe no comparison here
made of her faith and doing. For comparison must be made between two things or
mo that be or have a being. For Inter ens and non ens nulla est comparatio.
Between a thing that is, and that that is not there is no comparison. Thus thenwe
may end this part that the new Church not offering sacrifice neither keeps
Christ's institucion, neither follows the practice of the Apostolic
primitive, and ancient Church, but omitteth the commandment of Christ in his
institucion, and does clean contrary to the examples of the Apostles, and
holy Fathers.

THE EIGHT AND THIRTETH CHAPTER Treats of the prayer for acceptacion of the
oblacion or sacrifice made in the
Now remains to show what manner of prayer was used of the Apostles and of
their Disciples, and of the primitive Church after the offering of sacrifice in
Mass, for the acceptacion thereof. The holy Apostles and Fathers thought yt
not enough only in bare manner to offer the sacrifice to God: but also their
condition considered thought yt apperteining to their duty most humbly by
devout prayer to crave and desire at Gods hand that their service in so doing
might be mercisullie accepted. And her to observe the order before used we
shall first see how the Apostle S. James made his prayer to God for the
acceptacion of his service in offering of the sacrifice. Thus he prayed: Pro
oblatis and Jacob. in Missa.
sanctificatis, preciosis, supercoelestibus, ineffabilius, immaculatis,
gloriosis, tremendis, horrendis, diuinis donis Dom. Deo nostro oremus, vt Dom.
Deus n. acceptis iis in sanctum and super coeleste, mentale, and spiritale
altar suum, in odorem spiritalis fragrantiae, rependat ac mittat nobis diuina^
gratia^ et donu^ sanctiss. Spiritus: Oremus. Let us pray to our Lord God for
these offered and sanctified, preciouse heaue^lie, unspeakable, immaculate,
gloriouse, fragrance or sweetness, may give again and send to us the divine
grace,

S. Clement after he had offered sacrifice prayed thus. Rogamus vt propicio ac
sereno vultu respicias supra haec proposita dona coram te, tu qui nullius
indiges Deus, and tibi complacitum sit in eis ad honorem Christi tui, etc. O
God, which neadest no other man's goods we beseech thee, that with a merciful
and pleasant countenance In Missa Apost.
thou wilt look upon these present gifts set before thee, and that thowe may
be well pleased with them to the honor of thy Christ.

S. Basil prayed thus: Dominum postulemus pro oblatis and sanctificatis,
honorificentis simis muneribus Domini Dei nostri and commoditate bonorum
nostrarum animarum, vt clementiss. Deus, qui accepit ea in sancto and super
caelesti, intelligibili altari in odorem suauitatis emittat nobis gratiam et
communionem sancti sui Spiritus. Let us desire our Lord for the offered and
sanctified most honorable gifts of our Lord and God, and Basil in Missa.
the commodity of the goodness of our souls, that our most merciful God who
has received them in his holy and heavenly and intelligible altar in the
savor of sweetness, may send unto us the grace and communion of

S. Chrysostom follows S. Basil, and after the oblacion of sacrifice prays
thus: Pro ablatis et sanctificatis preciosis donis Dominum deprecemur, vt
clemens Deus qui ea suscepit in sancto coelesti intelligibili altari suo mittat
nobis propterea gratiam, et donum sancti spiritus. For the offered and
sanctified preciouse gifts, letvs pray to our Lord Chrysostom. in Missa.
that our merciful God, who has received the^ in his holy and heaue^lie
intelligle altar, may se^d us therefore grace, and the gift of the holy
Ghost. Thus he. I wish that all these alleged Fathers praing to God for the
acceptacion of their service in the offering of sacrifice, might be so
dilige^tlie noted, that their phrase may hereafter be remembered. For if they
be well noted, they seem in manner of speech to pray for their sacrifice, which
manner of speech S. Ambrose also uses, and after him the catholic Church S.
Ambrose in this manner. Ambr. li. 4 ca. 6. de sacr.
Petimus et precamur vt hanc oblationem suscipias, in sublimi altari tuo per
manus Angelorum tuoru^, sicut suscipere dignatus es munera pueri tui iusti
Abel, et sacrificiu^ Patriarchae nostri Abrahae, et quod tibi obtulit summus
sacerdos tuus Melchisedec. We desire and pray thee that thou wilt receive this
oblacio^ by the hands of the Angels into Abell, and the sacrifice of our
Patriarch Abraham, and that, which thie priest Melchisedech did offer unto
thee. The catholic Church makes the like request in this manner: Supra quae
propitio ac sereno vultu respicere digneris, et accepta habere, sicuti accepta
habere dignatus es munera pueri iusti tui Abel, et sacrificium Patriarchae
nostri Abrahae, et quod tibi obtulit summus sacerdos tuus Melchisedec, sanctum
sacrificium, immaculatam hostiam. Upon which things, vouchesafe to look with a
merciful and pleasant countenance, and to accept them, as thou did
vouchesafe to accept the gifts of thie child Abel the just, and the sacrifice
of our Patriarch Abraham, and that which thie high priest Melchisedec did offer
unto thee, an holy sacrifice, and an undefiled host. And immediately yt
follows thus: Supplices te rogamus, omnipotens Deus, iube haec perferri per
manus sancti Angeli tui in sublime altar tuum, in conspectu diuinae maiestatis
tuae, vt quotquot ex hac altaris participatione, sacrosanctum Filij tui corpus
et sanguinem sumpserimus omni benedictione coelesti Words in the Mass now
used.
repleamur et gratia, per eundem Christum Dominu^ nostru^. We mekelie beseech
thee (o almighty God) command these to be carried by the hands of thie holy
and grace by the same our Lord Jesus Christ.

These be the prayers that the Proclamer in his sermon derideth, mocking
withal the godly doings of the catholic Church. Here he triumphs, here he
shows his trifling toies and merry co^ceates to delight himself, and soch as
were of light heads and graceless hearts in his audience. Here his dissembled
gravity failing, he showed himself in his own colors, even like a man of his
profession, that is to misconstrue, to misunderstand, to wrest, to distort to
adulterate soch things as they read, and yet shamelessly with bold
countenance to utter yt, to compass therbie a mischief. But that he be no
otherwise charged then his own words will require we shall report them as
they be. Thus he says as touching these prayers.

Moreover the priest desiereth God so to accept the body of his Son Jesus
Christ as he The words of the Proclamer See what blind judgment blind malice
pronounces of all the chrystian world
once accepts the sacrifice of Abell, or the oblacio^ of Melchisedec. Yt is
known that Abell offered up of his fruict of his slocke a la^be or a sheep,
and that Melchisedec offered unto Abraham and his company returning from the
battaill bread and wine. And think we that Christ the Son of God stands so
far in his Fathers displeasure that he needs a mortal and miserable man to
be his spokesma^ to procure him favor? or think we that God receaueth the
body of his only begotten son none otherwise, then he once received a
sheep or a la^be, at the hands of Abel? or then Abraham received bread and wine
of Melchisedec? If no: why does the priest then make this prayer in the Canon
immediately after consecracio^? Supraquae propitio ac sereno vultu respicere,
digneris, and accepta habere, sicuti accepta habere dignatus es munera pueri
tui iusti Abel, and sacrificiu^ Patriachae nostri Abrahae, and quod tibi
obtulit summus sacerdos tuus Melchisedec, that is to say: Look down with
merciful contena^ce upon these sacrifices (that is, the body of Christ thy
Son, and the cup of his blood) and vouchesafe to receive the^, as thou
sometime vouchsafest to receive the oblacio^s of the child Abel the just, and
the sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and that thing that was offered to thee
by thy high priest Melchisedec. Besides this he desiereth that an Angel may
come, and carry Chrysts body away into heaven. This is the prayer that he
makes: Iube haec perferri per manus sancti Angeli tui in sublime altar tuum.
What a fable is this that Christ should be born upon an Angel, and so carried
up away into heaven? Thus much the Proclamer.

How say you? Have not seen him play his part? Have ye not seen a meruelouse
mockrie of Gods holy mysteries? Have ye not heard the phrase of The prayers of
the Cano^ of the Mass be the prayers of Fathers of the primitive Church.
Supra quae propitio ac seren, etc. is taken out of S. Clement, who prayed
thus: Rogamus vt propitio serenoque vultu respicias super haec doua. The Church
says: upon which vouchesafe, with a merciful and pleased countenance to
look upon, etc. S. Clement said: We beseech thee that with a merciful and
pleased countenance thou wilt look upon these gifts or sacrifices, that that
follows in the prayer of the Canon yt is wholly in S. Ambrose, saving that yt
is there divided as yt were into two prayers, that S. Ambr. co^prehe^deth in
one. For where in the prayer of the Church yt follows thus: and accepta habere
sicuti accepta, etc. And vouchesafe to receive these, as thou vouchsafest to
receive the gifts of Abel the just, and the sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham,
etc. yt is in S. Ambrose word Petimus and precamur vt hancoblat, etc. supra.
We desire and pray thee that thou wilt receive this oblacio^ by the hands of
the Angels into thie high altar as thowe vouchsafest to receive Abel the just,
and the sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and that, that thie high priest
Melchisedec offered unto thee. See ye not now that the catholic Church uses
the very same words that S. Ambrose and the ancient Church in his time did
use? well let us proceed to see and compare the rest.

The Church goes further in the Canon and prays thus: Suplices te rogamus
omnipotens Deus iube haec perferri, etc. We humbly beseech thee, o Almighty
God, that thowe wilt command these sacrifices to be carried by the hands of
thy holy Angel into thie high altar in the seight of thine divine Majesty
S. Ambrose prays, thus: Petimus et precamur, vt supra. We desire and pray,
that thou wilt receive this sacrifice by the hands of the holy Angels into
thie high altar.

Now ye see the prayer of the Canon of the Mass used in the catholic
Church, with which the Proclamer has fownd soche fault, ye see also the
prayers of S. Clement and S. Ambrose, and by conference ye perceive them so to
agree, that the words of the prayer of the Church now be none other then the
words of S. Clement and S. Ambrose. May yt not then be Three feigned faults
fownd in the Canon of the Mass by the Proclamer.
There be in all three principal and horrible blasphemies, as he feigneth and
sets the^ forth, committed in these prayers: The first is, that Christ
should so stand in the displeasure of his heavenly Father that he needs a
mortal and miserable man to be his spokesman. The second, that the body of
the only begotten Son of God should in no better wise be received of the
father then a lamb at the hands of Abel. The third, that desire is made that
an Angel may come and carry away Chrysts body into heaven.

For these offered, and sanctified, preciouse, heavenly, unspeakable,
immaculate, gloriouse, dreadful, horrible, divine gifts, let us pray that
our Lord accepting these into his holy heavenly mental and spiritual
altar, unto the savor of spiritual fragrance: And when S. Basil said: For
the offered and sanctified most honorable gifts of our Lord and God, let us
pray: And when Chrysostom likewise said: Let us pray to our Lord for the
offered and sanctified preciouse gifts: where undoubtedly by these sanctified,
precioufe, dreadful offered gifts, they understood and meant the body and blood
of Christ, there on the altar offered in sacrifice: Will the Proclamer, I say,
mock all these and other holy Apostles and Fathers, and skorning their
phraseis say that they pray to God the Father for the body of his Son
Jesus Christ to be accepted? Is this the learning and gravity wherewith a
matter of so great importance of so great, scripture against said, without
authority co^uelled without grave reason impugned, Mockes and skoffes the
only arguments of the Proclamer in this matter.
the Canon of the Mass, he has impugned yt with no other good learning or
authority, no other grave reason or argument, then only gibing mockes. This
is one that is worthy to occupy the place of a Bishop, this is one that is
reputed a famous preacher: this is a Iuell to help to pluck down the Church
of Christ and to set up the Sinagog of Satan, that can with a false
feigned skoff seem to stick down all that stand in his way doctors,
Fathers, Bishopps, Disciples, Apostles, and all. Can any chrystian heart
think that S. James S. Clement S. Basil S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and all
other holy fathers using these alleged prayers, did think the^ selves
spokesmen to entreat the Father for Christ? If yt can not be thought of them,
how can yt be thought of the catholic Church using the same prayers.

To conclude therefore this first part against the maliciouse mock of the
Proclamer, I say, that if the Apostles and Fathers using this manner of phrase
in their prayers were spokesmen to the Father for Christ his Son, then is The
mening of the Curche in the first poincte.
The Apostles and fathers, and the Church did allwaies and does well know
Christ, as he is the only begotten, so is he the well-beloved Son of the
Father. They believe, they teach and preach that yt is he, in who^ the Father
is well pleased: yea they believe that in him the Father is so well pleased, that
whatsoever they ask of the Father in his name, he will give yt the^. Where upon
the church in this prayer making humble intecession (as the Apostles and
fathers before have done) not for Christ, but by Christ, not to procure favor
for him, but to procure mercy to them selves from God the Father, cocludeth
their peticions and requests in these same prayers, which the Proclamer
skoffinglie abuses, with these words, Per Christum Dominum nostrum. By
Christ our Lord, which is as much to say: All this we desire for Christ
our Lord his sake. In this first part then behold the slaunderouse vanity,
and so let us examine the next pretended fault.

Abel, of Abraham, of Melchisedec. Abel, Abraham, and Melchisedec were men
acceptable to God, whose sacrifices were also acceptable, not for the things
them selves that were offered by them, as a sheep a ram, bread, wine, for of
these things as God has no need being the Lord of the wholl earth and all
that is there in: so of them, as of them selves he has no pleasure. In these
sacrifices then not the things but the service of them which offered those
things, was acceptable God looked not on the thing offered in the old
sacifices, but on the deuocio^ of the offerers.
and pleasant unto God. Abel offered sacrifice to God, so also did Cain. But
respexit Dominus ad Abel, and ad munera eius. ad Cain autem and ad munera eius
non respexit. God did look unto Abel and to this gifts, but unto Cain and to
his gifts he did not look. He looked first to Abel him self, then to his gifts
He beheld his hearty devotion and for that looked to his service in his
ductifull sacrifice: he saw in Cain a slacknesse or coldenesse of devotion,
wherefore he neither looked favorably to him nor to his seruise in offering
sacrifice.

Noe^ offered sacrifice and God smelled a sweet sauoure, says the scripture,
not that God was delighted with the kitche^ savor of burnt meat as here the
sweet savor of his devout and duetifull service. As God then was not Abel to
receive his sheep in to heaven, nor by Melchisedec to take up thither bread
and wine, nor by Abraham to take the ram that he offered, but that their
humble service and obedience thereby showed and declared might be accepted: So
the Church desiereth not that her sacrifice which is Christ might be
accepted (being most acceptable in yt self, and all other made acceptable by
yt) but that her devotion, humble service and obedience in doing that sacrifice
may be soche, that yt may be accepted as was the service of Abel, of
Melchisedec, and of Abraham in the offering of their.

In this same sense prayed the Apostolic and primitive Church. S. James
Jacob. in Miss.
in this manner: Respice in nos, o Deus, and ad nostrum hoc rationabile
obsequium in tuere, idque accipe vt Abel dona accepisti, Noe^ sacrificia,
Moysis and Aaronis sacerdocia Samuelis pacifica, Dauidis poenite^tia^,
Zachariae incensum. Look upon us, o Lord, and be hold this our reasonable
service, and receive the same as thowe did receive the gifts of Abel, the
sacrifices of Noe, the preistlie oblacio^s of Moses and Aaron, the peace
offerings of Samuel, the penance of David, the inceuse of Zachary.

S. Basil in his Mass prayed almost with same words: Respice in nos, Deus
and vide super seruitutem nostram hanc, and suscipe eam sicut susepisti Abel
munera, Noe, Basil in Miss.
sacrificium, Abrahae horocaustum, Moses and Aronis sacrationes, Samuelis
hostias pacificus, sicut susepisti de sanctis tuis Apostolis verum istud
mysterium, sic and ex manibus nostris peccatorum suscipe munera ista in
benignitate tua Domine. etc. Look upon us, o God, and look upon this our
service, and receive yt, as thou did receive the presents of Abel, the
sacrifice of Noe^ the burnt offering of Abraham, the oblacio^s of Moses and
Aaron, the peace offerings of Samuel, even as thowe hauest received this true
mystery of thie holy Apostles, so, o Lord, receive these sacrifices of our
hands being sinners, in thy benignity.

S. Ambrose and the ancient latin Church that he lived in, as ye have heard
yt allreadie testified, used a much like phrase. We beseech thee, o Lord,
says he, vouchsafe to receive this sacrifice as thowe hauest vouchedsafe to
receive the gists of thy child Abel the just, the sacrifice of our Patriarche
Abraham, and that which thy high priest Melchisedec did offer unto thee.

Thus have ye now seen the prayers for acceptacion of sacrifice, that were
prayed by the Apostles, used of the greek Church, received of the ancient The
service in doing of sacrifice is desierd to be accepted, not the sacrifice yt
self.
latin Church, and continued by the catholic Church eue^ to this our time.
Abel, Noe^, Abraham, etc. Did S. Ambrose and the fathers of the latin Church
for these xii hundredth years so basely think of the worthiness of Chrysts
body and sacrifice, that they thought a sheep, an ox or breada^d wine as
acceptable as the body of Christ? No, they thought nothing so, but they
desiered (as is said) that their service in offering this sacrifice might be
accounted as the service of those other was accepted. This acceptio^ the^ has
respect to the offrers, and not the sacrifice off.

And that the Proclamer shall not say, that this exposition is feigned by me,
let him understand that this same exposition has been made by diverse learned
fathers some hundredth years agon, of the which for proof I will allege the
saing of one which shall be Hugo de S. victore, who expownding the canon of
the Mass, upon, this prayer which the Proclamer by his mooking so
blasphemouslie Lib. 2. de. eccl. off. ca. 33.
abuses and derided says thus: Quasi per gradus scalae asce^dens come morat
munus Abel pueri, sacrificiu^ Abrahae Patriarchae, oblatione^ Melchisedec
sacerdotis, qui in pane and vino specie^ very sacrificii elega^ter expressit,
sicut Abraham veritate^ in filio, et Abel inuocentiae munus in agno. Quod
dicit: Sicuti accepta habere dignatus es munera, etc. non optat similiter
acceptari oblationes (haec enim multo est acceptabilitor) sed offerentes. As
Abel his child, of the sacrifice of Abraham the Patriarch, and of the oblacion
of Melchisedec the priest, who in bread and wine did well setfurth the figure
of the true sacrifice, as Abraham the verity in his Son, and Abel the gift
of innocentie in a lamb. That he says: As thowe hauest vouched safe to
accept the gifts of thy child Abel etc. he desires not the oblacions or
sacrifices to be in like accepted (for this sacrifice is much more acceptable)
but the offerers. If of this understanding the Proclamer would see more he may
read Gabriell and other which treacte of the Canon of the Mass, and The
mening of the Church in the second poinct.
he shall see so much that he may have just cause to be ashamed of his vain and
wicked saings and false imaginacions against the godly doings of Chrysts
catholic Church. To conclude then this second part also yt is evident that
the Church desiereth not the sacrifice of Christ to be equally taken with
the sacrifices of Abel, Abraham. Melchisedec, but raither the offerers of these
sacrifices, that is, that the priest and people offering this sacrifice Abel,
Abraham, Melchisedec, and their service in offering their sacrifices to God.

Melhoserus, Zuin glius and soche like, that he judges them insensate men and
very fools, and thinks him self only wise.

But that thowe (gentle reader) may, not by my words only, but by good
substanciall matter judge these maliciouse false imaginacions to be his
inverted toies void of all learning and rrueth, and as well impugning and
skorning the phrase of holy scripture and ancient fathers, as of the
catholic Church in these days, understand that the scriptures have this
manner of speech that an Angel does carry our prayers into the seight of God.
For the Angel Raphael said unto the holy father Tobias, Quando orabas cum
lachrimis, and sepiliebas mortuos etc. ego obtuli orationem tuam Domino. when
thowe did pray with tears and did bury the dead etc. I did offer or
present

Now will the Proclamer here skoff at the saing of the Angel Raphael and Tob.
12.
ask in his histrionicall manner whether he carried Tobies prayers in a cart or
a whelebarow, or will he ask him whether God could not know the prayers of
Tobie except he had brought them up into his seight? Soche fond friuolouse S.
Ambrose prayed in this poinct as the Church does now.


S. Ambrose, as before is seen, declares that he and the Church where in he
lived, used the like manner of speech in their prayer within the Canon of the
Mass, saing thus: We desire and prate thee, that thou wilt receive this
sacrifice into thie high altar, by the hands of thie holy Angels. Now did
S. Ambrose and the Church that he lived in desire by this manner of prayer as
the skoffing Proclamer fableth, that their sacrifice (which was he body of
Christ) might be carried a way into heaven by Angels? Was S. Ambrose of so
small learning and knowledge, or of so little wit and understanding as to
judge or think that? Naie, the lack of learning knowledge wit and grace also
is raither in the Proclamer, who of so learned and holy a man, and of the
wholl Church withal, so rashly and wickedlie judges. S. Ambrose so praieng

But that the right sense of this phrase may be here more fully declared: Of
the ministry of Angels.
understand, that, as S. Paul says, the Angels of God are all ministering
spirittes sent to help the^, that shall atteing the inheritance of salvation.
In the old law they did to Abraham, to Isaac, to Jacob, to the parents of
Sampson, and to diverse other innumerable ministeries. To holy Tobie the Angel
Raphael was the minister to conduct his son to Raguel in Rages. and there to
him he was Genesis 22. ibid. 28. Judic. 13 Tob. 3. 4. 5
the counsailour, not only to take Sara to wieff, but also by chaistvsage of
her, and by other means to restreign and debar the wicked assaulting and
molesting spirit, that infested that house. To the same father Tobie the Angel
so ministered that his seight was restored. His prayers also and other good
Ibid. 10. 11. 12.
deeds he did present in the seight of God.

In the new testament the Angel Gabriell was the messenger of the ioifull
conception of the Savior of the world. An Angel was the Messenger to Luc. 1.
ibid Ma. 2. Act. 5. 8.
Zacharias to tell him before of the birth of his son John the Baptist. An
Angel was messenger to the poor sheperds to give them to understand that they
had a Savior born. An Angel attended upon Peter and opened the doors of the
prison, guided him out and dimissed him in safety. What shall I stand to
enombre the no^bre of the places of scripture to this matter Every man has a
propre Angel
apperteining, which be almost immunerable? This is certain, that both men and
children have their Angels to keep them, help them, and to offer up their
prayers to God for them. Angelis suis mandauit de te etc. He has Psalm. 90
Math. 18.
commanded his Angels (says the Psalmist) to attend thee, that they may
keep thee in all thie ways, they shall carry thee in their hands, that thowe
hurt not thy foot with a stone. And for children Christ gave monicion Bern.
ser. 7 in Cant.
saing: Nolite scandalizare vnum ex his pusills. Do not offend one of these
little ones. I say unto you that their Angels do allwaies see the face of my
Father Angels offer up our prayers to God.
which is in heaven.

Diverse of these scripturs are treacted of by S. Bernard and expownded to the
same sense that I have alleged them for. Of the place of Tobie thus he says:
Credimus Angelos sanctos astare orantibus, offerre Deo preces and vota hominum
vbi tamen sine ira and disceptatione leuari puras manus perspexerint. Probat
hoc angelus ita loqueus ad Tobiam: Quando orabas cum lachrimis etc. We believe
that the holy Angels be present with them that do pray to offer to God the
prayers and Idem ser 12 in psalm. 90.
desires of men, where they see clean hands to be lifted up without wrath and
disceptacio^. This does the Angel prove thus speaking to Tobie: when thowe
did pray with tears and did bury the dead etc. I did offer thie prayer
before God. And upon the saing of the Psalmist he says thus: Quanta^ tibi
ibidem
debet hoc verbum infer reuerentiam, adferre deuotionem, confer fiduciam?
Reuerentia^ pro praesentia, deuotionem pro beneuolentia, siduciam pro custodia.
Caute ambula, vt videlicet cui adsunt Angeli etc. How much reverence, how
much devotion, how much trust aught this word to bring to us? Reverence
for the presence, devotion for benevolence, trust for their custody, walk
wisely forafmoche as Angels be present. Adsunt, and adsunt tibi, non modo
tecum, sed etiam prote. Adsunt vt protega^t, adsunt vt prosint. They are
present, and unto thee they are present, not only with thee but also for
thee. They are present to defend, they are present to profitt thee, and to do
thee good. That the saing of Christ teaches that Angels attend young
children, S. Bernad does also witness thus: Parum est, quod facis Angelos
tuos spiritus, facis and Angelos paruulorum. Denique, Angeli eorum semper
vident faciem Patris. Yt is but a small matter to thee, o God, that thowe
make thie Angels spirits, thowe make the^ also the Angels of little
children.

To conclude with S. Bernarde speaking of the ministry of Angels about us
in the service of God, thus he says: Attendite principes vestros cum statis
Jdem ser 7. in Cant.
ad orandum, vel psallendum, and state cum reuerentia, and disciplina, and
gloriamim quiae Angeli vestri quotidie vident faciem Patris, nimirum missi in
ministerium propter Angels what ministeries they do for us.
nos, qui haereditatem capimus salutis, deuotionem nostram in superna ferunt,
reserunt gratia^. When ye stand to pray or to sing praises to God, remember
your rulers (mening Angels) and stand with reverence and good order, or
semelie manner, and rejoice that your Angels do daily see the face of the
Father. For they being sent in ministry for us, which receive the inheritance
of salvation, do carry up our devout service into heaven, and bring us again
grace. That Angels then be present with us, that they keep us, that they help
us, that they carry up our prayers and devout services and offer them

But that the reader may understand how they offer our prayers, and what is
thereby meant, and to the intent also that both he may be delivered from all
scruple of that matter, and the Proclamers untrue feigning upon this place of
the Canon, perceived to be all together against the mind of the Church, as a
thing never by any of them there thought or spoken, I shall for this time
produce one of the same Church, expownding the same prayer of the Cano^ which
the proclamer so shamefullie abuses and wickedlie wresteth to a deuelish
sense. This shall be the reverend Father Hugo de S. Victore, who expowndeth yt
thus: Sacrificium per manus Angeli perferri nihil aliud intelligimus, li. 2.
ca. 34. de ossic. ecl
quam ipsum cooperari nostrae deuotioni. Cooperatur autem nobiscum pro nobis
orando, modoque inenarrabili et inuisibili bona mentibus nostris suggerendo.
The sacrifice to be carried by the hands of the Angels, we understand to be no
other thing, but the Angel to work with our devotion. He woorketh with us
both praieng for us, and also by a merueilouse and invisible manner putting good

The Angel then, after the mind of the Church, to carry our sacrifice, is
to help us by godly suggestion to do our service therein humbly and
devoutly, and by faith and charity effectually, and therein to pray with us
The mening of the Church in the third poinct
God. This is and ever has been the mind of the Church in this prayer of the
Canon. And here will I ioin issue with the Proclamer, that if he bring forth
any one catholic writer, be he never so slender, never so unlearned, never
so ancient, or never so young, that says that the prayer of the Cano^ is to
be understood as he has most vainlie and falselie (after his heretical
manner following Melhoferus) feigned and divised, I will yield to him and say,
that the wholl Church has offended: if he can bring no one (as certain I am he
can not) and I dare say he himself knows that he can not, let him blush and
be ashamed of this his wicked toieng: and let the reader see his vanity, and
beware of his false heretical subtlety, knowing that this is but a vain
imagined, and maliciouse divised understanding of heretics, never asmoche as
once dreamed of any good catholic.

And here I say farther to the Proclamer, that yt can not be but that he

THE NINE AND THIRTETH CHAPT. TREacteth
NOw follows the fourth thing I pourposed to speak of, namely of the value
of the sacrifice for the quick and the dead. For the which also I will have
recourse to the time of the Apostles and the Fathers of the primitive Church,
as here tofore I have done in the proof of matters reproved by the Adversaries,
and the proclamer. If yt shall be made evident that S. James in his Mass, S.
Basil in his Mass S. Chrysostom in his Mass, and other ancient Fathers in
their writings do say that the sacrifice of the Mass avails all that be
faith full both the quick and the dead, and not one can be brought that
denies yt, reason would that our cause should be approved and allowed, and
the cause of the Adversaries disprooued and disalowed. And for that the
Adversaries will sooner grant yt to be profitable to the quick then to the
dead,

And first to see what was done of and among the Apostles, we will see Recipe
munera haec proposita pertuam benignitatem, and fac vt oblatio nostra grata et
acceptabilis sit, per Spiritum sanctum sanctificata, in propitiatione^
peccatorum nostrorum, and eorum, quae populus per ignorantia^ admisit, and in
requiem animarum eorum, qui ante nos dormiunt, vt and nos abiecti, and
peccatores, and indigni serui tui, digni habiti, qui sine dolo ministremus
sancto altari tuo, mercedem, accipiamus fidelium and prudentium dispensatorum,
gratiamque inueniamus et misericordiam in die illa tremenda retributionis tuae
iustae et bonae. Receive through thy mercifulness these gifts of our hands
which be sinners, and grant that our oblacion may be pleasing and acceptable,
sanctified by the holy Ghost, unto the S. James prays both forth quick and
the dead
forgiveness of our sins, and of those which thy people has committed by
ignorance, and unto the rest of the souls of them, which sleep before us, and
that we also abiectes and sinners, and thy unworthy servants, may be
accounted worthy, which may without gile mynister at thie holy altar, and
that we may receive the reward of the faithful and wise stewardes, and that
we may find grace and mercy in that fearful day of the just and good
reward.

Not minding to tarry upon the beginniug of the prayer, where ye may perceive
that like manner of prayer is used, as in the last chapter is spoken of, namely
that this sacrifice may be received gratefully acceptably, etc. Which I do
but touch, wishing yt to be noted the better to perceive the malice of the
Proclamer, who (as ye have heard) reproves and skorneth that in the Church,
that was used of the Apostles. I mind not, I say, to tarry, but to have me to
note these things, that now we have to speak of, namely that the sacrifice of
the Mass is auailable both to the quick and the dead, which both be here
testified, when the Apostle prays that this sacrifice may be pleasing and
acceptable unto the remission of sins, and to the rest of the souls of the^
that sleep before us. Do not these words teach us, that S. James took this
for a sacrisice propiciatorie, when he desiereth that the sacrifice may be
accepted to the propiciacio^ of our sins? And did he not think yt auailable
to the dead, when he prays that yt may be to the rest of the sowles of the^
that be dead? The words be so plain, that yt can not be deuied.

And as Caiphas, though he were an euel Bishop spoke one truth of the S.
James Mass is full of knowledge eue^ by the judgment of the Proclamer
death of Christ: so the Proclamer though he be an evil man spoke one truth
of S. James Mass. For he says that S. James Mass is full of knowledge. If
yt be full of knowledge by the testimony of the Aduers. the^ fear thowe not,
whether thou be catholic or other, to say that this is good knowledge, that
the sacrifice of the Mass is aualeable to the quick and the dead. For soch is
the knowledge in S. James his Mass. And that thou may be farther assured that
the Apostles taught prayer and the Mass to be profitable to the dead, harken
first what Dionyse the Disciple to saint Paul, says for the one, and what
Chrysostom testifies for both. S. Dionyse describing the manner Dionys.
eccles. Hier. cap 7. part prim.
of the burial and exequies used in his time and before his time in the
church, for part of yt says thus: Accedens venerandus Antistes, precem
sacram super mortuum peragit, precaturque diuinam clementiam vt cuncta
dimittat, per infirmitatem humanam admissa, peccata defuncto, eumque in luce
statuat, in sinibus Prayer for the dead used in S. Dionyse time.
Abrahae, Isaac, et Jacob, in loco vbi aufugit dolor et tristicia, et gemitus.
The reuere^de Bishop coming, makes holy prayer upon the dead, and prays
the goodness of God, that he would forgive the dead person al his sins place
from whence flies sorrow, heaviness and morning. Thus much S. Dynise.

See you not prayers here made for the Sins of the dead? See you not
Objection.


Perchance yt may be said that if the Apostles had thought yt necessary to
pray for the dead they would have left yt written in some of their epistles.
To this I say, that yt neaded not. For first among the Jews yt was before the
coming of Christ in use, to pray and offer sacrifice for the dead, as the
second book of the Machabies does testisie. Which book although the
Adversary does reject: yet S. Augustine says yt is in the Canon of christian
men. And August. de cura promortu. Lib. universe fid. Indaeorum.
Antonius Margarita one converted from a Jew to a Chrystian man, in a book
that he made of the faith of the Jews, declares the prayer that they made for
the dead which is not, much unlike to this prayer of S. Dionyse. And over he
says that they have a book wherein be written the names of them that be dead,
which thrice in a year be read and so prayed for. Which order is

As for the Gentiles although they used funeral obsequies: yet for that they
were ungodly after the heathen manner, the Apostles gave the^ commandment by
tradicion to bury their dead, and to pray for the^ after the chrystia^ manner.
Of the which commandment S. Clement makes me^cio^, how yt was given by S.
Peter. And so does Chrysostom that yt was doe^ by the Apostles. Clemens epist.
1. Hom. 3. Philip. pri.
For he says thus: Non frustra ab Apostolis sancitu^ est, vt in celebratione
venerandoru^ mysterioru^ memoria fiat coru^ qui hinc decesserunt. Nouerunt
illis multu^ hinc emolumenti fieri, multu^ vtilitatis. Stante siquide^ vniuerso
populo manus in coelos extendente, coetu ite^ sacer dotali verendoque posito
sacrificio quomodo Deu^ non placaremus pro istis orantes? Yt was not but to
good purpose decreed of the Apostles that in the celebracion of the honorable
mysteries (whereby he meneth the Mass) a memory or reme^ The Apostles decreed
that the dead should be prayed for in the Mass.
brance should be made of the^ that have departed hence. They knew that much
commodity should come from thence to the^, and much profit. For all the
people standing, and holding up their hands into heaven, the company also of
preistes, and the fearful sacrifice being settfurth, how shall we not appease

As before ye have seen the prayer of the Apostle. S. James praing for the
dead: so now ye see yt testified by Chrysostom that the Apostles commanded
the dead to be prayed for in the celebracio^ of the holy mysteries, which is
the Mass, where the holy and blessed body and blood of Savior Christ is
setfurth in the seight of the Father: whereby his passion and death being
lively remembered, and humble peticio^ in the presence thereof, and for the
meritte thereof by the preistes and people being made, yt ca^ not be (says
Chrysostom.) but that God will be appeased and mercy for the souls obtained.
For (as S. Cypria^ says) In huius praesentiae no^ superuacue me^dica^t
lacrimae venia^, nec vnqua^ patitur co^triti cordis holocaustu^ repulsam. In
the presence of this (understand sacrifice) tears do adsurediebegge pardon,
neither does the sacrifice of aco^trite heart at any time suffer repulse.
There for in this sentence Chrysostom does not only testify the Cypr sermon.
de coena.
dead to be prayed for by the decree of the Apostles, but also that they are to
be prayed for in the celebracion of the honorable mysteries. Which mysteries
is a sacrifice. Finally howesoeuer the Deuel has bewitched some, Basil. in
Missa.
I find, this prayer: Nos aute^ oe^s de vno pane and de vno calice
participantes, coadunari Spiritus sancti co^munione, and nullu^ nostru^ ad
iudiciu^ aut condemnatione^ facias accipere sanctu^ corpus, and sanguine^
Christi tui: Sed vt inueniamus misericordia^ and gratia^ in coetu omniu^
sanctoru^, qui a seculo tibi placuerunt, Auoru^, Patru^, Patriarcharu^,
Prophetaru, Apostoloru^ Euangelistaru^, Martyrum, Confessorum, Doctoru^, and
omnis spiritus iustorum fine^ in fide habentium. Praecipue sanctae and
intermeratae, benedictae dominatricis nostrae Dei genitricis, and semper
virginis Mariae, sancti Ioannis praecursoris and Baptistae, Sancti illius,
cuius memoriam facimus, and omnium sanctorum tuorum, quorum postulationibus
visita nos Deus. Et memento omnium dormientium in spe resurrectionis vitae
aeternae, and refrigera eos vbi visitat lux vultus tui. Make all us partaking
of one bread and cup to be made S. Basil praeied in his Mass for the dead,
and made intercession to Saints
one together in the Communion of the holy Ghost, and make none of us to
receive the holy body and blood of thy Christ, to judgment and condemnacion,
but that we may find mercy and grace in the company of all saints which
have pleased even from the time of owre Graunfathers, Fathers, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, doctors, and of the
spirittes of all righteouse men having their end in faith, specially of the
holy and undefiled our blessed Lady, the Mother of God, and ever virgen
Marie, of saint John the forerunner, and Baptist, and of that Saint whose
memory we make this day, and of all thie saints, by whose prayers visit us
(o God) And remember all them that sleep in the hope of resurrection of
everlasting life, and refresh them, where the light of thy countenance
comfort. Thus fare S. Basil.

In this prayer yt not only request made for them that be dead, which Jacob
in Missa. S. James made intercession to Saints
is one thing among other for the which the Adversary raileth at the Mass:
But there is also intercession made to saints, which is an other matter
Commemorationem agamus sanctissimae, immaculaiae, gloriosissimae, benedictae
Dominae nostrae Matris Dei, and semper virginis Mariae, ac omnium sanctorum,
and iustorum, vt precibus atque intercessionibus eorum, omnes misericordiam
consequamur. Let us make a commemoracion of the most holy, undefiled, most
gloriouse, our blessed lady the Mother of God, and perpetual virgen Marie,
and all holy and just men, that by their prayers and intercessions, we may
all obtein mercy.

See ye not peticion here made that by the intercessions and prayers of all
saints and just men mercy may be obtained. Now if the knowledge of S.
James Mass teaches us the consecracion of the body and blood of Christ, if
yt teach us the same body and blood there to be offered in sacrifice: if yt
teach us yt to be auaiable to the quick and the dead: if yt teach us the
intercession of Saints: and if the same things be in the Mass now used in
the Church, how happened yt that the Proclamer could make that to be
ignorance in our Mass, that is knowledge James in his Mass preached and
setfurth the death of Christ: but they in their Mass ( speaking of the
catholic Church) have only a nombre of dumb gestures, and Ceremonies,
which they themself understand not, and make no manner mention of Christ's
death. The mean that he spoke this by was the spirit, but wilt thou ask me
what spirit? For there be two spirittes: Spiritus veritatis, qui docet omnem
veritatem: The Spiritte of The spirit of the Proclamer.
truth that teaches all truth: And Spiritus mendax in ore prophetae, the
lie^g spirit in the mouth of the Prophet. To the question then I say, that yt
can not be the spirit of the truth, that teaches all truth. For that
spirit can teach and utter nothing but truth, and with untruth he medleth
not. But yt is the lieng spiritte, who although sometime he utter a truth: yet
yt is to maintein an untruth, and to set a countenance of a truth upon an
untruth, and so by that countenance of truth, to make sale of his brag and
untruth.

For in the comparison under this truth that S. James in his Mass preached,
and setfurth the death of Christ, he utters three untruths against the Three
untruths uttered in one place by the Proclamer.
catholic Church. First, he says that they in their Mass have only a
no^bre of du^be gestures and ceremonies. How far wide this is from the truth
(as in S. James Mass) the sacrifice of lawd es, and thankesgeuing: there is the
holy sacrifice of Christ's body, with prayers for all states and soch other:
there is a remembrance of Christ's friends, the holy Apostles and Martyrs, and
Sainetes, What things be contained in the Mass now used.
to the settingfurth of Gods honor in them, who so mercifully has wrought in
them, that in their weak bodies, he would work the strong confession of his
holy name, even to the sheding of their bloodes for the same, there is
charitable prayer for the souls departed, according to the tradicion of the
Apostles: all which be more the^ only du^be gestures, and ceremonies, wherefore
by this he is convinced to have spoken and written an untruth.

The second untruth is that he says that we our selves understand not
these du^be gestures and ceremonies. This is not only an untruth. For he
knows that there be learned Fathers, that have written books of the
ceremonies of the Mass, and farther have declared what every p cercell or
piece Isidorus, Rabanus, Hugo de Sancto Victore, Gabriel, Hoiffmister and
Garetius with other. But yt is also arrogantlie slaunderouse, For he
generallieaccuseth the wholl Church of ignorance, therbie seking to win to
himself the praise of singular knowledge, and to blott all other before him
with the grosnesse of ignorance, to make himself to be seen wise, and all other
to be reputed as fools but dicentes seesse sapientes stulti facti sunt.

The third, which is so manifest an untruth, that even a plain man would by
plain word call yt a lie, as he may do the rest before mentioned, is that
the Mass makes no manner of mention of Christ's death. Who would having
knowledge so say except he were so far past shame, that he regarded not what
he said? Who would so say that were not forced by Deuellish malice, The Mass
setfurth the death of Christ more lively the^ the new Communion
that wittinglie he would impugn the truth and say that not to be that is,
and that to be that is not? What is he that knows not, that the Mass is the
memorial of Christ's passion and death? Why is the consecracion, that the day
before our Lord Jesus suffered, he took bread into his holy ba^des, and gave
thanks and said, take, eat, this is my body which shall be given for you:
makes he no mention of Christ's death? This is my blood of the new testament
which shall be shed for you and for many: is there no mention made of
Christ's passion and death? what has the new Communion to settfurth the death
of Christ more the^ this? but in the Mass besides this, when the body and
blood of Christ be lifted up, as once that same his body was upon the
cross: is there not a lively mention made of his exaltacion upon the cross,
and of his death? when the priest in doing of this speaks the words of
Christ, As often as ye do this ye shall do yt in the remembrance of me: is
there not good occasion given to remember Christ's passion, and death by the
rehersall of his own commandment?

After all this the priest immediately prays and says: Wherefore we Lord
being mindful of the passion, resurrection, and ascension of our Lord,
offer unto thie noble majesty this pure sacrifice: and be these words spoken
without any mencio^ of Christ's death, where his passion, resurrection and
ascencion be called to mind, and spoken by express words? Is not the
prophecy of S. Peter fulfilled in this man and his likes when he says: Erunt
in vobis magistri mendaces, qui 2. Peter. 2.
introducent sectas perditionis, etc. There shall be among you lie^g masters
which shall bring in sects of perdicio^, denieng the God, that bought the^,
bringing

Chrysostom also in his Mass prays likewise in this manner. Offerimus tibi
MissaChrisost.
rationabile hoc obsequiu^ pro fideliter dormientibus, pro patribus and pro
auis nostris, interuenientibus Patriarchis Prophetis, Apostolis, Martyribus,
confessoribus, et omnibus sanctis. We offer unto the this reasonable service
for the^ that sleep in faith, for our Fathers and great graundfathers, the
holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and confessors, and all
saints praing for us. And shortly, after he prays thus again: Sancti
Ioannis Baptistae prophetae and praecursoris, sanctoru^ and nominatis simoru^
Apostoloru^, et sanctihuius cuius memoria^ agimus, et omniu^ sanctoru^
supplicationibus visita nos Deus, et memor esto omniu^ in Domino dormientiu^,
in spe resurrectionis vitae aeternae Chrysosto^ desurethin tercessio^ of
Saints and prays for the dead.
ac requiem praestaeis, vbi lumen vultus tui superintendit. By the supplicacio^
or prayers Aug. li. de here is. Aerius accounted an heretic deniengthe sacrifice
of the Mass to auail the dead.
purseis, with soul pence. But ye see yt not inverted of the Papists as the
Adversary terms the catholic Chrystia^s, but ye see yt used and practiced
of the Apostles and the holy Fathers in their Masses, and so delivered to us.
Now as we have seen the practice of the ancient Church, for the doing and
affirming the thing: so let us see the practice of the same for denie^g and
refusing the thing. S. Augustine, and before him Ephiphanius, declare that there
was one Aerius, who as our new masters do now a days, denied the sacrifice
of the Mass to be profitable to the dead, for the which and certain other
doctrines, he was of the holy learned Fathers nombred among Epyphanius, and S.
Aug. Council. Cartha. 4.


Let us now proceade and see yet a little farther. In the fourth Council of
Cartage, in the which S. Augustine was one, soch a decree was made: Qui
oblationes defunctorum. aut negant ecclestis, aut cum difficultate reddunt,
tanquam egentium necatores, excommunice^tur, they which deny unto the church
the oblacions of the dead, or else do slacklie pay the^, let them as the
slears of the neadie be excommunicated.

What shall I stand longer in so plain a matter, sithen the practice declared
unto us by holy Cyprian, does both teach us that sacrifice was offered for the
dead as to there releif, and that to some yt was denied, as a pain inflicted?
Thus in acertain epistle we find this practice to be reported, Episcopi
antecessores nostri religiose co^siderantes, and salubriter prouide^tes
censueru^t ne quis frater excede^s, ad tutela^ vel curam clericu^ nominaret. Ac
si quis hoc fecisset, non offerretur pro eo, nec sacrificium pro dormitione
eius celebraretur. Neque enim ad altar Dei meretur nominari in sacerdotum Gip.
li. epist. 9.
prece, qui ab altari sacerdotes, and ministros suos leuitas auocare voluit. Et
ideo Victor, cu^m contra formam nuperin concilio a^ sacerdotibus data^,
Geminiu^ Faustinum ausus sit actorem constituere, non est quo pro dormitione
eius apud vosfiat oblatio, aut deprecatio aliquae nomine cius in ecclesia
frequentetur, vt sacerdotu decretum religiose, and necessary factum, seruetur
a nobis. The Bishops our predecessors, godly considering and holsomlie
providing, made a decre, that no brother departing this life should appoincte
If yt be the altar of God what a wicked de de is yt to throw them down?
any one of the clergy to be his Gardia^. And if any did so, neither
should oblacion be made for him, nor sacrisice celebrated for his death.
Neither does he deserve to be named in the prayer of the preistes at the
Altar, of God, that would call away the mynisters, the preistes and Deacons
from the altar. And therefore sithen Victor contrary to the order of late given
out by the preistes in the counsel, has been so bold to co^stitute Geminius
Faustinus, the priest his Guardian, their ought not among you, any oblacion to
be made for his death, or that any prayer should be used in the Church in his
name that the decree of the preistcs godly and necessarely made may be kept
of us. Thus much S. Cyprian.

Of whom as we may learn the decree and practice of the Church before The
denial of prayer for the dead of fending proves the use thereof to be good.
his time, that soch as made preistes their Gardians, for the punishment of
their so doing, there should neither sacrifice nor prayer be done or made for
them in the Church after their death: so may we very well perceive, that for
them that died in the obedience of the Church there was both sacrifice and
prayer offered and made for them at their burialls, and so after their deaths
were remembered in the prayers of the preistes. By the same also are we
instructed that as the denial of oblacion, sacrifice and prayer was to the
pain of them that were dead: so was the doing of the same to the emolument
releif and profitte of them that were dead.

What shall I need after so many practices of the holy Apostles, of the
primitive Church, and of the Church in the time of the ancient Fathers to
setfurth Amb. ad Faustin.
the practice of the Church in the time of S. Ambrose, who writing an epistle
of co^forth to Fustinus, for the death of his sister says, that he thinks
her not so much to be lamented, as with prayers to be releiued: not much Li.
9. Co^fesca. 13.
to be made sad with tears, but raither with oblacions to be commended to God?
Or of S. Augustine, whose mother (as before is said) desiered in her death
bed to be remembered at the Altar, which is, there to be prayed for?

The practice of the church in this matter being so far brought forth as to
the time of S. Augustine, I shall therein now no farther encombre the reader,
August. de Verbis Ap. sermon. 32.
but staing upon a place or two of the same S. Augustine, end this chapter In
one place thus he says: Orationibus vero sanctae Ecclesiae, and sacrificio
salutari, and eleemosinis quae pro eorum spiritibus erogantur, non est
dubitandum mortuos adiuuari, vt cum eis misericordius agatur, quam eorum
peccata meruerunt. Hoc enim a patribus traditum vniuersa obseruat Ecclesia, vt
pro eis qui in communione corporis and sangutnis Christi desuncti sunt, cum
adipsum sacrificium loco suo commemorantur, oretur, ac pro illis quoque id
offerri commemoretur. Yt is not to be doubted, that the dead Prayer,
sacri^ice, and almose pro^itable to the dead, decessing in the Coi^on of the
body and blod of Christ.


In this saing of S. Augustine first note the manner of his speech. that yt is
Prayer for the dead banished out of Euglond.
not to be doubted but the dead are helped with the prayers of the holy
Church, with the holsom sacrifice, and with almose. If by the judgment of S.
Augustine yt is not to be doubted, merciful God, why is yt called in question
at the bare saing of a railing heretic, and not only called in question,
but utterly denied, and almost with skorne hissed out of the Church The
uniuersal Church in and before the time of S. August. prayed for the dead.
of Inglonde?

Secondly, note that in the time of S. Augustine, the universal Church (for
they received yt of the Fathers) and then was the flowrishing Church both in
holiness of life, and excellency of learning how does now a piece of the
church that is in holiness far unlike, in learning much inferioure, reject
and contemn that, that (as is said) the wholl church has in the ancient
time reverently August. in Enchi. ca. 110.
received?

Thirdly, mark what was received, namely that both prayer should be made
for them that died in the Communion of Christ's body and blood, and also that
sacrifice should be offered for them. This doctrine S. Augustine says, Since yt
can not be denied but that prayer for the dead is good yt cannot again be
denied. but they be naught that say yt is euel
should not be doubted of: yea yt is so certain a doctrine that in an other
place he says yt can not be denied. Thus he writes: Neque negandu^ est
defunctorum animas pietate suorum viuentium releuari, cum pro eis sacrificium
mediatoris offertur, vel eleemosinae in ecclesia fiunt. Neither is yt to be
denied, but that the souls of the dead are releiued by the godliness of their
friends living, when the sacrifice of the mediator is offered for them, or else
almose deeds And wicked may he be judged that rejects yt, contemns yt, and

But that I may once make an end of this matter of the value of the Mass to
the dead, though a just volume might be made of that that therein may be said:
yet this may suffice to him that will be satissied. For first is showed that
the prayer and sacrifice for the dead, was used of the Apostles. For proof
whereof is produced the prayer of S. James Mass, and to confirm that, there is
added both the testimony of Chrysostom, and also the manner of praing for the
dead described by S. Dionise S. Paul's Disciple. Asterwarde for the farther
declaracion of the practice of the Church the authorities of the Masses,
as well of S. Basil as of Chrysostom be alleged. And that the continuance and
general receipt of this practice may be perceived to be good, and the
refusal of yt to be evil, as well in the greek Church as in the latin,
Epiphanius and S. Augustine be brought forth as witnesses testifienge that
Aerius mainteining the contrary doctrine, was reputed esteemed and nombred
among heretics. Against soche like persons did the Council of Carthage
publish a decree. And that this practice might most clerelie be perceived
Geminius Faustinus and Victor is added, which inuinciblie proves prayer and
sacrifice to be used for the dead in the holy ancient church.

Finally for the proof of the countinua^ce of this sacrifice from the
Apostles time to the time of S. Ambrose and S. Augustine not only mention is
made what S. Ambrose would have doe^ toward and for Faustinus sister, and what
was done of S. Augustines Mother, but also two places be alleged, in the which
the certentie of this matter is so taught, that yt is neither to be denied nor
doubted. And good cause why we should neither deny yt, nor doubt of yt. For
yt was received and observed of the vniuerfal Church.

Now, reader, when thowe seist this matter so plainly and so evidently
testified to thee, that thus yt has been taught, thus yt has be done: thus yt
has been used: and yet all this not withstanding, that the Adversary raigeth
and raileth against yt, and that, that by these Fathers was taught to be
heresy of him to be taught to be averitie: that the Apostles and Fathers

And now to end, I will ioin this issue: if either the proclamer, or any
Issue joined with the proclamer for prayer for the dead.
other of his adherentes can bring any one catholic and ancient Father,
that says that soche as depart in the says of Christ, are not to be prayed
for, or that sacrifice is not to be offered for them, or that charitable almosse
does not profitt the^: Let them I say bring one ancient and catholic
Father

Again, reader I beseech thee, if thowe be learned mark: if thou be unlearned

THE FOVRTETH CHAP. TREACTETH OF private Masses (as the Proclamer terms
them) and solueth his arguments.
Having now somewhat said of two principal parts of the Mass, namely
consecracion and oblacion: there remains the third principal part to be
spoaken of, which is receiving. As

In this matter, for that the catholic Church permiteth preistes in their
common ministracion to receive the blessed Sacrament alone, and sekemen for
their necessity to do the like, yt likes the Proclamer (as yt has done
other his likes) with might and main to accuse the Church of transgression and
breach of Christ's ordinance. And here we be all that evil is, for our so
doing. Here the Proclamer triumphs upon us in his own conceit, pressing and
crushinge us, as he suppseth, even to the grownde, so low, Parturiunt montes,
nascetur ridiculus mus: so here be great bragges, but we shall have but cold
roste: here is a great cowntenance, but small is the force. The Priclamer his
arguments against sole receiving.


Christ (says he) ministered not to one alone, but to all the twelve
Apostles. Paul commanded that one should tarry and wait for an other,
Inuicem expectate. S. Clement willed that so many hosts should be offered
upon the Altar, as might be sussicient for the people, S. Dionise says that
the priest when he had received himself and delivered the holy communion to
all the people, gives God thanks and makes an end of the mysteries.
Justinius the holy Martyr says that in his time the Deacon exhorted the
people that they will be partakers of those things that be laid forth before
the^ S. Ambrose rebukes his people that were then grown necligent in
receiving the lords supper, and used to excuse the matter for that they
thought If tbowe be not worthy every day, the^ art thowe not worthy once
in a year. And again S. Ambrose expownding these words of S. Paul: Alius
alium expectate, writes thus: He commanded them to tarry one for an other,
that the oblacion of many may be celebrated together, and so be ministered
unto them all S. Hierom, S. Augustine, and the ecclesiastical history,
witness, that until that time co^monlie every Leo wrote to Dioscorus
Bishop of Alexandria, and willed him, that where the church was not able to
receive all the people to communicate together, that the priest should
ministre two or three communions on one day, that as the people came in, and
had once filled the Church: so they should receive the communion, and
afterward give place to other. S. Hierom writing upon the elementh chapter of
S. Paul's first epistle to the Corinthians says that the supper of the Lord
must be common to all the people. For Christ gave his Sacraments to all his
Disciples that were present. These be the Proclamers scriptures, these be his
Doctors, these be his authorities.

And now, gentle Reader, weigh with one, what force these authorities have, to
prove that he intends. His intent is to prove that of necessity Solucion of
the Proclamers arguments.
there must be mo communicantes then one at every place and time, where and when
yt happens Mass to be said. Now these places prove no (as Chrysostom
says) yt is in the church. Non aliud quidem corpus dives, aliud vero
Chrysoft homil in dictum Apost Nolo vosignor
pauper, neque alium quidem sanguinem ille, alium autem iste. Sic and tunc, non
aliud accipiebat quidem dives Manna, aliud vero pauper, neque alterius fontis
iste participes erat, alterius vero indigentoris ille. For so yt is now in the
Church. For he rich man receaueth not one body, a poor man an other,
neither he one manner

And to this purpose said S. Hierom, where the Proclamer alleges him, that
the supper of our lord must be common to all people. For Christ gave his
sacraments equally to all his Disciples, that were present, and not to the
purpose that the Proclamer alleges yt, which ye may perceive by this
word (equally) whereby is signified that Christ gave his body and blood as
well to the inferior Apostles, as to the higher, and so equally to all. The
Proclamer both falsely interprets S. Hierom and misundersta^deth him.


And here note that the proclamer in his translacion left out this word
equally, and said thus: that Christ gave his sacraments to all his disciples
that were present, minding by that phrase of words to make yt appear that
all that be present must communicate, which was not saint Hieroms and the
supper of his body blood common to all his Disciples, equally giving

But to return: Baptism is a common sacrament for all, Now shall we say
that we may not ministre yt to one alone, but to many at once? Naie: the
community of yt stands well if all receive yt, though but one at once
receive yt. But you urge and say, that he brings the practice of the
primitive and ancient Church, that yt was received of many. To this first I
say that he may do the like for the ministracion of the sacrament of
Baptism. Yt is known to all that be learned, that there were in the primitive
She wing that many received together, yt proves that the like may be done
now, but enforces no necessity that yt aught so to be, or that any is
forbodden to receive alone.
Church two special assigned times for Baptism: Easter and whitsontide, at
which times not one alone, but many were baptized, and commonly in that time
Baptism was ministered to many, and not to one alone. But yet no good argument
can of that be deduced that Baptism is not to be ministered, but to many
together, and not to one alone. So though he bring many practices of the
Church, that many did receive the sacrament together, yet yt proves not that
yt can not be received of one alone at one time. For though the Sacrament be
common, yt nothing hinders the community

Again I say, these allegacions prove well the devotion and godly zeal of
the people in the primitive church, which I wish were like now in Fabiamus
made a law that people should receive thrice in a year.
our people, but they prove no law. For if yt had been a law that the people
as often as Mass was said, should communicate, Fabianus the ninete^th
Bishop of Rome and holy Martyr, who lived about the year of our Lord two
hundredth forty and two, and therefore in the pure time, would not have made a
law, that the people should receive the Sacrament at the leest thrice in a
year, that was, at Easter, Whit sontide and Chrystenmasse.

Now I would ask of the Proclaimer whether holy Fabian when he or deined
that the people should communicate thrice in the year, meant that the priest
also should say Mass but thrice in the year. And when the other decree was
made, that they should receive once in the year, whether yt was meant that the
priest should also say Mass but once in the year: if he say yt was so
meant, the practice of the church proves the contrary. For Chrysostom
says: Nonne per singulos dies offerimus? offerimus quidem, sed ad
recordationem facientes mortis eius. Do we not every day (says he) make
oblacion? we make oblacion in deed, but doing yt to the remembrance of his
death. And who doubts but the holy fathers of the latin Church did the
like? if he say that he meant not but that the priest might oftener say Mass,
then yt is manifest that he meant that the priest might say Mass without
communicantes. perceive, that all these alleged authorities prove not that
the priest may not, if he be disposed, receive alone, when none of the people
will

Likewise he alleges against the order of the Church the decree of that
holy man and ancient Father Leo Bishop of Rome, But how sincerely and
truly I shall cause thee to understand, when I have produced the very
words of the same Leo and the words of the Proclamer, and conferred them
together. These be the words of the Proclamer: Leo writing un Note this false
trauslacion of M. Juell.
to Dioscorus the Bishop of Alexandria, gave him this advise, that when the
church was so little, that yt was not able to receive all the wholl people to
communicate together, then the priest should ministre two or three communions
in one day, that as the people came in and had once filled the church so they
should receive the communion, and after give place to other. Thus the
Proclamer.

In reporting of this author first note this in the Proclamer, that alleging
S. Clement, Dionise. Iustine, Ambrose and Hierom in this matter, he alleges
A common sleight of heretics to allege the fathers where they may wrest them
or else to falsisie them.
them in the latin tongue as being bold by sleight to make them appear to his
hearer or reader, that they made somewhat for his cause and purpose. And being
desierouse to have a nombre of authors for the better commen dacion of his
matter, he would also allege Leo. But here he followed his ancient Father
Cranmer, who alleging certain Authors, alleged soche as he might with some
cowntenance wrest, in the latin tongue: other, which he could not well wrest
he would report as yt pleased him in the inglish tongue, but so as apparantlie
they should seem to be of his side, when in deed they were altogether against
him Even so this man, not daringe for very shame, to allege Leo, with his
own words, reports him as he would have had him to say, and not as he
said in deed. The very words of leo be these: Vt autem in omnibus
obseruantia nostra concordet, illud quoque volumus custodiri, vt quum solemnior
festiuitas conuentum populi numerosioris indixerit, and ad eam tanta multitudo
conuenerit quam recipere basilica simul vna non possit, sacrificii oblatio Leo
epla 79. ad Dioscoru^.
indubitanter iteretur, ne his tantum admissis ad hanc deuotionem, qui primi
aduencrint, videantur hi, qui postmodum confluxerint non recepti, cum plenum
pietatis atque rationis sit, vt quoties basilicam, in qua agitur, praesentia
nonae plebis impleuerit, toties sacrificium subsequens offeratur. Necesse est
autem vt quaedam pars populi sua deuotione priuetur, si vnius tatum Missae
ordine seruato, sacrificium offerre non possint, nisi qui prima diei part
conuenerint. Studiose ergo dilectionem tua^ and familiariter admonemus, vt quod
nostrae consuetudini, ex forma paternae traditionis insedit, tua quoque cura
non necligat, vt per omnia Jn stead of oblacion of sacrifice and Mass the
proclamer has communicate and Communion and for so often he has twice or
thrice.
nobis and side, and actibus congruamus. That our religion may in all things
agree we will that this be kept, that when a solemn feast shall cause a great
nombre of people to come together, and to that solemn feast so great a
multitude shall come, as one Church can not receive at once, that the oblacion
of the sacrifice be without all fear done again, leest these which came first
being admitted to this service, they that came afterward may seem not to be
received, sith yt is right godly and reasonable, that as often as the church
where the service is done is replenished with a new people, so often the
sacrifice first part of the day. Diligently therefore and familiarlie we
advertise yowr

These be the very words of Leo. This is the place which the Proclamer
takes in hand to report. Judge now I say, gentle Reader, whether he has
truly reported him or no. And first where he alleged Leo, to prove his
communion, vieue well, I pray thee, the author and observe diligently if
there be in him any one word of communion or communicantes, and See here the
impudency of the Proclamer.
thowe shall perceive that there is no mention made thereof. What truth then is
to be thought either in the man, or in the cause that he defends, when to
maintein yt, he is fain to falsify the authors that he alleges? Is yt not
lamentable to see his shameless boldness that he would wittinglievtter in an
honorable audience, and also publish the same in printe to an wholl realm that
he knew to be false and clean otherwise, then was the intent or mind of the
author which he alleged? That yt was not the mind of the author thowe shall
easily perceive: For first, where the Proclamer uses these words communicate
and communion, The author has these See here his false, slight.
the oblacion of the sacrifice, and the sacrifice. Now because the Proclamer
hates this word sacrifice as a scorpion, as being applied to the holy
Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, therefore to ease his maliciouse
affection, and to delude his hearers and readers, yt liked his Chrystian
sincerity, properly termed heretical malignitie, to corrupt and falsify
the author, and report soche matter to be in him, as there is in deed no
word toward yt in him, I mean to that sense and understanding.

Again thowe seist that in all that sermon (if yt be worthy of that name) his
chiefest purpose is to inueigh against that holy mynistracion, which is
called the Mass in so much that he says that this name, Mass, was not in
use many years after Christ, which is before improoued, yet in this author
Leo even in this place: which he alleged, there is express and lively
mention made of the Mass, and he calls yt Mass, that this man calls
Communion. And these two words, sacrifice and Mass, Sacrifice and Mass
cause the Proclamer to falsisie Leo.


But the Proclamer proceadeth and proves by the Mass book, that there
should be a Communion, because the priest says, orem^is, Let us pray. I see
this man would play small game raither then he will set out, of proof, raither
then mainteining an evil matter to seem to be destitute of all proof. I
prayer thee (good reader) weigh with me what proof is yt of (oremus) Let us
pray? what dependence is there of that word to prove the communion of the
Sacrament? If he can by that word prove the communion of the Sacrament: Let
us pray, is said in the morning and euenning prayer whe^ther is no Communion
he may do the like in the Sacrament of Baptism, and in other sacraments
also, for there the priest says (Oremus) Let us pray. If by yt he had
travailed to prove a communion in prayer, he had done right, but to abuse yt to
prove the necessity of the Communion of the Sacrament in soch sort as he
meneth, yt is raither a declaracion of his malice against the church, then
any proof of his purpose.

That there is a Communion in prayer, the other words of the priest, which he
also alleges for his purpose, do manifestly declare. The priest (says
he) says: The Lord be with you, and the people answer: And with thie
spirit. Do ye not see here how the priest and Communion in prayer at Mass.
the people ioin themselves together, one praing for the other? Which manner of
Communion is also lively settfurth by that that he afterward produces out
of the order of the Mass. The priest (says turns him to the people and
says: Orate pro me fratres, and sorores. Pray for me brothers and sisters.
Here (as before ye have perceived and shall hereafter perceive) he uses a
slight, he durst not for shame tell you, why the priest desiereth the people
to pray for him, but as traitors clippe the kings coin, and deceive the
people, so he clippeth many of the places which he alleges to deceive gods
people. But that his falshead may be perceived, and the cause known why the
priest desiereth the people An other sleight of the Prolamer.
to pray for him, I shall lay before yowr eyes the wholl prayer. Thus he
prays. Orate fratres and sorores pro me, vt meum pariter and vestrum acceptum
sit omnipotenti Deo sacrificium: Which is thus much to say in english: Pray
for me brothers and sisters, that my sacrifice and yowr may be accepted of our
Lord God. Two Communions in the Mass besides the rauing of the Sacra.


Se ye now his slight? Is here any prayer for the communion which he
intends? Do these words prove that the priest can not receive alone? Is
there any mention made here of that his communion? Do ye not perceive that
with two or three words he would blere you eyes, and (as

Thus ye see that he would claim help of the Mass book, which in deed does
him no other help but open his shame. Yt does us thus much help, that hereby
we learn two Communions: The first is of prayer: the second of sacrifice. For
in these two all that be faithfully and devoutly present, lifting up their
hearts to God, and ioining with the priest in godly affection, be
communicantes: And so yt comes to pass, that both the prayer and the
sacrifice made and offered by the priest, as by the common mynister of the

I will not stand upon this being so plain, but leave yt to the farther
consideracon of the Reader, and come to his conclusion of the Mass book And
to conclude the priest, by his own Mass book is bidden to say these words
immediately after the Agnus Dei. Haec sacrosancta commixtio and consecratio
The Procl.
corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus Christi fiat mihi and omnibus
sumentibus salus mentis and corporis. That is to say: This commixtion and
consecracion of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ be unto me and to
all that receive yt, health of body and soul.

I perceive this man keeps his profession. For yt is apperteining to me^of his
calling either to diminish and take away, or to add and put to somewhat The
Answer.
from or to most of the sentences that they allcage. For where before he cuttof
from the places which he alleged here he puts to For where the Mass book
has but these words. Haec sacrosancta commixtio corporis and sanguinis, etc.
He puts in this word (consecratio) which the book has not. But
ouerpassing yt, let us see the force of the argument that he makes out of our
own Mass book (as he terms yt) and very well. For in deed yt is our
book, that abide and remain in the catholic Church, not his, that has

The prayer is that the co^mixtion of the body and blood of Christ may be to
the priest, and to all that receive, health of body and soul. Understand that
the priest is the common mynister of the Church, wherefore doing the common The
common prayer of the Church is not for one angle, but for the wholl universal
Church
mynistracion he co^monlie prays for all that do receive generally, he
stricteth not his prayer for a few, neither does he limitte yt, or bownde yt
withtime and place, but he leaves yt common, and utters yt with an vniuer
sall. He prays not that the body and blood of Christ may be health of
soul and body to the^ only that receive with him at that time and in that
place (which is the thing the Proclamer labors to prove (but in vain) but he
prays for all that receive indifferenlie either in that place and time, or
any other. Whether yt be now or at any other time, in that place, or in any
other place in France, or in Italy, in Spain or in Germany in Englo^dor in
Jerusalem, whersoeuer the catholic Church is, and the Sacrament
catholiquelie

But be yt that the priest had prayed with limitacio^ of time and place, and
desiered that yt might be halth of soul and body to all that receive with him
in that place and time, what offense should the priest commit, if when none
would receive with him, he received alone? or how can the Proclamer prove a
necessity by yt, that neades there must be mo then the priest? or that at that
time and place the priest can not receive alone? If the Church charitablie
wishing that some people should receive the holy Sacrament with the priest,
had made soch a prayer, could the Proclamer turn this charity to a
necessity? Will he turn the charity of the Church wishing virtue,
godliness, and devotion in the people to a necessity, that because the people
will not use this of necessity the priest shall not? Is this good learning? Is
this his good doctrine is this his holy religion? Yt is as much to saiethat if
the people wax cold in deuocio^, so shall the priest to: If the people slack
their devotion, so shall the priest to: if the people neclect the service of
God, so shall the priest to. If the people omit to render most humble thanks
to them do yt not so often, no more shall the priest also. Thus shall yt come
to pass that the deuocio^ and duty of the priest, shall hang upon the will
of the Math. 5.
the people will not serve God, the priest shall not. But who is he that wise
is that sees not the vanity of yt, and whether yt tends? Hitherto, I trust
ye perceive that how great so ever the countenance was made by these
allegacions As odiouse as Popes be to protestants they can allege their decres
where they think good.
before alleged, that yet the force is very small.

But now come the great arguments, now come they, which can not be avoided
(as the Proclamer supposes) so great is the force of them. Where to his places
before alleged I said and do say, they are raither examples of virtue for
the people, and not laws of necessity for the priest, now he produces
laws, as the Canons of the Apostles, and the decrees of Bishops Fideles qui
ecclesiam ingrediuntur, and scripturas audiunt, and Communionem sanctam non
recipient, tanquam eccle Canon. 19. See this Cano^ cut of in the midst.
siastica pacis perturbatores a Communione arceantur. Soch Chrystian men as
come to the church and hear the scriptures, and do not receive the holy
communion, let them be excommunicated, as men that disquiet the Church.

In the alleging of this Canon he keeps his profession as he did in other by
him before alleged, that is to cut them of, and to mangle soch places as he
alleges, and not to bring the^ wholl as they lie, whereof, reader, I make thee
judge. This is the Canon. Omnes fideles, qut conueniunt in solemnibus sacris ad
ecclesiam scripturas Apostolorum, and Euangelium audiant. Qui autem non
perseuerarint in oratione vsque missa peragitur, nec sanctam Communionem
percipiunt, velut inquietudines eccle siae mouentes, conuenit communione
priuari. All the Chrystian men that in the solemn service come together to the
Church let them hear the scriptures of the Apostles and the Gospel. And soche
as continue not in prayer until

Now confer this with that he has alleged, and ye shall perceive that he
has varied in diverse poinctes. But of those I will touch but one. In this The
Proclamer alleging this Cano^ cheiflie against the Mass leaves out the
word Mass in the same.
sermon he cheiflie bends himself to impugn the Mass, wherein (malice
blinding his heart) he finds by his judgment many horrible faults, of the
which he specially choseth four, against the which with might and main, that
is to say, with as much falshead as he can, he does inueigh. And among these
four, as ye perceive, he traualleth very sore against that, that the priest
should receive alone. And to improve that receipt he pretends that this
Canon did mightily make for him. But when he read yt and saw in the same
Canon mention made of the Mass, which he impugneth, that the people should
continue in prayer until yt were all done, for hin dering of his cause, though
his conscience were touched, he used his common slight, and for shame durst
not speak the Cano^ as yt lay, and so with more shame wrote yt, and caused yt
to be printed, that all me^ might see and perceive his sincerity, and

But to answer that part of the Canon, that he alleges, as so strongly
making for him: I say first that he does mystake yt and misunderstand yt. The
true mening of the Apostles Canon misunderstanded by the Proclamer.
with all good Chrystians in prayer, and when devotion serves them in the
receipt of the holy Sacrament, but yt is made against licenciouse and yet
dissembling heretics and schismatiques, who then (as many have of late done)
came to the Church among good Chrystia^s, and yet being there would neither
communicate with them in prayer, neither in the receipt of the holy Sacrament.
Against soch (I say) as would neither in prayer, nor in Sacrament communicate
with the good Chrystians, that theie should be excommunicated, was the Canon
made.

And, Reader, I do not feign this understanding of my own head, I have
authority right good for me, that is right ancient, which is the Council of
Antioche, which Council having the same Canon almost word for word
expowndeth yt to the same understanding that I have. These be the words
Council. Antioch.
of the Council Omnes qui ingrediuutur ecclesia^ Dei, and scripturas sacras
audiunt, nec communicant in oratione cum populo, sed pro quada^ inte^perantia
se a perceptione sanctae co^munionis auertunt, ij de ecclesia remoueantur,
donec per confessione^ poenitentiae fructus osten dant, and precibus
indulgentia^ consequantur, Cum exco^municatis aute^ non licet communicare, nec
cum ijs, qui per domos conueniunt deuitantes orationes ecclesiae, simul orandu^
est. All that come to the Church of God, and hear the holy scriptures, and do
not communicate with the people in prayer, but for a certain wantonness do
auerte the^ selves from the receipt of the holy communion, let these men be
removed from the church, until by confession they show the fruictes of
penance, and through prayers do obtein pardon. With excommunicate persons yt
is not laufull to communicate, neither may we pray with soch as go from house
to house shunning the prayers of the Church. The canon was made against wa^ton
heretics and Schis matiques, whocoming to the church would not for a
singularity communicate either inpraier or in sacrament with the faithful.


This is the Canon of the Council of Antioche, which ye see to be the very
same, and all one with the Canon of the Apostles, or raither the exposition of
yt. In the which yt is plain to perceive that yt was spoken against soche as
were singular and wanton in their own conceiptes, disdeining to communicate
with the people of God, either in prayer, or in the receipt of the Sacram. but
only they would come to the church to hear the scriptures read. To meet
with soch as will not pray with the Church, the Cano^ forbids the

Seco^darelie to say, if the Proclamer will not admit or allow this true
understanding, grownded (as you perceive) upon authority, but cleave to his
false understanding of the Cano^, grownded upon his only fantasy, what
makes the Cano^ so understood, either against the Mass, or against the
Church, or against the priest? What one word finds he in this Cano^ that
proves the Mass to be naught, if the people do not communicate? By what
part of the Cano^ ca^ he reprehe^d the Church, if the whole co^gregacio^
receive not? which The Canon of the Apostles forbids not the priest to
recaaue alone
piece of the Cano^ does prohibitt the priest to receive alone if none other
desire to receive with him? Weigh well the Cano^ and ye shall perceive even
after his own understanding, that there is a law of correction for the people,
if and not against the godly devotion of the priest. Thus his greatest
argument

Calixtus (says he) Bishop of Rome not long after the Apostles time gives
out the like commandment, in the same behalf. His words be these: Peracta
consecratione omnes communicent, qui noluerint ecclesiasticis carere liminibus.
Sic enim Apostoli statuerunt, and sancta Romana tenet ecclesia. That is (says
he) when the consecracion is done, let every man receive the Communion,
unless he will be put of from the entry of the Church. For The decree of
Anacletus abused. by the Proclamer.
this thing have the Apostles ordained, and the holy church of Rome continues
the same.

In this alleged place be mo untruths then one used by the Proclamer. First
he does father yt upon Calixtus, where in deed yt is the decree of Anacletus.
But this is not so great a matter. I would easelie pardon that fault, if there
were no worse in him. But he commits two great faults here besides that.
For he does both distort abuse and wrest the place, and also (as he has done
diverse other) he does mutilate yt, and cut yt of by the knees (as we say)
and brings yt not wholly as yt lies. I will therefore bring the whole place,
that you may both perceive, how much he has of a deuelish purpose Anacletus
by Bartholemew Cara^za in the sum of the Councils: Sacerdotes quando Domino
sacrificant non soli hoc agere debent sed testes secum adhibeant, vt Domino in
sacratis Deo locis perfect sacrificare probentur, iuxta illud Deuteron. 12.
Vide ne offeras holocausta in omni loco, quem videris, sed in loco quem elegit
Dominus Dens tuus. Episcopus Deo sacrificans testes secum habeat, et plures
quam alius sacerdos, cum quo peracta consecratione, omnes ministri communicent,
qui noluerint ecclesiasticis carere liminibus. Sic Apostoli statuerunt, et
sancta Romana tenet ecclesia. The preistes when they do offer sacrifice unto
our Lord, they shall not do yt alone, but they shall have witnesses with
the^, that they may be proved to do sacrifice to our Lord perfectly in
places dedicated unto God, according to the saing of Deuteron. the xii.
chapter: Take beed thowe offer not sacrifice in every place that thou see,
but in the place that thy Lord God has choose^. A Bishop doing sacrifice to
God let him have mo wittenesses with him then an other priest, with whom, when
the co^secracion is done, let all the mynisters communicate, they that will
not, shall be forbidden to enter into the church.

This same place of Anacletus is also alleged in the second distinction
having the same sense, in lenght, that this has in Sum or in brief. Now
first judge of the sincerity of the Proclamer in alleging the Fathers,
whether he does as yt becomes one that takes upon him to correct all the
world, and to preach the truth, which in his judgment, was before lacking.
Is this sincerity to bring three or four words of the end of a saing,
which may be wrested to his purpose, and to leave out all that goes before?
Secondly, for the understanding of the place, he has voonderfully abused his
audience before whom he preached yt, and all soche also as have or shall happen
to read the same sermon now imprinted and diuulged. For in the epistle of
Anacletus yt is decreed thus: Episcopus Deo sacrificans testes secum habeat, in
solemnioribus diebus aut septe^, aut quinque, aut tres Diaconos, qui eius oculi
dicu^tur, and subdia conos, atque reliquos ministros secu^habeat. The Bishop
doing sacrifice unto God, let Anacletus cpla. 1.
him in the solemn days have either seven or sieve, or three deaeons which be
called his eyes, and subdeacons and other mynistres. And then yt follows
Peracta consecratioue omnes communicent, when the consecracion is done let all
communicate. So that this decree can not be understood of all the people, but
only of all those Deacons, and Subdeacons, and ministres which should
attend upon the Bishop in the

That this should be understood as is said yt does well appear by the
relacion of this decree to the doctrine of the Apostles. So (says the decree)
Canon. 9. Apostol.
have the Apostles taught. In deed in their canons they have so taught. For
this is one of their Canons. Si quis Episcopus, aut Presbiter, aut Diaconus,
vel quilibet ex sacerdotali catalogo, facta oblatione, non communicauerit, aut
causam dicat, vt si rationabilis fuerit, veniam consequatur, aut si non
dixerit, communione priuetur. If any Bishop or priest, or deacon, or any
other of the clergy, when the consecracion is done do not communicate, either
let him show a cause, that if yt be reasonable he may be pardoned, or if he
show none, let him be excommunicated. Thus the Apostles Canon.

The cause why this Canon was so made, was not for the necessity of the thing,
that the sacrifice were not perfect, or the Mass not good in yt self, if the
clergy assistent did not communicate, but that they absteining might be
occasion of offense to the people of suspicion against him that did offer the
sacrifice, that he had not well doe^ yt, as the words immediately following in
the same Canon do plainly declare. Sinon dixeritco^munione priuetur, tanqua^
qui populo causa laesionis extiterit, dans suspicionem de eo qui sacrificauit,
quod recte non obtulerit. If he show no reasonable cause why he absteineth let
him be excommunicated, as one that is cause of offense to the people, giving
suspicion of him that did sacrifice, that he had not well offered yt.

Thus now ye see how this man has abused this decree of Anacletus,
understanding yt of all that be present, where yt is to be understood only
of them that attend upon the Bishop in the time of the holy ministracion,
and that also on solemn days. In this poinct only he has not abused this
decree, but in this also, that by yt he intended to prove the

As for the ninthe Canon of the Apostles yt also after the right understanding
proceadeth not of necessity, but of condition. For if they or any of them,
that attend upon the Bishop in the time of ministracion, have reasonable
soche like small no^bre, they might all have cause to abstein. And so yt is
plain Private Mass used in the time of Chrysostom.


And thus ye may perceive that where the Proclamer says that he would make yt
plain to you by the most ancient writers, that were in and after the Apostles
time, and by the order of the first and primitive church, that then there could
be no private Mass, yt was a saing more full of ostentacion and brag, then
of truth. For though he has heaped a sort of places: yet there is no one
sentence in any of them, that proves that there could be Jssue joined with
the Proclamer for private Mass.
no private Mass And so far from truth is this his saing (that in the
ancient Church was no private Mass, I mean a Mass with sole receiving) that
in the Mass of Chrysostom is a plain rule given, what was to be done

And here to knitte up all that he has said, or can say in this matter,
which he terms private Masses: This I say, that if he can bring furthe
any one scripture, ancient council, or catholic doctor that says, that
that Mass, that is said without a nombre of Communicantes in the same place,
is naught, or that yt ought not to be said, except there be mo then the priest
to receive, or that there is prohibition for the priest to receive alone: or
any penalty in any catholic law assigned for the priest that does
receive alone: or any like decree forbidding a sick man to receive the
Sacrament, except some receive with him: Let him (I say) prove these, or some
one of them by express words in manner above said, and I will not only
subscribe, but I will agnise myself his scholar during our two natural lives.

TAE ONE AND FOVRTETHT CHAP. Proves
AS yt is not sufficient for a man to decline from evil: but also to do good,
the scripture so ioining them together, and saing: Declina a malo, and fac
bonum. decline from evil and do good. So Psalm. 33.
yt is not sufficient for a man only to fly heresy, but he must also
profess the truth. Where then I have in this last chapter opened the crafty
falshed of the Proclamer and solued his arguments which in deed be not
worthy to be called arguments for that they have no force to impugn that
that they are forged for, and thereby given occasion, as I myself do fly that
wicked doctrine, that other men may do the like: so will Romans 10. Soche there
be may now in England.
I now profess the tueth of that matter that other men may do the same.
Many in this time of temptacion embrace part of the saing of S. Paul: Cord
creditur ad iusticiam, but the greater no^bre (the more is the pity) stands
not to the other part: Ore confessio fit ad salutem. They believe well in heart:
but they fear with mouth to confess the same to salvation. They turn the
Nolite timere eos qui occidant corpus, animam autem non possunt occidere, sed
illum potius timete, qui potest and Math. 10.
animam and corpus mittere in gehenuam. Fear not them that sleie the body,
but can not sleie the soul: But raither fear him who can cast both body and
soul into hell fire. But they say in their deeds, fear him that kills the
body, and regard not him that has power to kill both body and soul. For
lamentable yt is to say, soche is the love of many to the life of the body,
and to worldly honor and wourshippe, and to the transitory baggage of this
world, that for the conseruacion of these, man is feared, and God the lord of
all power and majesty neclected. God grant us to hear the voice of the
caller, that calls and says: Venite filti audite me, timorem Domini docebo
vos. Come ye children and hear me. I will teach you the fear of our Psalm. 33.
Lord. If we fear him and love him as to our duty apperteineth, we shall
neither fear nor be ashamed to confess him and his holy faith before men.

S. Paul thought all things in the world, as filth or dunge, so that he
Worldly cares kepemen from God.
might win Christ, but we are contented to lose Christ, so that we may wine
the worldly mucke, and filth, for sauegarde of the which, where Christ in his
last supper, instituting the sacrifice of his body and blood to be offered and
frequented of his faithful in the remembrance, and for the high and solempn
memorial of his passion and death, and we have heretofore so received yt, and
in heart still receive yt: yet now we ioin with them, that hate yt, we go with
them that raill at yt, and abandoning yt with them we do as they do. But man's
folly shall come to an end, and the truth of our Lord abides for ever.

To take away this trueh of Christ's sacrifice Satan has taught his
Disciples that the Sacrament was instituted to none other end and purpose but
only to be received, and not to be offered. And to make that apparante all
their and his endeavor is to prove that yt must be received of many. And
that that receipt may be compassed, and the sacrifice defaced, they exclame
against the Mass. But when they have all said and done, the Mass

For proof of this, first, I use this reason. All things forbidden us to do
(as the Adversary says) be contained in the scripture: But in the scripture
Reasons for sole receiving grownded upon the Peotestants doctrine.
yt is not contained that any man is forbidden to receive the Sacrament alone.
Wherefore by the word of God man is not forbidden to receive the Sacrament
alone. Then may we also reason thus: What soever is not for bidde^ by Gods
word as touching matters of faith the Adversary says we may lawfully do
yt: To receive the Sacrament alone is not forbidden by Gods word, Wherefore we
may laufullie do yt. But leaving reasons, although they be of soche force
that the Proclamer can not with stand them, and do also overthrow his false
doctrine: I shall upon and after the rehersall of his own words, prove by
authority, that the Sacrament may be received of one person alone, which is
the contrary of that that he would maintein and defend, but all in vain.

He uses a certain preoccupacion and says thus: Perhaps their may be some
that will say. We grant these things be spoken of the commuuio^ in the old
doctors: but there be as many things or moo spoken by them, of the private
Mass, and all that you dissemble and pass by. I know soch replies have been
made by diverse. Thus much

These words have two principal parts: First is, that the catholics do
grant, that these things which the Proclamer has alleged, be spoaken of a
communion. The second, that there be as many things or mo spoken of the
private Mass by the holy doctors, which he dissembleth or passes by. In
deed the catholics grant both these parts, and say that they be both true.
As for the first, we say, where many of the people in the primitive Church,
and for the space of four or five hundredth years after, were well disposed,
devout and well and godly affected to the often receipt of the holy
Sacrament. For the continuance where of, the holy Fathers the Bishopps and the
preistes did trauaill with laws and decrees, with exhortacions, yea and
sometime as occasion was given by exprobacions to trade the people in the same
(which thing would to God the people would again bring in use, and frequent in
these days) to the great honor of God, and singular comfort of their own
souls health: yet we say that all this proves

For the second part of his saing, where he says that we say, that there be
as many things spoken by the holy doctors of private Mass which he Mark
here a sleight of the Proclamer.
dissembleth and passes by: yt is also true, that there be so. And therefore the
more shame for him, that, he dissembleth them. And here mark his slight: He
says that there be places in the old doctors for the matter that he calls
private Mass, but which of these did he allege and answer. He craftily
conueigheth him self away from them saing: I know soche replies have been made
by diverse. And by these words he bleereth the eics of his simple Readers,
and fills the ears of his audience, as though he had made sufficient answer
to them all, where in deed he touches no one syllable

But Reader, thowe shall perceive that we will use no soche dissimulacion nor
slight with thee, but as we have solued his arguments without any The
catholic doctrine and practice is that the Sacrament has and may bereceaued
of or of one many at once.
great labor, for in deed there was no weight in them: So shall we now open
the truth unto thee simply without all coolour of slight or craft, and that
by good and sufficient authority, as thowe shall well perceive. First to
certify thee of the truth: The truth is that the people did often and much
communicate together in the primitive and ancient church. And yet never the
less, truth yt is, that both the priest and other also upon occasion did
often and much receive alone. Of the which two practices this truth may be
gathered, that the blessed Sacrament may laufullie be received of many
together, and may also laufullie be received of one alone, the first is
proved by that, that the Proclamer has alleged: The second shall be proved
by that that I will allege.

And first I will use the testimony of Justinius whom both Cranmer and this
Proclamer do pitifully abuse, and truncatelie allege. But alleging
Justinius in his said sermon. Diaconi distribuunt ad participandu^ vnicuique
praesentiu^ ex consecrato pane, vino and aqua. Illis vero, qui non adsunt
deferunt domum. The Deacons deliver of the consecrated bread and wine and
water, to every one that is present. And if there be any away, they carry yt
home to them. Upon this piece of this author thus alleged, the Proclamer
brings in these his words: Here also we find a Communion, but no private
Mass. Note well (good Reader) what this man finds in this author, and then
shall thowe perceive whether he be clear or corrupted in seight, or not raither
altogether blinded.

In these words that Iustine says, that the Deacon delivers to every one
that is present of the consecrated bread wine and water, I grant that he
finds a The Sacrament was severally and solie received of the^ to whom yt
was carried home, and therefore privately, as the proclamer uses the tearmi.
Communion: But in the other part, when the same author says: And if any
be away, they carry yt home to them: What finds he there? Is he so blind
that he can not see the Sacrament carried home to them that be absent? Can he
not see that to every one of these that were absent, and had the Sacrament
brought home to them, that yt was brought that they should receive yt? And
when every of these to whom the Sacrament was brought, did severally receive
yt in their houses, what was yt then? how will he term yt, was yt private, or
a common receipt? What finds he here? What sees Iustine, shall find that
truth that before I testified, that in the primitive and ancient church the
people did receive both in nombre and alone.

Perhapps the Proclamer being by this place of Iustine driven to his shifts,
will say that yt was (notwithstanding that some of the people did receive at
home) a right communion, for that both they and the people being at the
ministracion, did all receive of one consecrate bread. Will you see what a
bare shift this is? And to ioin with him in his own terms, I will ask him,
as Iustine does tearin yt, is not the bread consecrated to day, and the bread
consecrated to morrow all one consecrated bread? all one sacramental bread,
is yt not allwais one Sacrament? Is not the sacrament of Baptism ministered to
day, and ministered to morrow all one Baptism? forasmoch as S. Paul says:
Vnus Dominus, vnae fides, vnum Baptisma. There is one lord, one faith, and one
Baptism. Likewise is not the bread consecrate in the morning, and at noone all
one consecrate bread? And to say more at large, is not the bread consecrated
in the Supper of Christ by Christ him self, and the bread consecrated now by
his minister, and that shall be consecrated in the last day of the world all
one bread? if yt be not so, why says S. Paul, that we are all partakers of
one bread? The reason why yt is one bread, Chrysostom shows, speaking of
the table of Christ consecrated by the minister, Homi 83 in 26. Math.
saing: Haec enim illa non alia mensa est. Haec nulla re minor quam illa est.
Non enim illam Christus, hanc homo quispiam facit, sed vtramque ipse. This is
even the same, not an other table: This in no poinct is lesser then that. For
Christ did not that we all do eat of one bread, in somoch that by yt we are
made one bread and one body: is yt not one Communion that the Apostles, and
the faithful that now be, and shall be in the last day of the world, have
made, do Private Communion how and where yt is.
and shall make? If yt be so, then among true Chrystians receiving as becomes
them the holy Sacrament, there is no private communion. Private communion is
among private men, soche as cut them selves of from the universal church,
and eat of one piece of bread to day, and of and other to morrow, as
heretics do, and do not all eat of one bread, as the faithful do.

This Proclamer alleges Leo Bishop of Rome, that upon consideracion that
the church being little, and not able to receive the people, there might be
three communions in one day, in one church. I would now know whether they
that received at the first, Second, and third communion,

I have tarried to long upon this place, in opening the vanity of this man's
doctrine, and the longer, that yt might be perceived, that he alleging this
holy man was so blinded, that he would not as well see the one truth as the
other, but brought yt as an argument to reprove the church, where yt reprooueth
him self, and to confute the truth where yt confuteth his heresy. But let us
hear other testimonies, and first of Tertullian, who lived in the time of
Seuerus the Emperor, in whose time the chrystian religion not yet being
received of the Princes of the world, the chrystians lived under great and
fearful presecucion, by reason whereof, though the people were right godly
affected, and well disposed to the service of God, and the receipt of the
blessed Sacrament: yet they could not freely make their assemblies when they
would. Wherefore at soch time as they came together the Bishopps and pastors
would to soch as were right godly and holy chystians deliver the blessed
Sacrament to carry home with them, to receive yt at home, at soche time as they
might, because they could not otherwise when they would.

For the which purpose, as by S. Cyprian, S. Basil, and S. Hicrom yt may be
gathered, the godly brought with them, either a fair clea^ linen cloth, or
a pretty box to carry yt home in. The like yt appears that Tertullians wief
did. For he diswading her from the Marriage of any gentile or heathen man
after his decesse, and knowing that she did secretly Non sciet maritus, quid
secreto ante omnem cibum gustes? et si sciuerit, panem non illum credet esse
qui dicitur. Shall not Tertullia^s wief received the B. Sacr alone or solie, or
privately
if he know yt he will not believe yt to be that bread, that yt is called. As
who might say: As I being yowr housband do know that you do receive the
Sacrament secretly: So yt can not be but an heathen man being yowr husband
shall perceive also that you do receive yt secretly. Whereby yt shall come to
pass that either he will restreign you from that liberty, that now ye use
in yowr secret receipt, or else taking, and believing yt not to be that bread
that yt is, he will with irreuerencie abuse yt. In this saing of Tertullian yt
is easy to be perceived, that his wief did secretly receive the Sacrament at
home, if secretly then with no nombre, So these words of Tertullian sauer of
the receipt of the Sacrament by one alone.

S. Basil also, as before is mentioned, gives a notable testimony in this,
matter, who writing to a notable godly matrone, who for the great reueren ce
she bare to the blessed Sacrament, feared and thought yt vnsemclie to receive
yt at her own hand in her own house, without the delivery of the
Communicare per singulos dies, and Basil epist, ad Caesaria^ patrici.
participare de sacro corpore and sanguine Christi pulchrum and valde vtile
est, ipso manifest dicente: Qui manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem
habet vitam aeternam. Quis enim ambigit, quin frequens vitae participatio^
nihil aliud sit quam pluribus modis viuere? Nos idcirco quater in singulis
hebdomadis communicamus: in die Dominico, in quarto die hebdomadae: in
Parasceu^, and in Sabbato, ac in aliis diebus, si qua memoria fuerit
sanctialicuius, Illud autem in persecutionis temporibus necessitate cogi
quempiam non praesente sacerdote, aut ministro, communionem propria manu sumere
nequaquam esse grave, superuacaneu^ est demonstrare, propterea quod longa
consuetudine hoc ipso reru vsu confirmatum est. Omnes enim in eremis solitariam
vitam agentes, vbi non est sacerdos, Communionem domi servants, a seipsis
communicant. In Alexandria vero and in Aegypto, vnusquisque eorum qui sunt de
populo, plurimum habet communionem in domo sua. Semel enim sacrificium
sacerdote consecrante, and distribuente, merito participare and suscipere
credere oportet. Etenim and in ecclesia sacerdos dat partem, and accipit eam is
qui suscipit cum omni liberate, and ipsam admouet ori propria manu. Idem
igitur est virtute, sieve vnam partem accipiat quisquam a sacerdore, sieve plures
parts simul. To communicate every day, and Ermets and holy menliuing in
wilderness reccaued the Sacr. by themselves.
me to declare, forasmoche as yt, by the very practice of the thing yt self,
is established and confirmed by a long custom. For all they that live
solitary lives in the wilderness, where there is no priest, having the
Sacrament at home, they communicate by themselves. In Alexandria, and in Egypt
every one of the people for the most part has the Sacrament in his own house.
We must believe that after the the priest has once consecrated and distributed
the sacrifice, we may well and putt yt to his own mouth, with his own hand.
Yt is all one in virtue or power, whether any man take one part of the priest,
or many parts together.

Thus much at lenght have I written out of saint Basil, that many things
may be perceived in one saing. In this you may perceive his faith as
touching the presence of Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament, which is so
far wide that he believes yt to be a only figure that he called yt the
sacred body and blood of Christ. In this ye may also perceive that he
understands the sixth of S. John of the blessed Sacrament. In this ye may
perceive that he believed not the Sacrament to be a dead piece of bread,
forasmoch as he terms and calls the same life. In this ye may perceive
the godly disposition and devotion of the people, that did communicate four
times every weke, and oftener if any feast of any Martyr happened. In this
also ye may evidently perceive, that in the time of persecucion (as before is
said upon Tertullian) yt was of long custom used, every man in his own
house to receive the Sacrament. For farther proof of this ye perceive here also,
that they which lived solitary lives in the wilderness, though they had

Now to lead a solitary life, What is yt else but to live sole, to live in a
cave or den, as Paul and Antonie did, alone, and so wholly giving
themselves to prayer and godly contemplacion, for their exercise therein did
often receive the Sacrament, which they had ready by them. In this also ye
may perceive how untruely the Proclamer has heretofore setfurth his matter,
when he says, that all the catholic Church of Christ used the communion as
he understands yt, that is, that none received yt alone. And to amplify his
matter he says the Indians the Arabians, the Armenians, the Grecians, and as
many as bare the name of Christ, have kept and continued the same amongst
themselves, from the first time they received the Gospel, unto this day, and
never received, nor used private Mass. For you here see yt testified by S.
Basil, whose creditte far surmou^teth the creditte of the Proclamer, that in
Alexandria and Egypt, every one of the people had the Sacrament in his house.
And why had they so, but that every one by himself might and did receive yt in
his own house? Thus ye may perceive Beelzebub, in S. Basil yt may be
perceived, that yt is called a sacrifice. And here I wish that, as saint
Basil does call yt both Sacrament, and sacrifice, so the Adversary would
also, and as he testifies yt to be received both of many together, and of
some alone: so he would also believe both and know as well the one to be true
as the other, and not maliciously to dissemble the one, and confess the other.

Yt is not unlike to this that saint Hierom testifies to have been used in
Rome in his time, in the time of persecucion. Thus he says: Scio Romae hanc
esse consuetudinem, vt fideles semper Christi corpus accipiant, quod nec
reprehendo, nec probo. Hieroe. Apolo. aduersus Iuni.
Vnusquisque enim in suo sensu abundat. Sed ipsorum conscientiam conuenio, qui
eodem die post coitum communicant, and iuxta Persium, noctem flumine purgant.
Quare ad Martyrs ire non audent? Quare non ingrediuntur ecclesias? An alius in
publico, alius in domo Christus est? quod in ecclesia non licet, nec domi
licet. Nihil Deo clausum est, and tenebrae quoque lucent apud Deum. Probet se
vnusquisque and sic ad corpus Christi accedat. I know at Rome this to be the
custom, that the faithful do always receive the body of Christ, which
thing I neither reprehended nor allow. Every man does abunde in his own
sense. But I call their conscience to judgment which after the duty of
matrimony do even the same day communicate, and according to the sainge of
Persius, they cleanse the night with the floode, Why dare they not go to the
Martyrs? Why do they not enter the churchs? Is there one Christ in the open
place, and an other Christ at home? That, that is not laufull in the Church,
is neither laufull at home. There is nothing shett from God, yea the very
darkness is bright before him. Let every man examine himself, and so let him
come to the body of Christ. Hitherto Saint Hierom.

As S. Basil reproved the Proclamer of untruth, so does S. Hiero^ of craft.
The Proclamer said that S. Hierom wittnesseth that until that time, commonly
The Proclamers slight in alleging S. Hierom.
every where but specially at Rome, the people used, to communicate every
day: but craftelie he suppresseth the manner how and where, where upon rests
all the controversy. The people of Rome in deed did always communicate,

In this saing then of S. Hierome we may perceive that the Chrystia^ people of
Rome did both receive the Sacrament, sometime privately at home, and sometime
also openly in the Church, wherbie the assertion of the Proclamer is
reproved. In this saing also are we taught, what is in the Sacrament, not
bread, but Christ. For says S. Hierom, there is not one Christ received at
home, and an other in the Church, but every where one Christ.

And here I wish the Sacramentaries to dispute with S. Hierom how the Let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup, that by that bread he meneth the body of Christ. For S. Hierom using
the same text, and uttering the right understanding of the same, speaks yt
thus: Let every man examine himself, and so let him come to the body of
Christ. So that saint Paul by bread meant not material bread, as the
Sacrame^taries would have yt, but the very body of Christ, the bread The act
of matrimony for prayer and receipt of tho B. Sacram. to be for born.
of everlasting life.

In this saing also is given an admonicion to married persons, that although
matrimony be honorable, and the office of the same duly done not displeasant
to God: yet as S. Paul wills a man to abstein fro^yt, when he will give
himself to prayer. And as David and his men might not eat of the show bread
saint Hierom rebukes them that after soch act with their wieues, did presume
Titus. And thus leaving unto them the matter farther to be considered, I will in
my purpose proceade, and after saint Hierom who has testified the manner,
how the people of Rome did communicate by themselves in their houses, we will
hear how the preistes in Greece did the like in their churches.

Chrysostom for that he perceived the godly devotion of the people, as Chrysostom.
in cap. 1. ad Ephesians. ho. 3. The people did not daily receive though Chrysostom.
did daily say Mass, Wherefore in that respect he said he did in vain offer
sacrifice at the altar.
touching the receipt of the Sacrament, to wax cold, he earnestly rebuked
his people, as I wish that our Bishopps, and Pastors should do theirs, and
to their reproache said thus: Frustra habetur quotidiana oblatio, frustra
stamus ad altar. Nemo est qui simul participet. The daily oblacion or
sacrifice is done in vain, we stand at the altar in vain. There is no man that
will partake with us. In this saing of Chrysostom these two things may be
perceived that by Chrysostom and his preistes the daily sacrifice was offered
in the Church of Constantinople, that is, that Mass, was daily said there.
For he says. Quoti diana habetur oblatio. The daily sacrifice is done, which
is to say, that every day the sacrifice is offered. The other that although
Mass were daily said, yet many times none did communicate with him that did
offer the sacrifice And therefore he said: Nemo est qui simul participet. There
is none that will take part of the sacrifice. Wherbie yt is evident that in
the greek Church Mass was said though there were no communicantes with the
priest.

Neither let the Adversary grownde his sandy argument upon this word
(Frustra) for nothing is absolutely done in vain that atteigneth any end that
yt was ordained for. Now where the holy consecracion of Christ's body
Objection, with answ. The body and blood of Christ consecrated to two ends
and blood is cheiflie and principally done for two ends: The one that yt
should by an vnblooddie manner in the name of the wholl Church be offered

That he meant not that the holy oblacion was absolutely vain if the people
did not communicate, yt is more plain then that yt neadeth any li. 3. de
sacerd.
great a miracle to be done? so great benevolence of God to be showed to
mankind, that in the same time of consecracion Christ that sits above with
the Father, is now in the hands of men? Again, does he mean yt to be done in
vain, that says that the mynistracion is so high, so excellent, and Jbid. li
7.
so honorable, that Angels in that time do accompany the priest, and that
the heavenly powers be assembled together in the honor of him that is there
offered?

Farther, does he think this sacrifice to be done in vain, that says we
offer Hom. 17. ad Hebr.
the same sacrifice that Christ offered? Moreover, is yt like that he takes yt
to be done in vain where prayer is made for princes, for rulers, and for all
that do acknowledge Christ? where also prayer is made for peace, for health,
Idem. in Liturgia. Sermon in. Enceniis Sermon. 3. ad Philip.
pain in captivity, and in prison? where all the heavenly powers do pray for
us with the priest?

Finally, yt can not be said that he thinks yt to be in vain, that says
that the Apostles did know that much releif and much profitte comes to the
souls departed by the oblacion of this holy sacrifice. Wherefore I conclude
that he spoke yt to be vain, not absolutely but in respect of his purpose and
desire, which was frustrated because the people did not communicate.

That the Sacrament may be received alone without a no^bre of communicantes,
Eusebius. li. 6. ca. 34.
the history ecclesiastical also proves inuinciblie. For there we read that
one Serapion being sick, sent his servant to the priest, desiering that he
would mynistre the Sacrament to him, that he might depart. The priest being
sick and not able to go himself, and yet loath but that the man should
Serapion being sick received the Sacrament alone.
receive the Sacrament or that he died, in this necessity sent of the
Sacrament by the messenger, which when yt was brought, the sick man received
yt without any to communicate with him, which may well be said,

A much like testimony for this matter have we of S. Augustine, whereof mention
is made before, which is, that a certain man having his house infested with
evil spirittes, came to saint Augustine house S. Augustine being absent, and
desiered of his preistes that they would ease him of that molestacion. One of
them went, and said Mass there, and prayed earnestly and the evil spirittes
ceased any more to trooble the house. Here we perceive the Sacrifice to be
offered, Mass to be said, but we hear no word of a communion. As by this
that is hitherto said yt may be perceived, that the priest mynistring, or
any other person may receive the blessed Sacrament, with out any other
communicantes, according to the practice of the primitive

Soter that was the eleventh Bishop of Rome after S. Peter, and lived about
the year of our Lord lxiii. made this decree. Nullus presbyterorum Missarum
solemnia celebrare praesumat, nisi duobus praesentibus, sibique respondentibus,
and ipse Soter vndecimus Ro^. Epis. Epist. secund. ad Episcop. Jtaliae.
tertius habeatur, quia cum pluraliter ab eo dicitur, Dominus vobiscum, and
illud in secretis: Orate pro me: apertissime conuenit, vt ip sius respondeatur
salutationi. Let none of the preistes presume to celebrate the solemn office
of the Mass, except there be two present and answering him, so that he may be
the third, for when yt is plurallie said of him: Owre Lord be with you, and
in the secrets: Pray for me, yt is most manifestly convenient, that his
salutacion be answered. Here ye see yt commanded that some be present at the
Mass, but not always to communicate, but answer the salutacion of the priest.

In a Council also thus we find yt decreed: Missas die Dominico secularibus
totas audire, speciali ordine praecipimus, ita vt ante benedictionem
sacerdotis, egredi populus Council. Agathen. and habetur de consecr. Did. 1.
non praesumat, quodsi fecerint ab Episcopo public confundantur. We command
the secular people by special order, upon the sondaie to hear the wholl
Mass. So that the people presume not to go forth before the benediction of the
Council. Aurelian.
council in these words. Cum ad celebrandas missas in Dei nomine conuenitur,
populus non ante discedat, quam Missae solemnitas co^pleatur, and vbi Episcopus
non suerit, benedictionem a sacerdote percipiat. When they be come together in
the name of God to celebrate Mass, the people may not depart before the
solemnity of the Mass be fulfilled. And where there is no Bishop present let
them receive the benediction of the priest. This decree commands no more but
that the people shall not depart until Mass be done, of the communion therys
no word.

S. Augustine also made this ordeinaunce, as yt is to be seen in the first
distinction of consecracion in these words. Et hoc attendendum, vt missae
peculiares, quae per dies solemnes a sacerdotibus fiunt, non ita in publico
fiant, vt propter eas populus Aug. de conse. Did. 1. cap. ct hoc.
a publicis missarum solemnibus, quae hora tercia canonice fiunt, abstrahatur,
sed sacerdotes qui in circuitu vrbis, aut in eadem vrbe sunt, and populus in
vnum ad missarum publicam celebrationem conueniant. And this is to be observed,
that the peculiar Masses that be said of the preistes upon the solempn days
be not so openly done, that for them the people be not drawn away from the
public solemnity of Masses, which be canonicallie done the third hour.
But the preistes that dwell about the city, or within the same city, and the
people also shall come together to the public celebracion of Masses. Thus he.

In this ordeinanceye first perceive that peculias Masses were said in one
city, beside the high or common Mass, to the which the people might so
resort, as that they might not be let or withdrawn from the high Mass. Ye
see again, that both the preistes that had said Mass, and the people that had
heard the^, were appoincted never the less to come to the high Mass. Now if
none may be present (as the Adversary teaches) but soch as will communicate,
and these preistes having said their peculiar Masses, and there communicated
must yet be present at the high Mass by S. Augustines ordeinance, yt follows
that the doctrine of the Adversary is contrary to the ordeinaunce the which
although the people might and aught to be: yet there is no commandment

What shall I need any more to say in this matter, since yt is manifest by
many practices of the primitive and ancient church, that both pristes at the
ministracion and other persons as well wholl as sick did and therefore may now
receive the blessed Sacrament alone, without a nombre of co^municantes? And
therefore to return part of the Proclamers words home to him and his
accomplices, again I say, O merciful God, who would think there could be so
much wilfullinesse in the heart of man, so maliciously, so slaunderouslie to
caluminate the Church, for that she like a good mother does suffer her
children to take their blessed and holy food of Christ's body and blood
either by nombre or by one alone, as devotion and occasion shall serve, since
that both manners have been allwaies practiced as before is proved?

Wherefore we may truly say: O Iustine, o Tertullian, o Basil, o Hierom, o
Chrysostom. o Austen, o Leo, o ancient counsels, if we be deceived, ye are
they that have deceived us. But sure we are, that we are not deceived, but we
rest in the truth that ye have taught us. But alas whose heart would yt not
greiue to see the blasphemy of the Proclamer against Christ and S. Paul, and
his detestable slander of the holy doctors, whom he charge to have taught
him his Scismes, divisions, and heresies? Is Christ who is the truth, the
ministre of heresy? Is Paul the doctor and Apostle of the gentiles, the
teacher of Scismes? Be the holy doctors and Fathers of Christ's Church, who
have been pastors and feaders of Christ's flock, and kepers of the same with
in his fold, in unity and peace, the authors of divisions, and dispersions
of the sheep of Christ? Naie, yt is Satan the first lie maker, the father of
lies and untruth, the author of division betwixt God and man, that has
taught him heresy, Scisme and division, whose wicked inspiracion (the more is
the pity) he follows. For neither Christ, nor Paul, not Iustine nor Basil
etc. has taught that the celebracion or ministracion of Christ's Sacrament is
not godly or good, if there be not many communicantes at yt, But they

And now to end this matter, as the Proclamer has done all that he can, and
yet, by no authority (as is said) has proved that a priest or any other
may not receive alone: so I say, that neither he, nor all his accomplices,
though they be joined all together, shall ever bring forth any express place
of scripture, Counsels, or doctors, that does by commandment forbid a
well disposed chrystian to receive the Sacrament alone. And thus the three
principal parts of the Mass being avouched by scriptures Counsels, and
doctors: I shall confirm the same by miracle, wrought by God, in the blessed
Sacrament in the Mass time.

THE TWO AND FOVRTETH CHAP. DROOueth
ALlthough the cominge of Christ into the flesh was most certainly taught by
promises, figures, and prophecies (as before in the first book is said) yet
the same his coming his conception, his birth and abode with us, was commended
unto us, by many protentes, miracles, and woonders, which the Gospel does
declare: Even so yt has pleased the goodness of God well knowing owre
infirmity and weakness, to deal with us in the matter of the Sacrament of
the body and blood of the same his Son Jesus Christ. The certain truth
whereof although by figures, prophecies, and by the lively word of Christ
himself yt be certenlie commended unto us: yet to the consirmacion of the same
truth to us ward, which otherwise in yt self is most 3 Reg. 18.


In the time of Elias the Prophett when God and his holy faith and religion
(as now yt is with us) was so far forsaken that none were fownde, that
openly for the fear of the king and wicked Iesabell would profess the same,
although some lay in caves and dens, as now I trust there do some, faith
fully serving God, Elias moved by the spirit of God to have the religion and
faith of God discerned from the religion of Baall would the trial of the same
should be made by sum miracle from heaven. Where unto the King and the
people agreed, that if any miracle were done on Baalls side he should be
taken for God, and his religion received: if on Elyas side: his God and his
religion should be embraced. The preistes of Baall laid on their sacrifice,
they called on their God in their manner, no fire came from heaven, no miracle
was done. After that they had done, Elyas prepaired the saicrifice, he Dominus
ipse est Deus, Dominus ipse est Deus. Owre Lord is God, owre Lord is God.
Even so now the ministers of Baall have perverted Christ's faith and religion.
The people in outward countenance for sear of laws have forsaken the same:
They are now taught that Christ is not reallie in the Sacrament duly
ministered: They are taught that his body there is not to be honored, They are
taught, that the blessed Sacrifice of Christ's body and blood is nothing
auailable either to the quick or to the dead, with soche other. Christ is not
in the sacramental bread of the new ministers, but he is in the B. Sacr.
duly ministered by a priest.


Now let them search all histories of antiquity, and show any one miracle
that God has wrought either in the time of Berengarius: of Wicleff, and Husse,
of Zwinglius Oecolampadius, or of this Proclamer for the confirmacion and
declaracio^ of that their faith, and if they do, we shall say that their
faith is good: If theie do not, and we do: let them yield and say that owre
way is good. For like yt is the truth there to be, where yt pleases God to
confirm the same by miracle: And like yt is no truth to be on the contrary

Now the catholic Church teaches the presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament: The Adversary teaches no body, but the figure of the body. The
catholic Church teaches Christ's body in the Sacrament Elyas willed the
preistes of Baall, first to confirm their way with miracles: So let the
Lutherans and the Sacramentaries, bring forth first some Miracle.

As for miracles for the confirmacion of their doctrine as touching this matter
of the Sacrament, I never did nor could hear or read of any, but only of
one, which is a miracle meet for the doctrine. Of which miracle Luther himself
is the reporter, Jonas his disciple being interpretour in his book of private
Mass, where he says thus: Ego coram vobis reuerendis patribus Luther.
and sanctis, confessionem faciam, date mibi absolutionem bonam, quae vobis
(opto) quamminimum noceat. Contigit me semel sub mediam noctem subito
expergefieri. Ibi Satan mecu^ caepit eiusmodi disputationem. Audi (inquit)
Luthere, doctor perdocte. Nosti te quindecim annis celebrasse Missas priuatas
pene quotidie. Quid si tales Missae horrenda essent Idololatria? Quid si ibi
non adfuisset corpus and sanguis Christi, Sed tantum panem and vinum adorasses,
and aliis adorandum proposuisses? I will before you reverend and holy Fathers
make a confession, give me a good absolucion, which I wish may nothing hurt
you. Yt happened me once at midnight sodenlie to be wakened. Satan appeared
to Luther and disputed with him of private Mass.
There Satan began this manner of disputacion with me. Hearken (says he)
thowe well learned doctor Luther. Thowe know that by the space of these
fiftene years, thowe hauest said private Mass all most every day. What if
soche private Masses were abominable Idolatry? What if there has not ben
present the body and blood of Christ, but that thowe had honored only
bread and wine and had set yt forth to other to be honored? Thus much
Satan to Luther.

In which talk Satan goes about to confirm three points of their
doctrine, that is, that Christ's body and blood be not in the Sacrament, but
only bread and wine: That Christ in the Sacrament is not to be adored: And
that private Masses are not to be used. See ye not now what a miracle here is,
that Satan would vouchesaf to speak with Lurher at middenight?

And thus to a good chrystian this doing of Satan may be occasion of
confirmacion in faith. For where Satan disswadeth Luther from the Mass, from
the belief of the presence of Christ in the Sacrament, from the honoring Joan.
8.
of Christ there, we may be certain and sure that the Mass is good, that the
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and the honoring of him there be holsom
and good doctrines. For he being (as Christ says) a liar, and 1. Pe. 5.
a manisleer from the beginning: seeks not to teach us the truth, nor to
help to save is, but raither (as S. Paul says) he being our adversary
goes about like a roaring lion seking whom he may devour, whom God grant
us strongly to withstand in faith. Thus I say, occasion is given us to be
confirmed in that faith from the which Satan would dissuade us.

But as touching the matters which Satan would persuade by his deuelish
apparition to Luther, if there were no more said, a wise reader would by these
few words easelie perceive, how good and true the doctrine of the Proclamer
is, which is soche as Satan persuaded, and even the very

Now for the catholic doctrine let us see if God has besides his figures,
prophecies, plain speeches of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, and the
great nombre of assertions, declaracions, and expositions of most holy
famous, ancient and learned Fathers, showed any miracles for the
confirmacion of the truth of the blessed Sacrament. And First let us see for
the presence of Christ in the Sacrament. Satan persuaded Luther that there is
not present the body and blood of Christ, but bread and wine let us try the
truth thereof by Gods work.

Amphilochius an holy Bishop, who lived within the compass of four
hondreth years after Christ and therefore a good nombre of years, more Jn vita
Ba. The blessed Sacr. deliue red to a Jewe was very flesh and very blood in
seight
then eleven hundred agone, writing the life of S. Basil, testifies that a
certain Jew desierouse to see the mysteries of the chrystians, came among an

Yt is redd also in the lives of the Fathers, that there was a certain old man,
who although he were a great man: yet he was simple and did err in the matter
of the Sacrament, and said that the consecrated bread which we do receive is
not the natural body of Christ, but a figure of yt. This his error when two
ancient men did understand and know that his life and co^uersacion (say
they) believe that that bread is the body of Christ, and that cup his blood
in very deed, and not in The blessed Sacr. delivered to a doubting chrystian
appeared flesh.
figure. But as in the beginning God taking a little earth, made man to his own
image, and no man can say but that man, although he be made of the earth he is
the image of God: Even so the bread, by cause he said: This is my body: we
believe that yt is verily his body. The old man said: except I may know yt
so to be in very deed, yowr reasons can not satisfy me: Then they said: Let
us give our selves to prayer this weke, that God may vouchsaffe to reueill
this mystery unto us. After their prayer they three came to the church. And
when the time came that they should receive, the one lie portion of the
Sacrament delivered to that old man, was very bloody flesh, which when he
saw he was afearde and cried, saing: I believe that

Let not the Adversary by skorning trauaill to reiecte this miracle or avoid
the force of yt by slander, saing that some papist has invented yt. For

I omit to allege here soche miracles, as S. Cyprian and S. Ambrose report
about the blessed Sacrament, for that I have made some mention of them
allreadie, and again by occasion shall. Many goodly miracles also be reported
by S. Gregory, and many were done in his time, about this blessed Sacrament,
which were to long to rehearse. These two therefore shall suffice to help us to
perceive and understand Gods pleasure and his holy truth as concerning the
presence of Christ's body in the blessed Sacrament.

Satan persuaded Luther not to honor the body of Christ in the Sacrament,
but what the Church has done from the Apostles time, and what Optatus li. 2.
cont Donatist.
perceive gods pleasure by miracle, that the blessed Sacrament should be
honored. In the which matter yt is very notable that Optatus reports of the
Donatistes, who being cruel heretics, so far misliked what was done by the
catholics, that violently inuading their Churches, they commanded the
Sacrament to be given to the dogs. But the judgment of God Dogs after
their eating of the Sacrament worowed their Masters that cast yt unto them.
not suffering so heinouse an offense to be unpunished, so great contumelic to
the dishonor of the blessed Sacrament, to be unrevenged: The dogs unto their
own masters whom before they loved and defended, now being enemies, fell on
them as on strangers or thieves, and with all violence as though they had never
known them, waxed feirce on them and worowed them, God herby (as I take yt)
signifieng unto us that as rabbish men forgatte their duty and honor to
their Lord God: so the unreasonable creatures forgatt their love to their
masters.

Whether they have offended and displeased God, that in this our time

Against the Mass also Satan persuaded Luther, and good cause why. For by
the Mass his power as well in extern or worldly things as in intern Satan
his power abated by the virtue of the Mass.
or spiritual things, is overthrown. For worldly things we have the
testimony of S. Augustine, who as be fore is mentioned, testifies that by the
offering of the sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ (which is the
Mass) the wicked power of the Deuell molesting the house of a certain man, and
much disquieting his family and servants, was clean driven away, Aug li. 22.
De ciuit. Dei. ca. 1


How much then so ever they cry out against Mass, how great ab hominacion
soever they make yt to say that the sacrifice of Christ's body is offered by
the priest: how much soever Satan and his disciples would extenuate the
virtue and power of yt: yet in spite of their teeth they must

In spiritual things yt also abateth the power of the Deuell, for yt
diminishes the force of temptacion (as says S. Bernard) Duo enim illud
sacramentu^ operatur in nobis, vt videlicet and sensum minuat in minimis, and
in grauioribus peceatis tol Sermon. de Baptis.
lat omnino consensum. Si quis vestrum non tam sepe modo, non tam acerbos
sentit iracundiae motus, luxuriae, aeut caeteroru^ huiusmodi, gratias agat
corpori, and sanguini Domini quonia^ virtus sacramenti operatur in eo. Two
things that Sacrament woorketh in us, that in lesser sins yt diminishes the
feeling, and in greater sins yt takes away consent. If any of you do not
so often now feel so bitter mocions of wrath, of envy, of lechery, or
soche other, let him give thanks to the body and blood of ower lord. For
the virtue of the Sacrament woorketh in him. Thus the body and blood of Christ
in the Sacrament with stands the fury of Satan and his Angels both in
outewarde things and inward things.

Now let not the Adversary cavil that because S. Bernarde says here Three
thin ges to be attended in the bless. Sacr.
him self to be given in the Sacrament, but the virtue. For S. Bernarde with
all catholics acknowlegeth three things in the Sacrament, the outward
forms, the body and blood of Christ, and the spiritual grace which three he
professes in a sermon saing. Tria in sacramento Altaris attendere debes,
speciem panis, veritatem carnis, virtutem gratiae spiritualis. vsque ad speciem
panis sensus pertingit exterior: ad veritatem carnis fides interior: ad
virtutem gratiae spirituallis charitas Bernardus sermon. de Cana Dom
superior. Three things thowe ought to attend in the Sacrament of the
altar: The outward form of bread: The verity of the flesh: the virtue of
spiritual grace. Unto the outward form of bread reaches the outward
sense: Unto the verity of the flesh the inward faith: Unto the virtue of the
spiritual grace, perfect charity. So that in the Sacrament is both the body
of Christ, unto whom we must give thanks and the virtue of the spiritual
grace therein received, for the which we aught to give thanks.

The pleasure of God being by his miraculouse works showed to be other the
Mass: we will cease to say any more upon the words of S. Bernard.

But if you desire to be advertised of some notable practice, call to
remembrance Paul Diacon.
the history of the noble matrone of Rome, who by Satan's tentacio^ enco^bred
and in (faith as many be now a days) blinded that could not believe the very
body and blood of Christ to be in the blessed Sacrament, but coming to the
Mass and ioining in company with other to receive, when in the delivery of
the Sacrament to her, she heard these words: The body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, awail thee to the remission of sins, she similed, which when S.
Gregory perceived and by examinacio^ understood her unbelieve, he and the
people prayed and after prayer going again to the altar, and taking the
Blessed Sacrament in his hand, to the help of the faith of that woman and the
confirmacion of the faith of the people, yt was of the one and of the other
seen as a very bloody fleshly little fingar. Whereupon S. Gregory willed her
to remember the saing of Christ: The bread which I will give you, is my flesh.
Which so being seen, and prayer made by S. Greg. and the people, that yt might
be reduced to the form that yt might be received, yt came furthwith

And now that we have made report of one miracle, done in the time of S.
Gregory, we will touch one or two mo reported by him and so end this matter
of proof. Thus writes S. Gregory: Non long a nostris fertur tempori bus
factu^, quod quida^ ab hostibus captus, long transductus est. Cumque diu
teneretur in vin Greg. hom. 37.
culis, eum vxor sua, cum ex eadem captiuitate non reciperet, extinctum
putauit. Pro quo iam velut mortuo, hostias hebdomadibus singulis curabat
offerri. Idem ergo vir longo post tempore reuersus, admirans valde, suae
indicauit vxori, quod diebus certis, hebdomadibus singulis, eius vincula
soluebantur. Quos videlicet dies eius vxor, atque horas discutiens, tunc eum
Aprisoners cheines loosed by vert ue of the Mass.
recognouit absolutu^, cum pro eo sacrificiu^ meminerat oblatu^. Yt is said to
be done not long before our time, that a certain man taken of his enemies was
carried into a far contrie, and when he was long kept in prison, so that he
could not come home to his wief, she thought that he had be^ dead. For who^ as
for one being

In this miracle reported by S. Gregory, this may we first perceive, that
Mass for the dead before S. Gregory's time.
the order of the universal Church was to pray for the dead, and to offer
sacrifice for them, which thing moved this woman supposing her husband in
captivity to have be^ dead, to cause the sacrifice of Mass to be celebrated
for him certain days every weke, Again this is to be observed, that Chrysts
sacrifice being offered for that man as for one that was dead, was not
ouerpassed or let fall from the merciful seight and hearing of God, as a thing
doe^ in Gregorius. ibidem.
vain, but miraculouslie, where yt was offered to loose the bands if a dead man
(he being a live) yt loosed the ba^des of a living man. Which thing S. Gregory
very godly also does note upon the same miracle, by these words: Hinc ergo,
fratres chrissimi, hinc certa consideratione colligite, oblata a nobis hostia
sacra, quanta^ in nobis soluere valeat ligatura^cordis, si oblata ab altero,
potuit in altero soluere vincula corporis. Virtue of the Mass.
Of this the^ deareli beloved, of this do you certe^lie gather, how much the
holy sacrifice offered of us, may loose the ba^de of conscience, if being
offered of one, yt might in an other lose the ba^des of the body.

The same S. Gregory also reports an other miracle done by one Agapetus, a
very holy and a verteouse man by the report of diverse writers, and A miracle
done in the Mass upon a dumb and lame man.
go to Constantinople to the Emperor Instinian. Unto whom, as he travailed in
the way, was brought one being both lame and dumb to be cured, who was so
sore taken, that he could neither speak any word, nor was able to rise
from the grownde. When the holy man understood, that they that brought him had
faith in God, that God by him would cure the deseased man, he prepared himself
to Mass, and doing the solemn service of the same, he offered up the
sacrifice in the seight of almighty God, which being done, he went from the
altar, and took the lame man by the hand, and in the seight of all the
people, he lifted him up, and set him on his feet. And when he had put
the body of our Lord in the mouth of the dumb man, that tongue that long
before had been bownde, and could not be framed to speak a word now is
loosed, and the man can speak, and with all his friends rejoice and praise
God.

In this miracle I will not encombre the reader with many notes, but this
only I wish to be marked, that the Mass is holy and the power of the blesed
Sacrament is great, for when after the Mass yt touched the dumb tongue yt made
yt furthwith to speak. Now reader of many, I have produced a few miracles to
the intent thou may perceive, and be assured, that if the doctrine of the
presence of Christ in the Sacrament were wicked capharnaites doctrine (as the
Adversary terms yt) or the sacrifice of Christ on the altar were the
robbery of Gods honor, or the wholl mynistracion of the holy and blessed
Mass were filthy stinking abhominacion, as gods enemies abominably terms
yt, God would never commend yt to us with so many miracles. And hereunto if
thou add the lowly and reverent service done of the holy Angels unto the
blessed Sacrament, in the time of the Mass, as yt is testified of Chrysostom,
S. Ambrose, and S. Gregory, thowe shall not need (I suppose) to fear to
follow the faith of the holy Church in believing, neither to do the duty,
and show thine obedience with them in honoring, nor to leave thie charity at
the Mass time, but for the quick

Look therefore to thy self (o Chrystian man) and ioin with Angel provoking
thee to thy duty, and consent not to Satan though he call the Mass,
Idolatry. For this I will assure thee, that the Mass was never so termed but
Jssue joined with all Sacramenries that the Mass was never by any catholic
called Jdolatrie.
by Satan. And here I will make this issue with Satan and the Proclamer, and
all the rest of Satan's disciples, that although the Mass has been in use by
the Proclamers own confession, more then eleven hundredth years agone. For he
says, although falselie, that the name of Mass began but four hundredth
years after Christ, yet they never have nor never shall find any one
approved catholic author either within the compass of those four hundredth
years or since that says as they do, that the Mass is Idolatry. If none
say yt the^ he and his co^plices speak yt of them selves, and qui ex propriis
loquitur, mendaciu^ loquitur. Finally to conclude for our faith, that yt is to
gods pleasure, we have besides the scriptures and Fathers, the testimony of
miracles. Let now the Proclamer, if he can, bring forth one miracle for the
confirmacio^ of his religion. If he can not, let him learn to know himself, and
his company, to be the preistes of Baall under Iezable. And let him confess

Neither, reader, be thowe dissuaded or out of countenance, if thou see any
of Satan's scholars mocking or skorning at these miracles, which is their
manner of following of arguments, when other wise they can not avoid that is
said. For understand and mark well, that none of these by me alleged, were
yesterdaie done, but they were all done before and in time of S. Gregory. And
therefore upon the poinct of a thousand years and vppewarde, and are reported
and testified by right grave and holy men. I know that these miracles will
and have spited the rebelliouse enemies of God, and his Christ. For the
Phariseis could not abide the miracles, that Christ himself did, but wickedlie
said: that in Beelzebub prince of Deuells he casts out Deuells. The Arrians
not bearing miracles confirming the faith of Christ, which they impugned,
either derided them, or said they were feigned miracles, or flatly, though
the matter were never so evident denied them, as in S. Ambrose yt may be at
large fownde testified. So for that these Sermon. 91 de invent. corp. Geruas.
and Protha.
miracles commend and confirm the catholic faith, which our heretics
Arrians and with Melancthon, and Vadian for spite mock, and skorn at them,
call them feigned miracles or deny ^latlie any soch to have been done. But
consider thowe the reporters: Theie be saint Amphiloch, S. Optatus, S.
Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, and S. Gregory, which all be in time
ancient, in life famousely holy, in learning with much commendacion
excellent, of the Church ever received, and therefore of a vain man not to be
rejected. Great is the difference betwixt the creditte of a nombre exalted to
glory, and of some yet living in sinful misery. There is great odds betwixt
them, whose doctrine has allwaies ben approved, and those whose doctrine is
allwais reproved. To be short, yt is more wisdom to believe an holy saint
reporting, then a wicked heretic denieng. For that then these miracles be
reported of soche as be reputed holy saints, yt is very meet, and most
saiftie for us to believe them.

THE THREE AND FOVRTETH CHAPT. Makes recapitulacion of the conferences of the
Masses of the Apostles and Fathers of the primitive Church, and of the
catholic Church that now is, with a brief confutacion of the conference made
by the Proclamer between, the Mass of S. James and that is now used.
FOrasmoch as a matter discoursed at large, being drawn into a compendiouse
and brief form is sooner atteigned, and better kept in memory: therefore, and
for that also I would take just occasion to open and show the folies vanities,
and shamfull untruths of the conference that the Proclamer has made betwe^
the Mass of S. James, and the Mass now used of the catholic Church: I
will, as yt were into a brief Sum collect that is said, and make a short
setfurth. The Proclamer divided the Mass into four parts: into holy
doctrine,

And here breislie to repete the parts as we have treacted of them, we have A
brief collection of the confere^ces of the Mass now used and of the new
communion with the Mass of the Apostles and Fathers.
first to speak of Consecracion. Consecracion, as yt is used now in the
catholic Church, has been by me conferred to the consecracion used by the
Apostles and Fathers, and is fownd in all substanciall parts to agree. The
schismatic mynistracion in most of them disagreeth. The intencion of the
Apostles and Fathers in and upon consecracion is showed, wherein they are
perceived to have believed, that by their due consecracion, the very body and
blood of Christ by the almighty power of God and virtue of his word were
made present in that blessed Sacrament. Wherun to the faith and intencion of
the catholic Church being conferred, yt is fownd fully to agree. The
schismatic Church altogether dissenteth and

Upon their consecracion the Apostles and Fathers made in the remembrance of
Chrysts passion, death, resurrection, and ascension, an oblacion or sacrifice
Sacrificevsed of the Apostles. abhorred of the Sacramentaries.
of the same body to God the Father according to the institucion and
ordeinance of Christ. The doing of the catholic Church in this poinct is
conferred and fownd agreeable. The schismatical church is so far wide from
following the Apostles and Fathers, that yt can not abide to hear soch
sacrifice asmoch as once named or spoken of.

The catholic Church in the Mass makes humble supplicacion and peticion for
the merciful acceptacion of their sacrifice, which manner of supplicacion the
Proclamer most fondly and vndiscretlie derideth and skorneth. But by
conference yt is fownde that the catholic Church follows therein the phrase of
scriptures, Apostles and Fathers, and does altogether as is fownd to have been
done by them, so neerlie that yt prays with the same words that the Fathers
did. The Schismatic congregation as yt follows not the Apostles and Fathers
in making this oblacion or sacrifice so contemns

Thus much being said of Consecracion, intencion, oblacion, and acceptacion,
we descended to the prayers in the Mass, wherein be two things which Prayer for
the dead used of the Aposts and the catholic Church despised of the Schism.
the Schismatic church impugneth that is, prayer for the dead, and
inuocacion of Saints. As for that the catholic Church prays for the dead,
the doing thereof is conferred to the doings of the Apostles and Fathers, and yt
is fownd that they prayed for the dead in their Masses, and that they gave
order to frequent and use prayer for the dead, wherefore yt is evident that the
catholic Church in so doing follows the^, and observes their order
appoincted. The Schismatical Church ca^ not well be co^ferred herin, for yt
utterly abandoneth all prayer for the dead so that yt has not one title for
that purpose, and where nothing is, no comparison can be made.

Inuocacion of Saints used in the Mass, is also conferred with the doings of
the Apostles and Fathers, and fownd to have been done by the^ in their Masses.
Jnuocacion of Saints likewise.
The Schismatic Church as in this yt flies the doing of the catholic

Finally we come to holy Communion, where the catholic Church is accused
and charged in two poinctes heinouslie to offend. The one that Sole Communion
and under one kind used in the primitive church
and ancient church are sought, and laid forth, and no commandment fownde
forbidding the priest in his Mass, or any other man sick or wholl to receive
alone. And the practice also of the same Church shows that oftentimes one
kind only was received, and none offense therein judged. Whereunto the use of
the catholic Church being co^ferred, yt is fownd to be agreeable and to do that
that in the primitive Church was practiced. The Schismatic Church under
pretense of singular obedience, committing great disobedience, and under the
countenance of sincere imitacion using a wicked innouacion, neither
communicates under one kind, nor alone, thinking that of necessity yt must
so be, and co^temneth the ancient practice of the primitive Church and most
fiercely accuses the wholl Church

Thus ye may see that the Mass of the catholic Church for the substanciall
parts, and poinctes of yt being conferred to the Mass of the Apostles and
Fathers of the primitive and ancient Church, is fownd to be fully agreeable,
and the Communion of the Schismatic Church in all poincts disagreable. If
the Mass had disagreed or dissented in any substanciall poinct thou may be
well assured (gentle Reader) that the Proclamer would not by so slender, so
impertinent yea and so untrue conferences, have gone about to improve and
disgrace yt, as he does. He conferred yt with the Mass of S. James but in
soch sort, that if he had never made pithier oracion in the disputacion at the
Paruis in Oxforde, I ween he should never have been allowed for a general
Sophister. But God be praised that his catholic Church is so appoincted,
that the enemies can not find any weighty matter justly to repugn or
reprove yt. But let us see his conferences.

S. James (saeth he) said Mass in the common tongue, as the people might
understand him: They say their Mass in a strange tongue, that the people
should not know what they mean. This is the first piece of his conference. The
man lackt good stuff to begin his work, when he is fain in the first show
of all to place soch pelf. Confider, I pray thee, gentle reader, that if yt
should be in question whether Plato were a man, and his enemy should come in
and say, he was no man because he spoke latin, yt were but a fond argument and
all together impertinent. For the matter to be tried is about the substance of
Plato, and not about any accident, and the enemy growndeth upon the accident
and leaves the substance: So the question here is whether the Mass be good or
no, which is about the substance of the thing, and he comes in with an
argument of an accident, that yt is said in latin, and therefore yt is not
good, what is this to the purpose? Many a thing is good in yt self, though yt
be not of all understood. The seven liberal Sciences be good though they be
not understood of all men. The holy scriptures be good in themselves though
all men understand them not. Yea, even now when they good. So is the Mass
likewise good though all the people understand yt not. This argument therefore
proves nothing against the Mass. If he

S. James spoke out the words of consecracion: They in their Mass suppress
the same words, and keep them close. Hitherto the Proclamer plaieth small
game. He had lever in a weighty matter speak some trifling word, then say
nothing. Malice will cast dust or what soever comes to hand at his enemy in
want of better weapon. Here seems a bare Armarie where so weak a weapon is
bent against that, which with all force The primitive church prayed many
prayers of the Mass secretly.
spoken. Is not yowr own Communion as good said as song, if there were any
goodness in yt? or is yt not as good said in a great congregation where some
stand so far of as they can not hear the words of consecracion which in
that case are spoken as in soste silence to them, as yt is being song in a
small congregation where all the people may hear? Were all the Masses in the
ancient Church thoroughly out spoken alowde? Let the Proclamer look the
books, and he shall find yt otherwise. Did S. Basil in his Mass pronounce
the wholl action of co^secracion with a loud voice? No, when he began the
Canon to enter toward consecracion he prayed secretly, and the rule is
prefixed at the beginning of the prayer: Pontifex secret. The Bishop prays
this secretly. By imitacion whereof I think yt received throughout the
catholic Church to pray the prayers of the Canon secretly. And when S.
Basil came to the consecracion, did he speak

S. James in his Mass mynistred the Communion to the people: They in their
Mass, receive themselves alone. This comparison in some understanding is true,
in some yt smells of untruth. If yt be understood particularly and not
generally that is, that S. James sometimes when he said Mass mynistred the
Communion to the people, yt is true. And so yt is true that the catholic
Church sometime mynistreth the Sacrament to to the people when Mass is said.
If yt be understood generally, that saint lames at all times when he said
Mass mynistred the Communion in him, that without some better authority then
his own bare word, I Mass said without commucants
matter good cause. For as I find that in the Church of Constantinople Mass
was daily said, when the people did not communicate: so do I find a rule
made in the ancient Church, what the priest should do, when there were no
communicantes. Wherbie being evident that Mass was said without
communicantes, yt smells, as I said, of an untruth, that S. James ministered
the communion to the people allwaies, when he said Mass. In Missa Chrysostom.
And for somoche as yt so does, yt raither declares the malice of him that
would somewhat say against the holy Mass, the^ that of certain knowledge he can
auouche any thing against yt.

S. James in his Mass ministered the communion to the people under both kinds:
They in their Mass minister the Sacrament unto the people in one kind only.
A proposition framed in an argument, and not containing the wholl truth of the
matter disputed, may well be rejected wherefore in consideracion that the
Proclamer trauaileth to improve every Mass in the Yt is evident by diverse
histories that the bless. Sacr. has been ministered under one kind in the
primitive Church
Tertullian, who was near to the Apostles in the time of S. Cyprian, who was
not long after him, in the time of S. Basil and other, the Sacrament was
diverse times ministered under one kind.

S. James in his Mass preached and setfurtb the death of Christ: They in
their Mass have only a nombre of dumb gestures and ceremones, which they
them selves understand Amaliciou seslaunder.
not, and make no manner of mention of Chrysts death. Hitherto he has made
conferences impertinent and slender: now for lack of soche pelting store, he
is fain to bodge up a few moo even with flatt lies. I told you before his
store of stuff was not great, and that his armarie was not well furnished with
weapons and now yt does appear. Ye have seen the best stuf and sharpest
weapons, now is he driven to this shifte to set up Skarecrowes in stead of
men, I mien, untruths in stead of trueths to skare away simple men from the
blessed Mass as the Skarecrowes do the simple fowls and birds from the corn,
each of the^ making the poor creatures to think them to be that in deed they
be not. That S. James setfurth the death of Christ I well allow, Three
untruths in one comparison of the Proclamers.
and willingly confess but that the Mass of the catholic Church is none
other then he reports, yt is to manifest an untruth. And that my saing may
be justified in the seight of all men, yt shall be made evident that there
gestures and ceremonies. Secondly, that we our selves understand them not.
Thirdly, that the Mass makes no mention of Chrysts death.





A brief explicacion of the lively represe^tacion of Chrysts passionin the
Mass.
Chrysts death, where yt does not only contein the memorial of Chrysts death
by the consecracion, oblacion, and receiving of his blessed body and blood
according to his institucion in his last supper, but also by outward ornaments
and gesturs expesseth all or most of the circumstances of his passion, as the
albe with which the priest is clothed, signifies the white garment that
Christ was sent in from Herod: the vestment signifies the garment that he
was mocked in, in the howsse of Pilate: the cross upon the vestiment signifies
the cross of Christ which the priest bears on his back going to the altar,
in significacion that Christ bare his cross upon his back to the place of
execution. And as Christ was there lifted upon the cross: so his body and
blood consecrated on the altar are there to the lively remembrance of the same
his eleuacion, elevated, speaking (as yt were) ran out and was divided apart
from the body as here ye see yt apart As often as ye do this, ye shall do
yt in the remembrance of me. That the Proclamer then says, that the Mass
makes no manner of mention of Chrysts death, is soch and impudent untruth,
that a plain man will term yt a shameful false lie. This place suffers me
not to answer every of his comparisons full. Wherefore I stay my self here,
where much more might be said, and will breiflie touch the rest of his
comparisons.

S. James Mass was full of knowledge: Their Mass is full of ignorance. As vain
gloriouse men, having not plenty of victuals in their larders, for their
glories sake will invent some toie to supply a dish and furnish the service,
so this man is now fain to run to his Rethorike to make up a show of
comparisons. But remember, gentle reader, that in the conferences, and
comparisons which I have made at large, I have declared the same knowledge that
was in S, James Mass, to be in the Mass of the catholic Church that is
now, forasmoche as in substance they be all one. S. James Mass

S. James Mass was full of consolacion: their Mass is full of superstition.
Here ye may see his gift of amplificacion. For he has made a large show in
terms, and done nothing in deed. I pray you, what consolacion was there in
Saint James Mass that is not in the Mass now? and what superstition is in
this, that was not in that? When you have declared these two, and proved that
you have declared, then yowr amplificacion shall be somewhat in deed. In the
mean while yt shall stand for a fume of vain words to help to fill up yowr
vain sermon.

S. James ministered the Communion in his Mass to the people, and this, which
with certain alteracion of words you make to appear an other comparison,
when you say. When S. James said Mass the people resorted to receive the
Communion, where in effect yt is all one. But particularly to say to this
comparison, what is this against the goodness of the Mass, that the people
resort not to receive? yowr

And to conclude S. James in his Mass had Chrysts institucion: They in their
Mass have wellneer nothing else but man's inuencion. This comparison seems
covertly to deny the institucion of Christ to be in the Mass, but plainly
yt does yt not, fearing that then yt should be rejected as a plain lie. For yt
is allreadie proved that in the Mass is the institucion of Christ. Where he
says, that yt has wellneer nothing but man's inuencion: if he term all
things that the holy Ghost has appointed The order of the Mass was left to be
disposed by the Apostles
the rest by the institucion of the holy Ghost, was added by the Apostles and
holy men. For, as S. Augustine says, Christ did not institute or appoinct
after what manner his supper should be celebrated, but he left that to his
Apostles by whom he would set his Church in order. Wherefore the manner of the
Mass being ordained and appoincted at the instruction and mocion of the holy
Ghost, and the appoinctment of Christ. yt becomes not the Proclamer so to
abuse yt, and discredit yt with soche terms, calling the contents thereof the
inuencions of men. A man in whom were regard of God, and his holy Church,
would not so irreuerentlie, and so contemptuously speak of things, that if
they had not ben ordeind by the Apostles and men Apostolic, but had been
only made by godly and vertueouse Bishops, and had continued in estimacion
and reverence more then a thousand years, might yt not have be comed the
proclamer reverently also Soche difference you may see between S. James Mass
and their Mass. Soche is the difference for any thing that he in these
comparisons has said, that as before he was borne they were in substance all
one: so be they still, and so will remain when he shall be rotten.

But where I have made comparisons between S. James Mass, and the Communion of
the Church of this Proclamer and his accomplices, you may see manifest and
great differences, not by my words, not by toies of rethoricall inuencion,
not by untruths, but in the things them selves, in their substanciall poincts,
in matters of weight and truth. For soche is the Substa^cial dyffere^ces of
the Mass and the new Co^mnunio^
difference between S. James Mass (which is the Mass of all the holy Apoles
and fathers, and of the catholic Church that has been or now is, for in
substance all is one) and the new Communion of the new Church, does neither
follow the Apostles, nor so well and lively set forth the death of Christ, as
the Mass. For as out of the side of Christ issued out both of him be this
water blessed, out of whose sideo ran out both blood and water. And the greek
Church says, these words of the scripture: Et vnus militum lancea latus
eius aperuit, and continuo exiuit sanguis and aqua. And one of the Soldiers
perced his side with a speer, and forth with there went out blood and water:
both well minding that blessed welspring of Chrysts side, out of the which
ran that clensing water and blood that washed away the filth of our sins.
Here you see one difference in substance.

The Mass of the Apostles, Fathers, and catholic Church (as is said) had
intencion, and believed that they following Chrysts institucion should
consecrate the body and blood of Christ: The new Communion of the new
Church has no soche intencion nor believes, no nor minds nor pourposeth to
consecrate the body and blood of Christ according to This do ye in the remem.
and consecrateth as he did, his very body and blood: The new Communion,
neither consecrateth the body and blood of Christ, neither abides the name
of consecracion, so far is yt from that Church either to obeie Christ, or to
follow the church of his Apostles and Fathers. The Mass according to Chrysts
institucion and commandment, as is proved, offreth his body and blood in
sacrifice to the Father, in the remembrance of his passion and death. The new
Communion not only abhors this to do, but also detesteth both the name of
sacrifice, and the name of him that has authority to do yt, that is, A
priest. The Mass as well of the Apostles as other offreth the same sacrifice,
as yt is also proved, for the living and the dead. The new Communion of the
new Church, deriding both, offreth neither for the one nor for the other. The
Mass of the catholic Church desiereth the aid and intercession of blessed
Saints to commend their service and prayers to God: The new Church skorneth
yt, and

Wherefore, Reader, look well to thie doings, there is no dallieng in Gods,
matters. For the Mass there have been brought forth without all haulting or to
us by the books of our elders. As for the comparisons of the Proclamer,

THE FOUR AND FOVRTETH CHAPT. RETVRning to the exposition of S. Paul,
expowndeth this text. As often as ye shall eat of this bread etc. by S Hyerom
and Theophilact.
IDoo here omit the institucion of the Sacrament declared

I come therefore to the words immediately following in S. Paul. As often as
ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of the cup, ye shall show forth the
death, of our Lord until he come. For that this text has been woonderfullie
abused and by soche abuse many of the simply have been deceived, and caused
otherwise to think and believe of the blessed Sacrament, than the trueh is, I
have thought yt good to open the true understanding of the same scripture to
the reader, that he being instructed may withdraw his foot from the snares
of Satan, and well epsy his falshoode, and so eschew soch error, as he
would entrappe him into.

Upon this text the ministres of Satan have grownded two arguments against
Christ's real presence in the blessed Sacrament. The one is (as Two arguments
of the Sacramentaries grownded upon S. Paul.
theie say) that by this scripture yt is manifest, that the Sacrament is
instituted for a memoryall of Christ: A memorial is of a thing that is absent.
Wherefore the Sacrament is a memorial of Christ that is absent and not present.
For (say they) what neadeth a thing present, any memorial? yt will cause yt
self to be remembered. The Sacrament then being a memorial of Christ, argues
Christ not to be present in the Sacrament, but to be absent. The other argument
is, that S. Paul calls the Sacrament not the body of Christ but calls yt
bread. For he says that as often as ye shall eat of this bread, and says
not, as often as ye shall eat the body of Christ in the Sacrament wherefore
(say they) the Sacrament is but bread and not the body of Christ.

As touching the first, yt is not true that Christ did institute this Sacrament
Solucions of the same argu.
as a memorial of him self or of his body, but of his passion and death
suffered in his bodies. which thing S. Paul here by express words As often
as ye shall eat this bread, and drink this cup ye shall declare or setfurth
the death of our Lord. So that the eating and drinking of this Sacrament is
not for a remembrance or a memorial of the body of Christ in yt self, as the
Aduersare falselie pretends, but is (as is said) a memorial Receipt of the
B. Sac. is not a memorial of Chrysts body but of his passion and death.
death be once done actuallie, and never shall so be again in that gloriouse
body, but only in mystery. Wherefore the passion and death whose memorial is
celebrated in that solemn institucio^ of Christ's Sacrament is and ever shall
be absent, and never present. And so is the Sacrament the memorial of a thing
absent and not present, which thing is the passion and death of Christ.

As touching their second argument, true yt is that S. Paul calls the
Sacrament bread, but will the Adversary thereupon induce that S. Paul meneth
material bread? even bakers bread? Though he would so induce: yet he neither
does nor can so prove yt, nor never shall. Bread he calls yt, but Joan 6. S.
Paulecalleth the Bl. Sacr. bread but he adds withal the article this, to
signify a special bread.
what bread? even soch as Christ the institutour of the Sacrament called yt
when he said: Panis que^ ego dabo, caro mea est, quam dabo pro mundi vita. The
bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. Wherefore S. Paul did not barelie call yt bread, but with an article,
saing: This bread. Words of the Cano^in the Mass.
after the consecracion (as before is declared) do say this in effect. Were
therefore (o Lord) being mindful of the passion of thy Son our Lord Jesus
Christ do offer unto thee, etc. The wholl catholic Church by open profession
of their duty in the holy mynistracion declares their obedience, and the
fulfilling of Christ's commandment, in that they offering and receiving the
blessed sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, be mindful of the passion and
death suffered in that same body, at the effusion of that preciouse blood. Thus
ye see how they abuse this scripture. For both S. Paul's own words, and
also the practice of the wholl Church, does declare that the holy

But that this truth may be proved, and thereby their falshead the more
confuted, I will also as I have upon other textes produce the expositions, and
understanding of holy Fathers and doctors, that yt may be fully perceived
Hieron. in. 11. 1. Cor.
how this scripture is to be understood, not by fantasy, but by their
sownde doctrines. And first we will hear saint Hierom upon the same text, who
says thus: Ideo hoc saluator tradididit Sacramentum, vt per hoc semper
commemoremus quia pro nobis est mortuus. Nam and ideo cum accipimus a
sacerdotibus commonemur, quia corpus and sanguis est Christi, vt beneficiis
eius non existimemur ingrati. Therefore our savior delivered this Sacrament,
that by this we should allwaies remember that he died for us. For therefore
also when we receive yt, What S. Paul calls bread, S. Hieron calls yt the
body of Christ.
we are warned of the preistes, that yt is the body and blood of Christ, that
we be not thought to be unthankful for his benefittes.

If this saing of S. Hierom be well noted, those two things, which I before
the Sacrament, that we should allwaies remember that he died forvs, so that yt
is the death of Christ that is to be remembered. I said that though saint

To S. Hierom, we shall ioin Thcophilact, to declare how this scripture was
understood in the greek Church. Thus he writes: Hoc facite, quottes
biberitis, in meam commemorationem. Per poculum isthuc (inquit) memoriam facis
Dominicae passionis. Theoph. in 11. 1. Cor.
Quid tu ig tur solus bibis and mebriaris, tremendo isto calice omnibus ex
aequo tradito? This do as often as ye shall drink in the remembrance of me.
By this cup (says he) thowe make a memorial of our Lords death, why
the^ do thou alone drink, and art dronke^ seeing that this fearful cup
is equally delivered to all. Thus Theophilact.

Se ye not that the cup of our Lords table is received in the remembrance of
his death? But yt shall not be without profit to learn of him why Cup of our
Lord a fearful cup.
he calls our Lords cup, a fearful cup. If yt be but a cup of wine
(as the Adversary says) yt is not fearful but pleasant. Why yt is a
fearful cup yt is declared of the same Theophilact expownding the text
immediately going before, which is this: Likewise when he had supped be took
the cup, saing: This cup is the new testament in my blood, upon this text
he says thus: Fuerunt and in veteri Testamento calices sieve pocula, quibus
sanguinem brutorum post victimam oblatam libarent. Pro sanguine itaque
brutorum, qui vetus Testamentum veluti sigillo consignabat, meum ego nunc
sanguinem pono, nouum Testamentum eo seu sigillo muniens. Ne turberis igitur
sanguinem audiens. Nam si irrationabilium sanguinem pecorum accepisti in veteri
Testamento: quanto potius nunc diuinum? There were in the old Testament also
cups or pottes in the which after the sacrifice they should offer the blood
of brute beasts. Therefore for the blood of brute beasts, which did sign the
old Testament as with a seal, I now setfurth before you my blood, signing
therewith the new testament as with a seal. For if thowe hauest received the
blood of unreasonable beasts in the old Testament, how much raither may
thowe now receive the blood of God?

In this exposition I wish yt to be noted, how the author in the person of
Christ speaks, saing: For the blood of brute beasts I put before thee my
blood. Seist thowe then why he calls the cup of our Lord a fearful A
plain place for the Proclamer.
cup? Yt is because owre Lord in that cup puts before thee his own
blood. And what blood is yt? Is yt the blood of a pure or only man? Naie
says Theophilact, yt is the blood of God. For (says he) if in the old
testament the blood of unreasonable beasts was received, much more now
receive thowe the blood of God. Perceive the^ that yt is the blood of God that
is in the cup of our Lord. Wilt thowe fully perceive why yt is fearful?
Consider and there is also the Godhead. In the death of Christ, the soul was
parted from Theophilact says) and where the blood of God is, there of
consequence is also God: does not Theophilact well in calling yt a fearful
cup? who may not well fear to approach so near unto his Lord God, and the
more that he knows his own filthiness, and there by his unworthiness? As
now you know why the cup of our Lord is fearful: so, what so ever the
Adversary bableth to the contrary, ye have learned that in owre Lords cup
is not bare wine but the blessed blood of God.

What shall I need to allege any mo of the sainges of Theophilact, seeing he
has allreadie opened the truth that we seek for namely that the Sacrament
Theoph. Ibid.
and blood of Christ that suffered. If any man will desire any other place let
the same understand that Theophilact expownding this place, as often as ye
shall eat this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall show forth the death
of our Lord What we aught to think inreceauing the Bl. Sacr.
until he come, says thus: Eo affectu debetis esse imbuti, perinde quasi in
illa ipsa esse it is Christicaena, and ab ipso Christo acciperetis sacrum istuc.
Illa enim ipsa coena est, and illam ipsam mortem annunciamus. Ye should be of
the same mind, or so be have yowrselues, as though ye were in the selfsame
supper of Christ, and should take of Christ himself this holy thing. Yt is
even the same very supper, and we show forth the very same death. If ye will
learn of Theophilact what Christ gave in his last supper, expownding Christ's
words rehearsed by S. Paul, What Christ delivered in his last supper.
he says thus: Ille vero in common, and generatim omnibus dixit: Accipite,
edite, idque corpus suum, quod pro omnibus ex equo fregit, in mortem tradens.
But he in common and generally said to all: Take, and eat, yea and that his
body, which he brake equally for all delivering yt to suffer death. Thus
Theophilact.

Here ye perceive by him, that Christ gave his body in his last supper. And if
this do not satisfy you, know that this Theophilact, as before is showed in
the second book, and else where, where he expowndeth S. Matthewe, Mark, Luke,
and John, says that Christ gave in his last supper, his very body, and not
an only a figure of his body. By all this then yt is evident, that
Theophilact understands by the word bread in S. Paul, the body of Christ,
and not material bread, and that that bread and cup are to be eaten and
dronken of, not in the remembrance of that body in yt self, but in the
remembrance of the passion and death suffered in the same body.

THE FIVE AND FOVRTETH CHAP. ABIDES
I Would have stayed my self, and ceased to have produced aniemoauthours for
the exposition of this text: but well knowinge that many (as is said) have
abused it and deceived many, I thought yt expedient, and necessary for the
help of the unlearned, somewhat more to say upon yt, by the expositions of S.
Basil and Rupertus. And whether we take a piece of bread in the remembrance of
Christ, or whether we receive the body and blood of Christ in the remembrance
that he suffered for us in that body, and shed that preciouse blood, we will
Basilius de Baptismo.
first hear S. Basil, who writes thus: Oportet accedentem ad corpus and
sanguinem Domini, ad rememorationem eius, qui pro nobis est mortuus, ac
resurrexit, non solum purum esse ab omni inquinamento carnis ac spiritus, ne ad
iudicium edat, ac bibat, sed and euidenter ostendere and exprimere memoriam
eius qui pro nobis mortuus est, acresurrexit. Yt behooves A plain place for the
Proclamer
him that comes to the body and blood of our Lord to the remembrance of him
that has died for us, and risen again, not only to be pure from all
uncleanness of body, and soul, least he eat and drink to his own
condemnacion, but he must also evidently show and declare the memory of him

Now where S. Paul says, that as often as we eat of that bread, and drink
of that cup we must declare the death of Christ S. Basil says that he that
comes to the body and blood of Christ must remember him that What S. Paul
calls bread, and cup S. Basil calls the body and blod of our lord.
died for us. So that what S. Paul in terms called, this bread and this
cup, S. Basil giving us to understand what S. Paul meneth by these terms
speaks by plain words, calling those things as they be in deed, the body
and blood of our Lord. Likewise yt may be perceived that S. Basil following S.
Paul teaches that the Sacrament is a, memorial of Christ as suffering for us,
and not of Christ in himself or absolutely without respect of passion and
death suffered for us, which is asmoch to say as a memorial done in the
remembrance of Christ's passion and death agreablie to the sainges of other
before alleged.

Rupert also, whom we ioin at this present with S. Basil, does even likewise
understand S. Paul. Thus he writes: Sacramentum hoc, quo mors eius
annunciatur (quemadmodum Apostolus dicit: quotitscunque manducabitis panem
hunc, and calicem bibetis, Rupert. in cap. 26. Matthew,
mortem Domini annunciabitis donec veniat) quando debuerat condi and dari, nisi
sub ipsius articulo passionis. This Sacrament by the which the death of our
Lord is declared (as the Apostle says: As often as ye shall eat this bread,
and drink of this cup ye shall show forth the death of our Lord until he
come) when should yt be made, and given forth, but even at the very poinct of
the same passion? In this saing of Rupert, the one part of our saing, namely
that the Sacrament is a memorial of Christ's death is clearly by expressed
words testified. The other part, that in the Sacrament the very body and
blood is eaten and dronken Rupert. in a Joon. We cate the flesh and drink the
blood of Christ in the remembrance of his death.
to and for the memorial of the same death is not here manifestly spoken?
Wherefore we shall hear him in an other place uttering his knowledge in this
matter. Thus he says: Quod fecit ipse, hoc idem in commemorationem ipsius
scimus, et been scimus, nos facere, id est carnem ipsius manducare, and
sanguine^ bibere. That which Christ himself did, we know and we well know that
we do even the very same thing in the remembrance of him that he did, that is
to eat his flesh and drink his blood.

Mark now the learning of Christ's catholic Church, note now well what we
eat and drink in the remembrance of Christ's passion and death. Judge now
whether S. Paul meant material bread as the Sacramentaries

I have now produced but four, two of the greek Church and two of the latin
Church, to give us understanding what we ought to remember in the receipt All
the rabble of the Sacramentaries cannot bring one coople of catholic authors
that say S. Paul spoke here of material bread.
of the Sacrament, and what in that Sacrament we do receive, whereupon they all
conclude that we receive the body and blood of Christ in the remembrance of
his death, and so S. Paul is to be understood in this place. Now let all the
whole rabble of the Adversaries side bring forth but two, whereas we might (as the
Adversary himself knows) have brought many mo, which for the avoiding of
more prolixitie, wherein we have allreadie offended we do ouerpasse and omit,
that shall by express words expownde S. Paul in this place, that he meant not
the body of Christ, but plain material bread: Let them, I say, bring but two
catholic, approved authors, and they shall have the victory. So weak is
their cause besides their own asseueracion, that yt is very certain they can
not bring one.

Although then this is a truth received of all the holy Fathers of Christ's
Church, and is the doctrine of S. Paul, that the body and blood of Christ be
received according to commandment in the remembrance of his passion and
death, and so yt also comes to pass, that the body of Christ even the self
same body in substance under the forms of bread and wine, is Jnexpositio^
verborum caenae. Objection of Oecolamp.
a figure of the self same body hanging upon the cross, and suffering passion
and death: yet Oecolampadius after his Sicophants manner, he himself either of
malice not willing to know, or else plainly ignorant, does accuse the
learned men of Christ's Church of ignorance, that they make the body of Christ
both the exemplar and the thing exemplified, the figure, and the thing
figurated, the sign and the thing signified, for that (says he) relacion must
be betwixt two things distincted, and not of one thing to ytself. For every
relative must have a correlatiue.

To answer him for that I write to the unlearned to instruct them in the
faith, I will not use the quiddities of schools, neither with school terms
The nnswer.
so darken the matter, that the reader shall not understand me, but I will use
Oecolampadius says: that relacion must be betwixt two things distincted, did
he not know that in the divine persons Matthew. 17
were sundry relacions grownded upon the one nature of God. But to come to
examples in Christ of whom we now dispute, was not Christ transfigured in the
mount, and showing himself in a glorionse manner, was he not an Theoph. in 17.
Math. Christ one and the same in substance has been, is and shall be a sigure of
bim self in diuer se manners.
exemplar or figure of himself now in glory, and of his gloriouse cominge to
judgment? Theophilact says that Dignitas secundi aduentus in splendore
faciei Christi ineffabili claruit. The dignity or excellency of the second
cominge of Christ did appear in the unspeakable brightness of the face of
Christ. So that Peter John and James saw now in his first coming an image of
the glory of Christ that he shall come in his second coming. Then may we see
that the self same body in substance after one manner, may be an exemplar or
figure of the same body after or in an other manner. Christ showed his body to
Thomas, and other the Apostles with the signs and tokens of his wounds, was
not that body now immortal and impassible an exemplar of the same both
mortal and passible? Chrysosthom. decru and Latrone


The scripture says, that the wicked shall in judgment see Christ, whom they
pricked and perced. For (as Chrysostom says) he shall appear with his cross
and wounds in the face of the world. This is his saing: Sed cur cum cruce
veniat videamus, scilicet vt hi, qui eum crucifixerunt, suae sentiant dementiae
caecitatem and ideo dementiae eorum signum portatur. Ideo Propheta ait. Tunc
lamentabuntur tribus terrae, videntes accusatorem, and agnoscentes peccatum. Et
quid mirum est, si crucem portans adueniet, quando and vulnera corporis ipse
demonstrat. Tunc enim (inquit) videbunt quem compunxerunt. Et sicut post
resurrectionem Thomae voluit diffidentiam commutare, and illi clauorum loca
monstrauit, and laterum vulnera declarauit, and dixit: Mitte manum tuam, and
vide, quoniam spiritus carnem and ossa non habet: sic and tunc ostendet
vulnera, crucemque demostrabit, vt istum ostendat illum esse qui fuerat
crucifixus. But why he comes with a cross, let us see, forsooth that they
that crucified him may perceive the blindness of their madness. And therefore
is the sign of their Christ shall come to judgment with the sign of the
cross and the printes of the woondes he suffered.
madness carried. Therefore the Prophet says: Then shall all the tribes of the
earth mourn seeing the accuser, and they acknowleging the sin. And what
wonder is yt if he come bringing a cross, seeing that he himself does show
forth his wounds. For then (says he) shall they see whom they have pricked.
And as after the resurrection he would amend the lack of belief in Thomas,
and did show him the places of the nails, and opened the wounds of his sides,
and said: Put forth thy band and see, that a spirit has not flesh and
bones. So then also shall he show his wounds, and shall openly setfurth his
cross in seight, that he may show

Seeing then Christ shall come to the general judgment with wounds and
cross representing the state and condition of himself sometime a passible and a
mortal man, he yet now being impassible, and immortal, and being soche an
examplar of himself, as he shall cause the faithful upon the remembrance of
that seight to rejoice that they embraced his faith and received the benefett
of their redemption wrought and done upon the cross, and by the suffering of
the wounds now there showed: and the wicked contrariwise upon the same seight
to wail and mourn that through their madness they contemned him, by whom
they now perceive they might haueben saved: Why may not the same body in the
Sacrament cause the faithful now to their comfort as well to remember the
passion and death and their redemption wrought by yt, and so to be a memorial
to them, as yt shall be both to the faithful and wicked at the day of
judgment? At the day of judgment that same body shall be a memorial and an
examplar of yt self, yt being the same very body in substance that yt was,
but changed in manner, as is said? why

THE SIX AND FOVRTETH CHAP. BEGINS
AS ye have seen the scripture last handeled recovered from the wresting and
wicked abusing of the Adversary: so by Gods grace shall you see this that
follows. Thus ymmediatelie says S. Paul. Itaque quicunque manducauerit
panem hunc and biberit calicem Domini indigne, reus erit corporis and sanguinis
Domini. Whosoever therefore shall eat this bread, and shall drink of the cup
of our Lord vnwoorthilie, shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord.

After the Apostle had declared the institucion of the honorable Sacrament, and
there unto had added the cause of the same, namely that yt should be done in
the remembrance of Christ's passion and death, that neither the Corinthians to
whom he wrote, who abused the same Sacrament, neither other chrystians should
think them selves to have done to

Two things are required to a worthy receauer, true faith and perfight
charity. For as Ignatius says: Fides est principium vitae. Charitas est
consummatio. Jgnatius epla ad Ephesios. Faith and charity together make
worthy receauers of the bless. Sacr.
Hae duae simul iunctae, and in vnitate factae Hominem Dei persiciunt. Faith is
the beginning of life. Charity is the consummacion. These two joined together
Qui diligit, legem impleuit. He that loves has fullfilled the Law. This love
causes a man to ioin in unity with God and man. Yt causes obedience to an
ordinary power. Yt causes a man also to flee all corrupt licenciouse, and
voluptuouse life. Where this charity is not, be his faith never so sownde he is
no worthy receauer. Wherefore Scismatiques and contemners of ordinary power,
and voluptuouse or corrupt livers be no worthy Two things to be considered in
S. Paul's words
receauers.

Thus much being said of worthy and unworthy receauers, there remains
two other things in S. Paul's words to be spoken of the one is what is
received, the other the peine inflicted for unworthy receiving. The thing to
be received is signified when he says: This bread, and the cup of our
Lord. The peine, that he shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord.

For the first, what the bread and the cup of our Lord is, yt was opened in
the exposition of the last scripture, that S. Paul meant thereby the body and
blood of our Lord. Which exposition shall here again be verisied and
justified by a nombre of holy Fathers to the intent the truth received in
Christ's Parliament house may be well known, and the untruth of the
adversary as well perceived and seen.

The second, which is the pein inflicted to the unworthy receauer forasmoche
as yt shall be plainly opened and declared by soche ancient writers, as I
shall allege, I will to avoid prolixitie omit to speak of yt my self and
refer the Reader, to the expositions of the Fathers, For the which
consideracion also forasmoche as S. Paul repeteth this text again, I have
thought good for the ease of the reader, to ioin them together in exposition

But before I enter into the exposition of these Fathers I wish the Reader The
Sacramentaries abuse S. Paul's words in two poinctes.
to understand that the Adversary has also abused this scripture in two
poinctes: The one that by cause S. Paul calls the Sacrament bread. Therefore
yt is after yt is consecrated material bread: the other, which is more
stowtelie then truly maintained, they say that evil men do not receive the
body of Christ in the Sacrament. These their wicked assertions by Gods grace
shall be plainly overthrown. For yt shall be ineuitablie proved, that by the
bread and cup that S. Paul speaks of is understood and mea^t the body
and blood of Christ, which being by S. Paul received of euellmen, yt must
necessarily follow that evil men receive the body of Christ in the Sacra.
And here may we see the miserable strictes, that men teaching an vntreuth be
brought unto, who for the maintenance of that untruth are

S. Cyprian writing to certain Martirs and confessors, and lamenting the rash
admission of certain that had offended to the recipit of the holy Sacrament,
writes thus of them so had admitted the offenders. Illi contra euan gelii
Cypr. li. 3. epist. 15.
legem, vestram quoque honorificam peticionem, ante actam paenitentiam, ante
exomologesin grauissimi atque extremi delicti factam ante manum ab Episcopo and
clero in paenitentiam impositam, offerre pro illis, and Eucbaristiam dare, id
est, sanctum Domini corpus prophanare audent, cum scriptum sit: Qui ederit
panem, aut biberit calicem Domini indigne, reus erit corporis and sanguinis
Domini. They against the law of the Gospel, and yowr commendable peticion,
before they had done penannce, before they had made confession of their most
greuouse and extreme offense, before our Lord. Forasmoch as yt is written: He
that eats the bread and drinks the cup of our Lord vnwoorthilie, shall
be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord. Of this holy Father and martyr,
S. Cyprian, if you will learn what is to minister the Sacrament to any
unworthy person, yt is (says he) to profane to holy body and blood of
our Lord. That yt is profaned in so doing he proves by this scripture of S.
Paul: He that eats and drinks vnwoorthilie shall be guilty of the body
and blood of our Lord.

A thing is profaned, when yt being holy is occupied about unholy or common
uses. As a church dedicated to God to be made a stable. The ornaments The
practice of prophanacio^ is lament ablie to be see^ in England.
of the same to be applied to the vanity of man's pride, as to make beds
hanginges or cooshinges. The plate of yt, as king Balthazar did with the plate
of the temple to make them vessels for the bankettes of men. So the body of
our Lord, says S. Cyprian, is profaned forasmoch as yt being holy, is cast
into an unholy thing, which is the unworthy receauer. Now if by the bread
spoken of in S. Paul's sentence were not understood the body of our Lord,
to what purpose should S. Cypria^ allege that text, as thereby to prove the
body of Christ profaned. That thing is profaned that is delivered and so
abused. If the^ not the body of our Lord be delivered

And here I wish the ministers of Christ's Church to take heed, and to be
very circu^spect, that they look well to who^ they ministre this holy
Sacrament, leest they be dot only guilty of the prophanacio^ of the holy
body of our Lord: but also be in very deed, not feeders, but deceauers, not
deliuerers from sins, but heapers and increacers there of, as S. Cypria^
says in the same li 3. epla. 15.
epistle. Ea enim co^cedere quae in pernitie^ verta^t, decipere est. Nec
erigitur sic lapsus, sed per Dei offensam, magis impellitur ad ruinam. To give
or grant those things that turn to a man's destruction is to deceive. Neither
is the offe^der so set in good stay, but by the offense of God, he is more
impelled to ruin. Which offenses, I mee^ as well of the ministre delivering,
as of the unworthy receauer receiving, being well weighed of Chrysostom how
weighty, and burdenouse they be, he says thus of the delivery of the
Sacrament. Non permitta^ ista fieri animam prius tradam meam quam Dominicu^
alicui corpus indigne. Sanguinemque meu^ effundi potius Chrysostom. hom 83. in.
26. Math.
patiar, quamsacratisssmum illum sanguine^ praeterqa^ digno co^ceda^. I will
not suffer these things to be doe^, I will first deliver up mi life, rhe^ I
will deliver the body of our Lord to any body unworthily: And I shall
suffer my blood raither to be shed, than I will give that most holy blood
to any other then to a worthy receauer.

How much may the sentences of these two grave ancient Fathers move soche
as be in the place of ministracion. Let them take heed that ministre to
heretics. Let them take heed that ministre to scismatiques. Let the^ take
heed that ministre to soche as they know to be in sin or in the purpose of
sins: They were better with Chrysostom to deliver up their lives, and shed
their blood, then to soche to deliver the blessed body and most holy blood
of our Lord.

Here with all, good Reader, note, that Chrysostom alludinge to this our text
of S. Paul, and opening what S. Paul spoke of there, and what he meant by the
bread and the cup, calls yt neither bread nor figure nor sign, but by
plain and express words calls yt with terms of honor, that is, owre
Lords body and his most holy blood. Again note if the body of our Lord
were received only by faith (as the Sacrame^taries do say) so that yt stood
upon the will of the receauer, according as he will measure his faith, not upon
the Orig ho. 6 in diverse.


But yt is time to hear Origin S. Cyprians yockfelowe in this place, what
light he gives us to understand S. Paul. Thus he writes: Quando sanctum
cibum, illudque incorruptum accipts epulum, quando vitae pane and poculo
fueris, manducas and bibis corpus and sanguinem Domini, tunc Dominus sub tectum
tuum ingreditur. Et tu ergo humilians temetipsum, imitare hunc Centurionem and
dicito: Domine non sum dignus vt intres sub tectum mecum Vbi enim indigne
ingreditur, ibi ad iudicium ingreditur accipienti. When thou take the holy
meat, and that incorrupt bankett when thowe receauest the bread and cup of
life, then our Lord enters under thie Centurio and say: Lord I am not
worthy, that thou should enter under my rofe where he enters vnworthilic,
there he enters to the condemnacion of the receauer. Thus Origin.

Who willing the chrystian man to be a worthy receauer of the holy
Sacrament, he does first declare the greatness, the holiness and excellency
of the Sacrament, and what he receaueth. Which done as a mea^ to make a man to
humble him self he moves him, to the intent that he may be a worthy
receauer, to follow the humbleness or humility of Centurio in acknoweleaging,
and confessiinge his unworthiness, and the raither to compass this he
fears him from unworthy receiving with the terror of S. Paul's sainge,
which now we have in hand, saing: where he vnwoorthilie enters he enters to
the condemnacion of the receauer. In the which his godly admonicion and
exhortacion ye may first perceive with what words he does extol the
blessed Sacrament, with soche words truly that if the body of Christ were
not there, they could not so be applied. But he was certain of that blessed
presence, and therefore he said: when thowe Origin) owre lord enters in under
thy roof, mening that he enters the house of thie body. Thirdly, ye may
perceive that the same our Lord as he may enter into our house of our body
woorthilie; as he did into the house of Centurio: so may he (says Origin)
enter into owre house of our body vnwoorthilie. And if he so do, yt is to
the damnacion of the receauer. What S. Paul calls the bread Origin calls
it the body of our Lord.


Now confer S. Paul's saing and Origin together. S. Paul says, he that
eats this bread and drinks this cup vnwoorthilie and c: Origin says
where our Lord enters vnwoorthilie and c: So that, what S. Paul calls
bread, and the cup of our Lord, Origin openinge and declaring the mind of
S. Paul, calls yt as yt is in deed, our Lord. Thus for the understanding
bread: ye see these two pillars of the Church, and ancient Fathers of

Likewise the Adversary has taught, that evil men receive not the body S.
Cyprian and Orige^ teach that evil me^ receive the body of Christ.
of Christ, ye see that these two Fathers do auouche that evil men do receive
the body of our Lord. For S. Cyprian says that to give the Sacrament to an
unworthy man, is to profane, not the Sacramental bread (as the Adversary
terms yt) but the holy body of our Lord. So that yt is the body of our
Lord being a most holy thing that is profaned, because yt is given to an
evil man, which is an unworthy thing. Origin says also by express
words, that where our lord enters vnwoorthilie, he enters to the
condemnacion of the receauer teaching plainly that our lord enters into the
unworthy man. Chrysostom also, whom by occasion I have in this chapter
alleged, saing that he will raither yield his life, and Origin is otherwise
to be understood in this place, then is here declared, because he in an other
place by express words says, that an evil man can not eat the body of
Christ. To this objection answer is made in the xxx chap. of this book,
whether for the avoiding of prolixitie, I remitte the Reader, and procead to
hear moo of the ancient Fathers of Christ's Parliament house, to the intent,
that we may perfectly learn the enacted truth of the understanding of S.
Paul in this place.

THE SEVEN AND FOVRTETH CHAPT. PROCEAdeth in the understanding of the same by
saint Basil and samct Hierom.
FOr somoche as nothing does more declare the truth of any matter called in
controversy in matters of our faith, then does the consonant, and accord
testimony of may holy learned Fathers, of sundry times, places and ages, as
well of the greek church, as the latin church: Therefore shall I proceade to
bring forth mo of the holy auncientes of Christ's Parliament house, that their
agreement and concord may be perceived in the understanding of S. Paul. In
the which, gentle Reader, trust me, thowe shall find so great consent, and so
evident matter, that this alone shall suffice, to bring thee or staic thee in
the matter of the blessed Sacrament, to believe Christ's very real presence
there, if Gods grace has not forsaken thee, that thowe wilt willfullie or
obstinately refuse to see the clear beams of the Sun.

Wherefore to go to our matter note well this sainge of S. Basil who asks this
question, whether yt be without danger, that any man not being clean from
all filthiness of body and Soul, may eat the body and drink Quoniam Deus
Basil. li. de Baptis. 2. ques. 93.
in lege supermam paenam constituerit contra eum, qui immundicia audet
contingere sancta, scriptum est enim, figurate quidem illis, ad nostram vero
commonefactionem. Et locutus est Dominus ad Moysen, Dic Aaron and filiis eius,
vt attendant a sanctis filiorum Israel, and non contaminabunt nomen meum,
quicunque ipsi sanctificant mihi, Ego Dominus. Dic ipsis in familias ipsorum:
Omnis homo, qui accesserit ab omni semine vestro ad sancta quaecunque
sanctificauerint filis Irael Domino, and immundicia ipsius in ipso: anima illa
exterminabitur a facie mea. Ego Dominus, Tales minae propositiae sunt co^tra
cos qui simpliciter accedunt ad ea quae ab hominibus sanctificata sunt, Quid
vero quis dixerit contra eum, qui in tantum ac tale mysterium audet? Quanto
enim plus templo hic est, iuxta ipsam Domini vocem, tanto grauius and
horribilius in inquinamento animae audere contingere corpus Christi, quam
attingere arietes aut cauros? Sic enim Apostolus dixit: Quare qui ederit panem,
and biberit poculum Domini indigne reus erit corporis and sanguinis: Domini,
Vehementius autem simulque horribilius proponit ac declarat condemnationem per
repetitionem dum ait: Probet autem vniusquisque seipsum, and sic ex pane hoc
edat, and ex poculo bibat. Quienim edit and bibit indigne, iudicium sibi ipsi
edit ac bibit, non diiudicans corpus Domini. Si vero qui in sola immundicia est
(immundiciae autem proprietatem sigurate ex lege discimus) adeo horrendum habet
iudicium, quanto magis qui in peccato est, and contra corpus Christi audet,
horrendum attrahet iudicium? Forasmoche as God in the law has ordained so
great a pain against him, that in his uncleanness is so bold to touch the
And our Lord said unto Moses, Say to Aaron and his sons, that they take
heed of the holy things of the children of Israel, and whatsoever they shall
sanctisie unto me, they shall not defile my holy name, I am the Lord. Say to
them, and to their families: A plain place for thr proclamer both for the
presence and the excellency of the bl. Sacr. above the Sacramets of the old
Low.
Every man that is of yowr seed, and comes to the holy things, what soever
they be that the childeren of Israel shall sanctify to the Lord, and his
vnelenesse be upon him, that soul shall be put away from my sace. I am the
Lord. Soche threatinges are settfurth against them that only come to those
things that be sanctified of me^. But what will a man say against him that is
so bold to come with his uncleanness to so great a mystery? Look how much
greater this (mening Christ) is then the temple, according to the very saing
of our Lord: So much more greuouse and horrible is yt in the filthiness of
his soul to be so bold to touch the body of Christ, as to touch ra^mes or
bulls For so the Apostle has said: wherefore he that eats the bread and
drinks the cup of our Lord unworthily, shall begiltie of the body and
blood of owre Lord. But more veheme^lie, and also Let every man examine himself
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. For he that eats
and drinks vnwoorthilie, he eats and drinks his condempnacion, making no
difference of our Lords body. If then he that is in uncleanness only (the
property of which sigurated vnclea^nsse, we have learned of the Law) has so
horrible judgment, how much more he that is in sin, and dares to presume
upon the body of Christ, shall draw unto him self horrible judgment? Thus
much S. Basil.

Whosoever does but superficially note this saing of his may easily perceive
the difference betwixt the law and the Gospel: Betwixt the uncleanness so
reputed in the law, and sin reputed for uncleanness in the Gospel, and
figured by the uncleanness in the law. But cheiflie the difference betwixt
the sacrifice of the old law, and the partaking of them, and the sacrifice of
the new law, and the partaking of yt: the excellency also of this above
that, and thereunto agreablie, and to the solucion of his question, the
greatness of judgment and co^dempnacion to the evil partaker of the

But leaving the first two differences and to speak of the other two, for
that they appertein directly to the matter that we have to speak of ye shall
note that they be contained breiflie, in this one sentence where he says: How
If Christ be received in the bl. Sace. but spirituallie, how ean the sinner
presume upon the body, which he nor will nor ca^ receive?
much greater Christ is then the temple, so much more greuouse and horrible
pain remains for them that being defiled in the soul, dare touch the body
of Christ, than does them that touch but Rams, and bulls? In which words
the sacrifices of both laws are expressed. The sacrifice of the old law were
Rams, and bulls: The sacrifice of the new law is the body of Christ. The
evil or unworthy partakers of the sacrifices of the law were soche as were
unclean with vnclea^nesse described in the law: The unworthy partakers of
the Sacrifice of the Gospel are soche as with deadly Sin or the pourpofe of
yt, being defiled in Soul, do presume to receive Christ's body in the holy
Sacrament. The pain of an unworthy partaker of the Sacrifices of the law was
death corporal: The pain of an unworthy receauer of the sacrifice of the
new law (which is the body of Christ) is death eternal. This he proves by
the scriptures of S Paul, which we now have in hand. For (says he) S.
Paul says, Whosoever shall eat the bread and drink the cup of our Lord
vnwoorthilie, shall be guilty of the body and blood of our lord.

Now, gentle Reader, weigh with me I paraie thee, that where S. Basil said
that so greuouse and horrible condemnacion shall fall upon them, that with
uncleanness of soul presume to touch the body of Christ, how does he
prove the same by this sainge of S. Paul, if by the bread and cup therein
spoken of, be not understand the body and blood of Christ? Yt is therefore most
certain that holy Basil so aleading S. Paul, understood him by the bread and
cup to have most assuredly me^t that blessed bread of Christ's body, and
the cup of his holy blood in the Sacrament. Basil was not so base in
learning, nor so simple in judgment, that he speaking of the unworthy
receauers of Christ's body, would for the confirmacion of his sainge allege
a text that speaks but of a piece of bread, and nothing to his purpose. No,
he was of an other manner of learning and gravity of judgment.

As this text by his judgment, is understood of the body and blood S.
Basil understands Saint Paul to speak of the bread of Chrysts body.
of Christ: So is the other also, which (says he) S. Paul speaks by
repeticio^. Si vero qui in sola immundicia est, adeo horrendum habet iudicium,
quanto magis qui in peccato est, and contra corpus Christi audet, horrendum
attrahet indicium? If he that is in the uncleanness of the law only has so
horible judgment, how much more he that is in sin, and dare presume upon
the body of Christ shall draw unto him horrible judgment? In the wiche who
sees not that he, as one expownding and declaring S. Paul's words, gives us
to understand that S. Paul by the bread meneth the body of Christ? For where
S. Paul says, He that eats this bread vnwoorthilie eats his own
damnacion: S. Basil says: He that presumes upon the body of Christ shall
have horible Damnacion.

A much like question the same S. Basil moves in the same book, which also
opens the truth of our matter. This is the question Whether yt be without
danger that he that is not pure in heart from an evil conscience and
uncleanness of life may do the office of a priest. In the answer of
Dominus dicens: plus templo hic est, erudit nos quod tanto magis impius est,
qui audet tractare corpus Domini, qui dedit semetipsum pro nobis oblationem,
and hostiam in odorem suauitatis; quantum corpus vnigeniti filij Dei excedit,
arietes, and tauros, non in comparationis ratione, Incomparabilis est enim
excellentia. Owre lord saing: This man is greater then the temple (mening him
self) teaches Let schismatic and irreuerent priests note well this saing of
S. Basil.


And here Reader if thowe be desierouse to know the truth, note and mark
well, how great condemnacion comes to them, that vnwoortilie handle the
Sacrament, above them that vnwoorthilie handle the sacrifices of the old law
and Testament. They are (Says Saint Basil) as much more wicked, as the
body of the only begotten Son exceadeth Rams and

And here plainly to say if the Sacrament were but a figure of the body If
the bless. Sacr. be but a figure as the Sacraments os the old law were, why
do the evil receauers offend so incomparably?
more wicked, and suffer more greuouse and horrible damnacion, then they that
received the figures of Christ in the old law? And here Reader understood
that by the doctrine of the Adversary, the Sacraments of the new law, are
no better, then the Sacraments of the old law. Which if yt be true, wheer
there is equality betwixt the things themselves: there is the abuse, I mean the
unworthy receiving equal also. But to an equal abuse justice inflicteth an
equal pain. Wherefore for the abuse of the Sacrmentes of both laws, there
should be equal pain. But the pain for the abuse of both Sacraments are not
equal. For the pain of the abuse of this Sacrament exceadeth the other as
far, as the Son of God exceadeth Ra^mes, and bulls. Wherefore the Sacraments
also are not equal. By that then that the pain of the unworthy receauinge of
the blessed Sacrament, so far exceadeth the pain of the abuse of the
Sacraments of the old law: yt that the body of the Son of God is received
of evil men in the bless. Sacrament.

But that ye may hear him by most plain words teach as much harken what
he says in an other place: Si vero is qui fratrem propter cibum offendit
Basil. de Bapt. li. 1. cap. 3 A plain place that evil men may eat the body
of Christ and drink his blood. But unprofitably. Joan. 6.
a charitate excidit, sine qua and magnorum donorum and iustificationum
operationes nihil prosunt: Quidnam dixerit quis de eo, qui ociose, and
inutiliter edere audet corpus, and bibere sunguinem Domini nostri Jesus Christi?
If he that for meat offends his brother falls from charity, whitoute the
which both the works of great gistes, and also of iustificacions do nothing
auaill, what shall a man say of him that idely and unprofitably dares to
eat the body and drink the blood of our lord Jesus Christ? What can the
Adversary say to this? Be not these words plain? Says not Basil that a
man may eat the body and drink the blood of Christ ydelie, and
unprofitably? And who can eat the body of Christ, and drink his blood
unprofitably, but the evil and sinful man? For of the good receauer Christ
says: Qui manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, habet vitam
aeternam. He that eats mi flesh and drinks my blood, has everlasting life.

But I have tarried long upon Saint Basil: I will therefore be short about
Saint Hierom, who is placed with Saint Basil to show the enacted truth of
the understanding of Saint Paul in the latin Church, as the other has done
in the greek Church. Thus writes Saint Hierom upon this verse of the psalm:
Adhuc escae eorum erant in ore ipsorum, and ira Dei descendit supercos. Hieron.
in Psalm. 77.
While the meat was yet in their mouths the wrath of God fell upon them. Haec
de his qui Deum past acceptnm Manna dereliquerunt. Nam nunc in Ecclesia si quis
carne and sanguine Christi reficitur, and declinat ad vitia, nouerit iudicium
Dei sibi imminere, sicut Paulus Apostolus ait: Qui acceperit corpus and
sanguinem Domini indigne, reus erit corporis and sanguinis Domini. These
words be spoken of them, A plain exposition of S. Paul's words for the
Proclamer.
that did forsake God, after they had received Manna. For now in the Church if
any man be fed with the body and blood of Christ and does decline to
vices, let him know that the judgment of God is at hand, as the Apostle Paul
says: He that takes the body and blood of our lord vnwoorthilie, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of our lord.

Mark here the saing of Saint Paul reported by Saint Hierom, and so shall
thowe see the very mind and true understanding of Saint Paul's sentence,
whose understanding we now seek. S. Hierom says, that S. Paul says thus:
He that takes the body and blood of our Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body and blood our lord. In deed, as yt is allreadie often rehearsed, the
words of Saint Paul be not soche: yet Saint Hierom says he says so,
because in very deed, the author says that, that Saint Paul does mien.
As when Christ did say: Destroy this Temple, and in three days I Joan. 2.
will reedifie yt, The Jews according to the outward sownde of the words,
said: that he spoke that saing of their very Temple. But the Evangelist well
knowinge the mind of his master, said: Hoc autem dicebat de templo corporis
sui. This he said, of the temple of his body Now if a man should say, that
Christ said. Destroy ie or kill this my body and in three days I will raise
yt up again, he shall with the Evangelist say the truth of Christ's saing,
though Christ's words were not the same words: yet Christ did so

sold, that he might, have remission of his sins, if he would not have had
Judas was present, and was partaker of that sacrifice. Thus far he.

In these words that Chrisosto^ says that Christ offered Judas the blood
that he sold, is both taught us the presence of Christ's body and blood in
the Sacrament, and also that evil persons do receive the same. For as Judas:
so all like unto Judas. And let these words (gentle Reader) be well noted of
thee, that Chrysostom says, that Christ gave Judas the blood that the sold.
If he gave him that he sold, he gave him his very blood, and not the figure
of his blood. For not the figure, but he blood yt self was sold. Where also in
the end of this place now alleged, Chrisostom says, that Judas was present
at the last Supper, and was partaker of the Sacrisice, these two points now
here inquired, are revived, and the truth of them to us confirmed. For the
sacrifice offered in the last Supper by Christ, was the sacrifice of his body,
as before in the first, and second, and also in this third book yt is
evidently proved, and here also by Chrisostom signified. Wherbie we are
taught that the body of Christ is present in the Sacrament, and Judas was at
Christ's supper and received there etc.
so Judas being a partaker of that sacrifice, was (though he were a traditour
and a wicked man) a receauer of the body of Christ. Which being so, yt may be
concluded that evil and wicked men may receive the body of Christ in the
Sacrament.

Allthough this that is produced out of Chrisostom may fully satisfy any
man, for that yt is evident and plain: yet that yt may be perceived by that he
speaks the same in sondrie places, that yt was a truth assured and commonly
received, I will touch a place or two moo of his. Of the which this is one.
Nullus igitur fictus accedat, nullus fucato animo tantis audeat mysterijs
proximare ne condemnetur, and sententiam mereatur, and quod Judas sustinuit
patiatur. Nam in illum post communicationem mensae Diabolus intrauit, non quia
contempsit Dominicum corpus, sed quia impudentia Iudae and malignitas mentis,
vt aduersarius Satan entered into Judas not in contempt of the body of Christ
but to punish the treason of Judas.
in eo habitaret, essecit. Let therefore no feigned man come, let none be so
bold with a counterfeit mind to come near so great mysteries, lest he Judas
suffered. For after he had partaken of Christ's table, the Deuell entered into
him, not that he contemned the body of our Lord, but because the impudency
of Judas, and the mischief of his mind had caused that the Deuell should
dwell in him.

Where Chrysostom says that after Judas had received, the Deuell not
contemning the body of Christ, entered into him: what else thereby does he
teach, but that Judas received the body of our Lord. For if he did not
receive yt, Chrisostom neded not to declare that the Deuell entered not upon
contempt of the body of Christ, For what contempt should he seem to make to
the body of Christ, by entering into Judas if the body of Christ entered not
into that person before. If any contempt should appear to be in that entry,
yt should be that that wicked Adversary, and miserable damned creature
should presume to enter to that place where his Lord and master had so lately
entered. But (says Chrysostom) with soche treachery, would with dissimuled
holiness and love receive Judas his mischief, and not as a Lord by power to
contemn the Lord of all Lords there entered. Chris. hom. 83. in 26. Math.


A like sentence has he in an other place which is this: Caenantibus autem
eis, accepit Jesus panem and benedixit, atque fregit, and dedit Discipulis
suis. O caecitatem proditoris, qui cum ineffabilibus mysterijs communicasset,
idem permansit, and diuina mensa susceptus in melius commutari noluit, quod
Lucas significauit dicens: Quia post hoc introiuit in cum Satanas, non quia
dominicum corpus despiceret, sed quia proditoris stoliditatem irridebat. When
they were at Supper Jesus took bread, and blessed yt, and brake yt, and gave
yt to his disciples. O the blindness of the traditour, who when he had taken
of the vnspeakeble mysteries, he remained the same man, and being allowed at
Gods table, he would not be changed into better, which thing Luke signified
sainge: that after that Satan entered into him not because he despised the
body of our Lord, but because he skorned the lewdness of the traditour.

Here again ye see, as before, that the Deuell despised not the body of
Sacramental bread and wine be not unspeakable mysteries.
our Lord received of Judas, though he entered into him after yt. That he had
received yt, these words of Chrisostom goinge a little before, do well
declare, when he says: When Judas had taken of the unspeakable mysteries, he
remained all one man. Which be the unspeakable mysteries? not a piece of
bread, and a cup of wine, received as signs and tokens of the body and
blood, For so these Sacraments be not unspeakable misteris, but the matter
is well able to be spoken of, as other figures of the old law were, which by
the doctrine of the Adversary be as good as this, and this no better then
they. If then the figures of the old law were not unspeakable mysteries (as
in deed they were not) then be these figures of bread and wine no unspeakable
mysteries. If bread and wine as only figures be no unspeakable mysteries,
and Judas in Christ's Supper received vnspeakeble mysteries then he received
not bare bread and Damascen says: Deus spiritus sancti operatione haec super
naturam Damnasc. li. 4. ca. 14.
operatur, quae non potest capere, nisi sola fides. God by the operacion of the
holy Ghost woorketh these things above nature, which things only faith can
understand. Wherefore thus speaking of the holy mysteries, we many well call
them unspeakable mysteries, which unspeakable mysteries, Chrisostom August.
epictola cont. Donatist. post collation. S. August reports the words of S.
Paul as S. Hier. and Chryso. did before.
says that Judas did receive.

The like are we taught of Saint Augustine, but we will first hear him give
us his understanding of the saing of Saint Paul which he does without all
circumstance even by plain words, as other have done before him. Thus he
writes against the Donatists. Quisquis autem in hac Ecclesia been vixerit,
nihil ei praeiudicant aliena peccata, quia vnusquisque in ea proprium onus
portabit, sicut Apostolus dicit. Et quicunque corpus Christi manducauerit in
digne, iudicium sibi manducat, and bibit. Nam and ipse Apostolus hoc scripsit.
Whosoever shall live well in this Church, other men's sins shall nothing hinder
him. For in her every man shall bear his own burden, as the Apostle says.
And in her whosoever shall eat the body of Christ vnwoorthilie, eats and
drinks his own conde^nacion. For the Apostle himself has written this.

Note in this sainge how Saint Augustine utters the sainge of Saint Paul,
he says not whosoever eats the bread, but as an expositour, whose office is
to give light to the text, if any part of yt be dark, and to give the true
sense of words that may be diuerselie understood he expowndeth the text
and opens yt, and plainly teaches us that by bread is understood the
body of Christ. Wherefore by plain words he speaks Saint Paul's sentence,
sainge: Whosoever shall eat the body of Christ vnwoorhilie etc.

Thus may ye see the true understanding of this scripture and by yt may ye
learn that Saint Augustine understood that in the Sacrament is the very
body of Christ, and that evil men though to their condemnation receive the
same. of which both, Saint Augustine says again. Sicut enim Cont.
donatist. lib. 5 cap. 8.
Judas cut buccellam tradidit Dominus, non malum accipiendo, locum in se
Diabolo praebuit: sic indigne quisque sumens Dominicum Sacramentum, non
essicit, vt quia ipse malus est, malum sit, aut quia non ad salutem accipit,
nihil accipiat. Corpus enim Domini, and sanguis Domini nihilominus erat etiam
illis, quibus dice bat Apostolus: Qui manducat and bibit indigne iudicium sibi
manducat and bibit. As Judas to whom our lord gave a morsel, not taking an
evil thing, but evil taking the thing, gave place to the deuell in himself:
So any man receauinge vnwoorthiely our Lords Hell gates ca^ not preuail
against these places, let the Proclamer well consider them.
Sacrament, causes not, because himself is evil, that yt should be evil: or
because he receaueth yt not to salvation, that he receaueth nothing. For yt
was nevertheless the body of our Lord, and the blood of our Lord also unto
then to whom the Apostle said: he that eats and drinks unworthily eats
and drinks his own condemnation. Thus much Saint Augustine.

Yt is now to be remembered that the Adversary denieng the real and
substanciall praesence of Christ's body in the Sacrament, is compelled for the
mainteinaunce of that his wicked heresy, to say that Christ's body is
received spirituallie, that is, that the grace, the virtue, and the meritte of
Christ's passion suffered in the same his body, is received. And for that these
A^ unto Judas yt was the very body and blood of Christ that he received So
yt is to all other ill receauers. Angu. in Joan tract. 26.
of our Lord, Which words the Adversary would have wrested to his
purpose, but by express words he says that is was the body of our Lord,
and the blood of our Lord unto them also, of whom the Apostle said: he that
eats, and drinks vnwoorthilie etc. Now what they be that receive
vnwoorthilie, yt neadeth no declaracion, being manifest that they be evil men.
And thus by S. Augustine yt is taught, that the very body of Christ being in
the Sacrament, is received of evil men: And although this place of S.
Augustine is so evidently against them: yet in an other place he presses them
so strictly, that they have no refuge, and yt is this. Quantum autem pertinet
ad illam mortem, de qua terret Dominus, quia mortut sunt patres eorum.
Manducauit Manna and Moises, manducauit Manna and Aaron: manducauit Manna and
Phinees, manducauerunt and multi, qui Domino placuerunt, and mortui non sunt.
Quare? quia visibilem cibum spiritualiter intellexerunt, spiritualiter
esurierunt, spiritualiter gustauernnt, vt Spiritualiter satiarenter. Nam and
nos hodie accepimus visibilem cibum. Sed aliud est Sacramentum, aliud virtus
Sacramenti, quam multi de altari accipiunt, and moriuntur, and accipiendo
moriuntur. Vnde dicit Apostolus: Iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. As touching
that death, of the which our Lord says: that their Fathers be dead: Moises
also did eat Manna, and Aaron did eat Manna, and Phinees did eat Manna, and
many did eat, which pleased our Lord, and they died not. Why? Because they
understood a visible meat spirituallie: They did spirituallie hungar yt, they
did spirituallie eat yt, that they might be spirituallie satisfied. And we
also this day have taken a visible meat. But the Sacrament is one thing, and
the virtue of the Sacrament an other thing, which virtue many do receive at
the Altar and do die, and in receareceauing yt do die. Wherefore says the
Apostle. He eats and drinks his damnacion. Thus far he.

Note here the distinction that S. Augustine makes betwixt the Sacrament, and
the virtue of the Sacrament sainge, that the Sacrament is one thing, and the
virtue of the Sacrament an other. Then of the virtue of the Sacrament he
says, that many receive yt at the Altar, and do die meaning according to
the saing of the Apostle, that receiving yt vnwoorthilie (Virtue.) First certain
yt is, that yt is not taken for the Sacramental Virtue of the blessed Sacr.
what yt is, and that evil men reccaue yt.
bread. For that is the other membre of the distinction. Then must yt either be
taken for the virtue of the passion of Christ, or for the body of Christ if
self. For in the Sacrament be no more but these three to be received: The
Sacrament, the body of Christ, and the virtue of his passion. Yt can not be
taken for the virtue of Christ's passion, for that is not nor can not be death
and damnacion to the receauer in the receiving, but life and salvation. This
virtue that S. Agustine speaks of is soche, that many do die in the
receiving of yt. Yt remains then that by this virtue of the Sacrament, is
understood the body of Christ, which many by unworthy receiving do
wickedlie abuse, and so receiving kill their souls, and die the death that
Judas did.

What shall I tarry in the rehersall of Saint Augustines sainges that touch
this matter? They were euough to make a just volume. Wherefore omitting many, I
will end with one, which also expowndeth this our text: Thus he says:
Recordamini vnde sit scriptum: Quicunque manducauerit panem, aut biberit
calicem Domini indigne, reus erit corporis and sanguinis Domini. Et de iss erat
sermo, cum Apostolus August. in Joan. tra. 6.
hoc dicerit, qui Domini corpus velut quemlibet alium cibum indiscrete,
necligenter que sumehant. Remember from whence yt is written: Whosoever shall
eat the bread, and drink the cup of our Lord vnwoorthieli, shall be guilty
of the body and blood of our Lord. For when the Apostle said this, he spoke
yt of them, Which received the body of our Lord vndiscreetlie and
necligentlie, as they would do any other meat.

Mark this well that Saint Augustine says plainly that Saint Paul spoke
this of them that necligentlie and vndiscreetlie received, not a piece of
Sacramental bread, but the body of our Lord. Then yt is manifest that the
body of our Lord is received in the Sacrament, and that non discernere a
ceteris cibis diuinu^ corpus. to make no difference of the body of our Lord
from other meats, but even as wewolde with polluted consciences eat profane
meats, and with purpose of sin ne, without repentance or purpose of
amendme^t of life, receive our

THE NINE AND FOVRTETH CHAP. Continues the same exposition by Isichius and.
Sedulius.
Saint Augustine writing against the Manicheis (in which sect he was by the
space of nine years pietifullie detained, and deluded) Audite doctos catholicae
Ecclesiae Viros tanta pace animi, and eo voto, quo ego vos audiui. Nihil opus
erit nouem annis, quibus Aug. de morib. Eccl. cap. 25.
me ludificastis. Long omnino, long beuiore tempore, quid intersit inter
veritatem vanitatemque, cernetis. Hear ye the learned men of the catholic
Church, with so much quiettnesse of mind, and with that desire, that I heard
you. There shall not need the nine years, in the which ye mocked me. In a
shorter time, yea in a much shorter time shall ye see, what difference is
betwixt verity and vanity. Even thus do I wish that they that have been
deluded with vain persuasions, and have been therbie ensnared and entrapped in
the heresy of the Sacramentaries, would with as good will hear the learned
Fathers of Christ's Church, as they have hitherto heard them, that have
deceived them. And I nothing doubt but if they will so do, and with devout
prayer

Six now have been alleged of the ancient and right famous Fathers, The
Proclamer required one plain sentence, he has had now these six and many
nio before, and herester yet mo shall have.
which all with great and goodly consent, have expownded the words of
Saint Paul, to be understood of the body of Christ. Which expositions be
not settfurth with obscurities in doubtful manner, as they may seem to be
understood diverse ways (which manner of sentences the Adversary does
produce to maintein his heresy) But they are clear plain, and easy to be
understood in their right sense, so, that they can not be drawn to any
other sense. And therefore let the Proclamer look well upon these expositions of
these six Fathers past, and he shall perceive that they by express words
teach that the body of Christ is in the Sacrament, and there received both of
good and evil men, which thing he shall see

Of these that yet remain to be alleged, the first coople shall be Isichius
and Isich. in Leuit ca. 26.
Sedulius. Isichius has this sainge: Propter quod sanctuarium eius paueamus,
vt nec corpus nostrum polluamus, nec ad corpus Christi, in quo est omnis
sanctificatio (in ipso enim omnis plenitudo inhabitat diuinitatis) sine subtili
dijudicatione nostri, temere accedamus, sed potius nosmetipsos probemus,
reminiscentes eius qui dixit: Quicunque manducauerit panem aut biberit calicem
Domini indigne, reus erit corporis and sanguinis Domini. Wherefore Jsich.
understands S. Paul to have speken of the body of Christ,
let us fear his holy place, that we neither defile our own body, nor
rashly come to the body of Christ, in the which is all sanctificacion (For
in him abides the fulness of the Godhead) without diligent examinacion of
our selves. But raither let us try our selves remembering him that said:
Whosoever shall eat the bread, and drink the cup of our Lord
vnwoorthielie, shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord.

How this Author understands S. Paul, yt is without great study to be
perceived. For he exhorting us to come with great examinacion of our selves,
with purity and cleanness of body and soul to the receipt of Christ's
body, uses for the place of his authority the sainge of S. Paul now in
hand: Who^soeuer eats the bread, and drinks the cup of our Lord
vnwoorthielie, shall be guilty of the body, and blood of our Lord. Where in
(as the other Fathers Theophilact says, Si quid est Deus Verbum in ipso
inhabitat, That that is the Son of God dwells in him. And farther
expowndinge the same, says: Ne autem cum audis, Theoph. in 2. cap. ad Coll^ss.
habitauit, existimes quod ageretur, aut impelleretur sicut Prophetae
(commorabatur enim and in illis Deus, iuxta illud, inhabitabo in ipsis, and
inambulabo) adiecit: corporaliter, hoc est, non energia vel operatio quaedam,
verum substantia, ac veluti corporatus, and vna hypostasis existens cum
assumpto. Least thowe (when thowe hear this word Exodus 29. 2. Cor. 6.
(dwells) should think that he should be moved or led, as the Prophets
were (for God dwelled in them also according to that saing I will dwell
Corporally, that is, not a certain force or operacion, but a substance, and as
corporated and being one person with the nature assumpted. Cyrill also by the
testimony of Theophilact, expownding these words, gives great light to the
understanding of them by an example and says this: Vel hunc ad modum
intelligere iuxta Diui Cyrilli sententiam Cyrill.
poteris: Perinde ac in corpore immoratur anima (immoratur autem ipsi corpori
essentialiter, and indiuisibiliter, ac citra mixturam) caeterum ipsa quidem
anima per mortem a corpore separatur, Deus autem Verbum, nunquam ab assumpta
carne separatus est, verum etiam in sepulchro aderat, ipsam incorruptibilem
seruans, animaeque, apud inferos praedicans sine donans captiuis remissionem.
Ye may also according to the mind of S. Cyrill thus understand yt, that as in
the body dwells the soul, (but yt dwells in the body essentiallie, and
indiuisiblie, and that without the commixtion of the two natures.) But yet the
soul ytself is separated from the body by death. But God the Son is never
separated from the flesh which he has taken, but he was with yt both in the
grave keeping yt from

By all this is meant that the very Godhead is substanciallie in Christ, as the
soul is substa^ciallie in the body, so that we cometo that body of Christ in
the which dwells fully, that is to say, substanciallie, the Godhead, Evil
men receive the body of Christ.
is impossible to be done. Yt were straung to persuade a man not to pull dowen
heaven with his hands. He were to beskorned that would move men to eat the
stars. And why? Because he should move them to do that, that

To Isichius is joined Sedulius, who in every part, affirms what the other
has taught. For he says thus upon these words of Christ recited of S.
Paul: Take ye, This is my body. Qnasi dixisset Paulus: Cauete ne illud corpus
indigne comedatis, dum Corpus Christi est. Indigne hoc comedetis: si pauperes
confundatis, sique escam aliquam ante spiritualem and Dominicam Caenam
comedatis. As though the Apostle had said: Beware ye that ye eat not that
body vnworrhilie, forsomoche as yt is the body of Christ. Ye shall eat this
body vnwoorthilie if ye confownde Sedulius. Where Saint Paul says: he that
eats this bread vnwoorthilie etc. This man says that Saint Paul in that
wholl proceasse spoke of the body of Christ. And therefore (says he) when S.
Paul Sedulius says that S. Paul spoke of the body of Christ.
had recited the words of Christ: Take ye, and eat. This is my body: yt was
as much, as though the Apostle had said: Beware that ye eat not that body
vnwoorthilie for somoche as yt is the body of Christ. In sewe words then yt
is evident and plain that the Apostle theer spoke of the body of Christ,
which thing that yt sholude be perceived to be void of all doubt, this
Author not contented with once speaking of the body, says with an addicion:
For yt is the body of Christ. Which manner of speech makes an assurance unto
us that yt is so. This also is to be observed, that as he says that S. Paul
teaches us the presence of Christ's body, that he also gives us an
admonicion that we be ware that we receive not that body vnwoorthilie. Whereby
(as before is noted) The body of Christ may be received of unworthy
persons.
of unworthy receauers. Which is as much to say, as evil men may receive
the body of Christ.

Now let not the good Christian be brought in doubt with the vain argument of
the Sacramentaries, who do reason thus: The Spirit of Christ is allwaies with
his body or is not. We may not, say that yt is not for that the spiritte of
Christ is This argumens was made to me in the Bishop of Elies house bye one yet
living.
inseparable from him. If then yt be allwaies with him, then the evil man
receiving Christ's body, receaueth also his Spiritte. And so shall the
Spiritte of God be in sinners, which is not to be said. This vain argument
shall the substanciall and pithie sainge of the holy Martyr Ciprian clean
dissolve and wipe away, who says thus. Sacramenta quidem quantum in se est,
sine propria esse virtute non possunt. Nec vllo modo diuina se absentat
maiestas mysterijs. Sed quamuis ab indignis se sumi, vel contingi Sacramenta
permittunt, non possunt tamen Spiritus esse participes, quorum infidelitas vel
Ciprian, sermon. de Caena.
indignitas tantae sanctitati contradicit. Ideoque alijs sunt haec munera odor
vitae in vitam, alijs odor mortis in mortem. quia omnino iustum est, vt tanto
beneficio priuentur gratiae contemptores, nec indignis tantae gratiae puritas
sibi faciat mansionem. The Sacraments Solucion of the argument by S. Ciprian.
truly formoche as in them is, can not be withthoute their propre virtue.
Neither does the divine majesty, by any means absent yt self from the
mysteries. But although the Sacraments suffer them selves to be touched or
received of the unworthy: they for all that, whose unbelief or unworthiness
does withstand so great holiness, can not be partakers of the Spirit. And
therefore are these Sacraments unto some the sauoure

Of whom we learn that allthough the divine majesty absenteth not yt self
from the Sacrament: yet the unworthy receauers be not partakers of the grace
of the Spiritte, because yt is unmeet that the co^tempners of grace, should
have grace abiding in them. For the more full understanding of God and his
Spirit in his creatures two ways.
this, note that God and his holy Spirit be in creatures two sondrie ways:
that is, by presence, and by grace. By presence God is in many places and
creatures, where he is not by grace. God by presence is in hell among the
damned souls, but he is not among them by grace. Christ was in the house of
Zachaeus by grace: But he was in the house of Caiphas and Pilate by presence,
and not by grace. Christ was in the midst of the Jews by presence, but he
was in the midst of his Apostles also by grace. Judas received the presence
of Christ without his grace in the same Supper. And so yt comes to pass that
the same Christ, who was set to be a fall, and an vprising of many in
Israel, is by the receipt Luc. 2.
of his body in the Sacrament, as Saint Ciprian says, to some a sauoure of
life, to life: and to other some a sauoure of death to death. For the same
flesh and blood, which is to some receauers (as Christ says) everlasting
life, is to other some, (as Saint Paul says), everlasting death.

Of the which says Saint Augustine: Quid de ipso corpore, and sangume
Domini Aug. cont. Gesconiu^.
vnico sacrificio pro salute nostra? Quamuis ipse Dominus dicat: Nisi quis
manducauerit carnem meam, and biberit sanguinem meum, non habebit in se vitam:
Nonne idem Apostolus docet etiam hoc perniciosum male vtentihus fieri? Ait
enim: Quicumque manducauerit panem, vel biberit calicem domini indigne, reus
erit corporis and sanguinis Domini. What shall we say of the very body and
blood of our Lord, the only sacrifice for our Salvation? of the which
although our Lord himself does Except a man do eat my flesh, and drink my
blood he shall not have life in himself: Does not the Apostle teach that the
same also is hurtful to them that do use yt evil? For he says: Whosoever
shall eat the bread, or drink the cup of our Lord vnwoorthilie shall be
guilty of the body and blood of our Lord, By this then I trust yt be made
manifest and plain, that Christ and his Spirit may of evil

THE FIFTETH CHAP. SHOWS THE understanding of the same text by Esfrem, and
Primasius.
AS the merciful goodness of God which by the testimony of the Prophet
David, endures for ever and ever upon the^ that fear him, is declared by
innumerable his works wrought in the creacion, redemption, and conseruacion of
man: So the Esfrem and Primasius, men of great antiquity. And for that they
were of Christ's Parliament house, and therefore well knowing the enacted truth
of the understanding of S. Paul in their times, they are the better to be
believed.

This holy Father Esfrem, writing of the day of judgment, and speakinge of
the worthy and unworthy receauinge of the Sacrament, makes relacion to
Saint Paul, sainge: the vnpure receauer to receive the same to his confusion
in the day of judgment, as the pure receauer to his comfort and glory. Thus
he writes: Si procul est a nobis Siloe, quo missus est caecus, sed D. Esfrem
tract de die Judic.
preciosus calix sanguinis tui plenus vita and lumine nobis in proximo est,
tanto propinqutor, quanto qui accesserit sucrit purior. Hoc igitur nobis
restat, misericors Christ, vt pleni gratia and illuminatione scientiae tuae
cum fide, and sanctificatione accedamus ad calicem tuu^, vt proficiat nobis ad
remisstonem peccatorum, non ad confusionem in die iudicij. Quta quicumque
mysterijs tuis indignus accesserit, sua^ animam ipse condemnat. non se
castificans vt cae lestem regem, atque immortalem Sponsum in sui pectoris
purissimum suscipiat Thalamum. Nam a^ma nostra sponsa est, immortalis sponsi.
Copula, autem nuptiarum, caelestia Sacrame^ta sunt, quia cum manducamus corpus
eius, and sanguinem bibimus, and ipse in nobis est, et nos in eo. Attend ergo
tibimet ipsi frater, festina thalamu^ cordis tui iugiter virtutibus exornare,
vt mansionem cum benedicto Patre suo faciat apud te. Et tunc coram Angelis, and
Archangeits erit tibi laus, and gloria, and gloriatio, et cum magna
exultatione, and gaudio ingredieris in Paradisum. If Siloe whether the blind
man was sent, be far from us: Yet A. plain saing of holy Esfrem for the
Proclamer.
the preciouse cup of thie blood being full of life and light, is near to
us, yea so much the nearer, as he that comes to yt is the purer. This then, o
merciful Christ, remains unto us, that we being full of grace, and the
illuminacion of thie pure or clean chamber of his breast receive the heavenly
king and immortal For when we do eat his We eat the body and drink the
blood of Christ.
body, and drink his blood, both he is in us, and we in him. Take heed to
thy self therefore, Brother, have thee to adorn the bride chamber of thy heart
continually with virtues, that with his blessed Father he may make his
mansion with thee. And then there shall be to thee before Angels and
Archangells praise and glory, and with great joy and gladness shall thowe
enter into Paradise. Thus far holy Esfrem.

Ye have heard a long testimony, but as godly, as long: and as true, as
godly. Cup of blood near to us.
Ye have heard that the cup of the blood of Christ, is near at hand with us.
If yt were not in the Sacrament, (as the Sacramentarie saleth yt is not) then
were Syloe being upon the earth nearer unto us, then the blood of Christ,
which by their saing is never upon the earth, but allwaies in heaven. This
cup of blood may not be understood by a figure, as to say we have at
hand a cup of wine, which is the figure of Christ's blood. For the words
of singular praise, which this Author adds unto the cup Iam the life. Iam
the light of the world.

This Author also opens the mind of S. Paul, saing: that whosoever comes
Bread in S. Paul is not material bread.
to the mysteries of Christ vnwoorthilie, does condemn his own soul. He
gives the cause why: For (says the Author) he does not receive that
heavenly king and immortal bridegroom into the bride chamber when we eat his
body, and drink his blood then he dwells in us, and we in him. In deed in
the receipt of Christ's body in the Sacrament is wrought the perfect
coniunctio^ betwixt Christ and us, if he be therein received as he aught to be
received. For then we are not only conioined to him spirituallie by faith and
charity, but also (as Chrisostom, and S Cyrill say) naturally. For both we
be in him by that he took our nature into him in his incarnation, And he is in
us by that we take his natural body in the holy ministracion. Wherefore reason
would, duty would, and love also would, that as he joined our nature to that
gloriouse person the Son of

Wherefore now ouerpassing yt, I have to hear what Primasius will say, to Qui
Primasius n^ Apocal.
edit mea^ carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet, and ego in eo. pro eo
acsi diceret: qui sic edent, vt edent est, and sic bibent, vt bibendus est
sanguis meus. Multi enim cum hoc videantnr accipere, in Deo non manent, nec
Deus in ipsis. quia sibi iudicium manducare perhibe^tur. He that eats my
flesh, and drinks my blood dwells in me, and I in him. As if he shoul say:
they that so shall eat my flesh as yt is to be eaten, and shall so drink my
blood, as yt is to be dronken. For many wen they are seen to receive this
Sacrament neither dwell they in God, nor God in them because they are
wittnessed to eat and drink their own damnation.

Primasius in this place alleged expowndeth two scriptures, the one out of
the vj. of S. John: the other, which we now have in hand out of S. The vj.
of S. John and S. Paul speak of one thing.
Paul. Out of the vj. of S. John, where Christ says. He that cateth my
flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him: Is not so to be
understood, that what soever he be, and in what state or condition soever he
be, in sin or out of sin, delighting in sin or detesting Sin, penitent
or impenite^t viciouse, or virtuous, if he eat the flesh of Christ, and
drink his blood that he dwells in Christ and Christ in him: But yt is to be
understood,

First, yt is to be considered that the vj. S. of John, out of the which he
alleges this scripture (as yt is allreadie invinciblie proved) speaks of
the very flesh and very blood of Christ. Secondly, yt is to be noted that
he expowndeth this text, and says that yt is not to be understood
indifferently of all men to dwell in Christ, and Christ in them, that do eat
his flesh and drink his blood: but of them that eat and drink them as they

THE ONE AND FIFTETH CHAP. ABIDES IN
YT Is much for the probacion and confirmacion of the truth, to see the
goodly consent and agreement among the holy Fathers of Christ's parliament
house. Wherefore perceauing Cassiodorus to ioin the vj. of S. Johan whith S.
Paul, as Primasius did, as having both one understanding. I have thought good,
of this coople, that here shall be brought forth, Primasius to place
Cassiodorus, that yt may more lively be perceived, that of them is by me
reported.

This Cassiodorus in his commentaries upon the psalms expowndinge this verse
spoken as a prophecy of Christ: Thou art a priest for ever, after the order
of Melchisedech: writes thus: Cui potest veraciter, et euidenter aptari nisi
Domino and saluatori, Cassiodor. in versu: Tues sacerdos etc.
qui corpus and sanguinem suum in panis ac vini erogatione salutariter
consecrauit? Sicut ipse in Euangelio dicit: Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij
hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem non habebitis vitam in vobis. Sed in ista
carne and sanguine, nil cruentum, nihil corruptibile men's humana concipiat (ne
sicut dicit Apostolus: Qui enim corpus Domini indigne manducat, iudicium sibi
manducat) sed viuificatricem substanciam, atque salutarem, and ipsius verbi
propriam factam, per quam peccatorum remissio, and aeternae vitae dona
praestantur. Unto whom may this be truly and euently applied, but unto our
Lord Christ consecrated his body and blood.
and Savior? Who in the giving forth of bread and wine to our health,
consecrated his body and blood, as he in the Gospel says: Except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall not have
everlasting life. But in this flesh and blood let not the mind of man
conceive any thing gross, any thing

Ye have now heard the weighty and pithic sainge of the holy Senator
Cassiodorus. Who as for his wisdom was woorthilie called to be a Senator to
give counsel in worldly affairs: So for his godliness and learning he is a
Senator of Christ's house in heavenly things. In these few words he has
uttered many trueths and given us many instructions. First, he utters this
truth, that Christ in his last Supper did consecrate his body and his blood.
Which his sainge, as yt declares and sets forth the truth of the
catholic faith: So yt opens and declares, and therewith impugneth Except ye
eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood ye shall not have life
in you: Whereby yt is manifest, that as by the forbearinge to eat the flesh of
Christ we leese the benefett of everlasting life: So by eatinge the same, as yt
is to be eaten, we obtein life everlasting. Which being so, his sainge is
affirmed and prooned where he said, that Christ to our health and salvation
consecrated his body and blood in his last Supper. For, having everlasting
life by the eating of that his body consecrated in his last Supper, we may
justly say that yt was consecrated to our salvation. Thirdly by that, that.
the vj. of John is so alleged, yt proves well that the same speaks of the
body and blood of Christ, that should be consecrated by him in his last
Supper, to ower health and salvation, as is said. Forthlie, we are instructed
and taught what What we should think of the body of Christ consecrated.
we aught to conceive and think of that blessed body and flesh of Christ so
consecrated. Marcion and Ma^nicheus did, or the body of a mere man, as did
Ebion and Cerynthus, against which heretics, as S. Hierom says, S. John
first was moved to write his gospel, thereby moved to open, declare and
settfurth the deity or godhead of Christ, which heresy afterward
notwitstanding S. John's Gospel, and Epistles (as Philaster wittnesseth) was
settfurth by Theodotus, who was condemned Victor then Bishop of Rome, who was
the thirtenth Bishop there after S. Peter, as the computacion of some does
testify:

Neither may we think, that because there be in Christ two natures, that Two
natures in Christ, but not two persons.
there be also in him two distincted persons, as did Nestorius, so that the
nature of man in Christ is so distincted and divided from the Godhead, that yt
has no soche coniunctio^ with the Godhead, as that yt by the reason of the
unity of person, should either be called the Son of God, or the propre and
very flesh of God, but the Son of man only. For all these thought yt a
corruptible flesh, the flesh of a pure man, and not the flesh of the Son of
God, as yt is in deed, but we must think yt, as this Author teaches, that yt
is a substance quickening us to salvation and everlasting life, forasmoche as yt
is made the very own and propre flesh of the Son of God, by the which we
have remission of sin, and life everlasting.

And this also are we taught of holy Cyrill, who gives also a reason, why
the flesh of God should give life, sainge thus: Quoniam saluatoris caro, verbo
Dei quod naturaliter vita est, coniuncta, viuifica effecta est, quando eam
comedimus, tunc vitam Cyrill. in 6. Joan. cap. 14.
habemus in nobis illi coniuncti, quae vita effecta est. Forasmoche as the
flesh of our

Thus then may we perceive that not only corrupt manners, but also corrupt
faith, otherwise conceauing or phantasinge of Christ's body then the
catholic Faith teaches, divides us from Christ, and makes us unworthy
receauers of that blessed body. If they be accounted among evil receauers,
that otherwise think of the body of Christ, then is to be thought of yt: What
is to be thought of them, that where Christ promised, that the bread, which he
would give should be his flesh, which he would give for the life of the
world, and by express words, for the perfourma^ce of the same promise,
taking bread, said plainly: This is my body: And S, Paul (as the wholl
company of the Fathers hitherto have testified, and mo yet shall testify)
says that in the Sacrament is the body of Christ, what, I say, Ebionites
and Cerinthians will make Christ no God, with the Manicheis will make him but a
fantastical figure, and with the Nestorians, will, as they made a distinction
betwixt the two naturs, leaving the nature of man divided and distincted from
the Godheade, so make the holy Sacrament distincted from Christ? where in very
deed, as God and man is one Christ: So the blessed Sacrament as touching the
Substance, and Christ is all one the Substance of the Sacrament being none
other but the very substance of Christ. These evil receauers, and abusers of
Christ's holy Sacrament, as they abuse the thing yt self: So by slaunderouse
terms do they abuse them that well use the same. For the true Christians
that honor God, call they Idolaters: Soche as acknowledge Christ's very body
in the Sacrament, call they gross Capharnaites: And soche as believe the
substance of bread by the omnipotency of God to be changed, and made the
substance of Christ, they call Papists. But God give them a better

And now to return to our matter, this finally is to be noted in our Cassiod,
how he utters Saint Paul's words.
Qui enim corpus Domini indigne manducat, iudicium sibi manducat. For he that
eats the body of our Lord vnwoorthilie, eats his own judgment. Note
well that he says not, he that eats the bread, but he that eats the body
of our Lord, expownding what bread Saint Paul spoke of in that scripture,
the bread, I say, of Christ's body, as oftentimes yt is allreadie said. What
can be said more plainer? would the Proclamer have any plainer speech then
this? Let him note the words, and the circunstance also, and weigh yt well,
and he shall find yt so plain, that all his engines and wrestinges, and all
his subtilties^, with the aid of all his accomplices, shall not be able to
withstand the plain truth of yt.

But Let us hear Damascen speaking as plainly, as he, and by like words
openinge to us the true mening of Saint Paul. This Damascen setting Damascen.
li. 4. ca. 14.
forth the virtue, goodness, and power of the Sacrament, says thus: Si aurum
offendat adulteratum, per iudicialem correptoriamque ignitionem purgat, vt non
in futuro cum mundo damnemur. Curat enim morbos, and omnimoda damna,
quemadmodum dicit Apostolus: Si nos vtique iudicaremus, non vtique iudicaremur.
Cum iudicamur autem a Deo, corripimur, vt non cum mundo condemnemur. Et hoc est
quod dicit: Quare qui participat corpus and sanguinem Christi indigne, iudicium
sibi tosi manducat, and bibit. Per illud purgati vnimur corpori Domini, and
spiritui eius and efficimur corpus Christi. Nam spiritus viuificans est caro
Domini, quia ex viuificante spiritu concepta est. Quod enim natum est ex
spiritu, spiritus est. Hoc autem dico non auferens corporis naturam, sed
viuificationem, and diuinitatem eius ostendens. If yt find gold that is
corrupted, by judicial and correptorie fieringe yt pourgeth yt, that we be not
in time to come condemned with the world. For yt cures diseases, and all
manner of hurtes, as the Apostle says. If we would judge our selves, we
should not be judged, but when we are judged of God, we are chasticed, that we
should not be damned with the world. And this is yt that the Apostle says:
Wherefore he that receaueth the Damascen. utters the words of S. Paul as
other elders before.
body and blood of Christ vnwoorthilie, he eats and drinks his own
damnacion. We being purged by that, are united to the body of our Lord, and
to his Spirit, and are made the body of Christ. For the flesh of our Lord
is a quickening Spirit, because yt was conceived by the quickninge Spirit. For
that that is borne of the Spiritte, is a Spiritte. This do I say not taking
away the nature of the body, but declaring his Godhead and power to give
life. Thus he.

Leaving diverse good and godly notes in this sainge of Damascen to be
considered, by the Reader, I have me to note those things that be to the
purpose of this present cause. Of the which the first and chiefest is, that
he alleging the sainge of Saint Paul, shewinge us the exposition of the
scripture, and giving us the understanding of the same, and the right meninge
of Saint Paul, speaks yt by these words. He that receaueth the body and
blood of Christ vnwoorthilie, eats and drinks his own damnacion. In which
manner of the body and blood of Christ, he right well knowing that they be so
in

I trust the Proclamer will not here upon this Author cast the stinking mist
of his figure, considering that yt is an exposition. And the nature of an
exposition is to be plainer then the thing expownded. And although both the
text, and the exposition speak the truth: yet he knows that what the text
oftentimes speaks obscurely or doubtfullie, that must the exposition speak
plainly, clearly, and manifestly. Whefor he must needs confess, that this
Author showing the mind of S. Paul, and expownding the bread and the cup
to be the body and blood of Christ, that yt is plainly so. And where diverse
of the adhere^ts of this Proclamer bear great Stomach against this Author
for his plain truth in many matters, Let both him and them know, that as in
all points of this matter the wholl catholic Church has allowed him: So is
he agreeable to all that hitherto have been alleged in the exposition of S.
Paul, which all be right ancient, or hereafter shall be alleged, though they
be not so ancient.

A Brief note also can I not but make of Damascen, where he says, that we
being pourged are by the receipt of the body of Christ united to the same
body and to his Spirit, and are also made his body. For as by these few
words the truth is opened, Worthy receauers os the bless. Sacr. What
benefitts they have.
and the great commodities that come to us by the worthy receipt of the
Sacrament declared: So is the vain argument of the Adversary before moved,
fully solued and answered. The truth is, that both good and bad receiving the
Sacrament, do receive the body of Christ. Commodities thercome none, but to
the worthy receruer, which commodities be three. The first is, that we be
united to the body of Christ, of the which much is said in this book upon
the tenth to the Corinthians. The second benefitt is, that we be also united to
his holy Spiritte. The third is, that we be made the mystical body of
Christ. These three commodities and benefits do we enioie by the receipt of
the Sacrament, says this author. But when? when (says he) we being pourged
do receive yt. For otherwise we receive not soche commodities, but we receive
great and notable incommodities For we receive (says S. Paul) our own
damnation. Then where the Adversary Unworthy receauers what they receue.
(as this Author says) pourged, they receive him not to grace. For neither
be they united to the body of Christ, neither to his holy Spirit, neither be
they thereby made members of Christ's mistical body. for (as Primasius has
said) they eat not that flesh as yt is to be eaten, nor drink that blood, as
yt aught to be drunk. For in deed yt is not to be eaten and dronke^, but of
soche as be cleansed and pourged from sin by penance, and be clerelie void
of purpose to sin again, And to soche yt brings these three commodities,
and many more, to the other nothing, but they them selves work their own
damnacion.

Thus gentle Reader, thowe may perceive, that if with the mind of the holy
Fathers of Christ's Parliament house, thowe wilt read the Scriptures, and by
them learn to understand the same, thowe shallt not only not be deceived,
but also in all matters of controversy be settled and stayed, and clerelie see
the toies and fantasies of the Adversaries to be maliciously, and deuellislie
forged and invented.

THE TWO AND FIFTETH CHAP. ENDS THE exposition of this text by Theodoret,
and Anselmus.
HItherto none be produced to show us the mind of S. Paul, but soch as by
the testimony of diverse writers, were a thousand years agon and more, save
this last alleged Damascen, whom some so place, as he had not lived full
nine hundredth years agon. But be yt that he were so, yet he is of so che
antiquity, as he may very well be called as witness in this matter, for
that he was before this controversy was raised in the Church, I mien, before
the time of Berengarius, Before whose time, I am sure the Adversaries can make
no prescription, nor yet since, but by startes as Satan might get occasion
and ministers now and Why God suffers Satan noweto wexe his Church with
heresies.
then to disturb gods Church. Which, I take, is suffered of God both to
correct our evil lives: and also to stir us to seek the knowledge of gods
truth. Which although we had, as yt were an upper face of the knowledge

But be yt, that Damascen were not nine hundredth years agon: yet the promise
of Christ being considered that he would be with his, Church to the end of
the the world, and that he would also send his holy spirit into the same
his Church, that shoule lead yt into all truth: As yt is to much shame for
the Adversary to say that all this time since Damascen taught Christ's
promise has failed: So yt is as much shame to say that all this time his
own doctrine has been suppressed.

In deed I would think that this Proclamer should do that, that all his The
Proclamers doctrine has no president, that yt has been quietly received.
progenitors could never yet do, if he could show that doctrine of the
Sacrament that he professes to have been receauedvuiuersallie and quietly but
one hundredth years: yea one half hundredth years: yea one twenty years or if
he can not do that, as I am sure he can not, Let him show yt received and
continued, as is said, but one year. If he can make no soche prescriptio^
Damascen until the time of this heresy: as we should be mad, men to receive
sochenouelties of so small stay or hold: So is the Proclamer more mad so to
move us. Damascen then teaching that, that all the Christian world received,
and that also long before the controversy was moved, cannot he justly
rejected, but is to be regarded.

These being twelve in nombre, are sufficient to be a quest and to give their

matter, and not delighted with some variety which of many is desiered: What
bread S. Paul spoke of.
yt the bread of our Lord, and sometime with and article, this bread: mente not
common bread, but a special bread that is, as often before is said, the
heavenly bread of Christ's body, which is the bread of our Lord in
veriedede. For in him only consists the power to make this bread, and to
give yt to the people. The other, that God suffers this heavenly bread of
Christ's The bless. Sacr. t. is proved byour Lord Jesus, to be his body.
body, to be received of sinners. As touching the Frst, the presupposall or
cause why a man should be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, when he
does vnwoorthilie receive the Sacrament is, says Anselmus, because by the
authority of our Lord Jesus yt is proved, that this bread that we speak of
here, is his body, and that the wine here also spoken of in the use of the
Sacrament is his blood.

Note I pray you, that this Authur says, that yt is proved of Saint Paul
by the authority of our Lord Jesus, that the body of the same our Lord
Jesus is in the Sacrament, formoche as the bread and wine there,

Let the Proclamer now, let all the Sacramentaries, which be his companions,
bringfurth one Author that says that yt is proved by the words of our
Lord Jesus that the bread and wine of the bless. Sacrament be not the body
and blood of our Lord Jesus, but only figures of the same body and blood,
and not the things themselves, and show the place as we do, and they shall
have the victory. But let them painte their matters as well as they can to
bleer the eyes of the simple, yet Vincit Veritas, the truth ouercometh. And so
shall yt in the end faull out, that they shall be perceived to be destitute
of truth. For their untruth shall be confownded by the truth. Though
untruth for a time get the vpperhand, and be maintained

But so, while I am a little passed the compass of the ringe, my second matter
knocks and calls me again, wherein breiflie to touch much matter: Three
sorts of evil receauers.
this Author makes three sorts of evil and unworthy receauers. The first
is of them that do otherwise celebrate or receive this holy mystery, then yt
was delivered of Christ. In the which sort as he touched the Berengarians,
which were in his time: So does he the Oecolampadians and the Caluinists of
this our time, which both otherwise celebrating, and otherwise receiving this
holy mystery, then yt was of Christ instituted, they make themselves
unworthy receauers. Christ instituted his body to be distributed and

An other sort is of them that receive the holy Sacrament without due
Lutherans who although they confess the very presence of Christ's body in
the Sacrament: yet they deny any honor or woorshippe to be done unto yt.
Which fond and infatuate doctrine, I ca^ but wonder at, well knowing that
whersoeuer Christ is either in heaven or Philip. 2.
in earth, he is (as Chrysostom says) worthy of most high honor, and if
God has so exalted him and given him a name, which is above all names, that in
the name of Jesus every knee shall bow, both of things in heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth: by what authority ca^ or will man will or
command no honor to be done to him? but of this we have already 3
spooken, wherefore staing any more to say of yt here, I come to the third
sort of receauers, which is (says this author) of them that presume to come
to the receipt of the blessed Sacrament before they have pourged themselves,
and cleansed their consciences by penance. Of this sort be all they who well
believing, yet not well living, come with the filthiness of sin allreadie
committed, yet remaing upon them, or else with purpose of sin to be

Here now ye see a variety of euel receauers, and yet (says this author)
that they all receive the Sacrament. And the Sacrament (says he) by the
authority of our Lord Jesus is proved to be the body and the blood of Christ.
Which thing this author yet by more express words teaches in the
exposition Anselm. ibid.
of the other text, where S. Paul as by repeticion says: He that eats and
drinks vnwoorthilie, eats and drinks his own damnacion: saing thus: Ideo
prius se discutiat and purget. Quia qui manducat and bibit indigne, id est sine
sui examinatione, iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. Sicut enim Judas cui
buccellam tradidit Dominus non malum accipiendo, sed male accipiendo, locum in
se Diabolo praebuit: sic indigne quisque sumens Dominicum Sacramentum, vt quia
ipse malus est, malum sit quod accepit, aut quia non ad salutem accipit, nihil
acceperit, corpus enim Domini, and sanguis Domini nihilominus est, sed ille
accipit hoc non ad vitam, sed ad indicium, quia non di^uidicat corpus Domini,
id est, non discernit quam sit dignius omnibus creaturis hoc corpus, quod
videtur esse panis. Si enim cogitaret hoc corpus esse Verbo Dei personaliter
vnitum, and vitam ac salutem eorum esse, qui hoc digne accipiunt, non
praesumeret indignus accipere, sed dignum se praepararet. Let him therefore The
bless. Sacr. is the body and blood of Christ though evil men receive yt.
Judas to whom our Lord gave a morsel, not taking an evil thing, but
taking yt in evil manner, gave to the Deuell a place in himself: so whosoever
receaueth the Sacrament of our Lord vnwoorthilie, causes not, because heys an
evil man, that thing which he has received is evil, or because he received
yt not to salvation, that he received nothing (For yt is nevertheless the
body of our Lord, and the blood of our Lord) but he takes this not to life,
but to condemnaciou, because he makes no difference of the body of our Lord,
that is, he discerns not how much more worthy this body, which seems to
be bread, is above all creatures. For if he had in mind that this body is
personallic united to the Son of God, and to be the life and salvation of
them that do receive yt woorthilie, the unworthy would not presume to
receive yt, but he would prepare himself to be worthy.

See ye not, that the blessed Sacr. is nevertheless the body and blood of of
Christ, and teaches the same to be verily received of evil and unworthy
receauers. Yt is not unknown to the Proclamer, but of the lower house Haymo,
Bid, Photius, Oecumenius. Thomas de aquino, Lyra, Dionyse, Hugo, and Erasmus,
and as many as have within the compass of these nine hundredth years, either
written upon S. Paul's Epistles, or alleged him in the matter of the Sacrament
out of the eleventh of the first epistle to the Corinthians. For they all
understand S. Paul both to have spoken of Christ's body in the Sacrament, and
that the same body is oftentimes received of evil men.

But among so many, I can not stay my self, but I must hear one of them,
and the raither for that he is a grecian, and so being no Papist, he may be
heard with more indifferent ear. Yt is Oecumenius, who upon the words of S.
Paul saing, that the unworthy receauer shall be guilty of the body and
blood of our Lord, says thus: Quod ait, reus erit corporis and sanguinis:
hoc Oecum. in 11. 1. Cor.
indicat, quod quemadmodum Judas eum tradidit. Iudaei vero in ipsum, debacchati
sunt: Ita ipsum ignominia afficiunt, qui sanctissimum ipsius corpus manibus
impuris suscipiunt (veluti Iudaei tunc eum tenuerunt) and execrando admouent
ori. Per hoc quod freque^ter ait, corporis and sanguinis Domini, manifestat,
quod non sit nudus homo, qui immolatur, sed ipse Dominus, and factor omnium, vt
videlicet per hoc eos terreat That he says: he shall be guilty of the body
and blood of our Lord: he shows this, that, as Judas betrayed him, and the
Jews raiged against him, even so do they dishonor The body of our Lord may
be received with un pure hands and execrable mouth.
him, that with unclean hands (as then the Jews did hold him) do receive
his most holy body, and put yt to their cursed or detestable mouth. By that,
that he often says: the body and blood of our Lord: he manifestly
declares, that yt is not a pure or only man that is offered, but even our
Lord himself, the maker of al things, that thereby he might make the^ afraied.

What is in the Sacrament, which is delivered into the hands and mouths of
men, by this author ye may perceive. For yt is (says he) the most holy
body of our Lord, which most holy body is received both with unclean
hands, for that the consciences of soch receauers be unclean, and with
detestable mouths, for that their mouths speaking wicked things, are
detestable S. Paul does often call the bless. Sacr. the body and blood of our
lord
the body and blood of our Lord, but will ye know why he does so? Not to
make us believe that yt is not the body of Christ (as this Proclamer would
bear us in hand) but that he would, as this author testifies, manifestly
teach us, that yt is a very body, and not the only figure of a body: a
body, which is not the body only of a man, but the body of our Lord God,
who is the maker of all things. If the Proclamer desire to have one that by
express words, does teach the very presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament. Let him behold a nombre now brought to expownde S. Paul, which al
not only of their own faith affirm soch presence, but also teach that saint
Paul affimed the same. And therefore if there be any treuth in the same
Proclamer let him now forsake his wicked heresy, and according to his
promise, let him subscribe to the verity. For that being now oftentimes
done, that he required but once to be done, as justly I may, so do I clame
the performance of his promise. Well reader whatsoever he, witho^den either
with shame or so many plain manifest, and express places: tarry and abide
upon them: vieue

THE THREE AND FIFTETH CHAP. Begins the exposition of the next text of S.
Paul, which is, Let every man examine himself, and so let him eat, etc.
INS. Paul yt follows. Probet seipsum homo, and sic de pane illo edat, and de
calice hibat. Let therefore a man examine himself: And so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup. The great peril and danger that shall come to
unworthy receauers of that blessed body and blood being by S. Paul
declared, he imediatelie ioineth thereunto, as a salve to a deadly sore, a
godly admonicion, that to avoid soche danger as may ensewe, or to remedy
the hurt, if yt be allreadie taken every man that will receive this blessed
Sacrament, should first consider Toexamin our selves what yt is and how yt
may be done.
much light, if we open what yt is for man to examine himself, and when he
has so done, how he shall know when he is worthy or unworthy. First, yt
is expedient, that the state of man, wherein he aught to be before God, be
known, for the state known, yt shall be easier for man, to make examinacion
of himself, wherher he be in the state nere to yt, or far from yt. The state
that man aught to be in before God in this fraill life consists in two parts
in vpprightnesse of faith and in purity or clenesse of life. As Hebr. 11.
touching faith the Apostle says: Sine fide impossible est placere Deo.
without fatth yt is impossible to please God. For (as he says again)
Accedentem ad Deum oportet credere. He that will come to God must believe.
Wherefore Christ being as touching the birth of his manheade in his own contrie
did not Ibidem. Faith how necessary yt is.
there many miracles, for that the unbelief of the people, which should have
comed to him by belief, did let him, and stay. For (says the Evangelist
Matthew) Nonfecit ibi virtutes multas, propter incredulitatem illorum Math. 13.
was, there Christ wroght his miracles bowntifullie. Wherefore when the Centurio
came unto Christ, as an humble and faithful suitor for the health Math. 8.
of his servant that lay sick of a palsy, and upon the merciful answer of
Christ, who said that he would come and cure him: The Centurio strong in faith
said: Lord I am not worthy than thowe should enter under my roof, but
Wherfaith is there God woorketh.
only say the word, and my servant shall be holle: Christ was so delighted
with his faith that he did not only praise yt saing: I fownde not so great
faith in Israel: But also for the health of the sick man he said to the
Centurio: Go thy ways, as thowe hauest believed, so be yt unto thee, and his
servant was healed in the self same hour.

The woman also that had the bloody flixe, was so strong in faith that she
said with in her self: if I may touch but the hemme of his vesture only
Math. 9.
I shall be wholl, whereupon immediately she both received the benefett of
health at Christ's hand and also the praise of her faith, Christ saing to her
be of good comfort daughter: thy faith has made the safe. Christ also
beholding Math. 15.
the faith of the woman of Canaan, did not only praise the same sainge: O
woman great is thie faith. But also for the health of her daughter said unto
her: Be yt unto thee as thowe hauest desiered, and her daughter was healed,
even at the same time. What shall I stand in this large camp of faith, and
Genesis, to Heb. 11. The force of faith.
the last of the Apocalips does continually make mention? wherefore I will with
S. Paul conclude in few words, saing with him: The holy faithful by faith
have subdewed kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained the promises,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, eschaped the edge
of the swoorde, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight,
turned to slight the armies of the alientes, the women received their dead
raised to life again.

Thus may we see how necessary faith is, without the which man cannot come
to God: Thus may we see how bowntifullie God woorketh where faith is: Thus
may we finally see the great might, and power of faith, which is soche, that
yt makes all things possible to the Math. 17.
beleuer. For to him that believes, nothing is impossible, says Christ.

Now as faith woorketh these wonders: so the lack of faith hyndereth all
these wonders. The Apostles attempted to deliver a man, that was possessed Want
of faith how yt hinders good effects. Marc. 9.
of a Deuell, and could not, whereupon the Father of him, brought him to Christ
saing: Master, I brought my Son to thie Disciples, and they could Why
could not we cast him out? Jesus said unto them, because of yowr unbelief.
Unbelief then was the hinderance of this great work that might have been done
by the Apostles. Faith made Peter walk upon the sea: unbelief made him sink,
whereupon he heard at Christ's mouth. Modicae sidei, quare dubitasti? O thou of
little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Vnbeleis so much displeases Christ
that after the resurrection he rebuked the two Disciples that went from
Jerusalem to Emaus, and with sharp words said unto them: O ye fools, and
slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken. S. Mark also
says that Christ appearing to the eleven as they satte at meat, cast their
unbelief in their teeth, and rebuked Matthew. 14 Mar. 16.
the hardness of their heart, because they believed not them, which had seen,
that he was risen from the dead.

To thus much, the Arrian, the Nouatian, the Pelagian, the Berengarian, the
Wycleffest, the Lutheran, the Oecolampadian, the Caluiniste, and the
Anabaptist, will agree, and every one of these will say, that faith must be
had, and each of Phariseies, and Sadduceis, that is having some piece, but
missing the wholl.

This faith therefore would be known, as also of whom yt should be learned.
The catholic faith described.
If ye will know this faith, in few words yt is the faith that we call
Apostolic, and catholic, Apostolic descending by continual succession
from the Apostles, as yt were from to hand hand, even unto us that now live.
Catholic as universally received, professed, and believed throughoute the
chrystian orb, not reigning in one corner, or in one realm, by the private
inuencion of one private brain, and maintained by the private affection of one
prince, but generally and universally of all Chrystian princes, of all
Chrystian Realms, of all Chrystian men, and that not for twenty or forty
years, as the new faith in Germany, and in England but in all times not now
received, and now disproued, as the Lutherans doctrine, but ever without
interruption continued. This faith may not Fides ex auditu, faith comes by
hearing says Paul, being called to be the singular vesell of God, was yet
sent by Christ's commandment Ananias, to learn of him what he should do.
Hic dicet tibi, quid te oporteat facere. He shall tell thee what thou must do.
Cornelius a godly man Act. 9.
and fearing God, although he might have been taught of the Angel that appeared
unto him, yet he was not, but by the same Angel was willed to send to Ioppe
for S. Peter to come to him. And he (says the Angel) shall tell thee what
thou ought to do. Mark learned of S. Peter, Luke of S. Paul, of the which
a longer discourse is made in the first book. So that this faith I say Cap. 7.
must by Gods ordeinaunce be learned of the elders, not devised by new
inuentours.

The faith, if yt may be so termed, which Luther taught, where learned he yt?
was there any elder at that day in all the world, that taught him that Where
learned Luther and his rabble their faith.
fantastical faith? did he not of his own private head newly skowre some of
the heresies of Wicliff and Husse, and some devised never heard of before? Who
in all the Christian orb, when Luther had griffed (as he said) a right, a
true and a perfect faith, taught Carolstadius, Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius a
contrary Luther, as to teach that Christ's body is not in the Sacrament? Let
Carolstadius bring forth one Chrystian realm that so taught him: or one
Church, or one allowed Father or elder then living, that so taught. But
forsomoch as he ca^ not, yt may be concluded, that as well his faith, as the
faith of Luther is not learned of the Fathers by succession, but partly
borrowed of some other heretic by private election, partly devised by a new
invention, and so a faith not continued, but both invented, and interrupted,
and therefore neither Apostolic, neither catholic. The state of man then in
the vpprightnesse of faith, must be in the faith Apostolic, and catholic,
and not in heretical faith, which is no more a faith in deed, then a painted
man is a man. A man is upright in faith when he discrediteth nothing that is
contained in the holy faith Apostolic and catholic.

The other part of the state of man's life before God is purity and cleanness
of life, which part who so can (Faith, as is saicd presupposed) atteign unto,
is blessed, Christ saing: Beatimundo cord, quoniam ipsi Deum videbunt. Blessed
be the clean in heart, for they shall see God.

This cleanness stands in two poinctes: in the eschewing the filthiness
Purity of life stands in two poincts. Psalm. 33.
of sin: and in adourning our selves with virtues, in declining from euel and
doing of good, as the psalm says, Declina a malo, and fac bonum. Decline or
forsake evil, and do good. For yt is not sufficient to a good life to fly
sin only, but also to do good. And therefore the holy Ghost has with a
copulacion coopled and linked them together allwaies.

Now thus much of the state of man's life known, yt is the easier to perceive
what S. Paul meeneth by the examinacion of themselves. To examine our selves
is to try and prove, to search to call our selves to account, first whether
we stand sownde in faith, according to the counsel of S. Paul in an other
place, Vos metipsos tentate si estis in fide, ipsi vos probate. Prove
yowrselues whether ye be in faith or not examine yowrselues. This trial is
made, when we examining our selves, whether we disagree or dissent from any
one article of the catholic faith, find our selves neither varieng from, nor
doubting of any of them.

In the second part, we must thus examine our selves, first whether any sin
2. Cop. 13.
and plain confession, true and faithful penance be wiped away. If any
purpose be in us to sin, that must be cut of and detested, and by

Thus much not only the catholic Church has willed to be done, as S.
Cyprian and S. Augustine are plentiful witnesses. But also the Lutherans
Conuenticles. For in their confession of the chief articles of their faith,
thus they say: Confessio in ecclesiis apud nos, non est abolita. Non enim
solet porrigi corpus Domini nisi antea exploratis, and absolutis. Confession is
not with us in our churches Confess. August. Art. de Confess.
abolished. For the body of our Lord is not wount to be given, but to soche
as before be diligently searched and examined and absolved.

When we be thus far goen we must examine our selves of our devotion, regard
and reverence to the thing that is to be received. For else we shall receive to
our own condemnacion, for that, as S. Paul says, we make no difference of
the body of our Lord, from other common meats. Thus much being said for our
examinacion and preparacion before we come to the receipt of this high
mystery, we have therein neither varied from the doctrine of Christ neither
from the doctrine of S. Paul, nor of the holy

Christ setting forth this high mystery of his body and blood, declared
Joan. 6. Christ in structed his Apostles in the faith of the bless. Sacrament
before he institutedit
that yt was necessary to have both faith and purity of life. First, as
touching faith, that his Apostles should be therein prepared and made ready,
he did not only instruct them fully long before he ministered the thing to
them that they should know what yt was that they should receive, but also
induced them to the same faith by a miracle wrought also in bread, that as they
knew by the power of his godhead the five loaves to be multiplied to the
satisfieng of five thousand people, and to the leaving yet of twelve baskettes
full of fragmentes of the same loaves, so they should (this being doe^ in
their seight) with the more ease be brought to believe, that he by the same
power could make of bread his body. Whereupon though many of the Disciples
not believing Christ did forsake him and came no more at him (as many have done
in these days) yet the Apostles by the miracle being prepared, and
saied-Domine ad quem ibimus? Verba vitae aeternae babes. Lord unto whom shall
we go? Thowe hauest the words of everlasting life.

Thus being by Christ's instruction made perfect in the faith of this my
sterie, they came (as Chrysostom says) quietly to the receipt of yt, being
nothing troobled with the words of Christ when he said: Take eat this is my
body. Take, and drink this is my blood, for that (says he) they had before
heard many and great things of this mystery. By this then yt is manifest
that to the receipt of this Sacrament, faith is necessarelie required..

Likewise are we by him admonished of the purity of life. For when he Christ
gave instruction of the purity of life required in the receauers of the bless.
Sacr.
would give forth this blessed Sacrament, he rose from the supper of the
Paschall lamb, and laid aside his upper garments, and being girded with a
towel washed his Disciples feet signifieng thereby, that all that come to
receive this Sacrament must before be cleansed and purified from all sinful

And here to say by the way, if this Sacrament contein no more, the^ did the
Paschall lamb, but that both this and that be only figures of Christ:

The other part of purity of life, which consists in the adourning of our
selves with virtuous and godly acts, was not left untaught of Christ, but
when he said: This do ye in the remembrance of me: he both willed that
godly act to be done, and also that we should be mindful of his death and
passion, and of his great love towordes us in suffering of the same, and thereby
to be moved, not only to render unto him most humble and lowly thanks, but
for his sake for the proporcion of owre possibility, to practice the like
charity, and show the like love to our brethren. Now he that has such
charity what lacks he to the sufficient furniture of his soul with all
godly virtues necessary?

But a merueilouse matter, as godly, a thing as yt is, for a man to examine
himself, as plain as yt is, both by Christ's doings, and S. Paul's words,
that yt should so be: yet Satan could get a minister to teach that no
other preparacion neadeth for the receipt of the Sacrament, but only faith. Is
there much hope of truth to be reposed in him, that so teaches? Liberty a
bait of the Deuell, setfurth by his ministers luther and his likes.
is not the religion to be suspected, or raither detested, that is settfurth by
soche a patron? yet this is the doctrine of Luther, who is the fownder of this
new religion, the inuentour of this faith, the setter up of the word, the
restorer, as they say, of truth, and the bringer of light. But Satan and his
minister also knew well how to win the people. They knew that liberty was
a goodly bait to catch them withal. Wherefore to deliver the people from the
trooble of contricion, and heaviness for sins, to make them free from the
heavy yocke (as yt is taken) of confession, to ease them of the labor of
prayer, to disburden them of the care of godly life, Satan by his minister
Luther teaches, that to the receipt of the Sacrament there

But that I may not be thought to misreport him, at my pleasure, I will Luth.
in Assert Acti. 15.
rehearse his own words, which be these: Magnus error est eorum, qui ad
sacramentum Eucharistiae accedunt, hinc innixi quod sint confessi, quod non
sint sibi conscii ali cuius peccati mortalis, quod praemiserint orationes suas,
and praeparatoria: Omnes illi iudicium sibi manducant, and bibunt. Sed si
credant, and confidant se gratiam ibi consecuturos, haec sola fides facit eos
puros and dignos. Great is the error of them that come to the Sacrament
trusting to this, that they be confessed, that they know not them selves
guilty of any mortal sin, that they have said their prayers before, that
they have prepared them selves: All they do eat and drink, their own
condemnacion. But if they believe and trust that they shall there obtein grace,
this faith alone makes them pure and worthy receauers.

Have ye not heard the same serpent now speaking to chrystian people, that in
paradse spoke to owre first parents? Have ye not heard him likewise
encounteringe with his negative, the affirmative of Christ and S. Paul, as he
did the affirmitiue of God, who said: In what day ye eat of this fruict, ye
shall die:: he contrariwise saing: Ye shall not die? Have ye not heard that
Christ used that solemn preparacion of wasshing the feet of his Disciples,
before he would minister unto them the Sacrament of his blessed body and I am
vos mundi estis: Now ye Joan. 13.
are clean? Did he not also then prepare them to humility and lowliness,
which is much required in all that receive the Sacrament? If I (says
Christ) have washed yowr feet being Lord and Master, then ought you also
to wassh one an others feet, I have given you an example, that as I have
done, even so that ye do. Is not lowliness a necessary virtue to a receauer
of this Sacrament? yt is not meet that a man know his own filthiness before
he receive and there fore go to Christ to be washed with the water of his
grace? Is yt not commendable that we say with the Centurion: Lord I am not
worthy that thowe enter Mith. 8.
under my roof? Ar we not so moved to do by the old Father Origin? Over and
above all this also we are willed by. S. Paul to examine our selves, and if we
do not, we shall eat and drink our own condemnacion: And yet this beast,
this Serpent shameth not to say clean contrary, that if ye confess yowr
sins, if ye find yowr self clear from all mortal sin if before

But perchance some Lutheran in desence of his Patriarche will say that S.
Paul willing a man to examine himself spoke only as Luther does of What
moved S. Paul to write of the Sacrament to the Corinth
the examinacion of faith. To try this let us have recourse to the letter of
S. Paul's epistle and there see what moved him to write this. That moved him to
write this, that moved him to write the wholl process of the Sacrament in the
same eleventh chapter. He wrote to the Corinthians in the matter of the
Sacrament, for that they coming to the receipt thereof admitted diverse faults
and abuses in manners, but not in faith. For first of all (says S. Paul) when
ye come together into the congregation, I hear that there is dissension among
you. There is also an other fault that every man begins a fore to eat his
own supper. And besides this in the eating of yowr Supper, there Let every man
examine him self, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that cup.

Ye see then that S. Paul moved by the evil manners of the Corinthians, and
not by their evil faith was moved to enter the treactise of the Sacrament, S
Paul corrected the manners of the Corinth and not their faith.
wherefore therein he corrects their manners, and not their faith. S. Paul then
travailing to remove dissension, and to plant concord, to remove glottonie and
to plant temperance: to remove pride which the rich had in the show of their
great suppers, and to plant humility: to remove lack of mercy which was in
the rich, they being drunk, while their poor prepare the Corinthians and in
them all chrystians to the worthy receipt

But what stand I so long in so open a matter? Finally where Luther says that
if we have faith, that we shall receive grace there, that grace alone makes us
pure and worthy receauers: First, I may ask him by what rule he speaks
this? where is his scripture for yt? Might the Corinthians (trow ye) being in
the case that they were in, and having, as they had faith, might they I say,
receive grace? If they might then, S. Paul was not true, that said they
should receive condemnacion.

But to look somewhat nearer to this saing of Luther, yt would have been
desined, and determined, seeing there be so many faiths now a days, by which
faith a man should receive this grace. If he say by the faith that he him
self has framed, the Carolstadins, Zwinglians, and Oecolampadius will deny
that If Oecola^padius will say, by his faith that he has devised: the Swenck
feldians, who deny all Sacraments, deny that. If Calvin will challenge yt to
his faith that he has inueuted, the Anabaptists will not abide that.

In the end, forasmoche as the Apostle speaks of the unworthy receauer
signifieng thereby, that there is a worthy receauer yt apperteineh to owre
Worthy or unworthy reteauers of the bless. Sacr. who be.
purpose to discuss, if any man may be a worthy receauer yt is plain that
a sinner is no worthy receauer. And S. John says: If we say that we have
no sin we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us: yea so many be
our sins, that the Prophet David says: If thowe Lord will be extreme to
mark what is done a miss, oh Lord who may abide yt? as who might say, no
man can abide yt. And therefore concluding all living men under sin, says: In
thie seight, o Lord, shall no man living be justified. if no man living can
1. Joan. 1.
be justified, then no man living us worthy to receive this blessed mystery.
Psalm. 130.
What now then shall we faie to S. Paul, that appoints worthy receauers?
Yt is the mind of S. Paul to pronownce who is an unworthy receauer: but he
describes not the worthy receauer. For in deed speaking of Cherubines and
Seraphines can be accounted worthy in that manner, to receive this high and
heavenly mystery. Worthiness proprelie what yt is.
For proprelie that man is worthy of an other thing, when he him self or his
deserts be equivalent, and do fully answer the goodness of the thing,
whereto yt is referred, as in our common speech we say that four pence be
worth a grote. And the woorkman is worthy his wages: in this kind of
worthiness no man is or can be worthy.

An other kind of woourthinesse is by reputacion, or acceptacion, when one is
accepted as worthy, when in very deed he is not. As a quee^ to maririe a low
subject. A noble woman to marry her servant betwe^ who^, when comparison is
made, there is neither birth, nor honor, nor living, nor dominio^nor richesse
in the man that can cownteruaill the woman, yet for somoch as yt likes her so
to accept him, by her acceptacio^ he is made now worthy of her, who of
himself before was not. Eue^ so our merciful Lord God, in power, wisdom and
goodness infinite, betwixt who^ and us sinful creaturs there unworthy
worthy, when he seith us in our weak manner endeavor ourselves to accomplish
his holy will: when he beholds how we prepare

THE FOUR AND FOVRTETH CHAP. Begins the exposition of the Fathers upon the
same text with saint Hierom and Chrysostom.
IN the allegacion of the Fathers that now shall be produced, Si^jn lintheum
vel vas sordidum non illud mittere audet, quanto magis in cord polluto? quam
immundiciam Deus super Hieron. in. 11. 1. Cor.
omnia execratur, and quae sola iniuria est eius corpori. Nam and Iosephille
iustus propterea sindone munda inuolutum in sepulchro nouo corpus Domini
sepeliuit, praefigurans corpus Domini accepturos tam mundam mentem babere, quam
nouam. If a man dare not put that body into a filthy vessel or cloth,
how much more in a defiled S. Hiero^ expowndeth S. Paul to speak of the
body of our Lord.
heart? which uncleanness God above all things detesteth, as which is the
only wrong that now can be done unto his body. For therefore did Iosph also
the righteouse, wrappe the body of our Lord in a clean sheet, and so buried
yt in a new Tumbe, prefiguring that they that should receive

In whom first we have to observe, that expowndinge S. Paul, who in this
place calls the Sacrament bread, and not absolutely bread, but with an
article (that bread) expowndeth yt to be the body of our Lord, which also he
does in an other place, by so express words that yt can not be denied. In
his apology against Iouinian he thus utters S. Paul saing: Probet se
vnusquisque, and sic ad corpus Christi accedat. Let every man examine him
self, and so let him come to the body of Christ (says S. Hierom) yt were
not an exposition but a confusion of the truth, if he should call that the
body of Christ, that is but bread. But yt is more then evident in all Hieron.
Apolo pr. lib. aduers Jouinianu^.
that place of S, Hierom, as the circunstance also inuinciblie proves, that
he understands S. Paul there to have spoken of the body of Christ, and of no
earthly bread.

In the end of this exposition, he does not only confirm this truth of
Luther. He says that Joseph burieng the body Christ in a clean sheet, and a
new Tumbe, prefigured that they that should receive the Let the proclamer see
here how plainly S. Hierom utters S. Paul's meninge.
Christ. Against Luther, who would have no other preparacion in us in the
receipt of the body of Christ but only faith, he faieth that they that will
receive the body of Christ, must have both a clean and a new mind. wherbie
what else is meant, but that we must cleanse owre consciences from dead works,
which putrify and stink in our sowles, and so leauinge the old man, we must
be renewed in spiritte of our mind, and be clothed with the new man, which
after God is shapen in righteousness and true holiness.

But let S. Hierome open him self, who expownding this text of S. Paul
Whosoever eats this bread, and drinks the cup of our lord vnwoorthilie,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of our lord: says thus: Sicut
scriptum est, Omnis mundus manducabit. Et iterum: Anima quae manducauerit
immunda, exterminabitur de populo suo Hier. in 11 1. Cor.
Et ipse Dominus ait: Si ante altar recordatus fueris, quia habet frater tuus
aliquid aduersum te relinque munus tuum ante altar, and vade reconciliari
fratri tuo. Prius ergo perscrutanda est conscientia, si in nullo nos
reprehendit, and sic aut offerre, aut commnnicare debemus. Quidam sane dicunt,
quia non indignum, sed indigne accipientem reuocet a sancto. Siergo dignus
indigne accedens retrahitur: Quanto magis indignus, qui non potest accipere
digne? Vnde oportet ociosum cessare a vitiis vt sanctum Domini corpus, sancte
accipiat. As yt is written Every clean man shall eat, and again: That soul
that shall eat being unclean, shall be putt from among his people. And our
Lord him self says: If thowe remember being before the altar, that thie
brother has any thing against thee, leave thy gift before the altar, and go
to be reconciled to thy brother. Therefore the conscience is first to be
searched, if yt do in nothing reprehende us, and so we aught How men aught to
prepare them selves to receive the bless. Sacr.
either to offer or communicate. There besome that say, that he does not
hereforbidde the unworthy man from the holy thing, but him that receaueth
vnwoorthilie. If the worthy cominge vnwoorthilie be for bidden, how much
more the vnwoorthilie that can not receive woorthilie? Wherefore the evil doer
must cease from vices, that he may holilie receive the holy body of our
Lord. hitherto S. Hierom. Who in every part improoueth Luther, First, by the
old Testament, whose extern cleanesse or uncleanness being commanded or
forbidden in the eating of the holy things of the same law, be figures of
spiritual cleanness or vncleannsse of our consciences, required or prohibited
in the receipt of the holy mysteries in the new law, So that, as there was
required an outward cleanness in the body. So here is required an inward
cleanness of conscience.

Besides this he beats him down with the plain and mighty authority Me
aught to prepare themselves be for the receipt of the bless. Sacr. even by
Christ rule
of Christ him self, who has given us this order, that being at the altar,
and remembering that our brother has any matter against us, we must first be
reconciled to our brother, or that we can do any thing at the altar, or
offer sacrifice or receive the holy Sacrament. Is not this a notable
preparacion commanded by our M. Christ? what can Luther and all his Disciples
say to this? Is there here nothing required but faith? is not here full and
perfect reconciliacion commanded? Is not here a discussion and examinacion of
our consciences in calling to mind and remembrance if Therefore first is the
conscience to be searched, if yt do not reprehende us, then may we either
offer or receive. If the conscience be to be searched for soche matters of
offense before we receive, where is Luthers only faith that will make us
worthy receauers? Luther says we may not search,

But S. Hierome has said sufficiently both for the truth of the presence
and also against Luthers licenciouse doctrine. Wherefore we will now hear
Chrysostom do the like. He also expowndeth this text of S. Paul and says
thus: Probet seipsum homo, quod and in secunda inquit: Vosinet tentate si estis
in fide: ipsi vos probate non quemadmodum nunc facimus, temporis gratia
accedentes, magis quam animi studio, neque vt praeparati ad vitia nostra
expurganda, compuctionis pleni accedimus: Chrysostom in 11. 1. Cor.
sed vt in solemnitatibus simus quando omnes adsunt, consideramus. Sed non ita
Paulus praecipit. Sed vnum tempus nouit quo accideremus, communicationis and
conscientiae puritatem. Let a man examine himself. Which thing also he says
in the second epistle: Prove yower selves if ye be in says. do ye yowr
selves examine yowr selves. Not as we do now, coming raither for the times
sake, then for any earnest affection or desire of the mind. Neither do we
come as full of compunction prepared to pourge out our vices, but our
consideracion is, upon that that all the people be assembled to gether, that we
also may be in the solemnities. But Paul does not so command, but he knew
one time in the which we should come, that is, the purity or cleanness of
communicacion and conscience.

That we should not come to the receipt of the holy Sacrament, but when we be
prepared, and have pourged out our vices by compunction and repentance he
declares by an apt similitude, sainge: Nam si sensibili nunquam communicamus
mensa, si febre laboramus, and malis humoribus abundamus, neperderemur: long
magis hanc tangere nephas est, absurdis cupiditatibus impediti, quae febribus
grauiores sunt. Cum autem absurdas dico cupiditates, etiam corporum dico, and
pecuniarum, and irae, and succensionis, and omnes simpliciter absurdas. Quae
omnia accedentem exhaurire oportet, and it a purum illud attingere sacrificium
non pigre disponi, and misere cogi propter solemmtate^ acccedere, neque rursum
compunctum, and praeparatum impediri, eo quod non sit solemnitas. Solemnitas
enim operum est demonstratio, animae puritas, vitae certitudo, quae si
habueris, semper celebrare poteris solemnitatem, and semper accedere. Propterea
(inquit) probet autem scipsum homo, and sic edat. For if we be sick of a
fever, and do abunde with humors, we would never be partakers of the
co^mondiett This wholl sentence impugneth luthers wicked assertion
lest we should be cast away much more yt is wicked to touch, this table,
being entangled with odiouse lusts, which be sorer then the fevers When I
speak of naughty and odiouse lusts or desires, I speak also of the lusts
and desires of owre bodies, and of moneie, and of wraithe, and of anger, and
plainly of all lusts that be naught. All which he that comes to receive,
must rid away, and so receive that pure sacrifice not to be flouthfullie
disposed, nor miserably to be compelled to come for the solemnity. Neither
again being penitent and prepared, to be let, because there is no
solemnity. Solemnity is an evident declaracion of good works, the

In these words the saing of Luther is also (as by S. Hierom) detected to
Luther has given, which to avoid prolixitie, I leave to the consideracion of
the reader wishing him yet to understand, what yt is that Chrysostom moves us
to receive. Yt is (says he) purum illud sacrificium, that pure sacrifice.
What is, or can be, that pure sacrifice but the body of Christ? Wherefore by
Chrysostom yt is the body of Christ, that we receive. Chrysostom Ho. oportet
haeresies, etc.


But thou shall hear himself speak yt in plain words, in an homely where
Deinde vbi multum disputauit de his, qui indigne communicant mysteriis, eosque
repraehendisset grauiter and demonstrasset quod idem supplicium passuri essent,
quod ij qui Christum occiderant, si sanguine^ eius and corpus absque probacione
and temere accipiant, rursum ad propositam materia^ sermone^ conuertit. Then
when Danger of the unworthy receiving of the bless. Sacr.
he has disputed much of those which vnwoorthilie receive the mysteries and
had greuouslie rebuked the^, and had declared that they should suffer the same
punishment, that they did, which had slain Christ, if they receive the body
and blood of Christ rashly without any examinacio^, he turns again his
communicacion to the matter in hand.

Note this then well, that by express and plain words, Chrysostom says,
that we shall suffer the same pain, that they which crucified Christ, if we
rashly without examinacion of our selves receive the body and blood of
Christ. Whereby he teaches that we receive the body of Christ in the
Sacrament, and that which is more, and is the great proof of the real and
substa^cial presence of Christ's body and blood in the blessed Sacr. that
evil men receive yt, which argues that presence there to be by the assured
power of Sacramentaries doctrine is without all grownd or authority of
scripturs
vnadsured, and slight faith of the receauer, according to the fantastical
doctrine of the Sacramentaries, grownded and fownded upon no one title of Gods
word, but only upon their own pleasures and phansies. Let this Proclamer if
he ca^, if he ca^ not, let him pray aid of his likes, and bring forth one
scripture, that teaches this doctrine that faith only makes Christ present
unto us in the Sacr. and that he is not verily and reallie present in the
Sacr. as is said, and he shall have the victory. If he ca^ not let him for
shame, let him yield, let the truth have the victory. Better yt is for him a
little here to be confownded, then to suffer everlasting confusion, in the
world to come.

But to return to our matter, I would here end, but that I think yt much
pity to keep from the knowledge of the godly reader, so godly a lesson as
Chrysostom has in this matter, containing both faithful instruction, and
godly exhortacion. Thus he writes: Considera nunc quanta illi veteris
sacrificii participes vitae frugalitate vtehantur. Quid enim ii non faciebant,
omni tempore purisicabantur. Hom. 3. in Epist. ad Ephesians.
Et tu ad salutare^ hanc hostiam accessurus, quam angeli ipsi cum tremore
suscipiut, re^ tantam circu^scribis te^poru^ ambitu? Qua fro^te teipsum sistes
ad Christi tribunal praesente^, qui impuris manibus ac labiis, sic impudenter
ipsius corpus ausus sis attingere. Regem vtique non eligas exosculari, siquidem
os tuum olet grauiter: and regem coelorum impudens exoscularis, anima tua tam
vitits olente? atrox sane contumelia est res huiusmodi, dic tu mihi: Number eligas
illotis manibus ad tam venerabilem victimam accedere? Non puto, quin, vt
coniicio, malis prorsus tibi temperare ab aditu, quam sordidis accedere
manibus. At interim in paruo tam religiosus cum sis, animam autem habens coeno
vitiorum squalentem accedis, and audes impudens contingere? Etiamsi ob manuum
sordes ad tempus quis contineat, sed ad animam omni elunic vitiorum
repurgandam, totus interim redeat. Consider now what great godliness of life
the receauers of the old sacrifice did use, what did they not? Sacrifice of
the altar honorable to Angels.
They were always purified, and do thou coming to this healthsome
sacrifice, which the angels themselves do with trembling honor, do thowe
measure so great a thing with the compass of time? with what countenance wilt
thou stand before the judgment seat of Christ, who hauest ben so bold, with
impure and unclean hands and lips so impudentlie to touch his body? Thowe
would not, if thowe had a stinking mouth, take upon thee to kiss the
king: And do thowe, thou impudent man, kiss the king of heavens, thy soul
so sore stinking with vices and sins? This manner of

Thou hauest heard, reader, a notable godly saing of Chrysostom. Thou may
therein, as I have said, find faithful instruction, and godly exhortacio^. 1
Three poincts of instruction in Chrysostom. words.
As concerning instruction, thou art instructed here in three poinctes? First,
that Christ's very body is in the Sacrament. Which thou art taught by
express words, when he says to the finful man: dare thou with vnclea^
hands and lips impudently touch his body? wherein he teaches that the body
of Christ is so present in the Sacrament, that yt is touched both with hands
and lips when yt is received, which manner of receiving argues the Palpate,
and videte quia spiritus carnem and ossa non habet, sicut me vid^tis habere.
Feel and see, that a Spirit has not flesh and bones as yt see me to have.
Again where he says to the like man: Thowe would not take upon thee, with a
stinking mouth to kiss the king. And dare thowe kiss the king of
heavens, thy soul so stinking with vices? Mark yt well, So certenlie is the
body of Christ presently touched, that he calls the same the King of
heavens. What wise, godly, or learned man making sermons to the people, would
ever call the Sacramen (if therein were nothing but a piece of bread) the body
of Christ, and the king of heavens, and so leave yt to them to believe, if yt
were not as he calls yt? Yt were not to teach but to deceive: not to edify,
2 The body of Christ may be touched and received of him that has a silthie
soul.
but to destroy. Wherefore understand that by the doctrine and instruction of
Chrysostom, the very body of Christ, the very king of heavens, is in the
Sacrament received into our hands and lips.

The second poinct of instruction confirms the first, which poinct is that
men defiled in soul may yet receive with their hands and mouths dare
thowe not kiss the King if thou hauest a stinking mouth. And dare thowe
kiss the king of heavens thy soul stinking with filthy and stinking vices?
By which words 3 Sacrifice avouched.


The third poinct of his instruction, that also confirms the presence is:
that he says that the Sacrament is a sacrifice, which he does in the
beginning of his saing, where alluding to the preparacion of the receauers of
the sacrifices of the old law, he says, they cleansed purified, and ordered
the^selus. And wilt thou (says he) come to this wholesome sacrifice, which
Angels with tre^bling do honor, by the measure of time? Meaning that the
people should not come to receive upon this only purpose, that yt is a
solemn feast, but upon this that they be pure and clean in conscience, from
all filthiness of sin. Where ye see that Chrysostom does not only call yt
a sacrifice, but also says yt to be soch a sacrifice as Angels with trembling
do honor, which Sacrifice is not our sacrifice of thankesgeuing (as the
Sacramentaries do feign) for that is no soch thing, as whereunto the Angels
should do honor, or in the presence of which they should tremble: No, this
sacrifice is soch, as unto the which Chrysostom. exhorts to preparacion
contrary to Luthers doctrine.


But this holy Chrysostom, as a right Chrystia^ man ought to do speakinge
and writing to Chrystia^ me^, presupposes faith. Wherefore speaking no word of
yt, wholly labors to have Chrystian receauers to be diligent in preparacion
of themselves, to be chaste in body, pure in soul, clean in conscience
uncorrupted in heart, in purpose diuerted from vice, wholly converted to
virtue. The subtle craft of the Deuell about Luther and so in other like.
This is the doctrine of exhortacio^ given by holy fathers of Christ's church.
Wherefore embrace yt, reader, for yt is fowded upon a sure stone. As for the
doctrine of Luther a father of Satha^s Synagog, yt is a doctrine meit to be
breathed out of Satan. For wilt thou see the subtilitie of Satan? When he
had corrupted the faith of Luther in no small nombre of articles, by which
corruption of good works, done with godly zeal and devotion, God might be
procured

THE FIVE AND FIFTETH CHAP. PROCEAdeth upon the same text by I sicbius and
saint Augustine.
Having in consideracion the detestablenesse of Luthers sainge, and to what
licenciousnes, yt makes a ready open way, how lightly Isichius and S.
Augustine by whose testimony, I doubt yt not, the matter shall be made very
clear. I sichius writes thus: Probet autem seipsum homo, and sic de pancillo
edat, and de calice Jsich in 26 Leuitic.
bibat. Qualem probationem dicit? id est, vt in cord mundo atque conscientia,
and poenitentiam little, quae deliquit intendenti, participetur sanctis ad
ablutionem peccatorum suorum. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of
that bread, and drink of that cup. What manner of examinacion does he speak
of? yt is this, that in a clean heart and conscience, and to him that minds
to do penance for those sins, that he has offended in, thee Sacrament
should be given to holy persons, to the washing away of their sins.

In this brief saing of Isichius, note I pray you, that asking upon the
words of S. Paul, what examinacion he would we should make, He answers
that we should be of clean heart, and conscience, and of mind to do penance
for our sins, before we receive, but of Luthers faith he speaks no one
word so that teaching soch examinacion to be made, he confowndeth Penance,
clean heart and conscience necessary to the receauers of the bless. Sacr.
clean Luthers doctrine. Luther says we must make no preparacio^ by
confession, which is a part of penance, this author says that we must do
penance for those offenses that we have committed. Luther says that we may
not search whether we find ourselves guilty or no: this author says that we
must be clean in heart and conscience, which can not be known but by soch
search. What shall I say more, but that Luthers wicked doctrine is in every
part contrary to the wholesome doctrine of the Fathers, even as a man would of
a set purpose take a vieue of their sainges, and maliciously say the
contrary of all that he finds them to have said: Which thing ye shall more
manifestly perceive, when ye shall hear the saing of S. Augustine also
produced for the understanding of S Paul. From whom because I will not long
detein you, his saing shall be furthwith ascribed.

Thus he writes: Ab iis, pietas Domini nostri Jesus Christi nos liberet, and
seipsum edendum tribuat, qui dixit: Ego sum panis viuus, qui de coelo descendi.
Qui manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem habet vitam aeternam in
seipso. Sed vnusquisque antequam August. ad Julian. Epist. 111.
corpus and sanguinem Domini nostri Jesus Christi accipiat, seipsum probet, and
secundum Apostoli praeceptum, sic de pane illo edat, and de calice bibat. Quia,
qui indigne mandu cat corpus and sanguinem Domini, iudicium sibi manducat, and
bibit, non diiudicans corpus Domini. Quando enim accipere debemus, antea ad
confessionem, and poenitentiam recurrere debemus, and omnes actus nostros
curiosius discutere, and peccata obnoxia si in nobis senseriserimus, cito
festinemus per confessionem, and veram poenitentiam abluere, ne cum Judah
proditore Diabolium intra nos celautes pereamus, protrahentes and celantes
peccatum nostrum de die in diem. Etsi quid mali aut nequam cogitauimus, de eo
poenitentiam agamus, and velociter illud de cord nostro eradere festinemus.
The great mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, deliver us from these things, and
give himself to be eaten, who said: The receauer of the bless. Sacrmust
prepare himself, by confession.
I am the bread of life, which came dowen from heaven. He that eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, has everlasting life in himself. But let every man
before he receive the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, examine
himself, and so Apostle, let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.
For he that vnwoorthilie eats the body and blood of our Lord, eats and
drinks his own conde^nacio^ making no difference of the body of our lord.
Therefore when we shall receive, we aught before to have recourse to confession
and penance, and most diligently search all our acts and doings. And if we
find any sins in us worthy of punishment, let us speedily have by
confession and true penance to wash them away, leest we with Judas hidinge
the deuell within us, do perish by that we do protracte and hide our sin
from day to do, and if we have thought any evil or unhappiness, let us do
penance for yt, and make have quickly to wipe yt clean from our hearts. Thus
much S. Augustine.

Ye have now heard how we should examine our selves S. Hieron. Chrysostom,
and Isichius, gave us like instruction in general words, but S. Augustine
has touched the matter with special words. For he expownding how we shall
examine or selves according to S. Paul's precept, says: that if we mind to
receive the holy Sacrament we ought before to have recourse Luther is herin
direotlieco^trarie to the fathers to S. Paul and to Christ.
beseech thee (gentle reader) how he agrees with the^. Is he not in every
title plainly repugnaunt to them? He would have no preparacion before we,
receive. All they, as with one mouth, exhort us to great and diligent
preparacio^. He would haueno confession: S. Augustine by express words
requires confession and penance. Luther says, if we prepare our selves by
confession, penance, and other good works, we receive our condemnacion: S.
Paul and the holy fathers say, if we do not examine our selves and prepare
our selves we reccaue or own condemnacion.

Hauest thou not heard the serpent againg or raither the deuel in the Serpent
contrarieng Gods own words, and his holy saints? Wherein they say, yea, he
therein says naie: and wherein they, say naie, therein he says yea. I would
to God that all they that have given their ears to the hissing of this Serpent
and have been thereby allured to fall from the ancient faith and godly religion
on, what a fownder, and patron they have of their new religion. If there were
no more but this, yt would make me afraied to follow soch a Schoolmaster.

As Luther is here touched by S. Augustine, so is the Proclamer also. For as
Luther will no confession to be made before receipt of the Sacrament, no more
will he and his accomplices, as the practice in the Church of England does well
declare? where, by their means confession of sins is so abandoned, that
almost there is no word of yt. Not only in this is the Proclamer touched,
but in one other poinct also wherein Luther is not touched, and that is in the
presence of Christ in the blessed Sacrament, wherein the Proclamer is worse
then Luther. S. Augustine expownding S. Paul's words speak the by clain
words: Let every man before he receive the body and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, examine himself, according to the precept of S. Paul. Perceive
then that by S. Augustine yt is the precept of S. Paul to examine our selves
Note here how S. Augustine utters S. Paul's words
before we receive the body and blood of Christ, and not before we receive a
piece of bread, and drink a cup of wine. So that here again as in diverse
other before, we see that S. Angustine expownding S. Paul calls yt the body
and blood of Christ, that S. Paul calls the bread and cup of our Lord,
teaching that by that same bread and cup, S. Paul meant none

But to return to our purpose: yt is well to be perceived that S. Augustine
teaches here two things, which the Proclamer refuses, that is, the presence,
and confession, of which both robbinge the people, he has with all robbed them
of godly devotion and fear, and opened the gate to them, to let them run
headling to all licenciousnesse, and abominable living. Among many euells
which they commit in putting away confession, two Two great euells committed
by putting away of confession.
in my judgment be notable. The one is that they would make the ordeinaunce of
God void, and his authority vain: The other that the simple pass and end
their lives without repentance.

As touching the first certain yt is that God has in his Church made this
ordeinaunce, and thereto has given his power that sins should be remitted.
This ordeinaunce he did with a Solemnity. For he first breathed upon Accipite
Spiritum sanctum, Quorum remiseritis peccata, remittu^tur eis, and quorum
retinueritis rete^ta sunt. Receive you the holy Ghost, whose sins ye
remitte, they are remitted, and whose sins you retein, they are retained.
Behold in the doing of this ordeinaunce Joan. 20.
the holy Ghost is first given to the Apostles, and after the gift of the holy
Ghost the authority to remitte sin is solemnly given. Now if confession be
taken away, and sins by the mynisters be not forgeuen in the people, then is
the ordeinaunce void, then is the authority vain. For where, when, or how do
they exercise this power of Christ in the remission of sins, if they do yt
not upon penite^tes? how shall they know penitentes but by confession?
Confession then taken away, yt must needs follow that the ordeinasice of God is
void, and that his authority is vainlie given to his Church.

S. Augustine says that for our fragilitie, God ordained penance. These be
his words: Ordinauit nobis poenitentiam propter fragilitatem nostram. Ideo
debemus nostras co^fessiones veraciter confiteri, et fructus dignos facere, id
est, praeterita ne iteremus, secundum August. ad Julian. commit epla. 111.
iussionem Denm timentis sacerdotis. Qui sacerdos vt sapiens, and medicus,
primum sciat curare peccata sua, et postea aliena vulnera detergere, et sanare,
and non publicare. Nos sequamur perquiramus, and cum talibus consilium salutis
nostrae ineamus, vt non perdamus haereditatem coelestem, quam nobis Dominus ab
initio mundi praeparauit, si seruiamus ei in iusticia, and sanctitate, and
puritate cordis, and charitate non ficta. God in consideracion Confession aught
to be madetrulie
of our fragilitie has ordained for us penance. Therefore we aught to confess
our confessions truly and do the worthy fruictes of penance, that is,
according to the commandment of the priest fearing God, that we commit not
again our sins past. Which priest let him first know, as a wise man and
good physician to cure his own sins, and after to wipe clean, and to heal
other men's woondes, and them not to publishe. Let us follow, let us search,
and with soche let us enter some wholesome talk of our health, that we leese,
not our heavenly inheritance, which God has prepared for us from the
beginning of the world, if we serve him in holiness, and rightwisonesse, and
purity of heart and charity not feigned, hitherto S. Augustine.

Se ye not that pennaunce is gods ordeinaunce mercifully appoincted for our
fragilitie? Se ye not what S. Augustine infers to be done on our behalf upon
that ordeinaunce? Therefore (says he) must we truly confess our confessions.
And that the hissing serpent should not deceive thee, sainge: Three things
perteining to a gostlie father.
woondes of our Sins (understand by godly counsel and whosome doctrine, and
iniunction of penance) to heal them (understand by the authority of
absolucion) Thirdly, not to publishe them, but to keep most secret all
things in confession disclosed. I may conclude then that to take away
confession is to make gods ordeinaunce void, and his authority given for the
remission of sins, to be given in vain.

The other notable evil is that the simple people pass their lives, yea, and
many end the same without penance. Confession beside many other
commodities, had these two: Yt was occasion that fewer sins among Two great
commodities of confession.
young people were committed: And yt was an occasion also to call themselves
to an account for soche as they had committed. And upon the remembrance

But now confession being abandoned, youth without fear or shame fall to
all kind of vices, whereby vice now excessiuelie abundeth. Contrition for
soche vices before God there is none. The gauitie of sins, other wise then
worldly shame leads is not discerned. The acco^pte that soche people call
themselves to before God either yt is merueilouse slender, or Penance banished
out England.
none at all. Penance is not seen, Sackcloath and herecloath, be not in use
Fasting is derided and skorned. Prayer is shortened, and almost banished.
Charity is all most dead for cold. The tears of Peter and Mary Magdalene are
dried up, they wash not ourfaces. Alas what speak we of these bitter
works of penance, when we hear not in these days from a penitent he O God
be merciful to me a sinner? Or this one voice of King David, Peccaui, I have
sinned. But the young man and the maide^, the Man and the wief, yea, the
ancient father, and the matrone

Now for somoche as Christ says: Nisi poenitentiam egeritis, omnes similiter
peribitis. Except ye do penance, ye shall all perish: what may we more Luc.
13.
fear to ensewe upon the greatest nombre but perdicion, loss and damnacion?
But God who is rich in mercy, and who (as S. Paul says) for his great
love, wherewith he loved us, when we were Ehp. 2.
dead by sins, quickened us together in Christ, and raised us up together
with him, and made us to sit to gether with him among them in heaven, in
Christ Jesus: he now quicken us and raise us up again from the death Math.
25.


But that I seem not (as yt is in the proverb) to dance out of the dance,
or forgetting my limittes to walk out of my compass, and so leaving my
principal matter, to wander in digressions (although this matter be
apperteinent necessarelie, unto the principal matter in deed) I shall end
this matter of confession with these few words, trustinge that God will give
me grace and time to speak more of yt in an other place. But yet reader
forgett not thowe, that yt is the mean of thy preparacion, as S. Augustine has
taught thee, if thowe wilt come to receive the body and blood of thy Lord
Jesus Christ. Which body and blood thowe hauest also heard the same S.
Augustine auouchinge to be received in the holy Sacrament.

THE SIX AND FIFTETH CHAP. ENDS the exposition of this text, By Theodoret,
and Anselm.
WEll perceauing that many, and those of the chiefest and most famous men of
Christ's Parliament house, have been now produced to testify unto us the
enacted truth of the right understanding of S. Paul, I have thought yt good,
not to troble the reader, with the allegacion of many mo upon this text but
have stayed my self with one coople only, although the Proclamer him self
knows that mo might be produced. In the producinge of which, I can not
commit but one of them (as co^mlie here to fore I have done) be of the later
days (which I term the lower house) that the doctrine of the later days
may be co^ferred with the doctrine of the ancient days which being
perceived to be all one the malice of the Proclamer and his likes may be the
more perceived,

Theodorete one of the higher house, whose testimony ye have heard upon the
last text before this in the last chapter of the exposition of the same Let
every man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup says thus: Sic tui ipsius Iudex vitam tuam exact iudica: conscientiam
scrutare, Theodoret in. ^1. 1 Cor
and examina and tunc dominum suscipe: So thowe being thine own judge,
exactlie judge thine own life, search and examine thine own conscience, and
then receive the gift. Thus Theodorete.

As who might say, forasmoche as every act of man, being Good or evil shall
be judged either by man himself, or else by God, if man prevent not the
judgment of God, and in God there is a merciful bowntifullnesse in geuinge, as
in man there aught to be a semelie duty in receauinge, therefore saying God
gives us so great a gift as the body of his own dear Son, and our part
is to be fownde pure, clean, undefiled, and without offense

But yt will be, that the adversary will think, that I presume to far upon
this author, that where he calls the Sacrament but the gift of God, I call
yt the body of Christ. Let the adversary understand that I neither swerve
Quid appellas donum, quod offertur post sanctificationem? Orth. corpus Christi,
and The dorit Dialog. 2.
sanguinem Christi. Era. Et credis te fieri participem Christi corporis and
sanguinis? Orth. Ita credo. What after sanctificacion do thowe call the gift
that is offered? The answer: I call them the body of Christ and the blood of
Christ. A plain place for the proclamer both for real presence, and sacrifice.
The question. And do thowe believe thy sels to be made partaker of the body
and blood of Christ? The answer. So I believe. Thus Theodorete. Ye may
perceive then that I calling the gift, the body of Christ, do follow the
mind of the author, who both did so call yt, and so believe yt to be, as after
in the same dialoge yt is easy to see. In this author then, as in other
before alleged we find plain and sufficient matter both against Luther, and
against the Proclamer. Against Luther. For the author says we must exactlie
judge our life and search and examine our conscience which (as ye have heard
ofter then once) Luther says yt aught not to be done, only faith is to be
had. Against the Proclamer he teaches that the body that they so believed, and
adored as being those things that they believed.

Thus having but, as yt were glau^ced by the notes of the sainges of this Nemo
praesumat accedere indignus. Sed homo, id est rationabiliter agens, probet, id
est, discutiat, and examinet prius seipsum, qut etiam ex eo Anselm. in 11. ^
Cor.
quod homo est, sine peccato non est. Probet autem seipsum, id est, vitam suam
inspiciat and co^sideret, an digne possit accedere vel non. Raro enim inueniri
potest quisqua^ ita magnus and iustus, vt in eo per dt scussionem, non
inueniatur aliquid quod debeat eum a corpore and sanguine Domini tardare, nisi
confessus fuerit illud and per paenitentiam deleuerit. Probet se, and sic, id
est, postquam se probauerit, edat de pane illo, and bibat de calice, quia tunc
ei proderit. Let no man being unworthy presume to come, but let the man,
that is to say, the reasonable dooer, examine, that is search and try first
himself who also for that that he is a man, he is not without sin. But let
him examine himself, that is, let him behold his own life, and considre yt,
whether he may come woorthilie or no. For seldon may any man be fownde
Anselmus.

This is a plain exposition, but as godly, and true, as is is plain. What can
the Adversary reprehend in this exposition? wherein dissenteth he from the
ancient Fathers, in expownding S. Paul? They all say that the examinacion of
our selves that S. Paul speaks of here, is a trial or a search,
anentringe, into judgment with owre own lives and conuersations upon the
testimony of our own consciences, whether we be clean from sin or no, and
so says he. S. Augustine says that if any thing be amiss in us, we must
by confession and penance put yt away, the like says this author. All the
rest understand S. Paul to have spoken here of the body and blood of Christ:
and so does he. Wherein then is the quarrel of the Adversary? because he and
his company speak to plain. They can not be wrested.

To conclude ye have now heard these three last cooples expownding S. Paul,
and they all determe that there must be an examinacion in life and manners and a
semelie preparacio^ of our selves before we receive the blessed Sacrament.
Wherein they overthrow the Satanicall doctrine of Luther, who The preparacion
that we are commanded to make for the receipt of the B. Sacr. and the danger
of unworthy receiving argues the real presence
would have no examinacion, no consession no preparacio^. Again they all
understand S. Paul to have spoken of the body and blood of Christ in this
process. Wherefore the heresy of the Proclamer and of the rest of the
Sacramentaries, which they would fain grif here upon S. Paul's words, is
plucked up by the roots for soche wicked plants may not grow upon soche
godly stocks.

And as touching this matter of the presence of Christ's body, if rher were
not so plain testimony for yt in S. Paul and the holy writers as there is: yet
the holy and great preparacion, that they exhort us to, and the heavy
sentence cause us easelie to perceive a much greater matter to be in the
Sacrme^t the^ Manna, the Paschall lamb, and the Exodus 16.
show bread, and see what preparacion is there commanded, what pain to the
evil receauers is there inflicted. As for Manna the second book of Moses
declares that although yt were so miraculouse a figure and that in many
respects as before is declared, yet there was no other preparacion required of
the people but only that they should get Baskettes, and gather yt. The pain
also inflicted for the abuse of yt, as the thing yt self was temporal, Exodus
12.
The Paschall lamb although yt were so lively a figure of Christ, yt had no
other preparacion But this. Of this manner says God shall ye eat yt with yowr
loins girded, and yowr shoes on yowr feet, and yowr staves in yowr hands.
And ye shall eat yt in haste. This preparacion was but civil and worldly
here is no spiritual preparacion commanded: here is no cleansing of the
conscience required. The Show bread also had none other preparacion, but that
the preistes might when new were putt upon the altar take the old and eat
them. Pain for the abuse of them we read none.

Perchance ye will say, that in the offringes of sacrifices and in soche as
did take part of the Sacrifices, there was required a preparacion. Truth yt
is, what does that help the cause of the Sacramentaries, who deny the
Sacrament to be a sacrifice? well yet for that the catholic faith teaches
Exodus 30.
we read this commandment given to Moses: Facies labium aeneum cum basi sua
ad lauandum, ponesque illud inter Tabernaculum testimonii and altar missa aqua
lauabunt in ea Aaron and filii eius manus suas, and pedes, quando ingressuri
sunt tabernaculum testimonii, and quando accessuri sunt ad altar, vt offerant
in eo thymiama, Domino, ne forte moriantur. Thowe shall make a lauer of brass,
and his foot also of brass, to wash with all, and shall putt yt between the
tabernacle of witness and the altar, and put water there in. For Aaron and
his sons shall wash their hands and there feet there in, even when they go
into the tabernacle of witness, or when they go unto the altar to ministre,
and to burn the Lords offringe they shall wash them selves with water leest
they die.

And again we find thus ordained of God: Omnis homo qui accesserit de stripe
Leuit. 22.
vestra ad ea, quae consecrata sunt, and quae obtulerunt filii Israel Domino,
in quo est immunditia, peribit coram Domino. Whosoever he be of all yower seed
that goes to the holy things, which the children of Israel halowe unto the
Lord having his uncleanness upon him, he shall perish. Here we sinde a
preparacion and a pain also inflicted to them that omitted so to prepare them
selves. But In the time of the law (says S. Paul) were offered gifts and
sacrifices, that Hebr. 9.
could not make the ministre perfect, as perteining to the conscience, with
only meats and drinks, and diverse wasshinges and iustifienges of the
flessh, which were ordained until the time of reformacion. For as there
sacrifices that were then offered did not take away sins and sanctify the
conscience, For yt is vupossible (says S. Paul) with the blood of goats
and calves sins to be taken away, but only sanctified men and purified
men, as touching the purifienge of the flessh, as he again says, no more did
those preparacions touch the conscience, but only were doe^ for an outward
cleanness. For reason will give that that thing, that the preparacio^ is done
for, should be of more force, value and virtue, then the preparacion in yt self
if then the sacrifices them selves purified not the consciences of men, much
less the preparacion. The pain also that was inflicted

Now the preparacion required before the offering of the sacrifice of our
Lord, and before the partaking of the same in the new Testament, is an exact
and a pure pourging and cleansinge of our consciences. And our pain for our
presumption to receive this sacrifice without due preparacion, is not as you
heard, death temporal, but even soche (as Chrysostom, and Theodorete say)
as they suffer, which crucified Christ, which is death everlasting. Now as
our preparacion, which consists in pourging and clensing of our consciences,
far surmounteth the wasshing of the flessh: And as our pain neclectinge this
preparacion is the loss of everlasting life, which above all measure passes
the loss of this tansitorie life: Even so must yt needs be, that the thing
that we prepare for, must above all measure pass and exceade in worthiness
the figures and sacrifices, that they in the old law made preparacion for.

But they will say, that we by faith make Christ, who substanciallie sits
Objection of spiritual presence by faith.
at the right hand of his Father, as verily present at the receipt of the
Sacramental bread and wine, and so we receive Christ's body and blood
verily, but yet spirituallie.

In deed they say yt, but they prove yt not. But how soever they say yt, and
how soever they painct and coolour their evil sainges, with goodly glosinge
words: certain yt is that this they say, that the fathers of the Theanswer.
old Testament received Christ as well as we, and that there is no more in
our Sacraments, then was in theirs, but that their Sacraments were figures of
Christ to come, and owers be figures of Christ as now comed. But to them I
say, if we have no more in our Sacraments then they had, why are we required
to make any other preparacion then they did? Why preparare we so diligently
our consciences, where they were required but to purify their flesh? Again as
touching the punishment they make God unjust. For if the thing received of the
fathers and us has no difference in value, why has yt a difference in pain?
yt stands not with the justice of God, the offense being all one to punish
to offenders, one with everlasting death: I shall wisshe the reader, to
consider that this our preparacion being so

THE SEVEN AND FIFTETH CHAP. EXPOVNdeth
YT follows in the text of S. Paul: Ideo inter vos multi imbecilles, and
infirmi, and dormiunt multi. For this cause many are weak and sick among you,
and many do die. S. Paul rebuking the uncharitable, the ungodly, and
undevout manner of the Corinthians in cominge to the receipt of the holy
Sacrament, of the which somewhat is before said, did plainly teach them and
assure them that soch unworthy receauers should be eternally condemned, as
they that vilanouslie and cruelly put Christ to death. For as they did with
all spite spitte upon him, pietifullie araie him, mock him, skorn him, and as
they thought, with all shame and reproache diswoorshippe and dishonor him, and
repute him but as a vile, abject, and a castawaie among the children of me^:
Even so they that come to receive his blessed body and blood, as they would
come to receive a piece of the carcass of an ox, la^be, calf, orshepe having
no regard to the cleanness and purity of their consciences, they do For
this cause many among you are weak, and seek, and many do die. As who
might say: think not that I dally with you, behold and see even among yowr
selves, how God shows a preamble or image of his fearful judgment which I
have spoken of. For even for this unworthy receiving of the body and blood
of his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, he has stricken many with weakness,
many with sickness, and many with death.

The literal exposition being thus breiflie touched as whereby yt may be
perceived, how this text does depend of the other, and is joined with the Of
these Fathers the first coople shall be Origin and saint Ambrose. Origin
says thus: Iudicium Dei paruipendis? and commonentem te Ecclesiam despicis?
Communicare non times corpus Christi, accedens ad Eucharistiam quasi mundus,
and purus, quasi in te Origin. in Psalm. 37.
nihil sit indignum, and in us omnibus putas quod effugies iudicium Dei. Non
recordaris illud quod scriptum est, quod propterea in vobis infirmi, and aegri,
and dormiunt multi. Quare multi infirmi? Quoniam non seipsos di^udicant, neque
seipsos examinant, neque intelligunt, quid communicare Ecclesiae, vel quid est
accedere ad tanta, and tam eximia Sacramenta. Patiuntur hoc quod febricitantes
pati solent, quum sanorum cibos praesumunt, sibimetipsis inferentes exitium.
Set thou little by the judgment of God? And despicest thou the Church
admonishing thee? Thou art not a feared to communicate the body Origin in
plain words calls the bless. Sacr. the body of Christ.
of Christ, coming to the Eucharist, as a clean and a pure man, as though there
were no unworthy thing in thee: and in all these, thou think that thou
shall eschape the judgment of God. Thowe do not remember, that which is
written: that for these things, there be many among you weak, and sick, and
many do die. Why be there many sick? Because they judge not themselves,
neither examine themselves, neither do they understand

Origin rebuking here the evil doings of some men, Who not fearing the
judgment of God, nor the admonicion of the Church presumed as though they had been in clean state of life to come to receive the body of Christ: puts them
in fear with this saing of saint Paul that for this cause there be among you
many weak, and sick, and many do die. Wherein note that Origin says, that
the cause of these plagues is the unworthy receauinge of the body of Christ
by express words. He neither calls yt Sacramental bread, nor figure nor
sign, but eue^ as yt is, the body of Christ. And for that yt is there
vnspeakeablie, and yet most assuredly, he afterward calls yt, so great, and
so excellent mysteries.

A mystery is where something lies hidden, that is not by open means, A
mystery what yt is, and how the blessed Sacr. is a mystery.
or common knowledge perceived. Forasmoch then as Christ verily being Origin
called mysteries. And forasmoch as Christ therein being, is so great and so
excellent, therefore very well does he call them mysteries great and excellent.
And there this is to be noted, that he calls yt not a mystery as being but
one, but he calls yt mysteries as being two. For although yt is sometime
called singularly, a Sacrament or a mystery as one thing, of the unity of
the thing fignified and contained, which is the body of Christ: yet as
touching the things that do signify, and contain, which be the forms of
bread and wine, under which both, Christ is verily and wholly, they are right
well called mysteries plurallie, because they be two kinds, and under each
kind Christ fully, and therefore each of them well called a Sacrament and a
mystery.

In all this sainge, this also may be noted, that evil men receive the body
of Christ, but specially, when he says: that evil men do as men Evil me^
receive the body of Christ in the B. Sac.
sick of agues, who will presume to eat holl men's meat, whereby he wherefore so
do evil men also, but to contrary effects. For as the holl man

O Lord, what mishappe have we, that after so long continuance of the faith of
Christ we should now in the later days, fall from that reverent and
honorable usage of this blessed Sacrament, that was used in the primitive
Church, when the faith was not so dilated, so spread, so established, as now
for the long continaunce of yt, yt aught to be: And yet then was yt had in
great reverence, and honorably

But among many testimonies that may be produced, because we are now
hearing the doctrine of Origin, we will also but hear his testimony in this
matter. He exhorting the people, that hearing the word of God they should
use great diligence, that, that they had once learned, should not by
necligence fall from their memory: uses the example of their regard of the
holy Sacrament, and says: Volo vos admonere religionis vestrae exemplis.
Orig. homil 13. in Exodus
Nostis, qui diuinis mysteriis interesse consuestis, quomodo cum suscipitis
corpus Domini cum omni cautela and veneratione seruatis, ne ex eo parum quid
decidat, ne consecrati muneris aliquid dilabatur. Reos enim vos creditis, and
recte creditis, si quid inde per neccligentiam decidat. Quodsi circa corpus
eius conseruandum, tanta vtimini cautela, and merito vtimini, See what
warenesse was used in the primitive Church in receiving the body of our Lord.
quomodo putatis minoris esse piaculi verbum Dei neclexisse, quam corpus eius?
I will admonish you with the examples of your own religion, ye, that have been wount to be at the mynistracion of the divine mysteries, know, how, when
ye receive the body of our Lord, ye give heed with all warenesse and Origin?

In this testimony is no mention made of the Adversaries figure, sign or
Sacramental bread, but here is plain declaracion of the catholic faith, A
plain saing for the Procla.
Origin saing and declaring to the Chrystian people of his time by express
words that they received the body of Christ. But note withal which is most
cheiflie to our purpose here, that not only the people did use the same
Origin does both well allow there so doing, and commends and praises the^
for the same also. And here note farther that the people had the blessed Sacr.
in so great reverence, that they believed the^ selves to have committed a great
offense (and Orige^ says they believed yt well) if by their neclige^ce any
part of the Sacr. had fallen from them to the grownde by which their reverend
usage, as we may clerelie perceive and see, that they believed there to be the
very body of See the use of the Communion bread in the new Church.
their doings, and consider their vsages, and compare them with the doings and
vsageis of the ancient Chrystian people, in the time of Origin. Owre
Sacramentaries caused that the bread which was left at their comunio^ should
not be honorably but prophanelie used. For in some places the mynister had
that that was left: in some places the parish clerk: in some places a piece of
yt was delivered to him that should the next sondaie provide the bread for the
communion. And every of these put this bread into his bosom or purse, as
beggars do their lumpes and fragmentes into their bags and wallettes without
all reverence or regard, and carieng yt home with like irreuerencie used yt in
no otherwise then other common bread, giving yt to their wieues and children,
the crustes to their dogs and cattes, the crommes to their pullen. O Lord
how far is this usage from the usage of the primitive Church? The good
people that the^ were (as thou hauest heard) thought

And Pius the ninth Bishop of Rome after S. Peter, and lived about the year
of our Lord cxlvii upon consideracion of the great excellency of the De
consec. Did. 2.
Sacrament as wherein is verily the body of our Savior Christ, and upon the
regard of soche due reverence as apperteineth to us to yeald to the same,
appoincted sondrie penau^ces, and fastings to soch as by whom any part of the
blood of Christ should happen to distill or to be shed: But these people
Difference of the primitive and schismatical church in use of the Sacr. and in
faith.
of our days neither regard falling to the grownde nor shedding, no, as, yt
is said, they spare not to give yt to their dogs. By which sundry manners yt
is easy to be perceived that the faithes of these people be sundry. The
people of the primitive church (as by their regard, reverence, and honor to
the B. Sacrament, yt may be perceived) believed the presence of Christ's body
and blood to be there, where they bestowed soche reverence and duty: The
company of Sacramentaries, as their irrenerent usage well declares, believe no
real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. For to yt they deny all
honor and reverence. If the primitive Church had believed as the
Sacramentaries do, why gave they that honor to yt, that these do not? or
raither why do not the Sacramentrries honor the Sacrament Clemens Epist. 2.
Church? They with all irreuerencie contemning the leauings of the Sacrament
where the primitive Church used honorably to repose them and reserve them in
the holy placea (as S. Clement gave commandment) and also had great regard,
and reverence to yt, where these men (as ye have heard) feed their families
with yt, as with profane bread. Wherefore to conclude this matter with saint
Paul, I may say, that they be guilty of the body and blood of owre Lord,
because they make no difference betwixit yt and common or profane meats, but
indifferently eat the one and the other. Ambr. in 11. 1. Cor.


But I tarry to long upon Origin, yt is time that S. Ambrose also were heard
Upon this text thus he says: Vt verum probaret, quia examen futurum est
accipientium corpus Domini, iam hic imaginem iudicii ostendit, in eos qui
inconsiderate corpus Domini acceperant, dum febribus, and infirmitatibus
corripiebantur, and multi moriebantur, vt iis caeteri discerent, and paucorum
exemplo territi emendarentur non inultum scientes corpus Domini negligenter
accipere, and eum quem hic poena distulerit, grauius tractari, fore, quia S.
Ambr. understands S. Panle io speak of the body of our Lord.
contempsit exemplum. To prove that there is a judgment to come of them, that
receive the body of our Lord, he does now show a certain image of the same
judgment upon them, which without due consideracio^ had received the body of
our Lord forasmoch as they were punished with fevers, and sicknesses, and many
died: that by these men other might learn, and they feared with the example of
a few might be amended: knowing that to receive the body of our Lord
necligentlie is not left unpunished, but if his punish meant be differred that
he shall be more greuouslie handled hereafter, because he has contemned the
example.

As Origin has done before: so S. Ambrose here agreablie declares that
fevers, sicknesses, and death also have by gods punishment fallen upon Origin,
and diverse other before alleged for the exposition of saint Paul, teaching
us that evil men receive the body of Christ, yt must needs necessarily
follow that there is besides the spiritual manner (which only the Adversary
teaches) an other manner of real and substanciall presence, by which the evil
man receaueth the very substance of the body of Christ verily and in deed.
Which being (as yt is in deed) a most certain truth testified by many holy
doctors, and grave Fathers, of the Church, the contrary assertion of the
Adversary, must neds be judged an heretical untruth. Wherefore Chrystian
Reader, be not deceived with vain gloses of light Sacramentaries, but stay
thie self upon the sure and agreeable expositio^s of the holy Fathers, and
believe no less but thou Ambr. in 11. 1. Cor. Reverence is due to him whose
body wereceaue.
body of Christ. But now yt stands thee in hand, to see how thowe
receauest yt, with what faith, with that devotion, and with what reverence. For
this holy father saint Ambrose (as other before) teaches us after the mind
of saint Paul, that we must come to this most holy Sacrament with devotion,
fear and reverence. For showing saint Paul's mind, who wills us to examine
our selves, he says upon the same thus: Deuoto animo, and cum timore
accedendum ad communionem docet, vt sciat meus reuerentiam se debere ei, ad
cuius corpus sumendum accedit. He teaches us to come to the communion with a
devout mind, and with fear, that the mind may know yt self to owe
reverence unto him, whose body yt comes to receive. Thus much he.

What soever Luther has said against our preparacion for our seemly coming
to the receipt of the bless. Sacrament: what soever the Adversaries S. Ambr.
and Origin use plaintearmes for the Procla.
the Sacramentaries and the Proclamer say against the holy and blessed body
call yt the body of Christ: yet this holy Father and Bishop. S. Ambrose in
both these places alleged, and Origin in his sainges, in this chapter
produced the body of our Lord, the doubtful terms of the Adversary left,
as by which they could not so lively express and show forth the truth.

To end with these two Fathers of Christ's Parliament house we may perfectly
by them understand, that God punishes unworthy receauers of the body of
Christ, some temporallie, by fevers sicknesses, and death: some eternally by
perpetual damnacion. Wherbie as by the greuousnesse of the punishme^tes we
may learn the greuousnesse of the offense: So by the great nesse of the
offense, we may learn the greatness of the blessed Sacrament, in the receipt
of which no soch offense could be committed, if he were not there present,
whose majesty being great, makes the offense great.

THE EIGHT AND FIFTETH CHAP. ENDS the exposition of the same text by
Theophilact.
Forasmuch as the matter treacted of by S. Paul in this text is apperteinent,
and depends of the matter spoken of before, in the which we have proceaded at
the lenght, therefore I have determined to content my self with the two Fathers,
in the last chapter produced, by whom we may learn the enacted truth of the
understanding of this text in the higher house, and with two other Fathers of
the lower house who shall open unto us also the understanding of the same in
the lower house, which two shall be Theophilact, and Anselme.

Theophilact writes thus: Accipite demonstratione^ ex iis, quae apud vos
contingunt. Hinc enim sunt immaturae mortes, diuturnaeque aegritudines, and
morbi, eo quod multi in digne assumant. Quid igitur? Qui non aegrotant, and ad
extremam vsque senectam seruantur Theophilact in 11. 1 Cor.
incolumes, nonne peccant? Peccant sane. Sed non huius temporis paenae solae
indigne accedentibus destinatae sunt, sed in futuro quoque seculo. Take ye a
demonstracion of those things which happen among you. For because many do
receive vnwoorthilie,

As the Judgments of God be merueilouse, and incomprehensible, so deep also
that no man can reach unto the profunditie thereof: so are they also God
punishes some tempor. illie but not eternally some eternally not temporallie
some (...) temparallie and eternally.
upright, just and full of equity, giving to every man according to his
works. By which he punishes some in this life, but not eternally, some
eternally, but not in this life temporallie: some both temporallie, and
eternally. So likewise of them that by unworthy receipt contemn and foulie
abuse the blessed Sacrament some by sicknesses, and diseases are punished who
humbly receiving the same, and repenting their former doings, and amending
their lives, God temperinge his justice with mercy punishes them but in this
life. Other some there be that abusing the holy Sacrament by unworthy
receipt, and continuing the same do yet some and continuinge in the same
without repentance as men even sold over to Theopilacle then we may learn,
that to unworthy receauers of the bless. Sacrament soche punishments have been inflicted of God, whereby (as is said) may be perceived, that as the
offense is great, so yt is done against him, who is great, even Christ our
Savior and redemer, whose blessed body being present in the Sacrament is by
wicked receauers much abused. I stand not to declare the faith of Theophllact
as touching the presence. For yt is more then manifest, that he that denies
the Adversaries figure in the Sacrument confesses the presence, which this
author does in diverse places expowndinge the scripturs, as in this work
also yt may be seen,

Wherefore leauinge him we will hear Anselmus, who upon this text folowinge
Anselm. in. 11. 1. Cor.
Corinthians in the person of S. Paul: Quia indigne manducatis hoc corpus, and
sanguinem bibitis, ideo sunt inter vos multi infirmi, qui graui morbo languent:
and imbecilles qui diuturua inualitudine torpent and dormiunt etiam multi, id
est somno mortis sunt occupati, vt verum probaret, quia examen futurum est
accipientium corpus Domini. Iam hic imaginem iudicii ostendit in nonnullis qui
corpus illud inconsiderate acceperant, dum aegrotationibus, and longis
inualitudinibus tenerentur, and multi morerentur, vt in eis caeteri discere^t
se non impune corpus Domini necligenter accipere, and paucoru^ exe^plo caeteri
territi emenda rentur, scientes quia grauiores paenas in futuro seculo propter
hanc culpa^ ipsi forent passuri, sinon corrigerentur. Because ye do eat and
drink his body and blood vnwoorthilie, therefore there be among you many sick of
grievous sickness, and weak which faint with long disease, and many also
sleep, that is, they are prevented with The Corinthians did eat and drink
the body and blood of our Lord unworthily.
death. To prove that a judgment or conde^nacio^ shall come of the^ that
receive the body of our Lord, he does now show the image of the judgment in
many, which had inco^sideratelie reaeaued that body, forasmochas they were
holden with sicknesses, and long weakness and many died, that by

We learn here of Anselmus, that the sicknesses, diseases and deaths that
happened among the Corinthians, were because they received not only the
Sacrament, or (as the Sacramentaries term yt) the Sacramental bread
unworthily, but because they did inconsideratelie receive the body of our
Lord. In which manner of faith, and speech this author follows not his
own devise, but the grave doctrine and judgment, of S. Ambrose whose sainge
he does here allege. And so by them both yt is manifest that the body of
Christ is received in the Sacrament, that evil men also receive yt there,
which proves the real and substanciall presence of Christ's body, and that
soche evil receauers for that they do much injury to that pure and
undefiled body of Christ castinge yt into their body defiled with

Of the displeasure of God against evil receauers, as S. Paul makes proof
by demonstracion, and experience of the same in his time: so does also S.
Cyprian for the like in his time, who brings three or four examples Cap.
ser. 5. de. lapsis.
approache to, or receive the holy body of Christ. The sirst example is of a
child, which being put to a Nource did taste of a soppe of bread, which was
offered unto Idols. And when the mother having this child in her arms came
to the Church among christian people, and the Sacrament among other, was
also offered to the child, the child (who I say, had tasted of Idols meat)
turned away her face from the Sacrament, she stopped her She might have
received the new Communion with out any soche troble.
mouth and held her lips hard together, she refused by any mean to touch
the cup of the blood of Christ. Yet though she did thus strive, the deacon
gave her of the Sacrament. Which when she had once received, forth with she
fell to boking and vomiting for (as Cyprian says) in corpore, atque ore
violato Eucharistia permanere non potuit. Sa^ctificatus in Domini sanguine
potus, de pollutis visceribus erupit. Tanta est potestas Domini, tanta
maiestas. In a defiled mouth and body the Sacrament could not abide. The
sanctified drink

By this example may we learn, how much yt offends God, that the body of
Christ should be received vnwoorthilie of one that has knowledge and reason.
Immediately after this, S. Cyprian makes report of a woman that was of age,
knowledge, and reason, sainge that soche one when he was offringe the sacrisice
priueilie stole in among other, and receiving A woman receiving the B. Sa.
unworthily stricken with death
the Sacrament, not as meat to comfort her, for that she was unworthy, but
as a sword to destroy her, and taking as yt were deadly poison in to her
mouth and breast, she began to be merueilouselie vexed, and disquieted, and so
suffringe the heavy punishment of her offense, pantinge and tremblinge she
fell down dead. So (says he) was not her evil offense left long unpunished.
But she that thought by her cloaking and dissemblinge of her offense to have
deceived man, felt God to whom all things be known, the revenger and
punisher of the same.

An other woman there was also, who receiving the Sacrament into her Cum arcam
suam in qua Domini sanctum fuit manibus indignis tentasset aperire, igne inde
surgente deterrita est, ne auderet attingere. When she would with unworthy
hands open the coafer, wherein was the holy thing of our Lord, there sprang
out a fire, whereby she was cast in soch fear that she durst not touch yt.
Upon this example this may we note, that if God would not suffer the woman,
forasmoche as she was unworthy, not as much as to open the coafer, where the
holy thing of our lord was laid, how much less will he bear yt that a
licenciouse filthy living man should touch the thing ytself, eat yt, and
cast yt into his sinful body?

An other merueilouse thing does S. Cyprian report of the blessed Sacrament,
A man vnwoorthilie receiving the bless. Sa in his hand when he opened his hand
there was nothing but ashes
There was (says he) a certain defiled or sinful man, who being present when
the Sacrament was celebrated by the priest (so does S. Cyprian term the
holy ministracion) he presumed priuielie with other to receive, but he could
not eat the holy thing of God nor handle yt. For when he sinner, forasmoche
as sodenlie yt pleases him to change yt into ashes

But let us hear what S. Cyprian him self notes upon this miracle of God
Sermon. s de lapsis.
Documento vnius ostensum est, Dominum recedere cum negatur, nec immerentibus
prodesse ad salutem quod sumitur, cum gratia salutaris in cinerem sanctitate
fugiente mutetur. By the example of one yt is declared, that our Lord
departs when he is denied, nether does yt, that is received profitte the
unworthy to salvation or health, when the wholesome grace, holiness
departinge away, is changed into ashes.

This note of S. Cyprian is notable in deed and for that yt is so, I wish yt
so to be noted of the reader, that yt never fall from his memory. First, let
the evil man note that at the receipt of the Sacrament because in life and
conversation God is denied that he departs and goes away. But let the
faithful herby learn, that owre Lord is present with his Sacrament, who as he
departs from the wicked so he abides to be received of the virtuous and
godly. This also is not to be ouerpassed, that the holy Martyr says, that
yt, that is received, profits not the unworthy to salvation. For by that he
says, yt profits not the unworthy, he argues that yt

If then one thing be received in the Sacrament that profits the good and
avails not the euel, we must first grant, that the good and the evil
receive one thing, profiting the one, and hurting the other. Now would yt be
learned of the Sacramentarie, what one thing that is in the Sacrament that is
received, that profits and hurts. The Sacramentarie leaves no more in the
Sacrament by his doctrine, but Sacramental bread, and Sacramental wine,
which both (says he) remain in their substance and nature, so that there is
no other thing (taking thing for substance) but the substance of bread and
wine: Certain yt is, that as God suffers the Sun to shine upon good and
evil, and raineth upon the just and unjust: So do the he suffer the substance
of bread and wine to feed and nourish both good and evil, as well to profitte
the wicked as the rightwise, no more (measure

Noweye have heard the presence of Christ's body and blood taught by S. Paul
in the epistle to the Corinthians: ye have heard yt testified, yea and avouched
by a nombre of ancient holy Fathers: ye have heard yt proved that by the
testimony a^s well of S. Paul, as the Fathers yt is plain difference of
things received in both laws. For in the old law Christ

THE NINE AND FIFTETH CHAP. TREACteth of these words of S. Paul. We are
members of his body, of his slesh, and of his bones, by Irenaeus and Hylarius.
IN the epistle to the Ephesians, S. Paul exhorting men to love Irenaeus does
understand of the flesh, body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament, I have
thought good to let the reader perceive the same*

Thus he writes: Quomodo carnem negant esse capacem donationis Dei, quae est
vita aeterna quae sanguine and corpore Christi nutritur, and membrum eius fit,
quemadmodum and Apostolus ait, in ea, quae est ad Ephesios epistola: Quoniam
membra sumus corporis Iraen. li. 5.
eius, de carne eius, and de ossibus eius, non de spirituali aliquo, and
inuisibili homine dicens haec (spiritus enim neque ossa, neque carnes habet)
sed de ea dispositione, quae est secundum hommem, quae ex carnibus and neruis
and ossibus consistit, quae de calice, qui est sanguis eius nutritur, and de
pane, qui est corpus eius augetun? How deny they the flesh to be hable to
receive the gift of God, which is everlasting life, which is nourished with
the body and blood of Christ, and is made a membre of him, as the Aplain
saing of Iren. agunst the Proclamer
Apostle also says in the epistle to the Ephesians: For we are members of his
body, of his flesh and of his bones: not speaking these words of any
spiritual or invisible man, but of that disposition, which is after the
nature of man which is of flesh, Sinnewes and bones, which is nourished of
the cup, which is his blood, and is increased by the bread which is his
body. hitherto Iren.

For the better understanding of this sainge, the occasion why he wrote this
is to be declared, although this Irenaeus were so ancient and so near to the
time of the Apostles, that he was the disciple of Policarpus, which Policarpus
was the disciple of saint John the Evangelist: yet before and in his time were
risen many heretics as Simon Samarites, who The flesh of man shall have
euerlaing life because yt is nourished with the flesh of Christ.
other wise is called Simon Magus: Menander, Carportes, Basilides, Cerinthus
Ebion, and Marcion: which fowlie and diversely erringe about the person of
Christ, some of them also denienge the resurrection, sainge that owre earthly
and gross flesh could not be partaker of salvation. Against which heresies
Irenaeus wrote five books, and in the fiste book by that yt is nourished with
the flesh and blood of Christ. And Both body and soul have benefit by the
body of Christ.


And here note how goodly he confirms the catholic faith, and how
mightily he overthrow the heresy of the Sacramentarie. The Catholic says
that the wholl man both body and soul takes benefitte, and is nourished by
the body and blood of Christ: The Sacramentarie says, that only the
inward man, the spiritual man is spirituallie nourished by faith. But this
false gloss is here by express words reproved and convinced. S. Paul
(says Irenaeus) speaks not this of any spiritual or invisible man, but of
the very natural man, which is made of flesh sinnewes, and bones which
natural man is nourished, and augmented by

Again yt is manifest, that not only the inward man, the inuinsible or The
outward natural man receaueth the body and blood of Christ.
spiritual man receaueth the body and blood of Christ, but also the
outward, the visible and natural man. And for the full and perfect
understanding of this, note well the chief grownde of this ancient holy
Father Irenaeus. His purpose is to prove, that our flesh although yt be a
mortal thing, shall receive immortallitie: although yt be earthilie, yt shall
receive an heavenly and everlasting life: how proves he that? By that that
our mortal flesh receaueth the immortal flesh and blood of Christ, and
thereby nourished shall in his time atteign to immortality and life
everlasting. The Sacramentaries denieng the receipt of Chrystsnaturall body
into our, deny withal the argument of Jren. and of consequent the
immortallitie of our body after resurrect.
Consider then that the argument of this holy father against this heresy, Si
in hac vita ta^tum, in Christo spera^tes sumus omnibus hominibus, etc. If in
this life only, we believe on Christ, then are we of all men most miserably.
If then they will rob us of the mean to atteign to this resurrection and
immortallitie, which mean is the very receipt of the body and blood of
Christ, they shall also rob us of the effect. For the cause being taken away
the effect also must be taken away: as the cause being admitted, the effect
must necessarily follow. For the cause of the immortality of our flesh is 1.
Cor. 15.
by the receipt of the same in the Sacrament.

Of these two Christ is a full witness, for the first he says. Nisi
manducaueritis carnem filii hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem non habebitis
vitam in vobis Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his
blood, ye shall

For the other, Christ also testifies: Qui manducat mea^ carnem and bibit meum
ibid.
sangumem, habet vitam aeternam. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood
has everlasting life. Whereby is taught that the receipt of the body and
blood of Christ, is the cause and mean of and to everlasting life.

But that the Adversary shall not cavil and say, that I speak much in this
matter at mine own liberty, and there unto expownde the scripturs by mine own
authority: he shall hear the holy Father Cyrill affirm as much as I have
said, and expownde the scripturs to the same sense. Thus he Cirill in 15 ca
Joan.
writes: Non poterat aliter corruptibilis haec natura ad incorruptibilitatem,
and vitam traduci, nisi naturalis vitae corpus ei coniungeretur. Non credis
mihi haec dicenti? Christo, te obsecro, fidem praebe dicenti: Amen, amen
(inquit) dico vobis: Nisi manducaueritis carnem filu hominis, and biberitis
eius sanguinem, non habebitis vitam in vobis. Qui manducat meam carnem, and
bibit meum sanguinem habet vitam aeternam. Audis aperte clama^tem non habituros
nos vitam, nisi sanguinem cius biberimus, and carnem manducauerimus. In vobis
autem ipsis, dicit, id est, in corpore vestro. Vita autem, iure ipsa vitae caro
intelligi potest. Haec enim nos in nouissimo die suscitat, and quomodo, dicere
non grauabor. Caro vitae facta Vnigeniti caro, ad virtutem vitae traducta est.
Non potest igitur morte superari. Propterea in nobis facta, interitum a nobis
expellit. Non enim abest ab ea vnigenitus Deisilius. Vnde quia vnus est cum
carne sua, Ego (inquit) suscitabo cum. This corruptible nature of owre body
could not other wise be brought to incorruptibilitie Our, corruptible nature
could not atteign to incorruptibilitie but by the receipt of the incorruptible
flesh of Christ.
and life, except the body of natural life should be joined to yt. Beleuest
thowe not me sainge these words? I pray thee then believe Christ sainge
Verily verily (says he) I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall have no life in you. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has everlasting life. Thowe hear
him openly saing that we shall have no life, except we drink his blood, and
eat his flesh. He says: in yower selves: that is, in yower body. By life,
may of right be understood, that flesh of life. For this flesh shall raise
us up in the last day. And how, yt shall not greiue me to tell. The flesh
of life being made the flesh of the only begotten Son of God is brought to
have the power of life. Yt can not therefore be ouercomed of death. Wherefore that
flesh being in us, expels death from us. For the only begotten Son of
God is not absent from that flesh. Wherefore because he is one with his flesh,
he said I will raise him up.

Se ye not here plainly affirmed by saint Cyrill, and that by those places of
the vi. of saint John, that this corruptible nature of owre body, can not
atteign to immortality and life, except the body of Christ, which he calls
the body of life, be conioined to yt. To return then, the argument of
Irenaeus is of great force. For in deed, that The flesh can not be subject to
mortality that duly receaueth the flesh of immortality.
flesh can not be subject to mortality, that receaueth the flesh of Christ,
which gives immortality. But once to end with Irenaeus, I wish the Reader
to be advertised of two things: The one that where Irenaeus and S. Quis est
homo, qui viuit, and non videbit mortem? What man is he, that lives, and shall
not die? And again the penal sentence of God is: Puluis es, and in puluerem
reuerteris. Thowe art dust, and into dust shall thowe return. For they speak
not of this worldly life, but of the heavenly life, that shall be given How
and when this immortality shall be given.
to man after the resurrection. At the which, forasmoche as man shall be
raised, this temporal death is properly in the scriptures called a sleep.
Which immortality is not promised to all that receive the body of Christ, no
more then salvation is to all them, that believe and be Baptized, although
Christ say: Qui crediderit, and baptisatus fuerit saluus erit. Who that shall
believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: But to soche as woorthilie receive,
and so persevere to the end. For Qui perseuerauerit in finem, hic saluus erit.
He that perseuereth to the end this man shall be saved.

The other is, that where Irenaeus said, that owre flesh is nourished by the
flesh of Christ, yt is not to be understood, that that blessed flesh is
turned or changed after the manner of other earthly meats into the The flesh
of Christ is not turned into our substance, but raither turns us into yt.
substance of our flesh and blood, but raither that yt turns us into yt, as
yt was said to Saint Augustine. Nec tu me mutabis in te, sicut cibum carnis
tuae: sed tu mutaberis in me. Neither shallt thowe change or turn me into
thee, as the meat of thie flesh, but thowe shallt be turned or changed into
me. Yt does also nourish us, in that yt gives us soche sustentacion of life
as yt has. Earthly meats why are they received, but that they should give
sustentacion of this earthly life? So this hauenlie meat is received to give
us sustentacion of the heavenly immortal life. As by the one then we are
nourished to live this mortal life: So by the other are we nourished to live
the immortal life.

Again by the receipt of this holy flesh are we made the members of Christ
incorporated to him, and made one with him, which thing the great and learned
Father Hilarie teaches. Whereby this text of saint Paul is much opened and
declared. Which thing (although he does not speak of the very words of S.
Paul) moved me to ioin him with Irenaeus in this place, his words be these:
Eos, qui inter Patrem and Filium voluntatis ingerunt vnitatem, interrogo vtrum
ne per naturae veritatem hodie Christus in nobis sit, an per concordiam
voluntatis? Si enim vere Verbum caro factum est, and nos Verbum carnem factum
cibo dominico sumimus, quomodo non naturaliter manner in nobis existimandus
est, qui et naturam carnis nostrae iam inseparabilem sibi homo natus assumpsit,
et naturam carnis suae ad naturam aeternitatis sub sacramento nobis
communicandae carnis admiscuit? Ita enim omnes vnum sumus, quia in Christo
Paterest, et Christus in nobis est. Quisquis ergo naturaliter, Patrem in
Christo negabit, neget prius non naturaliter, vel se in Christo vel sibi
Christum inesse, quia in Christo Pater, et Christus in nobis, vnum in iis esse
nos faciunt. Si vere igitur carnem corporis nostri Christus assump sit, et vere
homo ille, qui ex Maria natus fuit, Christus est, nosque vere sub mysterio
carnem corporis We verily receive the word made flesh in our Lords meat.
sumimus, et per hoc vnum erimus, quia Pater in eo est, et ille in nobis. I
ask them, that bring in the unity of will betwixt the Father and the Son,
whether Christ be in us now by the agreement of will or by the verity of
nature. For if the word was verily made flesh, and we verily receive the
word made flesh in our Lords meat, how is he to be thought not to abide in
us naturally, who being born man, did both take our nature now inseparable
upon him, and also under the Sacrament Whoseuer then shall deny the Father to
be naturally in Christ let him We verily receive the flesh of Christ in the
Sacr.
one. If than Christ has verily taken upon him the flesh of our body: and
that man that was borne of Marie, be verily Christ: And we also in the
Sacrament do verily receive the flesh of his body, we shall by this also be
one. For the Father is in him, and he in us. Thus much S. Hilarie.

For better understanding of whom, yt is to be noted that he wrote against
the pestiferouse heresy of the Arrians, who taught that the Son of God the
second person in deity was a creature, and was not all one with the Father in
nature, in deity, eternity and equality, but was less then the Father, and
only one with him in the unity of agreement or Arrius his heresy
consent of will. Against this pestilent doctrine did saint Hilarie write,
proving the Son of God to be naturally in the Father, and the Father
naturally in the Son And for that this wicked sect to prove their wicked
doctrine made a false argument upon our unity with God, sainge that Christ
took our flesh in the mystery of his incarnacion and gives us the same in
the mystery of his Sa. and so is naturalie in us, and we in him.
Christ was one with God as we be, but our unity with him is but by submission
and consent of will: therefore (say) they soch and none other is this also. To
improoue and dissolve this false and lieng argument, he proves that our
unity with God is not by consent of will only, but also by nature which
unity is made and wrought by the receipt of Christ's natural flesh and blood
in the Sacrament, Wherefore saint Hilarie thus reasons: Si vere verbum, etc.
If the word was verily made flesh, and we verily receive the word made
flesh in our Lords meat, how is he not to be thought naturally to abide in
us, who has both taken upon him, being made man, the nature of our flesh
now inseparable, and also under the Sacrament of communicating his flesh unto
us has admixed the nature of his flesh?

By which argument he does not only go about to prove that the Father is
naturally in Christ, but most plainly teaches also that we receive Christ's
very natural flesh in the Sacrament, and that, by that receipt, Christ is
naturally in us. By which two poinctes he conuinceth directly the wicked
assertion of the Sacramentaries, who against all truth that may be learned in
scriptures, and the most ancient Haec idcireo a nobis commemorata sunt, quia
voluntatis tantum inter Patrem and Filium, vnitatem haeretici mentientes,
vnitatis nostrae ad Deum vtebantur exemplo, tanquam nobis ad Filium, and per
filium ad Patrem obsequio tantum ac voluntate religionis vnitis, nulla per
Sacramentum and sanguinis naturalis communionis proprietas indulgeretur, cum
and per honorem nobis datum Dei filii, and per manentem in nobis carnaliter Dei
filium, and in eo nobis corporaliter, and inseparabiliter vnitis, mysterium
verae ac naturalis vnitatis sit praedicandum. These things are for this cause
spoken of us, that heretics untruly saing the unity betwixt the Father and
the Son

By these words as S. Hilarie improoueth the Arrians saing that Christ The
Sacramentaries ioin with the Arrians in denieng natural union be twe Christ and
us by the bless. Sa
is not naturally in us, so does he the Sacramentaries teaching the same. And
thus may we see the sincerity of them, who do maintein the pestilent
doctrine of the Arrians. And that that was confuted and reproved as heresy
twelve hondreth years agon, is now with a little false skouring and coloring,
sold to the people for truth.

The Proclamer has promised that he would subscribe if we that ower flesh is
nourished with the cup. He says not as the Sacramentarie does, with the
cup of the Lord, but he speaks as the catholic Church does, sainge:
With the cup, which is the blood of our Lord. Neither uses he the
heretical phrase, sainge that our flesh is nourished with the Sacramental
bread. but the phrase of Christ's Church, sainge that our flesh is nourished A
plain saing for the Procla.
with the bread, which is the body of our Lord, calling them by express
words, the body, and blood of Christ. Is not this a plain speech? The
other says, that as truly as the Father is naturally in the Son: So
truly is Christ naturally in us by the receipt of his natural flesh in the
Sacrament. Which speech is also so plain, that except men will not As God the
Father is naturally in the Son so is the Son by his natural flesh
received in the bless. Sacr. naturalie in us.
see, or will not hear, or hearing will not understand, they can not choose
but see, hear, and understand a merueillouse plain truth. Which truth was
so evident plain, famous and notoriouse in the time of these Fathers,

To conclude then saying the one of these Fathers, says that we be nourished
with the flesh of Christ, by the receipt of the same in the blessed Sacrament:
And the other, that by the same receipt Christ is naturally in us, and we
naturally one with him, we may very well say with saint Paul, that we are
members of his body, of his flesh and of his bones.

THE SIXTETH CHAP. TREACTETH UPON
IN the xiii. chapter of S. Paul's epistle to the Hebrews, we find this
sainge: We have an Altar, of the which yt is not laufull for them to eat that
serve in the tabernacle. Which saing I find so expownded that by the Altar
is understood the body of Christ in the Sacrament. So that the sense of
those words may be these: We have the body of Christ in the Sacrament of
the which yt is not laufull for any Jew, resting and abidinge in the law of
Moses to eat. Isich. in leuit. li. 1. c. 4.
That thus yt is to be understood I have witnesses, but I will not trooble
the reader with many, but only produce a coople, which both be grecians.
Isichius, and Theophilact, the one of the higher house and the other of the
lower. Isichius says thus expownding a text of Leuitic. Omnem sanguinem
reliquum Vituli, fundi circa basim altaris holocausti, quod est in tabernaculo
testimonii, praecepit. Altar holocaustomatis rursus Christi corpus
intelligamus. Sicut enim ipse Sacerdos, and sacrificium est, sic altar est.
Quia autem intelligibile altar corpus Domini, and beatus Paulus intelligit,
ipso dicente, cognosce. Ait enim: habemus Altar, de quo edere non habent
potestatem, qui tabernaculo deseruiunt: corpus videlicet Christi, dicens, De
illo enim comedere Iudaeis fas non est. He commanded all the rest The altar of
the which the Jews may not eatc is the body of Christ.
of the blood of the calfe to be powered out about the foot of the Altar of
the burnt sacrifice, which is in the Tabernacle of witness. Let us again
understand the Altar of the burnt Sacrifice to be the body of Christ. For
as he is the priest and the Sacrifice: so is he the Altar also. That saint
Paul also does understand the intelligle Altar, the body of Christ, know by
his own saing. For he says, We have an Altar of the which yt is not lauful
for them to eat, that do serve in the Tabernacle, that is to say, the body
of Christ, sainge that of yt, yt is not laufull for the Jews to eat. Thus
much Isichius.

I need not here much to say to open the place, for yt is open enough of yt
self, and can not well be wrested, but that in the literal sense yt must be
Hoopers gloss edere. 1. credere.
understood of the body of Christ, in that manner that the Jew observing yet
the Law, may not eat him. Which manner is only by his real presence in
the Sacrament, except we shall evil favorably (as Hooper did) expownde edere
for credere, to eat, that is, to believe. And then the sense must be: that we
have an Altar, which is Christ's body, on the which the Jews that do
observe the law of Moses may not believe. Which sense as yt is very false,
so yt is very cruel. God forbid but that the Jews should believe on
Christ, as many a thousand of them have done, as the Acts of the Apostles,
and diverse other hystories do testify. The like sense shall this scripture
have, if we understand yt with the Sacramentarie of the spiritual presence of
Christ and the spiritual eating of him. So that a diligent reader may in this
place perceive into what strictes, and what inconveniences Theophil. in 13. ca.
epist ad Hebrews.
soche wrestinge expositours do bring themselves, who leaving expositours of
the same. But let us hear Theophilact also upon the Quoniam dixerat non
obseruandos: esse cibos, ne videantur nostra despicatui habenda, quod
obseruatione careant, Nos (inquit) obseruationem, habemus, verum haud eam, quae
sit in huiusmodi cibis, sed super altar, sieve incruenta hostia viuifici
corporis, liuius enim vt sint participes, ne pontisicibus quidem legalibus
permittitur, tantisper dum tabernaculo deseruiunt, boc est, legalibus vmbris,
and siguris, quae transeunt, ac dissoluuntur. Forasmoche as he had said, that
regard of meats Note well these terms the altar, the unbloody sacrisice,
the living body, etc.
should not be had, least our things might seem to be despiced, because they
had no regard or reueronce. We (says he) have reverend regard, but not that
that was upon these manner of meats, but upon the Altar or the unbloody
sacrisice of the living body. For of this Sacrifice to be partakers, yt is
not permitted, no not to high preistes of the law as long as they serve in the
tabernacle, that is, as long as they serve the shadows and figures of the
law, which pass a way, and are dissolved.

Here again by Theophilact as before by Isichius, ye see this text understood
of the body of Christ in the Sacrament. He calls yt the unbloody Sacrifice
as the holy Nicen Council did. And that those words also of the unbloody
Sacrifice should not be drawn by the Sacramentaries, the Theophilact very
well called: Viuificum corpus: the body that is able to make to live. But note
that we speak not here of this transitory, and passing life, but of the
permanent and everlasting life.

In the words of S. Paul, this also is to be noted, that allthough in his
The sacrisice of the Church of fred in a thousand places is but oneand the
same sacrisice. Hier lib. 3. in Oseam. cap. 8.
time the faith was largely spread, as in Rome, in Corinthus, in Galatia, in
Ephesus, in Thessalonia, in Collossis, in Laodicea, yea (as he himself to the
Romans does testify) from Jerusalem rownde about all the coasts unto
Illiricum, he filled all the contries with the Gospel: yet now writing to the
Hebrews Vna est haec hostia, and non multae: This sacrifice is one, and not
many. For we do not offer one lamb to day, and an other to morrow, but
allwaies the same one sacrifice. Proinde (says he) Vnum est hoc sacrificium,
Therefore this sacrifice is one, yt has also but one Altar, as S. Hierom does
testify saing: Vnum esse altar in ecclesia, and vnam fidem, and vnum baptisma
Apostolus docet. Quod haeretici deferentes, multa sibi altaria sabricati sunt,
non ad placandum Deum, sed in delictorum multitudinem, propterea leges Dei
accipere non merentur, cum eas quaes acceperant, ante contempserint. Etsi quid
dixerint de scripturis, nequaquam diuinis verbis, sed Ethnicorum sensibus
comparandum est. Isti multas immolant hostias, and comedunt carnes earum, vnam
Christi hostiam deserentes, nec comedentes eius carnem, cuius caro cibus
credentium est, quicquid fecerint, sacrificiorum ordinem ritumque simulantes,
sieve dederint eleemosinam, sieve pudicitia^ repromittant, sieve humilitatem
simule^t, fictisque bla^ditiis simplices quosque decipia^t, nihil de huiusmodi
sacrificiis Dominus suscipiet. The Apostle teaches, to be in the Church one
Altar, one faith and one baptism, which the heretics forsakinge, have framed
to the^selus many Aultars not to appease God, but to the heaping up of
multitude of sins.

Whom if we mark well we may learn that he by this word (altar)
understands Christ, as saint Paul does in this scripture produced out of
the epistle to the Hebrews. For where saint Paul to the Ephesians says Vnus
Dominus, vna fides, vnum baptisma, etc. One Lord, one faith, one Baptism: S.
Hierom says, that S. Paul teaches that we have but one altar, taking

But note with all how lively he describes the heretics of our time,
Heretics of our time well described by S. Hieron.
by the painting of the heretics of and before his time. For heretics in
all ages be heretics, and heretics be like heretics. He says that the
heretics did forsake the one altar of the Church, and framed to themselves
many aultars. So in this our time they have forsaken the one altar of
Christ's Church, and framed to themselves many aultars. For first Luther
forsaking the altar of Christ's Church, framed himself an other altar. But
Carolstadius, Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius, not likinge either the altar of
the Church or of Luther, framed to themselves after their pha^tasie an other
altar. The Anabaptists framed themselves an other altar after their devise.
The Swenck feldians misliking all that was done before them framed after their
conceit a new altar altogether spiritual. The Caluinistes thinking to pass
them all, have invented an other manner of altar, even altogether after the
manner of the Arrians altar, or not much unlike, as Richerus Caluines preacher
has in Frasice plainly declared. Al which aultars (as ours also in England
with like diversity) have not ben to appease God, but raither to heap up
the multitude of iniquities to the great prouocacion of his ire, wrath, Soch be
the phansies of men of this time.
invent and devise. So great is their desire, to alter, change and make new
things, that they would leave nothing that they fownde forasmoche as they
have contemned the laws, which before they

As touching their allegacions of the scriptures, S. Hierom says, that their
understanding of them is no better, than to be compared to the sainges of
Ethnickes. For having the letters or words of the scriptures, and Force of
the scripturs falselie alleged by heretiket.
not the true sense, how much soever they brag of the word, of the Lord,
they have not the word of God, as yt does well appear in their handlinge of
the vi of S. John, the xxvi of S. Matthew, the x and xi chapt. of the first
epistle of S. Paul to the Corinthians, the fifth to the Ephe. the thirtenth to
the Hebrews and other, which in this book we have taken from their violent
wrestinge, and tirannouse captivity, and have restored them to the liberty of
the concord and true understanding of Christ's Church, as yt has been taught
to understand the same by the magisterie of the holy Ghost, the right and
appoincted Schoolmaster of the same Church, by our Lord and God Jesus
Christ.

To proceade in the sainge of S. Hierome, he says that they do not eat the
flesh of Christ, which sainge how true yt is, with the grief of my heart This
is a change for the wouse.
I say yt, yt is to well known. For what thing do they more detest and
abhor Fasting for meritte is punishable by statute.
whether they fast (as they do not) for fasting by them is exiled, or pray,
which by them is almost to nothing shortened, or vow chastity, which they
run so fast unto, that they hate all that do not marry, as the greater
nombre of them is married, and soche of them as do not marry, do yt for the
like holiness that was in Iouinian, not for perfection of life, but for
quiettnesse and ease, and to avoid then combrances that may happen by a
shrewed weif. For thorowoute they condemn the vow of chastity, though S.
Hierom,

Saying then their doings are accepted of God in no better part, I wish all
men to leave their vanity, and walk in the verity, to leave heresy, and to
walk in faith: to leave their invented toies, and to walk in gods
established, and long continued laws: to leave their many aultars framed upon
dissent, and division, and to cleave to the one altar of Christ's catholic
Church, which is our help and protection: to leave their houngrie cheer of
bare bread, and wine, and to enioie the royal feast of Christ's body and
Veritas liberabit, truth will deliver. And then, when conscience shall be set
before the judgment seat of God, in the day, when he shall judge the
secrettes of men, the^ unto them that be rebels, and that do not obeie the
truth but follow vnrightwisnes, shall come indignacion and wrath,
tribulacion, and angnishe upon the soul of every man, that does evil (as
says S. Paul) and as he says to the Jew first, and also to the Romans 2.
gentile: so say I, to the chrystian first, and also to the infidel: but to
every man that does good shall come praise, honor, and peace. God therefore
that has once called us to his holy faith, confirm and establish soche as
have not yet swarned from yt, and reduce, and bring home again soche as have
wa^dred like lost sheape, that we be may all be of the nombre of them, that
shall receive praise, honor, and peace, which God of his mercy grant Amen.

THE ONE AND SIXTETH CHAPTER makes a recapitulacion of that, that is done in
this work.
Now gentle Reader, have I goen through all those scriptures,

Considre, Reader, how many fathers of the greek church be here produced, as
Dionise, Iustyne, Irenaeus, Origin, Gregory Nazianzen, Basil, Chrisostom
Cyrill, with other of the elder sort, which although they were of one Church:
yet they were of diverse times, some of them with in one hundredth year after
Christ, some two hundredth, some three, and yet all these agree in one truth of
the presence of Christ's body in the bless. Sacrament,

In the latin Church were Alexander, Tertullian, Cyprian, Hilarie, Optatus,
Hierom, Ambrose Augustine, and other, which although they were far
distaunte, many hundredth of miles from the fathers of the greek Church: yet
in consent and agreement together in this matter they ioin and go together.

Of the greek church again be produced other, that were many years after the
other Fathers before rehearsed, as Theodorete. Euthimius, Damascen, Theophilact,
Oecumenius, and Bessario with other, which although they lived in great

Again also in the latin Church answerablie to these were produced, Gregory,
Beda, Haymo, Anselme, Paschasius, Thomas de Aquino, Lyra, and Dionise, with
other, which also living with much difference of times, and diversity of
places, were yet with the eldest, and the midlest, and with the latest all of
one mind.

And here note that these authors, as they do, according to the rule of
Vincentius Lirinen. altogether teach Christ's presence in the Sacrament, so
do they yt manifestly, commonly, and continually For Origin, Basil.
Chrysostom, Cyrill, Theodoret, Euthymius, and Theophilact, which be the
greater writers of the grecians, are not produced once only, neither speaking
obscurelie: but they are often and many times, and that with speech most
plain and manifest, and that commonly, in every weighty matter of the book.
Likewise be the Fathers of the latin church, which in every place bear
agreeable testimony to the Fathers of the greek church. And for asmoche as
these fathers have expownded the scriptures to us, that do treact of the
Sacrament and do therein agree, yt is meet for us to accept that sense and

Now therefore let the Proclamer turn his History of Mitridates unto his own
head and his likes, who lainge wicked seige to the city of Gods Church, would
bear the citizens in hand, that the army of the holy learned Fathers and
doctors of Christ's Church were on their side. But God be praised, the
contrary now appears. For this holy army is comed down, and have joined
with Gods citizens, and have vanquished Mitridates, and his company, and
delivered the city from their cruel tirannie of he resie, and have declared
them selves to all the world, that they be friends of Gods city, and
defenders of the same, and adversaries to Mitrydates the Proclamer and
vanquishers of the same. For we have not by brag, only said that the
scriptures, doctors, and Counsels be on our side (as this Mitrydates, this
proclamer did) But we have evidently, and inuinciblie proved Giezi the lieng
and leprouse seruante of Heliseus could not, when his master was compased
about with the thieves of Syria, see any that were on his masters side, but
against his Master he saw many, yet in very deed, there were mo on the
Prophets side, then on the Syrians part. as after yt was well declared: So this
Giezi, this Proclamer, the lieng leprouse servant sees not what a noble
company is on Christ's side, but on the Syrians side the enemies of Christ he
sees multitudes.

For hitherto being blinded with ambition, and (as Giezi did) lieng for some
gain, or promotion, he has since fallen into the deapth of the spiritual
leprey, which S. Austen calls heresy. Leprosi (says he) non absurd in
telliguntur, qui scientia^ verae fidei non habentes, varias doctrinas
profitentur erroris. Nulla porrofalsa doctrina est, quae non aliqua vera
intermiseat. Vera ergo falsis inordinate permixta in vna narratione, vel
disputatione hominis, tanquam in vnius corporis color significant lepram,
tanquam veris falsisque colorum fucis humana corpora variantem atque
maculantem. The lepres are very well to be understood those, which not
having the knowledge of the true faith, do profess diverse doctrines of
error. the color of one body, does signify the leprey altering and
defiling the bodies of men as yt were with true and false show of colors.

By these means then this man was so blinded that he could not see one
scripture, one doctor nor one Council, on Christ's side, or on his trueths
side. But on the enemies side, on heresies side, he could see an wholl army.
But I compare this army unto the people that were with in the walls of
Jerusalem, at the time of the destruction of the same, which, as Josephus
declares, were not only plagued by pestilence, and famine at the hand of
God, and with swoorde and fire at the hands of their enemies without the
walls, but also they being with in the walls plagued them selves with great
debates, discordes, insurrections, and mortal wars. So that the slaughter
was as great within, as yt was without. Even so this army has been much
plagued at Gods hand, yt has raised much sedicion and tumulte both in
Germany, Frannce, and England, even within their own walls, yt has be^ from
time to time persecuted with swoorde and fire, and the head capitaines have
not agreed among the^ selves, as in these our days yt is more then manifest
that they do not.

This army therefore, though yt be fuffred: yet as touching the cause, they are
not to be feared, For we standing with our Prophet, our cause can not faill,
and when yt shall please owre Prophet, the army, that was with Helizeus,
shall ioin with us, and deliver us, which army have among them no division,
no discord, there be amongst them no inward wars, no insurrections, no
tumultes (as be amongst the other) but of them all there is one heart and one
mouth. What one says all say, what one denies all deny.

On the other side, look how many cities, how many contries, so many
doctrines, somanie faiths, so many religions: yea almost how many heads, so
many opinnions. How does Luther agree with Oecolampadius? how does
Melancthon with Bullinger? yea how does Luther agree with him self or
Melancthon with himself As for their disagreinge with the holy fathers, yt is
to manifest. The holy fathers teach the presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
they deny yt. They teach that the sacrifice of Christ's

Yt were to long a repeticion to rehearse all the licenciouse doctrines, that be
settfurth against godly and virtuous living. But if there were no more but
these two euells last rehearsed, in them, namely their dissenting from the
fathers and their giving of liberty to viciouse living, yt were enough to give
any man just occasion to suspect, yea and utterly to forsake their doctrine.

In the other side, forasmoche as the Catholics embrace the doctrine of the
Fathers, and teach vertueouse living, as penance, contricion, confession,

God now of his mercy open the eyes of all his people, that having a brief
show of the teachers of truth and untruth, of verteuouse living, and of
lice^ciouse living, may by his grace take the one, and leave the other,
follow the good, and leave the evil, and so framing their life's, to live in
the true faith, and good life, may by his mercy atteign to the everlasting
life with him, to whom, be all honor and glory world without end Amen.

Volumen hoc ab eximio viro M. n. Thoma Heskins, De praesentia corporis and
sanguinis domini, Anglico idiomate conscriptum, perlectum est a viris illius
idiomatis and sacrae Theologiae peritissimis, quibus sicutipsi authori merito
id tribuendum esse iudico, vt ad vtilitatem gentis anglicae euulgetur:

Ita testor et iudico Cunerus Petri de Brouwershauen Pastor sancti Petri
Louanij,
4. Iulij anno 1565.
FINIS.
THE CHIEF AND MOST MATters contained in this book. where number of book is
omitted, ye be referred to the next before.
A.
AArons garment wotn for a Bishopric. lib. 3. cap. 33. Abstinence from sin
honors God. lib. 2. ca. 44. Adoracion of the B. Sacrament taught by S.
Paul. lib. 2. cap. 44. by Alexander. cap. 43. by S. Augustine. cap. 45. by S.
Dionyse. ca. 47. by Eusebius Emis. ib. by S. Bernarde. ibid. Adoracion
practiced by Angels. lib. 2. ca. 45. by priest deacon, and people in the Greek
Church: by S. Ambrose in the latin Church: by S. Austens mother. ca. 45 by
Erasmus, and al christen people. ca. 46. by Gorgonia cap. 27. Adoracion
impugned, and denied, by I uther. lib. 2. cap. 48. by the Proclamer. cap. 46.
by wicked doctrine. ibid. Adoracion proved by the same doctors, that the
Proclamer alleged against yt. li. 2. cap. 45. Adoracion aught to be done
before we receive. ibid. Adoracion used in and before the time of S. Austen.
ibid. Adoracion in the primitive Church infamed by infidells for idolatry.
ibid. Adoracion is to be allowed where the presence is admitted. li. 2. cap. 46.
Adoracion never by catholic writer denied. cap. 47. Adoracion first denied
about xl. years past. cap. 48. Adoracion not to have been used before the time
of Honorius is untrue. ibid. Aerius denieng the sacrifice of the Mass to
auaill the dead condemned for an heretic above a thousand years agon. lib. 3.
ca. 39. Ale given in stead of wine in a Communion lib. 1. cap. 26. Alexanders
authority approved. li. 2. ca. 32. Alfonsus nombreth xiij. heresies against
the B. Sacrament. in Prolog. Algasia moved doubts of scripture to S. Hierom.
lib. 1. cap. 4. Aliud in the neuter gendre signifies difference insubstance.
ca. 29. Almaricus a Sacrame^tarie condemned. in Pro. S. Ambrose understands
S. Paul to speak of the very body of Christ. li. 3. ca. 57 Ambrose
corrupted by Oecola^padius. ib. ca. 5 Ambrose his doctrine compared with the
Sacramentaries. lib. 2. ca. 52. Ambrose commended the faith of his Brother
Satyrus in the B. Sacrament. li. 1. ca. 24. Ambr. gives three instruct. li. 3.
ca. 14. Ambr. offered sacrifice in the Mass. cap. 37. he prayed as the Church
does. ibid. S. Andrewe offered the daily sacrifice. ca. 34. Angels attend upon
the priest in the time of sacrifice. li. 2. ca. 45. Angels appoincted to
every man, and offer our prayers to God. li. 3. ca. 38. Antichryste shall
cause the daily sacrifice to cease. lib. 1. cap. 32. Appologie, and
proclamacio^ both like bolts. lib. 3. cap. 33. Apostles understood not Christ's
own words. li. 1. ca. 1. Apostles learned of Christ. cap. 7. Apostles
decreed that the dead should be prayed for at Mass. lib. 3. cap. 39. Argument
of Chrysts ascension in the vi. of S. John proves the real presence in the
Sacrament. li. 2. ca. 35. Argument of Theophil. to prove the bread made flesh.
lib. 3. cap. 20. Arrogancy mother of error. lib. 1. cap. 4. Ascension of
Christ improueth not the presence in the Sacrament. li. 2. ca. 12. Asseurance
of mercy promised to man before full sentence pronownced against him. li. 1.
cap. 9. Ancient and godly customs are not to be left for the bare saing of a
protestant. ca. 25. Aultars holy. li. 3. cap. 31. testified by Optatus, and S.
Austen, and abuse of them punished. ibid. Aultars in use in time of S. Cyprian.
ib. ca. 39 Aultars from the Apostles time. cap. 31. Altar wherefore yt serves.
ibid. Altar and sacrifice correlatiues ibid. S. Austen to Dardan. opened li.
2. cap. 12. Austens cheifintent upon the vi. of S. John. lib. 2. cap. 16.
Austen teaches three things in one sentence against the Secramentaries. ca.
19. Austen anknowlegeth both spiritual and corporal receiving. ca. 16 Austen
produced by the Sacramentaries in wrong sense. ca. 24. Austen against Oecolamp.
and Cranmer. ca. 54. Austens assertions conferred with the judge meant of the
Aduersa. li. 3. ca. 15 Austen calls the bread and cup of our Lord a
sacrifice. ca. 18. Austen truly understanded. li. 2. ca. 54 Austen utters S.
Paul's wootdes expreslie of the body and blood of Christ. li. 3 ca. 55. S.
Austen corrupted by the Proclamer. li. 3. ca. 31. Authoririe of late writers
proved good by good reason. li. 2. ca. 3. Authority is to be obied where
corruption of life is. li. 1. ca. 6.
B
Baptism received of all indifferently. li. 3. cap. 2. Baptism and the read
sea compared. ibid. Baptism of christ and John much different. ibid. Baptism
instituted by christ and commended by the wholl Trinity li. 3. ca. 14 Basil
and Greg. Nazian. how they atteigned the knowledge of the scripturs. lib. 1. ca.
7. Basil how he taught the simple to believe of the Sacram. li. 2. ca. 52
Basil and Chrysostom not fownders of the Mass, but setters forth of soche
order as they fownd received by tradicion. lib. 3. cap. 35. Basil believed the
bread and wine to be made the body and blood of Christ. ca. 36. Basil offered
the body and blood of christ in sacrifice ca. 37. Basil in his Mass prayed
for the dead and to saints. ca. 39 Benediction, what power yt has. li 2. ca.
51. and ca. 62. Benefitts and plagues of the Jews, figurs of our benefitcs and
plagues. li. 3. ca. 1 Berengarius the first open impugner of the B. Sacrament
condemned in four Counsels prolog. Berengarius recanted and abiured ibid
Berengarius neither excellent in learning nor commendable in life. ibid.
Berengarius foolishlie objected S. Austen as the Sacramentaries do now. li. 2.
cap. 14. Bertramus wrote obscurelie and suspiciouslie of the Sacr. prolog.
Blasphemy to say the B. Sacr. to be only a figure. li. 2. ca. 64 Blessing of
Christ, what force yt has cap. 58. Blessing of more power then nature. cap.
62. Blood of Christ on the cross and in the Sacr. all one. li. 2. ca 5. and
li. 3. ca. 20. Blood in the chalice the same that was shedd on the cross. li.
2. cap. 60 Blood of Christ in the Sacr. how to be estomed. li. 3. ca. 16
Blood of the Paschall lamb a figure of christ's blood in the B. Sacr. ibid.
Body of christ joined to us by corporal receipt, not by spiritual only.
li. 2. cap. 14. Body of christ consecrated of many priests, all one body.
ca. 28. Body of christ invisible in the Sacrament, a figure of the same body
visible. ca. 49. Body of christ demonstrated and delivered not in figure but
in verity. ca. 63. Body of christ how yt is called a spiritual meat. li. 3.
ca. 8 Body of the lamb christ fedeth us. ca. 11 Body of christ under form
of bread. ca. 26. Body of christ consecrated to two ends. cap. 41. Books of
scripture sealed to many. li. 1. ca. 5 Bread of the new communion differs
not from common bread. li. 1. ca. 17. how the same is now used. li. 3. ca.
47. Bread broken in the Sacrament the medicin of immottalitie. li. 1. ca. 17.
Bread by the omnipotency of the word is made flesh ibid. and li. 3. ca. 9. 20
Bread and wine changed into the body and blood of christ, not in figure but
in verity. li. 1.. ca. 21. li. 2. ca. 59. 60. 51. 53. Bread and wine offered by
Melchisedecfigurs of that which christ offer in his supper. li. 1. ca. 29 Bread
turned into an holier thing. cap. 31. 37. Bread taken three ways in the vi. of
John. li. 2. ca. 2. Bread how yt is turned into flesh, and why flesh is not
seen in the Bless. Sacrament. li. 2. cap. 7. 8. 19. 57 and li. 3. cap. 20.
Bread that descended from heaven is the body of our Lord. li 2. ca. 31 Bread
which Christ delivered no bare figure but flesh. ca 51. 53 Bread and wine so
sanctified in consecracion, as yt passes man's wit. cap. 54. Bread given to
the two Disciples in Emaus was the body of Christ. cap. 65. 66. Bread which
we break is the body of Christ lib. 3. ca. 19. 27. Bread seems to be in the
Sacrament but yt is flesh li. 3, ca. 20 Bread divided to many is the body of
our Lord li. 3. ca. 21. Bread, and cup in Saint Paul the body, and blood
of Christ. lib. 3. cap. 27. 50. Brentius impugneth the form of Baptism lib.
2. cap. 28.
C.
Canon of the Apostles corrupted by the Proclamer, li. 3. ca. 40 Canon
forbiddetb not the priest to receive aloue ibi. Capharnaites understood Christ
carnally lib. 2. cap. 34. had two vain thoughts* ibid. Carnal understanding
is by reason and senses only cap. 37 Carnal men understanding nothing above
their senses, leap back from the understanding of the mystery of the
Sacrament cap-33 Cassiodorus how he utters Saint Pauleswoordes li. 3. ca.
51 Catholic priests following the Schism be in miserable case. lib. 3. cap.
36. Catholic faith described cap. 53. Chastity required in priests. lib. 1.
cap. 22. Christ turns the malice of heretics to the profitte of his
Church. prolog. Christ dwells in us corporally not only spirituallie in
Prolog. item lib. 1. cap. 14. lib. 3. cap. 23. and 26 Christ's real presence
in the Sacrament a received doctrine in all the chrystian Church. prolog.
Christ's Parliament house the catholic Church ibid. Christ's interpreting of
the scripture proves the difficulty. li. 1. cap. 7. Christ not Solomon the
seed promised to David cap. 9 Christ and Sampson compared ca. 10 Christ's
passion conferred to the prophecies thereof. lib. 1. cap. 11. item his
resurrection and ascension ca. 12. Christ's body and blood an everlasting
sacrifice. cap. 13. item 31. lib. 3. cap. 36. a daily sacrifice. ibi. Christ
is offered of his Church, and his Church of him. lib. 1. cap. 18. item lib. 3.
cap. 36 Christ and Melchisedech compared lib. 1. cap. 13. Christ offered
bread, and wine that is his body and blood. ca. 29 Christ's oblacion after the
order of Melchisedech overthrows the heresy of Eutyches cap. 30 Christ
offered sacrifice in his supper, and commanded yt to be contiuued. li. 1. ca.
32. 34. item lib. 3. cap. 33 Christ commanded himself to be offered lib. 3.
cap. 16 Christ offered every where is but one body and sacrifice lib. 2. cap.
10 Christ gave his own body to his Apostles. cap. 50. 64. he gives himself
to be eaten in the Sacrament, lib. 1. cap. 14. Christ's words: This is my
body, be not figurative. lib. 2. cap. 42. 43. 44. and sequent. Christ veri^e
body in the blessed Sacrament not the figure only. lib. 1. cap. 21. item
lib. 2. cap. 7. item lib. 3. cap. 7. and 59. Christ gives us the same flesh
by which he was joined to us, or took of our nature. lib. 1. cap. 14. item
lib. 2. cap. 5 Christ is joined to us corporally. lib. 1. cap. 14. Christ
and the Paschall lamb compared. lib. 1. cap. 15. Christ in our passover
verily perfectly. lib. 1. cap. 16. 19. in the Jews passover vnper fectlie
cap. 17 Christ if he be received but spirituallie then is our passover all one
with the Jews passover cap. 19 Christ first eat, and drank his body, and
blood, and then gave to his Apostles. and why. lib. 1. cap. 16. item lib. 2.
cap. 55. Christ gave inconsumptible meat, tho Sacramentaries consumptible
meat. li. 1. cap. 17. Christ consecrated his own body. lib. 3. cap. 51. and
commands the same to be consecrated. li. 1. ca. 20. the priest consecrateth
Christ and not the pope made the Sacra-Chrysts body. ibid. ca. 18 Christ did
three notable things in the institution of the blessed Sacrament. lib. 3 cap.
16. Christ commended to us his body, and blood 24 Christ in the law
presented in figure represented in the Gospel in verity. lib. 1. cap. 18
Christ is now received in verity li. 3. ca. 5. and 59. Christ's very body
set before us in earth. lib, 1. ca. 18. Christ the only begotten Son of
God received in the blessed Sacrament ibid. and lib. 3. ca. 25 Christ verily
upon the altar lib. 1. cap. 18. Christ gives his own blood in the cup
lib. 2. cap. 61 Christ turned the bread into his body and the wine into his
blood lib. 1. cap. 20. he made the bread his body. lib. 2. cap. 49. Christ
saing, this is my body, with the word made the thing cap. 55 Christ not man
does consecrate lib. cap. 20. 31 Christ's words (this do ye) be referred to
the substance not to the manner. lib. 1. cap. 27 Christ's manner in ministering
has no commandment. ca. 26. never since used. ibid. Christ left the manner
of ministracion to be ordered of his Apostles cap. 26. and lib. 3. cap. 34.
Christ in his supper bare himself in his hands lib. 2. cap. 10. 54 Christ
gives his flesh in substance verily not in manner grossly. ca. 36 Christ in
his supper the geuer and the gift. ca. 47. 53 Christ the meat that we all
feed on. lib. 3 cap. 6. Christ is the substance of the blessed Sacrament. cap.
10 Christ's body as verily received in the Sacrament as yt is believed to have
hanged on the cross. ibid. Christ's blood in the Sacrament shed upon the
soldiers garments lib. 1. cap. 24 Christ's body received with mouth both of
body and soul. li. 1. cap. 20. li. 2. ca. 14. 25. Christ's flesh is not
disgested as other meats. lib. 1. cap. 14. yt turns us into yt. li. 2. ca.
5. lib. 3. ca. 59. Christ is not there received spirituallie, where he is not
believed that he may be received reallie li. 1. cap. 31. Christ does
sanctify, and transmute the bread and wine. ibid. See bread. Christ's body
upon the cross called bread li. 2. ca. 6 Christ does bless sanctify, and
divide his holy body to the receauers. lib. 2. cap 8. Chrysts flesh in the
Sacrament gives life to the worthy receauers li. 2. cap. 6. li. 3. cap. 7.
Christ in all receauers naturally: in good receauers both naturally and
spirituallie lib. 2. cap. 20. 24. 25. lib. 3. cap. 6. Christ as verily in the
blessed Sacrament as he was verily incarnated lib. 2. cap. 24. Christ by his
incarnacion joined to us: we by the Sacrament joined to him, lib. 2. cap. 14.
28. item lib. 3. cap. 27. 59. Christ's body shall raise our bodies lib. 2.
cap. 26. Christ feadeth us with a bread, which is his flesh. ca. 32 Christ
moved the Jews to believe in his godhead, and to eat the flesh of his manhead.
li. 2. ca. 2 Christ by the Sacrament makes us one with his body, and among
our selves. li. 3. cap. 26. Christ instructed his Apostles in the faith of the
blessed Sacrament before he in stituted yt cap. 56 Christ spoke plentifully
of his body and blood in the sixth of Saint John. lib. 2. cap. 55. Christ's
institucion is to receive his body and blood in the remembrance of his death.
li. 3. cap. 36. Chrysts body is not in the Sacramental bread of the
communion. cap. 42 Christ why he instituted the Sacrament under two kinds
lib. 2. ca. 67 Christ being wholly under each kind, the people be not
defrauded receiving but the one ibid. Christ said Mass. li. 3. cap. 33 Christ
taught the new sacrifice of the new Testament lib. 1. cap. 34. 37. item lib.
2. ca. 56. 58. Christ meant a sacrifice li 1. ca. 31 Christ must of necessity
be granted to have offered sacrifice in his supper. ibid. Christ ceasseth not
to excute his perpetual preisthead and sacrifice. cap. 37 Christ offered every
where is but one body, and one sacrifice li. 2. cap. 10 Christ both in heaven
and earth in verity ibid. Christ's being in the Sacrament is miraculouse
contrary to the rules of philosophy. ibid. Christ body upon the cross, in
heaven, and on the altar all one. lib. 2. cap. 15. and 22. Christ the Sonue
of man, how he was in heaven, when he spoke in earth. lib. 2. cap. 34. Chrysts
godhead and manhead distincted as two breades ca. 3. and 15. Christ sits in
heaven, and yet is daily sacrificed by the priest ca. 46 Christ's body on the
altar that was in the maunger ca. 45. Christ why he made mention of his
ascension in the vi. of Saint John. cap. 34. 35. Christ's flesh besides nature
ascended into heaven, and besides nature gives life in the blessed Sacrament.
ca. 34. Christ's words wrested to xvi. diverse senses by protestants. ca. 41
Christ was the spiritual rock, not the material and therefore is there no
figure in Saint Paul's speech. lib. 3. cap. 3 Christ before the consecracion
of his body, lift up his eyes, and gave thanks to his Father. li. 3. ca. 34
Christ took the cup of wine mixed with water into his hands, and blessed,
and sanctified them. cap. 35 Chrysts blood not only in heaven but also in the
chalice ca. 25 Christ entered in to his Apostles the doors being shett. li. 2.
ca. 11 Christ shall come to judgment with the sign of the cross and prints
of his wounds. li. 3. ca 45. Christ how he is, has been, and shall be a
figure of himself. ibid. Christ what he delivered in his supper. ca. 44.
Chrystians eat the flesh of Christ, as the Jews did Manna. li. 3. ca, 6
Chrystians using, no external sacrifice, are less thankful then the Jews.
lib. 1. ca. 32. Chrystians receiving but a figure as the Jews, where is then
the verity. lib. 3. cap. 6 Chrystians come to a greater thing in the
Sacrament, then the Jews did in Manna li. 2. ca. 39 Chrysostom calls that
blood, which Saint Paul calls the cup lib. 2. cap. 27. he believed the
bread and wine, by sanctificacion to be made the body and blood of Christ.
lib. 3. ca. 36. Chrysostom offered sacrifice in Mass, cap. 37. desiered
intercession of Saints, and prayed for the dead. ca. 39 Chrysostom impugneth
Luther denieng preparacion to be needful before the receipt of the blessed
Sacrament. ca. 54 Church offering sacrifice in the Mass follows Christ his
Apostles and the primitive Church. ca. 37 Church must both offer and receive.
lib. 1. cap. 37 Church uses ministracion for reseruacion, as Saint Clement
ordained. cap. 24. Church falselie charged with error by M. Iuell ibid.
Church reserving the blessed Sacrament for the sick offends not cap. 27
Churches universal obseruacion to be obeyed and be kept. ibid. Church
teaching the scripturs to be scripturs teaches the understanding of them also.
cap. 20 Church of Afrik understood the vi. of S. John of the Sacrament. lib.
2. cap. 15 Saint Clements saing opened lib. 1. cap. 24. Clement offered Chrysts
body and blood in sacrifice. lib. 3. cap. 37. he believed the bread and wine
by the holy Ghost to be made the body and blood of Christ cap. 36 Cloud a
figure of the holy Ghost cap. 2 Communion with Christ two ways ca. 23 see
unity. Communion spiritual by Baptism corporal by the Sacrament cap. 23. 26
Communion under one kind lib. 2. cap. 67. Communion with heretics may not
be. lib. 3. cap. 25 Communion in prayer ca. 40 Communion bread of the new
Church ho we yt is used. 47. the body of Christ is not there *2 Communicacion
is a nearer conjunction them participacion. cap. 17. 20. Communicacion what yt
is ibid. item ca. 22 Common prayer of the Church is for the wholl Church. ca.
40. Comfort small where conscience is confownded. prol. Conference of Christ's
words, and the serpents. li. 2. ca. 42. Confession has three commodities.
li. 3. cap. 55. yt is to be made truly ibid. Consecracion what yt is lib. 3.
cap. 9. how yt is done. li. 1. ca. 20. 31. li. 2. ca. 8. what is the force. li.
3. ca. 14. Consecracion the word used by S. Ambrose. lib. 2. cap. 52. by
Tertullian. lib. 3. cap. 33. Consecracion used by the Apost. and that is used
now in the Church, all one. ca. 34 35. Consecracion and sacrifice avouched by
S. Cyprian. li. 1. ca. 29. Consecracion and sacrifice abolished in the Church
that the ministers may more frelie keep women. ca. 22. Counsels of more force
then Parliaments cap. 25. Cranmers gloseth without warrant upon Chrysostom. lib.
1. ca. 18. Cranmers sensual sentence of faith. cap. 16. Cranmer gloriouse
words to cloak euel mening. cap. 21. Cranmer falsifieth the scripture. li.
2. ca. 11. he falsifieth Iustine. ca. 44. Cranmer uses two false sleights in
alleging of Iustine. ibid. Cranmers heresy improued. li. 2. ca. 62. Cranmers
general rule refuted. lib. 3. cap. 30. Creature earthly can not be changed
in to a spiritual virtue. cap. 20. Cup of blessing what yt is, and why yt is
called. ca. 19. Cyprian and Origin teach that evil men receive the body of
Christ. cap. 46. Cyril denies that we receive Chrysts body only
spiritually. lib. 2. cap. 16. 26.
D.
Damasus pope disdenied not to learn of S. Hierom. li. 1. ca. 8. Damascen
understood S. Paul to speak of the very body of Christ. Cor. 11. li. 3.
cap. 51. Daily sacrifice of Christ's body and blood to be offered. li. 2. ca.
57. Daily sacrifice shall cease by Antichryst. li. 1. cap. 32. Danger of
unworthy receauers. lib. 3. cap. 54. Death to him that will not heat the
priest. lib. 1. cap. 6. Decaie of deuocio^ cause of shortning of the Mass. li.
3. cap. 34 Dcrees made against priests Marriages. lib. 2. cap. 28 Desire of the
eating of the flesh of Job applied to the eating of Chrysts flesh lib. 1. cap.
14. Difference between the body of Christ and show bread. ca. 22 Difference
of being of the holy Ghost with us, and of Christ. lib. 2. ca. 63. Difference
between the primitive Church, and the catholic Church now in the use of the
B. Sacrament. lib. 3. cap. 57. Diverse histories of scripture provoke to sin
being not godly understood and used. li. 1. ca. 2. Divine things are with
reverence and diligence to be handled. li. 3. ca. 1. Doctrine of the primitive
Church conferred with the Church now. lib. 2. cap. 43. Doctrine of the
Sacramentaries conferred with the Fathers. lib. 1. cap. 21. contrary to the
Fathers. li. 2. ca. 59. Doctrine of the real presence how yt is called new.
lib. 2. cap. 50. and that yt is not inuencion of the papists. Doctrine flieng
the common received understanding of the scripture is to be suspected. ca. 40
Dogs cruelly vourowed their Masters, that irreverently had cast the B.
Sacrament unto them. li. 3. ca. 43 Doubts in the law of God, where to be
dissolved. lib. 1. cap. 6. item lib. 3. cap. 1. Disciples in Emaus knew not
Christ before the eating of the bread. lib. 2. cap. 65. Drink which we drink
in the B. Sacrament flowed out of the side of Christ. lib. 3. cap. 7.
E.
Effect of chrysts blessing of the bread, and of the words of consecracion.
lib. 1. cap. 26. li. 2. cap. 61. and 62. Effect of the B. Sacrament euerlast.
life. lib. 2 cap. 6. 30. and lib. 3. cap. 7. Effects of the bl. Sacrament
proving the excellency thereof, and means to atteing the same. lib. 3. cap. 6.
and 14. li. 2. cap. 5. Effectual causes two. cap. 15 Epistle to the Romans
full of obscure places, li. 1. ca. 4 Ephesine Council understood the vi. of S,
John of the Sacrament. lib. 2. cap. 15. Erasmus calls the error of
Berengarius impudent. prolog. error of the Proclamer therefore arrogant. ibid.
Erasmus his judgment of the blessed Sacrament. ibid. Error of Origin. li. 2.
ca. 55 Error in the Sacrament brings many other errors. li. 2. ca. 1
Eucharist called the holy body of our Lord by S. Cyprian. ca. 13 Eutiches
his heresy. ca. 68. Euthymius denies that, which the Sacramen taries affirm
and affirms that they deny li. 2. ca. 15. Every chrystian may not dispute
of God. li. 1. cap. 7. Evil men eat and drink the body and blood of
Christ. li. 2. cap. 16. 24. lib. 3. cap. 46. 49. 52. 54. 57. Evil receauers
three sorts. cap. 52 Euells two committed by purting away of confess. cap. 55.
Examinacion of our selves what yt is, and how to be done. ca. 53. Excellency
of Sacraments stands in three points cap. 12 Excellency of the blessed
Sacrament above Manna. cap. 14. item 25. excellent titles thereof. cap. 30
Exhortacion to preparacion by Chrysostom. ca. 54
F.
Fabianus made a law that the people should communicate thrice in the year
lib. 3 cap. 40. Faith how yt is requisite to the receiving of the blessed
Sacrament. lib. 2. cap. 20. lib. 3 cap. 53 Faith that believes the flesh of
Christ to be in the blessed Sacrament a spiritual faith li. 2. cap. 37. Faith
above senses and reason and teaches many things contrary to them. lib. 1.
cap. 16. and lib. 2. cap. 39. 62. 10. Faith (...) in the mystery of the (...).
lib. 2. cap. 37. Faith judges possible that reason judges impossible. cap.
10. 30 Faith and Baptism inseparable means of salvation. ca. 48 Faith without
woorks sufficieth not in persons of discrecion li. 3. ca. 1 Faith nourished by
the body and blood of Christ. lib. 2. ca. 49 Faith catholic described. li.
3. ca. 53 False Chrystians more worthy reproach then Jews. lib. 1. cap. 19.
item lib. 2, cap. 9. False doctrine has some truth admixed. cap. 12 Fame of
the chrystian rites among infidells, proves the presence. ca. 42 Fasting for
merit punishable by statute. lib. 3. ca. 60 Fathers learned of their elders
lib. 1. cap. 7 Fathers in the primitive Church spoke of the mysteries often
covertly. lib. 2. cap. 3 Figurs of Christ's incarnacion. li. 1. ca. 10 Figurs
be not in all points comparable ibi. Figures of the blessed Sacrament four
cap. 15. Figurs in good things not so good as the things figured: in evil
things not so evil ibid. Figurative passover, and the true passover both on
one table ca. 18 Figurs of the old law, and verity of the new law, be as
shadows, and the thing shadowed li. 2. ca. 22 Figurs of things be not
merueillouse but the Sacrament is merueillouse ca. 47 Figure taken two ways
cap. 49. Figurs contein what reason conceive, the Sacrament, what faith
believes. cap. 51. Figure of the Sacramentaries excluded from Chrysts words
lib. 2. cap. 51. 52. wiped away by Chrysostom. cap. 55. denied cap. 58. 59. 60.
62. Figure what yt must be li. 3. ca. 2 Figure gives not life, but the blessed
Sacrament gives life, ergo etc. cap. 8 Figurs and things figured compared.
cap. 10. Figure may forshewe life, but yt can not be life. ca. 14 Flesh of
Christ in the Sacrament has an unspeakable power. lib. 2. ca. 1 Flesh of
Christ called life, as being the flesh of God, who is life. ca. 14 Flesh and
blood of Christ both under one kind in the catholic manner of ministracion:
neither of both under two kinds in the heretical Communion. cap. 16. Food of
Christ's flesh cause of our immortality lib. 2, cap. 17. 26. item lib. 3 cap.
24. 58. 59. Flesh of Christ meat in plain manner lib. 2. cap. 18. lib. 3. cap.
5 Flesh of Christ gives life and yet remains still natural flesh. cap. 27.
Flesh profits nothing John vi. is not spoken of the flesh of Christ, for
that profits much. cap. 36. Flesh of Christ both natural and spiritual
cap. 36. lib. 3. cap. 10. Flesh of the Son of God and the consecrated bread
one body. cap. 52. Flesh of Christ appears not in the B. Sacrament for our
infirmities sake. lib. 2. ca. 7. 8. 19. 57. lib. 3. ca. 20. Flesh united to the
Son of God by assumtion, the same united to us by participacion. li. 3. cap.
27. Flesh of Christ called spirit. li. 3. ca. 10. Flesh of Christ received in
the B. Sacrament seed of everlasting life. li. 2. ca. 57. Form, essence,
nature, substance, all one. lib. 2. cap. 7. Forms of bread and wine a speech
known to S. August. ca. 22. and form of bread remain. cap. 60. Four things
called the body of Christ. ca. 58. Four benefitts of the Jews no^bred. li.
3. ca. 1.
G.
Gelasius his meaning opened. li. 2. ca. 68. Gelasius truncatelie alleged by
the Proclamer, auoncheth two things which he concealed. ibid. Genesis not red
of the Jews before thirty years of age. li. 1. ca. 2. Germans acknowledge
the real presence. prolog. Good religion professed without good life not
auailable. li. 3. ca. 1. God appointed no vain figure. li. 1. cap. 24. God and
his spirit in his creaturs two ways. li. 3. ca. 49. God good by nature, man by
participacion. li. 1. cap 33. li. 2. cap. 12. God plagueth us in these days
for the abuse of the bl. Sacrament. lib. 2. ca. 5. God punishes some
te^porallie, some eternally, some both ways. li. 3. ca. 58. Gods word
contrary to senses must be believed. li. 2. ca. 55. Gods order in his Church
for doctrine. lib. 1. cap. 6. Gods order inuerted. ibid. Godhead of Christ
has not possibility but to be every where: his manhead has possibility to
be somwhere. li. 2. ca. 12. Godhead of the Son fills his boddie sanctified
by the priest. lib. 2. cap. 28. lib. 3. cap. 25. Gospel has two commodities.
li. 2. cap. 1. Gospel has not the figurs, but the very things, ca. 18.
Gospel commanded the eating of blood: the law did forbid yt. ca. 50.
Gospel and law compared. li. 3. cap. 15. Greeks affirm the real presence.
prol.
H.
Heresy makes man enemy to God. prol. Hetesie by arrogancy much
prevails. lib. 1. cap. 5. Heresy the farther yt goes the worse yt fretteth.
cap. 31. Heretics have moved war against the church. prolog. Heretics
agree in conspiring against the Church. li. 1. cap. 8. Heretics why they are,
not to be followed. ibid. Heretics bark against the truth, as dooges against
the Moon. cap. 16. Heretics build there faith upon reason and senses. ibid.
Heretics how they allege the fathers. lib. 1. ca. 21. li. 2. ca. 3.
Heretics have no faith but opinions. li. 1. cap. 21. Heretics refuges in
reasoning of the Sacrament. ibid. Heretical Counsels allwaies repressed. ca.
25. Heretical expositions of the prophecy of Malch. cap. 33. Heretics call
their phansies Gods word li. 2. ca. 33. Heretics must be shunned. li. 3.
ca. 25. Heretics of our time well described. ca. 60 Heretics like men in
fevers. ibid. Heretics saings compared to the saings of Ethnikes. ibid.
Hierom of praga condemned. prolog. S. Hierom how he learned the scripturs. li.
1. ca. 7. et. 8. he expowndeth the scripturs contrary to the Sacramentaries.
ca. 39. S. Hieroms saing opened li. 2. ca. 57. he expowndeth S. Paul of the
body of Christ. li. 3. ca. 44. S. Hilarie understands the vi. of S. John of
the Sacram. li. 2. ca. 24. Holy Ghost consecrateth the B. Sacr. by the hand
and tung of the priest li. 2. ca. 63. Holy Ghost woorketh the consecracion
above our understanding. li. 1. ca. 20. li. 2. ca. 63. Holy bread used in the
primitive church. li. 2. ca. 51. li. 3. ca. 23. Honor due to God wherein yt
consists. li. 1. ca. 18. Honor or dishonor done by the receauer is referred
to the Sacr. li. 2. ca. 44. Honorable titles, and great effects of the Sa. li.
2. ca. 5. Hoopers gloss. li. 3. ca. 60. Horns figuracion. li. 2. ca. 14. How,
the question of the faithless answered li. 1. ca. 20. li. 2. ca. 13.
I.
James and John's epistles of few vnderda^ded li. 1. ca. 5. S. James in his
Mass did three notable things. li. 3. ca. 37. he offered sacrifice ibid. he
prayed for the quick and dead. ca. 39. he makes intercession to Saints.
ibid. S. James in consecracion directed his speech to God the Father. ca. 34.
S. James Mass full of knowledge, as the proclamer grants ca. 39. Ignorance
as bold as blind. li. 1. ca. 5. Ignorance of the B. Sa. what yt is, and how to
be removed li. 2. ca. 54. Immortality when and how yt shall be given li. 3.
ca. 59. Intencion of the Apostles and fathers in the ministracion, of the
catholics now, and of the new ministers. ca. 36. John Wicleff, and John
Husse condemned. prolog. Joseph and Christ compared. li. 1. ca. 10 Isaac a
figure of Christ. ibid. Isichius acknowlegeth the presence of Christ's body
and blood in the B. Sa. ca. 29. Jews did eat Manna: we our lords body.
They drank water of the rock: we the blood of Christ. li. 3. ca 9. A Jew by
a miracle in the S. Sacrament induced to be a christian. li. 2. ca. 42. Issue
joined with the Proclamer, for the presence li. 1. ca. 21. li. 2. ca.. 54. for
reseruacion. li. 1. ca. 25.. 26. for sacrifice. li. 1. ca. 37. for adoracion.
li. 2. ca. 47. for private Mass li. 3. ca. 40. for prayer for the dead. ca.
39. Judas received the body of Christ which is our price. cap. 49. Iuell
falsifieth. li. 3. ca. 46.
L
Latin church has, and does confess the real presence prolog. Lay men for
prayer commanded to abstein from their wieues. li. 1. ca. 21. Law of Moses
had two offices. li. 2. ca. 1. Lent fast commanded. ca. 48. Liberty a bait of
the deuell. li. 3. ca. 53. Luther condemned. prolog. Luther contrary to him
self. li. 1. ca. 7. his proud bragges and lies. ibid. Luther his strange
doctrine. ca. 8. and his pride. ibid. Luthers fond opinion of the presence. ca.
25. Luther condemned Saint James epistle. li. 2. ca. 16. Lutherans doctrine
having no appearance of scripture is overthrown even by their own argument.
ca. 53. Luthers proud contempt of the holy learned fathers. ca. 59. Luther
where he learned his faith. li. 3. ca. 53. Luther is contrary to S. Paul, to
Chrysosto^ and the fathers. ca. 54.
M
Mahomets patched religion and the Sacramentaries much like. li. 2. ca. 10.
Manna why yt was called a spiritual meat. li. 3. ca. 3. 8. Manna a figure of
Christ ca. 4. 5. applied to the Sacr. ca. 11. 12. Manna three kinds, ca. 4.
Manna had xii wonders. ca. 12. Manna what yt is by interpretacion. ca. 11.
Manna and the Sacr. compared. li. 2. ca. 30. li 3. ca. 10. 11. 12. Manna much
inferior to the B. Sacr. ca. 5. 14. but more excellent then the sacramental
bread. ca. 12. Manna was from the aier, Christ from heaven ca. 4. a creature:
but Christ the creator. ca. 14. Manna the figure gave but temporal life:
Manna the thing gives eternal life. ibi. Manna gathered more then was
commanded corrupted. ca. 12. Man eatheth the body of Christ. li. 1. ca. 16
Marie Chrysts mother by nature, and above nature. li. 1. ca. 13. Mass taken
two ways li. 3. cap. 33. and what yt is proprelie. ibid. and cap 34. Masses in
the primitive Church varied in manner from Chrysts doing. cap. 27. Mass of S.
James allowed by the Proclam. cap. 34. Mass of the Apostles, fathers, and of
the Church now all one in substance. ibid. Mass called a sacrifice in the
Council of Constantinop. ca. 35. Mass sets forth the death of Christ more
lively then the new communion. cap. 39. Mass the word how yt comes. cap.
32. and in yse within CCCC. hundredth years after Christ even by the Proclamers
confession. ibid Masses mo then one may be said in one Church and one day.
ibid. three said on Christ mass day fourtene hundredth years agon. ibid.
Masters and teachers of the scripture must be had and consulted li. 1. ca. 7.
Matters of doubt are to be referred to the priests. ca. 6. Matthew and Luke
seem to vary in the genealogy of Christ. ca. 3. Meat of Christ's supper
differs from common meats. ca. 17. Melancthon his mutabilitie. li. 2. ca.
41. Melchisedech and his sacrifice treacted of and compared to Christ and his
sacrifice. li. 1. ca. 30. 31. Members only of Christ's body know Christ.
li. 2. ca 65. Memories and momuments of holy and worthy men defaced. li. 1.
ca. 21. Ministers of the new church can not consecrate. li. 3. ca. 34.
Ministers of two sorts. ca. 36. Ministry of Agells about men. ca. 38.
Miracles wrought in the blessed Sa. li. 1. ca. 24. li. 3. ca. 42.
Misunderstanding mother of heresy. li. 1. ca. 7. Misunderstanding of Christ's
words causes all the heresies of the Sacramentaries li. 2. ca. 64. Mocks and
skoffs the only arguments of the Proclamer against the Mass. li. 3. ca. 38.
Mother of Christ, and of Sampson compared. li. 1. ca. 10. Mouth receaueth that
faith believes. li. 2. ca. 15. Mysteries of religion not common to all me^. li.
1. ca. 7. Mysteries of the church wonderful. li. 2. ca. 5. Mystery what yt
is, and how the B. Sacr. is called a mystery. li. 3. ca. 57. My flesh is
verily meat John vi. no figurative speech li. 2. ca. 20. 21.
N
Natural order had no place in many of Chrysts doings. li. 2. ca. 10. and 12.
Natural unity of Christ to us. li. 2. ca. 24. see unity. Naturs two in
Christ, not two persons. li. 3 ca. 51. Nature corrupted could not be brought
to incorruption but by the incorruptible body of Christ. li. 3. ca. 59.
Nestorius and Eutiches heresies. li. 2. ca. 15. New law requires a new
presthead. li. 1. ca 13. New mynisters manner in their comunion. li. 3. ca. 34.
New church charge Christ with an vntreuth. ca. 39. Nothing so true but
heresy may impugn yt li. 2. ca. 12.
O
Obedience to be showed even where corruption of lifeys li. 1. ca. 6 Obedience
of the new church how yt stands. ca. 25. Objection out of Tertullian. li.
1. ca. 16. out of S. Austen ca. 19. item ca. 23. out of S. Clement ca. 24.
out of Chrysostom li. 2. ca. 5. out of S. Aug. ca. 14 out of Eusebius. Emis.
ca. 19 out S Gregory. ca. 25 out of S. Aug. ca. 34 out of. Tertull. ca: 49.
out of Leo. ca. 56. out of Rupert. li. 3 ca. 10. Obiction of the Adversary
solued. li. 1. ca. 18. Objection out of S. Hierom solued. ca. 22. Objection
upon Melchisedec answered. ca. 28 Objection of Chrysts being in diuersse
places. li 2. ca. 12. Objection of the spiritual eating of Christ. ca. 37.
Objections of the Proclamer against adoracion. cap. 44. Objection upon S.
Basil. solued by damascen. li. 3. ca. 18. Objection upon the word bread in S.
Paul. cap. 29. item other objections out of S. Paul. ca. 44. Objection of the
Proclamer against sole receiving. ca. 40 Objection of Oecolamp. ca. 45.
Ocolampadius denies that Christ affirms. li. 3. ca. 13. his wicked gloss
cofuted ca. 15. Oecolamp. condemned. prolog. Oecolamp. contradictions. li. 1.
ca. 23 Oecolamp. falsifieth Theophila. li. 2. ca. 12. and S. Aug. ibid. his
wresting and abusing of S August. ca. 54. Oecolamp. abuses S. Paul's words:
The rock was Christ. li. 3. ca. 3 Oecolamp. wresteth the scripture ibid. he
mutilateth S. Amb. ca. 4. Office of priest to expownd the scripture. li. 1. ca.
6 Office of consecracion instituted by Christ as Luther confesses. ca. 20.
Offering of bread and wine, not bringing forth of yt pertains to the
preisthead of Melch. sedech. cap. 18 Old law had but figurs, new law has
the very things. li. 1. ca. 15. 21 Old Paschall lamb the shadow, our
Paschall lamb the thing. ca. 18 One thing in many places two ways. lib. 2.
ca. 12. One altar, one faith one bapt. in the church li. 3. ca. 60 One bread
that many are made one by, is the body of Christ. li. 3. ca. 28. Opinion of
the Jews of the coming of Elias lib. 3. ca. 3 Order of God inuerted. li. 1.
ca. 6 Order of preisthead in two poincts. ca. 28 Ordeinances of elders to be
holden for laws, where scripture prescribes not. ca. 27. Origin opened. li. 3.
ca. 30. Origin in plain words calls the Sacr. the body of Christ. li. 3.
ca. 5.
P
Pagans have day Gods and hour Gods. li. 1. ca. 32. Partakers of Christ's
blood dwell with Angels. li. 2. ca. 5. Parts of the Sacr. ca. 56. Passion of
Christ settfurth with the prophecies of yt. li. 1. ca. 11 Paschal lamb had two
notable things. ca. 15 Passover of the chrystians more excellent the^ the
Passover of the Jews ibid. Paul by bread ad cup meant the body and blood of
Christ by the understanding of Chrysostom. li. 1. ca. 27. li. 3. ca. 16. and 24.
of S Aug. ca. 15. of Oecumenius and Isidor. ca. 19. of Theophilact. ca. 20. of
Anselme ca. 21 of Euthymius. ca. 37. of S. Hiero^. ca. 44. of S. Basil. ca. 45.
of Origin. ca. 46. S. Paul why he spoke not of the sacrifice of Melchisedec in
the epist. to the Hebrews. cap. 18. Paul's words: the rock was Christ,
cannot be expownded by a trope. li. 3. c. 3 Paul's words abused by Cranmer.
ca. 16 Paul in all his process of the Sacr. makes no little mention of any
figure. ca. 22. Paul says that our Lord imparteth to us his own body. ca.
29 Paul and the vi. of S. John speak of one thing. ca. 50. Paul does often
call the Sacr. the body of our Lord. ca. 52 Penance and clean conscience
necessary for the receauers of the Sacr. ca. 55. Peter said Mass at
Antioche. ca. 36. Peter de Bruis his heresy. prolog. Peter Martyr how he
wresteth Theophilact. and his gloss overthrown. li. 3. ca. 20. Philippe sent
by the holy Ghost to expownd the scripturs to the Eunuch, which argugueth the
difficulty thereof. li. 1. ca. 1. Plagues for breaking of Gods order in relig.
cap. 6. Polycarpus put out of the cale^der. li. 2. ca. 3 Practices of the
primitive church proving as well reseruacion, as sole receiving. li. 2. ca. 68.
li. 3. ca. 40. Practice of prophanacion lamentable to be seen in England. li.
3. ca. 49. Prayer necessarielie required to understand the scripture. li. 1.
ca. 7. Prayer of the cano^ in the Mass agrees with the fathers. The new
communion disagreeth. li. 3. ca. 35. 36. 38, Prayer for the dead and almose
profitable and used in the primitive church, ca. 39 Priests office none may
do but he that is called li 1. ca. 7 Priests ought to be reverenced for their
office. li. 1. ca. 18 Priests must consecrate offer, and receive. ca. 22.
Priest must allwaies have the B. Sacr. reserved for the sick. ca. 35.
Preisthead of christ shall never be changed. cap. 31 Priest makes God, the
cauil of the deuel. li. 2. ca. 8. Preistes doing the solemn action of the
memorial of christ in the Mass aught to receive under both kinds: Priests not
doing the same and other receive under one kind. ca. 67 Preparacion for the
worthy receipt of the B. Sacr. commanded: and the danger of unworthy
receipt declared, argues the real presence. li. 3. ca. 56 Prefence of chrysts
body in the B. Sacr. li. 1. cap. 17. 18. and passim per totos tres libros.
Presence of christ in the Sacr. no more impossible then other of his works and
doings. li. 2. ca. 22. Presence of the holy Ghost under the form of the dove
and christ's presence in the Sacr. compared. li. 3. ca. 3. Presuptuouse
teachers. li. 1. ca. 7. Private persons may receive under one kind. li. 2.
ca. 67. Private communion proprelie what and where yt is. li. 3. ca. 41.
Private Mass used in the time of chrysostom. ib. Proclamacion of a new Goliath.
prolog. Proclamer to be pitied ibid. he denies all, and proves nothing. li.
1. ca. 20 Proclamer impugneth reseruacion without reason or authority. li. 1.
ca. 27. Proclamer settfurth that now for truth, which S. Cyrill above a
thousand years agon reputed an heresy. li. 3. ca. 26. he truncateth S. Hierom.
li. 2. ca. 53. he falsifieth S. August. li. 3. ca. 37. he abuses Anacletus ca.
4. Proclamer skorneth the Mass. ca. 33. and sequ. he finds three faults in
the Canon thereof ca. 38. Proclamer braggeth of the primitive Church in
words, but refusith yt in deeds. ca. 32. Proclamer indgeth maliciously of
all the chrystian world. ca. 38. Proclamers slight in alleging S. Hierom.
ca. 41. Prositts coming to us by receiving of Chrysts flesh. ca. 39.
Prophanacion of holy things what yt is. ca. 46. Promise of gladd tidings to
Abraham. li. 1. ca. 9. Prophecy not given to all. ca. 1. Prophecy of the
stock of Christ and incarnation. ca. 11 Protestants of every sect challenge
to them the word of God, and the name of the church. ca. 25. Protestants
tormented with the prophecy of Malach. ca. 33. Protestants compared to the
dog in the fable. li. 3. ca. 7. Purity of life in two points. ca. 53.
R
Rash readers, and arrogant teachers. li. 1. ca. 7. Real body partaken:
mystical body partakers. li. 3. ca. 28. Real presence li. 1. ca. 14. 16. 29.
etc. li. 2. ca 15. 20. 43. 46. 49. and sequent. li. 3. ca. 5. 8. and alijs.
Real presence and sacrifice proved by S. Paul. li. 3. ca 16. 17. 22. 30.
proved by Chrysostom. ca. 36. by Theodoret. ca. 56. Receipt of Chrysts body both
spiritual and corporal. li. 1. ca. 14. li. 3. ca. 23. 26. Receipt of Chrysts
merits not propre to one Sacrament, but common to all li. 2. ca. 5 Receipt of
Christ's body makes our bodies immortal. li. 2. ca. 14. see body and flesh.
Receiving by ignorance what yt is. ca. 54. Receauers of the B. Sa. must prepare
the^ selses, and how. li. 3. ca. 55. must abstein from the act of matrimo. ca.
41. Read Sea a figure of Bapt. ca. 2. Represent what yt signifies li. 1. ca.
18. Reseruacion of the Sa. in the Apostles time li. 1. ca. 24 and after in the
primitive church ibid. and. ca. 25 26. 27. li. 2. ca. 68. Reseruacion not
against the institucion of Christ. li. 1 ca. 26. agnised by the nice^ Counsel.
ca. 25. deniers there of accursed ibid. Reseruacion in private houses li. 1. ca.
24. in the ship ibid. Rich and poor eat all one blood. li. 3. ca. 6.
Richerus a Caluinist forbids to pray to Christ. li. 2. ca. 48. Right way
to understand a caholique author. ca. 49. Roffensis never yet answered prolog.
his saings alleged li. 3. ca. 12. and 32.
S
Sacrament has honorable titles. li. 1. ca. 17. yt contains the thing
worthy of most honor. ca. 18. Sacrament reserved. ca. 24. 25. etc. sent to a
sick man ibid. carried home to soche as were absent. ca. 27. Sacrament a figure
not of the body of Christ, but of his death. li. 2. ca. 14. etc. li. 3. ca.
44. Sacrament a figure in diverse respects, but not only a figure. li. 2. ca.
14. li. 3. ca. 8. Sacrament contains three things li. 2. ca. 19. li. 3. ca.
42. Sacrament a mystery how and what a mystery is. ca. 23. Sacrament has
two parts, and which they be. ca. 57. and two offices. ca. 15. Sacrament may
be consecrated by no other words, then these Hoc est corp. ca. 64. Sacrament
a sanctified thing and sanctificacion. ca. 66. Sacrament delivered by Christ
in his supper under both kinds: in Emaus under one kind proves both to be
laufull. ca. 67. Sacrament mynistred under one kind by S. Cypr. ca. 68.
received so of a woman ibid. and upon good fridaie. ibid. Sacrament and the
thing of the Sacrament. li. 3. ca. 8. Sacrament if yt have not the presence of
Chrysts body is inferior to Ma^na. ca. 12 Sacraments diversely nombred by the
protostans. ca. 13. Sacrament giving life far excels Manna ca. 14. yt is
inconsumptible meat. ibid. Sacraments of the new law better, etc. ca. 15
sacrament defined. ibid. Sacraments of the new law give grace. ib. and
salvation. ibid. compared to the old law by S. August. ibid. Sacram. proved
by our lord to be his body. li. 3. ca. 53. Sacrament carried home and received
as devotion served, and lick wise reserved of holy men in wilderness ca. 41.
Sacrament delivered to a Jew appeared flesh and likewise to an other. ca. 42.
Sacramentaries condemned by eight Counsels prolog. their gloss upon S. Cyprian
overthrown li 1. ca. 17. Sacramentaries make two manner of presence ca. 21.
they take away the fat and sweet of the bless. Sacr. ca. 26. they stomble at
a straw and leap over a block. ibid. their chief grownds be natural
reasons. li. 2. ca. 19. Sacramentaries deny that the fathers affirm, and
affirm that they deny. ca. 59. they teach contrary to their own rules. ca.
60. they deny the excellency of the Sacraments of Christ. li. 3. ca. 4.
Sacramentaries maintein the heresy of Eutyches li. 1. ca. 30. and of the
Aarrians. li. 3. ca 59. and denieng the receipt of Christ's natural flesh seem
to deny the immortality of our flesh after resurrection. ibid. Sacrifice
after the order of Melchisedec now diffused throughout the world. li. 1. ca.
31. Sacrifice avouched. ibid. propiciatorie li. ca. 43. li. 3. ca. 14.
Sacrifice of lawde or gratulatorie separated from extern sacrifice. li. 1. ca.
33. li. 3. ca. 30. Sacrifice of the cross, and of the altar all one in
substance, but diverse in manner. li. 1 ca. 33. Sacrifice of the chrystians, a
peculiar and special sacrifice ca. 35. a full and most holy sacrifice. ibid.
full of horror honorable to Angels li. 3. ca. 54. immaculate. ca. 37. the
body and blood of Christ. li. 1. ca. 36. instituted by Christ. ca. 31. 32.
and li. 2. ca. 49. 56. li. 3. ca. 33. and alibi. Sacrifice of the Mass of what
priest soever offered, is one with that Christ offered. li. 2. ca. 8. offered in
many places is all one sacrifice. ca. 10. item li. 3. ca. 33. and 60.
Sacrifice of the church consists of the visible forms of bread and wine and
of the invisible flesh. etc. li 2. ca. 19. li. 3. ca. 6. Sacrrifice of the
church proved by S. Paul. li. 3. 16. after the understanding of S. Aug. ca.
18. 29. Sacrifice of Christ in his supper and Melchisedec compared. li. 1. ca.
13. 30. 31. li. 3. ca. 17. Sacrifice and Mass caused the Proclamer to falsify
Leo. ca. 40. Sampsons conception and Christ's compared. li. 1. ca. 10.
Sa^ctificacion, and a sanctified thing be diverse li. 1. ca. 66. Satha^s final
mark he slooteth at. li. 3. ca. 32 Satan appeared to Luther and dispured with
him of the Mass. ca. 42. Satan's power abated by virtue of the Mass. ibid.
Satirus saved from drowning by power of the Sa. and his faith commended by S.
Ambrose therein li. 1. ca. 24. Sects of religion principal in the world four.
li. 1. ca. 32. Sects of Sacramentaries sixteen. li. 2. ca. 41. Sedulius says
that S. Paul spoke of the body of Christ. li. 3. ca. 49. Serapion being
being sick called for the Sa. and received alone. li. 3. ca. 41. Show bread a
figure of the Sa. and applied to the Sa. li. 1. ca. 22. 23. 24. appointed for
three things ibid. continually upon the altar. ca. 23. School arguments made
for the opening of the truth produced by a Protestant to confirm a falshead
li 2. ca. 22 Scripturs to be hard proved by vii arguments li. 1. ca. 1.
Scripturs must be studied with much labor. ca. 5. Scripturs must be learned
of the fathers. ca. 7. they be full of doubts, and may be drawn to dinerse
senses. ca. 6. and 7. 8. Scripture the storehouse of God, and why God would the
same should be heard. ib. Scripturs alleged by Oecolamp. against the
presence. li. 2. ca. 12. Scripturs must be alleged in the literal sense ibid
ca. 50. Son of God made flesh is received in our lords meat li. 3. ca. 59.
Son of God troaden under foot when his body and blood are not believed to be
in the Bl. Sa. li. 2. ca. 67. Spirit how yt quickneth, and flesh how yt
Profits or not. ca. 36. Spirit taken two manner of ways. ca. 37. Spirit of
unity among catholics: spirit of division among Protest. li. 3. ca. 9.
Spiritual receiving not figured by the Paschall lamb. li. 1. ca. 19.
Spiritual understanding what yt is. li. 2. ca. 37. and 39. 63. Spiritual and
real receipt together wonder full. ca. 55. Spiritual knowledge as well teaches
the substance of Christ body and blood to be under the forms of bread and
wine, as natural knowledge the substance of natural things to be under their
forms. ca. 63. Stercoranits of our time li. 1. ca. 14. Storehouse of God not
common to all. ca. 7. Strange doctrines not to be followed. li. 1. ca. 8.
Substance of Sacraments must be observed the manner may be altered. ca. 26.
Substance of a thing said to be seen, when only the outward form is seen.
li. 2. ca. 63. Sinners receive the body of Christ reallie but not
spirituallie. ca. 55. Sixtene sects of Sacramentaries and other like. ca. 41.
Swearing to much used now a days. li. 3. ca. 30.
T
Table of Christ pourgeth li. 1. ca. 23. Table signifies sacrifice in S.
Paul. ca. 31. item li. 3. ca. 16. Table of Christ terrible of the old
Passover not so. li. 2. ca. 55 Table of our lord, the body of our lord. li.
3. ca. 30. Teachers meet or not meet to be followed. li. 1. ca. 8. Temtacions of
our first Parents and men in these days compared. li. 2. ca. 41. Tertullian
in one saing over throws three assertions of the Sacramentaries li. 2. ca.
42. the same opened and delivered from their sleights. ca. 49. Tertullians wief
received the Sa. secretly, and alone. li. 3. ca. 41. Theophilact avouches
three things against the Sacramentaries. li. 2. ca. 60. Three manner of doings
touching scripture. li. 1. ca. 26. Tradicion to be followed li. 3. ca. 1.
Transubstanciacion avouched li. 1. ca. 31. li. 2. ca. 7. 51. believed of the
fathers. ibid. what it is. ca. 53. li. 3. ca. 14. proved by Isich li. 2. ca.
54. and 57. item treacted of li. 2. ca. 59. 60. 62. Truth must have an
excellency above the figure. li. 3. ca.
W
Water of the Rock why yt was called spiritual. li. 3. ca. 3. Waldo, and
waldenses. prolog. Wanton lusts of Bishops and priests reproved. li. 1. ca. 22.
Washing of the Apostles feet what yt signifies. li. 2. ca. 47. Vere the
Aduerbe, what force yt has. li. 2. ca. 18. Very flesh of Christ under form
of bread ca. 22. the same called spirit ca. 39. Verity of Chrysts flesh
setfurth before us in the Sa. ca. 60. Victor excommunicated the Churches of
Asia li. 1 ca. 24. Wilful reason no sufficient warrant allwaies in the court
of faith. li. 2. ca. 42. Wine mixed with water in Chrysts cup. li 1. ca. 20.
26. li. 2. 43. li. 3. ca. 34. 35. yt is a divine tradicion so to be used, and
why yt is. ibid. Wise men, by hearing may be wiser. li. 1. ca. 8. Woman
stricken to death for unworthy receiving of the Bl. Sacr. li. 3. ca. 58.
Wonderful what is proprelie. li. 2. ca. 55. Work of the Sa. miraculouse. ca.
60. Worthy receauers and unworthy what they receive. li. 3. ca. 51. 52. 53.
worthiness proprelie what yt is ibid. Worldly cares keep men from God. li.
3. ca. 40. Untruths uttered by the Procla. three in one place. ca. 39.
Unbloody sacrifice, the lively body of christ, the altar which the Jews
may not eat. ca. 60. Unity with Christ two ways li. 1. ca. 14. li. 2 ca.
10. 14. 24. li. 3. ca. 23.
Faults in printing.
In this long work (gentle Reader) there can not a few faults be committed
in the or thographie, both because the printers were unskillful of our
language, and for that the ouerseer could not be allwaies ready at the press
to make corrections. In consideracion whereof, and that I have not time my self
to gather all, I pray thee of gentleness to bear there with, and for thy
skill to correct after these few examples. God be ever with thee.

In the prolog the first line: read, have moved: in the xv. line: for
primative, primitive and so in other places.

In the book first amend the nombres of the leaves, as, for vii. viii. xi.
xvi. lx. etc. ii. iii. iiii. viii. xl etc. then of the chapters, for thirtene,
fourtene, etc. read thirtenth, fortenth etc. and for nine and thirteth. read
nine and twenteth.

And let the binder look to the order of the Ternions, for the signatorie
letters be some wanting: some mysplaced.

Finis.

