CHARACTERS OF VERTVES AND VICES: In two Books: By IOS. HALL.

LONDON, Printed by Melch. Bradwood for Eleazar Edgar and Samuel Macham, and
are to be sold at the sign of the Bul-head in Paul's Churchyard. ANNO 1608.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY SINGVLAR GOOD LORDS, EDWARD LORD DENNY BARON OF
WALTHAM, AND JAMES LORD HAIE HIS RIGHT NOBLE AND WORTHY SON IN LAW, I. H.
HVMBLY DEDICATES HIS LABOR, DEVOTETH HIMSELF, WISHES ALL HAPPINESS.

A PREMONITION of the Title and Use of Characters.
READER,
THe Divines of the old Heathens were their Moral Philosophers: These
received the Acts of an inbred law, in the Sinai of Nature, and delivered them
with many expositions to the multitude: These were the Overseers of manners,
Correctors of vices, Directors of lives, Doctors of virtue, which yet taught
their people the body of their natural Divinity, not after one manner; while
some spent themselves in deep discourses of humane felicity and the way to it
in common; others thought best to apply the general precepts of goodness or
decency, to particular conditions and persons: A third sort in a mean course
betwixt the two other, and compounded of them both, bestowed their time in
drawing out the true lineaments of every virtue and vice, so lively, that who
saw the medals, might know the face: which Art they significantly termed
Charactery. Their papers were so many tables, their writings so many speaking
pictures, or living images, whereby the ruder multitude might even by their
sense learn to know virtue, and discern what to detest. I am deceived if any
course could be more likely to prevail; for herein the gross conceit is led
on with pleasure, and informed while it feels nothing but delight: And if
pictures have been accounted the books of idiots, behold here the benefit of
an image without the offense. It is no shame for us to learn wit of Heathens,
neither is it material, in whose School we take out a good lesson: yea, it is
more shame not to follow their good, than not to lead them better. As one
therefore that in worthy examples hold imitation better than invention, I have
trod in their paths, but with an higher and wider step; and out of their
Tablets have drawn these larger portraitures of both sorts. More might be
said, I deny not of every virtue, of every vice: I desired not to say all, but
enough. If thou do but read or like these, I have spent good hours ill; but if
thou shall hence abjure those vices, which before thou thoughtest not
ill-fauoured, or fall in love with any of these goodly faces of virtue; or
shall hence find where thou have any little touch of these evils, to clear
thy self, or where any defect in these graces to supply it, neither of us
shall need to repent of our labor.

THE SVMME OF the whole.
FIRST BOOK.
THe Prooeme. Page 1 Character of Wisdom. 5 Of Honesty. 13 Of Faith. 19 Of
Humility. 27 Of Valor. 33 Of Patience. 39 Of True-Friendship. 45 Of
True-Nobilitie. 51 Of the good Magistrate. 57
SECOND BOOK.
THe Prooeme. 67 Character of the Hypocrite. 71 Of the Busie-Bodie. 79 Of the
Superstitious. 87 Of the Profane. 93 Of the Malcontent. 99 Of the Inconstant.
107 Of the Flatterer. 113 Of the Slothful. 119 Of the Covetous. 125 Of the
Vainglorious. 133 Of the Presumptuous. 141 Of the Distrustful. 147 Of the
Ambitious. 153 Of the Unthrift. 161 Of the Envious. 167
THE FIRST Book. Characterismes of Virtues.

LONDON, Printed by M. B. for Eleazer Edgar, and S. Macham.

The Prooeme.
VERTVE is not loved enough, because she is not seen; and Vice loses much
detestation, because her ugliness is secret. Certainly, my Lords, there are so
many beauties, and so many graces in the face of Goodness, that no eye can
possibly see it without affection, without rauishment; and the visage of Evil
is so monstrous, through loathsome deformities, that if her lovers were not
ignorant, they would be mad with disdain and astonishment. What need we more
than to discover these two to the world? this work shall save the labor of
exhorting, and dissuasion. I have here done it as I could, following that
ancient Master of Morality, who thought this the fittest task for the ninety
and ninth year of his age, and the profitablest monument that he could leave
for a farewell to his Grecians. Lo here then Virtue and Vice stripped naked
to the open view, and despoiled, one of her rags, the other of her ornaments,
and nothing left them but bare presence to plead for affection: see now whether
shall find more suitors. And if still the vain minds of leaud men shall dote
upon their old mistress, it will appear to be, not because she is not foul,
but for that they are blind, and bewitched. And first behold the goodly
features of WISDOM, an amiable virtue and worthy to lead this stage; which as
she extends her self to all the following Graces, so amongst the rest is for
her largeness most conspicuous.

CHARACTER of the WISE MAN.
THERE is nothing that he desires not to know, but most and first himself;
and-not so much his own strength, as his weaknesses; neither is his knowledge
reduced to discourse, but practice. He is a skillful Logician not by nature, so
much as use; his working mind does nothing all his time but make syllogismes,
and draw out conclusions; every thing that he sees and hears serves for one of
the premises: with these he cares first to inform himself, then to direct
others. Both his eyes are never at once from home, but one keeps house while
the other roues abroad for intelligence. In material and weighty points he
abides not his mind suspended in uncertainties; but hates doubting where he
may, where he should be resolute: and first he makes sure work for his soul;
accounting it no safety to be unsettled in the foreknowledge of his final
estate. The best is first regarded; and vain is that regard which ends not
in security. Every care has his just order; neither is there any one either
neglected or mis-placed. He is seldom ouerseene with credulity; for knowing
the falsenesse of the world, he has learned to trust himself always; others
so far, as he may not be dammaged by their disappointment. He seeks his
quietness in secrecy, and is wont both to hide himself in retiredness, and
his tongue in himself. He loves to be gessed at, not known; and to see the
world unseen; and when he is forced into the light, shows by his actions that
his obscurity was neither from affectation nor weakness. His purposes are
neither so variable as may argue inconstancy; nor obstinately unchangeable, but
framed according to his afterwits, or the strength of new occasions. He is both
an apt scholar and an excellent master; for both every thing he sees informs
him, and his mind enriched with plentiful observation can give the best
precepts. His free discourse runs back to the ages past, and recouers events
out of memory, and then preuenteth Time in flying forward to future things; and
comparing one with the other can give a verdict well-neere prophetical:
wherein his conjectures are better than another judgments. His passions are
so many good servants, which stand in a diligent attendance ready to be
commanded by reason, by religion; and if at any time forgetting their duty they
be mis-carried to rebel, he can first conceal their mutiny; then suppress
it. In all his just and worthy designs he is never at a loss, but has so
proiected all his courses, that a second begins where the first failed; and
fetches strength from that which succeeded not. There be wrongs which he will
not see; neither does he always look that way which he means; nor take
notice of his secret smarts, when they come from great ones. In good turns he
loves not to owe more than he must; in evil to owe and not pay. Just censures
he deserves not, for he lives without the compass of an adversary; unjust
he contemns, and had rather suffer false infamy to die alone, than lay hands
upon it in an open violence. He confineth himself in the circle of his own
affairs, and lists not to thrust his finger into a needless fire. He stands
like a Center unmoved, while the circumference of his estate is drawn above,
beneath, about him. Finally, his wit has cost him much, and he can both keep,
and value, and employ it. He is his own Lawyer; the treasury of knowledge,
the oracle of counsel; blind in no man's cause, best-sighted in his own.

The Characterisme of an Honest man.
HE looks not to what he might do, but what he should; Justice is his first
guide, the second law of his actions is expedience. He had rather complain
than offend, and hates sin more for the indignity of it, than the danger:
his simple uprightness works in him that confidence, which oft-times wrongs
him, and gives advantage to the subtle, when he rather pities their
faithlesnes, than repents of his credulity: he has but one heart, and that
lies open to sight; and were it not for discretion, he never thinks ought,
whereof he would avoid a witness: his word is his parchment, and his yea his
oath, which he will not violate for fear, or for loss. The mishaps of
following events may cause him to blame his providence, can never cause him to
eat his promise: neither says he, This I saw not; but This I said. When he is
made his friends Executour, he defrayes debts, pays legacies, and scorneth to
gain by orphans, or to ransack graves; and therefore will be true to a dead
friend, because he sees him not. All his dealings are square, and above the
board: he bewrayes the fault of what he selles, and restores the ouerseene
gain of a false reckoning. He esteems a bribe venomous, tho it come gilded
over with the color of gratuitie. His cheeks are never stained with the
blushes of recantation; neither does his tongue falter to make good a lie with
the secret glosses of double or reserved senses; and when his name is traduced,
his innocence bears him out with courage: then, lo, he goes on the plain
way of truth, and will either triumph in his integrity, or suffer with it. His
conscience ouer-rules his providence: so as in all things, good or ill, he
respects the nature of the actions, not the sequel. If he see what he must do,
let God see what shall follow. He never loadeth himself with burdens above his
strength, beyond his will; and once bound, what he can he will do; neither does
he will but what he can do. His ear is the Sanctuary of his absent friends
name, of his present friends secret; neither of them can mis-carry in his
trust. He remembers the wrongs of his youth, and repayes them with that usury
which he himself would not take. He would rather want than borow, and beg
than not pay: his fair conditions are without dissembling; and he loves
actions above words. Finally, he hates falsehood worse than death: he is a
faithful client of truth; no man's enemy; and, it is a question, Whether more
another man's friend, or his own; and if there were no heaven, yet he would be
virtuous.

The Characterism of the Faithful man.
HIs eyes have no other objects, but absent and invisible; which they see so
clearly, as that to them sense is blind: that which is present they see not; if
I may not rather say, that what is past or future is present to them. Heerin he
exceeds all others, that to him nothing is impossible, nothing difficult,
whether to bear, or undertake. He walks every day with his Maker, and talks
with him familiarly, and lives ever in heaven, and sees all earthly things
beneath him: when he goes in, to converse with God, he wears not his own
clothes, but takes them still out of the rich Wardrobe of his Redeemer, and
then dare boldly prease in, and challenge a blessing. The celestial spirits do
not scorn his company, yea his service. He deals in these worldly affairs as
a stranger, and has his heart ever at home: without a written warrant he dare
do nothing, and with it, any thing. His war is perpetual, without truce,
without intermission; and his victory certain: he meets with the infernal
powers, and tramples them under feet. The shield that he ever bears before
him, can neither be missed, nor pierced: if his hand be wounded, yet his heart
is safe: he is often tripped, seldom foiled; and if sometimes foiled, never
vanquished. He has white hands, and a clean soul, fit to lodge God in, all
the rooms whereof are set apart for his Holiness: Iniquity has often called at
the door, and craved entertainment, but with a repulse: or if sin of force
will be his tenant; his lord he can not. His faults are few, and those he
has, God will not see. He is allied so high, that he dare call God Father, his
Savior Brother, heaven his Patrimony, and thinks it no presumption to trust to
the attendance of Angels. His understanding is enlightened with the beams of
divine truth; God has acquainted him with his will; and what he knows he
dare confess: there is not more love in his heart, than liberty in his
tongue. If torments stand betwixt him and Christ, if death, he contemnes them;
and if his own parents lie in his way to God, his holy carelessness makes them
his footsteps. His experiments have drawn forth rules of confidence, which he
dares oppose against all the fears of distrust; wherein he thinks it safe to
charge God with what he has done; with what he has promised: Examples are
his proofs; and Instances his demonstrations. What has God given which he
can not give? What have others suffered which he may not be enabled to endure?
Is he threatened banishment? There he sees the Dear Evangelist in Pathmos
cutting in pieces: he sees Esaias under the saw. Drowning? he sees Jonas diuing
into the living gulf. Burning? he sees the three children in the hot walk of
the furnace. Devouring? he sees Daniel in the sealed den amids his terrible
companions. Stoning? he sees the first Martyr under his heap of many
grauestones. Heading? lo there the Baptists neck bleeding in Herodias
platter. He emulates their pain, their strength, their glory. He wearies not
himself with cares; for he knows he lives not of his own cost: not idly
omitting means, but not using them with diffidence. In the midst of ill rumors
and amazements his countenance changes not; for he knows both whom he has
trusted, and whither death can lead him. He is not so sure he shall die, as
that he shall be restored; and out-faceth his death with his resurrection.
Finally, he is rich in works, busy in obedience, cheerful and unmoved in
expectation; better with evils, in common opinion miserable, but in true
judgment more than a man.

Of the Humble man.
HE is a friendly enemy to himself: for tho he be not out of his own favor,
no man sets so low a value of his worth as himself, not out of ignorance, or
carelessness, but of a voluntary and meek deiectednesse. He admires every
thing in another, whiles the same or better in himself he thinks not
unworthily contemned: his eyes are full of his own wants, and others
perfections. He loves rather to give, than take honor, not in a fashion of
complementall courtesy, but in simplicity of his judgment; neither does he
fret at those, on whom he forces precedencie, as one that hoped their
modesty would have refused; but holds his mind unfeignedly below his place,
and is ready to go lower (if need be) without coffeehouse: When he has
but his due, he magnifieth courtesy, and disclaimes his deserts. He can be
more ashamed of honor, than grieved with contempt; because he thinks that
causeless, this deserved. His face, his carriage, his habit, savor of
lowliness without affectation, and yet he is much under that he seems. His
words are few and soft, never either peremptory or censorious; because he
thinks both each man more wise, and none more faulty than himself: and when he
approaches to the throne of God, he is so taken up with the divine greatness,
that in his own eyes he is either vile or nothing. Places of public charge
are feign to sue to him, and hale him out of his chosen obscurity; which he
holds off, not cunningly to cause importunity, but sincerely in the conscience
of his defects. He frequenteth not the stages of common resorts, and then
alone thinks himself in his natural element, when he is shrouded within his
own walls. He is ever jealous over himself, and still suspecteth that which
others applaud. There is no better object of beneficence, for what he
receives, he ascribes merely to the bounty of the giver; nothing to merit. He
emulates no man in any thing but goodness, and that with more desire, than
hope to overtake, No man is so contented with his little, and so patient under
miseries, because he knows the greatest evils are below his sins, and the
least favors above his deseruings. He walks ever in awe, and dare not but
subject every word and action to an hie and just censure. He is a lowly valley
sweetly planted, and well watered; the proud man's earth, whereon he trampleth;
but secretly full of wealthy mines, more worth than he that walks over them; a
rich stone set in lead; and lastly, a true Temple of God built with a low roof.

The Character of a Valiant man.
He undertakes without rashness, and performs without fearer^ he seeks not
for dangers; but when they find him, he bears them over with courage, with
success. He has often times looked death in the face, and passed by it with a
smile, and when he sees he must yield, does at once welcome and contemn it.
He forecasts the worst of all events, and incounters them before they come in a
secret and mental war; and if the suddenness of an inexpected evil have
surprised his thoughts, and infected his cheeks with palenesse; he has no
sooner digested it in his conceit, than he gathers up himself, and insults
over mischief. He is the master of himself, and subdues his passions to
reason; and by this inward victory works his own peace. He is afraid of
nothing but the displeasure of the highest, and runs away from nothing but
sin: he looks not on his hands but his cause; not how strong he is, but how
innocent: and where goodness is his warrant, he may be ouermaistered, he can
not be foiled. The sword is to him the last of all trials, which he draws
forth still as Defendant, not as Challenger, with a willing kind of
unwillingness: no man can better manage it, with more safety, with more favor:
he had rather have his blood seen than his back; and disdaines life upon base
conditions. No man is more mild to a relenting or vanquished adversary, or
more hates to set his foot on a carcass. He had rather smother an injury than
revenge himself of the impotent: and I know not whether more detests
cowardlinesse or cruelty. He talks little, and brags less; and loves rather
the silent language of the hand; to be seen than heard. He lies ever close
within himself, armed with wise resolution, and will not be discovered but by
death or danger. He is neither prodigal of blood to mis-spend it idly, nor
niggardly to grudge it when either God calls for it, or his Country; neither
is he more liberal of his own life, than of others. His power is limited by
his will, and he holds it the noblest revenge, that he might hurt and does not.
He commands without tyranny and imperiousness, obeies without seruilitie,
and changes not his mind with his estate. The height of his spirits ouer-looks
all casualties, and his boldness proceeds neither from ignorance nor
senselessness: but first he values evils, and then despises them: he is so
balanced with wisdom, that he floats steddilie in the midst of all tempests.
Deliberate in his purposes, firm in resolution, bold in enterprising,
unwearied in atchieuing, and howsoever happy in success: and if ever he be
overcome, his heart yields last.

The Patient man.
THe Patient man is made of a metal, not so hard as flexible: his shoulders
are large, fit for a load of injuries; which he bears not out of baseness and
cowardlinesse, because he dare not revenge, but out of Christian fortitude,
because he may not: he has so conquered himself, that wrongs can not conquer
him; and heerin alone finds, that victory consists in yielding. He is above
nature, while he seems below himself. The vilest creature knows how to
turn again; but to command himself not to resist being urged is more than
heroical. His constructions are over full or charity and favor; either this
wrong was not done, or not with intent of wrong, or if that, upon
misinformation; or if none of these, rashness (tho a fault) shall serve for
an excuse. Himself craves the offenders pardon, before his confession; and a
slight answer contents where the offended desires to forgive. He is Gods best
witness, and when he stands before the bar for truth, his tongue is calmly
free, his forhead firm, and he with erect and settled countenance hears his
unjust sentence, and reioyces in it. The Iailers that attend him are to him his
pages of honor; his dungeon the lower part of the vault of heaven; his rack
or wheel the stairs of his ascent to glory: he challenges his executioners,
and incounters the fiercest pains with strength of resolution; and while he
suffers, the beholders pitse him, the tormentours complain of weariness, and
both of them wonder. No anguish can master him, whether by violence or by
lingering. He accounts expectation no punishment, and can abide to have his
hopes adiourned till a new day. Good laws serve for his protection, not for
his revenge; and his own power, to avoid indignities, not to return them. His
hopes are so strong, that they can insult over the greatest discouragements;
and his apprehensions so deep, that when he has once fastened, he sooner
leaves his life than his hold. Neither time nor perverseness can make him cast
off his charitable endeavors, and despair of prevailing; but in spite of all
crosses, and all denials, he redoubleth his beneficial offers of love. He
tries the sea after many ship-wracks, and beats still at that door which he
never saw opened. Contrariety of events does but exercise, not dismay him; and
when crosses afflict him, he sees a divine hand inuisibly striking with these
sensible scourges: against which he dares not rebel, not murmr. Hence all
things befall him alike; and he goes with the same mind to the shambles and
to the fold. His recreations are calm and gentle; and not more full of
relaxation than void of fury. This man only can turn necessity into virtue,
and put evil to good use. He is the surest friend, the latest and easiest
enemy, the greatest conqueror, and so much more happy than others, by how much
he could abide to be more miserable.

The True Friend.
HIs affections are both united and divided; united to him he loves; divided
betwixt another and himself; and his one heart is so parted, that whiles he
has some, his friend has all. His choice is led by virtue, or by the best of
virtues, religion; not by gain, not by pleasure; yet not without respect of
equal condition, of disposition not unlike; which once made admits of no
change, except he whom he loves be changed quite from himself, nor that
suddenly, but after long expectation. Extremity does but fasten him, whiles he
like a well-wrought vault lies the stronger by how much more weight he bears.
When necessity calls him to it, he can be a servant to his equal, with the
same will wherewith he can command his inferior; and tho he rise to honor,
forgets not his familiarity, nor suffers inequality of estate to work
strangeness of countenance; on the other side, he lifts up his friend to
advancement, with a willing hand, without out envy, without dissimulation.
When his mate is dead, he accounts himself but half alive; then his love not
dissolved by death deriues it self to those orphans which never knew the price
of their father; they become the heirs of his affection, and the burden of his
cares. He embraces a free community of all things, save those which either
honesty reserues proper, or nature; and hates to enjoy that which would do his
friend more good: his charity serves to cloak noted infirmities, not by
untruth, not by flattery, but by discreet secrecy; neither is he more
favorable in concealment, than round in his private reprehensions; and when
another simple fidelity shows it self in his reproof, he loves his monitor
so much the more by how much more he smarteth. His bosom is his friends
closet, where he may safely lay up his complaints, his doubts, his cares, and
look how he leaves, so he finds them; save for some addition of seasonable
counsel for redress. If some unhappy suggestion shall either disioint his
affection, or break it, it soon knits again, and grows the stronger by that
stresse. He is so sensible of another injuries, that when his friend is
stricken he cries out, and equally smarteth untouched, as one affected not
sympathy, but with a real feeling of pain: and in what mischief may be
prevented he interposeth his aid, and offers to redeem his friend with
himself; no hour can be unseasonable, no business difficult, nor pain
grievous in condition of his ease: and what either does or suffers, he
neither cares nor desires to have known; lest he should seem to look for
thanks. If he can therefore steal the performance of a good office unseen,
the conscience of his faithfulness herein is so much sweeter as it is more
secret. In favors done his memory is frail, in benefits received eternal:
he scorneth either to regard recompense, or not to offer it. He is the comfort
of miseries, the guide of difficulties, the joy of life, the treasure of earth;
and no other than a good Angel clothed in flesh.

Of the Truly-Noble.
HE stands not upon what he borrowed of his Ancestors, but thinks he must
work out his own honor: and if he can not reach the virtue of them that gave
him outward glory by inheritance, he is more abashed of his impotencie, than
transported with a great name. Greatness does not make him scornful and
imperious, but rather like the fixed stars, the higher he is, the less he
desires to seem. Neither cares he so much for pomp and frothie ostentation,
as for the solid truth of Nobleness. Courtesy and sweet affability can be no
more severed from him, than life from his soul; not out of a base and servile
popularitie, and desire of ambitious insinuation; but of a native gentleness
of disposition, and true value of himself. His hand is open and bounteous, yet
not so, as that he should rather respect his glory, than his estate; wherein
his wisdom can distinguish betwixt parasites and friends, betwixt changing of
favors and expending them. He scorneth to make his height a privilege of
looseness, but accounts his titles vain, if he be inferior to others in
goodness: and thinks he should be more strict, the more eminent he is;
because he is more observed, and now his offenses are become exemplar. There
is no virtue that he holds unfit for ornament, for use; nor any vice which he
condemns not as fordid, and a fit companion of baseness; and whereof he does
not more hate the blemish, than affect the pleasure. He so studies as one that
knows ignorance can neither purchase honor, nor wield it; and that knowledge
must both guide and grace him. His exercises are from his childhood ingenuous,
manly, decent, and such as tend still to wit, valor, actiuitie: and if (as
seldom) he descend to disports of chance, his games shall never make him
either pale with fear, or hot with desire of gain. He does not so use his
followers, as if he thought they were made for nothing but his servitude; whose
felicity were only to be commanded and please: wearing them to the back,
and then either finding or framing excuses to discard them empty; but upon all
opportunities lets them feel the sweetness of their own serviceableness and
his bounty. Silence in officious service is the best Oratorie to plead for his
respect: all diligence is but lent to him, none lost. His wealth stands in
receiving, his honor in giving: he cares not either how many hold of his
goodness, or to how few he is beholden: and if he have cast away favors, he
hates either to vpbraid them to his enemy, or to challenge restitution. None
can be more pitiful to the distressed, or more prone to succor; and then
most, where is least means to solicit, least possibility of requital. He is
equally addressed to war and peace; and knows not more how to command
others, than how to be his countries servant in both. He is more careful to
give true honor to his Maker, than to receive civil honor from men. He
knows that this service is free and noble, and ever loaded with sincere
glory; and how vain it is to hunt after applause from the world, till he be
sure of him that moldeth all hearts, and powers contempt on Princes; and
shortly, so demeanes himself, as one that accounts the body of Nobility to
consist in Blood, the soul in the eminence of Virtue.

Of the Good Magistrate.
HE is the faithful Deputy of his Maker, whose obedience is the rule whereby
he rules: his breast is the Ocean whereinto all the cares of private men empty
themselves; which as he receives without complaint and ouerflowing, so he
sends them forth again by a wise conueyance in the streams of justice: his
doors, his ears are ever open to suitors; and not who comes first speeds well,
but whose cause is best. His nights, his meals are short and interrupted; all
which he bears well, because he knows himself made for a public servant
of peace and justice. He sits quietly at the stern, and commands one to the
top-saile, another to the maine, a third to the plummet, a fourth to the
anchor, as he sees the need of their course and weather requires; and does no
less by his tongue, than all the Mariners with their hands. On the bench he is
another from himself at home; now all private respects of blood, alliance,
amity are forgotten; and if his own son come under trial, he knows him
not: Pity, which in all others is wont to be the best praise of humanity,
and the fruit of Christian love, is by him thrown over the bar for
corruption: as for Favor the false Advocate of the gracious, he allows him
not to appear in the Court; there only causes are heard speak, not persons:
Eloquence is then only not discouraged, when she serves for a client of truth:
mere Narrations are allowed in this Oratory, not Proemes, not Excursions, not
Glosses: Truth must strip herself, and come in naked to his bar, without
false bodies, or colors, without disguises: A bribe in his closet, or a letter
on the bench, or the whispering and winks of a great neighbor are answered
with an angry and courageous repulse. Displeasure, revenge, recompense stand on
both sides the bench, but he scorns to turn his eye toward them; looking
only right forward at Equity, which stands full before him. His sentence is
ever deliberate and guided with ripe wisdom, yet his hand is slower than his
tongue; but when he is urged by occasion either to doom or execution, he
shows how much he hates merciful injustice: neither can his resolution or
act be reuersed with partial importunity. His forhead is rugged and severe,
able to discountenance villainy, yet his words are more awful than his brow,
and his hand than his words. I know not whether he be more feared or loved,
both affections are so sweetly contempered in all hearts. The good fear him
lovingly, the middle sort love him fearfully, and only the wicked man fears
him slauishly without love. He hates to pay private wrongs with the advantage
of his office, and if ever he be partial it is to his enemy. He is not more
sage in his gown than valorous in arms, and increases in the rigor of his
discipline as the times in danger. His sword has neither rusted for want of
use, nor surfeteth of blood, but after many threats is unsheathed, as the
dreadful instrument of divine revenge. He is the guard of good laws, the
refuge of innocence, the Comet of the guilty, the pay-maister of good
deserts, the champian of justice; the patron of peace, the tutor of the Church,
the father of his Country, and as it were another God upon earth.

THE SECOND Book. Characterismes of Vices.

LONDON, Printed by M. B. for Eleazar Edgar, and S. Macham.

The Prooeme.
I Have showed you many fair Virtues: I speak not for them, if their sight can
not command affection, let them lose it. They shall please yet better, after
you have troubled your eyes a little with the view of deformities; and by how
much more they please, so much more odious, and like themselves, shall these
deformities appear. This light contraries give to each other, in the midst of
their enmity, that one makes the other seem more good, or ill. Perhaps in
some of these (which thing I do at once fear, and hate) my style shall seem
to some less grave, more Satyricall; if you find me not without cause
jealous, let it please you to impute it to the nature of those vices, which
will not be otherwise handled. The fashions of some evils are besides the
odiousness, ridiculous; which to repeat, is to seem bitterly merry. I
abhor to make sport with wickedness, and forbid any laughter here, but of
disdain. Hypocrisy shall lead this ring; woorthily, I think, because both
she comes nearest to Virtue, and is the woorst of Vices.

The Hypocrite.
AN Hypocrite is the worst kind of plaier, by so much as he acts the better
part; which has always two faces, often times two hearts: That can compose his
forhead to sadness and gravity, while he bids his heart be wanton and
careless within, and (in the mean time) laughs within himself, to think how
smoothly he has couzened the beholder. In whose silent face are written the
characters of Religion, which his tongue and gestures pronounce, but his hands
recant. That has a clean face and garment, with a soul soul; whose mouth
belies his heart, and his fingers belie his mouth. Walking early up into the
City, he turns into the great Church, and salutes one of the pillars on one
knee, worshipping that God which at home he cares not for; while his eye is
fixed on some window, on some passenger, and his heart knows not whither his
lips go. He rises, and looking about with admiration, complains of our frozen
charity, commends the ancient. At Church he will ever sit where he may be
seen best, and in the midst of the Sermon pulles out his Tables in haste, as
if he feared to leese that note; when he writes either his forgotten errand,
or nothing: then he turns his bible with a noise, to seek an omitted
quotation; and folds the lease, as if he had found it; and asks aloud the
name of the Preacher, and repeats it, whom he publikelie salutes, thanks,
praises, inuites, entertaines with tedious good counsel, with good discourse,
if it had come from an honester mouth. He can command tears, when he speaks
of his youth, indeed because it is past, not because it was sinful: himself
is now better, but the times are worse. All other sins he reckons up with
detestation, while he loves and hides his darling in his bosom. All his
speech returns to himself, and every occurrent draws in a story to his own
praise. When he should give, he looks about him, and says WHO SEES ME? No
alms, no prayers fall from him without a witness; belike lest God should
deny, that he has received them: and when he has done (lest the world
should not know it) his own mouth is his trumpet to proclaim it. With the
superfluity of his usury, he builds an Hospital, and harbors them whom his
extortion has spoiled; so while he makes many beggars, he keeps some. He
turns all Gnats into Camels, and cares not to undo the world for a
circumstance. Flesh on a Friday is more abomination to him than his neighbors
bed: He abhorres more not to uncover at the name of Jesus, than to swear by
the name of God. When a Rimer reads his Poem to him, he begges a Copy, and
persuades the Press; there is nothing that he dislikes in presence, that in
absence he censures not. He comes to the sick bed of his stepmother, and
weeps, when he secretly fears her recovery. He greets his friend in the
street with so clear a countenance, so fast a closure, that the other thinks
he reads his heart in his face; and shakes hands with an indefinite
inuitation of When will you come? and when his back is turned, joys that he
is so well rid of a guest: yet if that guest visit him vnseared, he
counterfeits a smiling welcome, and excuses his chere, when closely he frowns
on his wife for too much. He shows well, and says well; and himself is the
worst thing he has. In brief, he is the strangers saint, the neighbors
disease, the blotte of goodness; a rotten stick in a dark night, a poppie in
a corn field, an ill tempered candle with a great snuff, that in going out
smelles ill; an Angel abroad, a Devil at home; and worse when an Angel, than
when a Devil.

The Characterism of the Busie-Bodie.
HIs estate is too narrow for his mind, and therefore he is feign to make
himself room in others affairs; yet ever in pretense of love. No news can
stir but by his door; neither can he know that, which he must not tell: What
every man ventures in Guiana voyage, and what they gained he knows to a
hair. Whether Holland will have peace he knows, and on what conditions; and
with what success is familiar to him ere it be concluded. No Post can pass
him without a question, and rather than he will leese the news, he rides back
with him to appose him of tidings; and then to the next man he meets, he
supplies the wants of his hasty intelligence, and makes up a perfect tale;
wherewith he so haunteth the patient auditor that after many excuses, he is
feign to endure rather the censure of his manners in running away, than the
tediousness of an impertinent discourse. His speech is often broken off with a
succession of long parentheses, which he ever vows to fill up ere the
conclusion, and perhaps would effect it, if the others ear were as unweariable
as his tongue. If he see but two men talk and read a letter in the street,
he runs to them, and asks if he may not be partner of that secret relation;
and if they deny it, he offers to tell, since he may not hear, woonders:
and then falls upon the report of the Scottish Mine, or of the great fish taken
up at Linne, or of the freezing of the Thames; and after many thanks and
dismissions is hardly entreated silence. He undertakes as much as he performs
little: this man will thrust himself forward to be the guide of the way he
knows not; and calls at his neighbors window, and asks why his servants are
not at work. The Market has no commodity which he prizeth not, and which
the next table shall not hear recited. His tongue like the tail of Sampsons
foxes carries firebrand, and is enough to set the whole field of the world on
a flame. Himself begins table-talke of his neighbor at another board; to
whom he bears the first news, and adiures him to conceal the reporter: whose
choleric answer he returns to his first host, enlarged with a second
edition: so, as it uses to be done in the fight of unwilling mastiues, he
claps each on the side apart, and prouokes them to an eager conflict. There can
no Act pass without his Comment, which is ever far-fetch't, rash, suspicious,
delatorie. His ears are long, and his eyes quick, but most of all to
imperfections, which as he easily sees, so he increases with intermedling. He
harbors another man's servant, and amiddes his entertainment asks what fare is
usual at home, what hours are kept, what talk passes their meals, what his
masters disposition is, what his government, what his guests? And when he has
by curious inquiries extracted all the juice and spirit of hoped intelligence,
turns him off whence he came, and works on a new. He hates constancy as an
ear-then dullness, unfit for men of spirit: and loves to change his work and
his place; neither yet can he be so soon weary of any place, as every
place is weary of him; for as he sets himself on work, so others pay him
with hatred; and look how many masters he has, so many enemies: neither
is it possible that any should not hate him, but who know him not. So then he
labors without thanks, talks without credit, lives without love, dies without
tears, without pity; save that some say it was pity he died no sooner.

The Superstitious.
SVperstition is Godless religion, devout impiety. The superstitious is fond
in observation, servile in fear, he worships God but as he lifts: he gives God
what he asks not, more than he asks; and all but what he should give; and
makes more sins than the Ten Commandments. This man dares not stir forth
till his breast be crossed, and his face sprinkled: if but an hare cross him
the way, he returns; or if his journey began unawares on the dismal day; or
if he stumbled at the threshold. If he see a snake vnkilled, he fears a
mischief; if the salt fall toward him, he looks pale and red, and is not
quiet till one of the waiters have powered wine on his lap; and when he
neeseth, thinks them not his friends that uncover not. In the morning he
listens whether the Crow cries eeuen or odd, and by that token presages of
the weather. If he hear but a Raven croke from the next roof, he makes his
will, or if a Bittour fly over his head by night: but if his troubled fancy
shall second his thoughts with the dream of a fair Garden, or green rushes,
or the salutation of a dead friend, he takes leave of the world, and says he
can not live. He will never set to Sea but on a Sunday; neither ever goes
without an Erra Pater in his pocket. Saint Paul's day and Saint Swithunes with
the Twelve are his Oracles; which he dares believe against the Almanacke. When
he lies sick on his deathbed, no sin troubles him so much as that he did
once eat flesh on a Friday, no repentance can expiate that; the rest need none.
There is no dream of his without an interpretation, without a prediction; and
if the event answer not his exposition, he expounds it according to the event.
Every dark groaue and pictured wall strikes him with an awful but carnal
devotion. Old wives and Stars are his counselors; his night-spell is his
guard, and charms his Physicians. He wears Paracelsian Characters for the
toothache, and a little hallowed wax is his Antidote for all evils. This man
is strangely credulous, and calls impossible things, miraculous: If he hear
that some sacred block speaks, moves, weeps, smiles, his bare foot carry
him thither with an offering; and if a danger miss him in the way, his saint
has the thanks. Some ways he will not go, and some he dares not; either there
are bugs, or he faineth them; every lantern is a ghost, and every noise is of
chains. He knows not why, but his custom is to go a little about, and to
leave the cross still on the right hand. One event is enough to make a rule;
out of these rules he concludes fashions proper to himself; and nothing can
turn him out of his own course. If he have done his task he is safe, it
matters not with what affection. Finally, if God would let him be the caruer of
his own obedience, he could not have a better subject, as he is he can not
have a worse.

Characterisme of the Profane.
THe Superstitious has too many Gods, the Profane man has none at all,
unless perhaps himself be his own deity, and the world his heaven. To
matter of religion his heart is a piece of dead flesh, without feeling of love,
of fear, of care, or of pain from the deaf strokes of a revenging
conscience. Custom of sin has wrought this senslesnesse, which now has
been so long entertained that it pleades prescription, and knows not to be
altered. This is no sudden evil: we are borne sinful, but have made our
selves profane; through many degrees we climb to this height of impiety.
At first he sinned, and cared not; now he sins, and knows not. Appetite
is his lord, and reason his servant, and religion his drudge. Sense is the rule
of his belief; and if piety may be an advantage, he can at once counterfeit
and deride it. When ought succeeds to him he sacrifices to his nets, and
thanks either his fortune or his wit; and will rather make a false God, than
acknowledge the true: if contrary, he cries out of destiny, and blames him to
whom he will not be beholden. His conscience would feign speak with him, but
he will not hear it; sets the day, but he disappoints it; and when it cries
loud for audience, he drownes the noise with good fellowship. He never names
God but in his oaths; never thinks of him but in extremity; and then he knows
not how to think of him, because he begins but then. He quarrels for the
hard conditions of his pleasure, for his future damnation; and from himself
lays all the fault upon his maker; and from his decree fetches excuses of his
wickedness. The inevitable necessity of Gods counsel makes him desperately
careless: so with good food he poisons himself. Goodness is his Minstrell;
neither is any mirth so cordial to him as his sport with Gods fools. Every
virtue has his slander, and his jest to laugh it out of fashion: every vice
his color. His vsuallest theme is the boast of his young sins, which he can
still joy in, tho he can not commit; and (if it may be) his speech makes him
worse than he is. He can not think of death with patience, without terror,
which he therefore fears worse than hell, because this he is sure of, the
other he but doubts of. He comes to Church as to the Theater, saving that not
so willingly, for company, for custom, for recreation, perhaps for sleep;
or to feed his eyes or his ears: as for his soul he cares no more than if
he had none. He loves none but himself, and that not enough to seek his true
good; neither cares he on whom he treads, that he may rise. His life is full
of license, and his practice of outrage. He is hated of God as much as he
hates goodness, and differs little from a devil, but that he has a body.

The Characterism of the Malcontent.
HE is neither well full nor fasting; and tho he abound with complaints, yet
nothing dislikes him but the present: for what he condemned while it was, once
past he magnifies, and strives to recall it out of the jaws of Time. What he
has he sees not, his eyes are so taken up with what he wants; and what he
sees he cares not for, because he cares so much for that which is not. When
his friend carues him the best morsel, he murmures that it is an happy feast
wherein each one may cut for himself. When a present is sent him, he asks Is
this all? and What no better? and so accepts it as if he would have his friend
know how much he is bound to him for vouchsafing to receive it. It is hard to
enterteine him with a proportionable gift. If nothing, he cries out of
unthankfulness; if little, that he is basely regarded; if much, he exclames
of flattery, and expectation of a large requital. Every blessing has somewhat
to disparage and distaste it: Children bring cares, single life is wild and
solitary; Eminency is envious, retiredness obscure; Fasting painful,
satietie unwieldy; Religion nicely severe, liberty is lawless; Wealth
burdensome, mediocrity contemptible: Every thing faulteth either in too much
or too little. This man is ever headstrong, and selfe-willed, neither is he
always tied to esteem or pronounce according to reason; some things he must
dislike he knows not wherefore, but he likes them not: and other where
rather than not censure, he will accuse a man of virtue. Every thing he
medleth with, he either finds imperfect, or makes so: neither is there any
thing that sounds so harsh in his ear as the commendation of another;
whereto yet perhaps he fashionably and coldly assenteth, but with such an
after-clause of exception, as does more than mar his former allowance: and if
he list not to give a verbal disgrace, yet he shakes his head and smiles, as
if his silence should say, I could and will not. And when himself is praised
without excess, he complains that such imperfect kindness has not done him
right. If but an unseasonable shower cross his recreation, he is ready to fall
out with heaven, and thinks he is wronged if GOD will not take his times when
to rain, when to shine. He is a slave to envy, and loses flesh with
fretting, not so much at his own infelicitie, as at others good; neither has
he leisure to joy in his own blessings whilst another prospers. Feign would
he see some mutinies, but dare not raise them; and suffers his lawless tongue
to walk through the dangerous paths of conceited alterations, but so as in good
manners he had rather thrust every man before him when it comes to acting.
Nothing but fear keeps him from conspiracies, and no man is more cruel when
he is not manicled with danger. He speaks nothing but Satyrs, and libels, and
lodges no guests in his heart but rebels. The inconstant and he agree well in
their felicity, which both place in change: but herein they differ; the
inconstant man affects that which will be, the malcontent commonly that which
was. Finally, he is a querulous curre, whom no horse can pass by without
barking at; yea, in the deep silence of night the very moone-shine opens his
clamorous mouth: he is the wheel of a well-couched fireworke that flies out on
all sides, not without scorching it self. Every ear was long ago weary of
him, and he is now almost weary of himself. Give him but a little respite,
and he will die alone; of no other death, than others welfare.

The Unconstant.
THe inconstant man treads upon a moving earth, and keeps no pace. His
proceedings are ever headdie and peremptory; for he has not the patience to
consult with reason, but determines meerelie upon fancy. No man is so hot in
the pursuit of what he likes; no man sooner weary. He is fiery in his
passions, which yet are not more violent than momentanie: it is a wonder if
his love or hatred last so many days as a wonder. His heart is the Inn of all
good motions, wherein if they lodge for a night it is well; by morning they are
gone and take no leave, and if they come that way again they are entertained
as guests, not as friends. At first like another Ecebolius he loved simple
truth, thence diuerting his eyes he fell in love with idolatry; those
heathenish shrines had never any more doting and besotted client, and now of
late he is leapt from Rome to Munster, and is grown to giddie Anabaptisme:
what he will be next, as yet he knows not; but ere he have Wintred his
opinion, it will be manifest. He is good to make an enemy of; ill for a
friend; because as there is no trust in his affection, so no rancour in his
displeasure. The multitude of his changed purposes brings with it
forgetfulness; and not of others more than of himself. He says, swears,
renounces, because what he promised he meant not long enough to make an
impression. Heerin alone he is good for a Commonwealth, that he sets many on
work, with building, ruining, altering; and makes more business than Time it
self; neither is he a greater enemy to thrift, than to idleness. Propriety
is to him enough cause of dislike; each thing pleases him better that is not
his own. Even in the best things long continuance is a just quarrel; Manna it
self grows tedious with age, and Novelty is the highest style of
commendation to the meanest offers: Neither does he in books and fashions ask
How good, but How new. Variety carries him away with delight, and no uniform
pleasure can be without an irksome fullness. He is so transformable into all
opinions, manners, qualities, that he seems rather made immediately of the first
matter than of well tempered elements; and therefore is in possibility any
thing, or every thing; nothing in present substance. Finally, he is servile in
imitation, waxey to persuasions, witty to wrong himself, a guest in his own
house, an ape of others, and in a word, any thing rather than himself.

The Flatterer.
Flattery is nothing but false friendship, fawning hypocrisy, dishonest
civility, base merchandise of words, a plausible discord of the heart and
lips. The Flatterer is bleare-eyed to ill, and can not see vices; and his
tongue walks even in one tracke of unjust praises; and can no more tell how to
discommend, than to speak true. His speeches are full of wondering
Interiections; and all his titles are superlatiue, and both of them seldom
ever but in presence. His base mind is well matched with a mercenarie tongue,
which is a willing slave to another man's ear; neither regards he how true,
but how pleasing. His Art is nothing but delightful cozenage, whose rules are
smoothing and guarded with perjury; whose scope is to make men fools, in
teaching them to ouer-value themselves; and to tickle his friends to death.
This man is a Porter of all good tales, and mends them in the carriage: One of
Fames best friends, and his own; that helps to furnish her with those rumors,
that may advantage himself. Conscience has no greater adversary; for when
she is about to play her just part, of accusation; he stops her mouth with
good terms, and well-neere strangleth her with shifts. Like that subtle fish
he turns himself into the color of every stone, for a booty. In himself he
is nothing, but what pleases his GREAT-ONE, whose virtues he can not more
extol, than imitate his imperfections, that he may think his worst
graceful. Let him say it is hot, he wipes his forhead, and vnbraceth
himself; if cold, he shiuers, and calls for a warmer garment. When he walks
with his friend he swears to him, that no manels is looked at; no man talked
of; and that whomsoever he vouchsafes to look on and nod to, is graced
enough: That he knows not his own worth, lest he should be too happy; and
when he tells what others say in his praise, he interrupts himself modestly,
and dares not speak the rest: so his concealment is more insinuating than his
speech. He hangs upon the lips which he admireth, as if they could let fall
nothing but oracles, and finds occasion to cite some approved sentence under
the name he honors; and when ought is nobly spoken, both his hands are
little enough to bless him. Sometimes even in absence he extolleth his
patron, where he may presume of safe conueiance to his cares; and in presence
so whispereth his commendation, to a common friend, that it may not be unheard
where he meant it. He has salues for every sore, to hide them, not to heal
them; complexion for every face: Sin has not any more artificial broker or
more impudent band. There is no vice, that has not from him his color, his
allurement; and his best service is either to further guiltiness, or smother
it. If he grant evil things inexpedient, or crimes errors, he has yielded
much; either thy estate gives privilege of liberty, or thy youth; or if
neither, What if it be ill, yet it is pleasant? Honesty to him is nice
singularity, repentance superstitious melancholy, gravity dullness, and all
virtue an innocent conceit of the base-minded. In short, he is the moth of
liberal men's coats, the eare-wig of the mighty, the bane of Courts, a friend
and a slave to the trencher, and good for nothing but to be a factor for the
Devil.

The Slothful.
HE is a religious man, and wears the time in his cloister; and as the cloak
of his doing nothing, pleads contemplation; yet is he no whit the leaner for
his thoughts, no whit learneder. He takes no less care how to spend time, than
others how to gain by the expense; and when business importunes him, is more
troubled to forethinke what he must do, than another to effect it. Summer is
out of his favor for nothing but long days, that make no haste to their
eeuen. He loves still to have the Sun witness of his rising; and lies long
more for lothnesse to dress him, than will to sleep: and after some streaking
and yawning calls for dinner, unwashed; which having digested with a sleep in
his chair, he walks forth to the bench in the Marketplace, and looks for
companions: whomsoever he meets, he stays with idle questions, and lingering
discourse; how the days are longthened, how kindly the weather is, how false
the clock, how forward the Spring, and ends ever with What shall we do? It
pleases him no less to hinder others, than not to work himself. When all the
people are gone from Church, he is left sleeping in his seat alone. He enters
bonds, and forfeits them by forgetting the day; and asks his neighbor when his
own field was fallowed, whether the next piece of ground belong not to
himself. His care is either none, or too late: when Winter is come, after some
sharp visitations, he looks on his pile of wood, and asks how much was
cropped the last Spring. Necessity drives him to every action, and what he
can not avoid, he will yet defer. Every change troubles him, although to the
better; and his dullness counterfeits a kind of contentment. When he is warned
on a Jury, he had rather pay the mulct, than appear. All but that which
Nature will not permit, he does by a deputy, and counts it troublesome to do
nothing, but to do any thing, yet more. He is witty in nothing but framing
excuses to sit still, which if the occasion yield not, he coineth with ease.
There is no work that is not either dangerous, or thanklesse, and whereof he
foresees not the inconvenience and gainlesnesse before he enters; which if it
be verified in event, his next idleness has found a reason to patronize it.
He had rather freeze than fetch wood, and chooses rather to steal than work;
to beg than take pains to steal, and in many things to want than beg. He
is so loath to leave his neighbors fire, that he is feign to walk home in the
dark; and if he be not looked to, wears out the night in the chimney-corner;
or if not that, lies down in his clothes to save two labors. He eats, and
prays himself asleep; and dreams of no other torment but work. This man is
a standing poole, and can not choose but gather corruption: he is descried
amongst a thousand neighbors by a dry and nastie hand, that still sauors of
the sheet; a beard uncut, vnkembed; an eye and ear yellow with their
excretions; a coat shaken on, ragged, vnbrush't; by linen and face striving
whether shall excel in vncleanlinesse. For body he has a swollen leg, a
duskie and swinish eye, a blown cheek, a drawling tongue, an heavy foot, and
is nothing but a ^older earth molded with standing water. To conclude, is a man
in nothing but in speech and shape.

The Covetous.
He is a servant to himself, yea to his servant; and does base homage to
that which should be the worst drudge. A liuelesse piece of earth is his
master, yea his God, which he shrines in his coffer, and to which he
sacrifices his heart. Every face of his coin is a new image, which he adores
with the highest veneration; yet takes upon him to be protector of that he
worshippeth: which he fears to keep, and abhors to lose: not daring to trust
either any other God, or his own. Like a true Chemist he turns every thing
into silver, both what he should eat, and what he should wear; and that he
keeps to look on, not to use. When he returns from his field, he asks, not
without much rage, what became of the loose crust in his cup-boord, and who
has rioted amongst his leekes? He never eats good meal, but on his neighbors
trencher; and there he makes amends to his complaining stomach for his former
and future fasts. He bids his neighbors to dinner, and when they have done,
sends in a trencher for the shot. Once in a year perhaps, he gives himself
leave to feast; and for the time thinks no man more lavish; Wherein he lists
not to fetch his dishes from far; nor will be beholden to the shambles; his
own provision shall furnish his board with an insensible cost; and when his
guests are parted, talks how much every man devoured, and how many cups were
emptied, and feeds his family with the moldie remnants a month after. If his
servant break but an earthen dish for want of light, he abates it out of his
quarters wages. He chips his bread, and sends it back to exchange for staler.
He lets money, and selles Time for a price; and will not be importuned either
to prevent or defer his day; and in the mean time looks for secret gratuities,
besides the main interest; which he selles and returns into the stock. He
breeds of Money to the third generation; neither has it sooner any being, than
he sets it to beget more. In all things he affects secrecy and propriety:
he grudgeth his neighbor the water of his well: and next to stealing he hates
borrowing. In his short and unquiet sleeps he dreams of thieves, and runs
to the door, and names more men than he has. The least sheafe he ever culles
out for Tithe; and to rob God holds it the best pastime, the cleerest gain.
This man cries out above other; of the prodigality of our times, and tells of
the thrift of our forefathers: How that great Prince thought himself royally
attired, when he bestowed thirteen shillings and four pence on half a suit:
How one wedding gown served our Grandmothers, till they exchanged it for a
winding sheet; and praises plainness, not for less sin, but for less cost.
For himself he is still known by his forefathers coat, which he means with
his blessing to bequeath to the many descents of his heirs. He neither would
be poor, nor be accounted rich. No man complains so much of want to avoid a
Subsidy; no man is so importunate in begging, so cruel in exaction; and when
he most complains of want, he fears that which he complains to have. No
way is indirect to wealth; whether of fraud or violence: Gain is his
godliness; which if conscience go about to prejudice, and grow troublesome by
exclaming against, he is condemned for a common barretor. Like another Ahab he
is sick of the next field, and thinks he is ill seated, while he dwelles by
neighbors. Shortly, his neighbors do not much more hate him, than he
himself. He cares not (for no great advantage) to lose his friend, pine his
body, damn his soul; and would dispach himself when corn falls, but that
he is loath to cast away money on a cord.

The Vainglorious.
ALl his humor rises up into the froth of ostentation; which if it once
settle, falls down into a narrow room. If the excess be in the
understanding part, all his wit is in print; the Press has left his head
empty; yea not only what he had, but what he could borrow without leave. If
his glory be in his devotion, he gives not an Alms but on record; and if he
have once done well, God hears of it often; for upon every unkindness he is
ready to vpbraid him with his merits. Over and above his own discharge he
has some satisfactions to spare for the common treasure. He can fulfill the
law with ease, and earne God with superfluity. If he have bestowed but a
little sum in the glazing, pauing, parieting of Gods house, you shall find it
in the Church-window. Or if a more gallant humor possess him, he wears all
his land on his back, and walking hie, looks over his left shoulder, to see
if the point of his rapier follow him with a Grace. He is proud of another
man's horse; and well mounted thinks every man wrongs him, that looks not at
him. A bare head in the street, does him more good than a meals meat. He
swears big at an Ordinary, and talks of the Court with a sharp accent;
neither vouchsafes to name any not honorable, nor those without some term of
familiarity; and likes well to see the hearer look upon him amazedly, as if
he said, How happy is this man that is so great with great ones! Under pretense
of seeking for a scroll of news, he draws out an handful of letters endorsed
with his own style, to the height; and half reading every title, passes over
the latter part, with a murmur; not without signifying, what Lord sent this,
what great Lady the other; and for what suits; the last paper (as it happens)
is his news from his honorable friend in the French Court. In the midst of
dinner, his Lacquay comes sweating in, with a sealed note from his creditour,
who now threatens a speedy arrest, and whispers the ill news in his Masters
ear, when he aloud names a Counselor of State, and professes to know the
employment. The same messenger he calls with an imperious nod, and after
expostulation, where he has left his fellows, in his ear sends him for some
new spur-leathers or stockings by this time footed; and when he is gone half
the room, recalles him, and says aloud, It is no matter, let the greater
bag alone till I come; and yet again calling him closer, whispers (so that
all the table may hear) that if his crimson suit be ready against the day,
the rest need no haste. He picks his teeth when his stomach is empty, and
calls for pheasants at a common Inn. You shall find him prizing the richert
jewels, and fairest horses, when his purse yields not money enough for earnest
He thrusts himself into the prease, before some great Ladies; and loves to be
seen near the head of a great train. His talk is how many Mourners he
furnished with gowns at his fathers funerals, how many messes; how rich his
coat is, and how ancient, how great his alliance; what challenges he has made
and answered; what exploits he did at Cales or Nieuport: and when he has
commended others buildings, furnitures, suits, compares them with his own.
When he has undertaken to be the broker for some rich Diamond, he wears it,
and pulling off his glove to stroke up his hair, thinks no eye should have any
other object. Entertaining his friend, he chides his cook for no better
cheer, and names the dishes he meant, and wants. To conclude, he is ever on
the stage, and acts still a glorious part abroad, when no man carries a baser
heart, no man is more so. did and careless at home. He is a Spanish soldier
on an Italian Theater; a bladder full of wind, a skin full of words, a fools
wonder, and a wise-mans fool.

The Presumptuous.
PResumption is nothing but hope out of his wits, an high house upon weak
pillars. The presumptuous man loves to attempt great things, only because they
are hard and rare: his actions are bold, and venturous, and more full of
hazard than use. He hoiseth sail in a tempest, and says never any of his
Ancestors were drowned: he goes into an infected house, and says the plague
dares not seize on noble blood: he runs on high battlements, gallops down
steep hills, rides over narrow bridges, walks on weak ice, and never thinks,
What if I fall? but, What if I run over and fall not? He is a confident
Alchymist, and braggeth, that the womb of his furnace has conceived a burden
that will do all the world good; which yet he desires secretly borne, for
fear of his own bondage: in the mean time, his grass breaks; yet he upon
better luting, lays wagers of the success, and promises wedges beforehand
to his friend. He says, I will sin, and be sorry, and escape; either God will
not see, or not be angry, or not punish it; or remit the measure. If I do
well, he is just to reward; if ill, he is merciful to forgive. Thus his
praises wrong God no less than his offense; and hurt himself no less than
they wrong God. Any pattern is enough to encourage him: show him the way where
any foot has trod, he dares follow, although he see no steps returning; what if
a thousand have attempted, and miscarried; if but one have prevailed, it
suffices. He suggests to himself false hopes of never too late; as if he
could command either Time or repentance: and dare defer the expectation of
mercy till betwixt the bridge and the water. Give him but where to set his
foot, and he will remove the earth. He foreknowes the mutations of States, the
events of war, the temper of the seasons; either his old prophecy tells it
him, or his stars. Yea, he is no stranger to the Records of Gods secret
counsel, but he turns them over, and copies them out at pleasure. I know not
whether in all his enterprises he show less fear, or wisdom: no man
promises himself more, no man more believes himself. I will go and sell, and
return and purchase, and spend and leave my sons such estates; all which if
it succeed, he thanks himself; if not, he blames not himself. His purposes
are measured, not by his ability, but his will, and his actions by his
purposes. Lastly, he is ever credulous in assent, rash in undertaking,
peremptory in resolving, witless in proceeding, and in his ending miserable;
which is never other, than either the laughter of the wise, or the pity of
fools.

The Distrustful.
THe distrustful man has his heart in his eyes, or in his hand; nothing is
sure to him but what he sees, what he handles: He is either very simple, or
very false; and therefore believes not others, because he knows how little
himself is worthy of belief. In spiritual things, either God must leave a
pawn with him, or seek some other Creditour. All absent things and unusual,
have no other, but a conditional entertainment: they are strange, if true. If
he see two neighbors whisper in his presence, he bids them speak out, and
charges them to say no more than they can justify. When he has committed a
message to his servant, he sends a second after him, to listen how it is
delivered. He is his own Secretary, and of his own counsel, for what he
has, for what he purposes: and when he tells over his bags, looks through
the keyhole, to see if he have any hidden witness, and asks aloud, Who is
there? when no man hears him. He borrowes money when he needs not, for fear
lest others should borrow of him. He is ever timorous, and cowardly; and asks
every man's errand at the door, ere he opens. After his first sleep, he starts
up, and asks if the furthest gate were barred, and out of a fearful sweat
calls up his servant, and bolts the door after him; and then studies whether
it were better to lie still and believe, or rise and see. Neither is his heart
fuller of fears, than his head of strange proiects, and far-fetcht
constructions; What means the State, think you, in such an action, and
whether tends this course: Learn of me (if you know not) The ways of deep
policies are secret, and full of unknown windings; That is their act, this
will be their issue: so casting beyond the Moon, he makes wise and just
proceedings suspected. In all his predictions, and imaginations, he ever
lights upon the worst; not what is most likely will fall out, but what is most
ill. There is nothing that he takes not with the left hand; no text which his
gloss corrupts not. Words, oaths, parchments, seals, are but broken reeds;
these shall never deceive him; he loves no paiments but real. If but one in an
age have miscarried, by a rare casualtie, he misdoubts the same event. If but a
tile fallen from an hie roof have brained a passenger, or the breaking of a
coach-wheele have endangered the burden; he swears he will keep home; or
take him to his horse. He dares not come to Church, for fear of the crowd;
nor spare the Sabbaths labor for fear of the want; nor come near the
Parliament house, because it should have been blown up; What might have
been, affects him as much as what will be. Argue, vow, protest, swear, he
hears thee, and believes himself. He is a Skeptic, and dare hardly give
credit to his senses which he has often arraigned of false intelligence. He
so lives, as if he thought all the world were thieves, and were not sure
whether himself were one: He is uncharitable in his censures, unquiet in his
fears; bad enough always, but in his own opinion much worse than he is.

The Characterism of the Ambitious.
AMbition is a proud covetousness, a dry thirst of honor, the longing disease of
reason, an aspiring, and gallant madness. The ambitious climes up high and
perilous stairs, and never cares how to come down; the desire of rising has
swallowed up his fear of a fall. Having once cleaued (like a burre) to some
great man's coat, he resolves not to be shaken off with any small indignities,
and finding his hold thoroughly fast, casts how to insinuate yet nearer; and
therefore, he is busy and servile in his endeavors to please, and all his
officious respects turn home to himself. He can be at once a slave to command,
an intelligencer to inform, a parasite to sooth and flatter, a champian to
defend, an executioner to revenge; any thing for an advantage of favor. He
has proiected a plot to rise, and woe be to the friend that stands in his way:
He still haunteth the Court, and his unquiet spirit haunteth him; which having
fetched him from the secure peace of his countrey-rest, sets him new and
impossible taskes; and after many disappointments incourages him to try the
same sea in spite of his shipwracks; and promises better success. A small
hope gives him heart against great difficulties, and draws on new expense, new
seruilitie; persuading him (like foolish boys) to shoot away a second shaft,
that he may find the first. He yields, and now secure of the issue, applauds
him self in that honor, which he still affects, still misseth; and for the
last of all trials, will rather bribe for a troublesome preferment, than
return void of a title. But now when he finds himself desperately crossed,
and at once spoiled both of advancement and hope, both of fruition and
possibility, all his desire is turned into rage, his thirst is now only of
revenge; his tongue sounds of nothing but detraction and slander: Now the place
he sought for is base, his rival unworthy, his adversary injurious, officers
corrupt, Court infectious; and how well is he that may be his own man, his
own master; that may live safely in a mean distance, at pleasure, free from
staruing, free from burning. But if his designs speed well; ere he be warm
in that seat, his mind is possessed of an higher. What he has is but a degree
to what he would have: now he scorneth what he formerly aspired to; his
success does not give him so much contentment, as provocation; neither can he
be at rest, so long as he has one, either to ouerlook, or to match, or to
emulate him. When his Countrey-friend comes to visit him, he carries him up to
the awful presence; and now in his sight crouding nearer to the Chair of
State, desires to be looked on, desires to be spoken to, by the greatest, and
studies how to offer an occasion, lest he should seem unknown, unregarded;
and if any gesture of the least grace fall happily upon him, he looks back
upon his friend, lest he should carelessly let it pass, without a note: and
what he wants in sense, he supplies in history. His disposition is never
but shamefully unthankful; for unless he have all, he has nothing. It must
be a large draught, whereof he will not say, that those few drops do not
slake, but inflame him: so still he thinks himself the worse for small
favors. His wit so contriues the likely plots of his promotion, as if he
would steal it away without Gods knowledge, besides his will; neither does he
ever look up, and consult in his forecasts, with the supreme moderator of all
things; as one that thinks honor is ruled by Fortune, and that heaven medleth
not with the disposing of these earthly lots: and therefore it is just with
that wise God to defeat his fairest hopes, and to bring him to a loss in the
hotest of his chase; and to cause honor to fly away so much the faster, by
how much it is more egerly pursued. Finally, he is an importunate suitor, a
corrupt client, a violent undertaker, a smooth factor, but untrusty, a
restless master of his own; a bladder puffed up with the wind of hope, and
self-love. He is in the common body as a Mole in the earth, ever unquietly
casting; and in one word is nothing but a confused heap of envy, pride,
covetousness.

The Unthrift.
HE ranges beyond his pale, and lives without compass. His expense is measured
not by ability, but will. His pleasures are immoderate, and not honest. A
wanton eye, a lickerous tongue, a gamesome hand have impouerisht him. The
vulgar sort call him bountiful, and applaud him while he spends, and
recompense him with wishes when he gives, with pity when he wants: Neither can
it be denied that he raught true liberality, but ouer-went it. No man could
have lived more laudably, if when he was at the best, he had stayed there.
While he is present none of the wealthier guests may pay ought to the shot,
without much vehemency, without danger of unkindness. Use has made it
unpleasant to him, not to spend. He is in all things more ambitious of the
title of good fellowship than of wisdom. When he looks into the wealthy chest
of his father, his conceit suggests that it cannot be emptied; and while he
takes out some deal every day, he perceiues not any diminution; and when the
heap is sensibly abated, yet still flatters himself with enough: One hand
couzens the other, and the belly deceiues both: He does not so much bestow
benefits, as scatter them. True merit does not carry them, but smoothness of
adulation: His senses are too much his guides, and his purueyors; and appetite
is his steward. He is an impotent servant to his lusts; and knows not to
govern either his mind or his purse. Improuidence is ever the companion of
unthriftiness. This man can not look beyond the present, and neither thinks,
nor cares what shall be; much less suspects what may be: and while he lauishes
out his substance in superfluities, thinks he only knows what the world is
worth, and that others ouerprize it. He feels poverty before he sees it,
never complains till he be pinched with wants; never spares till the bottom,
when it is too late either to spend or recover. He is every man's friend save
his own, and then wrongs himself most, when he courteth himself with most
kindness. He vies Time with the slothful, and it is an hard match, whether
chases away good hours to worse purpose; the one by doing nothing, the other
by idle pastime. He has so dilated himself with the beams of prosperity,
that he lies open to all dangers, and cannot gather up himself, on just
warning, to avoid a mischief. He were good for an Almner, ill for a Steward.
Finally, he is the living tomb of his forefathers, of his posterity, and
when he has swallowed both, is more empty than before he devoured them.

The Envious.
He feeds on others evils, and has no disease but his neighbors welfare:
whatsoever God do for him, he can not be happy with company; and if he were
put to choose, whether he would rather have equals in a common felicity, or
superiors in misery, he would demurre upon the election. His eye casts out
too much, and never returns home, but to make comparisons with another good.
He is an ill prizer of foreign commodity; worse of his own: for, that, he
rates too hie, this under value. You shall have him ever inquiring into the
estates of his equals and betters; wherein he is not more desirous to hear
all, than loath to hear any thing ouer-good: and if just report relate ought
better than he would, he redoubles the question, as being hard to believe what
he likes not; and hopes yet, if that be auerred again to his grief, that
there is somewhat concealed in the relation, which if it were known, would
argue the commended party miserable, and blemish him with secret shame. He is
ready to quarrel with God, because the next field is fairer grown; and
angerly calculates his cost, and time, and tillage. Whom he dares not openly
backbite, nor wound with a direct censure, he strikes smoothly with an
ouer-cold praise; and when he sees that he must either maliciously oppugn
the the just praise of another (which were unsafe) or approve it by assent, he
yields; but shows withal that his means were such, both by nature, and
education, that he could not without much neglect, be less commendable: So his
happiness shall be made the color of detraction. When an wholesome law is
propounded, he crosses it, either by open, or close opposition; not for any
incommoditie or inexpedience, but because it proceeded from any mouth, besides
his own; And it must be a cause rarely plausible, that will not admit some
probable contradiction. When his equal should rise to Honor, he strives
against it unseen; and rather with much cost suborneth great adversaries; and
when he sees his resistance vain, he can give an hollow gratulation in
presence; but in secret, disparages that advancement; either the man is unfit
for the place, or the place for the man; or if fit, yet less gainful, or more
common than opinion; Whereto he ads, that himself might have had the same
dignity upon better terms, and refused it. He is witty in devising
suggestions to bring his rival out of love, into suspicion. If he be courteous,
he is seditiously popular; if bountiful, he binds over his Clients to a
faction; if succesfull in war, he is dangerous in peace; if wealthy, he
lays up for a day; if powerful, nothing wants but opportunity of rebellion.
His submission is ambitious hypocrisy, his religion, politic insinuation; no
action is safe from a jealous construction. When he receives an ill report of
him whom he emulates; he says, Fame is partial, and is wont to blanch
mischiefs; and pleases himself with hope to find it worse; and if Ill Will
have dispersed any more spightful narration, he lays hold on that, against
all witnesses; and brocheth that rumor for trust, because worst: and when he
sees him perfectly miserable, he can at once pity him, and rejoice. What
himself can not do, others shall not: he has gained well, if he have
hindered the success of what he would have done, and could not. He conceales
his best skill, not so as it may not be known that he knows it, but so as it
may not be learned; because he would have the world miss him. He attained to a
sovereign medicine by the secret legacy of a dying Empericke, whereof he will
leave no heir, lest the praise should be divided. Finally, he is an enemy to
Gods favors, if they fall beside himself; The best nurse of ill Fame; A man of
the worst diet; for he consumes himself, and delights in pining; A thornehedge
covered with nettles; A peevish interpreter of good things, and no other then a
lean and pale carcass quickened with a feend.


