A SVMMER SERMON UPON ELIAHS PRAYER. Preached in the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul's in LONDON, on the last Sunday of Trinity Term in the afternoon, being a
time of extraordinary heat and drought.

By John Gore, Rector of Wendenlofts in Essex.

Printed at London by Thomas Cotes, for Themas Alchorn, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Greene-Dragon. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Mr. WILLIAM BIRD, Doctor of the Civil Law, my most
Worthy Friend and Benefactor.
RIGHT WORSHIP.
WHen I consider the manifold favors and courtesies that I have found at your
hands, I am ready to say unto my self, as Ruth said once to Boaz, Ruth 2. 10.
Quare inveni gratiam? Why have I found grace in your eyes, that you should take
knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger? For mine own part I can impute it to
nothing, but unto Gods goodness, and your own worthiness: And my only
ambition is to make you this acknowledgement that the world may see, though I
am poor, I am thankful. Now as Ioab wished to David in another case, 2 Samuel
24. 3. so wish I to you, The Lord God add unto your estate, how much soever it
be, an hundred fold, and that your eyes may see it, and your heart may rejoice
in it all the days of your life.

Thus prays

A SVMMER SERMON.
JAMES 5. 17, 18. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he
prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the
space of three years and six months. And he prayed again, and the heavens
gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.
THe sum and drift of this Text is to set forth the efficacy, or rather
omnipotency of earnest and fervent Prayer. There be two graces of God in man,
that may justly be termed Omnipotent or Almighty graces; God himself being
pleased to show his Almighty power and goodness in them, and they are Faith
and Prayer. 1. For the first, Mat. 15. 28. O woman great is thy faith, be it
unto thee even as thou will. What a large unlimitted Grant and Patent was this
for a poor sinner to ask what she would, and have promise of acceptance.
Mark. 9. 23. To him that believes all things are possible. Look what a
believer cannot do himself, God himself will do it for him, and yet it shall
be accounted as his act and deed. Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me: Not meaning that he could do all things in
general and at large, as to walk on the waters, fly in the air, etc. but
all things that belonged to his calling, all things that concerned his
Ministry, and all things that pertained to the right way of pleasing God and
of saving his own soul: He could pray well, Preach well, live well; he could
want and he could abound, he could conform and apply himself to all estates
whatsoever: All this he could do, not by any power or ability of his own,
but by the strengthening grace, and faith, and virtue of Jesus Christ, (I can
do all things through Christ that strengthens me.) As on the contrary, our
Savior says of himself, Mark. 6. 5. that he could do nothing worth speaking
of in his own Country, (...), no mighty work, no work of wonder (in respect
of what he could have done) only because of their unbeleife: and mark, that it
is not said, He would do no such works there, but (...), He could not do
them: not that Christ was unable for want of power, but he saw it was
unavaileable through their lack of faith. For the power of God, and the faith
of men, are like the spirits and the sinews in the body, the one mooves, and
stirs, and works within the other; if there be no faith in us, there can be
no expectation of any power or any help from God.

2. The other omnipotent grace is Prayer; and that you may be assured it is so,
mark but that expression, Exodus 32. 10. Let me alone (says God to Moses) that
I may consume them, and I will make of thee a great Nation. What a word was
this to come from the mouth of Almighty God, to bid a poor weak creature, let
him alone: it shows that Moses by his prayer did even (as it were) overpower
the Lord, that the Lord had not the power to revenge himself on that provoking
people, as long as Moses interceded for them.

Such a powerful man with God was Eliah here in my text: His mouth (as a
Father says) was Fraenum Coeli, the very bridle of Heaven; he could even rule
the heavens with his prayers, as a man rules a horse with a bridle: Now least
you should think he did thus prevail with God, rather by the privilege of
his person, than by the virtue of his prayers, The Apostle tells us for that,
he was (...), he was a man subject to the same passions that we are, and yet
his prayer took such good effect. (Eliah was a man subject, etc.)

In my text there are two general points to be considered. 1. The condition
and quality of Eliahs person, [He was a man subject to like passions as we
are] 2. The condition and quality of his prayer; that like a two-edged sword,
it cut both ways, and prevailed in both kinds; both to bring a judgment, and
to bring a blessing upon the people. His first prayer like a burning fever
entered into the bowels of the earth, and scorcht and dried up the Rivers and
Lakes, and Springs, and left no moisture in them; and so brought a judgment of
drought and dearth upon the land. His second prayer went up into the clouds
above, and fetched an (...) a heaven-dropping dew, a happy and a heavenly rain
that moystned and fatned, and refreshed the earth again [He prayed again, and
the heavens gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit.

1. The condition and quality of Eliahs person, what manner of man Eliah was?
My Text says he was (...), A man subject to the same passions, to the same
frailties and infirmities that we are. Hence you may observe, that no
profession of holiness, no practice of piety, no degree of grace and
sanctification in this life, can exempt, or free, or privilege a man from
common passions, and infirmities, Eliah was a man of God, a mortified and a
sanctified man, and one of the greatest favorites in the Court of heaven, and
yet a man subject to passions. What shall I need to multiply examples to
prove this point, when we know the Apostle affirms even of our Savior
himself, That he was in all things like unto us sin only excepted: set but
sin aside (where of his blessed person was incapable, for as no rust can take
hold of burning and flaming iron; no more could any sin or corruption take hold
of his pure and precious soul) set but that aside, and our Savior Christ was
(as Eliah is said to be) (...) a man subject to the very same infirmities and
passions, of anger, and fear, and sorrow, and sadness, that we are: and
happy was it for us that so he was; for by this means he became (as the
Apostle says, Heb. 2. 17. A merciful High Priest,) one that knew how to
tender and succor our infirmities, because himself had a feeling of them in
his own nature. This made him so tenderly affected toward the hungry
multitude, Mat. 15. because himself knew by his own experience what an
unsufferable misery hunger was. This made him so compassionate toward the
sorrows of Mary and Martha, John 11. because himself was Vir dolorum, a man
acquainted with grief and sorrow: And such was his compassion toward Peter in
that state of desertion wherein he lay, Luke 22. because himself knew and felt
in his own soul, what a woeful thing it was to be forsaken of God. And this
is the assurance which the Apostle gives us, that we shall obtain mercy and
grace from Jesus Christ, to help and comfort us in time of need, Heb. 4. 16.
because himself had a feeling of the same infirmities, and was a man subject
to the same passions that we our selves are, sin only excepted.

In a word then, as there is no Rose since the Creation, but has his prickles,
as well as his sweet leaves; so there is no man living since the fall of Adam,
(except our Savior forementioned, who was (...) God and man both) but has his
passions as well as his perfections, his infirmities as well as his graces. As
Cyril observes, there is no Rock of stone so hard, but has some crackes, some
clefts and seames in it, whereat weeds spring out and grow: so there is no
man's heart so sanctified and filled with grace, but has some crackes, some
flawes in it, whereat his sins and corruptions sprout and issue out, to his
no small regret and grief. And as we see by experience, that there is chafe
about every corn in the field, and bitterness in every branch of Wormwood,
and saltness in every drop of water in the Sea: so is there infirmity and
frailty, corruption and passion in every man, woman, and child, of what estate,
of what degree, of what profession soever. Eliah was a holy man, a zealous man,
a man of God, and yet a man subject to passions.

Let no man therefore be too forward or too severe in censuring and condemning
the follies and frailties, the weaknesses and passions of godly men, or of the
men of God, (such as Eliah was) for alas, they are (...) subject to the same
passions that other men are, Solomon tells us, Pro. 27, 19, That as in water,
face answers to face, so does the heart of man to man. A man that looks into
the water, or into a glass, shall see a face there in all points answering to
his own, the same spots, the same warts, the same wrinkles and blemishes that
he sees in the face in the water; they are all the very same in his own face,
there is face answering to face, so does the heart of man to man; the same
evils, the same corruptions, lusts and sins, that thou see in another man's
heart, breaking out into his life, the very selfsame are in thy own heart;
his heart to thine is but as a face answering to a face in the water. Observe
the Apostles demand, 1 Cor. 4. 7. and apply it to thy self (...)? Who makes
thee to differ from another man? For by nature all are alike, all equally
devoid of spiritual grace and goodness, and all equally prone to sin and
wickedness: how comes it to pass then, that one man differs from another,
that one is holy, blameless, and undefiled in his way; another licentious and
loose, and spotted with the world? Answer, It is not any thing in nature
(believe that for a truth) but merely that same Gratia discriminans (as
Divines call it) that distinguishing Grace of God, it is that which makes the
difference betwixt one man and another. Let no man therefore ascribe any thing
to himself for his freedom from great offenses, but give God the glory of his
grace which had made him to differ from the greatest sinner, and if at any
time, thou see another man break out into passion, or miscarry in his way by
some ill temptation; reprove him in Gods name; and pray for him when thou have
done, and withal, reflect upon thy self, and say, as Plato did, Number ego talis
uspiam? Am not I such a one? Have not I been, or may not I be as vile and as
vicious as he? Be not therefore too censorious nor too supercilious (as the
manner of some is) but incline rather to think every man better, than to
think any man worse than thy self: if thou see thy brother overtaken in a
fault, do then as the Apostle advises thee, Gal. 6. 1. (...) restore him with
the spirit of meckenesse, or (as the word signifies) bind him up gently and
lovingly, as a Chirurgian does a bone that is out of joint; Considering thy
self (says he) least thou also be tempted; considering (I say) that thou
art, as he is, and all men are, as Eliah was (...), too like one another in
that which is naught, all subject to the same passions; All (as the Apostle
says) shut up under sin, And I pray God of his goodness have mercy on us
all, Amen.

Again, the consideration of this, if it be rightly conceived, may serve for a
comfort and a stay unto such tender consciences as have sinned of infirmity,
and like Moses in their haste, have spoken unadvisedly with their lips, not
being able for the time to overruled and bridle their passions. It is some
comfort to consider, that the greatest Saints of God have sometimes been of
the same temper; yea there is not a soul in heaven (the soul of Jesus Christ
only excepted) but has been sometimes subject to the very same passions. And
I said, This is my infirmity (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 77. 10. but I remember
the years of the right hand of the most High. i. I consider and call to mind
that God in former times, and in the days of old, has had compassion upon the
same infirmities in other men; and why should I misdoubt (he being still the
same compassionate God) but that he will have pity and compassion upon the
same infirmities in me. But some man may say: How shall I know and be assured
that my sins are sins of infirmity, such as God will wink at; and not
rather sins of presumption and iniquity, such as his soul abhorres? Answer,
A sin of infirmity may be known two ways.

1. By the antecedent which goes before it; and that is an honest resolution of
a man's heart against sin and evil; when a man does steadfastly resolve (by
the assistance and grace of God) to separate himself from every known sin,
and to sanctify himself in all holy duty and obedience to God, striving by a
holy desire and an hearty endeavor, in nothing willingly to sin against God,
but in every thing to please him and approove himself unto him: if such a man
chance to fall by occasion into a fault, or be overtaken unawares (as the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 6. 1.) besides the purpose of his heart, and the
intention and desire of his soul: that man's sins, are sins of infirmity,
which by the mercy of God shall never be laid to his charge. Contrarily, when a
man shall hang in equilibrio, in an even balance (as it were) betwixt
wickedness and goodness, and shall be equally disposed to sin or not to
sin as occasion shall offer it self; or which is worse, shall do like him,
Psalm. 36. 4. shall set, and settle himself in a way that is not good,
resolving with himself, that this sin fits my turn, and pleases my humor,
and I will not part with it: or which is worst of all, when a man shall draw
iniquity with cords of vanity (as the Prophet speaks) as if the devil were
backward, and sin would not come fast enough upon him of its own accord;
shall fish and angle for it, and hunt after ill company, and draw himself and
others into sin, as Fish and Fowls are drawn into a net, to their ruin and
destruction; this man's sins are far beyond the sin of infirmity, for they
are sins of iniquity, and sins of obstinacy, and such as will cost him many
a sigh, many a groan, many a tear, before ever he shall attain to this
comfortable persuasion, that there is compassion with God, and salvation with
Christ for his soul.

2. A sin of infirmity is known by the consequents of it, or that which
follows after it: it leaves such a sting behind it in the soul, that a man
can never be at quiet in his own conscience, till he has made his peace with
God by a sound and serious humiliation, and reconciled himself again to Jesus
Christ. Yea, it never leaves a man, till it has brought him to that same
(...), that Indignation which the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 7. 11. that a man
shall even fret and vex and fall out with himself for offending and provoking
so good, so gracious a God. It will make a man upbraid himself for a very
beast and a fool (as David did, Psalm. 73.) So ignorant was I, and so foolish,
even as a beast before thee. And it is a sure rule, that of Saint Augustine;
Peccata non nocent, si non placent; if a man's sins do not please him, they
will never hurt him. Whereas on the contrary, when a man can carry away his
sins as lightly as Sampson carried the gates of Azza, that they are no
burden to his soul; or if they do begin to trouble him, shall do as Saul
did, betake himself to music and sport, and merry company to drive it away
(as if one sin could drive out another, and not rather drive it further in:)
believe it, this man's sins are no sins of infirmity, but they are sins of
an higher nature, and such as will cost a man dear ere he can be acquitted of
them in the sight of God. And this I dare confidently affirm, that there is no
man that sins of infirmity, but he is afterward the better for his sin; it
makes him the more jealous of himself, the more watchful over his ways, the
more careful to serve and please God, than ever he had been in former times.
Whereupon says Saint Austin, upon those words of the Apostle, Romans 8. Omnia
cooperantur, etc. All things work together for good to them that love God.
Etiam pecata Domine, Even our very sins O Lord; for by sin we have
experience of our infirmity, our infirmity brings us down to humility,
humility brings us home to God, and in God every man has his quietus est, a
happy discharge from all his sins. This being done, one thing only remains,
and that is this; A man that has sinned of infirmity, will labor to bring
forth that same (...) which John Baptist speaks of, Mat. 3. 8. The worthy
fruits of repentance; for you most know, that repentance is one thing, and the
fruit of repentance is another; it is not enough to repent, and be sorry for
what a man has done (so did Judas, so did Ahab) but he must honestly and
unfainedly endeavor to bring forth the fruit of repentance, and that is the
reformation and alteration of his life, and conversation in the sight of God
and men. If it be thus with thee, take comfort (in Gods name) from this
comfortable Doctrine, that thou art no other then Eliah was, a man subject to
passion.

It follows; Eliah was a man subject to passions, yet he prayed; Hence we may
learn, never to be so dejected at the view of our frailties and imperfections,
as to forbear our resorting to God in prayer. For no man living has so much
need to pray to God, as a man subject to passions. It was one part of Solomon's
request to God, 2 Chronicles. 6. 29. When any one shall perceive and feel his own
sore, his own grief, and the Plague of his own heart (as he terms a man's
own corruption) what shall he do? Shall he despair, shall he be driven
back from God (as Jordan was driven back at the presence of the Arc) no, let
him do this; let him down upon his knees to God, and spread forth his hands
to Heaven, and the Lord which dwells in Heaven will hear him, and when he
hears, have mercy. It was an amazed and unadvised prayer, that of Simon to our
Savior, Luke 5. 8. when he cried out, Lord go from me, for I am a sinful
man; as if a Patient should say to the Physician, depart from me, for I am
sick. The sicker a man is, the more need he has of the Physicians presence;
and the sinfuller he is, the more need to draw near to his Savior: as a man
that shivers of an Ague creepes nearer and nearer to the fire. You know our
Saviors gracious call, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and
I will ease you. Now (as Saint Bernard says,) every Christian is Animal
oneriferum, a burden-bearing creature; not a Christian upon earth but has some
cross or other to clogge him, some corruption or other to burden him at
times, and lies heavy upon his heart; what then is to be done? Shall he lie
down like Issachar, and couch between his burden? Shall he be disheartened
and discouraged from resorting and approaching to God? God forbid; let him in
Gods name come to Jesus Christ that calls him, with tears in his eyes, with
true grief and godly sorrow in his heart, with humble confessions and prayers
in his mouth; and he has promised in verbo servatoris, in the word of a
Savior, that he will release and ease him of it. One thing I must tell thee by
the way, when thou prayest to Christ for ease, thou must promise him obedience
and service; as the Israelites did to Rhehoboam, 1 Reg. 12. Ease us of our
burden, and we will be thy servants for ever. Thus do, and then let thy
burden be never so great, thy corruptions never so many, thy passions never so
strong; He that could calm the sea, can calm thy sorrows, and speak peace
unto thy soul in the midst of all thy troubles, and therefore, if at any time
thy passions be stirred, and thy heart disquieted within thee; know of a
surety, that, there is some Jonah that has raised this storm, some sin or
other that has caused this trouble to thy soul; then fall to thy prayers (as
Eliab did) and give God no rest, till God has given rest to thy soul. Eliah
was a man subject to passions, and he prayed.

It follows, How did he pray? My Text says, he prayed earnestly, in the
Original it is, (...) In praying he prayed, or, he prayed a prayer, we
translate it, He prayed earnestly, and it is to very good purpose; for it
implies thus much: that no prayer is a prayer indeed, but an earnest prayer.
Cold and careless prayers, counterfeit and superstitious prayers, they be but
res nihili, in Gods account no prayers at all. I will give you an instance,
Act. 9. 11. When Paul was converted and stricken with blindness, Almighty God
sent Ananias to him to lay his hands upon him, and to recover him of his fight;
now least he should mistake the man, and lay his hands upon a wrong party, God
gives him this private token to know him by, forbehold he prays. Now let me
demand; do you think that Saint Paul never prayed to God till that time? or
do you imagine that was the first prayer that ever Saint Paul made? It is the
first we read of; but do you think he never prayed before? I believe he
did many a time and often; and I will give you my reason: Saint Paul (you know)
was a Pharisee, one of the strictest and devoutest of all the Sect (as he
testifies of himself) and the Pharisees, you know, were altogether given to
long praying; it was their glory and their gain too, that they could make long
prayers in every place, in the open streets, in widows houses; and no doubt
but Saint Paul had as excellent a faculty that way, and could pray as long and
as largely as the best of them all: but see the issue: Almighty God, who styles
himself the hearer of prayers, gave no ear, took no notice of all his
formal, Pharisaicall, hypocritical prayers, which he had made in former
times; till he came to this humble, this earnest, this heartbreaking prayer;
And now (says God) Behold he prays; he never prayed indeed, till now: for as
Philo says well; God does not numerare, but ponderare, not number our prayers,
but weigh them; if he find them cordial, if he find them hearty, that they
have some substance, and some weight in them, then he records and registers and
sets them down in that book of remembrance which the Prophet speaks of, Mal.
3. 16. If otherwise, they be dull and heartlesse, lazy and spiritlesse, God
does by them as he does by our sins of ignorance, Act. 17. 30. (...) wink at
them, pass by, and take no notice of them; let no man therefore deceive
himself to think that all kind of praying speedes alike, for no prayer is a
prayer in Gods account, but an earnest prayer, Eliah prayed a prayer, because
he prayed earnestly.

Furthermore, it is worth your noting, to see the constant disposition of this
holy man. Eliah was well known to be a hot spirited man in all his actions,
exceeding zealous and earnest in all his reprehensions, both of the King, and
of the people. Now here you may observe the equability, the evennesse of Eliahs
zeal; as he was earnest in his reprehensions, so he was as earnest in his
devotions; and as zealous in his prayers, as he was in his anger. There is many
a man hot and fiery in his anger, but cold and lukewarm in prayers; such
zeal is never right. Gal. 4. 18. It is good to be always earnest in a good
thing. (...), is the word to be hot and fiery, and zealously affected in one
good thing as well as another, in devotion, as well as reprehension, in prayer,
as well as in anger. When a man's zeal is equable (like Eliahs) then it is
right and pleasing to God.

As Physicians judge of the state of a man's body, Vniversalia salutaria,
particularia ex mo^bo; as thus: if a man be hot in one part and cold in
another; if the palms of his hands burn, and the soles of his feet be
key-cold, then all is not right; but if he be of an indifferent equal heat
all over, that held a good sign of good health in the body. By the like rule
judge thou of the state of thy soul, if thy zeal be equable and uniforme both
in prayer and in anger, it is a good sign of grace and sanctification in thy
heart; but if it vary and differ, that there is too much heat in the one, too
little in the other; all is not well within. It was the reason which old Father
Latimer gave, why men in these days do not prevail with God in their
prayers, as Eliah and such others had done in former times, Deest ignis (says
he) deest ignis, There lackes fire, there lackes fire; his meaning is, our
prayers want that zeal, that heat, that earnestness, which they put into
theirs. For as incense without fire yields no smell, no more does prayer
without zeal and earnestness; and as Honey is no Honey, if it have lost its
sweetness; and Vinegar is no Vinegar, if it have lost its sharpness; so
Prayer is no Prayer, if it be void of earnestness. Eliah prayed indeed,
because he prayed earnestly.

Now I come to the subject, and matter of his Prayer which (I told you) was
first for a judgment, and then for a blessing, first for a drought, and then
for rain, as it follows. He prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and
it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and six months. Here
are two weighty points to be considered. 1. What should moove Eliah to pray for
a judgment. 2. Why he made choice to pray for this kind of judgment, of
drought and dearth, rather then for any other. I will tell you my opinion of
both.

1. Upon what ground, or by what warrant did Eliah pray for a judgment. Saint
Paul (in my conceit) seems to tax him for it, Romans 11. 2. and he brings it in
with a notandum, wot ye not (i.) do ye not mark and observe what the
Scripture says of Eliah, how he made intercession to God against Israel. Good
men in former times were wont to make intercession to God For the people, not
Against them: Abraham prayed for the wicked Sodomites, Jeremy prayed for the
Idolatrous Israelites, till God forbad him, and gave him a countermand, Pray no
more for this people, for I will not hear thee, Ier. 11. 14. The Husbandman in
the Parable entreates his Master for the unfruitful tree, that he would spare
it and not cut it down, and does Eliah differ from all the rest, and bend his
prayers against the people, and pray for the vexation and undoing of his
Country? How could this stand with that good Religion, and that good affection
which so holy a man should bear toward the people of God? Answer. Three
things there are (in my weak judgment) that may seem to warrant and bear
out Eliah in praying for a judgment.

1. Authoritas Prophetica, Prophets might do more then ordinary persons, and
Eliah had the spirit of Prophecy, and knew by revelation from God, that such a
judgment was a coming, therefore he might the more warrantably and
unoffensively frame his desires to Gods appointments, and fit his prayers to
Gods purposes. Thus must we conceive of those bitter execrations and
imprecations wherewith David did so often in the Psalms curse and banne his
enemies, [Let their Table be their snare, let their children be vagabondes and
beg their bread, etc.] A man would think it could not stand with the piety
and charity of a godly man, to wish such wicked events, such uncharitable
wishes to proceed out of his mouth: but only that we know, he was a Prophet of
God, and did it per afflatum divinum, by the direction and inspiration of the
Holy Ghost; he knew by the spirit of Prophecy, they were such as were accursed
of God, being Gods enemies as well as his, and therefore might the more
warrantably and safely do it. It is not for us to use David's curses, unless
we had David's spirit. David and Eliah had that gift which the Apostle calls
(...) the discerning spirits; they knew by instinct from heaven, who were
blessed and who were cursed of God. It is not so with us, God has hid those
secrets from our eyes, and therefore it is our part and duty to pray in love
and charity, That God would have mercy upon all men.

But what use then are we to make of those curses in the Psalms that are read
so often to us? Answer, Thus we may do, we may apply them to the enemies of
the Church, that seek the ruin of the true Religion, and profess an open
enmity to the Gospel and faith of Jesus Christ (Who is God blessed for ever) we
may safely take our Saviors part, and curse all those that are enemies to him:
[So let all thy enemies perish, O Lord, Iud. 5. 31.] But for our own enemies,
that have done us some private wrong, or bare us some secret grudge, to curse
them and ban them in this kind (as the usual manner of some is) it is both
unwarrantable, uncharitable, and ungodly. But the best and safest use, that we
can make of those curses, is to appropriate and apply them to our selves, to
acknowledge and adjudge our selves worthy to undergo all those deadly evils,
and that God may justly do so; and more than so unto us, if he should deal
with us according to our sins; by this means we shall save God a labor, and
our selves a pain. For as on the contrary, to bless our selves is the way to
make God curse us, Deuteronomy. 29. 20. He that blesses himself when he hears
the words of these curses, saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the
imagination of my own heart, adding drunkenness to thirst. (mark what
follows) The Lord will be revenged upon the soul of such a one, his anger and
his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the curses that are written
in this book shall light upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from
under Heaven. This a man gets by blessing of himself: whereas if thou would
be blessed of God, I do not say, that thou should curse thy self (far be it
from any servant of Christ so to do) but this I would advise thee to do, even
with a sorrowful and a sad heart, to say Amen to all the curses in the Book
of God, to acknowledge and confess that thou have justly deserved, and that it
is Gods only mercy that thou have escaped them. So much for the first reason
that may warrant Eliahs prayer; the next may be this.

2. Convenientia temporis, the fitness and order of time when this was done,
it was done in the time of the Law, which was used to such judgments, they
were then accustomed to more terrible wonders, than are now suitable to the
sweet and saving time of the Gospel; observe the wonders that Moses wrought in
Egypt, what terrible, what hurtful, what mischievous wonders they were, he
turned all their water into blood, all their dust into Lice, and spoiled all
the fruits of the earth, and undid the whole Land. What a dreadful wonder was
that of Elisha, 2 Reg. 2. when he cursed the children of Bethel, that mocked
him for his baldness: One would have thought that a little discipline, a
little correction, or sending to their Parents or Masters, would have sufficed,
and been a sufficient revenge for waggish unhappy boys, that did not know
their duty to a man of God: but he looks upon them with a direful
countenance, and cursed and banned them in the name of the Lord, and
immediately two Shee-beares came out of the Wood, and tare two and forty of
them in pieces: what a horrible, what a terrible, what a mischeivous wonder was
this? Of the same kind was that of Eliah, 2 Reg. 1. When the Captain came with
authority, to bid him come down, and come before the King; he might have
answered, I cannot come, or the Lord appointed me some other way to go, etc.
but the next word we hear, is a word of Judgment and Vengeance, If I be a man
of God, let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee, and thy company: and
so it did both them, and the rest that came after on the same message. Such
wonders as these were usual in the time of the Law. But now look to the
Miracles and Wonders of our Savior in the Gospel, and you shall find them to
be of another nature, all of goodness and mercy, all merciful, all
beneficial, all healing Miracles, no way hurtful or destructive of any man's
life. We read of many a man's life that he saved, many that he recalled and
restored, none that he destroyed, no not one: being so reviled as he was, so
persecuted, so laid for, so betrayed, apprehended, condemned and crucified; yet
what one man did our Savior strike dead for all these heinous indignities?
Nay, he was so far from revenge, that he prayed for their lives that sought
and wrought his death.

The most terrible wonders that ever our Savior did, were but two, and those
no ways prejudicious to the person or life of any man, woman, or child. The
one was his cursing and blasting of the barren Fig Tree; and this was but
symbolicall, not done in any spleen to the poor tree; but only to show his
indignation against all unfruitful profession; when men make an outward show
of piety to God; but when the poor and hungry come to them (as Christ came to
that Fig Tree) hoping to pull some fruit of charity and mercy from them,
there is nothing to be found but leaves, good words perhaps, and that is all:
believe it, such men are nigh unto cursing, and it is Gods infinite mercy, if
he do not blast their estate (as Christ did the Fig Tree) that it shall never
prosper to them nor theirs. The other wonder of Christ that did any hurt, was
that, Matthew. 8. The drowning of the Swine, and yet that was the devils doing,
Christ only gave way to these evil spirits (which seek the destruction of
man and beast) to carry them headlong into the sea (as they would carry us too,
but that God above, who styles himself The preserver of men, is pleased in
mercy to keep out of their clutches;) and this was symbolicall too, to let us
understand how God hates all those that are of a swinish disposition; that is,
all drunken sots, that like swine, have neither wit nor grace to moderate
themselves in the use of Gods creatures; and all lazy beasts that mind nothing
but their bellies, (as you know) a Swine is one of the laziest creatures that a
man can keep, it does him no work, nor service at all; or lastly, All hoggish
worldlings, and miserable muckewormes of the earth, that never do good till
they come to dye: let all such tremble and fear, and call to God for mercy,
least in his just judgment he deliver their souls into the hands of those
hellish Fiends to carry them headlong (as they did the Swine) into the lake
that burns with fire and brimstone for evermore, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth.

These are the two severest wonders that ever our Savior did, or suffered to
be done; as for all the rest (look into the Stories of the Gospel, which are
the Acts and Monuments of Jesus Christ) you shall find to be all gracious, all
beneficial, all healing and saving wonders. Never any man came to him for
sight, that went away blind; never any came to him for hearing, that went away
deaf; never any came to him for health, that went away sick. In a word, you
shall never find that ever any man or woman came to our Savior for any help
or mercy, that ever went away confounded or disappointed of their hopes. Now
beloved, Christ is the same Jesus still, that then he was: Coelum non animum
(as we say) though he have changed his place, he has not changed his nature,
but is still as favorable, as indulgent to mankind as ever he was, if we do
but as truly seek unto him for our souls health, as they did for their
bodies.

So you see the nature of these wonders is altered from that they were in
Eliahs times: the severity of the Law suites not with the lenity of the
Gospel; and we must now imitate our Savior in works of mercy, and not
follow Eliah in prayers for judgment. We see, Luke 9. 54. When the Disciples
fingers itched to be revenged on the Samaritans for their base discourtesie in
not entertaining our Savior; Master, (says they) will thou that we command
fire from Heaven, and consume them, as Eliah did? We have a president for it,
it is a book case, Eliah did so, let us do the like, these men deserve it, as
bad or worse than they with whom Eliah had to do: No, (says our Savior, the
case is altered) ye know not of what spirit ye are; the spirit of the Law
required severity, the spirit of the Gospel requires meekness and mercy.
Far is it from the good Spirit of Christ and of God, to stir up any man's
heart to private revenge; not an Eagle, but a Dove was the shape wherein that
holy and healthful Spirit made choice to appear. Let us therefore all that
are called Christians, follow no other president, but our Savior Christ's;
whose only lesson that ever he set us to learn of him, was this, to be humble
and meek, and so doing we shall find Requiem animabus; rest and peace to our
own souls.

The third and last reason that may warrant Eliah in praying for a judgment,
was,

3. Necessitas rei, the necessity of the thing it self; that holy Prophet had
spent his strength in vain, Sermon upon Sermon, warning upon warning,
threatening upon threatening; and when he saw that nothing would work them to
goodness, then he prays for a judgment; not in a vindictive way to be
revenged upon them, but as a desperate remedy, knowing that that or nothing
would bring them to good, as it is said, 2 Chronicles. ult. God sent his Prophets,
rising early and sending them, and used all gentle means to reclaim them,
till there was no remedy, then he sent destruction. In this sense, if a man
have a child or a friend, or any one that he wishes well to his soul; if he
be grown to that pass, so hardened in sin, that no persuasions, no warnings,
no threatenings will work upon him; I am persuaded, it were neither
uncharitable, nor unpleasing to God, if a man should pray, Lord smite him,
correct him, lay some medicinal, some healing punishment upon him, that he
may see the error of his ways, and may return and repent, and so be saved.

Upon these and the like grounds, I suppose Eliah might with a safe conscience
pray for a judgment: but then the next questionis, Why he should make choice
to pray for this kind of judgment, of drought and dearth, for want of rain;
rather then any other. I will tell you what I think the reasons may be.

1. Because it was an uncontrouleable, a convincing judgment; if Eliah should
have brought any earthly or visible judgment, as Sword or Pestilence, etc.
they would have imputed it presently to some secondary means and causes; now
this was a heavenly an invisible judgment, the stoppage of the clouds, the
detaining of Rain, and the burning and scorching of the Sun; was a judgment
from heaven, and such as they must needs confess to be Digitus, the finger of
God, not Aliquid humani, no handy work of any mortal man. For this was the
fallacy which the Scribes and Pharisees put upon our Savior Math. 16. 1. When
they had seen all the miracles and wonders of Christ, how he cured the sick,
etc. they conceited that these things might be done by slight of hand, by Art
of Magic, by Beelzebub, or by Conjuration, etc. but (say they) Show us a
sign from heaven; and then we will believe. They knew that a Magician or a
devil might do much upon earth, but he could do nothing in heaven; therefore
(say they) show us a sign from Heaven, and we will believe. So here to prevent
all misconceites, Elias prayed and procures a judgment from heaven; and that a
convincing a cutting judgment; for you must know that the people at that time
left off to worship the true God, and fell to worship Baall, the Sun, the
Moon, and all the Host of Heaven; trusting no doubt that these gods of
theirs, would by their influence so moysten and fatten the earth, that they
should not need to be beholding to God for any rain: now (quoth Eliah) here is
a judgment to try yours gods withal, go to the gods that ye have served, let
them help now or never, if they can do any thing, they can send a shower of
rain, if not, why do ye serve them? I say it was a convincing judgment.
Eliah did it on purpose, to let them see the vileness of their Idolatry, what
base, what impotent, what unworthy gods they served, that could not help their
clyents to a drop of rain. In like manner, whatsoever a man makes his god,
besides the true one; I mean, puts his trust in, for help in time of need;
shall at length so deceive him, and so befoole him, that he shall be forced
to confess, as these people did in the end; The Lord he is God, The Lord he
is God.

2. Because it was a just and a fitting punishment; this people were guilty of
spiritual barrenness, and God plagued them with temporal barrenness. No
Nation under heaven was so husbanded, and manured of God, so watered with the
dewes of heaven, I mean, with the means of grace and salvation, as they were,
and yet none more unfruitful in every good work: Now therefore Eliah fits
them with a judgment suitable and agreeable to their sin: he prays to God
that it might not rain, that so their lands might be answerable to their
lives, and their foyles become as barren as their souls. Thus it pleases God
many times to pay men in their own coin, to come home to them in their own
kind, and to fit his punishments according to their sins. That as they that
sin in their goods, by misgetting, miskeeping, and mispending them, are many
times punished in their goods, by losses, and crosses, by fire, by water, etc.
And as they that sin in their children, by misloving, or misnurturing them,
are often times punished in their children, as David was in Absalom and Adonijah;
so they that sin in their lands: it is just with God to punish them in their
lands: Solomon tells us, Prove. 21. 4. that the plowing of a wicked man is sin,
That is strange; the husbandry and tillage of the ground is generally held to
be one of the most honest, the most innocent, the most harmless callings in
the world; and so it is of it self; and yet we see, when a wicked man takes
the plow in hand; when a man goes to his plow with an ill mind, and an ill
conscience, his very plowing adds to his sins. And it is just with God, that
that land which is plowed sinfully, should thrive accordingly, and become as
bad and as barren as the owner. A fruitful land does God make barren, for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein.

3. Because it was a sensible, and a palpable judgment. As God Almighty told
Caine, Genesis 4. 7. that he should be cursed from the earth. The Lord knew that
Caine cared not to be cursed from heaven, and to be banished from the presence
of God, and branded for a Reprobate; but to be cursed from the earth, to be
cursed in earthly things (he being a tiller of the earth) that would go
nearest to his heart of any judgment. Even such is the disposition of every
man of the earth (as David terms earthly minded men) they do not value nor
care to be cursed from heaven, to be excommunicated out of the favor of God,
and out of the blessed company of all faithful people (which censure of
excommunication if it be rightly carried with a Clave non erante (as the
Schoolmen speak) when there is no error committed in the use of the keys,
is one of the greatest punishments under heaven.) But carnal men are not
sensible of this, and therefore God will punish them in that wherein they are
sensible, in their wives and children, in their corn and cattle, etc. in such
things as are nearest and dearest to them: as when David slung his stone at
Goliath, if he had struck him upon any part of his harness, he had never
felt the blow, but striking him (as he did) in the forehead, which was naked
and tender, that sunk him presently; so it is with carnal men, for spiritual
judgments, they are harnessed, their hearts are hardened, their consciences are
seared, they have (as the Apostle speaks) (...), a horny hoof (as it were)
grown over their hearts, that makes them insensible of any spiritual blow
that can light upon them. Therefore Almighty God, knowing in what part they lie
naked, in what kind they are tenderly affected, namely, in their affection to
earthly things, strikes them there, plagues them in that, and that sinkes them
like Nabal, whose heart dyed within him like a stone. As we see in Exodus, how
Pharaoh and the Egyptians hardened their heart, and out stood all the plagues of
Egypt, till God plagued them in their children, and that broke their hearts. So
believe it, they that care not for spiritual punishments (for the loss of
Gods favor, the loss of heaven, the loss and peril of their own souls)
God will find a time to punish them in that which they do and shall care for,
in their corn, in their substance, in that which is nearest and dearest to
them: As he did these Israelies here, because they were not sensible of the
want of grace. God punished them with that would make them sensible, with the
want of rain; that when they had plowed and sown their land, and bestowed all
their care and cost, all should be in vain, for want of moisture to refresh
the earth. These or the like reasons (I suppose) might moove Eliah to pray and
procure this kind of judgment.

By the way, if any man desire to know the reason, why God is not thus
marveilous in the Ministers of the Gospel, as he was in Eliah, and those
other Prophets of the Law; why we that are his Evangelicall Prophets cannot
do such wonders in our days, as they did in theirs? Answer, though that same
donum miraculorum, the gift of Miracles be ceased in the Church, now that the
Gospel has taken root: as Husbandmen when they transplant a tree, at first,
they set props and stays to shore it up, but after it has taken root, they
take away the stays and let it grow by the ordinary influence of the heavens;)
I say though the gift of working wonders be ceased, yet miracles and wonders in
another kind nevercease, but are wrought daily by the Preachers of the Gospel.
For you must know that the miracles under the Gospel are of a differing nature
from the miracles under the Law: those were ocularia miracula (as I may fitly
call them) eye-miracles, that were visible and outwardly apparent to be seen;
but these are Auricularia miracula, Eare-miracles, secret and invisible,
wrought in the heart by the Word and Spirit of God, entering in at the ear, and
going down into the soul. Though we cannot command, or forbid the rain to
water the earth, as Eliah did; if we can water and mollify the earthen hearts
of men with the supernatural rain of heavenly Doctrine, and make a dry and
barren soul bear fruit to God; is not this as great a wonder as the other?
Though we cannot cause nor command the thunder (as Samuel did) to terrify the
people for their sins; yet God has his Boanerges, his sons of thunder still,
that by rattling from heaven the terrible judgments of God against sin and
sinners, are able to make the stoutest and the proudest heart upon earth, even
tremble and quake, and fall down before the presence of God; and is not this
as great a miracle as that of Samuel, to bring an unhumbled sinner upon his
knees, and make glad to cry God mercy for his sins? In a word, though we
cannot cast out devils out of men's bodies, as the disciples of Christ could
do; if we can cast the devil out of men's souls, by the powerful Gospel of
Jesus Christ; is it not as great a wonder? Believe it brethren, the conversion
of a sinner to God, and bringing of a soul to heaven, is absolutely without
comparison the greatest miracle, the greatest wonder in the world. And these be
the miracles wherewith it pleases God to grace the Ministers of the Gospel;
therefore ye observe, that the Collect for Ministers, runs thus, Almighty God
which only workest great marvels, etc. When a soul is sick to the death, with
a surfeit of sin, is recovered and revived again by that same healthful
spirit of grace, which God together with his Word does breathe into the soul,
it is so great a marvel, so rare a wonder, that the Angels of heaven rejoice
to see it.

I have held you overlong in the former part of Eliahs prayer, which brought
the judgment: hear now in a word or two, the Reversing of the judgment, and
I have done. [And he prayed again, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit.] It well becomes the Prophets of God to be merciful;
Good Eliah had not the heart to hold the people too long under a judgment,
when he saw he had done enough to humble them, he desires God to reverse the
judgment. As it is observed of the good Angels in the old and new Testament,
when they appeared to any, either man, or woman; their method and manner was
this, Primo terrent, deinde laetificant, they first terrified them, and put
them into fear, then presently comforted them, and put them out of fear. Thus
did Eliah with this people; thus did Moses with Pharaoh, that good man had not
the heart to hold wicked Pharaoh always under a judgment, but upon the least
entreaty made suite to God to reverse it. So dealt the Prophet with Jeroboam, 1
Reg. 13. 6. when he had smitten him with a judgment, and had him at the
advantage, that his hand was witnered, Jeroboam was glad to submit and say,
Entreat now the face of the Lord thy God, and pray for me, that my hand may be
restored me: The man of God had not the heart to deny him, but immediately,
besought the Lord, and the Kings hand was restored, and became as it was
before. When a judgment comes, then Prophet are in season. Abraham is better
than a King in this case, Genesis 20. 7. Restore the man his own, for he is a
Prophet, and he shall pray for thee; and ver. 17. Abraham prayed unto God, and
God healed Abimelech, etc. Go to my servant Job (says God to his friends, Job
42. 8.) and my servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept. So Act.
8. 24. When Peter had denounced a curse on Simon Magus, he was glad to crouch
and cry unto him, Oh pray ye to the Lord for me, that none of these things
which ye have spoken come upon me. Thus ye see that judgments and plagues
will bring Prophets into request: men commonly deal with their Ministers, as
boys do by Walnut-trees, and other fruit trees, in fair weather throw
cudgels at us, in foul run to us for shelter. In the days of peace and
prosperity we are past over as superfluous creatures, of whom there is little
use, and less need: but when the wrath of God falls on the naked soul, when
the conscience is wounded within, and body pained without, then the Minister is
thought on. I say no more, if you desire their prayers, and that God should
hear them praying for you in your extremity, do not slight them, do not
wrong them in prosperity. Remember how Ahab and all Israel were glad to be
beholden to Eliah to reverse their judgment; and you do not know how soon the
case may be your own: therefore as you love your souls, love those that have
charge of them.

And he prayed again, etc. When I look into the Story, 1 Reg. 18. I can find
no direct prayer that Eliah made for rain. But I find there a twofold prayer
that he made. 1. A vertuall. 2. A formal prayer.

1. A Vertuall prayer, not for rain, but for their conversion. Oh Lord, (says
Eliah) bring back, or bring home the heart of this people unto thee; verse. 73.
and this includes all other prayers that can be made: A prayer for conversion
is a prayer for every thing, Ier. 31. 18. When Ephraim prays for conversion,
Turn thou me, and I shall be turned: (says God) I will surely have mercy upon
him etc. Such is the goodness of God, that he will withold no good thing,
(be it rain, be it plenty, be it any thing that is good for them) from them
that are converted, and brought home by true repentance to him. Therefore if
thou stand in need of any temporal mercy, pray first for conversion, and
all other good things shall be super-added and thrown in unto thee; or if thou
prayest for any child, or for any friend to do him good indeed, pray for his
conversion, and thou prayest for every thing, that one prayer is instar omnium,
instead of all the rest. If he be in an ill way, desire God to bring him back,
and for future things take no care.

2. A formal prayer, when he saw that the people were truly humbled, and that
their hearts were indeed brought home to God, insomuch that they cried out,
with an ingemmination, The Lord he is God, the Lord he is God, then he buckles
his head between his knees (to show the humble prostration of his soul) and
falls a praying to God for rain. After humiliation any prayer comes in season,
Esaias 1. Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings, etc. And
now come (says God) and we will reason together, now let us parle, now let us
confess, now pray and I will hear you. Iud. 10. 17. When the Israelites put
away their strange gods, and turned themselves to the true God by sincere
repentance and reformation; the Text says, His soul was grieved for the
misery of Israel: thus the only way to case our own souls of grief, or to
be rid of any grievous judgment, is to grieve the soul of God, that is, to
humble our selves before him, to pray and seek his face, and to turn from our
wicked ways, and God will be even grieved with himself that ever he punished,
plagued, and put us to grief; and he will return (as he says) and have mercy
on us, and will do us good after he has done us hurt. Here then (in a word) is
the ready way to prevail with God, either for rain, or for fair weather, or
for any temporal blessing whatsoever, to do as Eliah did, buckle our very
heads between our knees, I mean, prostrate our selves before the face of God,
in the humblest, in the lowliest, in the most dejected manner that we can
device, and if any means under heaven will fetch down mercy from heaven, that
will do it. Eliah prayed again, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth
brought forth her fruit. Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, be ascribed and given, all honor and glory be done and performed all
service and duty, from this time forth for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

