POSSIDETE ANIMAS VESTRAS
NH

THE First and second volumes of Chronicles, comprising 1 The description and
history of England, 2 The description and history of Ireland, 3 The
description and history of Scotland:


First collected and published by Raphaell Holinshed, William Harrison, and
others:

Now newly augmented and continued (with manifold matters of singular note and
worthy memory) to the year 1586. by John Hooker alias Vowell Gent. and
others.

With convenient tables at the end of these volumes.

Historiae placeant nostrates ac peregrinae 1574



To the Right Honorable, and his singular good Lord and Master, S. William
Brook Knight, Lord Warden of the cinque Ports, and Baron of Cobham, all
increase of the fear and knowledge of God, firm obedience toward his Prince,
infallible love to the common wealth, and commendable renown here in this
world, and in the world to come life everlasting.
Having had just occasion, Right Honorable, to remain in London, during the
time of Trinity term last passed, and being earnestly required of diverse my
friends, to set down some brief discourse of parcel of those things, which I
had observed in the reading of such manifold antiquities as I had perused
toward the furniture of a Chronology, which I have yet in hand; I was at the
first very loath to yield to their desires: first, for that I thought my self
unable for want of skill and judgment, so suddenly and with so hasty speed to
take such a charge upon me: secondly, because the dealing therein might prove
an hinderance and impechment unto mine own Treatise: and finally, for that I
had given over all earnest study of histories, as judging the time spent about
the same, to be an hinderance unto my more necessary dealings in that vocation
and function whereunto I am called in the ministry. But when they were so
importunate with me, that no reasonable excuse could serve to put by this
travel, I condescended at the length unto their yrkesome suit, promising that
I would spend such void time as I had to spare, whilst I should be enforced to
tarry in the city, upon some thing or other that should satisfy their
request; and stand in lieu of a description of my Country. For their parts
also they assured me of such helps as they could purchase: and thus with hope
of good, although no gaie success, I went in hand withal, then almost as one
leaning altogether unto memory, since my books and I were parted by forty
miles in sunder. In this order also I spent a part of Michaelmas and Hilarie
terms ensuing, being enforced thereto I say by other businesses which
compelled me to keep in the city, and absent my self from my charge, though
in the mean season I had some repair unto my poor library, but not so great
as the dignity of the matter required, and yet far greater than the Printers
have would suffer. One help, and none of the smallest that I obtained herein,
was by such commentaries as Leland had sometime collected of the state of
Britain, books utterly mangled, defaced with wet and weather, and finally
imperfect through want of sundry volumes: secondly, I gat some knowledge of
things by letters and pamphlets, from sundry places and shires of England, but
so discordant now and then amongst themselves, especially in the names and
courses of rivers and situation of towns, that I had often greater trouble to
reconcile them one with an other, than orderly to pen the whole discourse of
such points as they contained: the third aid did grow by conference with
diverse, either at the table or secretly alone, wherein I marked in what things
the talkers did agree, and wherein they impugned each other, choosing in the end
the former, and rejecting the later, as one desirous to set forth the truth
absolutely, or such things in deed as were most likely to be true. The last
comfort arose by mine own reading of such writers as have heretofore made
mention of the condition of our country, in speaking whereof, if I should make
account of the success, and extraordinary coming by sundry treatises not
supposed to be extant, I should but seem to pronounce more than may well be
said with modesty, and say farther of my self than this Treatise can bear
witness of. Howbeit, I refer not this success wholly unto my purpose about this
Description, but rather give notice thereof to come to pass in the penning of
my Chronology, whose crumbs as it were fell out very well in the framing of
this Pamphlet. In the process therefore of this Book, if your Honor regard
the substance of that which is here declared, I must needs confess that it is
none of mine own: but if your Lordship have consideration of the barbarous
composition showed herein, that I may boldly claim and challenge for mine
own, since there is no man of any so slender skill, that will defraud me of
that reproach, which is due unto me for the mere negligence, disorder, and
evil disposition of matter comprehended in the same. Certes I protest before
God and your Honor, that I never made any choice of style, or words, neither
regarded to handle this Treatise in such precise order and method as many
other would have done, thinking it sufficient, truly and plainly to set
forth such things as I minded to entreat of, rather than with vain
affectation of eloquence to paint out a rotten sepulcher; a thing neither
commendable in a writer, nor profitable to the reader. How other affairs
troubled me in the writing hereof many know, and peradventure the flacknesse
showed herein can better testify: but howsoever it be done, and whatsoever I
have done, I have had an especial eye unto the truth of things, and for the
rest, I hope that this foul frizeled Treatise of mine will prove a spur to
others better learned, more skillful in Chorographie, and of greater judgment
in choice of matter to handle the self same argument, if in my life time I do
not peruse it again. It is possible also that your Honor will mislike hereof,
for that I have not by mine own travel and eysight viewed such things as I
do here entreat of. In deed I must needs confess, that until now of late,
except it were from the parish where I dwell, unto your Honor in Kent; or out
of London where I was borne, unto Oxford and Cambridge where I have been
brought up, I never traveled 40. miles foorthright and at one journey in all
my life; nevertheless in my report of these things, I use their authorities,
who either have performed in their persons, or left in writing upon sufficient
ground (as I said before) whatsoever is wanting in mine. It may be in like sort
that your Honor will take offense at my rash and retchlesse behavior used in
the composition of this volume, and much more that being scambled up after this
manner, I dare presume to make tendour of the protection thereof unto your
Lordships hands. But when I consider the singular affection that your Honor
does bear to those that in any wise will travel to set forth such
profitable things as lie hidden, and thereunto do weigh on mine own behalf
my bounden duty and grateful mind to such a one as has so many and sundry
ways benefited me that otherwise can make no recompense, I can not but cut off
all such occasion of doubt, and thereupon exhibit it, such as it is, and so
penned as it is, unto your Lordships tuition, unto whom if it may seem in
any wise acceptable, I have my whole desire. And as I am the first that
(notwithstanding the great repugnancie to be seen among our writers) has
taken upon him so particularly to describe this I Will of Britain; so I hope the
learned and godly will bear withal, and reform with charity where I do
tread amiss. As for the curious, and such as can rather evil fauouredlie
epsy than skilfullie correct an error, and sooner carpe at another man's
doings than publish any thing of their own, (keeping themselves close with an
obscure admiration of learning and knowledge among the common sort) I force not
what they say hereof: for whether it do please or displease them, all is one
to me, since I refer my whole travel in the gratification of your Honor, and
such as are of experience to consider of my travel, and the large scope of
things purposed in this Treatise, of whom my service in this behalf may be
taken in good part, that I will repute for my full recompense, and large
guerdon of my labors. The Almighty God preserve your Lordship in continual
health, wealth, and prosperity, with my good Lady your wife, your Honors
children, (whom God has endued with a singular towardness unto all virtue and
learning) and the rest of your reformed family, unto whom I wish farther
increase of his holy spirit, understanding of his word, augmentation of honor,
and continuance of zeal to follow his commandments.

Your Lordships humble servant and household Chaplein. W. H.

The names of the Authors from whom this History of England is collected.
A.
Aelius Spartianus. Aelius Lampridius. Asserius Meneuensis. Alfridus
Beuerlacensis. Aeneas Syluius Senensis. Auentinus. Adam Merimouth with
additions. Antoninus Archiepiscopus Florentinus. Albertus Crantz. Alexander
Neuill. Arnoldus Ferronius. Annius Viterbiensis. Amianus Marcellinus. Alliances
genealogiques des Roys and Princes de France. Annals D. Aquitaine per Iean
Bouchet. Annals de Bourgoigne per Guilamme Paradin. Annals de France per
Nicol Giles. Annals rerum Flandricarum per Iacobum Meir. Antonius Sabellicus.
Antonius Nebricensis. Aurea Historia.
B.
BIblia Sacra. Beda venerabilis. Berosus. Brian Tuke knight. Blondus
Forliuiensis. Berdmondsey, a Register book belonging to that house.
C.
Caesar's Commentaries. Cornelius Tactius. Chronica Chronicorum. Chronica de
Dunstable, a book of Annals belonging to the Abbey there. Chronicon Io.
Tilij. Chronica de Eyton, an history belonging to that college, although
compiled by some Northernman, as some suppose named Otherborne. Chronicles of
S. Albon. Chronica de Abingdon, a book of Annals belonging to that house.
Chronica de Teukesburie. Claudianus. Chronicon Genebrard. Chroniques de
Normandy. Chroniques de Britain. Chroniques de Flanders published by Denis
Savage. Continuation de History and Chroniques de Flanders by the same Savage.
Couper. Cuspinianus. Chronica Sancti Albani. Caxtons Chronicles. Carrion with
additions. Crockesden, a Register book belonging to an house of that name in
Staffordshire.
D.
DIodorus Siculus. Dion Cassius. Dominicus Marius Niger.
E.
EDmerus. Eusebius. Eutropius. Encomium Emmae, an old Pamphlet written to her,
containing much good matter for the understanding of the state of this realm
in her time, wherein her praise is not pretermitted, and so has obtained by
reason thereof that title. Enguerant de Monstrellet. Eulogium. Edmund Campian.
F.
FAbian. Froissart. Franciscus Tarapha. Franciscus Petrarcha. Flauius Vopiscus
Siracusanus. Floriacensis Vigorinensis.
G.
GViciardini Francisco. Guiciardini Ludouico. Gildas Sapiens. Galfridus
Monemutensis, alias Geffrey of Monmouth. Giraldus Cambrensis. Guilielmus
Malmesburiensis. Galfridus Vinsauf. Guilielmus Nouoburgensis. Guilielmus
Thorn. Gualterus Hemmingford, alias Gisburnensis. Geruasius Dorobernensis.
Geruasius Tilberiensis. Guilielmus Gemeticensis de ducibus Normaniae.
Guilielmus Rishanger. Guilielmus Lambert. Georgius Lilly. Guilamme Paradin.
H.
HIginus. Henricus Huntingtonensis. Henricus Leicestrensis. Hector Boece.
History Daniou. Historia Ecclesistica Magdeburgensis. Henricus Mutius.
Historia quadripartita seu quadrilogium. Hardings Chronicle. Halles Chronicle.
Henricus Bradshaw. Henricus Marleburgensis. Herodianus. Humfrey Luyd.
I.
Johannes Bale. Johannes Leland. Iacobus Philippus Bergomas. Julius
Capitolinus. Julius Solinus. Johannes Pike with additions. Johannes Functius.
John Price knight. Johannes Textor. Johannes Bodinus. Johannes Sleidan.
Johannes Euersden a Monk of Berry. Johannes or rather Giouan villani a
Florentine. Johannes Baptista Egnatius. Johannes Capgraue. Johannes Fourden.
Johannes Caius. Jacob de Voragine Bishop of Nebio. Iean de Bauge a Frenchman
wrote a pamphlet of the wars in Scotland, during the time that Monsieur de
Desse remained there. John Fox. Johannes Mayor. John Stow, by whose diligent
collected summarie, I have been not only aided, but also by diverse rare
monuments, ancient writers, and necessary register books of his, which he
has lent me out of his own Library. Josephus.
L.
LIber constitutionum London. Lucan. Laelius Giraldus.
M.
MArianus Scotus. Matthaeus Paris. Matthaeus Westmonaster. alias Flores
historiarum. Martin du Bellay, alias Mons. de Langey. Mamertinus in
Panegyricis. Memoires de la March.
N.
NIcephorus. Nennius. Nicholaus Treuet with additions.
O.
ORosius Dorobernensis. Osbernus Dorobernensis. Otho Phrisingensis.
P.
PAusania. Paulus Diaconus. Paulus Aemilius. Ponticus Virunius. Pomponius
Laetus. Philip de Cumeins, alias M. de Argenton. Polydor Virgil. Paulus Iouius.
Platina. Philippus Melancthon. Peucerus. Pomponius Mela.
R.
ROgerus Houeden. Ranulfus Higeden, alias Cestrensis the author of
Polychronicon. Radulfus Cogheshall. Radulfus Niger. Register of the Garter.
Records of Battle Abbey. Richardus Southwell. Robert Green. Radulfus de
Diceto. Robert Gaguin. Rodericus Archiepiscopus Toletanus. Records and rolls
diverse.
S.
STrabo. Suetonius. Sigebertus Gemblacensis. Sidon Appollinaris. Simon
Dunelmensis. Sextus Aurelius Victor.
T.
TRebellius Pollio. Thomas More knight. Thomas Spot. Thomas Walsingham. Titus
Liuius de Foroliuisijs de vita Henrici. 5. Titus Liuius Patauiensis. Thomas
Lanquet. Thomas Couper. Taxtor a Monk of Berry. Theuet. Thomas de la More.
Tripartita Historia.
V.
VVlcatius Gallicanus. Volfganus Lazius.
W.
WHethamsted, a learned man, sometime Abbat of Saint Albons a Chronicler.
William Harrison. William Patten of the expedition into Scotland. 1574. William
Proctor of Wiats rebellion.
Besides these, diverse other books and treatises of historical matter I have
seen and perused, the names of the authors being utterly unknown.

FINIS.
A Table of such Chapiters as are contained in the first book of this
Description.
1 Of the division of the whole earth. 2 Of the position, circuit, form, and
quantity of the I Will of Britain. 3 Of the ancient denominations of this Island.
4 What sundry nations have dwelled in Albion. 5 Whether it be likely that
any giants were, and whether they inhabited in this I Will or not. 6 Of the
languages spoken in this Island. 7 Into how many kingdoms this Island has been
divided. 8 The names of such kings and princes as have reigned in this Island. 9
Of the ancient religion used in Albion. 10 Of such Islands as are to be seen
upon the coasts of Britain. 11 Of rivers, and first of the Thames, and such
rivers as fall into it. 12 Of such streams as fall into the sea, between the
Thames and the mouth of Sauerne. 13 The description of the Sauerne, and such
waters as discharge themselves into the same. 14 Of such waters as fall into
the sea in compass of the Island, between the Sauerne and the Humber. 15 The
description of the Humber or Isis, and such watercourse as do increase her
channel. 16 Of such falls of waters as join with the sea, between Humber and
the Thames. 17 Of such ports and creeks as our sea-faring-men do note for
their benefit upon the coasts of England. 18 Of the air, soil, and
commodities of this Island. 19 Of the four high ways sometime made in Britain
by the princes of this Island. 20 Of the general constitution of the bodies of
the Britons. 21 How Britain at the first grew to be divided into three
portions. 22 After what manner the souereigntie of this I Will does remain to the
princes of Lhoegres or kings of England. 23 Of the wall sometime builded for a
partition between England and the Picts and Scots. 24 Of the maruels of
England.
REGVM ANGLIAE SERIES and catalogus.
COnquestor, Rufus, Will. Conqu. Will. Rufus. Henricus 1. Stephanus. Henricus 2.
Richardus 1. Ioannes. Henricus 3. Eduardus 1. Eduardus 2. Eduardus 3. Richardus
2. Henricus 4. Henricus 5. Henricus 6. Eduardus 4. Eduardus 5. Richardus 3.
Henricus 7. Henricus 8. Eduardus 6. Phil. and Mar. Elisabeth.

prior Henricus, Stephanusque,
Alter and Henricus, Leonino cord Richardus,
Rex and Ioannes, Henricus tertius inde:
Eduardus primus, Gnatusque, Neposque sequuntur:
His infoelicem Richardum iunge secundum:
Henricus quartus soboles Gandaui Ioannis,
Praecedit Gnato quinto, sextoque Nepoti:
Eduardus quartus, quintus, homicida Richardus,
Septimi and Henricus octauus clara propago:
Eduardus sextus, regina Maria, Philippus:
Elisabeth longos regnet victura per annos,
Seraque promisso foelix potiatur olympo.
CARMEN CHRONOLOGICON
Thomae Newtoni Cestreshyrij.
GRamine, fluminibus, grege, principe, fruge, metallis,
Lacte, feris, armis, vrbibus, art, foris,
Quae viget ac floret generosa Britannia, quaeque,
Obruta puluereo squalluit ante situ:
Exerit ecce caput, genuinum nacta nitorem,
Et rutilum emittit cum grauitate iubar.
Et quod blaesa hominum mutilarat tempore lingua,
Illud habet rectum pumice tersa nouo.
Loydus in hac pridem gnauus prolusit arena, Loydus. Lelandus. Prisius. Stous.
Holinshedius. Lambardus. Morus. Camdenus. Thinnius. Hallus. Vocalis alias
Hookerus. Graftonus. Foxius. Harrisonus. Hardingus. Gildas. Staniherstus. Beda.
Neuillus. Flemingus. Parkerus.


Lelandus, Prisius, Stous, Holinshedius,
Lambardus, Morus, Camdenus, Thinnius, Hallus,
Vocalis, Grafton, Foxius, Harrisonus,
Hardingus, Gildas, Staniherstus, Beda, Neuillus,
Doctaque Flemingi lima poliuit opus:
Nec te cane senex, magne o Parkere, silebo,
Cui decus attulerat pontificalis apex.
Omnibus his merito est laus debita and optima merces,
Quod patriae accendant lumina clara suae.
Longa dies opus hoc peperit, longaeua senectus,
Et libri authors perbeet, atque librum.

An Historical description of the Island of Britain, with a brief rehersall
of the nature and qualities of the people of England* and such commodities as
are to be found in the same. Comprehended in three books, and written by W. H.
Of the division of the whole earth. Chapter. 1.
WE read that the earth has been divided into three parts, even since the
general flood. And the common opinion is, Noah first divided the earth among
his sons.
that Noah limited and bestowed it upon his Iaphet, Cham, and Sem, preserved
with him in the Arc, giving unto each of them such portions thereof as to him
seemed good, and nevertheless reteining the souereigntie of the whole still
unto himself: albeit as yet it be left uncertain how those several parts
were bounded, and from whom they took such names as in our times are
attributed to each of them. Certes the words, Asia, Europa, and Africa, Noah,
the sea has in sundry places won or lost, added or diminished to and from
each of them; or whether Europa, and Lybia were but one portion; and the same
westerlie regions of late discovered (and now called America,) was the third
part (counting Asia for the second) or the self region of the Atlantides,
which Plato and others, for want of traffike thither in their times, supposed
to be dissolved and sunk into the sea: as by

Not long before my time, The division of the earth not yet certein^ie known.
we reckoned Asia, Europa, and Africa, for a full and perfect division of the
whole earth, which are parcels only of that huge Island that lies east of the
Atlantike sea, and whereof the first is divided from the second by Tanais
(which rises in the rocks of Caucasus, and hides it self in the Meotine
moors) and the Ocean sea; and the last from them both by the Mediterrane and
red sea, otherwise called Mare Erythraeum. But now all men, especially
Cimmerian darkness, and were utterly ignorant of the truth of that
whereabout they endeavored to show their travels and knowledge in their
writings. Some piece of this confusion also is to be found amongst the ancient
and Roman writers, who (notwithstanding their large conquests) did stick in
the same mire with their successors; not being able (as appears by their
treatises) to deliver and set down the verity. Uariance among the writers
about the division of the earth.
For Salust in his book De bello Iugurthino cannot tell whether Africa be
parcel of Asia or not. And with the same scruple Varro in his book De lingua
Lat. is not a little encumbered, who in the end concludes, that the whole earth
is divided into Asia and Europa: so that Africa is excluded and driven out of
his place. Silius also writes of Africa, (as one not yet resolved whereunto to
lean,) that it is; Aut ingens Asiae latus, aut pars tertia rerum. Wherein
Lucane lib. 9. shows himself to be far of another judgment, in that he
ascribes it to Europa, saying after this manner: Tertia pars rerum Lybia: si
credere famae
Cuncta velis, si ventos coelumque sequaris,
Pars erit Europae, nec enim plus littora Nili
Quam Scythicus Tanais primis a gradibus absunt.


Whereby (I say) we may well understand, that in the time of Augustus
Tiberius, Claudius and Nero, the Romans were not yet resolved of the division
of the earth. For my part, as I endeavor not to remove the credit of that
which antiquity has delivered (and yet loath to continue and maintain any
corruption that may be redressed) so I think good to give forth a new
division more probable, and better agreeing with a truth. And therefore I
divide the whole into five several parcels, The earth divided into five parts,
whereas Belforrest has but four, in Prefat. lib. 4.
reteining the common division in the first three, as before; and unto the
fourth allowing not only all that portion that lies by north of the Magellan
streicts, and those Hyperborean Islands which lie west of the line of longitude,
of late discovered by Frobisher, and called by her Majesty Meta incognita: but
likewise so many Islands as are within 180. degrees Westwards from our
beginning or common line of longitude, whereby they are parted from those,
which by this division are allotted unto Asia, and the portion it self made
equipollent with the same for greatness, and far exceeding either Europa or
Africa, if it be not fully so much in quantity as they both united and laid
together. The fifth and last part is the Antartike portion with her Islands
annexed, that region (I mean) which lies under the South pole, cut off from
America, or the fourth part by the Magellan strei^ts; and from Africa by the
sea which passes by the Cape of good hope; Cape di bon^ Speranzae.
a country no less large for limits and bounds than Africa or America, and
therefore right worthy to be called the fifth: howsoever it shall please the
curious to mislike of this division. This also I will add, that albeit the
continent hereof do not extend it self unto the very Antartike point, but
lies as it were a long table between two seas, of which the later is under
the South poole, The form^ of the fifth part.
and as I may call it a maine sea under the aforesaid prick, yet is it not
without sundry Islands also adioining unto it, and the inner most sea not
destitute of many, as by experience has been of late confirmed. Furthermore,
whereas our describers of the earth have made it such in their descriptions, as
has reached little or nothing into the peaceable sea without the Antartike
circle: it is now found by Theuet and others, that it extends it self
northwards into that trace, by no small number of leagues, even in manner to the
Equator, in so much that the westerlie part thereof from America, is supposed
to reach Africa does southwards from the tropike of Cancer, which is no small
portion of ground; and I marvel why not observed by such as heretofore have
written of the same. But they excuse themselves by the ingratitude of the
Portingals and Spaniards, who have of purpose concealed many things found out
in their travel, least they should seem to open a gap by doing otherwise,
for strangers to enter into their conquests. As for those Islands also which lie
in the peaceable sea, scattered here Iaua the greater, the lesser Sumatra,
Iapan, Burneo, etc: with a number of other, I refer them still unto Asia, as
before, so as they be without the compass of 90. degrees eastward from the
line of longitude, and not above 180. as I do the I Will of S. Laurence, and a
number of other unto Africa within the said proportion, wishing so little
alteration as I may: and yet not yielding unto any confusion, whereby the truth
of the division should hereafter be impeached.

And whereas by Virgil (speaking of our Island) says; Et penitus toto diuisos
orb Britannos,

And some other authors not unworthy to be read and perused, Unto what
portion Britain is referred.
it is not certain unto which portion of the earth our Islands, and Thule, with
sundry the like scattered in the north seas should be ascribed, because they
excluded them (as you see) from the rest of the whole earth: I have thought
good, for facility sake of division, to refer them all which lie within the
first minute of longitude, set down by Ptolome, to Europa, and that as reason
requires: so that the aforesaid line Meta and partition from such as are to be
ascribed to America; albeit they come very near unto the aforesaid portion,
and may otherwise (without prejudice) be numbered with the same. It may be that
some will think this my dealing either to be superfiuous, or to proceed from
(I wot not what) foolish curiosity: for the world is now grown to be very apt
and ready to judge the hardest of every attempt. But for so much as my purpose
is to leave a plain report of such matter as I do write of, and deliver such
things Albion as the mother, and the rest of the Islands as her daughters, lieng
east of the line of longitude, be still ascribed unto Europa: whereunto some
good authors heretofore in their writings, and their own proper or natural

Of the position, circuit, form and quantity of the I Will of Britain. Cap. 2.
BRitannia or Britain, How Britain lies from the maine.
as we now term it in our English tongue, or Brutania as some pronounce it (by
reason of the letter y in the first syllable of the word, as antiquity did
sometime deliver it) is an I Will lieng in the Ocean sea, directly over against
that part of France which contains Picardie, Normandy, and thereto the
greatest part of little Britain, which later region was called in time past
Armorica, of the situation thereof upon the sea coast, until such time as a
company of Britons (either led over by some of the Roman Emperors, or flieng
thither from the tyranny of such as oppressed them here in this Island) did
setle themselves there, and called it Britain, after the name of their own
country, from whence they adventured thither. It has Ireland upon the west
side, on the north the maine sea, even to Thule and the Hyperboreans; and on
the east side also the Germane Ocean, by which we pass daily through the
trade of merchandise, not only into the low countries of Belgie, now
miserably afflicted between the Spanish power and popish inquisition (as
spice between the mortar and the pestell) but also into Germany, Friezeland,
Denmark, and Norwaie, carrieng from hence thither, and bringing from thence
hither, all such necessary commodities as the several countries do yield:
through which means, and besides common amity conserved, traffike is
maintained, and the necessity of each party abundantly relieved.

It contains in longitude taken by the midst of the region 19. degrees
exactlie: The longitude and latitude of this I Will.
and in latitude 53. degrees, and thirty min. after the opinions of those that
have diligently observed the same in our days, and the faithful report of
such writers as have left notice thereof unto us, in their learned treatises to
be perpetually remembered. Howbeit, whereas some in setting down of these two
lines, have seemed to vary about the placing of the same, each of them
diuerstie remembering the names of sundry cities and towns, whereby they
affirm them to have their several courses: for my part I have thought good to
proceed somewhat after another sort; that is, by dividing the latest and best
chards each way into two equal parts (so near as I can possible bring the
same to pass) whereby for the middle of latitude, I product Caerlile and
Newcastell upon Tine, (whose longest day consists of sixteen hours, 48.
minutes) and for the longitude, Newberie, Longest day.
Warwike, Sheffield, Skipton, etc: which dealing, in mine opinion, is most
easy and indifferent, and likeliest mean to come by the certain standing and
situation of our Island.

Touching the length and breadth of the same, The compass of Britain.
I find some variance amongst writers: for after some, there are from the Piere
or point of Dover, unto the farthest part of Cornwall westwards 320. miles:
from thence again to the point of Cathnesse by the Irish sea 800. Whereby
Polydore and other do gather, that the circuit of the whole Island of Britain
is 1720. miles, which is full 280. less than Caesar does set down, except
there be some difference between the Roman and British miles, as there is
indeed; whereof hereafter I may make some farther conference.

Martianus writing of the breadth of Britain, has only 300. miles, but
Orosius has 1200. in the whole compass. Ethicus also agreeing with Pliny,
Martianus, and Solinus, has 800. miles of length, but in the breadth he
comes short of their account by 120. miles. In like manner Dion in Seuero
makes the one of 891. miles: but the other; to wit, where it is broadest, of
289. and where it is narowest, of 37. Finally, Diodorus Siculus affirms the
south coast to contain 7000 furlongs, the second; to wit, a Carione ad
Promontorium 15000. the third 20000. and the whole circuit to consist of 42000.
But in our time we reckon the breadth from Dover to Cornwall, not to be above
300. miles, and the length from Dover to Cathnesse, no more than 500. which
nevertheless must be measured by a right line, for otherwise I see not how the
said division can hold.

The form and fashion of this I Will is three cornered, The (...)
as some have devised, like unto a triangle, bastard sword, wedge, or
partesant, being broadest in the south part, and gathering still narrower and
narrower, till it come to the farthest point of Cathnesse northward, where it
is narrowest of all, and there ends in manner of a promontorie called
Caledonium and Orchas in British Morwerydh, which is not above 30. miles over,
as daily experience by actual travel does confirm.

The old writers give unto the three principal corners, crags, Promontories of
Britain.
points, and promontories of this Island, three several names. As unto that of
Kent, Cantium, that of Cornwall, Hellenes, and of Scotland, Caledonium,
Orchas; and these are called principal, in respect of the other, which are
Taruisium, Nouantum, Epidium, Gangacum, Octapites, Herculeum, Antiuesteum,
Ocrinum, Berubium, Taizalum, Acantium, etc: of which I thought good also to
leave this notice, to the end that such as shall come after, may thereby take
occasion to seek out their true places, whereof as yet I am in manner ignorant,
I mean for the most part; because I have no sound author that does lead me
to their knowledge.

Furthermore, The distance from the maine.
the shortest and most usual cut that we have out of our Island to the maine,
is from Dover (the farthest part of Kent eastward) unto Calice a town in
Picardie 1300 miles from Rome, in old time called Petressa and Scalas, though
some like better of blackness where the breadth of the sea is not above
thirty miles. Which course, as it is now frequented and used for the most
common and safe passage of such as come into our country out of France and
diverse other realms, so it has not been unknown of old time Romania or
Romanorum insula) as to avoid the force of the wind and weather, that often
molesteth seafaringmen in these narrow seas, best liked them for their
safegards. Between the part Rhene and this our Island, are 900. furlongs, as
Sosimus says; and besides him, diverse other writers, which being converted
into English miles, do yield 112. and four od furlongs, whereby the just
distance of the nearest part of Britain, from that part of the maine also
does certeinlie appear to be much less than the common maps of our country
have hitherto set down.

Of the ancient names or denominations
IN the diligent perusal of their treatises, who have written of the state of
this our Island, I find that at the first it seemed to be a parcel of the
Celtike kingdom, Dis, Samothes.
whereof Dis otherwise called Samothes, one of the Samothea. Afterward in
process of time, when desire of rule began to take hold in the minds of men,
and each prince endeuouted to enlarge his own dominions: Neptimus Marioticus.
Albion the son of Neptune, Amphitrite surnamed Marioticus (because his
dominions lay among the Islands of the Mediterran sea, as those of Plutus did
on the lower grounds near unto shore, as contrariwise his father Jupiter
dwelled on the high hills nearer to heaven) hearing of the commodities of the
country, and plentifulnesse of soil here, made a voyage over, The first
conquest of Britain.
and finding the thing not only correspondent unto, but also far
surmounting the report that went of this Island, it was not long after yer he
invaded the same by force of arms, brought it to his subjection, in the 29.
year after his grandfathers decease, and finally changed the name thereof
into Albion, whereby the former denomination after Samothes did grow out of
mind, and fall into utter forgetfulness. And thus was this Island bereft at on
time both of her ancient name, Britain under the Celts 341. years.
and also of her lawful succession of princes descended of the line of Iaphet,
under whom it had continued by the space of 341. years and nine princes, as by
the Chronology following shall easily appear.

Goropius our neighbor being very nice in the denomination of our Island, as in
most other points of his huge volume of the original of Antwarpe lib. 6. (whom
Buchanan also follows in part) is brought into great doubt, whether Britain
was called Albion of the word Alb, white; or Alp an hill; as Bodinus is no
less troubled with fetching the same ab Olbijs, or as he wresteth it, ab
Albijs gallis. But here his inconstancy appears, in that in his Gotthadamca
liber. 7. he takes no less pains to bring the Britains out of Denmark,
whereby the name of the Island should be called Vridania; Freedania, Brithania,
or Bridania, tanquam libera Dania, as another also does to fetch the original
out of Spain, where Breta signifies soil or earth. But as such as walk in
darkness do often straie, because they wot not whither they go: even so do
these men, whilst they seek to extenuate the certeintie of our histories, and
bring us altogether to vncerteinties and their conjectures. They in like manner,
which will have the Welshmen come from the French with this one question, under
Walli nisia Gallis, or from some Spanish colonie, do greatly bewraie their
ouersights; but most of all they err that endeavor to fetch it from Albine the
imagined daughter of a forged Dioclesian, wherewith our ignorant writers have
of late not a little stained our history, and brought the sound part thereof
into some discredit and mistrust: but more of this hereafter.

Now to speak somewhat also of Neptune as by the way (since I have made
mention of him in this place) it shall not be altogether impertinent. Wherefore
you shall understand, that for his excellent knowledge in the art of navigations
(as navigations then went) he was reputed Neptune God of the sea.
the most skillful prince that lived in his time. And therefore, and likewise
for his courage and boldness in aduenturing to and fro, he was after his
decease honored as a god, The manner of dressing of ships in old time.
and the protection of such as traveled by sea committed to his charge. So
rude also was the making of ships wherewith to sail in his time (which were
for the most part flat bottomed and broad) that for lack of better experience
to calke and trim the same after they were builded, they used to nail them
over with raw hides of bulls, buffles, and such like, and with such a kind of
navy (as they say) first Samothes, and then Albion arrived in this Island,
which unto me does not seem a thing impossible. The northerlie or artike
regions, do not nail their ships with iron, which they utterly want, but with
wooden pins, or else they bind the planks together very artificially with bast
ropes, osiers, rinds of trees, or twigs of popler, the substance of those
vessels being either of fir or pine, since oak is very deintie and hard to be
had amongst them. Of their wooden anchors I speak not (which nevertheless are
common to them, and to the Gothlanders) more than of ships wrought of wickers,
sometime used in our Britain, and covered with leather even in the time of
Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 56. as also bofes made of rushes and reeds, etc. Neither
have I just occasion to speak of ships made of canes, of which sort
Staurobates, king of India fighting against Semiramis, brought 4000. with him
and fought with her the first battle on the water that ever I read of, and
upon the river Indus, but to his loss, for he was overcome by her power, and
his navy either drowned or burned by the fury of her soldiers.

But to proceed, when the said Albion had governed here in this country by the
space of seven years, it came to pass that both he and his brother Bergion
were killed by Hercules at the mouth of Rhodanus, as the said Hercules passed
out of Spain by the Celtes to go over into Italy, and upon this occasion (as
I gather among the writers) not unworthy to be remembered. It happened in time
of Lucus king of the Celts, Lestrigo.
that Lestrigo and his issue (whom Osyris his grandfather had placed over the
Ianigenes) did exercise great Ianigenes were the posterity of Noah in Italy.
not only over his own kingdom, but also in molestation of such princes as
inhabited round about him in most intolerable manner. Moreover he was not a
little encouraged in these his doings by Neptune his father, Neptune had
xxxiii. sons.
who thirsted greatly to leave his xxxiii. sons settled in the mightiest
kingdoms of the world, as men of whom he had already conceived this opinion,
that if they had once gotten foot into any region whatsoever, it would not be
long yer they did by some means or other, not only establish their seats,
but also increase Laabin, Lubim, or Libius, in the revenge of his fathers
death, proclaimed open wars against them all, and going from place to place,
he ceased not to spoil their kingdoms, and therewithal to kill them with
great Lomnimi or Geriones in Spain, Lomnimi. Geriones.
and understanding that Lestrigo and his sons did yet remain in Italy, he
directed his viage into those parts, and taking the kingdom of the Celts in
his way, he remained for a season with Lucus the king of that country, where
he also married his daughter Galathea, Galathea.
and begat a son by her, calling him after his mothers name Galates, Galates
or Kelts.
of whom in my said Chronology I have spoken more at large.

In the mean time Albion understanding how Hercules intended to make wars
against his brother Lestrigo, he thought good if it were possible to stop him
that tide, Bergion.
and therefore sending for his brother Bergion out of the Orchades (where he
also reigned as supreme lord and governor) they joined their powers, and
sailed over into France. Being arrived there, Pomponius Mela cap. de Gallia.
it was not long yer they met with Hercules and his army, near unto the mouth
of the river called Roen (or the Rhodanus) where happened a cruel conflict
between Strabo lib. 4.
whereof there lay great Lucus king of the Celts delivered from an usurper
(that daily incroched upon him, building sundry cities and holds, of which
some were placed among the Alps and called after his own name, and other also
even in his own kingdom on that side) and Lestrigo greatly weakened by the
slaughter of his brethren. Of this invention of Hercules in like sort it
comes, that Jupiter father unto Hercules (who indeed was none other but
Osyris) is feigned to throw down stones from heaven upon Albion and Bergion,
in the defense of his son: which came so thick upon them, as if great drops
of rain or hail should have descended from above, no man well knowing which
way to turn him from their force, they came so fast and with so great a
violence.

But to go forward, albeit that Albion and his power were thus discomfited and
slain, yet the name that he gave unto this Island died not, but still remained
unto the time of Brute, who arriving here in the 1116. before Christ, and
2850. after the creation of the world, not only changed it into Britain
(after it had been called Albion, by the space of about 600. years) but to
declare his souereigntie over the rest of the Islands also that lie scattered
round about it, he called them all after the same manner, so that Albion was
said in time to be Britanniarum insula maxima, that is, The greatest of those
Isles that bear the name of Britain, which Pliny also confirms, and Strabo
in his first and second books denies not. There are some, which utterly
denieng that this Island took her name of Brute, do affirm it rather to be so
called of the rich metals sometime carried from the mines there into all the
world as growing in the same. Vibius Sequester also says that Calabria was
sometime called Britannia, Ob immensam affluentiam totius delitiae atque
vbertatis, that was to be found herein. Other contend that it should be
written with P ( Pritannia.) All which opinions as I absolutely deny not, so
I willingly lean unto none of them in peremptory manner, since the antiquity
of our history carries me withal unto the former judgments. And for the
same cause I reject them also, which derive the aforesaid denomination from
Britona the nymph, in following Textor (or Prutus or Prytus the son of Araxa)
which Britona was borne in Creta daughter to Mars, and fled by sea from thence
only to escape the villainy of Minos, who attempted to ravish and make her
one of his paramours: but if I should forsake the authority of Galfride, I
would rather lean to the report of Parthenius, whereof elsewhere I have made a
more large rehersall.

It is altogether impertinent, to discuss whether Hercules came into this
Island after the death of Albion, or not, although that by an ancient monument
seen of late, as I hear, and the cape of Hartland or Harcland in the West
country (called Promontorium Herculis in old time) diverse of our British
antiquaries do gather great likelihood that he should also be here. But since
his presence or absence makes nothing with the alteration of the name of this
our region and country, and to search out whether the said monument was but
some token erected in his honor of later times (as some have been elsewhere,
among the Celts framed, and those like an old criple with a bow bent in one
hand and a club in the other, a rough skin on his back, the hair of his head
all to be matted like that of the Irishmens, and drawing many men captive
after him in chains) is but smallie auailable, and therefore I pass it over
as not incident to my purpose. Neither will I spend any time in the
determination, whether Britain had been sometime a parcel of the maine,
although it should well seem so to have been, because that before the
general flood of Noah, we do not read of Islands, more than of hills and
valleys. Wherefore as Wilden Arguis also notes in his philosophy and
tractation of meteors, it is very likely that they were only caused by the
violent motion and working of the sea, in the time of the flood, which if S.
Augustine had well considered, he would never have asked how such creatures as
lived in Islands far distant from the maine could come into the arc, De ciuit.
lib. 16. cap. 7. howbeit in the end he concludes with another matter more
profitable than his demand.

As for the speedy and timely inhabitation thereof, this is mine opinion, to
wit, that it was inhabited shortly after the division of the earth. For I read
that when each capteinie and his company had their portions assigned unto them
by Noah in the partition that he made of the whole among his posterity, they
never ceased to travel and search out the uttermost parts of the same, until
they found out their bounds allotted, and had seen and vewed their limits,
even unto the very poles. It shall suffice therefore only to have touched
these things in this manner a far off, and in returning to our purpose, Yet
Timeus, Ephorus, and some of the Grecians, know the name Britannia. as
appears also by Diodorus. etc, before the coming of Caesar.
which was known unto most of the Greeks for a long time, by none other name
than Albion, and to say the truth, even unto Alexanders days, as appears by
the words of Aristotle in his De mundo, and to the time of Ptolomie:
notwithstanding that Brute, as I have said, had changed the same into Britain,
many hundred years before.

After Brutus I do not find that any men attempted to change it again,
until the time that Theodosius, Valentia, as Marcellinus says. But as this
devise took no hold among the common sort, so it retained still the name of
Britain, until the reign of Ecbert, who about the 800. year of Grace, and
first of his reign, gave forth an especial edict, dated at Winchester, that
it should be called Angles land, or Angellandt, for which in our time we do
pronounce it England. And this is all (right honorable) that I have to say, Of
this opinion is Belforest, lib. 3. cap. 44.
neither Hengist, neither any Queen named Angla, neither whatsoever
deriuation ab Angulo, as from a corner of the world bearing swaie, or having
ought to do at all in that behalf.

What sundry nations have dwelled in Albion. Cap. 4.
AS few or no nations can justly boast themselves to have continued sithence
their country was first replenished, without any mixture, more or less, of
Samotheans.
brought in by Samothes in the 1910. after the creation of Adam. Howbeit in
process of time, and after they had indifferently replenished and furnished
this Island with people (which was done in the space of 335. years) Albion the
giant before mentioned, repaired hither with a company of his own race
proceeding from Cham, and not only annexed the same to his own dominion, but
brought all such in like sort as he found here of the line of Iaphet, into
miserable servitude and most extreme thraldom. After him also, and within
less than six hundred and two years, came Brute the son of Syluius with a
great train of the posterity of the dispersed Trojans in 324. ships: Britains.
who rendering the like courtesy unto the Chemminits as they had done before
unto the seed of Iaphet, Chemminits.
brought them also wholly under his rule and governance, and dispossessing the
peers and inferior owners of their lands and possessions, he divided the
country among such princes and capteines as he in his arrival here had led
out of Grecia with him.

From henceforth I do not find any sound report of other nation whatsoever,
Romans.
that should adventure hither to dwell, and alter the state of the land, until
the Roman emperors subdued it to their dominion, saving of a few Galls, (and
those peradventure of Belgie) who first coming over to rob and pilfer upon the
coasts, did afterward plant themselves for altogether near unto the shore, and
there builded sundry cities and towns which they named after those of the
maine, from whence they came unto us. And this is not only to be gathered out
of Caesar where he writes of Britain of set purpose, but also elsewhere, as
in his second book a little after the beginning: for speaking of Deuiaticus
king of the Swessions living in his time, he affirms him not only to be the
mightiest prince of all the Galls, but also to hold under his subjection the
I Will of Britain, of which his son Galba was afterward dispossessed. But after
the coming of the Romans, it is hard to say with how many sorts of people we
were daily pestered, almost in every steed. For as they planted their
forworne legions in the most fertile places of the realm, and where they might
best lie for the safeguard of their conquests: so their armies did commonly
consist of many sorts of people, and were (as I may call them) a confused
mixture of all other countries and nations then living in the world. Howbeit, I
think it best, because they did all bear the title of Romans, to retain
only that name for them all, albeit they were woeful ghests to this our
Island: since that with them came all manner of vice and vicious living, all riot
and excess of behavior into our country, which their legions brought hither
from each corner of their dominions: for there was no province under them from
whence they had not seruitours.

How and when the Scots, Scots. Picts.
a people mixed of the Scithian and Spanish blood, should arrive here out of
Ireland, and when the Picts should come unto us out of Sarmatia, or from
further toward the north and the Scithian Hyperboreans, as yet it is
uncertain. For though the Scottish histories do carry great countenance of
their antiquity in this Island: yet (to say freely what I think) I judge
them rather to have stolen in hither within the space of 100. years before
Christ, than to have continued here so long as they themselves pretend, if my
conjecture be any thing. Yet I deny not, but that as the Picts were long
planted in this Island before the Scots adventured to settle themselves also in
Britain; so the Scots did often adventure hither to rob and steal out of
Ireland, and were finally called in by the Meats or Picts (as the Romans named
them, because they painted their bodies) to help them against the Britains,
after the which they so planted themselves in these parts, that unto our time
that portion of the land cannot he cleansed of them. I find also that as these
Scots were reputed for the most Scithian-like and barbarous nation, and longest
without letters; so they used commonly to steal over into Britain in leather
skewes, and began to help the Picts about or not long before the beginning of
Cesars time. For both Diodorus lib. 6. and Strabo lib. 4. do seem to speak
of a parcel of the Irish nation that should inhabit Britain in their time,
which were given to the eating of man's flesh, and therefore called
Anthropophagi. Mamertinus in like sort does note the Redshanks and the Irish
(which are properly the Scots) to be the only enemies of our nation, before
the coming of Caesar, as appears in his panegyricall oration, so that hereby
it is found that they are no new ghestes in Britain. Wherefore all the
controversy does rest in the time Cantaber and Partholonus: but I see
perfectly that this shift should be too gross for the maintenance of their
desired antiquity. Now, as concerning their name, the Saxons translated the
word Scotus for Irish: whereby it appears that those Irish, of whom Strabo
and Diodorus do speak, are none other than those Scots, of whom Jerome
speaks A duersus Iouinianum, lib. 2. who used to feed on the buttocks of
boys and Aethicus writing of the I Will of Man, affirms it to be inhabited with
Scots so well as Ireland even in his time. Which is another proof that the
Scots and Irish are all one people. They were also called Scoti by the Romans,
because their Island and original inhabitation thereof were unknown, and they
themselves an obscure nation in the sight of all the world. Now as concerning
the Picts, Of the Picts.
whatsoever Ranulphus Hygden imagines to the contrary of their latter
entrance, it is easy to find by Herodian Mamertinus (of which the one calls
them Meats, the other Redshankes and Pictones) that they were settled in this
I Will long before the time of Seuerus, yea of Caesar, and coming of the Scots.
Which is proof sufficient, if no further authority remained extant for the
same. So that the controversy lies not in their coming also, but in the true
time of their repair and adventure into this Island out of the Orchades (out of
which they gat over into the North parts of our country, as the writers do
report) and from whence they Sarmatia or Scythia: for that nation having how
always an eye unto the commodities of our country, has sent out many
companies to invade and spoil the same. It may be that some will gather, those
to be the Picts, of whom Caesar says that they stained their faces with wad
and madder, to the end they might appear terrible and fearful to their
enemies; and so infer that the Picts were natural Britans. But it is
Propertius says, Nunc etiam infectos demummutare Britannos, And to paint the
images and portrattures of beasts, fish and fowls over the whole body, as the
Picts did, of whom Martial says, Barbara depictis veni Bascauda Britannis.
Certes the times of Samothes and Albion, have some likely limitation: and so
we may gather of the coming in of Brute, of Caesar, the Saxons, the In
tenebris. This nevertheless is certain, that Maximus first Legate of
Britain, and afterward emperor, drove the Scots out of Britain, and
compelled them to get habitation in Ireland, the out Isles, and the North part
of the maine, and finally divided their region between the Britains and the
Picts. He denounced war also against the Irishmen, for receiving them into
their land: but they craving the peace, yielded to subscribe, that from
thence-foorth they would not receive any Scot into their dominions; and so much
the more, for that they were pronounced enemies to the Romans, and disturbers
of the common peace and quietness of their provinces here in England.

The Saxons became first acquainted with this I Will, by means of the piracie
which they daily practiced upon our coasts (after they had once begun to
adventure themselves also upon the seas, thereby to seek out more wealth than
was now to be gotten in the West parts of the maine, which they and their
neighbors had already spoiled in most lamentable and barbarous manner) howbeit
they never durst presume to inhabit in this Island, The hurt by foreign aid.
until they were sent for by Vortiger to serve him in his wars against the
Picts and Scots, after that the Romans had given us over, and lest us wholly to
our own defense and regiment. Being therefore come under Hengist in three
bottoms or keeles, and in short time espieng the idle and negligent behavior
of the Britains, and fertility of our soil, they were not a little inflamed
to make a full conquest of such as at the first they came to aid and succor.
Hereupon also they fell by little and little to the winding in of greater
numbers of their countrymen and neighbors, with their wives and children into
this region, so that within a while these new comlings began to molest the
homelings, and ceased not from time to time to continue their purpose, until
they had gotten possession of the whole, or at the leastwise the greatest part
of our country; the Britons in the mean season being driven either into Wales
and Cornwall, or altogether out of the Island to seek new habitations.

In like manner the Danes (the next nation that succeeded) came at the first
only to pilfer and rob upon the frontiers of our Island, Danes.
till that in the end, being let in by the Welshmen or Britons through an
earnest desire to be revenged upon the Saxons, they no less plagued the one
than the other, their friends than their adversaries, seeking by all means
possible to establish themselves also in the sure possession of Britain. But
such was their success, that they prospered not long in their devise: for so
great was their lordlinesse, cruelty, and infatiable desire of riches, beside
their detestable abusing of chaste matrons, and young virgins (whose husbands
and parents were daily enforced to become their drudges and slaves, whilst
they sat at home and fed like drone bees of the sweet of their travel and
labors) that God I say would not suffer them to continue any while over us,
but when he saw his time he removed their yoke, and gave us liberty as it
were to breath us, thereby to see whether this his sharp scourge could have
moved us to repentance and amendment of our lewd and sinful lives, or not.
But when no sign thereof appeared in our hearts, he called in an other nation
to vex us, I mean the Normans, The Normans.
a people mixed with Danes, and of whom it is worthily doubted, whether they
were more hard and cruel to our countrymen than the Danes, or more heavy and
intolerable to our Island than the Saxons or the Romans. This nation came out
of Newstria, the people thereof were called Normans by the French, because the
Danes which subdued that region, came out of the North parts of the world:
nevertheless, I suppose that the ancient word Newstria, is corrupted from
West-rijc, because that if you mark the situation, it lies opposite from
Austria or Ost-rijc, which is called the East region, as Newstria is the Weast:
for Rijc in the old Scithian tongue does signify a region or kingdom, as in
Franc-rijc, or Franc-reich, Westsaxon-reich, Ost saxon-reich, Su-rijc,
Angel-rijc, etc, is else to be seen. But howsoever this falls out, these
Normans or Danish French, were dedlie adversaries to the English Saxons, first
by mean of a quarrel that grew between them in the days of Edward the
Confessor, at such time as the Earl of Bullen, and William Duke of Normandy,
arrived in this land to visit him, and their friends; such Normans (I mean) as
came over with him and Emma his mother before him, in the time of Canutus and
Ethelred. For the first footing that ever the French did set in this Island,
sithence the time of Ethelbert and Sigebert, was with Emma, which Lady brought

After her also no small numbers of attendants came in with Edward the
Confessor, The cause of the conquest by the Normans.
whom he preferred to the greatest offices in the realm, in so much that one
Robert a Norman, became Archbishop of Canturburie, whose preferment so much
enhanced the minds of the French, on the one side, as their lordly and
outrageous demeanor kindled the stomachs of the English nobility against them
on the other: insomuch Emma the kings mother, and upon occasion of the brall
happening at Dover (whereof I have made sufficient mention in my Chronology, not
regarding the report of the French authors in this behalf, who write
altogether in the favor of their Archbishop Robert, but following the
authority of an English priest then living in the court) the English Peers
began to show their disliking in manifest manner. Nevertheless, the Normans so
bewitched the king with their lieng and bosting, Robert Goodwijn of Kent was
the chief, a noble Gentleman and father in law to king Edward by the marriage
of his daughter. The matter also came to such issue against him, that he was
exiled, and five of his sons with him, whereupon he goes over the sea, and
soon after returning with his said sons, they invaded the land in sundry
places, the father himself coming to London, Robert the Archbishop,
Archbishop of Can. exiled, and the rest of the French.
and of secret counsel with the king, was first exiled as principal abuser
and seducer of the king, who goes to Rome, and there complains to the Pope
of his injury received by the English. Howbeit as he returned home again with
no small hope of the readeption of his See, he died in Normandy, whereby he
saved a killing. Certes he was the first that ever tendered complaint out of
England unto Rome, and with him went William Bishop of London (afterward
revoked) and Vlfo of Lincoln, Robert possessed the primacie, which being once
obtained, and to set his mischief intended abroch withal, a contention was
quickly procured about certain Kentish lands, and controversy kindled,
whether he or the Earl should have most right unto them. The king held with
the priest as with the church, the nobility with the Earl. In process also
of this business, Earl Goodwine slandered by the French writers.
the Archbishop accused the Earl of high treason, burdening him with the
slaughter of Alfred the kings brother, which was altogether false: as appears
by a treatise yet extant of that matter, written by a chaplain to king Edward
the Confessor, in the hands of John Stow my very friend, wherein he says
thus, Alfredus incaute agens in aduentu suo in Angliam a Danis circumuentus
occiditur. He adds moreover, that giving out as he came through the country
accompanied with his few proud Normans, how his meaning was to recover his
right unto the kingdom, and supposing that all men would have yielded unto
him, he fell into their hands, whom Harald then king did send to apprehend
him, upon the fame only of this report brought unto his ears. So that (to be
short) after the king had made his pacification with the Earl, the French (I
say) were exiled, the Queen restored to his favor (whom he at the beginning
of this broile had imprisoned at Wilton, allowing her but one only maid to
wait upon her) and the land reduced to her former quietness, which continued
until the death of the king. After which the Normans not forgetting their old
grudge, remembered still their quarrel, that in the end turned to their conquest
of this Island. After which obtained, they were so cruelly bent to our utter
subversion and overthrow, that in the beginning it was less reproach to be
accounted a slave than an Englishman, The misery of the English under the
French.
or a drudge in any filthy business than a Britain: insomuch that every
French page was superior to the greatest Peer; and the loss of an
Englishmans life but a pastime to such of them as contended in their bravery,
who should give the greatest strokes or wounds unto their bodies, when their
toiling and drudgerie could not please them, or satisfy their greedy humors.
Yet such was our lot in those days by the divine appointed order, that we must
needs obey such as the Lord did set over us, and so much the rather, for that
all power to resist was utterly taken from us, and our arms made so weak and
feeble that they were not now able to remove the importable load of the enemy
from our surburdened shoulders. And this only I say again, The cause of our
misery.
because we refused grace offered in time, and would not hear when God by his
Preachers did call us so favorably unto him. Oh how miserable was the estate
of our country under the French and Normans, wherein the British and English
that remained, could not be called to any function in the commonwealth, no not
so much as to be constables and headburowes in small villages, except they
could bring 2. or 3. Normans for suerties to the Lords of the soil for their
good behavior in their offices! Oh what numbers of all degrees of English and
British were made slaves and bondmen, and bought and sold as oxen in open
market! In so much that at the first coming, the French bond were set free;
and those that afterward became bond, were of our own country and nation, so
that few or rather none of us remained free without some note of bondage and
servitude to the French. Hereby then we perceive, how from time to time this
Island has not only been a prey, but as it were a common receptacle for
strangers, the natural homelings or Britons being still cut shorter and
shorter, as I said before, till in the end they came not only to be driven
into a corner of this region, In this voyage the said Harald builded
Portaschith, which Caradoch ap Griffin afterward overthrew, and killed the
garrison that Harald left therein.
but in time also very like utterly to have been extinguished. For had not
king Edward, surnamed the saint, in his time, after grievous wars made upon
them 1063. (wherein Harald lately made Earl of Oxenford, son to Goodwin
Earl of Kent, and after king of England, was his general) permitted the
remnant of their women to join in marriage with the Englishmen (when the most
part of their husbands and male children were slain with the sword) it could
not have been otherwise chosen, but their whole race must needs have sustained
the uttermost confusion, and thereby the memory of the Britons utterly have
perished among us.

Thus we see how England has six times been subject to the reproach of
conquest. And whereas the Scots seem to challenge many famous victories also
over us, beside grievous impositions, tributs, and dishonorable compositions:
it shall suffice for answer, that they deal in this as in the most part of
their history, which is to seek great honor by lieng, and great renown by
prating and Edw. the 3. but it took none effect. Another by Henry the 4. who
nevertheless was at the last though hardly drawn from the challenge by
William Thorington, then chief Justice of England. The third by Henry the 7.
who had some better show of right, but yet without effect. And the last of all
by Q. Marie, as some of the papists gave out, and also would have had her to
have obtained, but God also stayed their malices, and her challenge. But beside
the six before mentioned, Huntingdon the old historiographer speaks of a
seventh, likely (as he says) to come one day out of the North, which is a
wind that blows no man to good, since nothing is to be had in those parts, but
hunger and much S. Albons, and aforsaid author which lies on the left side of
the library belonging now to Paul's: for I regard no prophesies as one that
doubts from what spirit they do proceed, or who should be the author of them.

Whether it be likely that any giants were, and whether they inhabited in this
I Will or not.
BEsides these aforesaid nations, which have crept (as you have heard) into our
Island, we read of sundry giants that should inhabit here. Which report as it
is not altogether incredible, since the posterities of diverse princes Starcater,
Hartben, Angrine, Aruerode, etc: of whom Saxo, Johannes Magnus and Olaus do
make mention, and whose bones do yet remain to be seen as Olaus lived, and
wrote the same of his own experience and knowledge. Of the giant of Spain
that died of late years by a fall upon the Alps, as he either went or came
from Rome, about the purchase of a dispensation to marry with his kinswoman (a
woman also of much more than common stature) there be men yet living, and may
live long for age, that can say very much even by their own knowledge.
Wherefore it appears by present experience, that all is not absolutely untrue
which is remembered of men of such giants. For this cause therefore I have now
taken upon me to make this brief discourse ensuing, as indeuouring thereby to
prove, that the opinion of giants is not altogether grounded upon vain and
fabulous narrations, invented only to delight the cares of the hearers with
the report of marvelous things: but that there have been such men in deed, as
for their hugeness of person have resembled rather Esaias. 30. verse. 25.
high towers than mortal men, although their posterities are now consumed, and
their monstrous races utterly worn out of knowledge.

I do not mean herein to dispute, whether this name Gigas or Nephilim was
given unto them, rather for their tyranny and oppression of the people, than
for their greatness of body, or large steps, as Goropius would have it (for
he denies that ever men were greater than at this present) or because their
parents were not known, for such in old time were called Terrae filij; or
whether the word Gigas does only signify Indigenas, or homelings, borne in
the land or not; neither whether all men were of like quantity in stature, and
far more greater in old time, than now they be: and yet absolutely I deny
neither of these, since very probable reasons may be brought for each of them,
but especially the last rehearsed, whose confirmation depends upon the
authorities of sundry ancient writers, who make diverse of noble race, equal
to the giants in strength and manhood, and yet do not give the same name unto
them, because their quarrels were just, and commonly taken in hand for defense
of the oppressed. Examples hereof we may take of Hercules and Antheus, Antheus.
Lucane lib. 4. in fine.
whose wrestling declares that they were equal in stature and stomach. Such
also was the courage of Antheus, that being often overcome, and as it were
utterly vanquished by the said Hercules, yet if he did estsoones return
again into his kingdom, he forthwith recovered his force, returned and held
Hercules tacke, till he gat at the last between him and home, so cutting off
the farther hope of the restitution of his army, and killing finally his
adversary in the field, of which victory Politian writes thus: Incaluere
animis dura certare palaestra,
Neptuni quondam filius atque Iouis:
Non certamen erant operoso ex aere lebetes,
Sed qui vel vitam vel ferat interitum:
Occidit Antaeus Jove natum viuere fas est,
Estque magistra Pales Graecia, non Lybia.


The like do our histories report of Corineus and Gomagot, Corineus. Gomagot.
peradventure king of this I Will, who fought a combat hand to hand, till one of
them was slain, and yet for all this no man reputeth Hercules or Corineus for
giants, albeit that Hanuile in his Architrenion make the later to be 12. cubits
in height, which is full 18. foot, if poetical license do not take place in
his report and assertion. But since (I say again) it is not my purpose to stand
upon these points, I pass over to speak any more of them. And whereas also I
might have proceeded in such order, that I should first set down by many
circumstances, whether any giants were, then whether they were of such huge and
incredible stature as the authors do remember, and finally whether any of
them have been in this our Island or not, I protest plainly, that my mind is
not here bent to deal in any such manner, but rather generally to confirm and
by sufficient authority, that there have been such mighty men of stature,
and some of them also in Britain, which I will set down only by sundry
examples, whereby it shall fall out, that neither our Island, nor any part of
the maine, have at one time or other been altogether without them. First of all
therefore, and to begin with the scriptures, the most sure and certain ground
of all knowledge: you shall have out of them such notable examples set down,
as I have observed in reading the same, which unto the godly may suffice for
sufficient proof of my position. Nevertheless, after the scriptures I will
resort to the wrttings of our learned Divines, and finally of the infidel and
pagane authors, whereby nothing shall seem to want that may confute Goropius,
and all his cauillations.

Moses the prophet of the Lord, Cap. 6. verse. 5.
writing of the estate of things before the flood, has these words in his
book of generations. In these days says he, there were giants Berosus also
the Chalde writes, Anti. li. 1.
that near unto Libanus there was a city called Oenon (which I take to be
Hanoch, builded sometime by Cham) wherein giants did inhabit, who trusting to
the strength and hugeness of their bodies, did very great oppression and
mischief in the world. The Hebrews called them generally Enach, of Hanach the
Chebronite, father to Achimam, Scheschai and Talma, although their first
original was derived from Henoch the son of Caine, of whom that pestilent
race descended, Moabits named them Emims, and the Ammonites Zamsummims, and it
should seem by the second of Deuteronomy. cap. 19, 20. that Ammon and Moab were
greatly replenished with such men, when Moses wrote that treatise. For of
these monsters some families remained of greater stature than other unto his
days, ^^. cap. 13. verse. 33, and 34.
in comparison of whom the children of Israel confessed themselves to be but
grasshoppers. Which is one noble testimony that the word Gigas or Enach is so
well taken for a man of huge stature, as for

Furthermore, Deuteronomy. 3. verse. 11. Og of Basan.
there is mention made also in the scriptures of Og, sometime king of Basan,
who was the last of the race of the giants, that was left in the land of
promise to be overcome by the Israelits, and whose iron bed was afterward
showed for a wonder at Rabbath (a city of the Ammonites) containing 9. cubits
in length, and 4. in breadth, which cubits I take not to be geometrical, (that
is, each one so great as six of the smaller, as Augustine: whereas Origin, hom.
2. in Genesis out of whom he seems to borrow it, appears to have no such
meaning directly) but rather of the arm of a mean man, which oftentimes
does vary and differ from the standard. Oh how Goropius dalieth about the
history of this Og, of the breaking of his pate against the beds head, and of
hurting his ribs against the sides, and all to prove, that Og was not bigger
than other men, and so he leaves the matter as sufficiently answered August.
de ciuit. lib. 15. cap. 25. and ad Faustum Manich. lib. 12. Ambros. etc. and
Johannes Buteo that excellent geometrician, who has written of purpose of the
capacity of the Arc.

In the first of Samuel you shall read of Goliath a Philistine, Cap 17. ver. 4,
5, 6. Goliath.
the weight of whose brigandine or shirt of maile was of 5000. sicles, or 1250.
ounces of brass, which amounts to 104. pound of Troie weight after 4. common
sicles to the ounce. The head of his spear Goropius thinking himself still to
have Og in hand, and indeuouring to extenuate the fullness of the letter to his
uttermost power, does nevertheless earnestly affirm, that he was not above
three foot more than the common sort of men, or two foot higher than Saul: and
so he leaves it as determined.

In the second of Samuel, Cap. 21. ver. 26, 17, etc.
I find report of four giants borne in Geth; of which Ishbenob the first, that
would have killed David, had a spear, whose head weighed the just half of
that of Golias^: the second called Siphai, Sippai or Saph, 1. Par. 20. was
nothing inferior to the first: the third hight also Goliath, the staff of
whose spear was like unto the beam of a weauers loome, nevertheless he was
slain in the second battle in Gob by Elhanan, as the first was by Abisai
Ioabs brother, and the second by Elhanan. The fourth brother (for they were all
brethren) was slain at Gath by Jonathan nephew to David, and he was not only
huge of personage, but also of disfigured form, for he had 24. fingers and
toes. Whereby it is evident, that the generation of giants was not extinguished
in Palestine, until the time of David, which was 2890. after the flood, nor
utterly consumed in Og, as some of our expositors would have it.

Now to come unto our christian writers. For though the authorities already
alleged out of the word, are sufficient to confirm my purpose at the full; yet
will I not let to set down such other notes as experience has revealed,
only to the end that the reader shall not think the name of giants, with
their quantities, and other circumstances, mentioned in the scriptures, rather
to have some mystical interpretation depending upon them, than that the sense
of the text in this behalf is to be taken simply as it speaks. And first of
all to omit that which Tertullian Lib. 2. de resurrect. says; S. Augustine
notes, De ciuitate Dei lib. 15. cap. 9.
how he with other saw the tooth of a man, whereof he took good aduisement, and
pronounced in the end that it would have made 100. of his own, or any other
man's that lived in his time. The like hereof also does John Boccace set down,
Johannes Boccacius.
in the 68. chapter of his 4. book, saying that in the cave of a mountain,
not far from Drepanum (a town of Sicilia called Eryx as he gesseth) the body
of an exceeding high giant was discovered, three of whose teeth did weigh 100.
ounces, which being converted into English poise, does yield eight pound and
four ounces, after twelve ounces to the pound, that is 33. ounces every tooth.

He adds farther, that the forepart of his scull was able to contain many
bushels of wheat, and by the proportion of the bone of his thigh, the
Symmetricians judged his body to be above 200. cubits. Those teeth, A carcass
discovered of 200. cubits.
scull, and bones, were (and as I think yet are, for ought I know to the
contrary) to be seen in the church of Drepanum in perpetual memory of his
greatness, whose body was found upon this occasion. As some dug in the
earth to lay the foundation of an house, the miners happened upon a great
vault, not far from Drepanum: whereinto when they were entered, they saw the
huge body of a man sitting in the cave, of whose greatness they were so
afraid, that they ran away, and made an outcrie in the city, how there sat
a man in such a place, so great as an hill: the people hearing the news, ran
out with clubs and weapons, as if they should have gone unto a foughten field,
and 300. of them entering into the cave, they forthwith saw that he was dead,
and yet sat as if he had been alive, having a staff in his hand, compared by
mine author unto the mast of a tall ship, which being touched fell by and by to
dust, saving the nether end between his hand and the ground, whose hollownesse
was filled with 1500. pound weight of lead, to bear up his arm that it should
not fall in pieces: nevertheless, his body also being touched fell likewise
into dust, saving three of his aforesaid teeth, the forepart of his scull, and
one of his thigh bones, which are reserved to be seen of such as will hardly
believe these reports.

In the histories of Brabant I read of a giant found, whose bones were 17. or
18. cubits in length, but Goropius, as his manner is, denies them to be the
bones of a man, affirming rather that they were the bones of an elephant,
because they somewhat resembled those of two such beasts which were found at the
making of the famous ditch between Bruxels and Machlin. As though there were
any precise resemblance between the bones of a man and of an elephant, or
that there had ever been any elephant of 27. foot in length. But see his
demeanor. In the end he grants that another body was found upon the shore
of Rhodanus, of thirty foot in length. Which somewhat staieth his judgment,
but not altogether remooueth his error.

The body of Pallas was found in Italy, Mat. Westmon.
in the year of Grace 1038. and being measured it contained twenty foot in
length, this Pallas was companion with Aeneas.

There was a carcass also laid bare 1170. in England upon the shore (where the
beating of the sea had washed away the earth from the stone wherein it lay)
and when it was taken up, Johannes Leland. Mafieus, Lib. 14. Trivet. Mat. West.
it contained 50. foot in measu^^, as our histories do report. The like was
seen before in Wales, in the year 1087. of another of 14. foot.

In Perth moreover a village in Scotland another was taken up, which to this
day they show in a church, under the name of little John ( per Antiphrasin)
being Hector Boet.
and whereof Hector Boethius does say, that he did put his whole arm into one
of the hanch bones: which is worthy to be remembered.

In the year of Grace 1475. the body of Tulliola the daughter of Cicero was
taken up, and found higher by not a few foot than the common sort of women
living in those days.

Geruasius Tilberiensis, Geruasius Tilberiensis.
head Marshall to the king of Arles writes in his Chronicle dedicated to Otho
4. Isoretum, in the suburbs of Paris, he saw the body of a man that was
twenty foot long, beside the head and the neck, which was missing and not
found, the owner having peradventure been beheaded for some notable trespass
committed in times past, or (as he says) killed by S. William.

The Greek writers make mention of Andronicus their emperor, who lived 1183.
of Grace, and was ten foot in height, that is, three foot higher than the Dutch
man that showed himself in many places of England, Marpaca a fine harlot, who
ruled him as she listed.

Zonaras speaks of a woman that lived in the days of Iustine, who being
borne in Cilicia, and of very comely personage, was nevertheless almost two
foot taller than the tallest woman of her time.

A carcass was taken up at Iuie church near Salisburie but of late years to
speak of, Sir Thomas Eliot.
almost fourteen foot long. in Dictionario Eliotae.

In Gillesland in Come Whitton paroche not far from the chapel of the Moore,
Leland in Combrit.
six miles by east from Carleill, a coffin of stone was found, and therein the
bones of a man, of more than incredible greatness. In like sort Leland speaks
of another found in the I Will called Alderney, whereof you shall read more in the
chapter of our Islands.

Richard Grafton in his Manuell tells of one whose shinbone contained six
foot, Richard Grafton.
and thereto his scull so great that it was able to receive five pecks of
wheat. Wherefore by coniecturall symmetrie of these parts, his body must needs
be of 24. foot, or rather more, if it were diligently measured. For the
proportion of a comely and well featured body, answers 9. times to the
length of the face, taken at large from the pitch of the crown to the chin,
The Symmetrie or proportion of the body of a comely man.
as the whole length is from the same place unto the sole of the foot, measured
by an imagined line, and severed into so many parts by like overthwart
draughts, as Drurerus in his lineall description of man's body does deliver.
Nevertheless, this symmetrie is not taken by other than the well proportioned
face, for Recta, orbiculata (or fornicata) prona, resupinata, and lacunata (or
repanda) do so far degenerate from the true proportion as from the form and
beauty of the comely. Hereby also they make the face taken in strict manner,
to be the tenth part of the whole body, that is, from the highest part of the
forehead to the pitch of the chin, so that in the use of the word face there is
a difference, whereby the 9. part is taken (I say) from the crown (called
Vertex, because the hair there turns into a circle) so that if the space by
a rule were truly taken, I mean from the crown or highest part of the head
to the pitch of the nether chap, and multiplied by nine, the length of the
whole body would easily appear, and show it self at the full. In like manner
I find, that from the elbow to the top of the middle finger is the 4. part of
the whole length, called a cubit: from the wrist to the top of the same finger,
a tenth part: the length of the shinbone to the ancle a fourth part (and all
one with the cubit:) from the top of the finger to the third joint, two third
parts of the face from the top of the forehead. Which observations I willingly
remember in this place, to the end that if any such carcases happen to be
found hereafter, it shall not be hard by some of these bones here mentioned, to
come by the stature of the whole body, in certain and exact manner. As for the
rest of the bones, ioints, parts, etc: you may resort to Drurerus, Cardan, and
other writers, since the farther delivery of them concerns not my purpose. To
proceed therefore with other examples, I read that the body of king Arthur
being found in the year 1189. was two foot higher than any man that Syluester
Gyraldus.
came to behold the same. Finally the carcass of William conqueror was seen
not many years since (to wit, 1542.) in the city of Cane, twelve inches
longer, by the judgment of such as saw it, Constans fama Gallorum.
than any man which dwelled in the country. All which testimonies I note
together, because they proceed from christian writers, from whom nothing
should be farther or more distant, than of set purpose to lie, and feed the
world with fables.

In our times also, and whilst Francis the first reigned over France, there
was a man seen in Aquiteine, whom the king being in those parties made of his
guard, whose height was such, that a man of common height might easily go under
his twist without stooping, a stature incredible. Moreover Casanion, a writer
of our time, tells of the bones of Briat a giant found of late in Delphinois,
Briat.
of 15. cubits, the diameter of whose scull was two cubits, and the breadth of
his shoulders four, as he himself beheld in the late second wars of France,
and whereunto the report of Joan Marius made in his books De Galliarum
illustrationibus, where he writes of the carcass of the same giant found not
far from the Rhodanus, which was 22. foot long, from the scull to the sole of
the feet, does yield sufficient testimony. Also Calameus in his commentaries
De Biturigibus, confirms no less, adding that he was found 1556. and so
does Baptista Fulgosus, lib. 1. cap. 6. saying farther, that his grave was
seen not far from Valentia, and discovered by the violence and current of
the Rhodanus. The said Casanion in like sort speaks of the bones of a man
which he beheld, one of whose teeth was a foot long, and eight pound in weight.
Also of the sepulcher of another near unto Charms castle, which was nine
paces in length, things incredible to us, if eiesight did not confirm it in
our own times, and these carcases were not reserved by the very providence of
God, to the end we might behold his works, and by these relikes understand,
that such men were in old time in deed, of whose statures we now begin to
doubt. Now to say somewhat also of mine own knowledge, there is the thighbone
of a man to be seen in the church of S. Laurence near Guildhall in London,
which in time past was 26. inches in length, but now it begins to decaie, so
that it is shorter by four inches than it was in the time of king Edward.
Another also is to be seen in Aldermar^e bury, of some called Aldermanburie,
of 32. inches and rather more, whereof the symmetrie has been taken by some
skillful in that practice, and an image made according to that proportion,
which is fixed in the east end of the cloister of the same church, not far
from the said bone, and shows the person of a man full ten or eleven foot
high, which as some say was found in the cloister of Poules, that was near to
the library, at such time as the Duke of Somerset did pull it down to the
very foundation, and

Now it rests furthermore that I set down, what I have read thereof in Pagane
writers, who had always great regard of their credit, and so ought all men
that

Plutarch tells how Sertorius being in Lybia, In vita Seriorij de Antheo.
near to the streicts of Maroco, to wit, at Tingi (or Tanger Mauritania, as it
is now called) caused the sepulcher of Antheus, before remembered to be opened:
for hearing by common report that the said giant lay buried there, whose corpse
was fifty cubits long at the least, he was so far off from crediting the same,
that he would not believe it, until he saw the coffin open wherein the bones
of the aforesaid prince did rest. To be short therefore, he caused his
soldiers to cast down the hill made sometime over the tomb, and finding the
body in the bottom coffined in stone, after the measure thereof taken, Strabo
also confirms.

Pausanias reports out of one Miso, that when the body of Ajax was found,
the whirlebone of his knee was adindged so broad as a pretty dish: also that
the body of Asterius sometime king of Creta was ten cubits long, and that of
Hyllus or Gerion no less marvelous than the rest, all which Goropius still
condemns to be the bones of monsters of the sea (notwithstanding the

Philostrate in Heroicis says, Philostrate.
how he saw the body of a giant thirty cubits in length, also the carcass of
another of two and twenty, and the third of twelve.

Liuie in the seventh of his first decade, speaks of an huge person which
made a challenge as he stood at the end of the Anien bridge, against any Roman
that Golias, of Artaches (of whom Herodot speaks in the history of Xerxes)
who was six common cubits of stature, which make but five of the kings
standard, because this is longer by three fingers than the other. Of Pusio,
Secundilla, and Cabaras, of which the first two living under Augustus were
above ten foot, and the later under Claudius of full nine* and all remembered by
Pliny; of Eleazar a Jew, of whom Josephus says, that he was sent to
Tiberius, and a person of height five cubits, of another of whom Nicephorus
makes mention lib. 12. cap. 13. Hist. eccles. of five cubits and an handful,
I say nothing, because Casanion of Mutterell has alredie sufficiently
discoursed upon these examples in his De gigantibus, which as I guess he has
written of set purpose against Goropius, who in his Gigantomachia, supposes
himself to have killed all the giants in the world, and like a new Jupiter
Alterum carcass Herculem, as the said Casanion does merrily charge and
vpbraid him.

Pliny tells of an earthquake at Creta, Lib. 7.
which discovered the body of a giant, that was 46. cubits in length after the
Roman standard, and by diverse supposed to be the body of Orion or Aetion.
Nevertheless I read, that Lucius Flaccus and Metellus did swear Per sua
capita, that it was either the carcass of some monster of the sea, or a forged
devise to bleare the peoples eyes withal, wherein it is wonderful to see, how
they please Goropius as one that first derived his fantastical imagination
from their asseueration and oath. The said Pliny also adds that the body of
Orestes was seven cubits in length, one Gabbara of Arabia nine foot nine
inches, and two reserved In conditorio Sallustianorum half a foot longer than
Gabbara was, for which I never read that any man was driven to swear.

Trallianus writes how the Athenienses digging on a time in the ground,
Trallianus.
to lay the foundation of a new wall to be made in a certain Island in the
days of an emperor, did find the bones of Macrosyris in a coffin of hard
stone, of 100. cubits in length after the account of the Roman cubit, which
was then either a foot and a half, or not much in difference from half a yard
of our measure now in England. These verses also, as they are now translated
out of Greek were found withal, Sepultus ego Macrosyris in longa insula
Vitae peractis annis mill quinquies: which amounts
to 81. years four months, after the Egyptian reckoning.

In the time of Hadrian the emperor, the body of the giant Ida was taken up
at Messana, containing 20. foot in length, and having a double row of teeth,
yet standing whole in his chaps. Eumachus also in Perigesi, tells that when
the Carthaginenses went about to dich in their province, they found two bodies
in several coffins of stone, the one was 23. the other 24. cubits in length,
such another was found in Bosphoro Cymmerio after an earthquake, but the
inhabitants did cast those bones into the Meotidan marris. In Dalmatia, many
graves were shaken open with an earthquake, in diverse of which certain
carcases were found, whose ribs contained 16. else, after the Roman measure,
whereby the whole bodies were judged to be 64. since the longest rib is
commonly about the fourth part of a man, as some rouing symmetricians affirm.

Arrhianus, says that in the time of Alexander the bodies of the Asianes were
generally of huge stature, and commonly of five cubits, and such was the
height of Porus of Inde, whom the said Alexander vanquished and overthrew in
battle.

Suidas speaks of Ganges, killed also by the said prince, who far exceeded
Porus; for he was ten cubits long. What should I speak of Artaceas a captain
in the host of Xerxes* before remembered, whose height was within 4. fingers
breadth of five cubits, and the tallest man in the army except the king
himself. Herod. lib. 7. Of Athanatus whom Pliny remembers I say nothing.
But of all these, this one example shall pass, which I do read of in
Trallianus, and he sets down in form and manner following.

In the days of Tiberius the emperor says he, a corpse was left bare or laid
open after an earthquake, of which each tooth (taken one with another) contained
12. inches over at the least. Now for so much as in such as be full mouthed, A
mouth of sixteen foot wide.
each chap has commonly 16. teeth at the least, which amount unto 32. in the
whole, needs must the wideness of this man's chaps be welneere of 16. foot, and
the opening of his lips five at the least. A large mouth in mine opinion, and
not to eat peason with Ladies of my time, besides that if occasion served, it
was able to receive the whole bodies of mo than one of the greatest men, I
mean of such as we be in our days. When this carcass was thus found, every
man marvelled at it, and good cause why. A messenger was sent to Tiberius the
emperor also to know his pleasure, A counterfect made of a monstrous carcass
by one tooth taken out of the head.
whether he would have the same brought over unto Rome or not, but he forbad
them, willing his Legate not to remove the dead out of his resting place, but
rather This man was more favorable to this monster than our papists were to the
bodies of the dead who tare them in pieces to make money of them.
when the image was once made and set up on end, it appeered rather an huge
colossie than the true carcass of a man, and when it had stood in Rome until
the people were weary and thoroughly satisfied with the Pausan. lib. 8.
tells in like manner of Hiplodanus and his fellows, who lived when Rhea was
with child of Osyris by Cham, and were called to her aid at such time as she
feared to be molested by Hammon her first husband, whilst she remained upon
the Thoumasian hill, In ipso loco, Grandiaque effossis mirabitur ossa
sepulchris.
says he, spectantur ossa maiora multo quam vt humana Of Protophanes who had
but one great and broad bone in steed of all his ribs on each side I say
nothing, since it concerns not his stature.

I could rehearse many mo examples of the bodies of such men, out of Solinus,
Sabellicus, D. Cooper, and others. As of Oetas and Ephialtes, who were said to
be nine orgies or paces in height, and four in breadth, which are taken for so
many cubits, because there is small difference between a man's ordinary pace
and his cubit, This king Richard I understand,
Yer he went out of England,
Let make an axe for the nones,
Therewith to cleave the Saracens bones,
The head in sooth was wrought full we will,
Thereon were twenty pound of steel,
And when he came in Cyprus land,
That ilkon axe he took in hand, etc.


I could speak also of Gerards staff or lance, yet to be seen in Gerards
hall at London in Basing lane, which is so great and long that no man can
beweld it, neither go to the top thereof without a ladder, which of set purpose
and for greater countenance of the wonder is fixed by the same. I have seen a
man my self of seven foot in height, but lame of his legs. The chronicles also
of Cogshall speak of one in Wales, who was half Turnus threw at Aeneas, and
was such as that twelve chosen and picked men (says Virgil, (Qualia nunc
hominum producit corpora tellus) were not able so stur and remove out of the
place: but I pass it over, Vis vnita fortior est eadem dispersa.
and diverse of the like, concluding that these huge blocks were ordained and
created by God: first for a testimony unto us of his power and might; and
secondly for a confirmation, that hugenes of body is not to be accounted of
as a part of our felicity, since they which possessed the same, were not only
tyrants, doltish, and evil men, but also oftentimes overcome even by the weak
and feeble. Finally they were such indeed as in whom the Lord delited not,
according to the saying of the prophet Cap. 3, 36.
Baruch; Ibi fuerunt gigantes nominati, illi qui ab initio fuerunt statura
magna, scientes bellum, hos non elegit Dominus, neque illis viam disciplinae
dedit, propterea perierunt, and quoniam non habuerunt sapientiam, interierunt
propter suam insipientiam, etc. that is, There were the giants famous from the
beginning, that were of great stature and expert in war, those did not the
Lord choose, neither gave he the way of knowledge unto them, but they were
destroyed, because they had no wisdom, and perished through their own
foolishness. That the bodies of men also do daily decaie in stature, beside
Pliny lib. 7. Esdras likewise confesses lib. 4. cap. 5. whose authority 4.
Esd. cap. 5.
is so good herein as that of Homer or Pliny, who do affirm so much, whereas
Goropius still continuing his woonted pertinacitie also in this behalf, makes
his proportion first by the old Roman foot, and then by his own, and
thereupon concludes that men in these days be fully so great as ever they
were, whereby as in the former dealing he thinks it nothing to conclude
against the scriptures, chosen writers and testimonies of the oldest pagans.
But see how he would salve all at last in the end of his Gigantomachia, where
he says, I deny not but that od huge personages have been seen, as a woman
of ten, and a man of nine foot long, which I my self also have beholden, but
as now so in old time the common sort did so much wonder at the like as we do
at these, because they were seldom seen, and not commonly to be heard of.

Of the languages spoken in this Island. Cap. 6.
WHat language came first with British.
Samothes and afterward with Albion, and the giants of his company, it is hard
for me to determine, since nothing of sound credit remains in writing, which
may resolve us in the truth hereof. Yet of so much are we certain, Small
difference between the British and Celtike languages.
that the speech of the ancient Britons, and of the Celts, had great affinity
one with another, so that they were either all one, or at leastwise such as
either nation with small help of interpretors might understand other, and
readily discern what the speaker meant. Some are of the opinion that the
Celts spoke Greek, and how the British tongue resembled the same, which was
spoken in Grecia before Homer did reform it: but I see that these men do
speak without authority and therefore I reject them, for if the Celts which
were properly called Galls did speak Greek, why did Caesar in his letters
sent to Rome use that language, because that if they should be intercepted they
might not understand them, or why did he not understand the Galls, he being so
skillful in the language without an interpretor? Yet I deny not but that the
Celtish and British speeches might have great affinity one with another, and
the British above all other with the Greek, for both do appear by certain
words, as first in tri for three, march for an horse, and trimarchia, whereof
Pausanias speaks, for both. Atheneus also writes of Bathanasius a captain
of the Galls, whose name is mere British, compounded of Bath and Ynad, and
signifies a noble or comely judge. And whereas he says that the relics of
the Galls took up their first dwelling about Isther, and afterward divided
themselves in such wise, that they which went and dwelled in Hungary were
called Sordsai, and the other that inhabited within the dominion of Tyroll)
Brenni, whose seat was on the mount Brenhere parcel of the Alps, what else
signifies the word Iscaredich in British, from whence the word Scordisci
comes, but to be divided? Hereby then, and sundry other the like
testimonies, I gather that the British and the Celtish speeches had great
affinity one with another, as I said, which Caesar (speaking of the similitude
or likeness of religion in both nations) does also auerre, and Tacitus in vita
Agricolae, in like sort plainly affirms, or else it Appianus talking of the
Brenni calls them Cymbres, and by this I gather also that the Celts and the
Britons were indifferently called Cymbri in their own language, or else that
the Britons were the right Cymbri, who unto this day do not refuse to be
called by that name. Bodinus writing of the means by which the original of
Cymbri and Cymmerij, as most writers do remember. This also is evident (as
Plutarch likewise confesses In vita Mary) that no man knew from whence the
Cymbres came in his days, and therefore I ^^^^eeue that they came out of
Britain, for all the maine was well known unto them, I mean even to the
uttermost part of the north, as may appear furthermore by the slaves which
were daily brought from Daui for Daci, Getae for Goths, etc for of their
conquests I need not make rehearsal, since they are commonly known and
remembered by the writers, both of the Greeks and Latins.

The British tongue called Camberaec does yet remain in that part of the
Island, British corrupted by the Latin and Saxon speeches.
which is now called Wales, whither the Britons were driven after the Sarons
had made a full conquest of the other, which we now call England, although the
pristinate integrity Bards and cunning men have been most slack and
negligent. Giraldus in praising the Britons affirms that there is not one
word in all their language, that is not either Greek or Latin. Which being
rightly understood and conferred with the likeness that was in old time
between the Celts and the British toongs, will not a little help those that
think the old Celtish to have some favor of the Greek. But how soever that
matter stands, after the British speech came once over into this Island, sure
it is, that it could never be extinguished for all the attempts that the
Romans, Saxons, Normans, and Englishmen could make against that nation, in any
manner of wise.

Petigrees and genealogies also the Welsh Britons have plenty in their own
tongue, The Britons diligent in petigrees.
insomuch that many of them can readily derive the same, either from Brute or
some of his band, even unto Aeneas and other of the Trojans, and so forth unto
Noah without any manner of stop. But as I know not what credit is to be given
unto them in this behalf, although I must needs confess that their ancient
Bards were very diligent in there collection, and had also public allowance
or salarie for the same; so I dare not absolutely impugn their assertions,
since that in times past all nations (learning it no doubt of the Hebrews) did
very solemnly preserve the catalogs of their descents, thereby either to
show themselves of ancient and noble race, or else to be descended from some
one of the gods. But Stemmata quid faciunt? quid prodest Pontice longo
Sanguine censeri? aut quid auorum ducere turmas? etc.


Next unto the British speech, Latin.
the Latin tongue was brought in by the Romans, and in manner generally planted
through the whole region, as the French was after by the Normans. Of this tongue
I will not say much, because there are few which be not skillful in the same.
Howbeit, as the speech it self is easy and d^lectable, so has it perverted
the names of the ancient rivers, regions, and cities of Britain in such wise,
that in these our days their old British denominations are quite grown out of
memory, and yet those of the new Latin left as most uncertain. This
remains also unto my time, borrowed from the Romans, that all our deeds,
evidences, charters, and writings of record, are set down in the Latin tongue,
though now very barbarous, and thereunto the copies and court-rolles, and
processes of courts and leets registered in the same.

The third language apparantlie known is the Scithian or high Dutch, The Saxon
tongue.
induced at the first by the Saxons (which the Britons call Saysonaec, as they
do the speakers Sayson) an hard and rough kind of speech, God wot, when our
nation was brought first into acquaintance withal, but now changed with us
into a far more fine and easy kind of utterance, and so polished and helped
with new and milder words, that it is to be aduouched how there is no one
speech under the sun spoken in our time, that has or can have more variety
of words, copy of phrases, or figures and flowers of eloquence, than has our
English tongue, although some have affirmed us rather to bark as dogs, than
talk like men, because the most of our words (as they do indeed) incline unto
one syllable. This also is to be noted as a testimony remaining still of our
language, derived from the Saxons, that the general name for the most part of
every skillful artificer in his trade ends in Here with us, albeit the H be
left out, and er only inserted, as Scriuenhere, writehere, shiphere, etc: for
scriuener, writer, and shipper, etc: beside many other relikes of that speech,
never to be abolished.

After the Saxon tongue, The French tongue.
came the Norman or French language over into our country, and therein were
our laws written for a long time. Our children also were by an especial
decree taught first to speak the same, and thereunto enforced to learn their
constructions in the French, whenever they were set to the Grammar school.
In like sort few bishops, abbats, or other clergy men, were admitted unto any
ecclesiastical function here among us, but such as came out of religious
houses from beyond the seas, to the end they should not use the English tongue
in their sermons to the people. In the court also it grew into such contempt,
that most men thought it no small dishonor to speak any English there. Which
bravery took his hold at the last likewise in the country with every
plowman, that even the very carters began to wax weary of there mother tongue,
and labored to speak French, which as then was counted no small token of
gentilitie. And no marvel, for every French rascal, when he came once
hither, was taken for a gentleman, only because he was proud, and could use
his own language, and all this (I say) to exile the English and British
speeches quite out of the country. But in vain, for in the time of king
Edward the first, to wit, toward the latter end of his reign, the French it
self ceased to be spoken generally, but most of all and by law in the midst
of Edward the third, and then began the English to recover and grow in more
estimation than before; notwithstanding that among our artificers, the most
part of their implements, tools and words of art retain still their French
denominations even to these our days, as the language it self Geffray
Chaucer, The helpers of our English tongue.
and John Gowre, in the time of Richard the second, and after them of John
Scogan, and John Lydgate monk of Berrie, our said tongue was brought to an
excellent pass, notwithstanding that it never came unto the type of
perfection, until the time of Queen Elizabeth, wherein John Jewel B. of
Sarum, John Fox, and sundry learned and excellent writers Englishmen apt to
learn any foreign tongue.
that since ours is a mean language, and neither too rough nor too smooth in
utterance, we may with much facility learn any other language, beside Hebrew,
Greek and Latin, and speak it naturally, as if we were home-borne in those
countries; and yet on the other side it falls out, I wot not by what other
means, that few foreign nations can rightly Natalis Comes in like manner,
speaking of our affairs, does clip the names of our English lords. But this
of all the rest does breed most admiration with me, that if any stranger do
hit upon some likely pronuntiation of our tongue, yet in age he swarueth so
much from the same, that he is worse therein than ever he was, and thereto
peradventure Reginald Wolf, and other, whereof I have justly marvelled.

The Cornish and Devonshire men, The Cornish tongue.
whose country the Britons call Cerniw, have a speech in like sort of their
own, and such as has in deed more affinity with the Armoricane tongue than I
can well discuss of. Yet in mine opinion, they are both but a corrupted kind
of British, albeit so far degenerating in these days from the old, that if
either of them do meet with a Welshman,

The Scottish english Scottish english.
has been much broader and less pleasant in utterance than ours, because
that nation has not till of late endeavored to bring the same to any perfect
order, and yet it was such in manner, as Englishmen themselves did speak for
the most part beyond the Trent, whither any great amendment of our language
had not as then extended it self. Howbeit in our time the Scottish language
endeuoreth to come near, if not altogether to match our tongue in finenesse of
phrase, and copy of words, and this may in part appear by an history of the
Apocrip^a translated into Scottish verse by Hudson, dedicated to the king of
that country, and containing six books, except my memory do fail me.

Thus we see how that under the dominion of the king of England, and in the
south parts of the realm, we have three several toongs, that is to say,
English, British, and Cornish, and even so many are in Scotland, if you
account the English speech for one: notwithstanding that for breadth and
quantity of the region, I mean only of the soil of the maine Island, it be
somewhat less to see to than the other. For in the north part of the region,
where the wild Scots, The wild Scots.
otherwise called the Redshanks, or rough footed Scots Redshanks. Rough footed
Scots.
(because they go bare footed and clad in mantels over their saffron shirts
after the Irish manner) do inhabit, Irish scots. Irish speech.
they speak good Irish which they call Gachtlet, as they say of one Gathelus,
whereby they show their original to have in times past been fetched out of
Ireland: as I noted also in the chapter precedent, and whereunto Vincentius
cap. de insulis Oceani does yield his assent, saying that Ireland was in time
past called Scotia; Scotia eadem (says he) and Hibernia, proxima Britanniae
insula, spatio terrarum angustior, sed situ foecundior; Scotia autem a Scotorum
gentibus traditur appellata, etc. Out of the 14. book of Isidorus entitled
Originum, where he also adds that it is called Hybernia, because it bends
toward Iberia. But I find elsewhere that it is so called by certain Spaniards
which came to seek and plant their inhabitation in the same, whereof in my
Chronology I have spoken more at large.

In the Isles of the Orchades, or Orkeney, as we now call them, and such coasts
of Britain as do abbut upon the same, the Gottish or Danish speech is
altogether in use, and also in Shetland, by reason (as I take it) that the
princes of Norwaie held those Islands so long under their subjection, albeit
they were otherwise reputed as rather to belong to Ireland, because that the
very soil of them is enemy to poison, as some write, although for my part I
had never any sound experience of the truth hereof. And thus much have I
thought good to speak of our old speeches, and those five languages now
usually spoken within the limits of our Island.

Into how many kingdoms this Island has been divided. Cap. 7.
IT is not to be doubted, Britain at the first one entire kingdom.
but that at the first, the whole Island was ruled by one only prince, and so
continued from time to time, until civil discord, grounded upon ambitious
desire to reign, caused the same to be governed by diverse. And this I mean
so well of the time before the coming of Brute, as after the extinction of his
whole race and posterity. Howbeit, as it is uncertain into how many regions
it was severed, after the first partition; so it is most sure that this latter
disturbed estate of regiment, continued in the same, not only until the time
of Caesar, but also in manner unto the days of Lucius, with whom the whole
race of the Britons had an end, and the Romans full possession of this Island,
who governed it by Legates after the manner of province. It should seem also
that within a while after the time of Dunwallon (who rather brought those four
princes that usurped in his time to obedience, than extinguished their titles,
and such partition as they had made of the Island among themselves) each great
city had her freedom and several kind of regiment, proper unto her self,
beside a large circuit of the country appertinent unto the same, wherein were
sundry other cities also of less name, which owght homage and all subjection
unto the greatter sort. And to say truth, hereof it came to pass, that each
of these regions, whereinto this Island was then divided, took his name of some
one of these cities; although Ciuitas after Caesar does sometime signify an
whole continent or kingdom, whereby there were in Tot civitates quot regna,
and contrariwise as may appear by that of the Trinobantes, which was so called
of Trinobantum the chief city of that portion, whose territories contained
all Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hertfordshire, even as the jurisdiction of
the bishop of London is now extended, for the oversight of such things as
belong unto the church. Each of the governors also of these regions, called
themselves kings, and thereunto either of them daily made war upon other,
for the enlarging of their limits. But for so much

We find therefore for the first, how that Wales had her three several
kingdoms, Wales divided into three kingdoms.
which being accounted together contained (as Giraldus says) 49. cantreds or
Lhoegres by the rivers Sauerne and Dee, of which two streams this does fall
into the Irish sea at Westchester, the other into the maine Ocean, betwixt
Somersetshire and Southwales, as their several courses shall witness more at
large.

In the beginning it was divided into two kingdoms Venedotia or Gwynhedh G^inhed.
(otherwise called Dehenbarth) and Demetia, for which we now use most co^monlie
the names of South and Northwales. But in a short process of time a third
sprung up in the very midst between them both, which from thence-foorth was
called Powisy, as shall be showed hereafter. For Roderijc the great, who
flourished 850. of Christ, and was king of all Wales (which then contained
only six regions) leaving three sons behind him, by his last will and
testament divided the country into three Morwing or Morwinner had Gwynhedh or
Northwales, Cadelh Demetia or Southwales, and Anaralt Powisy, as Giraldus and
other do remember. Howbeit it came to pass that after this division, Cadelh
suruiued all his brethren, and thereby became lord of both their portions, and
his successors after him until the time of Teuther or Theodor (all is one)
after which they were contended to keep themselves within the compass of
Demetia, Powisy did six, and Gwinhedh fourteen, except my memory do fail
me.

The first of these three, being called as (I said) Northwales or Venedotia
Venedotia.
(or as Paulus Iouius says Malfabrene, for he divides Wales also into three
regions, of which he calls the first Dumbera, the second Berfrona, and the
third Malfabrene) lies directly over against the I Will of Anglesei, the chief
city whereof stood in the I Will of Angleset Anglesei.
and was called Aberfraw. It contains 4. regions, of which the said Island is
the first, and whereof in the chapter ensuing I will entreat more at large.
The second is called Arfon, Arfon.
and situate between two rivers, Merioneth.
the Segwy and the Conwy. The third is Merioneth, and as it is severed from
Arfon by the Conwy, so is it separated from Tegenia Stradcluyd or Tegenia.
(otherwise called Stradcluyd and Igenia the fourth region) by the river Cluda.
Finally, the limits of this latter are extended also even unto the Dee it
self, and of these four regions consists the kingdom of Venedotia, whereof
in times past the region of the Canges was not the smallest portion.

The kingdom of Powisy, last of all erected, Powisy.
as I said, has on the north side Gwinhedh, on the east (from Chester to
Hereford, or rather to Deane forest) England, on the south and west the river
Wy and very high hills, whereby it is notably severed from Southwales, the
chief city thereof being at the first Salopsburg, in old time Pengwerne, and
Ynwithig, but now Shrowesburie, a city or town raised out of the ruins of
Vricouium, which (standing 4. miles from thence, and by the Saxons called
Wrekencester and Wrokecester, before they overthrew it) is now inhabited with
mere English, and where in old time the kings of Powisy did dwell and hold
their palaces, till Englishmen drove them from thence to Matrauall in the same
province, where they from thencefoorth abode. Upon the limits of this kingdom,
and not far from Holt castle, upon each side of the river, as the channel now
runs, stood sometime the famous monastery of Bangor, Bangor.
whilst the abated glory of the Britons yet remained vnextinguished, and
herein were 2100. monks, of which, the learned sort did preach the Gospel,
and the unlearned labored with their hands, thereby to maintain themselves,
and to sustain their preachers. This region was in like sort divided afterward
in twain, of which, Mailrosse.
the one was called Mailor or Mailrosse, the other retained still her old
denomination, and of these the first lay by south, and the latter by north of
the Sauerne.

As touching Mailrosse, I read moreover in the gests of Fowkes de Warren,
Fowkes de Warren.
how that one William son to a certain lady sister to Pain Peuerell, the
first lord of Whittington, after the conquest did win a part of the same, and
the hundred of Ellesmore from the Welshmen, in which enterprise he was so
desperately wounded, that no man hight him life; yet at the last by eating of
the shield of a wild bore, he got an appetite and recovered his health. This
William had issue two daughters, Helene. Mellent.
to wit, Helene married to the heir of the Alans, and Mellent which refused
marriage with any man, except he were frist tried to be a knight of prowess.
Hereupon her father made proclamation, that against such a day and at such a
place, whatsoever Gentleman could show himself most valiant in the field,
should marry Mellent his daughter, and have with her his castle of
Whittington with sufficient liueliehood to maintain their estates for ever.
This report being spread, Fowkes de Warren came thither all in red, with a
shield of silver and pecocke for his crest, whereof he was called the red
knight, and there ouercomming the kings son of Scotland, and a Baron of
Burgundy, he married the maid, and by her had issue as in the treatise
appears. There is yet great mention of the red knight in the country there
about; and much like unto this Mellent was the daughter sometime of one of the
lord Rosses, called Kudall, who bare such good will to Fitz-Henrie clarke of
her fathers kitchen, The original of Fitz-Henries.
that she made him carry her away on horssebacke behind him, only for his
manhood sake, which presently was tried. For being pursued and over taken, she
made him light, and held his cloak whilst he killed and drove her fathers men
to flight: and then away they go, till her father conceiving a good opinion of
Fitz-Henrie for this act, received him to his favor, whereby that family came
up. And thus much (by the way) of Mailrosse, whereof this may suffice, since
mine intent is not as now to make any precise description of the particulars
of Wales; but only to show how those regions lay, which sometime were known
to be governed in that country. Demetia.
The third kingdom is Demetia, or Southwales, sometime known for the region
of the Syllures, whereunto I also am persuaded, that the Ordolukes lay in the
east part thereof, and extended their region even unto the Sauerne: but
howsoever that matter falls out, Demetia has the Sauerne on her south, the
Irish sea on her west parts, on the east the Sauerne only, and by north the
land of Powisy, whereof I spoke of late.

Of this region also Caermarden, which the old writers call Maridunum, Cair
Maridunum.
was the chief city and palace belonging to the kings of Southwales, until
at the last through foreign and civil invasions of enemies, the princes thereof
were constrained to remove their courts to Dinefar (which is in Cantermawr,
and situate nevertheless upon the same river Tewy, whereon Caermarden stands)
in which place it is far better defended with high hills, thick woods, craggie
rocks, and deep marises. In this region also lies Pembroke alias Penmoroc
shire, whose fawcons have been in old time very much regarded, and therein
likewise in Milford haven, whereof the Welsh wisards do yet dream strange
toies, which they believe shall one day come to pass. For they are a nation
much given to fortelling of things to come, but more to believe such blind
prophesies as have been made of old time, and no man is accounted for learned
in Wales that is not supposed to have the spirit of prophecy.

That Scotland had in those days two kingdoms, Pictland. Scotland. Picts.
Scots.


The first of these kingdoms therefore was begun in Kent by Henghist in the
456. of Christ, Kent Henghist.
and thereof called the kingdom of Kent or Cantwarland, and as the limits
thereof extended it self no farther than the said county (the chief city
whereof was Dorobernia or Cantwarbyry now Canturburie) so it endured well near
by the space of 400. years, before it was made and earldom or Heretochie,
and united by Inas unto Athelstane his son, being the first Earl or Heretoch
of the same. Master Lambert in his history of Kent does gather, by very
probable conjectures, that this part of the Island was first inhabited by
Samothes, and afterward by Albion. But howsoever that case stands, sure it is
that it has been the only door, whereby the Romans and Saxons made their
entry unto the conquest of the region, but first of all Caesar, who entered
into this Island upon the eighteenth Call. or 14. of September, which was four
days before the full of the moon, as he himself confesses, and then fell
out about the 17. or 18. of that month, twelve days before the equinoctial
(apparent) so that he did not tarry at that time above eight or ten days in
Britain. And as this platform cannot be denied for his entrance, so the said
region and east part of Kent, was the only place by which the knowledge of
Christ was first brought over unto us, whereby we became partakers of
salvation, and from the darkness of mistie error, true conuerts unto the
light and bright beams of the shining truth, to our eternal benefit and
everlasting comforts.

The second kingdom contained only Sussex, South sax Esta.
and a part of (or as some say all) Surrie, which Ella the Saxon first held:
who also erected his chief palace at Chichester, when he had destroyed
Andredswald in the 492. of Christ. And after it had continued by the space of
232. years, it ceased, being the very least kingdom of all the rest, which
were founded in this I Will after the coming of the Saxons (for to say truth, it
contained little above 7000. families) and within a while after the erection of
the kingdom of the Gewisses or West saxons, notwithstanding that before the
kings of Sussex pretended and made claim to all that which lay west of Kent,
and south of the Thames, unto the point of Corinwall, as I have often read.

The third regiment was of the East Saxons, Eastsa^. Erkenwiin.
or Trinobantes. This kingdom began under Erkenwijn, whose chief seat was in
London (or rather Colchester) and contained whole Essex, Middlesex, and part of
Herfordshire. It endured also much about the prick of 303. years, and was
divided from that of the East Angles only by the river Stoure, as Houeden and
others do report, and so it continues separated from Suffolk even unto our
times, although the said river be now grown very small, and not of such
greatness as it has been in times past, by reason that our countriemen make
small account of rivers, thinking carriage made by horse and cart to be the
less chargeable way. But herin how far they are deceived, I will elsewhere
make manifest declaration.

The fourth kingdom was of the West Saxons, Westsax.
and so called, because it lay in the west part of the realm, as that of
Essex did in the east, and of Sussex in the south. It began in the year of
Grace 519. under Cerdije, Cerdiic.
and endured until the coming of the Normans, including at the last all
Wiltshire, Bar keshire, Dorset, Southampton, Somersetshire, Glocestershire,
some part of Devonshire (which the Britons occupied not) Cornwall, and the
rest of Surrie, as the best authors do set down. At the first it contained
only Wiltshire, Dorcetshire, and Barkeshire, but yer long the princes thereof
conquered whatsoever the kings of Sussex and the Britons held unto the point of
Cornwall, and then became first Dorchester (until the time of Kinigils) then
Winchester the chief city of that kingdom. For when Birinus the moonke came
into England, the said Kinigils gave him Dorchester, and all the land within
seven miles about, toward the maintenance of his cathedral sea, by means
whereof he himself removed his palace to Winchester.

The first kingdom began under Ida, Brennicia, alias Northumberland. Ida.
in the 548. of Christ, and was called Northumberland, because it lay by north
of the river Humber. And from the coming of Henghist to this Ida, it was only
governed by earls or Heretoches as an Heretochy, till the said Ida converted it
into a kingdom. It contained all that region which (as it should seem) was in
time past either wholly apperteining to the Brigants; or whereof the said
Brigants did possess the greater part. The chief city of the same in like
manner was York, as Beda, Capgraue, Leyland, and others do set down, who ad
thereto that it extended from the Humber unto the Scottish sea, until the
slaughter of Egfride of the Northumbers, after which time the Picts gat hold of
all, between the Forth and the Twede, which afterward descending to the Scots
by means of the utter destruction of the Picts, has not been since united
to the crown of England, nor in possession of the mere English, as before
time it had been. Such was the cruelty of these Picts also in their recovery
of the same, that at a certain hour they made a Sicilien euensong, and slew
every English man, woman and child, that they could lay hold upon within the
aforesaid region, but some escaped narrowly, and saved themselves by flight.

Afterward in the year of Grace 560. it was parted in twain, Deira. Ella.
under Adda, that yielded up all his portion, which lay between Humber and the
Tine unto his Deira, or Southumberland, but reteining the rest still unto his
own use, he diminished not his title, but wrote himself as before king of all
Northumberland. Howbeit after 91. years, it was reunited again, and so
continued until Alfred annexed the whole to his kingdom, in the 331. after
Ida, or 878. of the birth of Jesus Christ our Savior.

The seventh kingdom, Eastangles Offa, a quo Offlingae.
called of the East Angles, began at Norwich in the 561. after Christ, under
Offa, Icenes, but as yet for my part I cannot yield to their assertions, I
mean it of Leland himself, whose help I use chiefly in these collections,
albeit in this behalf I am not resolved that he does judge aright.

The 8. and last was that of Mertia, which endured 291. Mearc the Saxon word,
because it was march to the rest (and truly, the limits of most of the other
kingdoms abutted upon the same) or else for that the laws of Martia the
Queen were first used in that part of the Island. Mertia. Creodda.
But as this later is but a mere conjecture of some, so the said kingdom
began under Creodda, in the 585. of Christ, and endured well near 300. years
before it was united to that of the West Saxons by Alfred, then reigning in
this I Will. Before him the Ceolulph an idiot in the same; but as he was soon
rejected for his folly, so it was not long after yer the said Alfred (I say)
annexed it to his kingdom by his manhood. The limits of the Mertian dominions
included Lincoln, Limits of Mertia.
Northampton, Chester, Darbie, Nottingham, Stafford, Huntington, Rutland,
Oxford, Buckingham, Worcester, Bedford shires, and the greatest part of
Shropshire (which the Welsh occupied not) Lancaster, Gloucester, Hereford (
alias Hurchford) Warwijc and Hertford shires: the rest of whose territories
were holden by such princes of other kingdoms through force as bordered upon
the same. Moreover, this kingdom was at one time divided into south and north
Mertia, whereof this lay beyond and the other on this side of the Trent, which
later also Oswald of Northumberland did give to Weada the son of Penda for
kindred sake, though he not long inioied it. This also is worthy to be noted,
that in these eight kingdoms of the Saxons, there were twelve princes reputed
in the popish Catalog for saints or martyrs, of which Alcimund, Edwine, Oswald,
Oswijn and Aldwold reigned in Northumberland; Sigebert, Ethelbert, Edmond, and
another Sigebert among the Estangels; Kenelme and Wistan in Mertia; and Saint
Edward the confessor, over all; but how worthily, I refer me to the
judgment of the learned. Thus much have I thought good to leave in memory of
the aforesaid kingdoms: and now will I speak somewhat of the division of this
Island also into provinces, as the Romans severed it whiles they remained in
these parts. Which being done, I hope that I have discharged whatsoever is
promised in the title of this chapter.

The Romans therefore having obtained the possession of this Island, divided the
same at the last into five provinces, as Vibius Sequester says. The first
whereof was named Britannia prima, Britannia prima.
and contained the east part of England (as some do gather) from the Trent
unto the Twede. Valentia.
The second was called Valentia or Valentiana, and included the west side, as
they note it, from Lirpoole unto Cokermouth. Britannia secunda.
The third hight Britannia secunda, and was that portion of the I Will which lay
southwards, between the Trent and the Thames. The fourth was surnamed Flauia
Caesariensis, Flauia Caesariensis.
and contained all the country which remained between Dover and the Sauerne,
I mean by south of the Thames, and whereunto (in like sort) Cornwall and
Wales were orderly assigned. The fifth and last part was then named Maxima
Caesariensis, Maxima Caesariensis
now Scotland, the most barren of all the rest, and yet not unsought out of the
greedy Romans, because of the great plenty of fish and foul, fine alabaster
and hard marble that are engendered and to be had in the same, for furniture of
household and curious building, wherein they much delited. More hereof in Sextus
Rufus, who lived in the days of Valentine, and wrate Notitiam prouinciarum now
extant to be read.

A Catalog of the kings and princes of this Island, first from Samothes unto the
birth of our savior Christ, or rather the coming of the Romans: secondly of
their Legates: thirdly of the Saxon princes according to their several
kingdoms: fourthlie of the Danes, and lastly of the Normans and English
princes, according to the truth contained in our Histories.
Of the kings of Britain, from Samothes to Brute.
SAmothes. Magus. Sarronius. Druiyus. Bardus. Longho. Bardus Junior. Lucus.
Celtes. Albion. Celtes after Albion slain. Galates. Harbon. Lugdus. Beligius.
Iasius. Allobrox. Romus. Paris. Lemanus. Olbius. Galates 2. Nannes. Remis.
Francus. Pictus.
After whom Brute enters into the Island, either neglected by the Celts, or
otherwise by conquest, and reigned therein with his posterity by the space of
636. years, in such order as follows.

Brute. Locrinus. Gwendolena his widow. Madan. Mempricius. Ebracus. Brutus
Junior. Leil. Rudibras. Bladunus Leir. Cordeil his daughter. Cunedach and
Morgan. Riuallon. Gurgustius. Sisillus. Iago. Kimmachus. Gorbodug. Ferres and
Porrex.
These 2. being slain, the princes of the land straue for the superiority and
regiment of the same, by the space of 50. years (after the race of Brute was
decayed) until Dunwallon king of Cornwall subdued them all, and brought the
whole to his subjection, notwithstanding that the aforesaid number of kings
remained still, which were but as vassals and inferiors to him, he being their
chief and only sovereign.

Dunwallon reigns. Belinus his son, in whose tune Brennus usurps.
Gurgwinbatrus. Guittellinus. Seisill. Kymarus. Owan alias Ellan. Morwich alias
Morindus. Grandobodian alias Gorbonian. Arcigallon. Elidurus alias Hesidor.
Arcigallon again. Elidurus again. Vigen alias Higanius, and Petitur alias
Petidurus. Elidurus the third time. Gorbodia alias Gorbonian. Morgan. Meriones
alias Eighuans. Idouallon. Rhimo Rohugo. Geruntius Voghen. Catellus. Coellus.
Pyrrho alias Porrex. Cherinus. Fulganius alias Sulgenis. Eldadus. Androgius.
Vrian. Hellindus. Dedantius Eldagan. Clotenis Claten. Gurguintus. Merian.
Bledunus Bledagh. Cophenis. Owinus alias Oghwen. Sisillus or Sitsiltus.
Blegabridus. Arcimalus Archiuall. Eldadus. Ruthenis three months. Rodingarus
alias Rodericus. Samulius Penysell. Pyrrho 2. Carporis alias Capporis. Dynellus
alias Dygnellus. Hellindus a few months. Lhoid. Casibellane. Theomantius.
Cynobellinus. Aruiragus. Marius. Coellus. Lucius.
Hitherto I have set forth the catalog of the kings of Britain, in such sort
as it is to be collected out of the most ancient histories, monuments and
records of the land. Now I will set forth the order and succession of the
Roman iegates or deputies, as I have borrowed them first out of Tacitus, then
Dion, and others: howbeit I cannot warrant the just course of them from Julius
Agricola forward, because there is no man that reherseth them orderly. Yet by
this my doing herein, I hope some better table may be framed hereafter by
other, whereof I would be glad to understand when soever it shall please God
that it may come to pass.

Aulus Plautius. Ostorius Scapula. Didius Gallus. Auitus. Veranius a few
months. Petronius Turpilianus. Trebellius Maximus. Vectius Volanus. Petilius
Cerealis. Julius Frontinus. Julius Agricola.
Hitherto Cornelius Tacitus reherseth these vicegerents or deputies in order.

Salustius Lucullus. Cneius Trebellius. Suetonius Paulinus. Calphurnius
Agricola. Publius Trebellius. Pertinax Helrius. Vlpius Marcellus. Clodius
Albinas. Heraclius. Carus Tyrannus. Iunius Seuerus, alias Julius Seuerus.
Liuius Gallus. Lollius Vrbicus. Maximus. Octauius. Traherus. Maximinianus.
Gratianus. Aetius.
Other Legates whose names are taken out of the Scottish history but in
incertein order.

Fronto sub Antonino. Publius Trebellius. Aulus Victorinus. Lucius Antinoris.
Quintus Bassianus.
Wales. 1.
The Romans not regarding the governance of this Island, the Britons ordeine a
king in the 447. after the incarnation of Christ.

VOrtiger. Vortimer. Aurelius Ambrosius. Other. Arthur. Constantine. Aurelius
Conanus. Vortiporius. Maglocunus. Caretius. Cadwan. Cadwallon. Cadwallader.
The kingdom of Wales cease, and the governance of the country is
translated to the Westsaxons by Inas, whose second wife was Denwalline the
daughter of Cadwallader: and with her he not only obtained the principality
of Wales but also of Corinwall and Armorica now called little Britain, which
then was a colonie of the Britons, and under the kingdom of Wales.

Kent. 2.
Hengist in the 9. of the recovery of Britain proclaims himself king of
Kent, which is the 456. of the birth of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ.

HEngist. Osrijc alias Osca. Osca his brother. Ermenricus. Athelbert.
Eadbaldus. Ercombert. Ecbert. Lother. Edrijc.
The seat void.

Withredus. Adelbert Junior. Eadbert. Alrijc. Eadbert. Guthred. Alred.
As the kingdom of Wales was united unto that of the Westsaxons by Inas, so is
the kingdom of Kent, at this present by Ecbert in the 827. of Christ, who
puts out Aldred and makes Adelstane his own base son Hertoch of the
same, so that whereas it was before a kingdom, now it becomes an Hertochie or
Dukedom, and so continues for a long time after.

Southsex. 3.
Ella in the 46. after Britain given over by the Romans erecteth a kingdom in
Southsex, to wit, in the 492. of Christ whose race succeeds in this order.

ELla. Cyssa. Ceaulijn. Celrijc. Kilwulf. Kinigils. Kinwalch. Ethelwold.
Berthun. Aldwijn.
This kingdom endured not very long as ye may see, for it was united to that
of the Westsaxons by Inas, in the 4689. of the world, which was the 723. of
Christ, according to the usual supputation of the church, and 232. after Ella
had erected the same, as is aforesaid.

Estsex. 4.
Erkenwijn in the 527. after our savior Christ begins to reign over
Estsex, and in the 81. after the return of Britain from the Roman obedience.

ERkenwijn. Sledda. Sebertus. Sepredus and Sywardus. Sigebert fill. Syward.
Sigebert. Swithelijn. Sijgar and Sebba. Sebba alone. Sijgard. Offa. Selredus.
Ethelwold. Albert. Humbcanna. Sinthredus.
In the 303. after Erkenwijn, Ecbert of the Westsaxons united the kingdom of
Estsex unto his own, which was in the 828. after the birth of our savior
Christ. I cannot as yet find the exact years of the later princes of this
realm, and therefore I am constrained to omit them altogether, as I have done
before in the kings of the Britons, until such time as I may come by such
monuments as may restore the defect.

Westsex. 5.
Cerdijc enters the kingdom of the Westsaxons, in the 519. of the birth of
Christ, and 73. of the abiection of the Roman servitude.

CErdijc alias Cercit. Cenrijc. Ceaulijn. Kilriic alias Celrijc. Kilwulf.
Kinigils. Ceuwalch. Sexburgh.
The seat void.

Centwinus. Cadwallader. Inas. Ethelard. Cuthredus. Sigebert. Kinwulf.
Brithrijc. Ecbert. Ethelwulf. Ethebald. Ethelbert. Ethelfrid. Alfrid. Edward.
1. Adelstane. Edmund. Eadred. Edwijn. Edgar. Edward 2. Eldred. Edmund 2.
Canutus. Harald. Canutus 2. Edward 3. Harald 2.
The saxons having reigned hitherto in this land, and brought the same into a
perfect monarchy, are now dispossessed by the Normans, and put out of their
hold.

Bernicia. 6.
Ida erecteth a kingdom in the North, which he extended from the Humber mouth
to S. John's town in Scotland, and called it of the Northumbers. This was in
the 547. after the birth of our savior Christ.

IDa. Adda. Glappa. Tidwaldus. Fretwulfus. Tidrijc. Athelfrid. Edwijn. Kinfrid.
Oswald. Oswy. Egfrid. Alfrid. Osred. Kindred. Osrijc. Kilwulf. Edbert. Offulse.
Ethelwold. Elred. Ethelred. Alswold. Osred. Ethelred. Osbald. Eardulf.
Aldeswold. Eandred. Edelred. Redwulf. Edelred again. Osbright. Ecbert.
Ricisiuus a Dane. Ecbert again.
Alfride king of the westsaxons subdueth this kingdom in the 878. after our
savior Christ, and 33. after Ida.

Deira. 7.
Ella brother to Adda is over the south Humbers, whose kingdom reched from
Humber to the These, in the 590. after the incarnation of Jesus Christ our
savior.

ELla. Edwijn. Athelbright. Edwijn again, Osrijc. Oswald. Oswijn.
Of all the kingdoms of the Saxons, this of Deira which grew by the division
of the kingdom of the Northumbers between the sons of Ida was of the smallest
continuance, and it was united to the Northumbers (whereof it had been I say in
time past a member) by Oswijn in the 91. after Ella, when he had most
traitorouslie slain his brother Oswijn in the year of the world, 4618. (or
651. after the coming of Christ) and contained that country which we now call
the bishoprike.

Estanglia. 8.
Offa or Vffa erecteth a kingdom over the Estangles or Offlings in the 561.
after the nativity of Christ, and 114. after the delivery of Britain.

OFfa. Titellius. Redwaldus. Corpenwaldus. The seat void. Sigebert. Egricus.
Anna. Adeler. Ethelwold. Adwulf. Beorne. Ethelred. Ethelbert.
Offa of Mercia kills Ethelbert, and unites Estanglia unto his own
kingdom, in the 793. of Christ, after it had continued in the posterity of
Offa, by the space of 228. years and yet of that short space, it enjoyed only
35. in liberty, the rest being under the tribute of the king of Mercia
aforesaid.

Mercia. 9.
Creodda begins his kingdom of Mercia, in the 585. of our savior Christ,
and 138. after the captivity of Briteine ended.

CReodda. Wibba. Cherlus. Penda. Oswy. Weada. Wulferus. Ethelred. Kindred or
Kindred. The seat void. Kilred. Ethebald. Beorred. Offa. Egferth. Kinwulf.
Kenelme. Kilwulf. Bernulf. Ludicane. Willaf. Ecbert. Willaf again. Bertulf.
Butred. Kilwulf.
Alfride unites the kingdom of Mercia, to that of the westsaxons, in the 291.
after Creodda, before Alfred the Dane had gotten hold thereof, and placed one
Clcolulphus therein, but he was soon expelled, and the kingdom joined to the
other before rehearsed.

The succession of the kings of England from William bastard, unto the first of
Queen ELIZABETH.
WIlliam the first. William his son. Henry 1. Stephen. Henry 2. Richard 1.
John. Henry 3. Edward 1. alias 4. Edward 2. Edward 3. Richard 2. Henry 4.
Henry 5. Henry 6. Edward 4. alias 7. Edward 5. Richard 3. Henry 7. Henry 8.
Edward 6. Marie his sister. Elizabeth.
Thus have I brought the Catalog of the Princes of Britain unto an end, and
that in more plain and certain order than has been done hertofore by any.
For though in their regions since the conquest few men have erred that have
used any diligence, yet in the times before the same, fewer have gone any thing
near the truth, through great oversight and negligence. Their several years
also do appear in my Chronology ensuing.

Of the ancient religion used in Albion. Cap. 9.
IT is not to be doubted, but at the first, and so long as the posterity of
Iaphet only reigned in this Island, Samothes.
that the true knowledge and form of religion Samothes, and published with his
laws in the second of his arrival, was exercised among the Britans. And
although peradventure in process of time, either through curiosity, or
negligence (the only corruptors of true piety and godliness) it might a
little decaie, yet when it was at the woorst, it far exceeded the best of
that which afterward came in with Albion and his Chemminites, as may be
gathered by view of the superstitious rites, which Cham and his successors did
plant in other countries, yet to be found in authors.

What other learning Magus the son of Samothes taught after his fathers
death, when he also came to the kingdom, beside this which concerned the true
honoring of God, I cannot easily say, but that it should be natural
philosophy, and astrology (whereby his disciples gathered a kind of
foreknowledge of things to come) the very use of the word Magus (or Magusaeus)
among the Persians does yield no uncertain testimony.

In like manner, Sarron.
it should seem that Sarron son unto the said Magus, diligently followed
the steps of his father, and thereto beside his own practice of teaching,
opened schools of learning in sundry places, both among the Celts and
Britans, whereby such as were his auditors, grew to be called Sarronides,
notwithstanding, that as well the Sarronides as the Magi, and Druiydes, were
generally called Samothei, or Semnothei, of Samothes Samothei. Semnothei.
still among the Grecians, as Aristotle in his De magia does confess; and
furthermore calling them Galls, he adds thereunto, that they first brought
the knowledge of letters and good learning unto the Greeks.

Druiyus Druiyus.
the son of Sarron (as a scholar of his fathers own teaching) seemed to be
exquisit in all things, that perteined unto the divine and humane knowledge:
and therefore I may safely pronounce, that he excelled not only in the skill
of philosophy and the quadriuials, but also in the true Theology, whereby the
right service of God was kept and preserved in purity. He wrote moreover
sundry precepts and rules of religious doctrine, which among the Celts were
reserved very religiously, and had in great estimation of such as sought unto
them.

How and in what order this prince left the state of religion, Corruptors of
religion.
I mean touching public orders in administration of particular rites and
ceremonies, as yet I do not read: howbeit this is most certain, that after he
died, the purity of his doctrine began somewhat to decaie. For such is man's
nature, that it will not suffer any good thing long to remain as it is left,
but (either by addition or subtraction of this or that, to or from the same) so
to chop and change withal from time to time, that in the end there is nothing
of more difficulty, for such as do come after them, than to find out the
purity of the original, and restore the same again unto the former
perfection.

In the beginning this Druiyus did preach unto his hearers, Caesar.
that the soul of man is immortal, that God is omnipotent, merciful as a
father in showing favor unto the godly, and just as an upright judge in
punishing the wicked; that the secrets of man's heart are not unknown, and
only known to him; and that as the world and all that is therein had their
beginning by him, at his own will, so shall all things likewise have an end,
Strabo. li. 4. Socion. lib. success.
when he shall see his time. He taught them also with more facility, Cicero
diuinat. 1.
how to observe the courses of the heavens and motions of the planets by
arithmeticall industry, to find out the true quantities of the celestial
bodies by geometrical demonstration, and thereto the compass of the earth,
and hidden natures of things contained in the same by philosophical
contemplation. But alas, this integritte continued not long among Ovid says;
Morte carent animae, semperque priore relicta
Sede, nouis domibus viuunt habitantque receptae.)
The second or succedent, being always either more noble, or more vile than
the former, as the party deserved by his merits, whilst he lived here upon
earth. And therefore it is said by Plato and other, that Orpheus after his
death had his soul thrust into the body of a Agamemnon conveyed into an egle,
of Ajax into a lion, of Atlas into a certain wrestler, of Thersites into an
ape, of Deiphobus into Pythagoras, and Empedocles dieng a child, after sundry
changes into a man, whereof he himself says; Ipse ego namque fui puer olim,
deinde puella,
Arbustum and volucris, mutus quoque in aequore piscis.
For said they (of whom Pythagoras also had, Plinius. lib. 16. cap. vltimo.
and taught this error) if the soul apperteined at the first to a king, and
he in this estate did not lead his life worthy his Metempsuchossis.
it should after his decease be shut up in the body of a slave, beggar, cock,
owl, dog, ape, horse, ass, worm, or monster, there to remain as in a place
of purgation and punishment, for a certain period of time. Beside this, it
should peradventure sustain often translation from one body unto another,
according to the quantity and quality of his doings here on earth, till it
should finally be purified, and restored again to an other humane body,
wherein if it behaved it self more orderly than at the first: after the next
death, it Diodorus says, they used to cast certain letters into the fire,
wherein the dead were burned, to be delivered unto their deceased friends,
whereby they might understand of the estate of such as traveled here on earth
in their purgations (as the Moscouits Nicholas to be a speach-man for him that
is buried, in whose hand they bind a letter, and send him with a new pair of
shoes on his feet into the grave) and to the end that after their next death
they should deal with them accordingly, and as their merits required. They
brought in also the worshipping of many gods, and their several sacrifices:
they honored likewise the oak, Oak honored whereon mistle did grow, and so do
our sorcerers even to this day thinking some spirits to deal about ye same,
for hidden treasure,
whereon the mistle grows, and daily devised infinite other toies (for error
is never assured of her own doings) whereof neither Samothes, Sarron, Magus,
nor Druiyus did leave them any prescription.

These things are partly touched by Cicero, Strabo, Pliny, Sotion, Laertius,
Theophrast, Aristotle, and partly also by Caesar, Mela, Val. Max. lib. 2. and
other authors of later time, who for the most part do confess, that the
chief school of the Druiydes was holden here in Britain, where that religion
(says Pliny) was so hotly professed and followed, Vt dedisse Persis videri
possit, lib. 30. cap. 1. and whither the Druiydes also themselves, that dwelt
among the Galls, would often resort to come by the more skill, and sure
understanding of the mysteries of that doctrine. And as the Galls received
their religion from the Britons, so we likewise had from them some use of
Logike and Rhetorike, Logike and Rhetorike out of Gallia.
such as it was which our lawiers practiced in their plees and common causes.
For although the Greeks were not unknown unto us, nor we to them, even from
the very coming of Brute, yet by reason of distance between our countries,
we had no great familiarity and common access one unto another, till the time
of Gurguntius, after whose entrance many of that nation traveled hither in
more security, as diverse of our countriemen did unto them without all danger,
to be offered up in sacrifice to their gods. That we had the manner of our plees
also out of France, Iuuenal is a witness, who says; Gallia causidicos docuit
facunda Britannos. Howbeit as they taught us Logike and Rhetorike, so we had
also some Sophistry from them; but in the worst sense: for from France is all
kind of forgerie, corruption of manners, and crafty behavior not so soon as
often transported into England. And albeit the Druiydes were thus honored and
of so great authority in Britain, yet were there great numbers of them also
in the Isles of Wight, Anglesey, and the Orchades, in which they held open
schools of their profession, aloof as it were from the resort of people,
wherein they studied and learned their songs by heart. Howbeit the chief
college of all I say, remained still in Albion, whither the Druiydes of other
nations also (beside the Galls) would of custom repair, when soever any
controversy among them in matters of religion did happen to be moved. At such
times also the rest were called out of the former Islands, whereby it appears
that in such cases they had their synods and public meetings, and thereunto it
grew finally into custom, and after that a proverb, even in variances
falling out among the princes, great men, and common sorts of people living in
these weast parts of Europe, to yield to be tried by Britain and her three
Islands, because they honored her preests (the Druiydes) as the Atheniens did
their Areopagites.

Furthermore, Estimation of the Druiydes or Druiysh preests.
in Britain, and among the Galls, and to say the truth, generally in all
places where the Druiysh religion was frequented, such was the estimation of
the preests of this profession, that there was little or nothing done without
their skillful advise, no not in civil causes, perteining to the regiment of
the commonwealth and country. They had the charge also of all sacrifices,
public and private, they interpreted oracles, preached of religion, and were
never without great numbers of young men that heard them with diligence, as
they taught from time to time.

Touching their persons also, they were exempt from all temporal services,
Immunitie of the clergy greater under idolatry than under the gospel.
impositions, tributes, and exercises of the wars: which immunitie caused the
greater companies of scholars to flock unto them from all places, and to
learn their trades. Of these likewise, some remained with them seven, eight,
ten, or twelve years, still learning the secrets of those unwritten mysteries
by heart, which were to be had amongst them, and commonly pronounced in verse.
And this policy, as I take it, they used only to preserve their religion
from contempt, whereinto it might easily have fallen, if any books thereof had
happened into the hands of the common sort. It helped also not a little in the
exercise of their memories, whereunto books are utter enemies, insomuch as he
that was skillful in the Druiysh religion, would not let readily to rehearse
many hundreds of verses together, and not to fail in one tittle, in the whole
process of this his laborious repetition. But as they dealt in this order for
matters of their religion, so in civil affairs, historical treatises, and
setting down of laws, they used like order and letters almost with the
Grecians. Whereby it is easy to be seen, that they retained this kind of
writing from Druiyus (the original founder of their religion) and that this
Island has not been void of letters and learned men, even since it was first
inhabited. I would ad some thing in particular also of their apparel, but since
the dealing withal is nothing profitable to the reader, I pass it over,
signifieng nevertheless, that it was distinguished by sundry dauises from
that of the common sort, and of such estimation among the people, that
whosoever ware the Druiysh weed, might walk where he would without any harm
or annoiance. This honor was given also unto the preests in Rome, insomuch
that when Volusius Triumuirate, and saw himself in such danger, as that he
could not escape the hardest, he gat the weed of a priest upon his back, and
begged his alms therein, even in the high ways as he traveled, and so
escaped the danger and the fury of his adversaries: but to proceed with other
things.

After the death of Druiyus, Bardus.
Bardus his son, and fifth king of the Celts, succeeded not only over the
said kingdom, but also in his fathers virtues, whereby it is very likely,
that the winding and wrapping up of the Genesis 4. 21.
as was also the harp and pipe, which Iubal invented, and could never be
performed without great skill in music. But to proceed, as the chief
estimation of the Druiydes remained in the end among the Britons Bardes (which
were so called of this Bardus for their excellent skill in music, poetry,
and the heroical kind of song, which at the first contained only the high
mysteries and secret points of their religion. There was little difference also
between them and the Druiydes, The Bards degenerate.
till they so far degenerated from their first institution, that they became
to be minstrels at feasts, droonken meetings, and abominable sacrifices of the
idols: where they sang most commonly no divinity Bardes, are not yet
extinguished among the Britons of Wales, where they call their poets and
Musicians Barthes, as they do also in Ireland: which Sulpitius also writing to
Lucane remembers, where he says that the word Bardus is mere Celtike, and
signifies a singer. Howbeit the Romans judging all nations beside themselves
to be but rude and barbarous, Bardes, entered so far into the contemptuous
mockage of their melody, that they ascribed the word Bardus unto their fools
and idiots, whereas contrariwise the Scythians and such as dwell within the
northweast part of Europe, did use the same word in very honorable manner,
calling their best poets and heroical singers, Singebardos; their courageous
singers and capiteins that delited in music, Albardos, Dagobardos,
Rodtbardos, and one lame musician Lambard Quizqueia or new Spain, an Island of
the Indies, they call such men Boitios, their rimes Arcitos, and in steed of
harps they sing unto timbrels made of shells such sonnets and ditties as either
perteine unto religion, profane love, commendation of ancestrie, and
inflammation of the mind unto Mars, whereby there appears to be small
difference between their Boitios and our Bardes. Finally of our sort, Lucane
in his first book writes thus, among other like saiengs well toward the
latter end; Vos quoque qui fortes animas, Lucan. li. 1.
belloque peremptas
Laudibus in longum vates dimit titis auum,
Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi,
Et vos barbaricos ritus, moremque sinistrum
Sacrorum Druiydae, positis recepistis ab armis.
Solis nosse Deos, and coeli numina vobis,
Aut solis nescire datum: nemora alta remotis
Incolitis lucis. Vobis authoribus, vmbrae
Non tacitas Erebi seeds, Ditisque profundi
Pallida regna petunt, regit idem spiritus artus
Orb alio Longae canitis si cognita, vitae
Morsmedia est, certe populi, quos despicit arctos,
Foelices errore suo, quos ille timorum
Maximus haud vrget leti metus: inde ruendi
In ferrum men's prona viris, animaeque capaces
Mortis: and ignauum est rediturae parcere vitae.


Thus we see as in a glass the state of religion, for a time, after the first
inhabitation of this Island: but how long it continued in such soundnese, as the
original authors left it, in good sooth I cannot say, yet this is most
certain, that after a time, when Albion arrived here, the religion erst
embraced fell into great decaie. For whereas Iaphet and Samothes with their
children taught nothing else than such doctrine as they had learned of Noah:
Cham the great grandfather of this our Albion, and his disciples utterly
renouncing to follow their steps, gave their minds wholly to seduce and lead
their hearers headlong unto all error. Whereby his posterity not only
corrupted this our Island, with most filthy trades and practices; but also all
mankind, generally where they became, with vicious life, and most ungodly
conversation. What doctrine Cham and his disciples taught.
For from Cham and his successors proceeded at the first all sorcerie,
witchcraft, and the execution of unlawful lust, without respect of sex, age,
consanguinitie, or kind: as branches from an odious and abominable root, or
streams derived from a most filthy and horrible stinking puddle. Howbeit, and
notwithstanding all these his manifold lewdnesses, such was the folly of his
Egyptians (where he first reigned and taught) that whilst he lived they alone
had him in great estimation (whereas other nations contemned and abhorred him
for his wickedness, calling him Chemesenua, Chemesenua. Chem Min. Cham made a
god.
that is, the impudent, infamous and wicked Cham) and not only builded a
city unto him which they called Chem Min, but also after his death reputed him
for a god, calling the highest of the seven planets after his name, as they did
the next beneath it after Osyris his son, whom they likewise honored under
the name of Jupiter.

Certes it was a custom begone in Egypt of old time, Translation of mortal
men into heaven how it began.
and generally in use almost in every place in process of time (when any of
their famous worthy princes died) to ascribe some form or other of the stars
unto his person, to the end his name might never wear out of memory. And this
they called their translation in heaven, so that he which had any stars or
form of stars dedicated unto him, was properly said to have a seat among
the gods. A toie much like to the catalog of Romish saints, (although the one
was written in the celestial or immateriall orbs, the other in sheeps skins,
and very brickle paper) but yet so esteemed, that every prince would often
hazard and attempt the uttermost adventures, thereby to win such fame in his
life, that after his death he might by merit have such place in heaven, among
the shining stars. Howbeit, every of those that were called gods, could not
obtain that benefit, for then should there not have been stars enough in heaven
to have served all their turns, wherefore another place was in time imagined,
Cyril. aduersus Iul. lib. 6. sect. 8.
where they reigned that were of a second calling, as the Semones who were gods
by grace and favor of the people. Semones dici voluerunt (says Fulgentius In
vocibus antiquis) quos coelo nec dignos ascriberent, ob meriti paupertatem;
sicut Priapus Hyppo. Vortumnus, etc. nec terrenos eos deputare vellent per
gratiae venerationem, as also a third place that is to say an earth, where
those gods dwelled which were noble men, officers, good governors and
lawgiuers to the people, and yet not thought worthy to be of the second or
first company, which was a iollie division.

Thus we see in general manner, how idolatry, honoring of the stars, and
brood of inferior gods were hatched at the first, which follies in process of
time came also into Britain, as did the names of Saturn and Jupiter, etc: as
shall appear hereafter. And here since I have already somewhat digressed from
my matter, I will go yet a little farther, and show forth the original
Saturn, Jupiter, Hercules, etc: whereby your Honor shall see a little more
into the errors of the Gentiles, and not only that, but one point also of the
root of all the confusion that is to be found among the ancient histories.
Which were properly called, Saturni, Jove's, Iunones, and Hercules.
Certes it was used for a few years after the partition of the earth (which
was made by Noah, in the 133. year after the flood) that the beginners of such
kingdoms as were then erected should be called Saturni, whereby it came to
pass that Nimbrote was the Saturn of Babylon: Cham of Egypt: and so forth
other of sundry other countries. Their eldest sons also that succeeded them,
were called Jove's; and their nephews or sons sons, which reigned in the
third place Hercules, by which means it followed that every kingdom had a
Saturn, Jupiter and Hercules of her own, and not from any other.

In like sort they had such another order among their daughters, whom they
married as yet commonly unto their brethren (God himself permitting the same
unto them for a time) as before the flood, to the end the earth Saturn was
called Rhea, but of Jupiter, Juno, Isis, or Io. Isis, Io, and Juno all one.
Beyond these also there was no latter Harold that would endeavor to derive the
petigree of any prince, or potentate, but supposed his duty to be
sufficiently performed, when he had brought it orderly unto some Saturn or
other, whereat he might cease, and shut up all his travel. They had likewise
this opinion grounded amongst them, that heaven and earth Saturn and Rhea, not
knowing out of doubt, what they themselves did mean, Coelum or Coelus.
since these denominations, Heaven, Ogyges, Ogyges.
the Sun, Sol.
Pater Pater deorum.
Deorum, and such like, were only ascribed unto Noah: as Tydea.
Terra, Terra.
(the Earth) Vesta, Vesta.
Aretia, Aretia.
the Moon, Luna.
Matter deorum, Deorum matter.
and other the like were unto Tydea his wife. So that hereby we see, how
Saturn is reputed in every nation for their oldest god, or first prince,
Jupiter for the next, and Hercules for the third. And therefore since these names
were dispersed in the beginning over all, Cham did bring over into Britain.
For until their coming, it is not likely that any gross idolatry or
superstition did enter in among us, as deifieng of mortal men, honoring of the
stars, and erection of huge images, beside sorcerie, Chemminites are
worthily called the autors. Neither were these errors any thing amended, From
whence Brute did learn his religion.
by the coming in of Brute, who no doubt added such devises unto the same, as
he and his company had learned before in Graecia, from whence also he brought
Helenus the son of Priamus, (a man of exceeding age) and made him his priest
and bishop thorough out the new conquest, that he had achieved in Britain.

After Brute, idolatry and superstition still increased more and more among
us, insomuch that beside the Druiysh and Bardike ceremonies, and those also
that came in with Albion and Brute himself: our countriemen either brought
hither from abroad, or daily invented at home new religion and rites, whereby
it came to pass that in the stead of the only and immortal God (of whom
Samothes and his posterity did preach in times past) Dis or Samothes made a
god.
now they honored the said Samothes himself under the name of Dis and Saturn:
also Jupiter, Mars, Minerua, Mercury, Apollo, Diana; and finally Hercules,
unto whom they dedicated the gates and porches of their temples, entrances
into their regions, cities, towns and houses, with their limits and bounds (as
the papists did the gates of their cities and ports unto Botulph and Giles)
because fortitude and wisdom are the chief vpholders and bearers up of
commonwealths and kingdoms, both which they ascribed to Hercules (forgetting
God) and diverse other idols whose names I now remember not. Mela.
In lieu moreover of sheep and oxen, Diodorus.
they offered mankind also unto some of them, Strab. 4.
killing their offenders, Plin.
prisoners, and often such strangers as came from far unto them, Caesar. 5.
by shutting up great numbers of them together in huge images made of wicker,
reed, haie, or other light matter: and then setting all on fire together, they
not only consumed the miserable creatures of ashes (sometimes adding other
beasts unto them) but also reputed it to be the most acceptable sacrifice that
could be made unto their idols. From whence they had this horrible custom,
truly I cannot tell, but that it was common to most nations, not only to
consume their strangers, captives, etc; but also their own children with fire,
in such manner of sacrifice: beside the text of the Bible, the profane
histories do generally leave it evident, as a thing either of custom or of
particular necessity, of which later Virgil says; Sanguine placastis ventos
and virgin caesa, etc. As Silius does of the first, where he tells of the
usual manner of the Carthaginenses, saying after this manner; Vrna reducebat
miserandos annua casus, etc. But to proceed with our own gods and idols, more
pertinent to my purpose than the rehersall of foreign demeanours: I find that
huge temples in like sort were builded unto them, so that in the time of
Lucius, when the light of salvation began strongly to shine in Britain,
thorough the preaching of the gospel, the christians discovered 25. Ptol.
Lucensis.
Flamines or idol-churches, beside three Archflamines, whose preests were then
as our Archbishops are now, in that they had superior charge of all the rest,
the other being reputed as inferiors, and subject to their jurisdiction in
cases of religion, and superstitious ceremonies.

Of the quantities of their idols I speak not, Monstrous proportions of idols.
since it is enough to say, that they were monstrous, and that each nation
contended which should honor the greater blocks, and yet all pretending to
have the just height of the god or goddess whom they did represent. Apollo
Capitolinus that stood at Rome, was thirty cubits high at the least;
Tarentinus Jupiter of 40.; the idol of the son in the Rhodes, of 70. (whose
toe few men could fadam;) Tuscanus Apollo that stood in the library of the
temple of Augustus, of 50. foot; another made under Nero of 110. foot; but one
in France passed all, which Zenoduris made unto Mercury at Aruernum in ten
years space, of 400. foot Whereby it appears, that as they were void of
moderation in number of gods, so without measure were they also in their
proportions, and happy was he which might have the greatest idol, and lay
most cost thereon.

Hitherto ye have heard of the time, Theodoret. Sophronius.
wherein idolatry reigned and blinded the hearts of such as dwelled in this
Island. Now let us see the success of the gospel, after the death and passion
of Jesus Christ our savior. And even here would I begin with an allegation of
Theodoret, whereupon some repose great assurance (conceiving yet more hope
therein by the words of Sophronius) that Paul the Apostle should preach the
word of salvation here, after his delivery out of captivity, which fell as I
do read in the 57. of Christ. But since I cannot verify the same by the words
of Theodoret, to be spoken more of Paul than Peter, or the rest, I will pass
over this conjecture (so far as it is grounded upon Theodoret) and deal with
other authorities, whereof we have more certeintie. First of all therefore let
us see what Fortunatus has written of Paul's coming into Britain, and
afterward what is to be found of other by-writers in other points of more
assurance. Certes for the presence of Paul I read thus much: Quid sacer ille
simul Paulus tuba gentibus ampla,
Per mare per terras Christi praeconia fundens,
Europam and Asiam, Lybiam, sale dogmata complens,
Arctos, meridies, hic plenus vesper and ortus,
Transit and Oceanum, vel qua facit insula portum,
Quasque Britannus habet terras atque vltima Thule, etc.


That one Josephus preached here in England, in the time of the Apostles, his
sepulcher yet in Aualon, now called Glessenburg or Glastenburie, Josephus.
an epitaph affixed thereunto is proof sufficient. Howbeit, since these Nero,
at which time Philip and diverse of the godly being in France (whether he came
with other christians, after they had sowed the word of God in Scythia, by the
space of 9. years) severed themselves in sunder, to make the better shift for
their own safeguard, and yet not otherwise than Philip. Freculphus To. 2. lib.
2. cap. 4. Nennius. Nicephorus lib. 2. cap. 40.
that the said Philip upon good deliberation did send Josephus over, and with
him Simon Zelotes to preach unto the Britons, and minister the sacraments there
according to the rites of the churches of Asia and Greece, from whence they
came not long before unto the country of the Galls. Which was says
Malmesburie 103. before Faganus and Dinaw did set forth the gospel amongst
them. Isidorus lib. de vita and obit. dict. patrum. W. Malmes. de antiq.
Glasconici monast.
Of the coming of Zelotes you may read more in the second Niceph. Call. where
he writes thereof in this manner: Operae pretium etiam fuerit Simonem Cana
Galileae ortum, qui propter flagrantem in magistrum suum ardorem, summamque
euangelicae rei per omnia curam Zelotes cognominatus est hic refer, accepit
enim is coelitus adueniente spiritu sancto, Aegyptium Cyrenem and Africam,
deinde Mauritaniam and Lybiam omnem euangelium depraedicans percurrit,
eandemque doctrinam etiam ad occidentalem Oceanum insulasque Britannicas
perfert. And this is the effect in a little room, of that which I have read at
large in sundry writers, beside Claudia Rufina the wife of Pudens to be one,
Claudia Rufina a British lady.
who was a British lady indeed, and not only excellently seen in the
Greek and Latin toongs, but also S. Paul, as one having had conversation and
conference with them at Rome, 2. Tim. 4.
from whence he did write his second epistle unto Timothy, as I read. Of this
lady moreover Martial speaks, in reioising that his poesies were read also
in Britain, and only by her means, who used to cull out the finest and
honestest of his epigrams and send them to her friends for tokens, saying after
this manner, as himself does set it down: Dicitur and nostros cantare
Britannia versus. Furthermore making mention of her and her issue, he adds
these words: Claudia coeruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis
Edita, cur Latiae pectora plebis habet? Li. 11. Epig. 54.

Quale decus formae? Romanam credere matres
Italides possunt, Atthides esse suam.
Dij been, quod sancto peperit faecunda marito,
Quot sperat, generos, quotque puella nurus.
Sic placeat superis, vt coniuge gaudeat vno,
Et semper natis gaudeat illa tribus.
The names of her three children were Pudentiana, Praxedes, both virgins, and
Nouatus, who after the death of Pudens their father (which befell him in
Cappadocia) dwelled with their mother in Vmbria, where they ceased not from
time to time to minister unto the saints. But to leave this impertinent
discourse, and proceed with my purpose.

I find in the Chronicles of Burton (under the year of Grace 141. and time of
Hadrian the emperor) that nine scholars or clerks of Grantha or Granta (now
Cambridge) were baptized in Britain, and became preachers of the gospel
there, but whether Taurinus bishop or elder over the congregation at York (who
as Vincentius says, was executed about this tune for his faith) were one of
them or not, Lib. 10. cap. 17. Taurinus.
as yet I do not certeinlie find; but rather the contrary, which is that he
was no Britain at all, but Episcopus Ebroicensis, for which such as perceive
not the easy corruption of the word, may soon write Eboracensis, as
certeinlie mine author out of whom I allege this authority has done before
me. For Vincentius says flat otherwise, and therefore the Chronology if it
speak of any Taurinus bishop of York is to be reformed in that behalf.
Diverse other also embraced the religion of Christ very zealouslie before these
men. Howbeit, all this notwithstanding, the glad tidings of the gospel had
never free and open passage here, until the time of Lucius, in which the very
enemies of the word became the apparent means (contrary to their own minds)
to have it set forth amongst us. For when Antoninus the emperor had given out
a decree, that the Druiysh religion should every where be abolished, Lucius
the king (whose surname is now perished) took advise of his council what was
best to be done, and wrote in this behalf. And this did Lucius, because he
knew it This is contrary to the common talk of our Atheists who say, Let us
live here in wealth, credit and authority upon earth, and let God take heaven
and his religion to himself to do withal what he lists.
impossible for man to live long without any religion at all: finally finding
his Nobility and subjects utter enemies to the Roman devotion (for that they
made so many gods as they listed, and some to have the regiment even of their
dirt and dung) and thereunto being pricked forwards by such christians as were
conversant about him, to choose the service of the true God that lives for
ever, rather than the slavish servitude of any pagan idol: he fully resolved
with himself in the end, to receive and embrace the gospel of Christ. He sent
also two of his best learned and greatest philosophers to Rome, unto Eleutherus
then bishop there in the 177. of Christ, Lucius opens his ears to good
counsel, as one desirous to serve God and not prefer the world.
not to promise any subjection to his sea, which then was not required, but to
say with such as were pricked in mind, Acts. 2. verse. 37. Quid faciemus viri
fratres? I mean that they were sent to be perfectly instructed, and with
farther commission, to make earnest request unto him and the congregation
there, that a competent number of preachers might be sent over from thence, by
whose diligent advise and travel, the foundation of the gospel might surely
be laid over all the portion of the I Will, which contained his kingdom,
according to his mind.

When Eleutherus understood these things, The purpose of Lucius opened unto the
congregation at Rome by Eleutherus.
he reioiced not a little for the great goodness, which the Lord had showed
upon this our I Will and country. Afterward calling the brethren together, they
agreed to ordeine, even those two for bishops, whom Lucius as you have heard,
had directed over unto them. Finally after they had thoroughlie catechized
them, making general prayer unto God and earnest supplication for the good
success of these men, they sent them home again with no small charge, that
they should be diligent in their function, and careful over the flock
committed to their custody.

The first of these was called Eluanus Aualonius, a man borne in the I Will of
Aualon, and brought up there under those godly pastors and their disciples,
whom Philip sent over at the first for the conversion of the Britons. The other
hight Medguinus, and was thereto surnamed Belga, because he was of the town of
Wells, which then was called Belga. This man was trained up also in one
school with Eluanus, both of them being ornaments to their horie ages, and men
of such Eleutherus supposed none more worthy to support this charge, than
they: after whose coming home also, it was not long yer Lucius and all his
household with diverse of the Nobility were baptized, A zealous prince makes
fervent subjects.
beside infinite numbers of the common people, which daily resorted unto them,
and voluntarily renounced all their idolatry and paganism.

In the mean time, Eleutherus understanding the success of these learned
doctors, and supposing with himself, that they two only could not suffice to
support Faganus, Faganus.
Dinaw (or Dinauus) Dinauus.
Aaron, Aaron.
and diverse other godly preachers, as fellow laborers to travel with them
in the vineyard of the Lord. These men therefore after their coming hither,
Radulphus de la noir alias Niger.
consulted with the other, and forthwith wholly consented to make a division
of this Island amongst themselves, appointing what parcel each preacher should
take, 3. Chief Bishops in Britain.
that with the more profit and eass of the people, and somewhat Theonus.
Theodosius London. York. Caerlheon.
where they placed Theonus as chief elder and bishop, for that present time,
worthily called Theonus. 1. for there was another of that name who fled into
Wales with Thadiocus of York, at the first coming of the Saxons; and also
Guthelmus, who went (as I read) into Armorica, there to crave aid against the
Scots and Uandals that plagued this Theonus also Eluanus succeeded, who
converted many of the Druiydes, and builded the first library near unto the
bishops palace. The said Lucius also placed another at York, whither they
appointed Theodosius: and the third at Caerlheon upon the river Uske, builded
sometimes by Belinus, and called Glamorgantia, but now Chester (in which three
cities there had before time been three Archflamines erected unto Apollo,
Mars, and Minerua, but now raced to the ground, and Lucius) to the end that the
countries round about might have indifferent access unto those places, and
therewithal understand for certeintie, whither to resort for resolution, if
after their conversion they should happen to doubt of any thing. In like sort
also the rest of the idoll-temples standing in other places were either
overthrown, or converted into churches for christian congregations to assemble
in, as our writers do remember. In the report whereof give me leave gentle
reader, of Lucius builded at London stood at Westminster, or in Cornehill. For
there is some cause, why the metropolitan church should be thought to stand
where S. Peter's now does, by the space of 400. and years before it was removed
to Canturburie by Austine the monk, if a man should lean to one side without
any conference of the asseuerations of the other. But herin (as I take it)
there lurketh some scruple, for beside that S. Peter's church stood in the east
end of the city, and that of Apollo in the west, the word Cornehill (a
denomination given of late to speak of to one street) may easily be mistaken
for Thorney. For as the word Thorney proceeds from the Saxons, who called the
west end of the city by that name, where Westminster now stands, because of
the wildness and bushinesse of the soil; so I do not read of any street in
London called Cornehill before the conquest of the Normans. Wherefore I hold
with them, which make Westminster to be the place where Lucius builded his
church upon the ruins of that Flamine 264. years, as Malmesburie says,
before the coming of the Saxons, and 411. before the arrival of Augustine.
Read also his appendix in lib. 4. Pontif. where he notes the time of the
Saxons, in the 449. of Grace, and of Augustine in the 596. of Christ; which is
a manifest account, though some copies have 499. for the one, but not without
manifest corruption and error.

Thus became Britain the first province that generally received the faith,
Britain the first province that received the Gospel generally.
and where the gospel was freely preached without inhibition of her prince.
Howbeit, although that Lucius and his princes and great numbers of his people
embraced the word with greediness, yet was not the success thereof either so
universal, that all men believed at the first; the security so great, as that
no persecution was to be feared from the Roman empire after his decease; or
the proceeding of the king so severe, as that he enforced any man by public
authority to forsake and relinquish his paganism: but only this freedom
was enioied, that who so would become a christian in his time, might without
fear of his laws profess the Gospel, in whose testimony, if need had
been, I doubt not to affirm, but that he would have shed also his blood, as
did his niece Emerita, Emerita niece unto Lucius.
who being constant above the common sort of women, refused not after his
decease by fire, to yield her self to death, as a sweet smelling sacrifice in
the nostrels of the Lord, beyond the sea in France.

The faith of Christ being thus planted in this Island in the 177. Lucius
sends again to Rome.
after Christ, and Faganus and Dinaw with the rest sent over from Rome, in the
178. as you have heard: it came to pass in the third year of the Gospel
received, that Lucius did send again to Eleutherus the bishop, requiring that
he might have some brief epitome of the order of discipline then used in the
church. For he well considered, that as it avails little to plant a costly
vineyard, except it afterward be cherished, kept in good order, and such things
as annoie, daily removed from the same: so after baptism and entrance into
religion, it profits little to bear the name of christians, except we do
walk in the spirit, and have such things as offend apparentlie, corrected by
severe discipline. To. 8. ver. 1
For otherwise it will come to pass, that the weeds of vice, and vicious
living, will so quickly abound in us, that they will in the end choke up the
good seed sown in our minds, and either enforce us to return unto our former
wickedness with deeper security than before, or else to become mere
Atheists, which is a great deal worse.

For this cause therefore did Lucius send to Rome, the second time, for a copy
of such politic orders as were then used there, in their regiment of the
church. But Eleutherus considering with himself, The wisdom of Eleutherus.
how that all nations are not of like condition, and therefore those
constitutions that are beneficial to one, may now and then be prejudicial to
another: and seeing also that beside the word no rites and orders can long
continue, or be so perfect in all points, but that as time serves, they will
require alteration: he thought it best not to lay any more upon the necks of
the new conuerts of Britain as yet, than Christ and his apostles had already
set down unto all men. In returning therefore his messengers, he sent letters
by them unto Lucius and his Nobility, dated in the consulships of Commodus and
Vespronius, wherein he told them that Christ had left sufficient order in the
scriptures for the government of his church already in his word, and not for
that only, but also for the regiment of his whole though most princes cannot
hear (...) that side.
kingdom, if he would submit himself, to yield and follow that rule. The
epistle it self is partly extant, and partly perished, yet such as it is,
and as I have faithfully translated it out of sundry very ancient copies, I
do deliver it here, to the end I will not defraud the reader of any thing
that may turn to the glory of

You require of us the Roman ordinances, Epistle of Eleutherus unto Lucius.
and thereto the statutes of the emperors to be sent over unto you, and which
you desire to practice and put in ure within your realm and kingdom. The
Roman laws and those of emperors we may eft soones reprove, but those of
God can never be found fault withal. You have received of late through Gods
mercy in the realm of Britain the law and faith of Christ, you have with you
both volumes of the scriptures: out of Psalm. 24.
as the royal prophet says; The earth is the Lords and all that is therein,
the compass of the world, and they that dwell therein. Again, Thou have loved
truth and hated iniquity, wherefore God, Psalm. 45.
even thy God has anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy fellows.
And again, according to the saying of the same prophet; Oh God give thy Psalm.
71.
thy justice unto the kings son. The kings sons are the christian people and
flock of the realm, which are under your governance, and live and continue in
peace within your kingdom. Here wa^teth.
* The gospel says; As the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, so
does the king his people. Such as dwell in the kingdom of Britain are yours,
whom if they be divided, you ought to gather into concord and unity, to call
them to the faith and law of Christ, and to his sacred church: to chearish and
maintain, to rule also and Psalm. 55.
* By feeding I understand gluttony; by gluttony, lust; and by lust all
wickedness and Solomon the king; Wisdom enters not into a wicked mind, nor
dwells with a man that is subject unto sin. A king has his name of ruling,
and not of the possession of his realm. You shall be a king whilst you rule
well, but if you do otherwise, the name of a king shall not remain with you,
but you shall utterly forgo^it, which God forbid. The almighty God grant you
so to rule the kingdom of Britain, that you may reign with him for ever,
whose vicar (or vicegerent) you are within your

Hitherto out of the epistle that Eleutherus sent unto Lucius, wherein many
pretty observations are to be collected, if time and place would ^erue to stand
upon them. After these days also the number of such as were ordained to
salvation, increased daily more and more, whereby (as in other places of the
world) the word of God had good success in Britain, in time of peace; and in
heat of persecution, there were no small number of martyrs that suffered for
the same, of which Albane, Albane. Amphiba^^s. Julius. Aaron.
Amphibalus, Julius and Aaron, are reputed to be the chief, because of their
noble parentage, which is a great matter in the sight of worldly men.

There are which affirm our Lucius to renounce his kingdom, and afterward to
become first a bishop, then a preacher of the gospel, and afterward a pope:
but to the end such as hold this opinion may once understand the botome of
their errors, I will set down the matter at large, whereby they shall see (if
they list to look) how far they have been deceived.

I find that Chlorus had issue by his second wife, Chlorus had three sons, and
a daughter by Helena.
two sons, Dalmatius (who had a son called also Dalmatius and slain by the
soldiers) Constantius father to Gallus, and Julian the apostata; besides four
other whose names as yet I find not. But being at the first matched with
Helena, and before she was put from him by the royal power of Dioclesian, he
had by her three sons (beside one daughter named Emerita) of which the name
of the first is perished, the second was called Lucius, and the third
Constantine, that afterward was emperor of Rome, by election of the armies in
Britain. Now it happened that Lucius, whom the French call Lucion, by mean^s
of a quarrel grown between him and his elder brother, did kill his said
brother, either by a sraie or by some other means, whereupon his father exiled
him out of Britain, and appointed him from thencefoorth to remain in Aquitane
in France. This Lucion brought thus into worldly sorrow, had now good leisure
to meditate upon heaven, who before in his prosperity had peradventure never
regard of hell. Finally he fell so far into the consideration of his estate,
Lucion becomes a christian.
that at the last he renounced his paganism, and first became a christian,
then an elder, and last of all a bishop in the church of Christ. He erected
also a place of prayer wherein to serve the living God, Lucion a bishop.
which after sundry alterations came in process of time to be an Abbaie, and
is still called even to our time after Lucion or Lucius: the first founder
thereof, and the original beginner of any such house in those parts.

In this also he and diverse other of his friends continued their times, in
great contemplation and prayer, and from hence were translated as occasion
served, unto sundry ecclesiastical promotions in the time of Constant. his
brother. So that even by this short narration it is now easy to see, that
Lucius the king, and Lucius or Lucion the son of Chlorus, were (...) persons.
Hereunto Hermannus Hermannus
Schedelius* Schedelius.
adds also how he went into Rhetia with Emerita his sister, and near unto
the city Augusta converted the Curienfes unto the faith of Christ, Bruschius
cap. 3.
and there likewise (being put to death in Castro Martis) lies buried in the
sail town, where his feast is holden upon the third day of December, as may
readily be confirmed, whereas the bones of our Lucius were to be seen at
Gloucester. That Schedelius erreth not herein also, the ancient m^nunients of
the said Abbaie, whereof he was the original beginner, as I said, do yield
sufficient testimony, beside an hymn made in his commendation, entitled
Gaude Lucionum, etc. Festum Lucionis. John Bouchet.
But for more of this you may resort unto Bouchet in his first book, and fifth
chapter of the Annals of Aquitane, who nevertheless makes the king of Britain
grandfather to this Lucion. The said Schedelius furthermore sets down, that
his sister was martyred in Trinecastell, near unto the place where the said
Lucion dwelled, Emerita martyred in Rh^^ia.
whereby it appears in like sort, that she was not sister to Lucius king of
Britain, of which prince Alexander Neccham in his most excellent treatise De
sapientia diuina, sets down this Distichon: Prima Britannorum fidei lux
Lucius esse
Fortur, qui rexit moenie Brute tua.


Neither could Lucion or Lucius be fellow and of kindred unto Paul the apostle,
as Auentine infers, except he mean it of some other Lucius, as of one whom
he names Cyrinensis. But then will not the history agree with the conversion
of the Rhetians and Vindelicians, whereof Schedelius and other do make
mention. But as each river the farther it runs from the head, the more it is
increased by small riuelets, and corrupted with filthy puddels, and stinking
gutters, that descend into the same: so the purity of the gospel, Heresy and
monastical life brought into Britain at one time by Pelagius.
preached here in Britain, in process of time became first of all to be
corrupted with a new order of religion, and most execrable heresy, both of
them being brought in at once by Pelagius, of Wales, who having traveled
through France, Italy, Egypt, Syria, and the easterlie Bangor.
Wales, upon the river Dee, but also sowed the pestiferous feed of his
heretical prauities over all this Island, whereby he seduced great numbers of
Britons, teaching

Thus we see how new devises or orders of religion and heresy came in
together. I could show also what Comets, and strange signs appeared in
Britain, Pelagius, at the entrance of any new kind of religion into this I Will
of Britain. But I pass them over, only for that I would not seem in my
tractation of antiquities, to trouble my reader with the rehersall of any new
inconveniences.

To proceed therefore with my purpose, after these, there followed in like sort
sundry other kinds of monastical life, as Anachorites, Anachorites.
Heremits, Heremites.
Cyrilline Cyrillines.
Benedictine Benedictines.
monks, albeit that the heremeticall profession was only allowed of in
Britain, until the coming of Augustine the monk, who brought in the
Benedictine sect, framed after the order of the house which Benedict surnamed
Nursinus did first erect in Monte Cassino, about the 524. of Christ, and was
finally so well liked of all men, that we had few or (as I suppose) no black
monks in England that were not of his order. In process of time how Benedict
Biscop also our countrieman restored the said Benedictine profession Biscop
went often into Italy, and at one time for a special confirmation of his two
monasteries which he had builded at other men's costs unto Paul and Peter upon
the banks of the Were, as Beda does remember. So fast also did these and
other like humane devises prosper after his time, that at their suppression in
England and Wales only, Monks and Heremites only allowed of in Britain.
there were found 440. religious houses at the least, of which 373. might
dispend 200. li. by the year at the least, as appears by the record of their
suppression, which also notes the total sum of their revenues to amount
unto 32000. pounds, their moueables 100000. li. and the number of religious men
contained in the same, to be 10000. which would make a pretty army, where unto
if you add those 45. The number of religious houses in England at their
dissolution.
of late standing in Scotland, you shall soon see what numbers of these dens
of spiritual robbers were maintained here in Britain. What number of saints
also have been hatched in them I could easily remember, and beside those 160.
which Capgraue sets down, and other likewise remembered in the golden Legend,
and Legendarie of Excester, I might bring a rabble out of Scotland able to
furnish up a calendar, though the year were twice as long.

As touching Pelagius the first heretic that ever was bred in this realm
(notably known) and parent of Monachisme, it is certain, that before his
corruption and fall, he was taken for a man of singular learning, deep
judgment, and such a one, as upon whom for his great gifts in teaching and
strictness of life, no small piece of the hope and expectation of the people
did depend. But what is wisdom of the flesh, without the fear and true
knowledge of God? and what is learning except it be handmaid to verity and
sound judgment? Wherefore even of this man, we may see it verified, that one
Roger Bakon pronounced long after of the corruption of his time, Roger Bakon
his saying of the preachers of his time who were the best lawyers and the worst
Divines.
when all things were measured by wit and worldly policy, rather than by the
scriptures or guidance of the spirit; Better it is says he, to hear a rude
and simple idiot preach the truth, without appearance of skill and learned
eloquence, than a profound clearke to set forth error, with great show of
learning, and boast of filed utterance. Gerson in like sort has said fully
as much. These follies of Pelagius were blased abroad about the 400. of Christ,
and from thencefoorth how his number of monks increased on the one side, and
his doctrine on the other, there is almost no reader that is unskillful and
ignorant.

This also is certain, that within the space of 200. years and odd, More
than 2100. monks in the College or Abbaie of Bangor in whose territories the
parish of Ouerto^ stands.
there were many more than 2100. monks gathered together in his house, whose
trades notwithstanding the errors of their founder, (who taught such an
estimation of merits and bodily exercise (as Paul calls it) that thereby he
sought not only to impugn, but also prevent grace, which was in deed the
original occasion of the erection of his house) were yet far better and more
godly than all those religious orders, that were invented of later time,
wherein the professors lived to themselves, their wombs and the licentious
fruition of those parts, that are beneath the belly. For these labored
continually for their own livings, at vacant times from prayer (as did
Serapions monks, Niceph. lib. 11. cap. 34.
which were 10000. over whom he himself was Abbat) and likewise for the
better maintenance of such learned men as were their appointed preachers. Their
lives also were correspondent to their doctrine, so that herein only they
seemed intolerable, in that they had confidence in their deeds, and no warrant
out of the word for their succor and defense, but were such a plant as the
heavenly father had not planted, and therefore no marvel, though afterward
they were raised by the roots.

But as Pelagius and his adherents had a time to infect the church of Christ in
Britain, so the living God has had a season also to purge and cleanse the
same, though not by a full reformation of doctrine, since Germanu^, Lupus,
Palladius, Patricius, Germanus, Lupus, Palladius, Patricius.
and such like leaning for the most part unto the monastical trades, did not
so much condemn the general errors of Pelagius one way, as maintain the
same, or as evil opinions another. For as Patricke seemed to like well of the
honoring of the dead, so Germanus being in Britain repaired an old chapel to
s. Albane, wherein Lupus also prayed, as Palladius vph^ld the strictness of
life, in monastical profession to the uttermost of his power. Se^^^^ Sulpiti^s
in vita Patrick.
Wherefore God wrought this purgation of his house at the first, rather by
taking away the wicked and pompous schoolemaisters of error out of this life:
hoping that by such means, his people would have given ear to the godly that
remained. But in process of time, when this his merciful dealing was
forgotten and our countriemen returned to their former disorders, he brought in
the Saxons, who left no idol vnhonored, no not their filthy Priapus, unto
whom the women builded temples, and made a beastly image ( Cum pene intenso,
and as if he had been circumcised) whom they called Ithypallus, Verpus, and
as Goropius Atvatic. page 26. adds, Ters: calling upon him in manner Pelagius,
it received that of Rome also, Augustine the monk.
brought in by Augustine and his monks, whereby it was to be seen, how they
fell from

This Augustine, Augustine.
after his arrival, converted the Saxons in deed from paganism, but as the
proverb says, bringing them out of Gods blessing into the warm sun, he
also imbued them with no less hurtful Monks of Canturburie plagued.
how often they were spoiled by enemies, their houses burned by casualtie, and
brethren consumed Gotcellius, Houeden, Geruase, and the rest of their own
historiographers. And so sore did the pestilence rage among them in the time of
Celnothus (in whose daics the preests, clerks and monks sang their service
together in the quire, that (of I wot not how many) there remained only
five alive, which was a notable token of the fury and wrath of God conceived
and executed against that malignant generation. It came also to pass at the
last, that men used to pray for help at the said Augustines Athelstane was
one, whom Elnothus the abbat stayed so long in the place, when he came thither
to pray, that his soldiers waiting for his coming, and supposing the monks
to have murdered him, began to give an assault and set fire upon the house.

Whilst these things were thus in hand, in the south part of Albion, the
Meats, Meats.
Picts, Pictes.
and Caledoniens, Caledoniens.
which lie beyond the Scottish sea, received also the faith, by preaching of
such christian elders as adventured thither daily, who traveled not without
great success and increase of perfect godliness in that part of the I Will. Certes
this prosperous attempt passed all men's expectation, for that these nations
were in those days reputed wild, savage, and more unfaithful and crafty than
well-minded people (as the wild Irish are in my time) and such were they (to
say the truth) in deed, as neither the sugared courtesy, nor sharp swords of
the Romans could mollify or restrain from their natural fury, or bring to
any good order. For this cause also in the end, the Roman emperors did
utterly cast them off as an unprofitable, brutish, and untameable nation, and
by an huge wall herafter to be described, separated that rude company from the
more mild and civil portion.

This conversion of the north parts fell out in the sixth year before the
wars that Seuerus had in those quarters, Scotland converted to the faith of
Christ.
and 170. after the death of our savior Jesus Christ. From thenceforth also
the christian religion continued still among them, by the diligent care of
their pastors and bishops (after the use of the churches of the south part of
this Island) till the Roman shepherd sought them out, and found the means to
pull them unto him in like sort with his long staff as he had done our
countriemen, whereby in the end he abolished the rites of the churches of Asia
there also, as Augustine had done already in England: and in steed of the same
did furnish it up with those of his pontifical see, although there was great
contention, and no less bloodshed made amongst them, before it could be
brought to pass, as by the histories of both nations yet extant may be seen.

In the time of Coelestine bishop of Rome, Paladius.
who sa^e in the 423. of Christ, one Paladius a Grecian borne (to whom Cyrill
wrote his dialog De adoratione in spiritu) and sometime disciple to John 24.
The first attempt of the bishop of Rome to bring Scotland under his obedience.
bishop of Jerusalem, came over from Rome into Britain, there to suppress the
Pelagian heresy, which not a little molested the orthodoxes of that Island. And
having done much good in the extinguishing of the aforsaid opinion there, he
went at the last also into Scotland, supposing no less, but after he had
traveled somewhat in confutation of the Pelagians in those parts, he should
easily persuade that crooked nation to admit and receive the rites of the
church of Rome, as he would feign have done beforehand in the south. But as
Fastidius Priscus archbishop of London, Fastidius bishop of London.
and his Suffragans resisted him here; so did the Scottish prelates withstand
him there also in this behalf: howbeit, because of the authority of his
commission, gravity of personage, and the great gift which he had in the vein
of pleasant persuasion (whereby he drew the people after him, as Orpheus did
the stones with his harp, and Hercules such as heard him by his tongue) they
had him not only then in great admiration, but their successors also from
time to time, and even now are contented (and the rather also for that he came
from Rome) to take him for their chief apostle, reckoning from his coming as
from the faith received, Paladius accounted for the apostle of the Scots
which was in the 431. year of Christ, as the truth of their history does
very well confirm.

Thus we see what religion has from time to time been received in this Island,
and how and when the faith of Christ came first into our country. Howbeit as
in process of time it was ouershadowed, and corrupted with the dreams and
fantastical imaginations of man, so it daily waxed worse and worse, till
that it pleased God to restore the preaching of his gospel in our days,
whereby the man of sin is now openly revealed, and the purity of the word
once again brought to light, to the final overthrow of the Romish satan, and
his popish adherents that honor him day and night to the uttermost of their
power, yielding up their hearts as temples for him to dwell in, which rather
ought to be the temples of God and habitations of the Holy Ghost, But such is
their perverse ignorance (notwithstanding that Paul has given warning of him
already 2. These. 2. calling him (as I said) the man of sin, and saying that
he sits as God in the temple of God, showing himself in his challenge of
power, as if he were God, under pretense of zeal unto true religion) that they
will not give ear unto the truth, but rather shut their ears and their eyes
from hearing and reading of the scriptures, because they will not be drawn out
of his snares and bondage.

Of the manifold conuersions and alterations of the estate of the commonwealth
of Britain, since the time of Samothes.
THere is a certain period of kingdoms, of Ioachimus Camerarius, who in his
first book De ostentis entreating Delus, which was never touched with any such
plague before or after the overthrow of the Persians, given unto them by the
Grecians; also of the beard that suddenly grew out of the face of the Pedacien
prophetess, so often as the city was to be touched with any alteration and
change. Nam (says he) descriptas esse diuinitus aetates quibus idem humanarum
rerum status duraret, quibus finitis, praedici prius quam existeret nouationem
in deterius euenturam rerum, quaeque indies minus ac minus numini cordi essent.
Emittuntur igitur cometae diuinitus, and reuocantur dum refers such changes
as happen in commonwealths to a certain divine force that rests hidden in
sundry od numbers, whereof their periods do consist. True it is that God
created all things in number, weight and measure, and that after an
incomprehensible manner unto our frail and humane capacity. Nevertheless, he
appointed not these three to have the rule of his works, wherefore we must not
ascribe these changes to the force of number with Plato, much less then unto
destiny with the Peripatetiks, but unto the divine providence and appointment
of God, which only may be called de stinie as S. Augustine says, for of
other destim^ it is impiety to dream. Aristotle ascribing all events unto
manifest causes precedent, does scoff at Plato and his numbers in his book
of commonwealths, and brings in sundry causes of the alteration of the
state of things, which we may refer unto principals, as injury, oppression,
ambition, treason, rebellion, contempt of religion and Aristotle gesseth at
these things by humane reason as at the first causes, yet we acknowledge other
beyond them, as sin, which being suffered and come to the full, is cut down
by the justice of the high God, the chief cause of all, who foreseeing the
wickedness of such as dwell on earth, does constitute such a revolution of
things in their beginnings, as best stands with the execution of his purpose,
and correction of our errors. The causes therefore that Aristotle does
deliver, Bodinus in his historical method, cap. 6. making a large discourse of
the conuersions of commonwealths, does seem at the first to deny the force
of number, but after a while he maruelleth that no Grecian or Latin Academike,
has hitherto made any discourse of the excellency of such numbers as
apperteine to the estate of empires and kingdoms by exemplification in any one
city or other. Hereby he shows himself upon the sudden to alter his
judgment, so that he sets down certain numbers as fatal; (...)
to wit, six unto women, and seven and nine unto men, which (says he) have
Magnam in tota rerum natura potestatem, meaning as well in commonwealths and
kingdoms from their first erections, as in particular ages of bodies, for
sickness, health, change of habitation, wealth, and loss, etc: and for the
confirmation of the same, he sets down sundry examples of apparent
likelihood, either by multiplication of one by the other, or division of
greater numbers by either of them, or their concurrence one with another,
calling the aforesaid three his critical or judicial numbers, whereby he
brings or rather restores an old kind of arithmancie (fathered on
Pythagoras, yet never invented by him) again into the world. But we
christians, in respecting of causes, have to look unto the original and great
cause of all, and therefore we have not to lean unto these points in any wise
as causes: for we know and confess that all things depend upon his providence,
who humbles and exalts whom it pleases him. Nevertheless, I hope we may
without offense examine how these assertions hold, so long as we use them
rather as Indices than Causas mutationum. And therefore have I attempted to
practice at this present the example of Bodinus, first in the alterations of
our civil estate passed; and secondly, of the like in cases of religion; from
the flood generally, and then after the first coming in of Samothes into our
I Will, thereby somewhat to satisfy my self, and recreate the readers; but still
protesting in the mean season that I utterly deny them to be any causes, or
of themselves to work any effect at all in these things, as Bodinus would
seem to uphold. As for those of other countries, I refer you to Aristotle's
politikes, and the eight of the commonwealth which Plato has left unto us,
thereby to be farther resolved, if you be desirous to look on them. In
beginning therefore with my purpose; First because the flood of Noah was
general, and therefore appertinent unto all, it shall not be amiss to begin
with that, which was in the year 1656. after the creation of Adam, so that if
you divide the same by nine, you shall find the quotient to fall out exactlie
with the 184. revolution of the same number. Secondly, for so much as the
confusion of toongs was the original cause of the dispersion of the people
over the face of the whole earth, it shall not be amiss also to examine the
same. Certes it fell out in the 133. after the flood: if we divide therefore
the said 133. by seven, you shall find the quotient 19. without any ods
remaining. From hence also unto the coming of Samothes into Britain, or
rather his laws given unto the Celts, and with them unto the Britons, in the
second of his arrival in this land, we find by exact supputation 126. years,
which being parted by nine or seven shows such a conclusion as makes much
for this purpose. Doubtless I am the more willing to touch the time of his
laws than his entrance, since alteration of ordinances is the chief and
principal token of change in rule and regiment; although at this present the
circumstances hold not, since he dispossessed none, neither incroched upon any.
From Samothes unto the tyranny of Albion, are 335. years complet, so that he
arrived here in the 335. or 48. septenarie, which also concurreth with the 590.
after the flood. In like sort the regiment of Albion continued but seven
years, and then was the souereingtie of this I Will restored again by Hercules
unto the Celts. The next alteration of our estate openly known, happened by
Brute, between whose time and death of Albion there passed full 601. years
(for he spent much time after his departure out of Grecia, before he came into
Albion) so that if you account him to come hither in the 602. you shall have
86. septenaries exactlie. From Brute to the extinction of his posterity in
Ferrex and Porrex, and pentarchie of Britain, are 630. years, or 70.
nouenaries, than the which where shall a man find a more precise period after
this method or prescription, for many and diverse considerations. The time of
the pentarchie endured likewise 49. years, or seven septenaries, which being
expired Dunwallo brought all the princes under his subjection, and ruled over
them as monarch of this I Will. After the pentarchie ended, we find again that in
the 98. year, Brennus rebelled against Beline his brother, whereupon insued
cruel bloodshed between them. So Brennus was reconciled to his brother, to
the coming of Caesar into this Island (whereat our servitude and miserable
thraldom to the Romans may worthily take his entrance) 48. or 336. years,
than the which concurrences I know not how a man should imagine a more exact.

After the coming of Caesar we have 54. or six nouenaries to Christ, whose
death and passion redoundeth Vortiger in the third years of his reign (which
was the 63. septenarie after Christ) did send for the Saxons, who arrived here
Canutus. But their time lasting not long, the Normans followed in the end of
the 49. year, and thus you see how these numbers do hold exactlie unto the
conquest. The like also we find of the continuance of the Normans or succession
of the Conqueror, which endured but 89. years, being extinguished in Stephen,
and that of the Saxons restored in Henry the second, although it lack one
whole year of ten nouenaries, which is a small thing, since upon diverse John's
days, whereupon insued the resignation of his crowns and dominions to the
pope, are eight septenaries or 56. years. Thence again to the deposition of
Richard. 2. and usurpation of Henry 4. are 77. years or 11. septenaries. From
hence to the conspiracy made against Edward. 2. after which he was deposed
Edward the 4 are 14. years or two septenaries, and last of all to the union of
the said houses in Henry the eight, is an exact quadrat of seven multiplied in
it self, or 49. years, whereof I hope this may in part suffice.

Now as concerning religion, we have from Christ to the faith first preached in
Britain (by Josephus ab Aramathia, and Simon Zelotes) as some write 70. years
or 10. septenaries. Thence also to the baptism of Lucius, and his nobility in
the year after their conversion, 12. nouenaries or 108. years. After these
the Saxons entered and changed the state of religion for the most part into
paganism, in the year 449. 39. nouenarie, and 273. year after Lucius had
been baptized, which is 39. septenaries, if I be not deceived. In the 147. or
21. septenarie, Augustine came, who brought in popery, which increased and
continued till Wicklif with more boldness than any other began to preach the
gospel, which was Anno. 1361. or 765. years after the coming of Augustine,
and yield 85. nouenaries exactlie. From hence again to the expulsion of the
pope 175 years, Henry. 8.
or 25. septenaries, thence to the receiving of the pope and popish doctrine
21. Marie.
years or 3. septenaries, whereunto I would ad the time of restoring the
gospel by Queen Elizabeth, were it not that it wants one full year of 7.
Whereby we may well gather, that if there be any hidden mystery or thing
contained in these numbers, yet the same extends not unto the divine
disposition of things, touching the gift of grace and free mercy unto the
penitent, unto which neither number weight nor measure shall be able to aspire.

Of such Islands as are to be seen upon the coasts of Britain. Cap. 10.
THere are near unto, or not very far from the coasts of Britain many
fair Islands, whereof Ireland with her neighbors (not here handled) seem to be
the chief. But of the rest, some are much larger or less than other, diverse
in like sort environed continually with the salt sea (whereof I purpose only
to entreat, although not a few of them be Islands but at the flood) and other
finally be clipped partly by the fresh and partly by the salt water, or by
the fresh alone, whereof I may speak afterward.

Of these salt Islands (for so I call them that are environed with the Ocean
waves) some are fruitful in wood, corn, wild foul, and pasture ground for
cattle, albeit that many of them be accounted barren, because they are only
replenished with conies, and those of sundry colors (cherished of purpose by
the owners, for their skins or carcases in their provision of household)
without either man or woman otherwise inhabiting in them. Furthermore, the
greatest number of these Islands have towns and parish-churches, within their
several precincts, some mo, some less: and beside all this, are so enriched
with commodities, that they have pleasant havens, fresh springs, great store of
fish, and plenty of cattle, whereby the inhabitants do reap no small
advantage. How many they are in number I cannot as yet determine, because mine
informations are not so fully set down, as the promises of some on the one
side, and mine expectation on the other did extend unto. Howbeit, first of all
that there are certain which lie near together, as it were by heaps and
clusters, I hope none will readily deny. Of these also those called the
Nesiadae, Nesiadae,
Insulae Insulae
Scylurum, Scylurum,
Silcustrae, Silcustrae.
Syllanae, Syllanae.
now the Sorlings, Sorlingae.
and Isles of Silley, Sylley.
lieng beyond Cornwall are one, and confe^eth in number one hundredth forty
and seven (each of them bearing grass) besides shelfes and shallowes. In like
sort the company of the Hebr^des Hebrides.
in old time subject unto Ireland are another, Hebudes.
which are said to be 43. situat upon the west side of this Iand, Meuaniae.
between Ireland and Scotland, and of which there are some that repute
Anglesei, Orchades.
Mona Caesaris, and other lieng between them to be parcel, in their corrupted
judgment. The third cluster or bunch consists of those that are called the
Orchades, and these lie upon the northwest point of Scotland, being 31. alias
28. in number, as for the rest they lie scattered here and there, and yet not
to be untouched as their courses shall come about. There are also the 18.
Shetland Isles, and other yet farther distant from them, of which John Frobuser
I doubt not touched upon some in his voyage to Meta Incognita: but for so much
as I

There have been diverse that have written of purpose, De insulis Britanniae,
as Caesar does confess. The like also may be seen by Plutarch, who names one
Demetrius a Britain, that should set forth an exact treatise of each of them
in order, and among other tell of certain desert Isles beyond Scotland
dedicated to sundry gods and goddesses, but of one especially, where Briareus
should hold Saturn and many other spirits Plutarch De cessatione oraculorum,
etc. But since those books are now perished, and the most of the said Islands
remain utterly unknown, even to our own selves (for who is able in our time
to say where is Glota, Hiuerion, Etta, Iduna, Armia, Aesarea, Barsa, Isiandium,
Icdelis, Xantisma, Indelis, Siata, Ga. Andros or Edros, Siambis, Xanthos,
Ricnea, Menapia, etc? Leland, or am otherwise instructed of by such as are of
credit. Herein also I will touch at large those that are most famous, and
breeflie pass over such as are obscure and unknown, making mine entrance at
the Thames mouth, and directing this imagined course (for I never sailed it) by
the south part of the

In beginning therefore, with such as lie in the mouth of the aforesaid river,
I must needs pass by the How, Hoo.
which is not an Island, and therefore not within the compass of my description
at this time, but almost Peninsulas, and I do english a Byland, using the word
for such as a man may go into drie-footed at the full sea, or on horssebacke at
the low water without any boat or vessel: and such a one almost is Rochford
hundred in Essex also, yet not at this time to be spoken of, because not the
sea only but the fresh water also does in manner enuiron it, and is the chief
occasion wherefore it is called an Island. This How lies between Cliffe (in old
time called Clouesho, to wit, Cliffe in How or in the hundred He that rides
into the hundred of How,
Beside pilfering seamen shall find dirt ynow.


Next unto this we have the Greane, Greane.
wherein is a town of the same denomination, an I Will supposed to be four miles
in length, and two in breadth. Then come we to Shepey, Shepey.
which Ptolomie calls Counos, containing seven miles in length, and three in
breadth, wherein is a castle called Quinborow, and a park, beside four
towns, of which one is named Minster, another Eastchurch, the third Warden,
and the fourth Leyden: the whole soil being thoroughly fed with sheep, very
well woodded, and (as I hear) belongs to the Lord Cheyney, as parcel of his
inheritance. It lies thirteen miles by water from Rochester, but the castle
is fifteen, and by south thereof are two small Islands, Elmesie. Herresie.
whereof the one is called Elmesie, and the more easterlie Hertesie. In this
also is a town called Hertie, or Hearty, and all in the Lath of Scraie,
notwithstanding that Hearty lies in the hundred of Feuersham, and Shepey
reteineth one especial Bailie of her own.

From hence we pass by the Reculuers (or territory belonging in time past to
one Raculphus, who erected an house of religion, or some such thing there) unto
a little Island in the Stoure mouth. Hereupon also the Thanet abutteth, Srureey.
Thanet.
which Ptolomie calls Toliapis, other Athanatos, because serpents are
supposed not to live in the same, howbeit since it is not environed with the
sea, it is not to be dealt withal as an Island in this place, albeit I will not
let to borow of my determination, and describe it as I go, because it is so
fruitful. Beda notes it in times past to have contained 600. families, which
are all one with Hidelands, In Lincolneshire the word Hide or hideland, was
never in use in old time as in other places, but for Hide they used the word
Carucate or ^artware, or Teme, and these were of no less compass than an
Hideland.
Ploughlands, Carrucates, or Temewares. He adds also that it is divided from
our continent, by the river called Wantsume, which is about three furlongs
broad, and to be passed over in two places only. But whereas Polydore says,
the Thanet is nine miles in length and not much less in breadth, it is now
reckoned that it has not much above seven miles from Nordtmuth to Sandwich,
and four in breadth, from the Stoure to Margate, or from the south to the
north, the circuit of the whole being 17. or 18. as Leland also notes. This
Island has no wood growing in it except it be forced, and yet otherwise it is
very fruitful, and beside that it wants few other commodities, Ex Hugone le
blanc Monacho Petrob^^gensi.
the finest chalk is said to be found there. Herein also did Augustine the
moonke first arrive, when he came to convert the Saxons, and afterward in
process of time, sundry religious houses were erected there, as in a soil
much bettered (as the supersticious supposed) by the steps of that holy man,
and such as came over with him. There are at this time 10. parish churches at
the least in the I Will of Thanet, as S. Nicholas, Birchington, S. John's, Wood or
Woodchurch, S. Peter's, S. Laurence, Mownton or Monkeron, Minster, S. Gyles, and
all Saints, whereof M. Lambert has written at large in his description of
Kent, and placed the same in the Lath of saint Augustine and hundred of
Kingslow, as may easily be seen to him that will peruse it.

Sometime Rutupium or (as Beda calls it) Reptacester, Rutupium.
stood also in this Island, but now thorough alteration of the channel of the
Dour, it is shut quite out, and annexed to the maine. It is called in these
days Richborow, and as it should seem builded upon an indifferent soil or
high ground. The large brickes also yet to be seen there, in the ruinous
walls, declare either the Roman or the old British workmanship. But as time
decaieth all things, so Rutupium named Ruptimuth is now become desolate, and
out of the dust thereof Sandwich producted, which stands a full mile from the
place where Reptacester stood. The old writers affirm, how Arthur and Mordred
fought one notable battle here, wherein Gwallon or Gawan was slain; at which
time the said rebel came against his sovereign with 70000. Picts, Scots,
Irish, Norwegiens, etc: and with Ethelbert the first christian king of Kent did
hold his palace in this town, and yet none of his coin has hitherto been
found there, as is daily that of the Romans, whereof many pieces of silver
and gold, so well as of brass, copper, and other metal have often been
showed unto me. It should appear in like sort, that of this place, all the
whole coast of Kent therabout was called Littus Rutupinum, which some do not a
little confirm by these words of Lucane, to be read in his sixth book soon
after the beginning* Aut vaga cum Tethis, Rutupinaque littora fervent,
Vnda Calidonios fallit turbata Britannos.
Or when the wandering seas
and Kentish coasts do work,
And Calidons of British blood, The last verse of one couple and first of an
other.

the troubled waves beguile.


Meaning in like sort by the latter, the coast near Andredeswald, which in
time past was called Littus Calidonium of that wood or forest, as Leland also
confirms. But as it is not my mind to deal any Seolesey of Seles there
taken.
but now in manner a Byland or Peninsula, wherein the chief see of the bishop of
Chichester was holden by the space of three hundred twenty nine years, and
under twenty bishops.

Next unto this, we come unto those that lie between the Wight and the maine
land, of which the most easterlie Thorn.
and to say truth, the very least of all that are to be found in that knot.
Being past the Thorn, we touched upon the Haling, which is bigger than the
Thorn, and wherein one town is situat of the same denomination beside
another, whose name I remember not. Haling.
By west also of the Haling lies the Port (the greatest of the three already
mentioned) and in this stands Portsmouth and Ringsteed, whereof also our
Leland, says thus: Port I Will is cut from the shore by an arm of the maine
haven, which breaks Port.
which is two miles from Portsmouth. Then breaks there out another creek
from the maine sea, about Auant haven, which gulleth up almost to Portbridge,
and thence is the ground disseuered, so that Portsmouth stands in a corner of
this I Will, which Island is in length six miles, and three miles in breadth, very
good for grass and corn, not without some wood, and here and there enclosure.
Beside this, there is also Ptolomie affirms in his Geographicall tables of
all those Islands which enuiron our Albion.

The Wight is called in Latin Vectis, Wight. Guidh.
but in the British speech Guidh, that is to say, Eefe or easy to be seen,
or (as D. Caius says) separate, because that by a breach of the sea, it was
once divided from the maine, as Sicilia was also from Italy, Anglesei from
Wales, Foulness from Essex, and Quinborow from Kent. It lies distant from
the south shore of Britain (where it is fardest off) by five miles and a
half, but where it comes nearest, not passing a thousand paces, and this at
the cut over between Hirst castle and a place called Ptolomie, and such as
follow his assertions in the same. In form, it represents almost an eg, and
so well is it inhabited with mere English at this present, that there are
thirty six towns, villages and castles to be found therein, be side 27.
parish-churches, of which 15. or 16. have their Parsons, the rest either such
poor Uicars or Curats, as the livings left are able to sustain. The names of
the parishes in the Wight are these.

1 Newport, a chap. 2 Cairsbrosie. v. 3 Northwood. 4 Arriun. v. 5 Goddeshill.
v. 6 Whitwell. 7 S. Laurence. p. 8 Nighton. p. 9 Brading. v. 10 Newchurch. v.
11 S. Helene. v. 12 Yauerland. p. 13 Calborne. p. 14 Bonechurch. p. 15
Mottesson. p. P. signifies parsonages, U. vicarages.
16 Yarmouth. p. 17 Thorley. v. 18 Shalflete. v. 19 Whippingham. p. 20 Wootton.
p. 21 Chale. p. 22 Kingston. p. 23 Shorwell. p. 24 Gatrombe. p. 25 Brosie. 26
Brixston. p. 27 Bensted. p.
It belongs for temporal jurisdiction to the county of Hamshire, but in
spiritual cases it yields obedience to the sea of Winchester, whereof it is a
Deanerie. As for the soil of the whole Island, it is very fruitful, for
notwithstanding the shore of it self be very full of rocks and craggie
cliffes, yet there wants no plenty of cattle, corn, pasture, meadow ground,
wild foul, fish, fresh rivers, and pleasant woods, whereby the inhabitants may
live in ease and welfare. It was first ruled by a several king, and afterward
won from the Britons by Vespasian the legate, at such time as he made a voyage
into the west country. In process of time also it was gotten from the Romans
by the kings of Sussex, who held the souereignti^ of the same, and kept the
king thereof under tribute, till it was won also from them, in the time of
Athelwold, the eight king of the said south region, by Ceadwalla, who killed
Aruald that reigned there, and reserved the souereigntie of that I Will to
himself and his successors for evermore. At this time also there were 1200.
families in that Island, whereof the said Ceadwalla gave 300 to Wilfride
sometime bishop of York, exhorting him to erect a church there, and preach the
gospel also to the inhabitants thereof, which he in like manner performed, but
according to the precriptions of the church of Rome, whereunto he yielded
himself vassal and feudarie: so that this I Will by Wilfride was first converted
to the faith, though the last of all other that hearkened unto the word. After
Ceadwalla, Woolfride the parricide was the first Saxon prince that adventured
to fly into the Wight for his safeguard, whither he was driven by Kenwalch of
the Westsaxons, who made great wars upon him, and in the end compelled him to
go into this place for succor, as did also king John, in the rebellious stir
of his Barons, practiced by the clergy: the said Island being as then in
possession of the Forts, as some do write that have handled it of purpose. The
first Earl of this Island that I do read of, was one Baldwijne de Betoun, who
married for his second wife, the daughter of William le Gross Earl of
Awmarle; but he dieng without issue by this lady, she was married the second
time to Earl Maundeuile, and thirdly to William de Fortes, who finished
Skipton castle, which his wives father had begun about the time of king
Richard the first. Hereby it came to pass also, that the Forts were Earls of
Awmarle, Wight, and Devonshire a long time, till the lady Elizabeth Fortes,
sole heir to all those possessions came to age, with whom king Edward the
third so prevailed through money and fair words, that he gat the possession of
the Wight wholly into his hands, and held it to himself and his successors,
until Henry the sixth, about the twentieth of his reign, crowned Henry
Beauchamp son to the lord Richard Earl of Warwike king thereof and of
Iardesey and Gardesey with his own hands, and thereunto gave him a commendation
of the Duchy of Warwike with the titles of Comes comitum Angliae, lord
Spenser of Aburgauenie, and of the castle of Bristow (which castle was
sometime taken from his ancestors by king John) albeit he did not long enjoy
these great honors, since he died 1446. without issue, and seven years after
his father.

After we be past the Wight, we go forward and come unto Poole haven, wherein
is an I Will, called Brunt Keysy, Brunt Keysy.
in which was sometime a parish church, and but a chapel at this present, as I
hear. There are also two other Isles, but as yet I know not their names.

We have (after we are passed by these) another I Will, or rather Byland also upon
the coast named Portland not far from Waymouth or the Gowy, Portland.
a pretty fertile Florus lib. 3. cap. 8. Which feat the Portlands use for the
defense of their Island, and yet otherwise are very covetous. And whereas in
time past they lived only by fishing, now they fall to

Being past this we raise another, also in the mouth of the Gowy, between
Colsford and Lime, of which Iardsey.
I cast about to Iardsey, and Gardesey, Gardesey.
which Isles with their appurtenances apperteined in times past to the Dukes of
Normandy, but now they remain to our Queen, as parcel of Hamshire and
jurisdiction of Winchester, and belonging to her crown, by means of a
composition made between K. John of England and the K. of France, when the
dominions of the said prince began so fast to decrease, as Thomas Sulmo says.

Of these two, Iardsey.
Iardsey is the greatest, an Island having thirty miles in compass, as most
men do conjecture. There are likewise in the same twelve parish-churches, with
a college, which has a Deane and Prebends. It is distant from Gardsey full
21. miles, or therabouts, and made notable, by means of a bloody fact done
there in Queen Mary's days, whereby a woman called Perotine Massy wife unto
an honest minister or priest, being great with child by her husband, was
burned to ashes: through the exceeding Horrible murder.
they threw it unto the carcass of the mother which burned in the fire, whereby
the poor innocent was consumed to ashes, whom that furious element would
gladly have left untouched, Gardsey.
and whereunto it ministered (as you hear) an hurtlesse passage. In this latter
also, there have been in times past, five religious houses, and nine castles,
howbeit in these days there is but one parish church lest standing in the
same. There are also certain other small Islands, which Henry the second in
his donation calls Insulettas, beside very many rocks whereof one called S.
Hilaries S. Hilaries.
(wherein sometime was a monastery) is fast upon Iardsey, another is named the
Cornet, Cornet.
which has a castle not passing an arrow shot from Gardsey. Serke.
The Serke also is between both, which is six miles about, and has another
annexed to it by an Isthmus or Strictland, wherein was a religious house, and
therwithall great store of conies.

There is also the Brehoc, Brehoc.
the Gytho, Gytho.
and the Herme, Herme.
which latter is four miles in compass, and therein was sometime a Canonrie,
that afterward was converted into an house of Franciscanes. There are two other
likewise near unto that of S. Hilarie, of whose names I have no notice. There
is also the rockie I Will of Burhoo, Burhoo, alias the I Will of rats.
but now the I Will of rats, so called of the huge plenty of rats that are found
there, though otherwise it be replenished with infinite store of conies,
between whom and the rats, as I conjecture, the same which we call Turkey
conies, Turkey conies.
are oftentimes produced among those few houses that are to be seen in this
Island. Some are of the opinion that there has been more store of building in
this I Will than is at this present to be seen, and that it became abandoned
through multitudes of rats, but hereof I find no perfect warrantise that I may
safely trust unto, yet in other places I read of the like thing to have
happened, as in Gyara of the Cyclades, where the rats increased so fast that
they drauc away the people. Varro speaks of a town in Spain that was
overthrown by conies. The Abderits were driven out of Thracia by the increase
of mice and frogs; and so many conies were there on a time in the Isles Maiorca
and Minorca (now perteining to Spain) that the people began to starve for want
of bread, and their cattle for lack of grass. And because the Ilanders were
not able to overcome them, Augustus was constreined to send an army of men to
destroy that needless brood. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 55. A town also in France
sometime became desolate only by frogs and todes. Another in Africa by
locustes and also by grasshoppers, as Amicla was by snakes and adders. Causes of
the desolation of sundry cities and towns.
Theophrast tells of an whole country consumed by the palmer-worme, which is
like unto an huge caterpiller. Pliny writes of a province upon the borders of
Aethiopia made void of people by ants and scorpions, and how the citizens of
Megara in Grecia were feign to leave that city through multitudes of bees, as
waspes had almost driven the Ephensians out of Ephesus. But this of all other
(whereof Aelianus entreats) is most wonderful, that when the Cretenses were
chased out of a famous city of their Island by infinite numbers of bees, the
said bees converted their houses into hiues, and made large combs in them
which reached from wall to wall, wherein they reserved their honey. Which
things being duly considered, I do not deny the possibility of the
expulsion of the inhabitants out of the I Will of Burho by rats, although I say
that I do not warrant the effect, because I find it not set down directly in
plain words.

Beside this there is moreover the I Will of Alderney a very pretty plot,
Alderney.
about seven miles in compass, wherein in a priest not long since did find a
coffin of stone, in which lay the body of an huge giant, whose fore teeth were
so big as a man's fist, as Leland does report. Comment.
Certes this to me is no marvel at all, Brit.
since I have read of greater, and mentioned them already in the beginning of
this book. Such a tooth also have they in Spain whereunto they go in
pilgrimage as unto S. Christophers tooth, but it was one of his eye teeth, if
Ludouicus Viues say true, who went thither to offer unto the same. S. August.
de ciuit. lib. 15. cap. 9. writes in like sort, of such another found upon the
coast of Vtica, and thereby gathers that all men in time past were not only
far greater than they be now, but also the giants far exceeding the huge
stature and height of the highest of them all. Iliad. 6.
Homer complains that men in his time were but dwarfes in comparison of such
as lived in the wars of Troy. See his fifth Iliad, where he speaks of
Diomedes, Iliad 5. and 7.
and how he threw a stone at Aeneas, (which 14. men of his time were not able
to stir) and Virgil also notes no less, in his own devise, Virgilius Aen.
12.
but Iuuenall breefelie comprehends all this in his 15. Satya, where he
says: Saxa inclinatis per humum quaesita lacertis
Incipiunt torquere, domestica seditione
Tela, nec hunc lapidem, quali se Turnus, and Ajax,
Et quo Tytides percussit pondere coxam
Aeneae: sed quem valiant emittere dextrae
Illis dissimiles, and nostro tempore nata.
Nam genus hoc viuo iam decrescebat Homero,
Terra malos homines nunc educat, atque pusillos,
Ergo Deus quicunque aspexit, ridet, and odit.


But to return again unto the I Will of Alderney, from whence I have digressed.
Herein also is a pretty town with a parish church, great plenty of corn,
cattle, conies, and wild foul, whereby the inhabitants do reap much gain
and commodity: only wood is their want, which they otherwise supply. The
language also of such as dwell in these Isles, is French; Henry the eight, was
all after the Irish guise. The I Will of Gardsey also was sore spoiled by the
French 1371. and left so desolate, that only one castle remained therein
untouched.

Beyond this, and near unto the coast of England (for these do lie about the
very midst of the British sea) we have one Island called the Bruch or the
Bruchsey, Bruchsey.
lieng about two miles from Poole, whither men

Next to this also are certain rocks, which some take for Isles, as Illeston
rock near unto Peritorie, Horestan I Will a mile from Peritorie by south, Black
rock I Will southeast from Peritorie toward Teygnemouth, and also Chester,
otherwise called Plegimundham: but how (to say truth) or where this latter
lies, I cannot make report as yet, nevertheless since Leland notes them
together, I think it not my part to

From hence the next I Will is called Mount. Island, Mount Island.
otherwise Mowtland, situate over against Lough, about two miles from the
shore, and well near three miles in compass. This Island has no inhabitants,
but only the warrenner and his dog, who looks unto the conies there:
notwithstanding that upon the coast thereof in time of the year, great store
of pilchards is taken, and carried from thence into many places of our
country. It has also a fresh well coming S. Nicholas I Will, S. Nicholas Island.
and midwaie between Falmouth and Dudman (a certain Promontorie is such
another named the Grief, Grief.
wherein is great store of gulles and sea foul. As for Inis Prynin, Inis
Prynin.
it lies within the Baie, about three miles from Lizards, and contains not
above two acres of ground, from which Newltjn is not far distant, and wherein
is a poor fisher-towne and a fair wel-spring, whereof as yet no writer has
made mention. After these (omitting Pendinant in the point of Falmouth haven)
we came at last to saint Michaels mount, S. Michaels mount.
whereof I find this description ready to my hand in Leland.

The compass of the root of the mount of saint Michael is not much more than
half a mile, and of this the south part is pasturable and breeds conies, the
residue high and rockie soil. In the north side thereof also is a garden, with
certain houses and shops for fishermen. Furthermore, the way to the mountain
lies at the north side, and is frequented from half eb to half flood, the
entrance beginning at the foot of the hill, and so ascending by steps and
greeces westward, first; and then eastward to the utter ward of the church.
Within the same ward also is a court strongly walled, wherein on the south
side is a chapel of S. Michaell, and in the east side another of our lady.
Many times a man may come to the hill on foot. On the north northwest side
hereof also, is a Piere for botes and ships, and in the Baie betwixt the mount
and Pensardz are seen at the low water mark, diverse roots and stubs of
trees, beside hewn stone, sometimes of doors and windows, which are
perceived in the inner part of the Baie, and import that there has not only
been building, but also firm ground, whereas the salt water does now rule and
bear the maisterie. Beyond this is an other little I Will, called S. Clements
I Will, of a chapel there dedicated to that saint. S. Clements I Will.
It has a little from it also the I Will called Mowshole, which is not touched in
any Chard. As for Mowshole it self, it is a town of the maine, called in
Cornish Port Enis, that is, Portus insulae, whereof the said I Will takes
denomination, and in tin works near unto the same there has been found of
late, spear heds, battle axes, and swords of copper wrapped up in linen, and
scarcely hurt with rust or other hinderance. Certes the sea has won very
much in this corner of our Island, but chiefly between Mowshole and Pensardz.

Having thus passed over very near all such Isles, as lie upon the south coast
of Britain, and now being come unto the west part of our country, a sudden
Pirie cat^heth hold of us (as it did before, when we went to Iardsey) and
carries us yet more westerlie among the flats of Sylley. Such force does the
southeast wind often show upon poor travelers in those parts, Sylley Isles or
Syl.
as the south and southwest does upon strangers against the British coast,
that are not skillful of our rodes and harborowes. Howbeit such was our
success in this voyage, that we feared no rocks, more than did king
Athelstane, when he subdued them (and soon after builded a college of preests
at S. Burien, in performance of his vow made when he enterprised this voyage
for his safe return) nor any tempest of weather in those parts that could
annoie our passage. Perusing therefore the perils whereinto we were pitifully
plunged, we found the Syllane Islands (places often robbed by the Frenchmen and
Spaniards) to lie distant from the point of Cornwall, about three or four
hours sailing, or twenty English miles, as some men do account it. There are
of these (as I said) to the number of one hundredth forty seven in sight,
whereof each one is greater or less than other, and most of them sometime
inhabited: howbeit, there are twenty of them, which for their greatness and
commodities exceed all the rest. Thereto (if you respect their position) they
are situat in manner of a circle or ring, having an huge lake or portion of the
sea in the midst of them, which is not without peril to such as with small
aduisement enter into the same. Certes it passes my cunning, either to name or
to describe all these one hundredth forty seven, according to their estate;
neither have I had any information of them, more than I have gathered by
Leland, or gotten out of a map of their description, which I had sometime of
Reginald Woolfe: wherefore omitting as it were all the rags, and such as are not
worthy to have any time spent about their particular descriptions, I will
only touch the greatest, and those that lie together (as I said) in manner of
a roundle.

The first and greatest of these therefore, S. Mary's I Will.
called S. Mary's I Will, is about five miles over, or nine miles in compass.
Therein also is a parish church, and a poor town belonging thereto, of
threescore households, beside a castle, plenty of corn, conies, wild swans,
puffens, gulles, cranes, and other kinds of foul, in great abundance. This
fertile Island being thus viewed, we S. Mary's sound unto Agnus I Will, which is
six miles over, Agnus I Will.
and has in like sort one town or parish within the same of five or six
households, beside no small store of hogs and conies of sundry colors, very
profitable to their owners. It is not long since this I Will was left desolate,
for when the inhabitants thereof returned from a feast holden in S. Mary's I Will,
they were all drowned, and not one person left alive. There are also two other
small Islands, between this and the Annot, whereof I find nothing Annot Annot.
for greatness and circuit, so they want both hogs and conies, whereof Annot
has great plenty. There is moreover the Minwisand, Minwisand.
from whence we pass by the Smithy sound Smithy sound.
(leaving three little Islands on the left hand, unto the Suartigan Suartigan.
Island, then to Rousuian, Rousuian.
Rousuiar, Rousuiar.
and the Cregwin, Cregwin.
which seven are (for the most part) replenished with conies only, and wild
garlike, but void of wood and other commodities, saving of a short kind of
grass,

Leaving therefore these desert pieces, we incline a little toward the
northwest, where we stumble or run upon Moncarthat, Moncarthat.
Inis Welseck, Inis Welseck.
and Suethiall. Suethiall.
We came in like sort unto Rat Island, Rat Island.
wherein are so many monstrous rats, that if any horses, or other beasts,
happen to come thither, or be left there by negligence but one night, they are
sure to be devoured and eaten up, without all hope of recovery. There is
moreover the Anwall Anwall.
and the Brier, Brier.
Islands in like sort void of all good furniture, Brier (wherein is a village,
castle, and parish church) brings forth no less store of hogs, and wild
foul, than Rat Island does of rats, whereof I greatly marvel.

By north of the Brier, lies the Rusco, Rusco.
which has a Labell or Byland stretching out toward the southwest, called Inis
widdon. Inis widdo^.
This Rusco is very near so great as that of S. Mary's. It has moreover an
hold, and a parish within it, beside great store of conies and wild foul,
whereof they make much gain in due time of the Round Island, Round Island.
which is about a mile over, then to S. Lides S. Lides.
Island, (wherein is a parish church dedicated to that Saint, beside conies,
wood, and wild foul, of which two later there is some indifferent store) the
Notho, Notho.
the Auing, Auing.
(one of them being situat by south of another, and the Auing half a mile
over, which is a just half less than the Notho) and the Tyan, Tyan.
which later is a great Island, furnished with a parish church, and no small
plenty of conies as I hear. S. Martines.
After the Tyan we come to S. Martines Rusco for greatness, and very well
furnished with conies and fresh springs. Also betwixt this and S. Mary's, are
ten other, smaller, which reach out of the northeast into the southwest, as
Knolworth, Knolworth.
Sniuilliuer, Sniuilliuer.
Menwetham, Menwetha^.
Vollis. 1. Vollis. 1.
Surwihe, Surwihe.
Vollis. 2. Vollis. 2.
Arthurs Arthurs I Will.
Island, Guiniliuer, Guiniliuer.
Nenech Nenech.
and Gothrois, Gothrois.
whose estates are diverse: howbeit as no one of these is to be accounted great
in comparison of the other, so they all yield a short grass meet for sheep
and conies, as do also the rest. In the greater Isles likewise (whose names are
commonly such as those of the towns or churches standing in the same) there
are (as I here) sundry lakes, and those never without great plenty of wild
foul, so that the Isles of Sylley, are supposed to be no less beneficial to
their lords, than any other what soever, within the compass of our I Will, or
near unto our coasts. In some of them also are wild swine. Wild swine in
Sylley.
And as these Isles are supposed to be a notable safeguard to the coast of
Cornwall, so in diverse of them great store of tin is likewise to be found.
There is in like manner such plenty of fish taken among these same, that beside
the feeding of their swine withal, a man shall have more there for a penie,
than in London for ten grotes. Howbeit their chief commodity is made by
Reigh, which they dry, cut in pieces, and carry over into little Britain,
where they exchange it there, for salt, canuas, ready money, or other
merchandise which they do stand in need of. A like trade have some of them
also, with Buckhorne or dried whiting, as I hear. But since the author of this
report did not flatly avouch it, I pass over that fish as not in season of
this time. Thus have we viewed the richest and most wealthy Isles of Sylley,
from whence we must direct our course eastwards, unto the mouth of the Sauerne,
and then go back again unto the west point of Wales, continuing still our
voyage along upon the west coast of Britain, till we come to the Soluey
whereat the kingdoms part, and from which forth on we must touch such Islands
as lie upon the west and north shore, till we be come again unto the Scottish
sea, and to our own dominions.

From the point of Cornwall therefore, or promontorie of Helenus Helenus.
(so called, as some think, because Helenus the son of Priamus Priamus.
who arrived here with Brute lies buried there, except the sea have washed
away his sepulcher) until we come unto the mouth of Sauerne, we have none
Islands at all that I do know or hear of, but one little Byland, Cape or
Peninsula, which is not to be counted of in this place. And yet since I have
spoken of it, you shall understand, that it is called Pendinas, and beside that
the compass thereof is not above a mile, this is to be remembered farther
thereof, how there stands a Pharos or light therein, for ships which sail by
those coasts in the night. There is also at the very point of the said
Pendinas, Pendinas.
a chapel of saint Nicholas, beside the church of saint Ia, an Irish woman
saint. It belonged of late to the Lord Brook, but now (as I guess) the Lord
Mountioy enioieth it. There is also a blockhouse, and a peer in the eastside
thereof, but the peer is sore choked with sand, as is the whole shore
furthermore from S. Ies unto S. Carantokes, insomuch that the greatest part of
this Byland is now covered with sands, which the sea casts up, and this
calamity has endured little above fifty years, as the inhabitants do
affirm.

There are also two rocks near unto Tredwy, and another not far from
Tintagell, all which many of the common sort do repute and take for Isles:
wherefore as one desirous to note all, I think it not best that these should
be omitted: but to proceed. When we be come further, I mean unto the Sauerne
mouth, we meet the two Holmes, of which one is called Stepholme, and the other
Flatholme, of their forms being in deed parcels of ground and low soiles fit
for little else than to bear grass for cattle, whereof they take those
names. For Holme is an old Saxon word, applied to all such places. Of these
also Stepholme lies south of the Flatholme, about four or five miles; the
first also a mile and an half, the other two miles or thereabout in length;
but neither of them a mile and an half in breadth, where they do seem to be
the broadest.

It should seem by some that they are not worthy to be placed among Islands:
yet othersome are of opinion, that they are not altogether so base, as to be
reputed amongst flats or rocks: but whatsoever they be, this is sure, that they
often annoie such passengers and merchants as pass and repasse upon that river.
Neither do I read of any other Isles which lie by east of these, save only the
Barri, Barri.
and Dunwen: the first of which is so called of one Barroc, a religious man (as
Gyraldus says) and is about a flight shot from the shore. Herin also is a
rock standing at the very entrance of the cliffe, which has a little rift or
chine upon the side, whereunto if a man do lay his ear, he shall hear a
noise, as if smithes did work at the forge, sometimes blowing with their
bellows, and sometimes striking and clinking with hammers, whereof many Barri
is a feight shot from the shore.
and no marvel. It is about a mile in compass, situat over against Aberbarry,
and has a chapel in it.

Dunwen is so called of a church (dedicated to a Welsh woman saint, Dunwen.
called Dunwen) that stands there. It lies more than two miles from
Henrosser, right against Neuen, and has within it two fair mils, and great
store of conies. Certes if the sand increase so fast hereafter as it has done
of late about it, it will be united to the maine within a short season. Beyond
Caldee or Inis Pyr. Caldee.
It has a parishchurch with a spire steeple, and a pretty town belonging to
the county of Pembroke, and jurisdiction of one David in Wales. Leland
supposes the ruins that are found therein to have been of an old priorie
sometimes called Lille, which was a cell belonging to the monastery of S.
Dogmael, but of this I can say nothing. The other hight Londy, Londy.
wherein is also a village Schalmey.
Schalmey the greater and the less lie northwest of Milford haven a good way.
They belong both to the crown, but are not inhabited, because they be so often
spoiled with pirates. Schoncold.
Schoncold I Will ioineth unto great Schalmey, and is bigger than it, only a
passage Leland notes them to lie in Milford haven. Beside these also we found
the Bateholme, Stockeholme, Midland, and Gresholme Isles, and then doubling the
Wellock point, we came into a Baie, where we saw saint Brides Island, and
another in the Sound between Ramsey and the point, of all which Isles and such
rocks as are offensive to mariners that pass by them, it may be my hap to
speak more at large hereafter.

Limen (as Ptolomie calls it) is situat over against S. David's in Wales
(whereunto we must needs come, Limen or Ramsey.
after we be past another little one, which some men do call Gresholme) and
lies directly west of Schalmey. In a late map I find this Limen to be called
in English Ramsey: Leland also confirms the same, and I cannot learn more
thereof, than that it is much greater than any of the other last mentioned
(since I described the Holmes) and for temporal jurisdiction a member of
Penbrookeshire, as it is unto S. David's for matters concerning the church.
Leland in his commentaries of England lib. 8. says that it contained three
Ilets, whereof the bishop of S. David's is owner of the greatest, but the
chanter of S. David's claims the second, as the archdeacon of Cairmarden does
the third. And in these is very excellent pasture for sheep and horses, but
not for other horned beasts which lack their upper teeth by nature (whose
substance is converted into the nourishment of their horns) and therefore
cannot bite so low. Next unto this I Will we came to Mawr, Mawr.
an Island in the mouth of Mawr, scant a bow shoot over, and environed at the
low water with fresh, but at the high with salt, and here also is excellent
catching of herings.

After this, proceeding on still with our course, we fetched a compass, going
out of the north toward the west, and then turning again (as the coast of the
country leads) until we sailed full south, leaving the shore still on our
right hand, until we came unto a couple of Isles, which do lie upon the mouth
of the Soch, one of them being distant (as we gessed) a mile from the other,
and neither of them of any greatness almost worthy to be remembered. The
first that we came unto is called Tudfall, and therein is a church, Tudfall.
but without any parishioners, except they be sheep and conies. The quantity
thereof also is not much above six acres of ground, measured by the pole. The
next is Penthlin, Myrach, or Mererosse, Penthlin.
situat in manner betwixt Tudfall or Tuidall and the shore, and herein is very
good pasture for horses, whereof (as I take it) that name is given unto it.
Next unto them, we come unto Gwelyn, Guelyn.
a little I Will which lies southeast of the fall of Daron or Daren, a thing of
small quantity, and yet almost parted in the mids by water, and next of all
unto Bardsey an Island lieng over against Periuincle the southwest point or
promontorie of Northwales (where Merlin Syluestris lies buried) and whither
the rest of the monks of Bangor did fly to save themselves, when 2100. of
their fellows were slain by the Saxon princes in the quarrel of Augustine the
monk, and the city of Caerleon or Chester raced to the ground, and not since
reedified again to any purpose. Ptolomie calls this Island Lymnos, the
Britons Enlhi, and therein also is a parish church, as the report goes. From
hence we cast about, gathering still toward the northest, till we came to Caer
Ierienrhod, a notable rock situat over against the mouth of the Leuenni,
wherein stands a strong hold or fortress, or else some town or village.
Certes we could not well discern whether of both it was, because the wind blew
hard at southwest, the morning was mistie, and our mariners doubting some flats
to be couched not far from thence, hasted away unto Anglesei, whither we went
apace with a ready wind even at our own desire.

This Island (which Tacitus mistaketh no doubt for Mona Caesaris, and so does
Ptolomie as appears by his latitudes) is situat about two miles from the
shore of Northwales. Paulus Iouius gesseth that it was in time past joined to
the continent, or maine of our I Will, Anglesei cut from Wales by working of the
sea.
and only cut off by working of the Ocean, as Sicilia peradventure was from
Italy by the violence of the Leuant or practice of some king that reigned
there. Thereby also (as he says) the inhabitants were constreind at the first
to make a bridge over into the same, till the breach waxed so great, that no
such passage could any longer be maintained. But as these things do either
not touch my purpose at all, or make smallie with the present description of
this I Will: so (in coming to my matter) Anglesei is found to be full so great as
the Wight, Anglesei.
and nothing inferior, but rather surmounting it, as that also which Caesar
calls Mona in fruitfulness of soil by many an hundred fold. In old time it
was reputed and taken for the common granarie to Wales, as Sicilia was to Rome
and Italy for their provision of corn. In like manner the Welshmen themselves
called it the mother of their country, for giving their minds wholly to
pasturage, as the most easy and less chargeable trade, they utterly
neglected tillage, Gyraldus says that the I Will of Anglesei was no less
sufficient to minister grain for the sustentation of all the men of Wales,
than the mountains called Ereri or Snowdoni in Northwales were to yield
plenty of pasture for all the cattle whatsoever within the aforesaid
compass, if they were brought together and left upon the same. It contained
moreover so many towns welneere, as Gyraldus says. Howbeit, as there have
been I say 363. towns in Anglesei, so now a great part of that reckoning is
utterly shroonke, and so far gone to decaie, that the very ruins of them are
uneath to be seen and discerned: and yet it seems to be meetlie well
inhabited. Leland noting the smalnesse of our hundreds in comparison to that
they were in time past, adds (so far as I remember) that there are six of
them in Anglesei, as Menay, and Tindaithin: hereunto Lhoid says also how it
belonged in old time unto the kingdom of Guinhed or Northwales, and that
therein at a town called Aberfraw, being on the southwestside of the I Will, the
kings of Gwinhed held evermore their palaces, whereby it came to pass, that
the kings of Northwales were for a longtime called kings of Aberfraw, as the
Welshmen named the kings of England kings of London, till better instruction
did bring them farther knowledge.

There are in Anglesei many towns and villages, whose names as yet I cannot
orderly atteine unto: wherefore I will content my self with the rehearsal of
so many as we viewed in sailing about the coasts, and otherwise heard report of
by such as I have talked withal. Beginning therefore at the mouth of the Gefni
(which rises at northeast above Gefni or Geuenni, 20. miles at the least into
the land) we passed first by Hundwyn, then by Newborow, Port Hayton,
Beaumarrais, Penmon, Elian, Almwoch, Burric (whereby Cornew, Holihed (standing
in the promontorie) Gwifen, Aberfraw, and Cair Cadwalader, of all which, the
two latter stand as it were in a nuke between the Geuenni water, and the Fraw,
whereupon Aberfraw is situate. Within the Island we heard only of Gefni before
mentioned, of Gristial standing upon the same water, of Tefri, of Lanerchimedh,
Lachtenfarwy and Bodedrin, but of all these the chief is now Beaumarais, which
was builded sometime by king Edward the first, and therewithal a Leland says)
31. parishchurches beside 69. chapels, that is, a hundredth in all. But heerof
I can say little, for lack of just instruction. In time past, the people of
this I Will used not to several their grounds, but now they dig stony hillocks,
and with the stones thereof they make rude walls, much like to those of
Devonshire, since they want hedgebote, fire bote, and house bote, or (to say at
one word) timber, bushes and trees. As for wine, it is so plentiful and good
cheap there most commonly as in London, through the great recourse of
merchants from France, Spain, and Italy unto the aforesaid Island. The flesh
likewise of such cattle as is bred there, whereof we have store yearly
brought unto Cole fair in Essex is most delicate, by reason of their excellent
pasture, and so much was it esteemed by the Romans in time past, that Columella
did not only commend and prefer them before those of Liguria, but the
emperors themselves being near hand also caused their provision to be made
for nete out of Anglesei, to feed upon at their own tables as the most
excellent beef. It takes now the name of Angles and Ei, which is to mean the
I Will of Englishmen, because they wan it in the Conquerors time, under the
leading of Hugh earl of Chester, and Hugh of Shrewesburie. Howbeit they
recovered it again in the time of William Rufus, when they spoiled the city
of Gloucester, ransacked Shrewesburie, and returned home with great booty and
pillage, in which voyage also they were helped greatly by the Irishmen, who
after three years joined with them again, and slew the earl of Shrewesburie
(which then lived) with great cruelty. The Welshmen call it Tiremone and Mon,
and herein likewise is a promontorie or Byland, called Holy head Holy head,
or Cair kiby.
(which has in time past been named Cair kyby, of Kyby a monk that dwelled
there) from whence the readiest passage is commonly had out of Northwales to
get over into Ireland, of which I Will I will not speak at this time, least I
should bereave another of that travel. Yet Pliny says, lib. 4. cap. 16. that
it lies not far off from and over against the Silures, which then dwelled
upon the west coast of our Island, and even so far as Dunbritton, and beyond:
but to our Cair kybi. The Britons named it Enylsnach, or holy I Will, Enilsnach,
holy I Will.
of the number of carcases of holy men, which they affirm to have been
buried there. But herein I marvel not a little, wherein women had offended,
that they might not come thither, or at the least wise return from thence
without some notable reproach or shame unto their bodies. By south also of
Hilarie point, somewhat inclining toward the east, lies Inis Lygod, a small
thing (God wot) and therefore not worthy great remembrance: nevertheless not to
be omitted, though nothing else enforced the memorial thereof, but only the
number and certain fale of such Isles as lie about our Island. I might also
speak of the I Will Mail Ronyad, which lies north west of Anglesei by six
miles; but because the true name hereof, as of many rivers and streams are to
me unknown, I am the more willing to pass them over in silence, least I
should be noted to be farther corrupter of such words as I have no skill to
deliver and exhibit in their kind. And now to conclude with the description of
the whole Island, this I will ad moreover unto her commodities, that as there
are the best milstones of white, red, blew, and green greets, (especially in
Tindaithin) so there is great gains to be gotten by fishing round about this
I Will, if the people there could use the trade: but they want both cunning and
diligence to take that matter in hand. And as for temporal regiment, it
apperteineth to the county of Cairnaruon, so in spiritual cases it belongs
to the bishoprike of Bangor. This is finally to be noted of Anglesei, Ancient
burial.
that sundry earthen pots are often found there of dead men's bones converted
into ashes, set with the mouths downward contrary to the use of other
nations, which turned the brims upwards, whereof let this suffice.

Having thus described Anglesei, it rests to report furthermore, how that in
our circuit about the same, we met with other little Ilets, of which one lies
northwest thereof almost over against Butricke mouth, or the fall of the water,
that passes by Butricke. The Britons called it Ynis Ader, Adar.
that is to say, the I Will of birds in old time, but now it hight Ynis Moil, Moil.
or Ynis Rhomaid, Rhomaid.
that is the I Will of porpasses. It has to name likewise Ysterisd, Ysterisd.
and Adros. Adros.
Being past this, we came to the second lieng by north east, over against the
Hilarie point, Lygod.
called Ynis Ligod, that is to say, the I Will of Mise, and of these two this
latter is the smallest, neither of them both being of any greatness to speak
of. Ynis Seriall Seriall.
or Prestholme, Prestholme
lies over against Penmon, or the point called the head of Mon, where I found
a town (as I told you) of the same denomination. Ptolomie names not this
Island, whereof I marvel. It is parcel of Flintshire, and of the jurisdiction
of S. Asaph, and in fertility of soil, and breed of cattle, nothing
inferior unto Anglesei her mother: although that for Anglesei, is called
Credine, Credine.
and although it lie not properly within the compass of my description, yet I
will not let to touch it by the way, since the causey thither from Denbighland,
is commonly overflowed. It is partly made an Island by the Conwey, and partly
by the sea. But to proceed, when we had viewed this place, we passed forth to
S. Antonies I Will, which is about two or three miles compass Antonie and S.
John, but the people are very poor, because they be so often spoiled by pirates,
although the lord of the same be very wealthy thorough the exchange made with
them of his Hilberie.
or Hilberie, and point of Wyrale, from whence is a common passage into
Ireland, of 18. or 20. hours sailing, if the wether be not tedious. This Island
at the full sea is a quarter of a mile Hilberie, by whose offerings a cell of
monks there, which belonged to Chester, was cherished and maintained.

The next Island upon the coast of England is Man or Mona Caesaris, which some
name Mana or Manim, Ptolomie, Monaoida, as some think, though other ascribe
that name to Anglesei, which the Welshmen do commonly call Mon, as they do
this Manaw, It is supposed to be the first, as Hirtha is the last of the
Hebrides. Hector Boethius notes a difference between them of 300. miles. But
Pliny says that Mona is 200000. miles from Camaldunum, lib. 2. cap. 75. It
lies also under 53. degrees of latitude, and 30. minutes, and has in longitude
16. degrees and 40. minutes, abutting on the north side upon S. Ninians in
Scotland, Furnesfels Anglesei on the south, and Ulsther in Ireland on the west.
It is greater than Anglesei by a third, and there are two rivers in the same,
whose heads do join so near, that they do seem in manner to part the I Will in
twain. Some of the ancient writers, as Ethicus, etc: call it Eubonia, Eubonia.
and other following Orosius, Meuana Meuania.
or Maeuania, howbeit after Beda and the Scottish histories, the Meuaniae are
all those Isles aforesaid called the Hebrides, Eubonides, or Hebudes (whereof
William Malmesburie, lib. 1. de regibus (beside this our Mona) will have
Anglesei also to be one. Wherefore it seems hereby that a number of our late
writers ascribing the said name unto Mona only, have not been a little
deceived. Iornandes lib. de Getis speaks of a second Meuansa; Habet and aliam
Meuaniam (says he) necnon and Orchadas. But which should be prima, as yet I do
not read, except it should be Anglesei; and then says Malmesburie well. In
like sort Propertius speaks of a Meuania, which he called Nebulosa, but he
means it evidently of a little town in Umbria where he was borne, lib. 4.
eleg. De vrbe Romans Wherefore there needs no use of his authority. This in the
mean time is evident out of Orosius, lib, 1. capite 2. that Scots dwelled
sometime in this I Will, as also in Ireland, which Ethicus also affirms of his
own time, and finally confirms that the Scots and Irish were sometime one
people. It has in length 24. miles, and 8. in breadth, and is in manner of like
distance from Galloway in Scotland, Ireland and Cumberland in England, as
Buchanan reports.

In this Island also were some time 1300. families, of which 960. were in the
west half, and the rest in the other. But now through ioining house to house
and land to land (a common plague and canker, which will eat up all, if
provision be not made in time to withstand this mischief) that number is half
diminished, and yet many of the rich inhabiters want room, and wot not how
and where to bestow themselves, to their quiet contentations. Certes this
impediment grows not by reason that men were greater in body, than they have
been in time past, but only for that their insatiable desire of enlarging
their private possessions increases still upon them, and will do more, except
they be restrained: but to return to our purpose. It was once spoiled by the
Scots in the time of king Athelstane, cheeflie by Anlafus in his flight from
the bloody battle, wherein Constantine king of Scotland was overcome:
secondly by the Scots 1388. after it came to the possession of the English,
for in the beginning the kings of Scotland had this Island under their dominion,
almost from their first arrival in this Island, and as Beda says till Edwine
king of the Northumbers wan it from them, and united it to his kingdom. After
the time of Edwine, the Scots gat the possession thereof again, and held it
till the Danes and Norwaies wan it from them, who also kept it (but with much
trouble) almost 370. years under the governance of their viceroies, whom the
kings of Norwaie invested unto that honor, till Alexander the third king of
that name in Scotland recovered it from them, with all the rest of those Isles
that lie upon the west coast, called also Sodorenses in the days of Magnus
king of Norwaie. And since that time the Scottish princes have not ceased to
give laws to such as dwelled there, but also from time to time appointed such
bishops as should exercise ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the same, till it
was won from them by our princes, and so united unto the realm of England.
Finally, Chronica Tinemuthi.
how after sundry sales bargains and contracts of matrimony (for I read that
William Scroope the kings Uicechamberleine, did buy this I Will and crown thereof
of the lord William Montacute earl of Sarum) it came unto the ancestors of
the earls of Darbie, who have been commonly said to be kings of Man, the
discourse following shall more at large declare. Giraldus notes a contention
between the kings of England and Ireland for the right of this Island, but in
the end, when by a compr^mise the trial of the matter was referred to the
lives or deaths of such venomous worms as should be brought into the same, and
it was found that they died not at all, as the like do in Ireland, sentence
passed with the king of England, and so he retained the Island. But howsoever
this matter stands, and whether any such thing was done at all or not, sure
it is that the people of the said I Will were much given to witchcraft and
sorcerie (which they learned of the Scots a nation greatly bent to that
horible practice) in so much that their women would oftentimes sell wind to the
mariners, enclosed under certain knots of thread, with this iniunction, that
they which bought the same, should for a great gale undo many, and for the
less a fewer or smaller number. Tall men in Man.
The stature of the men and also fertility of this Island are much commended,
and for the latter supposed very near to be equal with that of Anglesei, in
all commodities.

There are also these towns therein, as they come now to my remembrance,
Rushen, Dunglasse, Holme town, S. Brids, Bala cury (the bishops house) S.
Mich. S. Andrew, kirk Christ, kirk Louel, S. Mathees, kirk S. Anne, Pala sala,
kirk S. Marie, kirk Concane, kirk Malu, and Home. But of all these Rushen with
the castle is the strongest. Rivers.
It is also in recompense of the common want of wood, endued with sundry
pretty waters, as first of all the Burn rising in the northside of Warehill
botoms, and branching out by southwest of kirk S. An, it seems to cut off a
great part of the eastside thereof, from the residue of that Island. From those
hills also (but of the south half) comes the Holme and Holmey, Pile before
mentioned. They have also the Bala passing by Bala cury, on the westside, and
the Rame on the north, whose fall is named Ramesei haven, as I do read in
Chronicles.

There are moreover sundry great hills therein, as that whereupon S. Mathees
stands, Hills.
in the northeast part of the I Will, a parcel whereof comes flat south,
between kirk Louell, and kirk Marie, yielding out of their botoms the water
Bala, whereof I spoke Ramsei haven, Havens.
by north Laxam haven, by east Port Iris, by southwest Port Home, and Port
Michell, by west. In like sort there are diverse Ilets annexed to the same, as
the Calfe of man on the south, Calfe of man.
the Pile The pile. S. Michels I Will.
on the west, and finally S. Michels I Will in the gulf called Ranoths way in
the east. Moreover the sheep Sheep.
of this country are exceeding Hogs.
In like sort their hogs are in manner monstrous. They have furthermore great
store of barnacles breeding upon their coasts, Barnacles.
but yet not so great store as in Ireland, and those (as there also) of old
ships, ores, masts, pieces of rotten timber as they say, and such putrified
pitched stuff, as by wrecke has happened to corrupt upon that shore. Howbeit
neither the inhabitants of this I Will, nor yet of Ireland can readily say
whether they be fish or flesh, Barnacles neither fish nor flesh.
for although the religious

For my part, I have been very desirous to understand the uttermost of the
breeding of barnacls, and questioned with diverse persons about the same. I have
red also whatsoever is written by foreign authors touching the generation of
that foul, and sought out some places where I have been assured to see great
numbers of them: but in vain. Wherefore I utterly despaired to Lobell and
Pena do give forth in their description of this foul: so that I am now
fully persuaded that it is either the barnacle that is engendered after one
manner in these shells, or some other sea-foule to us as yet unknown. For by the
feathers appearing and form so apparent, it cannot be denied, but that some
bird or other must proceed of this substance, which by falling from the sides
of the ships in long voiages, may come to some perfection. But now it is time
for me to return again unto my former purpose.

There has sometime been, and yet is a bishop of this I Will, Bishop of Man.
who at the first was called Episcopus Sodorensis, when the jurisdiction of all
the Hebrides belonged unto him. Whereas now he that is bishop there, is but a
bishops shadow, for albeit that he bear the name of bishop of Man, yet have
the earls of Darbie, as it is supposed, Patron of Man.
the chief profit of his see (saving that they allow him a little somewhat for
a flourish) notwithstanding that they be his patrons, and have his nomination
unto that living. The first bishop of this I Will was called Wimundus or
Raymundus, and surnamed Monachus Sauinensis, who by reason of his extreme and
tyrannical cruelty toward the Ilanders, had first his sight taken from him,
and then was sent into exile. After him succeeded another moonke in king
Stephens days called John, and after him one Marcus, etc: other after other in
succession, the sea it self being now also subject to the archbishop of York
for spiritual jurisdiction. In time of Henry the second, this Island also had
a king, King of Man.
whose name was Cuthred, unto whom Vinianus the cardinal came as legate 1177.
and wherein Houeden erreth not. In the year also 1228. one Reginald was viceroy
or petie king of Man, afterward murdered by his subjects. Then Olauus, after
him Hosbach the son of Osmond Hacon, 1290. who being slain, Olauus and
Gotredus parted this kingdom of Sodora, in such wise, that this had all the
rest of the Isles, the other only the I Will of Man at the first; but after the
slaughter of Gotredus, Olauus held all, after whom Olauus his son succeeded.
Then Harald son to Olauus, who being entered in May, and drowned upon the
coasts of Ireland, his brother Reginald reigned twenty and seven days, and
then was killed the first of June, whereby Olauus alias Harald son to Gotred
ruled in the I Will one year. Next unto him succeeded Magnus the second son of
Olauus, and last of all Iuarus, who held it so long as the Norwaies were lords
thereof. But being once come into the hands of the Scots, one Godred Mac Mares
was made lieutenant, then Alane, thirdly Maurice Okarefer, and fourthlie one
of the kings chapleines, etc. I would gladly have set down the whole catalog
of all the viceroyes and lieutenants: but since I can neither come by their
names nor successions, I surcesse to speak any more of them, and also of the
I Will it self, whereof this may suffice.

After we have in this wise described the I Will of Man, with her commodities, we
returned eastwards back again unto the point of Ramshed, where we found to
the number of six Ilets of one sort and other, whereof the first greatest and
most southwesterlie, is named the Wauay. It runs out in length, Wauay.
as we gessed, about five miles and more from the southeast into the northwest,
between which and the maine land lie two little ones, whose names are
Oldborrow and Fowlney. The fourth is called the Fouldra, Fouldra.
and being situate southeast of the first, it has a pretty pile or blockhouse
therein, which the inhabitants name the pile of Fouldra. By east thereof in like
sort lie the Fola Fola. Roa.
and the Roa, plots of no great compass, and yet of all these six, the first
and Fouldra are the fairest and most fruitful. From hence we went by
Rauenglasse point, Rauenglasse.
where lies an Island of the same denomination, as Reginald Wolf has noted in
his great card, not yet finished, nor likely to be published. He notes also
two other Ilets, between the same and the maine land; but Leland speaks
nothing of them (to my remembrance) neither any other card, as yet set forth
of

Having so exactlie as to me is possible, set down the names and positions of
such Isles, as are to be found upon the coast of the Queens Majesty's
dominions, Isles in Scotland.
now it rests that we proceed orderly with those that are seen to lie upon
the coast of Scotland, that is to say, in the Irish, the Deucalidonian and the
Germans seas, which I will perform in such order as I may, since I cannot do so
much therein as I would. alias the Orchades and Zelandine, or the Shetlands.
They place the first between Ireland and the Orchades, so that they are
extended from Man and the point of Cantire almost unto the Orchades in the
Deucalidonian sea, and after some are called the Hebrides. In this part the old
writers in deed placed the Hebrides or Hemodes, Hemodes of some called Acmodes,
see Pliny, Mela, Martianus, Capella. Plutarch. de defect. orac.
Hebudes and the Acmodes; albeit the writers vary in their numbers, some
speaking of 30 Hebudes and seven Hemodes; some of five Ebudes, as Solinus, and
such as follow his authority. Howbeit the late Scottish writers do product a
sum of more than 300 of these Islands in all, which sometime belonged to the
Scots, sometime to the Norwegians, and sometime to the Danes. The first of
these is our Manaw, of which I have before entreated: next unto this is Alisa a
desert. I Will, yet replenished Arran, a very hilly and craggie soil, yet very
plentiful of fish all about the coast, and wherein is a very good haven: over
against the mouth whereof lies the Moll, which is also no small defense to
such seafaring men as seek harbor in that part. Then came we by the Fladwa or
Pladwa, no less fruitful and stored with conies than the Bota, Bura, or
Botha, or eight Rosse, and a castle named the Camps. There is also another
called the Marnech, an Island of a mile in length, and half a mile in breadth,
low ground also but yet very fertile. In the mouth likewise of the Glot, lies
the more Cumber and the less, not far in sunder one from another, and both
fruitful enough the one for corn, and the other for Platyceraton. The Auon
another Island lies about a mile from Cantire, and is very commodious to
ships, whereof it is called Auon, that is to say, Portuosa, or full of harbor:
and therefore the Danes had in time past great use of it. Then have we the
Raclind, the Kyntar, the Cray, the Gegaw six miles in length and a mile and a
half in breadth; the Dera full of dear, and not otherwise unfruitful: and
therefore some think that it was called the I Will of dear in old time. Scarba.
Scarba four miles in length, and one in breadth, very little inhabited, and
thereinto the sea between that and the I Will of dear is so swift and violent,
that except it be at certain times, it is not easily nauigable. Being past
these, we come to certain Islands of no great fame, which lie scattered here
and there, as Bellach, Gyrastell, Longaie, both the Fiolas, the three Yarues,
Culbrenin, Duncomell, Lupar, Belnaua, Wikerua, Calfile, Luing, Sele I Will, Sound,
of which the last three are fruitful, and belong to the earl of Argile. Slate
I Will.
Then have we the Slate, so called of the tiles that are made therein. The
Nagsey, Isdalf, and the Sken (which later is also called Thian, of a wicked
herb growing there greatly hurtful, and in color not much unlike the
lilly, saving that it is of a more wan and feeble color) Vderga, kings I Will,
Duffa or black I Will, Kirk I Will, and Triarach. There is also the I Will Ard, Humble
I Will, Green I Will, and Heth I Will, Arbor I Will, Got I Will, Conies I Will alias idle I Will,
Abrid I Will or bird I Will, and Lismor, wherein the bishop of Argill sometime held
his palace, being eight miles in length and two miles in breadth, and not
without some mines also of good metal. There is also the I Will Ouilia, Siuna,
Trect, Shepey, Fladaw, Stone I Will, Gresse, great I Will, Ardis, Musadell, and
Berner, sometime called the holy sanctuary, Vghe I Will, Molochasgyr, and
Drinacha, now ouergrowne with bushes, elders, and utterly spoiled by the
ruins of such great houses as have heretofore been found therein. There is in
like sort the Wijc, the Ranse, and the Caruer.

In this tract also, there are yet three to entreat of, Ila.
as Ila, Mula and Iona, of which the first is one of the most, that has not
been least accounted of. It is not much above 24 miles in length, and in
breadth 16 reaching from the south into the north, and yet it is an exceeding
rich plot of ground very plentious of corn, cattle, dear, and also lead,
and other metals, which were easy to be obtained, if either the people were
industrious, or the soil yeeldable of wood to fine and try out the same. In
this Island also there is a lake of sweet water called the Lay, and also a baie
wherein are sundry Islands; and thereunto another lake of fresh water, wherein
the Falangam I Will is situate, wherein the sovereign of all the Isles sometime
dwelled. Round I Will.
Near unto this is the round I Will, so called of the consultations there had:
for there was a court sometime holden, wherein 14 of the principal inhabitants
did minister justice unto the rest, and had the whole disposition of things
committed unto them, which might rule unto the benefit of those Islands. There
is also the Stoneheape, an other Island so called of the heap of stones that is
therein. On the south side also of Ila, we find moreover the Colurne, Mulmor,
Osrin, Brigidan, Corkerke, Humble I Will, Imersga, Bethy, Texa, Shepeie, Naosig,
Rinard, Cane, Tharscher, Aknor, Great I Will, Man I Will, S. John's I Will, and Stackbed.
On the west side thereof also lies Ouersey, whereby runs a perilous sea,
and not nauigable, but at certain hours, Merchant I Will, Vsabrast, Tanask,
Neff, Waver I Will, Oruans, Hog I Will, and Colauanso.

Mula is a right noble I Will, 24 miles in length and so many in breadth, Mula.
rough of soil, yet fruitful enough: and beside woods, dear, and good
harbrough for ships, replenished with diverse and sundry towns and castles.
Over against Columkill also, it has two rivers, which yield very great store
of salmons, and other riuellets now altogether unfruitful, beside two lakes,
in each of which is an Island: and likewise in every of these Islands a castle.
The sea beating upon this I Will, makes four notable baies wherein great plenty
and very good herrings are taken. It has also in the northwest side
Columbria, or the I Will of doves; on the southeast, Era: both very commodious
for fishing, cattle, and corn. Moreover, this is worth the noting in this
I Will above all the rest, that it has a pleasant spring, arising two miles in
distance from the shore, wherein are certain little eggs found, much like unto
indifferent pearls, both for color and brightness, and thereto full of
thick humor, which eggs being carried by violence of the fresh water unto the
salt, are there within the space of twelve hours converted into great shells,
which I take to be mother pearl; except I be deceived.

Iona was sometime called Columkill, Iona.
in fame and estimation nothing inferior to any of the other, although in
length it exceed little above two miles, and in breadth one. Certes it is very
fruitful of all such commodities, as that climat wherein Columbus the abbat,
of whom I have spoken more at large in my Chronology. There were sometimes
also two monasteries therein, one of moonks builded by Fergus, another of nuns:
and a parish church, beside many chapels builded by the Scottish kings, and
such princes as governed in the Isles. And when the English had once gotten
possession of the I Will of Manaw, a bishops see was erected in the old monastery
of Columbus, whereby the jurisdiction of those Regum tumuli.
Tumuli regum Scotiae, The burials of the kings of Scotland: for (as they say)
forty eight of them were there interred. Another is entitled with these
words, The burials of the kings of Columbus. Howbeit in process of time, when
Malcolme Cammor had erected his abbeie at Donfermeling, he gave occasion to
many of his successors to be interred there.

About this Island there lie six other Isles dispersed, small in quantity, but
not altogether barren, sometimes Columbus, of which the Soa, albeit that it
yield competent pasturage for sheep, yet is it more commodious, by such eggs as
the great plenty of wildfoule there breeding do lay within the same. The I Will
of Shrewes.
Then is there the I Will of Shrewes or of women; as the more sober heads do call
it. Also Rudan, and next unto that, the Rering. There is also the Shen half a
mile from Mula, whose banks do swarm with conies: it has also a parish
church, but Columbus abbeie. Two miles from Arse is the Olue, an Island five
miles in length, and sufficiently stored with corn and grass, and not
without a good haven for ships to lie and harbor in. There is also the Colfans,
an Island fruitful enough, and full of cornell trees. There is not far off also
the Gomater, Stafa, the two Kerneburgs, and the Moss I Will, in the old British
speech called Monad, that is to Moss I Will.
The soil of it is very black, because of the corruption and putrefaction of
such woods as have rotted thereon: whereupon also no small plenty of moss is
bred and ingendered. The people in like manner make their fire of the said
earth, which is fully so good as our English turffe. There is also the Long,
and six miles further toward the west, Tirreie, which is eight miles in length
and three in breadth, and of all other one of the most plentiful for all kinds
of commodities: for it bears corn, cattle, fish, and seafowle abundantly.
It has also a well of fresh water, a castle, and a very good haven for great
vessels to lie at safeguard in. Two miles from this also is the Gun, and the
Coll two miles also from the Gun. Then passed we by the Calfe, a very wooddie
Island, the four green Isles, the two glass or sky Islands, the Ardan, the I Will
of woolfes, and then the great Island which reaches from the east into the
west, is sixteen miles in length, and six in breadth, full of mounteins and
swelling woods: and for as much as it is not much inhabited, the seafoules lay
great plenty of eggs there, whereof such as will, may gather what number them
lists. Upon the high cliffes and rocks also the Soland geefe are taken very
plentifully. Beyond this, about four miles also is the I Will* of horses: and a
little from that the hog Island, which is not altogether unfruitful. There is a
falcon which of custom breeds there, and thereunto it is not without a
convenient haven. Not far off also is the Canna, and the Egga, little Isles,
but the later full of Soland geefe. Likewise the Sobratill, more apt to hunt in
than meet for any other commodity that is to be reaped thereby.

After this we come to the Sky, Sky.
the greatest I Will about all Scotland: for it is two and forty miles long; and
somewhere eight, and in some places twelve miles broad: it is moreover very
hilly, which hills are thereunto laden with great store of wood, as the
woods are with pasture, the fields with corn and cattle; and (besides all
other commodities) with no small herds of mares, whereby they raise great
advantage and commodity. It has five rivers very much abounding with
salmons, and other fresh streams not altogether void of that provision. It is
environed also with many baies, wherein great plenty of herrings is taken in
time of the year. It has also a noble poole of fresh water; five castles and
sundry towns; as Aie, S. John's, Dunwegen, S. Nicholas, etc. The old Scots
called it Skianacha, that is, Winged, but now named Sky. There lie certain
small Islands about this also, as Rausa a batable soil for corn and gras;
Conie Island full of woods and conies; Paba a theeuish Island, in whose woods
thieves do lurk to rob such as pass by them. Scalpe I Will, which is full of
dear; Crowling, wherein is very good harbor for ships; Rarsa, full of
beechen woods and stags, being in length seven miles, and two in breadth. The
Ron, a woodie I Will and full of heath: yet has it a good haven, which has a
little Island called Gerloch on the mouth thereof, and therein lurk many
thieves. There is not far off from this Ron, to wit about six miles also, the
Flad, the Tiulmen, Oransa, Buie the less, and Buie the more, and five other
little trifling Isles, of whose names I have no notice.

After these we come unto the Ise, a pretty fertile Island, to the Oue, to the
Askoome, to the Lindill. And four score miles from the Sky toward the west,
to the Ling, the Gigarmen, the Berner, the Magle, the Pable, the Flab, the
Scarpe, the Sander, the Uateras, which later has a noble haven for great
ships, beside sundry other commodities: and these nine last rehearsed are
under the dominion of the bishop of the Isles. After this we come to the Bar,
Bar.
an Island seven miles in length, not unfruitful for grass and corn, but the
chief commodity thereof lies by taking of herrings, which are there to be
had abundantly. In one baie of this Island there lies an Islet, and therein
stands a strong castle. In the north part hereof also is an hill which
bears good grass from the foot to the top, and out of that rises a spring,
which running to the sea, does carry withal a kind of creature not yet
perfectly formed, which some do liken unto cockels; and upon the shore where
the water falls into the sea, they take up a kind of shelfish, when the water
is gone, which they suppose to be engendered or increased after this manner.
Between the Bar and the Uisse lie also these Islands, Orbaus, Oue, Hakerset,
Warlang, Flad, the two Baies, Haie, Helsaie, Gigaie, Lingaie, Fraie, Fudaie,
and Friskaie. The Uisse is thirty miles long and six miles broad; and therein
are sundry fresh waters, but one especially of three miles in length:
nevertheless, the sea has now of late found a way into it, so that it cannot
be kept off with a bank of three score foot, but now and then it will flow
into the same, and leave seafish behind it in the lake. There is also a fish
bred therein almost

Eight miles beyond this lies the Helscher, appertinent to the nuns of Iona:
we have then the Hasker, very plentifully benefited by seals, which are
there taken in time of the year. Three score miles from this also is the
Hirth, whose inhabitants are rude in all good science and religion; yet is the
Baptism without preests.
sends over his bailiffe into the same at midsummer, to gather in his duties,
and with him a priest to say mass, and to baptize all the children borne
since that time of the year precedent: or if none will go over with him
(because the voyage is dangerous) then does each father take

Being past the Uisse, we came after to Walaie, the Soa, the Strome, to Pabaie,
to Barner, Ensaie, Killiger, the two Sagas, the Hermodraie, Scarf, Grie, Ling,
Gilling, Heie, Hoie, Farlaie, Wild sheep.
which are often hunted, but seldom or never eaten. For in steed of flesh they
have nothing but tallow; and if any flesh be, it is so unsavory, that few men
care to eat of it, except great hunger compel them. I suppose, that these be
the wild sheep which will not be tamed; and because of the horrible grenning
thereof, is taken for Tigers.
and the hair of a goat, resembling both, shacked, and yet absolutely like
unto neither of both: it may be also the same beast which Capitolinus calls
Ouis fera, showed in the time of Gordian the emperor; albeit that some take
the same for the Camelopardalis: but hereof I make no warrantise.

There is also not far off the Garuell, the Lamb, the Flad, the Kellas, the
two Bernars, the Kirt, the two Buies, the Uixaie, the Pabaie, the two Sigrams,
I Will of Pigmeies.
(which is so called upon some probable conjecture) for many little sculs and
bones are daily there found deep in the ground, perfectly, resembling the
bodies of children; and not any of greater quantities, whereby their conjecture
(in their opinion) is the more likely to be true. There is also the Fabill
I Will, Adams I Will, the I Will of Lambs, Hulmes, Uiccoll, Haueraie, Cax, Era,
Columbes I Will, Tor I Will, Iffurd, Scalpe, Flad, and the Swet; on whose east side
is a certain vault or cave, arched over, a flight shoot in length, whereunto
mean ships do use to run for harbor with full sail when a tempest
ouertaketh them, or the raging of the sea, in those parts do put them in danger
of wrecke. Also we passed by the old castle I Will, which is a pretty and, very
commodious plat for fish, foul, eggs, corn and pasture. There is also the
I Will Eust or Eu, which is full of wood, and a notable harbor for thieves, as is
also the Grinort; likewise the preests I Will, which is very full of sea foul
and good pasture. The Afull, the two Herbrerts, to wit, the greater and the
less; and the Isles of Horses, and Mertaika: and these 8 lie over against the
baie which is called the Lake Brian. After this, we go toward the north, and
come to the Haraie, and the Lewis or the Leug, both which make (in truth) but
one Island of three score miles in length, and sixteen in breadth, being
distinguished by no water, but by huge woods, bounds, and limits of the two
owners that do possess those parts. The south part is called Haraie, and the
whole situate in the Deucalidon sea, over against the Rosse, and called Thule
by Tacitus, Lewis called Thule by Tacitus, with no better authority than the
Angleseie Mona.
wherein are many lakes, and very pretty villages, as lake Erwi^n, lake
Unsalsago: but of towns, S. Clements, Stoie, Nois, S. Columbane, Radmach, etc.
In like sort, there are two churches, whereof one is dedicated to saint Peter,
an other to S. Clement, beside a monastery called Roadill. The soil also of
this I Will is indifferent fruitful; but they reap more profit under the ground
than above, by digging. There is neither woolfe, fox, nor serpent seen in this
Island; yet are there great woods therein, which also separate one part from the
other. Likewise there be plenty of stags, but far less in quantity than
ours: and in the north part of the Island also is a river which greatly
abounds with salmons. That part also called Lewisa, which is the north half
of the I Will is well inhabited toward the sea coasts, and has rivers no less
plentiful for salmon than the other half. There is also great store of
herrings taken, whereof the fisher men do raise great gain and commodity;
and no less plenty of sheep, which they do not sheere, but pluck every
year; yet is the ground of this part very heathie, and full of moss, and the
face thereof very swart and black, for the space of a foot in depth, through
the corruption of such woods as in time past have rotted on the same. And
therefore in time of the year they convert it into turffe to burn, as need
shall serve; and in the year after, having well doonged it in the mean time
with slawke of the sea, they sow barleie in the self places where the turffes
grew, and reap very good corn, wherewith they live and feed. Such plenty of
whales also are taken in this coast, Tithe whales.
that the very tithe has been known, in some one year, to amount unto
seven and twenty whales of one greatness and other. This is notable also in
this part of the I Will, that there is a great cave two yards deep of water when
the sea is gone, and not above four when it is at the highest; over which
great numbers do sit of both sexes and ages, with hooks and lines, and catch
at all times an infinite deal of fish, wherewith they live, and which makes
them also the more idle.

Being past this about sixty miles, we come unto the Rona, or Ron, which some
take for the last of the Hebrides, distant (as I said) about forty miles from
the Orchades, and one hundredth and thirty from the promontorie of Dungishe.
The inhabitants of this I Will are very rude and irreligious, the lord also of
the soil does limit their number of households, and having assigned unto them
what numbers of the greater and smaller sorts of cattle they shall spend and
inioie for their own provision, they send the overplus yeerlie unto him to
Lewis. Their chief paiments consist of a great quantity of meal, which is
very plentiful among them, sowed up in sheep skins. Also of mutton and sea
foul dried, that rests over and above, which they themselves do spend. And
if it happen that there be more people in the Island than the lords book or
rate does come unto, then they send also the overplus of them in like manner
unto him: by which means they live always in plenty. They receive no vices
from strange countries, neither know or hear of any things done elsewhere
than in their own Island. Many whales are taken also upon their coasts, which
are likewise replenished with seal, and porpasse, and those which are either
so tame, or so fierce, that they abash not at the sight of such as look

Beyond this I Will, about 16 miles westward, there is another called Suilscraie,
Suilscraie.
of a mile length, void of grass, and without so much as heath growing upon
her soil: yet are there many cliffes and rocks therein, which are covered
with black moss, whereon innumerable sorts of fowls do breed and lay their
eggs. Thither in like sort many do sail from Lewissa, to take them young in
time of the year, before they be Colke foul.
which is little less than a goose; and this kind comes thither but once in
the year, to wit, in the spring, to lay her eggs and bring up her young, till
they be able to shift for themselves, and then they get them away together to
the sea, and come no more until that time of the year which next insueth.

The Orchades (whose first inhabitants were the Scithians, Orchades.
which came from those Isles where the Goths did inhabit, as some sparks yet
remaining Orosius, but Pliny says forty) and now belonging to the crown of
Scotland, as are the rest whereof heretofore I have made report, since we
crossed over the mouth of the Solueie stream, to come into this country.
Certes the people of these Islands retain much of their old Hector) that there
is any drunkard among them, If he speak all in truth.
either frantike, or mad man, dolt, or natural fool, meet to wear a
cockescombe.

This unmeasurable drinking of theirs is confessed also by Buchanan, who
notes, that whenever any wine is brought unto them from other soiles, they
take their parts thereof abundantly. He adds moreover, how they have an old
bole (which they call S. Magnus bole, who first preached Christ unto them) of
far greater quantity than common boles are, and so great, that it may seem
to be reserved since the Lapithane banquet, only to quaffe and drink in. And
when any bishop comes unto them, they offer him this bole full of drink,
which if he be able to drink up quite at one draught; then they assure
themselves of good luck, and plenty after it. Nevertheless this excess is
not often found in the common sort, whom penury makes to be more frugall; but
in their priests, and such as are of the richer calling. They succor pirates
also, and very often exchange their vittels with their commodities, rather for
fear and want of power to resist (their Islands lieng so scattered) than for
any necessity of such gains as they do get by those men: for in truth, they
think themselves to have little need of other furniture than their own soiles
do yield and offer unto them. This is also to be read of the inhabitants of
these Islands, that ignorance of excess is unto the most part of them in steed
of physic; and labor and travel a medicine for such few diseases as they
are molested and incombred withal.

In like sort they want venomous beasts, chiefly such as do delight in
hotter soil, and all kinds of ouglie creatures. Their ewes also are so full of
increase, that some do usually bring forth two, three, or four lambs at
once, whereby they account our anelings (which are such as bring forth but one
at once) rather barren than to be kept for any gain. As for wild and tame
fowls, they have such plenty of them, that the people there account them
rather a burden to their soil, than a benefit to their tables: they have also
neat and gotes, whereby they abound in white meat, as butter and cheese:
wherein, next unto fish, the chief part of their sustenance does consist.
There is also a bishop of the Orchades, who has his see in Pomona the chief
of all the Islands, wherein also are two strong castles, and such has been the
superstition of the people here, that there is almost no one of them, that has
not one church at the least dedicated to the mother of Christ. Finally, there
is little use of physic in these quarters, less store of eeles, and least of
frogs. As for the horses that are bred amongst them, they are commonly not
much greater than asses, and yet to labor and travel, a man shall find very
few elsewhere, able to come near, much less to match with them, in holding
out their iournies. The seas about these Islands are very tempestuous, not
only through strong winds, and the influences of the heavens and stars; but
by the contrary meetings and workings of the west ocean, which rages so
vehemently in the streicts, that no vessel is able to pass in safety
amongst them. Some of these Islands also are so small and low, that all the
commodity which is to be reaped by any of them, is scarcely sufficient to
sustain one or two men: and some of them so barren and full of rocks, that
they are nothing else but moss or bare shingle. Wherefore only thirteen of
them are inhabited and made account of, the rest being left unto their sheep
and cattle. Of all these Islands also Pomona is the greatest, and therefore
called the continent, which contains thirty miles in length, and is well
replenished with people: for it has twelve parish churches, and one town,
which the Danes (sometime lords of that Island) called Cracouia: Kirkwa.
but now it hight Kirkwa. There are also two pretty holds, one belonging to the
king, the other to the bishop: and also a beautiful church, and much building
between the two holds, and about this church, which being taken as it were for
two towns, the one is called the kings and the other the bishops town. All
the whole Island is full of cliffes and promontories, whereby no small number of
baies and some havens are producted.

There is also tin and lead to be found in six of these Isles, so good and
plentifully as any where else in alias Dunachisbie, and that in two hours
space, such is the swiftness of the sea in that tract. Buchanan does
remember. And these are the Isles which lie

Next unto this is the greatest of all the Hethlands, an Island called the
Maine, sixty miles in length, and sixteen in breadth, full of rocks, and whose
coasts are only inhabited, the innermost parts being lest unto the fowls of
the air, because of the barrenness and unfruitfulness of the soil: yet of
late some have endeavored to impeople it, but with no success correspondent to
their desire. Wherefore they returned to their former trades, making their
chief commodity and yearly gain by fish, as aforetime. Ten miles from this
toward the north, lies the Zeal, twenty miles in length, eight in breadth,
and so wild that it will suffer no creature to live thereof, that is not bred
therein. Between this Island also and the Maine, are other smaller Islands to be
found, as the Ling, Orne, Big, and Sanferre. And from hense nine miles
northward Usta, twenty miles long, and six in breadth, plain, pleasant, but
environed with a swift and terrible sea. Between this also and the Zeal, are
the Uie, the Ure, and the Ling: also toward the west, the two Skenes,
Chalseie, Nordwade, Brase, and Mowse, on the west side lie the west Skenes,
Rottia, Papa the less, Wunned, Papa the more, Ualla, Tondra, Burra, Haura the
more, Haura the less, and in manner so many holmes dispersed here and there,
whereof I have no notice. Some call these the Shetland, and some the Shotland
Isles. Buchanan names them in the third member of his division Zelandise, and
toward the end of his first book seems to avouch, that they live in manner as
do the inhabitants of the Orchades: although not in so civil wise, nor in
such large measure and abundance of diet in their houses. He adds moreover,
that their apparel is after the German cut, comely, but not so chargeable
and costly, and how they raise their gain by skins of beasts, as marterns,
sheep, oxen, and gotes skins, and thereunto a kind of cloth which they weaue,
and sell to the merchants of Norwaie, together with their butter, fish, either
salted or dried, and their train oil, and exercise their trade of fishing
also in their uncertain skewes, which they fetch out of Norwaie.

Their speech is Gothish, and such of them as by their dealing with foreign
merchants do gather any wealth, that they will very often bestow upon the
furniture of their houses. Their weights and measures are after the German
manner, their country is very healthie, and so wholesome, that of late a man
was found which had married a wife at one hundred years of age, and was able to
go out a fishing with his bote at one hundred and forty, and of late years
died of mere age, without any other disease. Drunkenness is not heard of
among them, and yet they meet and make good cheer very often. Neither do I
read of any great use of flesh or foul there, although that some of their
Islands have plenty of each. Nor any mention of corn growing in these parts,
and therefore in steed of bread they dry a kind of fish, which they beat in
morters to powder, and bake it in their ouens, until it be hard and dry.
Their fuel also is of such bones as the fish yields, that is taken on their
coasts: and yet they live as themselves suppose in much felicity, thinking it
a great piece of their happiness to be so far distant from the wicked
avarice, and cruel dealings of the more rich and civil part of the world.

Herein also they are like unto the Hirthiens, in that at one time of the
year, there comes a priest unto them out of the Orchades (unto which
jurisdiction they do belong) who baptiseth all such children, as have been
borne among them, since he last arrived, and having afterward remained there
for a two days, he takes his tithes of them (which they provide and pay with
great scrupulositie in fish, for of other commodities pay they none) and then
returns home again, not without boast of his troublesome voyage, except he
watch his time. In these Isles also is great plenty of fine Amber to be had
Amber.
(as Hector says) which is producted by the working of the sea upon those
coasts: but more of this elsewhere. This nevertheless is certain, that these
Islands, with the Orchades, were never perfectly united to the crown of
Scotland, till the marriage was made between king James and the lady Marie
daughter to Christierne king of Denmark 1468; which Christierne at the birth
of their son James (afterward king of Scotland and called James the fourth)
resigned all his right and title whatsoever either he or his ancestors either
presently or hertofore had, might have had, or herafrer may or should have,
unto the aforesaid peers, as appears by the charter.

From these Shetland Isles, and until we come southwards to the Scarre, which
lies in Buquhamnesse, I find no mention of any I Will situat upon that coast,
neither greatly from thence, until we come at the Forth, that leads up to
Sterling, neither

The first Island therefore which comes to our sight, after we passed Berwike,
is that which was sometime called Lindesfarne, but now Holy Island, Lindesfarne
or Holy Island.
and contains eight miles; a place much honored among our monastical
writers, because diverse moonks and heremits did spend their times therein.
There was also the bishops see of Lindesfarne for a long season, which
afterward was translated to Chester in the street, and finally to Duresine,
Dunelme, or Aidanus the learned Scottish moonke, who came hither out of the I Will
called Hij, whereof Beda speaking in the third chapter of his third book,
notes, that although the said Hij belong to the kings of Northumberland, by
reason of situation and neerenesse to the coast; yet the Picts appointed the
bishops of the same, and gave the I Will with the sea it self to such Scottish
moonks as they liked, because that by their preaching they first received the
faith. But to return Aidan departed this life, Finanus finished and builded
the whole church with sawed timber of oak, after the manner of his country,
which when Theodorus the archbishop of Canturburie had dedicated, Edbert the
bishop did cover over with lead.

Next unto this is the I Will of Farne, Farne.
and herein is a place of defense so far as I remember, and so great store of
eggs laid there by diverse kinds of wildfoule in time of the year, that a man
shall hardly run for a wager on the plain ground without the breach of many,
before his race be finished. About Farne also lie certain Isles greater than
Farne it self, but void of inhabitants; and in these also is great store of
puffins, Puffins.
graie as duckes, and without colored feathers, saving that they have a white
ring round about their necks. There is moreover another bird, Saint Cuthberts
fowls.
which the people call saint Cuthberts fowls, a very tame and gentle
creature, and easy to be taken. After this we came to the Cocket Island; so
called, because it lies over against the fall of Cocket water. Herein is a
vein of mean seacole, which the people dig out of the shore at the low water;
and in this Island dwelled one Henry sometime a famous heremite, who (as his
life declares) came of the Danish race. And from thence until we came unto
the coast of Norffolke I saw no more Islands.

Being therefore past S. Edmunds point, we found a little I Will over against the
fall of the water that comes from Holkham, and likewise another over against
the Claie, before we came at Waburne hope: the third also in Yarmouth river
over against Bradwell, a town in low or little England, whereof also I must
needs say somewhat, because it is in manner an Island, and as I guess either
has been or may be one: for the brodest place of the strict land that leads
to the same, is little above a quarter of a mile, which against the raging
waves of the sea can make but small resistance. Little England Little England.
or low England therefore is about eight miles in length and four in breadth,
very well replenished with towns, as Fristan, Burgh castle, Olton, Flixton,
Lestoft, Gunton, Blundston, Corton, Lownd, Ashebie, Hoxton, Belton, Bradwell,
and Gorleston, and beside this it is very fruitful and endued with all
commodities.

Going forward from hence, by the Estonnesse (almost an Island) I saw a small
parcel cut from the maine in Oxford haven, the Langerstone in Orwell mouth,
and two pieces or Islets at Cattiwade bridge; and then casting about unto the
Colne, we beheld Merseie Merseie.
which is a pretty Island, well furnished with wood. It was sometime a great
receptacle for the Danes when they invaded England; howbeit at this present it
has beside two decayed blockehouses, two parish churches, of which one is
called east Merseie, the other west Merseie, and both under the archdeacon of
Colchester, as parcel of his jurisdiction. Foulness is an I Will void of wood,
Foulness.
and yet well replenished with very good grass for neat and sheep, whereof
the inhabitants have great plenty: there is also a parish church, and albeit
that it stand somewhat distant from the shore, yet at a dead low water a man
may (as they say) ride thereto if he be skillful of the causie; it is under
the jurisdiction of London. And at this present master William Tabor bacheler
of divinity and archdeacon of Essex has it under his jurisdiction and
regiment, by the surrender of master John Walker doctor also of divinity, who
lived at such time as I first attempted to commit this book to the impression.

In Maldon water are in like sort three Islands environed all with salt
streams, as saint Osithes, Northeie, Osithe. Northeie.
and another (after a mersh) that bears no name so far as I remember. On the
right hand also as we went toward the sea again, we saw Ramseie I Will, or rather
a Peninsula or Biland, Ramseie.
and likewise the Reie, Reie.
in which is a chapel of saint Peter. And then coasting upon the mouth of the
Bourne, we saw the Wallot I Will and his mates, whereof two lie by east Wallot,
and the fourth is Foulness, except I be deceived, for here my memory fails
me on the one side, and information on the other, I mean concerning the
placing of Foulness. But to proceed. After this, and being entered into the
Thames mouth, I find no Island of any name, except you account Rochford hundred
for one, whereof I have no mind to entreat, more than of Crowland, Mersland,
Elie, and the rest, that are framed by the ouze, Andredeseie in Trent, so
called of a church there dedicated to saint Andrew, and Auon (two noble rivers
hereafter to be described) since I touch only those that are environed with
the sea or salt water round about, as we may see in the Canwaie Canwaie.
Isles, which some call marshes only, and liken them to an ipocras bag, some
to a vice, scrue, or wide sleeue, because they are very small at the east end,
and large at west. The salt rilles also that cross the same do so

The description of the Thames, and such rivers as fall into the same. Cap. 11.
Having (as you have seen) attempted to set down a full discourse of all the
Islands, that are situat upon the coast of Britain, and finding the

Wherefore I beseech your honor to pardon this imperfection and rudeness of
my labor, which notwithstanding is not altogether in vain, since my errors
may prove a spur unto the better skilled, either to correct or enlarge
where occasion serves, or at the leastwise to take in hand a more absolute
piece of work, as better direction shall encourage them thereto. The entrance
and beginning of every thing is the hardest; and he that begins well, has
atchiued half his purpose. The ice (my lord) is broken, and from henceforth
it will be more easy for such as shall come after to wade through with the
rest, since Facile est inuentis addere; and to continue and finish, is not so
great a matter in building, as to attempt and lay the foundation or platform
of any noble piece of workmanship, though it be but rudely handled. But to my
purpose. As I began at the Thames Thamesis.
in my description of Islands, so will I now do the like with that of famous
rivers; making mine entry at the said river it self, of whose founteine some
men make as much adoo, as in time past of the true head of Nilus, which, till
of late (if it be yet descried) was never found: or the Tanais, whose original
was never known, nor shall be: for whilst one places it here, another there;
there are none at all that deal with it exactlie. Wherefore leaning to such
men's writings as have of set purpose sought out the spring of the Thames; I
affirm, that this famous stream has his head or beginning out of the side of
an hill, standing in the plains of Cotswold, about one mile from Tetburie,
near unto the Fosse (an high way so called of old) where it was sometime
named Isis, or the Ouse, although diverse do ignorantly call it the Thames
even there, rather of a foolish custom than any skill, because they either
neglect or utterly are ignorant how it was named at the first. From hence it
runs directly toward the east (as all good rivers should) and meets with
the Cirne or Churne, (a brook called in Latin Corinium) whereof Cirncester
Corinium.
town (by which it comes) does take the denomination.

From hence it hastes unto Creekelade, alias Crekanford, Lechlade,
Radcotebridge, Newbridge, and Eouesham, receiving by the way an infinite sort
of small streams, brooks, beckes, waters, and rundels: and here on this side
of the town divides it self into two courses, of which the one goes
straight to Botleie and Hinkseie, the other by Godstow, a village not far
off. This latter spreads it self also for a while into sundry smaller
branches, which run not far yer they be reunited, and then beclipping sundry
pleasant meadows, it passes at length by Oxford, Charwell.
of some supposed rather to be called Ouseford of this river, where it m^eteth
with the Charwell, and a little from whence the original branches do join and
go together by Abbandune ( alias Sensham or Abington as we call it) although no
part of it at the first came so near the town as it does now, Some write,
that the maine stream was brought thither which ran before between
Andredeseie and Culenham.
till a branch thereof was led thither from the maine stream, thorough the
industry of the moonks, as (beside the testimony of old records thereof yet
extant to be seen) by the decaie of Cair Dour now Dorchester it self,
sometime the throughfare from Wal^s and the west country to London, which
insued upon this fact, is easy to be seen. From hence it goes to Dorchester,
and so to Them, where ioining with a river of the same denomination, it
loses the name of Isis or Ouse (whereof Ousencie at Oxford is producted) and
from thenceforth is called Thamesis. From Them it goes to Wallingford, and so
to Reding, Pontium.
which in time past, of the number of bridges there, was called Pontium; albeit
that the English name does rather proceed from The, or Ree, Saint Marie over
Rhee.
the Saxon word for a watercourse or river, which may be seen in Oueree, or
Sutheree, for over the Ree, or south of the Rhee, as to the skillful does
readily appear; yet some hold (and not altogether against probability and
likelihood) that the word Sutheree is so called of Sudrijc, to wit, the south
kingdom, whereunto in part the Thames is a bound. But that holds not in
denomination, either of the said church or name of the foresaid county. Other
affirm likewise, that Reding is so called of the Greek word ((...)) which is
to over flow. Certes, as neither of these conjectures are to be contemned, so
the last comes most near to mine aid, who affirm, that not only the
course of every water it self, but also his over flowing was in time past
called The, by such Saxons as inhabited in this Island: and even to this Kenet.
which comes from the hills that lie west of Marleborough, and then the
Thetis, Thetis.
commonly called the Tide that comes from Thetisford: it hieth to Sudlington
otherwise called Maiden head, and so to Windleshore (or Windsore) Eaton, and
then to Chertseie, where Erkenwald bishop of London, sometime builded a
religious house or cell, as I do read.

From Chertseie it hastes directly unto Stanes, and receiving an other
stream by the way, called the Cole Cole.
(whereupon Colbrooke stands) it goes by Kingstone, Shene, Sion, and
Brentford or Bregentford, where it meets the Brane or the Brene, another
brook descending from Edgeworth, whose name signifies a frog, in the British
speech. Upon this also sir John Thin had sometime a stately house, with a
marvelous provision to enclose and retain such fish as should come about the
same. Brene.
From Darwent.
whereunto the Craie Craie.
falls. And last of all the Medwaie a notable river (in mine opinion) which
waters all the south and southwest part of Kent, and whose description is not
to be omitted hereafter

Having in this manner breefelie touched this noble river, and such brooks as
fall into the same; I will now add a particular description of each of these
last by themselves, whereby their courses also shall be severally described to
the satisfaction of the studious. But yer I take the same in hand, I will
insert a word or two of the commodities of the said river, which I will
perform with so much brevity as is possible; hereby also finding out his
whole tract and Politian fableth of the Rhene, Epistiloram lib. 8. epi. 6. nor
yields clots of gold as the Tagus does: but an infinite plenty of excellent,
sweet and pleasant fish, wherewith such as inhabit near unto her banks are
fed and fully nourished.

What should I speak of the fat and sweet salmons, Salmons.
daily taken in this stream, and that in such plenty (after the time of the
smelt be past) as no river in Europa is able to exceed it. But what store also
of barbels, trouts, cheuins, pearches, smelts, breames, roches, daces,
gudgings, flounders, shrimps, etc: are commonly to be had therein, I refer me
to them that know by experience better than I, by reason of their daily trade
of fishing in the same. And albeit it seems from time to time, to be as it
were defrauded in sundry wise of these her large commodities, by the
insatiable avarice of the fishermen, yet this famous river complains
commonly of no want, but the more it loses at one time, the more it yields
at another. Only in carps it seems to be scant, Carps a fish late brought
into England and later into the Thames.
since it is not long since that kind of fish was brought over into England, and
but of late to speak of into this stream, by the violent rage of sundry
landflouds, that brake open the heads and dams of diverse gentlemen's ponds, by
which means it became somewhat partaker also of this said commodity, whereof
erst it had no portion that I could ever hear. Oh that this river might be
spared but even one year from nets, etc! But alas then should many a poor
man be undone. In the mean time it is lamentable to see, how it is and has
been choked of late with sands and shelues, through the penning and wresting
of the course of the water for commodities sake. But as this is an
inconvenience easily remedied, if good order were taken for the redress
thereof: so now, the fine or pay set upon the ballaffe sometime freelis given
to the merchants by patent, even unto the lands end ( Iusques au poinct) will
be another cause of harm unto this noble stream, and all through an advantage
taken at the want of an ( i) in the word ponct: which grew through an error
committed by an English notarie unskillful in the French tongue, wherein that
patent was granted.

Furthermore, the said river flows and fills all his channels wise in the
day and night, that is in every twelve hours once; and this ebbing and
flowing, holds on for the space of seauentie miles, within the maine land:
the stream or tide being always highest at London, when the moon does
exactlie touch the northeast and south or west points of the heavens, of which
one is visible, the other under the earth, and not subject to our sight. These
tides also differ in their times, each one coming latter than other, by so
many minutes as pass yer the revolution and natural course of the heavens do
reduce, and bring about the said planet unto those her former places: The just
distance between one tide and another.
whereby the common difference between one tide and another, is found to
consist of twenty four minutes, which wants but twelve of an whole hour in
four and twenty, as experience does confirm. In like sort we see by daily
trial, that each tide is not of equal height and greatness. For at the full
and change of the moon we have the greatest floods, and such is their
ordinary course, that as they diminish from their changes and fuls, unto the
first and last quarters; so afterward they increase again, until they come
to the full and change. Sometimes also they rise so high (if the wind be at the
north or northeast, which brings in the water with more vehemency, because
the tide which fills the channel, comes from Scotland ward) that the Thames
ouerfloweth her banks near unto London: which happens especially in the fuls
and changes of January and February, wherein the lower grounds are of custom
soonest drowned. This order of flowing in like sort is perpetual, so that when
the moon is upon the southwest and north of points, then is the water by
London at the highest: neither do the tides alter, except some rough winds out
of the west or southwest do keep back and check the stream in his
entrance, The stream often checked in her entrance into the land.
as the east and northeast do hasten the coming

But how so ever these small matters do fall out, and how often soever this
course of the stream Polydore says, that this river is seldom increased or
rather never ouerfloweth her banks by landflouds: but he is herein very much
deceived, as it shall be more apparantlie seen hereafter. For the more that this
river is put by of her right course, the more the water must of necessity
swell with the white waters which run down from the land: because the passage
cannot Aristotle will have the salt water to be most gross, because a ship
will bear a greater burden on the sea than on the fresh water; and an eg sink
in this that swimmeth on the other. But he may easily be answered by the
quantity of room and abundance of waters in the sea; whereby it becomes of
more force to sustain such vessels as are committed to the same, and whereunto
London bridge.
for it is in manner a continual street, well replenished with large and
stately houses on both sides, and situat upon twenty arches, whereof each one
is made of excellent free squared stone, every of them being threescore foot
in height, and full twenty in distance one from another, as I have often
viewed.

In like manner I could entreat of the infinite number 2000 boats upon the
Thames and 3000 pooreine^ maintained by the same whose gains come in most
plentifully in the term tune.
of swans daily to be seen upon this river, the two thousand wherries and
small boats, whereby three thousand poor watermen are maintained, through the
carriage and recariage of such persons as pass or repasse, from time to time
upon the same: beside those huge tideboats, tiltbotes, and barges, which either
carry passengers, or bring necessary provision from all quarters of
Oxfordshire, Barkeshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Herfordshire, Midlesex,
Essex, Surrie, and Kent, unto the city of London. But for so much as these
things are to be repeated again in the particular description of London,
annexed to his card; I surceasse at this time to speak any more of them here,
as not lingering but hasting to perform my promise made even now, not yet
forgotten, and in performance whereof I think it best to resume the
description of this noble river again into my hands, and in adding whatsoever
is before omitted, to deliver a full and perfect demonstration of his course.
How and where the said stream arises, is already and with sufficiency set
down, noting the place to be within a mile of Tetburie, whereof some do
utterly mislike, because that rill in summer drouths is often so dry, that
there is little or no water at all seen running above ground in the same. For
this cause the therefore many affirm the very head of Isis Isis.
to come from the poole above Kemble. Other confound it with the head of the
Cirne or Chirne, called in Latin Corinium that rises above Coberleie. For my
part I follow Leland, as he does the moonke of Malmesburie, which wrote the
history entitled Eulogium historiarum, who searched the same of set purpose,
and pronounced with Leland, although at this present that course be very
small, and choked up (as I hear) with gravel and sand. Proceeding therefore
from the head, it first of all receives the Kemble water called the Coue,
which rises above Kemble town, Couus.
goes by Kemble it self unto Poole and Somerford, and then (accompanies the
Thames) unto Canes, Ashton, Canes, and Howston, holding on in one channel
until they meet with the Chirne, the next of all to be described.

The Chirne is a fair water arising out of the ground above Coberleie,
Corinium.
from whence it runs to Cowleie, Cowlesburne, Randcome, and so into the Isis
on the left side above Crekelade. These three waters being thus united and
brought into one channel, within a little space of the head of Isis, it runs
on by Crekelade, beneath which town it receives the The, descending from
Elcombe, The.
Escot, Redburne, Widhill, and at the fall into Isis, or not far off ioineth
with another that runs west of Purton by Braden forest, etc. Next of all
our Isis meets with the Amneie on the left hand, which coming from above
Holy roode Amneie, Amneie.
runs by Down Amneie, and finally into the Isis a little above Iseie. In
like sort I read of another that meets withal on the right hand above Iseie
also, which so far as I can call to remembrance, comes from about Orifield
and falls so into our Isis, that they run as one until they come at the
Colne, although not so nakedlie and without help, but that in this voyage, the
maine stream does cross one water that descends from Swindon, and going
also by Stratton toward Seuingham, is it self increased with two rils by the
way, whereof one comes from Liddenton by Wambreie, as I have been informed.

The Colne is a fair river rising by north near to Witchington, Colneius,
Colineus, or Colunus.
and from thence goes to Shiptons, Compton Abdale, Wittenton, Yarneworth,
Colne Deanes, and Colne Rogers, Winston, Biberie, Colne Alens, Quenington,
Faireford, and west of Lachelade into the river Isis, which hereabout on the
southside also takes in another, whereof I find this remembrance. The Isis
being once past Seuingham, crosses a brook from southest that mounteth about
Ashbirie, and receiving a rill from bywest (that comes from Hinton) beneath
Shrineham, it afterward so divides it self, that the arms thereof include
Inglesham, and by reason that it falls into the Isis at two several places,
there is a pleasant Island producted, whereof let this suffice.

Being past Lechelade a mile, Lecus or Leche.
it runs to saint John's bridge, and the reabout meets with the Leche on
the left hand. This brook, whereof Lechlade takes the name (a town whereunto
one piece of an old university is ascribed, which it did never possess, more
than Crekelade did the other) rises east of Hampnet, from whence it goes to
north Lech, Estenton, Anlesworth, east Lech, south Thorpe, Farendon, and so
into the Isis. From hence this famous water goes by Kenskot toward Radcote
bridge (taking in the rill that rises in an od piece of Barkeshire, and
runs by Langford) and being past the said bridge (now notable through a
conspiracy made Winrush.
The Winrush rises above Shieburne in Glocestershire, from whence it goes to
Winrush, and coming by Barrington, Burford, Widbrooke, Swinbecke castle,
Witneie, Duckington, Cockthorpe, Stanlake, it meets with the Isis west by
south of Northmore. From hence it goes Leland calls it) the Bruerne water.
Briwerus.


It rises above Limington, and going to Norton in the Marsh, and through a
patch of Worcestershire unto Euenlode, between it and the four shirestones,
Comus.
it takes in a rill called Come, coming by the long and the little Comptons.
After this also it goes by Bradwell, Odington, and so to Bleddenton, above
which town it takes in the Rolrich water Rolrich.
and join above Kenkeham, and Church hill. From thence also it goes unto
Bruerne, Shipton underwood, Ascot, Short hamton, Chorleburie, Corneburie park,
Stonfield, Longcombe, and southeast of Woodstocke park, takes in the Enis,
that rises above Emstone, Euis.
and goes to Ciddington, Glimton, Wotton (where it is increased with a rill
that runs thither from steeple Barton, by the Beechin tree) Woodstocke,
Blaidon,

The head of Charwell is in Northamptonshire, Charwell.
where it rises out of a little poole, by Charleton village, seven miles above
Banberie northeast, and there it issues so fast at the very surge, that it
grows into a pretty stream, in manner out of hand. Soon after also it takes
in a rillet called the Bure, Bure. Culen.
Come.
(which falls from fennie Conton by Farneboro, and afterward going by kings
Sutton, not far from Aine, it receives the discharge of diverse rillets, in
one bottom before it come at Clifton. The said water therefore engendered of so
many brookelets, consists chiefelie of two, whereof the most southerlie
called Oak, Ocus.
comes from Oak, Norton, by Witchington or Wiggington, and the Berfords; and
carieng a few blind rils withal, does meet with the other that falls from
by northwest into the same, within a mile of Charwell.

That other (as I conjecture) is increased of three waters, whereof each one
has his several name. The first of them therefore hight Tudo, Tudo.
which coming between Epwell and the Lee by Toddington, ioineth about
Broughton with the second that runs from Horneton, named Ornus, Ornus.
as I guess. The last falls into the Tude or Tudelake, beneath Broughton; and
for that it rises not far from Sotteswell in Warwikeshire, some are of the
opinion, that it is to be called Sotbrooke. Sotbrooke. Souarus.
The next water that meets without Charwell beneath Clifton comes from
about Croughton, and after this is the Sowar Sowar.
or Swear, that rises north of Michaell Tew, and runs by nether Wotton. The
last of all is the Reie alias Bure, Burus.
whose head is not far above Burcester, alias Bincester, and Burncester: and
from whence it goes by Burecester to Merton, Charleton, Fencote, Addington,
Noke, Islip, and so into Charwell, that holds on his course after this
augmentation of the waters, between Wood and Water Eton, to Marston, and the
east bridge of Oxford by Magdalene college, and so beneath the south bridge
into our aforesaid Isis.

In describing this river, Midst of England whereabouts.
this one thing (right honorable) is come unto my mind, touching the center and
nauill as it were of England. Certes there is an hilly plot of ground in
Helledon parish, not far from Danberie, where a man may stand and behold the
heads of three notable rivers, whose waters, and those of such as fall into
them, do abundantly serve the greatest part of England on this side of the
Humber. The first of these waters is the Charwell, already described. The
second is the Leme that goes westward into the fourth Auon. And the third is
the head of the Nene or fifth Auon it self, of whose courses there is no card
but does make sufficient mention; and therefore your honor may behold in the
same how they do coast the country, and also measure by compasses how this
plot lies in respect of all the rest, contrary to common judgment, which
makes Northampton to be the midst and center of our country.

But to go forward with my description of the Ouse, which being past Oxford
goes to Iflie, Kennington, Sanford, Rodleie, Newnham, and so to Abington,
sometime called Sensham, without increase, where it receives the Oche, Ocus.
otherwise called the Coche, a little beneath S. Helens, which runs thither
of two brooklets, as I take it, whereof one comes from Compton, out of the
vale and west of the hill of the White horse, the other from Kings Letcombe,
and Wantage in Barkshire, and in one channel, enters into the same, upon the
right side of his course. Arun.
From Abington likewise (taking the Arun withal southwest of Sutton Courtneie)
it goes by Appleford, long Wittenham, Clifton, Wittenham the less, and
beneath Dorchester, takes in the Them water, from whence the Isis loses the
pre-eminence of the whole denomination of this river, and is contented to
impart the same with the Them, so that by the conjunction of these two waters
Thamesis is producted, and that name continued even unto the sea.

Them river rises in the easterlie parts of Chilterne hills, Them.
toward Penleie park, at a town called Tring west of the said park, which
is seven miles from the stone bridge, that is between Querendon and Ailsburie
(after the course of the water) as Leland has set down. Running therefore by
long Merston, and Puttenham, Hucket, and Bearton, it receives soon after a
rill that comes by Querendon from Hardwike, and yer long an other on the
other side that rises above Windouer in the Chilterne, and passing by Halton,
Weston, Turrill, Broughton, and Ailsburie, it falls into the Tame west of the
said town (except my memory do fail Blauius.
now Blewberie, as I learn.

Thus have I brought the Thames unto Wallingford, situate in the vale of White
horse that runs

The Kenet rises above Ouerton 5 or 6 miles west of Marleborow, Cenethus.
or Marlingsborow, as some call it; and then going by Fifeld; Clatfor, Maulon,
and Preshute, unto Marleburie: it holds on in like order to Ramsburie, and
northwest of little Cote, takes in a water by north descending from the hills
above Alburne chase west of Alburne town. Thence it runs to little Cote,
Charnhamstreet, and beneth Charnhamstreet it crosses the Bedwin, Bedwiine.
which (taking the Chalkburne Chalkeburne.
rill withal) comes from great Bedwiine, Lamburne.
Egerston, the Sheffords, Westford, Boxford, Donington castle, and Shaw. From
Newberie it goes to Thatcham, Wolhampton, Aldermaston, a little above which
village it receives the Alburne, Alburnus.
another brook increased with sundry rils: and thus going on to Padworth,
Oston, and Michaell, it comes at last to Reading, where (as I said) it
ioineth with the Thames, and so they go forward as one by Sonning to Shiplake,
and there on the east side receive the Loddon that comes down thither from
the south, as by his course appears.

The Loddon rises in Hamshire between west Shirburne and Wooton toward the
southwest, Lod^nus.
afterward directing his course toward the northwest, thorough the Uine, it
passes at the last by Bramlie, and thorough a piece of Wiltshire, to
Stradfield, Swallowfield, Arberfield, Loddon bridge, leaving a patch of
Wiltshire on the right hand (as I have been informed.) This Loddon not far
from Turges town receives two waters in one bottom, whereof the westerlie
called Basing water, comes from Basingstoke, and thorough a park unto the
aforesaid place.

The other descends of two heads from Mapledour well, and goes by Skewes,
Newenham, Rotherwijc, and yer it come at Hartlie, ioineth with the Basing
water, from whence they go together to Turges, where they meet with the Loddon
(as I have said already.) The next stream toward the south is called Ditford
brook. Ditis vadum.
It rises not far from Upton, goes by Gruell, and beneath Wharnborow
castle receives the Ikell Ikelus.
(coming from a park of the same denomination) from whence they go together
by Maddingleie unto Swalowfield, and so into the Loddon. In this voyage also
the Loddon meets with the Elwie or Elueie that comes from Aldershare, not
far by west of Euersleie: Elueius.
and about Eluesham likewise with another running from Dogmansfield named the
Douke: Ducus.
and also the third not inferior to the rest coming from Erin, Erin.
whose head is in Surreie, and going by Ash becomes a limit, first between
Surreie and Hamshire; then between Hamshire and Barkeshire, and passing by
Ash, Erinleie, Black water, Yerleie, and Finchamsted; it ioineth at last with
the Ditford, before it come at Swalowfield. To conclude therefore with our
Loddon, having received all these waters; and after the last confluence with
them now being come to Loddon bridge, it passes on by a part of Wiltshire to
Twiford bridge, then to Wargraue, and so into the Thames that now is
maruellouslie increased and grown unto triple greatness (to that it was at
Oxford.)

Being therefore past Shiplake and Wargraue, it runs by Horsependon, or
Harding: then to Henleie upon Thames, where sometime a great rill voideth it
self in the same. Then to Remenham, Greneland (going all this way from
Shiplake just north, and now turning eastwards again) by Medenham, Hurleie,
Bisham, Marlow the greater, Marlow the less, it meets with a brook soon
after that consists of the water of two rilles, whereof the one called the
Use, Us^.
rises about west Wickham, out of one of the Chilterne hills, and goes from
thence to east Wickham or high Wickham, a pretty market town. The other named
Higden, Higden.
descends also from those mounteines but a mile beneath west Wickham, and
ioining both in one at the last, in the west end of east Wickham town, they go
together to Wooburne, Hed^or, and so into the Thames. Some call it the Tide;
and that word do I use in my former treatise: but to proceed. After this
confluence our Thames goes on by Cowkham, Topleie, Maidenhead, alias
Sudlington, Braie, Dorneie, Clure, new Windsore (taking in nevertheless, at
Eaton by the way, the Burn which rises out of a Moore, and comes thither
by Burnham) old Windsor, Wraiborow, and a little by east thereof does cross the
Cole, whereof I find this short description ensuing.

The Cole rises near unto Flamsted, Colus, ali^s Uere and Uertume.
from whence it goes to Redburn, S. Michaels, S. Albons, Aldenham, Watford,
and so by More to Richmansworth, where there is a confluence of three waters,
of which this Cole is the first. The second called Gadus Gadus.
rises not far from Ashridge, an house or palace belonging to the prince:
from whence it runs to great Gaddesdin, Hemsted, between Kings Langleie,
and Abbots Langleie, then to Hunters, and Cashew bridges, and so to Richman
swoorth, receiving by the way a rill coming from Alburie by northwest, to
Northchurch, Barkehamsted, and beneath Hemsted ioining with the same. The last
comes in at northwest from above Chesham, by Chesham

Being past the Cole, Uindeles.
we come to the fall of the Uindeles, which rises by northwest near unto
Bagshot, from whence it goes to Windlesham, Chobham, and meeting with a
brooklet coming westward Ueius.
and is called the Way. The Weie or the Way rising by west, comes from
Olsted, and soon Thuresbie.
and so to Pepper harrow, where it ioineth with the Thuresbie water, which
comes not far off from a village of the same denomination. From hence also
it goes to Godalming, and then toward Shawford, but yer it come there, it
crosses Craulie beck, which rising somewhere about the edge of Sussex short
of Ridgewtjc, goes by Uacherie Crawleie.
Knoll, Craulie, Bramleie, Wonarsh, and so into the Way. From hence then our
river goes to Shawford, and soon after (meeting with the Abbinger water that
comes by Shere, Albirie, Abbinger.
and the chapel on the hill) it proceeds to Guldeford, thence to Stoke,
Sutton in the park, Send, Woking, and at Newarke park side takes in a brook
that rises of two heads, whereof one does spring between two hills north of
Pepper harrow, and so runs through Henleie park, the other above Purbright,

From Oteland the Thames goes by Walton, Sunburie, Molis.
west Moulse^e, Hampton, and yer it come at Hampton court on the northside, and
east Moulseie on the other, it takes in the Moule water, which gives name
unto the two towns that stand on each side of the place, where it falls into
our stream. It rises in Word forest, and going by Burstow, it meets
afterward with another gullet, containing a small course from two several
heads, whereof one is also in the forest aforenamed, the other runs from
Bebush wood, and coming by Iseld, meets with the first above Horleie, and so
run on in one channel, I say, till they join with the Moule water, whereof I
spoke before.

After this confluence in like sort, it is not long yer the Moule take in
another from by north, which comes from about Mesham on the one side, and
another on the other side, running by Ocleie and Capell, and whereinto also a
branch or rill comes from a wood on the northwest part. Finally, being thus
increased with these many rilles, it goes by east Becheworth, west
Becheworth, and over against the Swalow on the side of Drake hill, taking in
another that comes thither from Wootton by Darking and Milton, it runs to
Mickleham, Letherhed, Stoke, Cobham, Ashire park, east Moulseie, and so into
the Thames, which after this conjunction goes on to Kingston, and there also
meets with another beck, rising at Ewell south of Nonsuch. Certes, this rill
goes from Ewell by the old park, then to Mauldon, and so to Kingston town.
The Thames in like manner being past Kingston, goes to Tuddington, Petersham,
Twickenham, Richmond, and Shene, where it receives a water on the northwest
side, which coming from about Harrow on the hill, and by west of the same,
goes by Haies, Harlington, Felthan, and Thistle worth into the Thames.

The next fall of water is at Sion, Brane.
near unto new Brainford, so that it issues into the Thames between them
both. This water is called Brane, that is in the British tongue (as Leland
says) a frog. It rises about Edgeworth, and comes from thence by
Kingesburie, Twiford, Periuall, Hanwell, and Austerleie. Thence we followed our
river to old Brentford, Mortlach, Cheswtjc, Barnelmes, Fulham, and Putneie,
beneath which towns it crossed a beck from Wandlesworth, that rises at
Woodmans turn, and going by Easthalton, meets another coming from Croidon
by Bedington, and so going on to Mitcham, Marton abbeie, and Wandlesworth, it
is not long yer it fall into the Thames. Mariburne.
Next unto this is Mariburne rill on the other side, which comes in by S.
James, so that by this time we have either brought the Thames, or the Thames
conveyed us to London, where we rested for a season to take view of the
several tides there, of which each one differs from other, by four and
twenty minutes, that is forty eight in a whole day, as I have noted before,
except the wether alter them. Being past London, and in the way toward the
sea: the first water that it meets withal, is the Brom on Kent side, west
of Greenewich, whose head is Bromis in Bromleie parish, and going from thence
to Lewsham, Bromis.
it takes in a water from by east, and so directs his course forth right
unto the Thames.

The next water that it meets withal, is on Essex side, almost against
Woolwich, and that is the Lee Lee.
or Luie, whose head rises short of Kempton in Hertfordshire, Logus.
four miles southeast of Luton, sometime called Logodunum or Logrodunum, and
going through a piece of Brokehall park (leaving Woodhall park on the north,
and Hatfield on the south, with another park adioining) it goes toward
Hartford town. But yer it come there, it receives a water (peradventure the
Marran) rising at northwest in Brodewater hundred, Marran.
from above Welwin, northeast of Digeswell, and going to Hartingfeld bury,
where the said confluence is within one mile of the town. Beneath Hatfield
also it receives the Bean (as I guess) coming from Boxwood by Benington,
Bean.
Aston, Watton, and Stapleford, and a little lower, the third arm of increase
from above Ware, which descends from two heads: whereof the greatest comes
from Barkewaie in Edwinster hundred, the other Sandon in Oddesey hundred, and
after they be met beneath little Hornemeade, they go together by Pulcherchurch,
or Puckrich, Stonden, Thunderidge Wadesmill, Benghoo, and so into the Lee,
which from hence runs on till it come at Ware, which was drowned by the rage
of the same 1408, and so to Amwell, where on the north side it receives the
water that comes from little Hadham, through a piece of Singleshall park,
then by great Hadham, and so Le Veil, branching in such wise yer it come there,
that it runs through the town in sundry places. Thence it goes forth to
Abbats Stansted, beneath which it meets with the Stoure, west (as I remember)
of Roidon. Sturus.
This Sture rises at Wenden lootes, from whence it goes to Langleie,
Clauering, Berden, Manhuden, and Birchanger (where it takes a rill coming
from Elsingham, and Stansted Mountfitchet.)

It runs also by Cheston nunrie, and out of this a little beneath the said
house, breaks an arm called the Shirelake, because it divides Eastsex and
Hartford shire in sunder, and in the length of one meadow called Fritheie. This
lake runs not but at great floods, and meets again with a succor of
ditchwater, at a place called Hockesdich, half a mile from his first breaking
out, and half a mile lower at Marsh point ioineth again with the stream from

From hence the Lee runs on by south on Waltonstow till it come to Stretford
Langthorne, Alfred.
where it brancheth partly of it self, and partly by man's industry for
mils. Howbeit herein the dealing of Alfred (sometimes king of England) was not
of smallest force, who understanding the Danes to be gotten up with their ships
into the country, there to kill and slaie his subjects, in the year of grace
896, by the conduct of this river: he in the mean time before they could
return, did so mightily weaken the maine channel, by drawing great numbers of
trenches from the same; that when they purposed to come back, there was
nothing so much water left as the ships did draw: wherefore being set on
ground, they were soon fired, and the adversaries overcome. By this policy
also much meadow ground was woone, and made firm land, whereby the country
about was not a little enriched, as was also a part of Assyria by the like
practice of Cyrus with the Ganges, at such time as he came against Babylon,
which river before time was in manner equal with Euphrates. For he was so
offended, that one of his knights whom he loved deerlie, was drowned and borne
away with the water in his passage over the same, that he swear a deep oath
yer long to make it so shallow that it should not wet a woman to the knees.
Which came to pass, for he caused all his army to dig 46 new draines from the
same, whereby the vow that he had made was at the full performed. Senec. de Tra.
li. 3. But to conclude with the Lee that sometime ouerflowed all those meadows,
through which it passes (as for a great way not inferior to the Thames) and I
find that being past Westham, it is not long yer it fall into that stream. One
thing I read more of this river before the conquest, that is, how Edward the
first, and son of Alfred, in the year of grace 912, builded Hartford town:
at which time also he had Wittham a town in Essex in hand, as his sister
called Aelfled repaired Oxford and London, and all this four years before the
building of Maldon, of some called Hertford or Herudford between three waters,
that is, the Lee, the Benefuth, and Memmarran, or rather Penmarran: but how
these waters are distinguished in these days, as yet I cannot tell. It is
possible, that the Been may be the same which comes by Benington, and
Benghoo: which if it be so, then must the Memmarran be the same that descends
from Whitwell, for not far from thence is Branfield, which might in time past
right well be called Marranfield, for of like inuersion of names I could show
many examples.

Being past the Lee (whose channel is begun to be purged 1576, with further
hope to bring the same to Rodon or Rodunus.
the north side of London) we come unto the Rodon, upon Essex side in like
manner, and not very far (for four miles is the most) from the fall of the
Lee. This water rises at little Canfield, from whence it goes to great
Canfield, high Roding, Eithorpe Roding, Ledon Roding, White Roding, Beauchampe
Roding, Fifeld, Shelleie, high Ongar, and Cheping Ongar, where the Lauer
falls into it, Lauer.
that arises betwixt Matching and high Lauer; and taking another rill withal
coming from above Northweld at Cheping Ongar, they join (I say) with the
Rodon, after which confluence Leland coniectureth that the stream is called
Iuell: Iuelus.
for my part, I wot not what to say of it. But heerof I am sure, that the whole
course being past Ongar, it goes to Stansted rivers, Theidon mount, Heibridge,
Chigwell, Woodford bridge, Ilford bridge, Barking, and so into the Thames.

The Darwent Darwent.
meets with our said Thames upon Kents side, two miles and more beneath
Erith. It rises at Tanridge, or there abouts, as I have been informed by
Christopher Saxtons card late made of the same, and the like (I hope) he will
do in all the several shires of England at the infinite charges of sir Thomas
Sackford knight, and master of the requests, whose zeal unto his country
heerin I cannot but remember, and so much the rather, for that he means to
imitate Ortelius, and somewhat beside this has helped me in the names of the
towns, by which these rivers for the Kentish part do run. Would to God his
plats were once finished for the rest! But to proceed. The Darwent therefore,
rising at Tanridge, goes on by Titseie toward Brasted, and receiving on each
side of that town (and several banks) a river or rill, it goes on to
Nockhold, Shorham, Kinsford, Horton, Darnhith, Dartford or Derwentford, and
there taking in the Craie on the left hand that coms from Orpington by Craie.
Marie Craie, Paul's Craie, North Craie, and Craiford, it is not long yer it
fall into the Thames. But after I had once passed the fall of the brook, it is
a world to see what plenty of Serephium grows upon the Kentish shore, in
whose description Fuichfius has not a little halted; whilst he gives forth
the herb Argentaria for Serephium, between which there is no manner of
likelihood. This nevertheless is notable in the said herb, that being
translated into the garden, it receives another form clean

I would have spoken of one creek that comes in at Cliffe, and another that
runs down from Haltsto by S. Mary's: but since I understand not with what
backewaters they be served, I let them pass as not skillful of their courses.
And thus much of the rivers that fall into the Thames, wherein I have done
what I may, but not what I would for mine own satisfaction, till I came from
the head to Lechlade, unto which, as in lieu of a farewell, I will ascribe that
distichon which Apollonius Rhodius writes Huic non est aliud flumen par, nec
tot in agros
Vllum dimittit riuos quot fundit vtrinque.


Next unto the Thames we have the Midwaie water, Midwaie.
whereof I find two descriptions, the first begins thus. The Midwaie water
is called in Latin Medeuia (as some write) because the course thereof is
midwaie in a manner between London and Dorobernia, or (as we now call it)
Canturburie. In British it hight Dourbree: and thereof Rochester Frethus.
and an other little stream that comes from the hills, between Peuenburie
and Horsemon on the southeast. These. Grane alias Cranus.
which having his head not far from Cranbrooke, and meeting with sundry
other riuelets by the way, whereof one branch of These is the last, for it
parts at the Twist, and including a pretty Island, does join with the said
Midwaie, a little above Yalding, and then with the Lowse. Finally at Maidstone
it meets with another brook, whose name I know not, and then passes by
Allington, Duton, Newhide, Halling, Cuckestane, Rochester, Chattham,
Gillingham, Upchurch, Kingsferrie, and falls into the maine sea between
Shepeie and the Grane.

And thus much out of the first author, who commends it also, for that in
time past it did yield such plenty of sturgeon, as beside the kings portion,
and a due unto the archbishop of Canturburie out of the same, the deane and
chapter of Rochester had no small allowance also of that commodity: likewise
for the shrimps that are taken therein, which are no less esteemed of in their
kind, than the western smelts or flounders taken in the Thames, etc. The
second author describes it after this manner, and more copiouslie than the
other.

The chief head of this stream rises in Waterdon forest, from whence after
it has run a pretty way still within the same, east of Whetlin, it meets
with a brook, whose head is in Ward forest, southwest of Greenested, which
goes to Hartfield, and so to Whetlin, and yer long ioineth with the Midwaie.
After this confluence it is not long yer it take in another by-west from Cowden
ward, and the third above Pensherst, growing from two heads, whereof one is in
Lingfield park, the other west of Crawherst; and ioining above Edinbridge, it
does fall into the midwaie beneath Heuer town, and Chiddingston. From
Pensherst our maine stream hastes to Ligh, Tunbridge, and Twidleie, and
beneath the town, it crosses a water from North, whereof one head is at the
Mote, another at Wreteham, the third at west Peckham, and likewise another from
southest, that runs east of Capell. Next after this it receives the These,
whose forked head is at These Hirst, which descending down toward the north,
takes in not far from Scotnie a brook out of the northside of Waterden
forest, whose name I find not, except it be the Dour. After this confluence
our river goes to Goldhirst, and coming to the Twist, it brancheth in such
wise, that one part of it runs into Midwaie, another into the Garan, or
rather Cranebrooke (if my conjecture be any thing.) The Garan (as Leland
calls it) or the Crane (as I do Garunus, Cranus.
take it) rises near to Cranebrooke, and going by Sissinghir^t, it receives
yer long one water that comes by Fretingdon, and another that runs from
great Chard by Smerdon, and Hedcorne, crossing two rilles by the way from by
north, Hedcorne it self standing between them both. Finally, the Garan or
Crane meeting with Midwaie south of Yalling, they on the one side, and the
These on the other, leave a pretty Island in the midst, of four miles in
length, and two in breadth, wherein is some hilly soil, but neither town nor
village, so far as I remember.

From Yalling forward, the Midwaie goes to west Farlegh, east Farlegh: and yer
it come at Maidstone, it interteineth a rill that rises short of Ienham, and
goes by Ledes and Otteringden, which is very beneficial to clothiers in dry
years: for thither they conueie their clothes to be thicked at the fulling
milles, sometimes ten miles for the same: there is also at Ledes great plenty
of fulling earth, which is a necessary commodity.

Being past Maidstone, it runs by Allington, Snodland, Halling, Cuckstane,
and Rochester, where it passes under a fair bridge of stone, with a very
swift course, which bridge was begun 1388 by the lord John Cobham, the lady
Margaret his wife, and the valiant sir Robert Knolles, who gave the first onset
upon that piece of work, and thereunto builded a chapel of the Trinity at
the end thereof, in testimony of his piety. In process of time also one John
Warner of Rochester made the new coping thereof; and archbishop Warham of
Canturburie the iron bars: the bishops also of that see were not slack in
their benevolence and furtherances toward that work, especially Walter Merton
founder of Merton college in Oxford, who by misfortune perished by falling from
the same, as he rode to surueie the workmen. Being past Rochester, this noble
river goes to Chatham, Gillingham, Upchurin, and soon after branching, it
imbraceth the Green at his fall, as his two heads do Ashdon forest, that
lies between them both.

Of such streams as fall into the sea, between the Thames and the mouth of
the Sauerne.
AFter the Midwaie we have the Stoure that rises at Kingeswood, Stoure.
which is fourteen or fifteen miles from Canturburie. This river passes by
Ashford, Nailburne water also (as I hear) near to Cantwarbirie, but I wot not
whereabouts: see Marianus Scotus.
Wie, Nackington, Canturburie, Fordish, Standish, and Sturemouth, where it
receives another river growing of three branches. Beda calls Wantsome;
Wantsome.
but

There are other little brooks which fall into the Stoure, whereof Leland
speaks, as Fishpoole beck that arises in Stonehirst wood, and meets with
it four miles from Canturburie: another begins at Chislet, and goes into
the Stoure gut, which Leland says: the third issues out of the ground at
Northburne (where Eadbert of Kent sometime past held his palace) and runs to
Sandwich haven, as the said author reports: and the fourth called
Bridgewater that rises by S. Marie Burn church, and going by Bishops Burn,
meets with Canturburie water at Stourmouth: also Wiham that rises above
Wiham short of Adsam, and falls into Bridgewater at Dudmill, or Wenderton:
and the third namelesse, Dour.
which in the British foong is a common name for waters, as is also the old
British word Auon for the greatest rivers, into whose mouths or falls ships
might find safe entrance; and therefore such are in my time called havens, a
new word grown by an aspiration added to the old: the Scots call it Auen. But
more of this elsewhere, since I am now only to speak of Dour, whereof it is
likely that the town and castle of Dover did sometime take the name. From
hence we go toward the Camber (omitting peradventure here and there sundry
small creeks void of backwater by the way) whereabouts the Rother a noble
river falls into the sea. This Rother Rother.
separateth Sussex from Kent, and has his head in Sussex, not far from Argas
hill near to Waterden forest, and from thence directs his course unto
Rotherfield. After this it goes to Ethlingham or Hitchingham, and so forth by
Newendon unto Mattham ferrie, where it divides it self in such wise, that one
branch thereof goes to Appledoure (where is a castle sometime builded by the
Danes, in the time of Alfred, as they did erect another at Middleton, and the
third at Beamflete) and at this town, where it meets the Bilie Bilie.
that rises about Bilsington, the other by Iden, so that it includes a fine
parcel of ground called Oxneie, which in time past was reputed as a parcel of
Sussex; but now upon some occasion or other (to me unknown) annexed unto Kent.
From hence also growing into some greatness, it runs to Rye, where it
meets finally with the Beck, Beck.
which comes from Beckleie: so that the plot wherein Rye stands, is in
manner a by-land or peninsula, as experience does confirm. Leland and most men
are of the likeliest opinion, that this river should be called the Limen, which
(as Peter of Cornhull says) Limenus.
does issue out of Andredeswald, where the head thereof is known to be.
Certes, I am of the opinion, that it is called the Rother unto Appledoure, and
from thence the Limen, because the Danes are noted to enter into these parts by
the Limen; and sailing on the same to Appledoure, did there begin to fortify,
as I have noted already. Howbeit, in our time it is known by none other name
than the Rother or Appledoure water, whereof let this suffice.

Being thus crossed over to the west side of Rye haven, and in vewing the
issues that fall into the same, I meet first of all with a water that grows
of two brooks, which come down by one channel into the east side of the mouth
of the said port. The first therefore that falls into it descends from
Beckleie or thereabouts (as I take it) the next runs along by Pesemarsh, and
soon after ioining with all, they hold on as one, till they fall into the same
at the westerlie side of Rye: the third stream comes from the north, and as
it mounteth up not far from Munfield, so it runs between Sescambe and
Wacklinton near unto Bread, taking another rill withal that rises (as I
hear) not very far from Westfield. There is likewise a fourth that grows of
two heads between Ielingham and Pet, and going by Winchelseie it meets with
all about Rye haven, so that Winchelseie stands environed on three parts with
water, and the streams of these two that I have last rehearsed.

The water that falls into the Ocean, a mile by southwest of Hastings, or
therabouts, is called Aestus Aestus.
or Asten: perhaps of Hasten or Hasting the Dane, (who in time past was a
plague to France and England) and rising not far from Penhirst, it meets with
the sea (as I hear) by east of Hollington. Buluerhith Buluerhithe.
is but a creek (as I remember) served with no backewater; and so I hear of
Codding or Old haven, wherefore I mean not to touch them.

Into Peuenseie haven diverse waters do resort, Peuensete.
and of these, that which enters into the same on the east side rises out
from two heads, where of the most easterlie is called Ash, the next unto the
Burn, Ash. Burn.
and uniting themselves not far from Ashburne, they continue their course
under the name and title of Ashburne water, as I read. The second that comes
thereinto issues also of two heads, whereof the one is so many miles from
Boreham, the other not far from the Park east of Hellingstowne, and both of
them concurring southwest of Hirstmowsen, they direct their course toward
Peuenseie (beneath which they meet with another rising at Foington) and thence
go in one channel for a mile or more, till they fall together into Peuenscie
haven. Cucomarus.
The Cuckmer issues out at several places, and hereof the more easterlie
branch comes from Warbleton ward, the other from Bishops wood, and meeting
beneth Halling, they run in one bottom by Micham

Unto the water that comes out at Newhauen, Isis, ni fallor.
sundry brooks and riuerets do resort, but the chief head rises toward the
west, somewhat between Etchinford and Shepleie, as I hear. The first water
therefore that falls into the same on the east side, issues out of the
ground about Uertwood, and running from thence by Langhton and Ripe, on the
west side; it falls into the aforesaid river beneath Sturewell.
The fifth rises about Plimus.
The last of all comes from Plimodune or Plumpton, and having met in like
sort with the maine river about Barcham, it runs

The next river that we came unto west of Brighthemston is the Sore, Soru.
which notwithstanding I find to be called Brember water, in the ancient map of
Marton college in Oxford: but in such sort (as I take it) as the Rother or
Limen is called Appledoure stream, because of the said town that stands
thereupon. But to proceed, it is a pleasant water, and thereto Bimarus.
not much south from Shermonburie, whence they run together almost two miles,
till they fall into the Sore. That on the west side descends from about
Billingeshirst, and going toward the east, it crosses with the fourth (which
rises a little by west of Thacam) east from Pulborow, and so they run as one
into the Sore, that after this confluence hastes it self southward by
Brember, Burleis, the Combs, and yer long into the Ocean.

The Arun (of which beside Arundell town the castle Arunus.
and the vallie wherein it runs is called Vallis Aruntina, or Arundale in
English) is a goodly water, and thereto increased with no small number of
excellent and pleasant brooks. It springs up of two heads, whereof one
descends from the north not far from Gretham, and going by Lis, meets with
the next stream (as I guess) about Doursford house. The second rises by west
from the hills that lie toward the rising of the sun from East maine, and
runs by Peterfield. The third comes from Beriton ward, and ioineth with
the second between Peterfield and Doursford, after which confluence they go
together in one channel still toward the east (taking a rill with them that
co^mmeth between Fernehirst and S. Lukes chapel, southwest of Linchmere, and
meeting with it east of Loddesworth (as I do read, and likewise sundry other
in one channel beneath Stopham) to Waltham, Bury, Houghton, Stoke, Arundell,
Tortington ford, Climping (all on the west side) and so into the sea.

Having thus described the west side of Arun, let us do the like with the
other in such sort as we best may. The first river that we come unto therefore
on the east side, and also the second, rise of sundry places in S. Leonards
forest, and ioining a little above Horsham, they meet with the third, which
comes from Ifield park, not very far from Slinfeld. The fourth has two
heads, whereof one rises in Witleie park, the other by west, near unto
Heselmeere chapel, and meeting by west of Doursfeld, they unite themselves
with the channel, growing by the confluence that I spoke of beneath Slinfeld, a
little above Billingshirst. The last water comes from the hills above
Linchemere, and runs west and south, and passing between Billingthirst and
Stopham, it comes unto the channel last mentioned, and so into the Arun
beneath Stopham, without any further increase, at the least that I do hear
of.

Burn has his issue in a park near Aldingburrie (or rather a little above
the same toward the north, Burn.
as I have since been informed) and running by the bottomes toward the south,
it falls between north Berflete and Flesham. Erin rises of sundry heads,
Elin.
by east of Erinleie, and directing his course toward the sun rising, it
peninsulateth Seleseie town on the southwest and Pagham at northwest. Deel
springs about Benderton, Delus.
and thence running between middle Lauant and east Lauant, it goes by west of
west Hampnet, by east of Chichester, or west of Rumbaldesdowne, and afterward
by Fishburne, where it meets with a rill coming north west from Funtingdon
(a little beneath the town) and then running thus in one stream toward the
sea, it meets with another rillet coming by north of Bosham, and so into
Auant gulf by east of Thorneie Island.

The Racon rises by east of Racton or Racodunum (as Leland calls it) and
coming by Chidham, Racunus.
it falls into the sea, northeast of Thorneie aforesaid. The Emill comes
first between Racton and Stansted, Emill.
then down to Emilsworth or Emmesworth, and so unto the Ocean, separating
Sussex from Hampshire almost from the very head. Having in this manner passed
along the coasts of Sussex, the next water that I remember, rises by east of
the forest of Estbirie, from whence it goes by Southwike, west Burhunt,
Farham, and so into the gulf almost full south. Badunus forre*
Then come we to Bedenham creek (so called of a village standing thereby) the
mouth whereof lies almost directly against Porchester castle, which is
situat about three miles by water from Portesmouth town, as Leland does
report. Then go we within half a mile further to Forten creek, Forten or
Fordon.
which either gives or takes name of a village hard by. Osterpoole.
After this we come to Osterpoole lake, a great creek, that goes up by west
into the land, and lies not far from a round turret of stone, from whence also
there goes a chain to another tower on the east side directly over against
it, the like whereof is to be seen in diverse other havens of the west
country, whereby the entrance of great vessels into that part may be at
pleasure restreined.

From hence we go further to Tichefeld water, that rises about Eastmaine
park, Tichefield.
ten or twelve

After this we come to Hamble haven, Hamelrish.
or Hamelrish creek, whose fall is between saint Andrews castle, and Hoke.
It rises about Shidford in Waltham forest, and when it is past Croke bridge,
it meets with another brook, which issues not far from

Now come we to the haven of Southhampton, Southhampton.
by Ptolomie called Magnus portus, which I will briefly describe so near as
I can possibly. The breadth or entry of the mouth hereof (as I take it)

The Alresford begins of diverse fair springs, Alresford.
about a mile or more from Alresford, or Alford as it is now called, and soon
after resorting to one bottom, Otter.
and so into the salt creek that leads down to the haven.

On the other side of Southhampton, there resorteth into this haven also both
the Test and the Stockbridge water in one bottom, Stock.
whereof I find this large description ensuing. The very head of the
Stockewater, is supposed to be somewhere about Basing stoke, or church
Hockleie, and going from thence between Ouerton and Steuenton, it comes at
last by Lauerstocke and Whitchurch, and soon after receiving a brook by
northwest, called the Bourne (descending from S. Marie Bourne, Bourne.
southeast from Horsseburne) it proceeds by Long paroch and the wood, till it
meet with the Cranburne, on the cast side (a pretty riuelet rising about
Michelneie, and going by Fullington, Barton, and to Cramburne) thence to
Horwell in one bottom, beneath which it meets with the Andeuer water, that
is increased yer it come there by an other brook, whose name I do not know.
This Andeuer stream rises in Culhamshire forest, not far by north from
Andeuer town, and going to upper Clatford, yer it touch there it receives the
rill of which I spoke before, which rising also neeer unto Anport, goes to
Monketon, to Abbatesham, the Andeuer, and both (as I said) unto the Test
beneath Horwell, whereof I spoke even now.

These streams being thus brought into one bottom, it runs toward the
south under Stockbridge, and soon after dividing it self in twain, one
branch thereof goes by Houghton, and a little beneath meets with a rill,
that comes from bywest of S. Ans hill, and goes by east of upper Wallop,
west of nether Wallop, by Bucholt forest, Broughton, and called (as I have
been informed) the Gallop, but now it is named Wallop. Ualopius.
The other arm runs through the park, by north west of kings Somburne, and
uniting themselves again, they go forth by Motteshunt, and then receive the
Test, Test.
a pretty water rising in Clarendun park, that goes by west Deane, and east
Deane, so to Motteshunt, and finally to the aforesaid water, which from
thencefoorth is called the Test, even unto the sea. But to proceed. After this
confluence, it takes the gate to Kimbebridge, then to Rumseie, Longbridge, and
beneath the same receives a concourse of two rilles whereof the one comes
from Sherefield, the other from the new Forest, and ioining in Wadeleie park,
they beat upon the Test, not very far from Murseling. From thence the Test
goes under a pretty bridge, before it come at Redbridge, from whence it is not
long yer it fall into the haven.

The next river that runs into this port, springs in the new Forest, and
comes thereinto about. Eling, Eling.
not passing one mile by west of the fall of Test. From hence casting about
again into the maine sea, and leaving Calde shore castle on the right hand,
we directed our course toward the southwest, unto Beaulieu haven, whereinto the
Mineie descends. The Mineie rises not far from Mineiesteed, Mineie.
a village in the north part of the new Forest; and going by Beaulieu, it
falls into the sea southwest, west (as I take it) of Exburie, a village
standing upon the shore.

Being past the Mineie, Limen.
we crossed the Limen as it is now called, whose head is in the very heart of
the new Forest (sometime converted into a place of nourishment for dear by
William Rufus, buieng his pleasure with the ruin of many towns and villages,
as diverse have enclosed or enlarged their parks by the spoil of better
occupiengs) and running southwest of Lindhirst and the park, it goes by east
of Bure.
so the next unto it hight Mile, Milis.
as I have heard in English. Certes the head thereof is also in the southwest
part of the said Forest, and the fall not far from Milford bridge, beyond the
which I find a narrow going or strictland leading fro the point to Hirst
castle which stands into the sea, as if it hoong by a thread, from the maine
of the Island, ready to be washed away by the continual working and daily
beating of the waves.

The next river that we came unto of any name is Auon.
which (as Leland says) rises by northeast, and not far from Woolfehall in
Wilthshire, supposed to be the same which Ptolomie called Halenus. The first
notable bridge that it runs unto, is at Uphauen, thence four miles further
it goes to little Ambresburie, and there is another bridge, from thence to
Woodford village, standing at the right hand bank, and Newton village on the
left. The bishops of Sarum had a proper manor place at Woodford, which bishop
Shaxton pulled down altogether, because it Leland of this stream, which for
the worthiness thereof (in mine opinion) is not sufficiently described.
Wherefore I think good to deliver a second received of another, which in more
particular manner does exhibit his

Certes this Auon is a goodly river, rising (as I said before near) unto
Wolf hall; although he that will seek more scrupulouslie for the head in
deed, must look for the same about the borders of the forest of Sauernake
(that is Sour oak) which lies as if it were embraced between the first arms
thereof, as I have been informed. These heads also do make a confluence by
east of Martinshall hill, and west of Wootton. From whence it goes to Milton,
Powseie, Manningfield abbeie, Manningfield cross, and beneath Newington takes
in one rill west from Rudborow, and another a little lower that rises also
west of Alcanninges, and runs into the same by Patneie, Merden, Wilford,
Charleton, and Rustisall. Being therefore past Newington, it goes to Uphauen
(whereof Leland speaks) to Chesilburie, Compton, Ablington, little Almsburie,
Darntford, Woodford, old Salisburie, and so to new Salisburie, where it
receives one notable river from by northwest, and another from north east,
which two I will first describe, leaving the Auon at Salisburie for a while.
The first of these is called the Wilugh, Wilugh.
whereof the whole shire does take her name, and not of the great plenty of
willowes growing therein, as some fantastical heads do imagine: whereof also
there is more plenty in that country than is to be found in other places. It
rises among the Deuerels, and running thence by hill Deuerell, and Deuerell
long bridge, it goes toward Bishops straw, taking in one rill by west and
another from Upton by Werminster at northwest. From Bishops straw it goes to
Norton, Upton, Badhampton, Steplinford, and Stapleford, where it meets with
the Winterburie water from by north, descending from Maddenton by Winterburne.
From Stapleford it hastes to Wishford, Newton, Chilhampton, Wilton: and
thither comes a water unto it from southwest, which rises of two heads above
Ouerdonet. After this it goes by Wordcastell, to Tisburie, and there receives
a water on each side, whereof one comes from Funthill, the other from two
issues (of which one rises at Austie, the other at Swalodise) and so keeping
on still with his course, our Wilugh runs next of all by Sutton. Thence it
goes to Fouant, Boberstocke, Southburcombe, Wilton (where it takes in the
Fomington or Nader water) Westharnam, Nader beck.
Salisburie, and Eastharnam: and this is the race of Wilugh.

The other is a naked arm or stream without any branches. It rises above
Colingburne Kingston in the hills, and thence it goes to Colingburne, the
Tidworths (whereof the more southerlie is in Wiltshire) Shipton, Cholterton,
Newton, Toneie, Idmerson, Porton, the Winterburns, Lauerstocke, and so into
Auon east of Salisburie. And thus is the confluence made of the aforesaid
waters, with this our second Auon, Becquith brook.
whereinto another water falls (calls Becquithes brook) a mile beneath
Harneham bridge, whose head is five miles from Sarum, and three miles above
Becquithes bridge, as Leland does remember, Chalkeburne.
who notes the Chalkeburne water to have his due recourse also at this place
into the aforesaid river. Certes it is a pretty brook, and rises six miles
from Shaftesburie, and in the way toward Salisburie in a bottom on the right
hand, whence it comes by Knighton and Fennistratford, to Honington, that is
about twelve miles from the head, and about two miles and an half from
Honington beneath O^stocke, goes into the Auon, a mile lower than Harnham
bridge, except he forget himself. This Harnham, whereof I now entreat, was
sometime a pretty village before the erection of new Salisburie, and had a
church of S. Martin belonging unto it, but now in steed of this church, there
is only a barn standing in a very low mead on the northside of S. Michaels
hospital. The cause of the relinquishing of it was the moistness of the
soil, very often overflowed. And whereas the kings high way lay sometimes
through Wilton, license was obtained of the king and Richard bishop of
Salisburie, to remove that passage unto new Salisburie in like manner, and upon
this occasion was the maine bridge made over Auon at Harneham. By this exchange
of the way also old Salisburie fell into utter decaie, Three towns decayed by
changing one way.
and Wilton which was before the head town of the shire, and furnished with
twelve parish churches, grew to be but a poor village, and of small
reputation. Howbeit, this was not the only cause of the ruin of old
Salisburie, since I read of two other, whereof the first was a salve unto the
latter, as I take it. For whereas it was given out, that the townsmen wanted
water in old Salisburie, it is flat otherwise; since that hill is very
plentifully served with springs and wels of very sweet water. The truth of
the matter therefore is this.

In the time of civil wars, the soldiers of the castle and chanons of old
Sarum fell at ods, insomuch that after often bralles, they fell at last to sad
An holy conflict.
It happened therefore in a rogation week that the clergy going in solemn
procession, a controversy fell between them about certain walks and limits,
which the one side claimed and the other denied. Such also was the hot
intertainment on each part, that at the last the Castellanes espieng their time,
gate between the clergy and the town, and so coiled them as they returned
homeward, that they feared any more to gang about their bounds for the year.
Heerevpon the people missing their belly Latimer said, with beef, bread and
beer) they conceived forthwith a deadly hatred against the Castellans. But
not being able to cope with them by force of arms, they consulted with Richard
Pore their bishop, and he with them so effectually, that it was not long yer
they, I mean New Salisburie begun.
in the year 1260, and five and twentieth of March, whereby it appears that
it was above forty years in hand, although the clearks were translated to the
new town 1220, or the third year after the fraie. The

Now to return again from whence I thus digressed. Our Auon therefore
departing from Salisburie, goes by Burtford, Longford, and taking in the
waters before mentioned by the way, it goes by Stanleie, Sturus.
Dunketon, Craiford, Burgate, Fording bridge, Kingwood, Auon, Christ's church;
and finally into the sea. But yer it come all there and a little beneth
Christ's church, it crosses the Stoure or S^ure, a very fair stream, whose
course is such as may not be left untouched. It rises of six heads, whereof of
three lie on the north side of the park at (...) within the pale, the other
rise without the park; and of this river the town and baronie of Sturfon
does take his name as I guess, for except my memory do too much fail me, the
lord Sturton gives the six heads of the said water in his arms. But to
proceed. After these bran^hes are conioined in one bottom, it goes to long
Laime mill, Stilton, Milton, and beneath Gillingham receives a water that
descends from Mere. Thence the Sture goes to Bugleie, Stoure, Westouer
bridge, Stoure provost, and yer long it takes in the Cale water, Cale.
from Pen that comes down by Wickhampton to Moreland, and so to Stapleford,
seven miles from Wickhampton, passing in the said voyage, by Wine Caunton, and
the five bridges. After this confluence, it runs to Hinton Mary's, Lidden.
Deuilis.
and soon after crosses the Lidden and Deuilis waters all in one channel,
whereof the first rises in Blackemore vale, and goes to the bishops Caundell:
the second in the hills south of Pulham, and so runs to Lidlinch; the third
water issues near Ibberton, and going by Fifehed to Lidlington, and there
meeting with the Lidden, Iber. Blackewater.
they receive the Blackewater above Bagburne, and so go into the Stoure.

After this the Stoure runs on to Stoureton minster, Fitleford, Hammond, and
soon after taking in one water that comes from Hargraue by west Orchard, and
a second from Funtmill, it goes on to Chele, Ankeford, Handford, Durweston,
Knighton, Brainston, Blandford, Charleton: and crossing yer long a rill that
rises about Tarrent, and goes to Launston, Munketon, Caunston, Tarrant, it
proceeds forth by Shepw^^^, and by and by receiving another brook on the
right hand, that rises about Strictland, and goes by Quarleston, Whitchurch,
Anderston, and Winterburne, it hastes forward to Stoureminster, Berford lake,
Alen bridge, Winburne, alias Twinburne minster, whither comes a water called
Alen (from Knolton, Wikehampton, Estambridge, Hinton, Barnsleie) which has two
heads, whereof one rises short of Woodcotes, and east of Farneham, named
Terig, the other at Munketon above S. Giles Winburne, and going thence to S.
Giles Ashleie, it takes in the Horton beck, as the Horton does the
Cranburne. Finally, meeting with the Terig above Knolton, This Stoure
abounds with pike, perch, roch, dace, gudgeon and eeles.
they run on under the name of Alen to the Stoure, which goes to the Canfords,
Preston, Kingston, Perleie, and Yolnest: but yer it come at Yolnest it takes
in two brooks in one bottom, whereof one comes from Woodland park by Holt
park, and Holt, another from above upper Winburne, by Edmondesham, Uertwood,
and Mannington, and ioining about S. Leonards, they go to Hornebridge, and so
into Stoure. After which confluence, the said Stoure runs by Iuor bridge,
and so into Auon, leaving Christ's church above the meeting of the said waters
(as I have said before.)

Having in this manner passed Christ's church head we come to the fall of the
Burn, Burn.
which is a little brook running from Stourefield heath, without branches;
from whence we proceeded: and the next fall that we come unto is Poole, Poole.
from whose mouth upon the shore, by southwest in a bale of three miles off, is
a poor fisher town called Sandwich, where we saw a peer and a little fresh
brook. The very utter part of saint Adelmes point, is five miles from
Sandwich. In another baie lies west Lilleworth, where (as I hear) is some
profitable harborough for ships. The to wite of Poole is from Winburne about
four miles, and it stands almost as an I Will in the haven. The haven it self
also, if a man should measure it by the circuit, wants little of twenty
miles, as I did guess by the view.

Going therefore into the same, between the north and the south points, to see
what waters were there, we left Brunkeseie Island, and the castle on the left
hand within the said points; and passing about by Pole, and leaving that
creek, because it has no fresh, we came by Holton and Kesworth, where we
beheld two falls, of which one was called the north, the other the south
waters. The north stream hight Piddle as I hear. Piddle.
It rises about Alton, and goes from thence to Piddle trench head, Piddle
hinton, Walterstow, and yer it come at Birstam, receives Deuit^s.
Thence it goes to Tow piddle, Ash piddle, Turners piddle (taking in yer it
come there, a water that runs from Helton by Middleton, Milburne and Biere)
then to Hide, and so into Pole haven, and of this water Marianns Scotus
speaks, except I be deceived. The south water is properly called From for
Frame. From.
It rises near unto Euershot, and going down by Fromequitaine, Chelmington,
and Catstocke, it receives Ocus.
where it meets with the Owke, that rises either two miles above Hoke park
at Kenford, or in the great pond within Hoke park, and going by the Tollards,
falls into the From about Maden Newton, and so go as one from thence to
Fromevauchirch, Crokewaie, Frampton, and Muckilford, and receives near unto
the same a rill from above Upsidling by S. Nicholas Sidling, Silleie.
and alias Minterne and Cherne brooks both in one channel: Minterne* Cherne.
whereof the first rises in upper Cherne parish, the other at Minterne, and
meeting above middle Cherne, they go by nether Cherne, Forston, Godmanston, and
above Charneminster into From. In the mean time also our From brancheth and
leaves an Island above Charneminster, and ioining again near Dorchester, it
goes by Luckford.
from whence also it passes by Eastholme, Warham, and so into the Baie. Seek
more for wily brook that goes by west bury to Pole haven.
From this fall we went about the arm point

When we were past Pole haven, we lest the Handfast point, the Peuerell point,
S. Adelmes chapel, and came at last to Lughport haven, whereby and also to
the Luckeford lake, all this portion of ground last remembered, is left in manner
of a byland or peninsula, Chesill.
is the head or point of the Chesill lieng northwest, which stretches up from
thence about seven miles, as a maine narrow bank, by a right line unto the
southeast, and there abutteth upon Portland scant a quarter of a mile above the
Newcastle there. The nature of this bank is such, that so often as the wind
blows vehemently at southeast, so often the sea beats in, and losing the
bank soketh through it: so that if this wind should blow from that corner any
long time together, Portland should be left an Island as it has been before.
But as the southwest wind does appaire this bank, so a northwest does bar
it up again. It is pretty to note of the Townelet of Waimouth, which lies
straight against Milton on the other side, and of this place where the water of
the haven is but of small breadth, that a rope is commonly tied from one side
of the shore to another, whereby the ferrie men do guide their botes without
any help of Ores. But to proceed with our purpose. Into the mouth of this
river do ships often come for succor.

Going by Portland and the point thereof called the Raze, we sailed along by
the Shingle, till we came by saint Katharins chapel, where we saw the fall of
a water that came down from Blackdeene Beaconward, by Portsham and
Abbatsburie. Thence we went to another that fell into the sea, near Birton,
and descended from Litton by Chilcombe, Bride. Nature has set the mouth of
this river in manner betwixt two hills, so that a little cost would make an haue^
there.
then unto the Bride or Brute port, a pretty haven, and the river it self
served with sundry waters. It rises half a mile or more above Bemister, and
so goes from Bemister to Netherburie by Parneham, then to Melplash, and so to
Briteport, where it takes in two waters from by east in one channel, of which
one rises east of Nettlecourt, and goes by Porestoke and Milton, the other at
Askerwell, and runs by Longlether. From hence also our Bride going toward
the sea, Simen.
takes the Simen on the west that comes by Simensburge into the same, the
whole stream soon after falling into the sea, and leaving a pretty have not.

The next port is the Chare, Chare.
served with two rits in one confluence, beneath Charemouth. The chief head of
this river is (as Leland says) in Marshwood park, and comes down by
Whitechurch: the other runs by west of Wootton, and meeting beneath
Charemouth town (as I said) does fall into the sea. Then came we to the
Cobbe, and beheld the Lime water, Buddle.
which the townsmen call the Buddle, which comes about three miles by north
of Lime, from the hills, fleting upon Rockie soil, and so falls into the sea.
Certes, there is no haven here that I could see, but a quarter of a mile by
west southwest of the town, is a great and costly iuttie in the sea for
succor of ships. The town is distant from Coliton, about five miles. And
here we ended our voyage from the Auon, which contains the whole coast of
Dorcester, or Dorcetshire, so that next we must enter into Summerset county,
and see what waters are there.

The first water that we meet withal in Summersetshire is the Axe, Axe.
which rises in a place called Are knoll, longing to sir Giles Strangwaie,
near unto Cheddington in Dorsetshire, from whence it runs to Mosterne,
Feborow, Claxton, Weiford bridge, Winsham foord, and receiving one rill from
the east by Hawkechurch, and soon after another coming from northwest by
Churchstoke, from Wainbroke, it goes to Axeminster, beneath which it crosses
the Yare, Yare alias A^rte.
that comes from about Buckland, by Whitstaunton, Yarecombe, Long bridge,
Stockeland, Kilmington bridge (where it receives a brook from by south, that
runs by Dalwood) and so into the Axe. From hence our Axe goes to Drake,
Musburie, Culliford: but yer it come altogether

But the other toward the east is named Whitecliffe, in the time of Athelstane,
the greatest navy that ever adventured into this Island, arrived at Seton in
Devonshire, being replenished with aliens that sought the conquest of this
Island, but Athelstane met and incountered with them in the field, where he
overthrew six thousand of his aforesaid enemies. Not one of them also that
remained alive, escaped from the battle without some deadly or very grievous
wound. In this conflict moreover were slain five

As for the haven which in times past as I have heard, has been at Sidmouth
(so called of Sidde a rillet that runs thereto) and likewise at Seton,
Sidde. Seton.
I pass it over, since now there is none at all. Yet has there been sometime
a notable one, albeit, that at this present between the two points of the old
haven, there lies a mighty bar of pibble stones, in the very mouth of it,
and the river Axe is driven to the Colie.
From Seton westward lies Coliton,

By west of Bereworth point lies a creek, served (so far as I remember)
with a fresh water that comes from the hills south of Soutleie Sid.
or Branscombe. Sidmouth haven is the next, and thither comes a fresh water
by S. Mary's from the said hills, that goes from S. Mary's aforesaid to
Sidburie, and between Saltcombe and Sidmouth into the maine sea. Autrie alias
Ottercie.
By west of Auterton point also lies another haven, and thither comes a
pretty riueret, whose head is in the Hackpendon hills, and comes down first
by Upauter, then by a park side to Mohuns Auter, Munketon, Honniton,
Buckewell, and north of Autrie receives a rill called Tale, Tale.
that rises northwest of Brodemburie in a wood, and from whence it comes by
Pehemburie, Uinniton, and making a confluence with the other, they go as one
between Cadde and Autrie, to Herford, Luton, Collaton, Auterton, Budeleie, and
so into the sea. On the west side of this haven is Budeleie almost directly
against Otterton. It is easy to be seen also, that within less space than
one hundred years, ships did use this haven, but now it is barred up. Some call
it Budeleie haven of Budeleie town, others Salterne port, of a little creek
coming out of the maine haven unto Salterne village, that has in time past
been a town of great estimation.

The Exe rises in Exemore in Summersetshire, Exe.
near unto Exe cross, and goes from thence unto Exeford, Winsford, and
Extun, where it receives a water coming from Cutcombe, by north. After this
confluence it goes on toward the south, till it meet with a pretty brook
rising northeast of Whettell (going by Brunton Regis) increased at the least
with three rilles which come all from by north. These being once met, this
water runs on by west of the beacon that bears the name of Haddon, and
soon after takes in the Barleie, Barleie. Done alias Done stroke.
that receives in like sort the Done at Hawkbridge, and from hence goes by
Dauerton, and Comb, and then does meet with the Exe, almost in the very
confines between Dorset and Summerset shires. Being past this conjunction, our
Exe passes between Brushford and Murbath, and then to Exe bridge, where it
takes in (as I hear) a water by west from east Austie: and after this
likewise another on each side, whereof one comes from Dixford, Woodburne.
and Baunton, the other called Woodburne, somewhat by east of Okeford. From
these meetings it goes to Cave and through the forest and woods to Hatherland
and Washfields, until it come to Tiuerton, and here it receives the Lomund
water that rises above Ashbrittle, and comes down by Hockworthie, upper
Loman, and so to Tiuerton that stands almost even in the very confluence.
Some call this Lomund the Simming brook or Sunnings bath. Lomund or Simming.
After this our Exe goes to Bickleie, Theuerten (taking in a rill by west)
nether Exe, Bramford, beneath which it ioineth with the Columbe that rises of
one head northeast of Clarie Haidon, Columbe.
and of another south of Shildon, and meeting beneath Columbe stock, goes by
Columbe and Bradfeld, and there crossing a rill that comes by Ashford, it
runs south to Wood, More haies, Columbton, Brandnicke, Bear, Columbe John,
Horham, and ioining (as I said) with the Exe at Bramford, passing under but one
bridge, yer it meet with another water by west, growing of the Forten and Cride
waters (except it be so that I do judge amiss.) Cride. Forten.
The Cride rises above Wolle sworthie, and near unto Upton: after it is past
Dewrish, crosses a rill from between Puggill and Stockeleie by Stock
English, etc. From hence it goes to Fulford, where it meets with the Forten,
whereof one branch comes by Caldbrooke, the other from S. Marie Tedburne, and
ioining above Crediton, the channel goes on to the Cride, (which yer long also
receives another from by north, coming by Stockeleie and Comb) then between
Haine and Newton Sires, to Pines, and so into the Exe, which staieth not until
it come to Excester. From Excester (whither the burgesses in time past labored
to bring the same, but in vain) it runs to Were, there taking in a rill
from by west, and an other lower by Exminster, next of all unto Toppesham;
Cliuus.
beneath which town the Cliue enters thereinto, which rising about Plumtree,
goes by Clift Haidon, Clift Laurence, Broad Clift, Honiton, Souton, Bishops
Clift, S. Marie Clift, Clift saint George, and then into the Exe, that runs
forward by Notwell court, Limston and Ponderham castle. Here (as I hear) it
takes in the Ken, (...)
or Kenton brook (as Leland calls it) coming from Holcombe park, by
Dunsdike, Shillingford, Kenford, Ken, Kenton, and so into Exe haven, at whose
mouth lie certain rocks which they call the Checkston^es, except Leland says
nothing at all, comes by Ashcombe and Dulish, and has his head in the hills
thereby.

The Teigne mouth is the next fall that he came to, Teigne.
and it is a goodly port four miles from Exemouth. The head of this water is
twenty miles from the sea at Teigne head in Dartmore among the Gidleie hills.
From whence it goes to Gidleie town, Crokerne.
Teignton drue, where it receives the Crokerne coming from by north, and
likewise an other Bouie. Eidis.
taking in Eidis, a brook beneath Preston that comes from Edeford by the
way. And when it is past this confluence, at kings Teignton, Leman.
it crosses the Leman, which comes from Saddleton rock by Beckington, and
Newton Bushels: Aller.
and soon after the Aller that rises

The very utter west point of the land, at the mouth of Teigne is called the
Nesse, and is a very high red cliffe. The east part of the haven is named the
Poles, a low sandy ground, either cast up by the spuing of the sand out of the
Teigne, or else thrown up from the shore by the rage of wind and water. This
sand occupies now a great quantity of the Regis) has in time past been sore
defaced by the Danes, and of late timeby the French.

From Teignemouth we came to Tor baie, whereof the west point is called Birie,
and the east Perritorie, between which is little above four miles. From Tor
baie also to Dartmouth is six miles, where (says Leland) I marked diverse
things. First of all upon the east side of the haven a great hilly point

The river of Dart or Darent (for I read Derenta muth for Dartmouth) Dart.
comes out of Dartmore fifteen miles above Totnesse, in a very large plot,
and such another wild morish and forrestie ground as Ermore is. Of it self
moreover this water is very swift, and thorough occasion of tin-workes whereby
it passes, it carries much sand to Totnesse b^^dge, and so choketh the depth
of the river downward, that the haven it self is almost spoiled by the same.
The mariners of Dartmouth account this to be about a kenning from Plimmouth.
The Darent therefore proceeding from the place of his vprising, goes on to
Buckland, Ashburne.
from whence it goes to Buckland hole; and soon after taking in the Ashburne
water on the one side that runs from Saddleton rock by north, Buckeastlich.
and the Buckfastlich that comes from north west, it runs to Staunton,
Darington, Hemston, and there also crossing a rill on each side passes forth
to Totnesse, Bowden, and above Gabriell Stoke meets with the Hartburne that
runs under Roast bridge, two miles above Totnes, Hartburne.
or (as another says) by Ratter, Harberton, Painesford, and Asprempton into
Darent, which yer long also comes to Corneworthie, Grenewaie, Ditsham,
Darntmouth town (whereunto king John gave sometimes a mayor, as he did unto
Totnesse) from thence between the castelles, and finally into sea.

From hence we went by Stokeflemming to another water, which comes from
black Auton, then to the second that falls in east of Slapton, and so
coasting out of this baie by the Start point, we sail almost directly west,
till we come to Saltcombe haven. Certes this port has very little fresh water
coming to it, and therefore no meruell though it be barred; yet the head of it
(such as it is) rises near Buckland, and goes to Dudbrooke, which stands
between two creekes. Thence it hieth to Charleton, where it takes in a rill,
whose head comes from south and north of Shereford. Finally, it has another
creek that runs up by Ilton: and the last of all that falls in north of
Portlemouth, whose head is so near the baie last before remembered, that it
makes it a sorry peninsula (as I have heard it said.)

Then come we to the Own, Own.
whose head is in the hills far above Brent town, from whence it goes to
Dixford wood, Loddewell, Hache, Aunton, Thorleston, and so into the sea over
against a rock called S. Michaels burrow. Arm rises above Harford, Arm.
thence to Stoford, Iuie bridge, Armington bridge, Fleet, Orchardton, Ownewell,
and so unto the sea, which is full of flats and rocks, so that no ship comes
thither in any tempest, except it be forced thereto, through the uttermost
extremity and desperate hazard of the fearful mariners. King Philip of
Castile lost two ships here in the days of king Henry the seventh, See Hen.
7. page 792, 793, 794.
when he was driven to land in the west country by the rage of weather. Yaline.
Yalme goes by Cornewood, Slade, Stratleie, Yalmeton, Collaton. Newton ferrie,
and so into the sea, about four miles by south east from the maine stream of
Plimmouth. Being past these portlets, then next of all we come to Plimmouth
haven, Plim.
a very busy piece to describe, because of the numbers of waters that resort
unto it, and small help that I have for the knowledge of their courses; yet
will I do what I may in this, as in the rest, and so much I hope by Gods grace
to perform, as shall suffice my purpose in this behalf.

The Plimne or Plim, Plim.
is the very same water that gives name to Plimpton town. The mouth of this
gulf, wherein the ships do ride, is walled on each side and chained over in
time of necessity, and on the south side of the haven is a block house upon a
rockie hill: but as touching the river it self, it rises in the hills west of
Cornewood, and comes down a short course of three miles to Newenham after it
be issued out of the ground. From Newenham also it runs to Plimpton, and
soon after into the Stoure, Stoure alias Catwater.
which Stoure arises northwest of Shepistour, and goes from thence to
Memchurch, Hele. Shane, Bickleie, and so to Eford, where taking in the Plim, it
runs down as one under the name of Plim, until it go past Plimmouth, and
fall into the haven south east of Plimmouth aforesaid. I have oftentimes
traveled to find out the cause why so many rivers in England are called by
this name Stoure, and at the first supposing that it was grown by the
corruption of Dour, the British word for a stream, I rested thereupon as
resolved for a season: but afterward finding the word to be mere Saxon, and
that Stouremare is a province subject to the duke of Saxony, I yielded to
another opinion: whereby I

Plimmouth it self stands between two creeks, not served with any
backewater, therefore passing over these two, we enter into the Thamer that
discharges it self into the aforsaid haven. Going therefore up that stream,
which for the most part parts Devonshire from Cornwall, the first riueret
that I met withal on the east side is called Tauie, Taue or Tauie.
the head whereof is among the mounteins four miles above Lidde.
the next that falls in on the east side upwards is the Lidde, which rising
in the hills above Lidford, runs down by Curriton and Siddenham, and so to
Lidstone, above which it receives the Trushell brook, Trushell.
which rising north east of Brediston, goes by Trusholton to Ibaine, where it
receives a rill that comes by Bradwood from Germanswike, and after the
confluence runs to Liston, and from thence into the Thamar. The next above
this is the Corewater, Core.
this

Certes, the Thamar Thamar.
it self rises in Summersetshire, Arteie.
that rises short of Iacobstow. Two miles in like sort from this confluence,
we met with the Kenseie, Kenseie.
from whence it goes by Treneglos, Tremone, Tresmure, Trewen, Lanfton, and so
into the Thamar, that runs from hence by Lowwhitton unto Bradston, and going
on toward Dunterton, takes in a rill from south Pitherwi^c, Enian.
and by Lesant; beneath Dunterton also it crosses the Enian. This river rises
at Dauidston, and directs his race by saint Clethir, Lancast, and Trelaske
first; and then under sundry bridges, until it meet with the Thamar. From
hence also the Thamar goes by Siddenham to Calstocke bridge, Calstocke town,
Clifton, Cargreue (there abouts taking in a creek above Landilip) and running
on from thence, hastes toward Saltash, Liver.
where it receives the Liver water. The head of Liver is about Broomwellie
hill, from whence it goes on to North hill, Lekenhorne, South hill, and taking
in a rill by east (from above Kellington) it runs on to Newton, Pillaton,
Wootton, Blosfleming, saint Erne, and beneath this village crosses a rillet
that runs thither from Bicton by Quithiocke, saint Germans, and Sheuiocke.
But to proceed. After the confluence, it goes between Erlie and Fro Martine
castle, and soon after taking in a rill from by north, that passes west of
saint Steuens, it is not long yer it fall into the Thamar, which after this
(receiving the Milbrooke creek) goes on by Edgecombe, and between saint
Michaels I Will and Ridden point into the maine sea. And thus have I finished the
description of Plimmouth water, and all such falls as are between Mewston
rock on the east side, and the Ram head on the other.

After this we proceeded on with our journey toward the west, Sutton.
and passing by Longstone, we came soon after to Sothan baie, where we crossed
the Seton water, whose head is about Liscard, and his course by Minheniet,
Chafrench, Tregowike, Sutton, and so into the sea. Then came we to Low, Low.
and going in between it and Mount I Will, we find that it had a branched course,
and thereto the confluence above Low. The chief head rises in the hills, as it
were two miles above Gain, and going by that town, it cease not to continue
his course east of Dulo, till it come a little above Low, where it crosses and
ioineth with the Brodoke water that runs from Brodokes by Trewargo, and so
into the sea. Next unto these are two other rils, of which one is called
Polpir, Polpir. Fawie.
before we come at Foy, or Fawy.

Foy or Fawy river rises in Fawy moore, on the side of an hill in Fawy moore,
from whence it runs by certain bridges, till it meet with the Glin water
west of Glin town, Glin.
which rising above Temple, and meeting with a rill that comes in from S.
Neotes, does fall into Fawy a mile and more above Resprin from by east. After
this confluence then, it goes to Resprin bridge, Lestermen castle,
Loftwithiell bridge, Pill, saint Kingtons, saint Winnow, and Golant, and here
also receives the Lerine water out of a park, Lerinus.
that takes his way into the maine stream by Biconke, Tethe, and the Fining
house. Being thus united, it proceeds unto Fawy town, taking in a rill or
creek from above it on the one side, and another beneath it south of Halling
on the other: of which two this latter is the longest of course, fith it
runs three good miles before it come at the Foy. Leland writing of this
river adds very largely unto it after this manner. Faw.
The Fawy rises in Fawy moore (about two miles from Camilford by south, and
sixteen miles from Fawy town) in a very quaue mire on the side of an hill.
From hence it goes to Drainesbridge, to Clobham bridge, Lergen bridge, New
bridge, Resprin bridge, and Lostwithiell bridge, where it meets with a little
brook, and near thereunto parts it self in twain. Of these two arms
therefore one goes to a bridge of stone, the other to another of timber, and
soon after ioining again, the maine river goes to saint Gwinnowes, from
thence also to the point of saint Gwinnowes wood, which is about half a mile
from thence, except my memory does fail me. Here goes in a salt creek
half a mile on the east side of the haven, and at the head of it is a bridge
called Lerine bridge; the creek it self in like manner bearing the same
denomination.

From Lerine creek, to S. Caracs pill or creek, In the middle of this creek
was a cell of S. Ciret in an Islet longing sometime to Mountagew a priorie.
is about half a mile, and Lower on the east side of the said haven: it goes
up also above a mile and an half into the land. From Caracs creek to
Poulmorland a mile, and this likewise goes up scant a quarter of a mile into
the land, yet at the head it parts it self in twain. From Poulmorland weto
Bodnecke village half a mile, where the passage and repassage is commonly to
Fawy. From Bodnecke to Pelene point (where a creek goes up not fully a
thousand paces into the land) a mile, thence to Poulruan a quarter of a mile,
and at this Poulruan is a tower of force, marching against the tower on
Comwhath.
and being situat on the northside of the haven, is set hanging on a maine
rockie hill, being in length about one quarter of a mile, except

The renown of Fawy rose by the wars under king Edward the first, Edward the
third, and Henry the fifth, partly by feats of arms, and partly by plain
pirasie. Finally, the townsmen feeling themselves somewhat at ease and strong
in their purses, they fell to merchandise, and so they prospered in this their
new devise, that as they traveled into all places, so merchants from all
countries made resort to them, whereby within a while they grew to be exceeding
Gallants of Foy or Fawy.
whereof they not a little reioised, and more peradventure than for some
greater booty. And thus much of Fawy town, wherein we see

Being therefore past this haven, we come into Trewardith baie, which lies
into the land between Canuasse and the Black head point, and hereabout Leland
places Vrctoum promontorium. In this we saw the fall of two small brooks, not
one very far

When we were past the Black head, we came to Austell brook, Austell.
which is increased with a water that comes from above Mewan, and within a
mile after the confluence, they fall into the sea at Pentoren, from whence we
went by the Black rock, and about the Dud^^an point, till we came to Chare
haies, where falls in a pretty water, Chare.
whose head is two miles above saint Tues. Thence we went by here and there a
mere salt creek, till we passed the Graie rock, in Gi^in^raith baie, and S.
Anthonies point, where Leland makes his account to enter into Falamouth haven.

The Fala rises a little by north of Penuenton town, Fala.
and going westward till it come downwards toward saint Dionise, it goes from
thence to Melader, saint Steuens Grampont, Goldon, Creed, Corneleie, Tregue,
Moran, Tregu^^an, it falls into the haven with a good indifferent force: and
this is the course of Fala. But least I should seem to omit those creekes that
are between this and S. Anthonies point, I will go a little back again, and
fetch in so mani^ of them, as come now to my remembrance. Entering therefore
into the port, we have a creek that runs up by saint Anthonies toward saint
Gereus, then another that goes into the land by east of saint Mary's castle,
with a forked head, passing in the mean time by a great rock that lies in
the very midst of the haven, in manner of the third point of a triangle,
between saint Mary's castle and Pendinant.

Thence we cast about by the said castle, and came by another creek that
falls in by east, then the second above saint Iustus, the third at Ardenora,
the fourth at Rilan. And having as it were visited all these in order, we come
back again about by Tregonnian, and then going upward between it and
Taluerne, till we came to Fentangolan, we found the confluence of two great
creekes beneath saint Clements, whereof one has a fresh water coming down by
S. Mer^her, the other another from Truro, increased with sundry branches,
though not one of them of any greatness, and therefore unworthy to be
handled. Pole hole stands upon the head almost of the most easterlie of them.
S. Kenwen and Truro stand above the confluence of other two. The fourth falls
in by west from certain hills: as for the fifth and sixth, as they be little
creeks and no fresh, so have I less language and talk to spend about them.

Of saint Caie, and saint Feokes creek, whose issue is between Restronget and
creek of Trurie, I see no cause to make any long speech; yet I remember that
the town of S. Feoke stands between them both. S. Caie. S. Feoks
That also called after this saint, rising above Perannarwothill, and coming
thence by Kirklo, falls into Falamouth, northeast of Milor, which stands
upon the point between it and Milor creek. Milor creek is next Restronget:
Milor.
some call it Milor poole, from whence we went by Trefusis point, and there
found an other great fall from Perin, which being branched in the top, has
Perin town almost in the very confluence. And thus much by my collection of
the fall. But for so much as Leland has taken some pains in the description of
this river, I will not suffer it to perish, since there is other matter
contained therein worthy remembrance, although not delivered in such order as
the thing it self requires.

The very point (says he) of the haven mouth (being an hill whereon the king
has builded a castle) Fala.
is called Pendinant. It is about a mile in compass, almost environed with the
sea: and where the sea covers not, the ground is so low that it were a small
mastrie to make Pendinant an Island. Furthermore, there lies a cape or foreland
within the haven a mile and a half, and betwixt this and master Killigrewes
house one great arm of the haven runs up to Penrine town, which is three
miles from the very entry of Falamouth haven, and two good miles from
Penfusis. Leuine.
Moreover, there is Leuine, Priselo, betwixt saint Budocus and Pendinas, which
were a good haven but for the bar of sand. But to proceed.

The first creek or arm that casts on the northwest side of Falemouth
haven, goes up to Perin, and at the end it breaks into two arms, whereof
the less runs to Glasenith, Viridis nidus, the green nest, or Wagmeere at
Penrine: the other to saint Glunias the parish church of Penrine. In like sort
Milor.
which goes up a mile into the land, and by the church is a good rode for
ships. The next creek beyond the point of Restronget wood, is called
Restronget, which going Restronget.
breaks into two arms. In like order betwixt Restronget and the creek of
Trurie be two creekes; one called saint Feokes, S. Feoks.
the other saint Caie, S. Caie.
next unto which is Trurie creek that goes up about two miles creeking from
the principal stream, and breaks within half a mile of Trurie, casting in
a branch westward even hard by Newham wood.

This creek of Trurie is divided into two parts before the town of Trurie,
Trurie creek
and each of them having Moran.
This creek goes up a quarter of a mile from the maine stream into the
haven, as the maine stream goes up two miles above Moran creek ebbing and
flowing: and a quarter of a mile higher is the town of Cregowie, where we
found a bridge of stone upon the Fala river. Fala it self rises a mile

This Graund pont is four miles from Roche hill, Graund pont.
and two little miles from Cregowie, betwixt which the Fala takes his course.
From Cregowie to pass down by the body of the haven of Falamouth to the
mouth of Lanie horn pill or creek, on the south side of the haven is a mile,
and (as I remember) it goes up half a mile from the principal stream of the
haven. From Lanihorne pill also is a

In like manner from saint Iustes pill or creek (for both signify one thing)
to saint Mawes creek is a mile and a half, S. Iustus. S. Mawes.
and the point between them both is called Pendinas. The creek of saint Mawes
goes up a two miles by east northeast into the land, and beside that it ebbeth
and flows so far, there is a mill driven with a fresh creek that resorteth
to the same. Half a mile from the head of this downward to the haven, is a
creek in manner of a poole, whereon is a mill also that grindeth with the tide.
And a mile beneath that on the south side enters a creek (about half a mile
into the country) which is barred from the maine sea by a small sandy bank,
and another mile yet lower, is an other little creekelet. But how so ever these
creekes do run, certain it is that the banks of them that belong to Fala are
meruellouslie well woodded. And hitherto Leland, whose words I dare not alter,
for fear of corruption and alteration of his judgment. Being past Falmouth
haven therefore (as it were a quarter of a mile beyond Arwennach, master
Killegrewes place which stands on the brimme or shore within Falmouth) we
came to a little haven which ran up between two hills, but it was barred:
wherefore we could not learn whether it were served with any back fresh
water or not.

From thence we went by Polwitherall creek Polwitherall. Polpenrith.
(parted into two arms) then to the Polpenrith, whereunto a riueret falls
that rises not far from thence, and so goes to the maine stream of the
haven at the last, whither the creek resorteth about three miles and more from
the mouth of the haven, Wike.
and into which the water that goes under Gare Gare.
and Mogun Mogun.
bridges, do fall in one bottom (as Leland has reported.) Unto this haven
also repaireth the Penkestell, Penkestell.
the Callous, Callous.
the Cheilow, Cheilow.
and the Gilling, Gilling.
although this latter lies against saint Mawnons on the hither side hard
without the haven mouth (if I have done aright.) For so motheaten, mouldie,
and rotten are those books of Leland which I have, and beside that, his
annotations are such and so confounded, as no man can (in a manner) pick out
any sense from them by a leaf together. Wherefore I suppose that he dispersed
and made his notes intricate of set purpose: or else he was loath that any man
should easily come to that knowledge by reading, which he with his great
charge and no less travel atteined unto by experience. Thus leaving Fala
haven, as more troublesome for me to describe, than profitable for seafaring
men, without good advise to enter into, we left the rock on our left hand, and
came straight southwest to Helford haven, whose water comes down from Wreeke
(where is a confluence of two small rilles whereof that rill consists) Hail.
by Mawgan and Trelawarren, and then it receives a rill on the north ripe from
Constantine, after whose confluence it goes a maine until it come to the
Ocean, where the mouth is spoiled by sand coming from the tinworks. See Leland
in the life of S. Breaca. Beneath this also is another rill coming from S.
Martyrs, by whose course, and another over against it on the west side that
falls into the sea by Winniton, all Menage is left almost in manner of an
Island. From hence we go south to the Manacle point, then southwest to Lisard,
and so north and by west to Predannocke points, beyond which we meet with the
fall of the said water, that rises in the edge of Menag, and goes into the
sea by Melien on the north, and Winniton on the south. By north also of
Winniton is the Curie water that runs short of Magan, Curie.
and touches with the Ocean south of Pengwenian point.

From hence we sailed to the Loo mouth, Loo.
which some call Lopoole, because it is narrower at the fall into the sea, than
it is between the sea and Hailston. It rises above S. Sethians, and coming
down by Wendron, it hastes to Hailston or Helston, from whence only it is
called Loo: but between Helston and the head, men call it commonly Cohor. Of
this river Leland says thus: The Lopoole is two miles in length, and betwixt
it and the maine Ocean is but a bar of sand that once in three or four
years, what by weight of the fresh water, and working of the sea breaks out,
at which time it makes a wonderful noise: but soon after the mouth of it is
barred up again. At all other times the superfluity of the water of Lopole
(which is full of trout and eele) draineth out through the sandy bar into
the open sea: certes if this bar could always be kept open, it would make a
goodly haven up unto Haileston town,

Being passed the Loo, I came to another water that descends without any
increase from Crowan by Simneie, Simneie.
whose whole course is not above three miles in all. Then going by the Cuddan
point, we entered the mounts Baie, and going straight north (leaving S.
Michaels mount a little upon the left hand) we came to the Lid, which rising
short of Tewidnacke, descends by Lidgenan, Lid.
and so into the sea. Certes Bresan I Will
and rather more, if you reckon to the fall of the Hail, which lies in the
very midst

The Hail rises in such manner, Hail.
and from so many heads, as I have before said: howbeit I will add somewhat
more unto it, for the benefit of my readers. Certes the chief head of Hail
rises by west of Goodalfin hills, and going down toward saint Clowart.
south of Phelacke, which has two heads the said village standing directly
betwixt them both.

The Caine rises southeast of Caineburne town a mile and more, Caine.
from whence it goes without increase by west of Gwethian, and so into the sea
west of Mara Darwaie. From hence we coasted about the point, and left the baie
till we came to a water that rises of two heads from those hills that lie by
south of the same: one of them also runs by saint Uni, another by Redreuth,
and meeting within a mile, they fall into the Ocean beneath Luggam or Tuggan.
Luggam.
A mile and a half from this fall we come unto another small rill, and
likewise two other creekes, betwixt which the town of saint Agnes stands;
and likewise the fourth half a mile beyond the most easterlie of these, whose
head is almost three miles within the land in a town called saint Alin. Thence
going by the Manrocke, and west of saint Piran in the sand, we find a course of
three miles and more from the head, and having a forked branch, the parts do
meet at west above saint Kibbard, and so go into the sea. I take this to be
saint Pirans creek, S. Pirans creek. Carantocke.
for the next is Carantocke pill or creek, whose head is at Guswarth, from
whence it goes unto Trerise, and soon after taking in a rill from by west, it
runs into the sea coast of saint Carantakes. Beyond this is another creek
that rises above little saint Colan, and goes by less saint Columbe: and
east and by north hereof comes down one more whose head is almost south of
the Nine stones, and going from thence to great saint Columbes, it passes by
Lamberne, and so into the sea. S. Merous creek is but a little one, rising
west of Padstow, and falling in almost over against the Gull rock. Then
turning between the point and the black rock, we entered into Padstow haven
three miles lower than port Issec, and a mile from port Gwin, Padstow. Locus
bufonis. Alannus.
whose waters remain next of all to be described.

The Alan arises flat east from the haven mouth of Padstow, well near eight
or nine miles about Dauidstone, near unto which the Eniam also issues, Eniam.
that runs into the Thamar. Going therefore from hence it passes to
Camelford, saint Aduen, saint Bernard (both Cornish saints) and soon after
receives a rill at northeast, descending from Rowters hill. Thence it goes to
Bliseland, and Helham, the first bridge of name that stands upon Alin. Yer
long also it takes in one rill by south from Bodman, another from saint
Laurence, the third by west of this, and the fourth that comes by Wethiell,
no one of them exceeding the course of three miles, and all by south. From
hence it goes toward Iglesaleward, and there receives a water on the east
side, which comes about two miles from saint Teath, by Michelston, saint
Tuchoe, saint Maben (mo Cornish patrons) and finally south of Iglesall,
meets with the Alen that goes from thence by S. Breaca to Woodbridge.
Hereabout I find, that into our Alein or Alen, there should fall two riuerets,
whereof the one is called Carneseie, Carneseie. Lain.
the other Lain, and coming in the end to full notice of the matter, I see
them to issue on several sides beneath Woodbridge almost directly the one
against the other. That which descends from northwest, and rises about saint
Kew, is named Carneseie, as I hear: the other that comes in on the southwest
bank hight Lain, and noted by Leland to rise two miles above S. Esse. But
howsoever this matter stands, there are two other creekes on each side also,
beneath these, as Pethrike creek, Pethrike. Minner.
and Minner creek (so called of the Cornish saints) for that soil bred many,
wherewith I finish the description of Alen, or (as some call it) Dunmere,
Dunmere.
and other Padstow water.

From Padstow haven also they sail out full west to Waterford in Ireland.
There are likewise two rocks, which lie in the east side of the haven,
secretly hidden at full sea, as two pads in the straw, whereof I think it
takes the name. Yet I remember how I have read that Padstow is a corrupted
word for Adlestow, and should signify so much as Athelstani locus, as it may
well be. For it is evident that they ^ad in time past sundry charters of
privilege from Athelstane, although at this present it be well stored with
Irishmen. But to our purpose. Leland supposes this river to be the same
Camblan, where Arthur fought his last and fatal conflict: for to this day men
that do ear the ground there, do often plow up bones of a large size, and
great store of armor, or else it may be (as I rather conjecture) that the
Romans had some field (or Castra) thereabout, for not long since (and in the
remembrance of man) a brass pot full of Roman coin was found there, as I
have often heard. Being thus passed Padstow haven, and after we had gone three
miles from hence, alias Cunilus two miles further, and found there a brook, a
peer, and some succor for fisher boats. Next of all unto a brook that ran
from south east, directly north into the Sauerne sea, and within half a mile
of the same lay a great black rock like an Island. From this water to
Treuenni is about a mile, where the paroch church is dedicated to saint
Simphorian, and in which paroch also Tintagell or Dundagie

The next creek is called Bosinni, which is a mile from Tintagell, and to the
same Tredwie water Tredwie.
and so they go to the sea betwixt two hills, whereof that on the one side lies
out like an arm or cape, and makes the fashion of an hauenet or peer,
whither shiplets sometime do resort for succor. A friar of late days took
upon him to make an haven at this place, but in vain. There lie also two
black rocks as Ilets, at the west northwest point, or side of this creek, the
one (saving that a little gut does part them) ioining with the other, and in
these by all likelihood is great store of gulles. I can not tell whether
Boscastell.
Boscastell creek that lies east of Tintagell, is but a small thing, running
at the most not above two miles, into the land, yet it passes by four towns,
whereof the first is called Lesneth, the second saint Juliet, the third
Minster, and the fourth Boscastell or Bushcastell, as some men do pronounce it.

In Bid baie I find the Bedewater, Bid.
whose chief Lancels.
it receives the Lancels rill before it come at Norham. And here also it
crosses another whose head is east of saint Marie w^ke, from whence it runs
by Wolston and Whalesborow, and thence into the sea between Efford and Plough
hill. And thus much of the waters that lie between the point of Cornwall, and
the Hartland head upon the north side of Cornwall. Now let us do the like
with those that remain of Devonshire, whereof the said Hartland

The first and more westerlie of these is called Ocus, Ocus.
whose head is not far west of the head of Darnt, and does in Darntmore.
Rising therefore in the aforesaid place, it runs northwest to Snorton, and
so to Okehampton, beneath which town it meets with an other water coming
from southeast, and rises not much west from the head of Tawe. From hence it
goes to Stow Exborne, Moonke Okington, and Iddesleie, Tanridge. Turrege.
where it takes in the Tanridge a very pretty streamelet, whose issue is not
full a mile by east from the head of Thamar, three miles by north east from
Hartland. Coming therefore by west and east Putford, Bulworthie, Bockington,
Newton, and Shebbor, it receives a forked rill that runs from each side of
Bradworthie by Sutcombe, Treborow, Milton, and so to Thornebirie, where meeting
with an other forked water (whereof one head coming from Duns^and, ioineth
with the other north of Cockbirie) it goes with speed into the Tanridge water.
After this confluence it runs on to Sheepewash (by west whereof falls in
the Buckland water from by north) thence to high Hainton, Buckland.
and so to Haitherlaie, north whereof it takes in a rill from by south, and
ends his race at Iddesleie, by ioining with the Oak. Hence then the Ocus
hastes to Dowland, and between it and Doulton, receives one rill from by
east, as it does an other between Doulton and Marton from by west, and so
proceeding on with his course, it comes cast of Torrington the less, and
taking in a water at east, that runs from three heads (by Wollie park)
between which Comb and Roughborow are situat, it descends to Torington the
more, and meeting with the Langtree water on the one side, Langtree.
and the Ware brook on the other, Were or Ware.
it proceeds to Bediford, crossing a rill by the way that comes unto it
between Annarie and Littham. From Bediford bridge it goes without any
increase to Westleie, Norham, Appledoure, and so into the haven.

The Taw of both is the more noble water, Taw.
notwithstanding that his haven be barred with sand; and thereby dangerous, and
has most rils descending into his channel. Howbeit, by these two is all the
heart of Devonshire well watered on the northside of the moors. The Tawy rises
directly at south west of Throwleie, and north of the head of Darnt, or (as
Leland says) in Exmoore south east from Barstable. From thence also it runs
to Sele, South Taueton, Cockatre, Bath, Northtaueton, Ashridge, Colridge, and
soon after receives the Bowmill creek, Bowmill.
whereof one head rises at Bow, the other at Mill, and meeting beneth Bishops
Morchard, they fall into the Taw north of Nimeth Rowland, as I have been
informed. From hence then it runs by Edgeforth, to Chimligh, by south
whereof it meets with a rill coming down of two heads from about Rakenford,
by Wetheridge and Chawleie. Thence it goes to Burrington, and Chiltenholtwood,
and there takes in the Moulebraie water Moulebraie.
consisting of two in one channel, whereof the Moll does rise above north
Moulton, and coming to Moulton receives another rill running from Molland,
and soon after the second that growing by two brooks (the head of one being
at Knawston, and of the other west of Crokeham, and both uniting themselves
beneath Mariston) does fall into the same yer long also, and so go together
till it cross the Braie, which (being the second of the two that makes the
Moulbraie) rises at Braie, Braie.
comes by Buckland, and south of Holtwood does make his confluence with Taw.
Being past the wood, it goes on to Brightleie hall, Taueton, Tauestocke, and
Berstable, sometime a pretty walled town with four gates, but now a little
thing; and such in deed, as that the suburbs thereof are greater than it
self. I suppose that the name of this town in the British speech was Abertaw,
because it stood toward the mouth of Taw, and Berdnesse pronounced short (as I
guess) for Abernesse. As for Staple, it is an addition for a market, and
therefore has nothing to do in the proper name of the town. King Athelstane
is taken here for the chief priuileger of the town. This is also worthy to
be noted hereof, that the houses there are of stone, as most are in all the
good towns thereabout.

But to proceed with our purpose. Beneath this town there falls in a water
that has one head near about Challacombe, and another at east Down, whereof
this descending by Stoke river, and the other by Sherwell, they unite
themselves within three miles of Berstaple. Soon after also it takes in
another that descends from Bitenden by Ashford, and the last of all east of
saint Anthonies chapel, named Doneham.
because one head is at west Done, and the other at Ham, both of them meeting
west of Ash. And thus is Taue described, which is no great water nor quick
stream, as may appear in Low water mark at Berstable, and yet is it a pretty
riueret. This also is worthy to be noted thereof, that it receives no brook
from by west, whereof I would somewhat marvel, if Taurige were not at hand.

Being past the Taue, Cride baie and Bugpoint alias Bagpoint, we go by More
baie, Morstone alias Paradine.
whereat (I mean each of them) are sundry creekes of salt water, but not
served with any fresh that I as yet do hear of. Marry there is between
Martinbow and Trensow, a creek that has a backewater, which descends from
Parracombe (so far as I call to mind named Parradine beck) but the greatest
of all is between Linton and Connisberie called Ore, Orus.
which rises in Summersetshire The breadth of Devonshire and Cornwall.
whose breadth in this place from hence overthwart to the Checkstones in the
mouth of Ex, on the south side of the I Will, is eight and thirty miles or under
forty, and so much likewise is it from Plimmouth to Hartland point, but

Being past the aforesaid limits of the counties we came to Portloch baie, Loch.
whither comes a water named Loch that descends from Stokepero, Lucham and
Portloch without increase. Thence to Dunsteir brook, Durus.
which runs from about Wootton, and Courtneie by Tunbercombe and Dunsteir,
then to another that comes west of Old Cliffe, Vacetus.
whereof one head comes from the Quantocke hills south of Bickualer by
Westquantocke head, and almost at Doniford, receives the Williton Williton.
beck, then to east Quantocke brook (omitting a creeket) and next of all to
Doddington Doddington.
water, that goes by Holford, Alfoxton, and afterward into the sea. From hence
we go by Bottesall point, to Stert point, where two noble rivers do make their
confluence, which I will severally describe, as

The first of these is called the Iuell, or (as I find it in an ancient writer)
Yoo, Iuelus.
who says that the river Yoo does run from Ilchester to Bridgewater, and so
into the sea. It rises above Oburne, and at Shirburne receives a water,
whereof Leland says thus. There are seven springs in an hill called the seven
sisters, The seven sisters.
north east from Shireburne, which gather into one bottom, and come into the
Mere. Another brook likewise comes by Heidon from Puscandell, three miles
from thence by flat east, betwixt the park and the Mere full so great as the
stream of the Mere, and ioining at the lower mill of Shireburne, with the Mere
water, it is not long yer it fall into the Evil. Thence our Evil goes on
toward Glasen Bradford, and yer it come there takes in a forked rill from by
south, descending from about west Chelburie and Chetnall in Dorsetshire,
beneath which town the other head falls into the same, so that they run
forth by Bearhaggard and Thorneford (till they meet with the Iuell) and so to
Clifton, Evil a proper market town, Trent, Mutford, Ashinton, and east of
Limminton it meets with the Cade Cade.
that runs from Yarlington, by north Cadbirie, and soon after crossing a
rill also from by east, that comes from Blackeford by Compton, it hastes to
south Cadbirie, Sparkeford, Queens Camel, west Camel, and so into Iuell,
which runs on to Kimmington, Ilchester, Ilbridge, long Sutton, and yer it
come at Langport, takes in two famous waters in one channel, next of all to be
remembered before I go any further. The first of all these rises southeast
between the Parrets (where it is called Parret water) and goes to Crokehorne,
Parret.
and at Meriot takes in a brook from the east, which consists of two
courses united at Bowbridge, whereof the one descends from Pen by Hasilburie,
the other from above the three Chenocks, as I do understand.

From hence also they go as one with the Parret water, toward south Pederton
(taking in at east a beck coming from Hamden hill) thence to Pederton,
Lambrooke, Thorneie bridge, and Muchelneie where it meets with the second
called Ill or Ilus, Ill.
whose head is above Chellington, and coming down from thence by Cadworth,
before it come at Dunniet, it takes in a rill that runs by Chascombe and
Knoll. Thence leaving Ilmister on the east side, it meets with another from
by east, descending from about Whitlakington. Then it goes to Pokington (where
it crosses the Ilton water by west) Ilton.
next to Ilbruers, and there it ioineth with a rillet that rises by west at
Staple, and runs by Bicknell and Abbats Ilie, and after this confluence
goes on toward Langport. And here after some men's opinion, the Iuell loses
his name, and is called Parret: but this conjecture cannot hold, since in the
old writers it is called Iuell, till it fall into the sea. Nevertheless, how
soever this matter stands), being past Langport, it goes by Awber toward
saint Anthonies, where it meets with the Tone next of all to be described.

The Tone issues at Clatworthie, Tone.
and goes by west of Wiuelscombe, to Stawleie, Ritford; Runton, Wellington and
Bradford, beneath which it takes in a fair water coming from Sanford Comb,
Elworthie, Brunt Rafe, Miluerton, Oak and Hilfarens. After this confluence also
it runs to Helebridge, and there below meets with one water that runs
by Hawse, Hethford and Norton, then another from Crokeham by bishops Slediard,
and the third and fourth at Taunton, that descends from Kingston by north,
and another by south that rises about Pidmister. And thus is the Tone
increased, which goes from Taunton to Riston, Crech, Northcurrie, Ling, and so
by Anthony into the Iuell, that after this confluence meets yer long with
the Chare, a pretty river that comes by east from Northborow, Chare or Care.
by Carleton, Badcare, Litecare, Somerton, Higham, Audrie moore, Audrie, and
Michelsborow. From whence going on between Queens moore and North moore, it
receives one brook called Peder from by southwest, that runs through
Pederton park and North moore; Peder.
and likewise another that passes by Durleie, yer it do come at Bridgewater.
From Bridgewater it goes by Chilton directly north west, and then turning
flat west, it goes northward toward the sea, taking in two waters by the
way, whereof one runs by Coripole and Camington, Camington. Brier.
and bears the name of Camington, the other by Siddington and Comage, and
then receiving the Brier before it come at Start point, they fall as one into
the Ocean, whereof let this suffice for the description of the Iuell, whose
stream does water all the west part of Summersetshire and leaves it very
fruitful.

The Brier, Brier.
Bruer, or Breer, rises of two waters, whereof one is in Selwood forest, and
comes down Leland writes the first Brieuelus and the second Mellodunus or
the Milton water.
Bruham, and Bruton. The other which Leland names Mellos, is northest of
Staffordell town, and going by the same, it runs by Redlinch, to Wike;
where it meets with the other head, and thence go on as one to Awnsford,
Alford (where it takes in a water called Dulis from by north that rises near
Dolting, Dulis.
and comes by Euerchurch park) then to the Lidfords, Basborow wood, the Tor
hill, Sowaie or Stowaie.
Pont perilous (whereinto they fable that Arthur being wounded to death did Cos.
the other named Cos or the Coscombe water, from above Shepton, Mallet (which
east of Wike takes in a water coming from Wells) by Wike, Gedneie, and so
into the Mere. Finally, returning all into one channel, it runs to
Burtlehouse, and soon after dividing it alias Brent bridge, to High bridge,
leaving Huntspill a market town by southwest, the other by Mark to Rokes
bridge, Hebbes passage, and so into the sea, leaving a fair Island, wherein
beside Brentmarsh are seven or eight towns, of whose names I have no knowledge.

Now as touching the water that comes from Wells, which falls (as I said)
into the Coscombe water on the right hand of the Cawseie; you shall understand
that as many springs are in Wels, so Leland speaks of the Milton and Golafer
waters, Milton. Golafer.
which should fall likewise into the Brier: but whether those be they whereof
the one rises above Staffordell, and in the descent runs by Shipton,
Pitcombe, and so to Awnsford on the one side, as the other does rise between
Batcombe and Upton noble on the other

The second Axe which comes by Axe town in old time called Uexa, Axe. 2. The
Chederbrooke, drives twelve miles within a quarter of a mile of his head.
issues out of Owkie hole, from whence it goes by Owkie town, afterward
meeting with the Chederbrooke that comes from the Cheder rocks, wherein is an
hole in old time called Carcer Aeoli, whereof much has been written and
surmised past credit. It runs by Were, Ratcliffe, Bane.
whose head is about Banwell park, or else in Smaldon wood. Then to an other,
and to the third, called Artr^, Artro.
which rises about Litton, and going by the Artroes, Ubbeie, Perribridge
(receiving a rill yer it come thither from by south) beneath Cungesbirie, or
(as I learn) between Kingston and Laurence Wike, it meets with the sea.

Sottespill water rises between Cheueleie and Naileseie, S^ttespill.
howbeit it has no increase before it come into the sea at Sottespill, more
than the next unto it, which is named Cleueden water, of a certain town near
to the fall thereof. Cleueden.
It rises southeast of Barrow, goes by Burton Naileseie, and so unto
Cleuedon. The Auon, commonly called the third Auon, is a goodly water, Auon.
3.
and grown to be very famous by sundry occasions, to be particularly
touched in our description of Bristow. Yet thus much will I note here thereof
as a rare accident, how that in king Edgars days, the very same year that
the old monastery of Euesham fell down by it self, a porpasse was taken
therein near to the said monastery, and never any before or since that time
heard of to have been found in that stream. And even so not many years
before I first wrote this treatise, Sturgion taken in Rochester water.
a sturgion was taken alive in Rochester stream, which the bishop gave unto
your honor, and you would as gladly have sent it to the queens majesty, if
she might have been presented withal alive as it was taken. Certes both these
rare occurrents gave no less occasion of strange furmises to the inhabitants
of both places, than the blocks of Brerton, when they appear, do unto that
family; of which the report goes that they are never seen but against some
mischief or other to befall unto that house. But how far am I gone from my
purpose?

The Auon therefore rises in the very edge of Tetburie, and goes by long
Newton to Brokenton, Whitchurch, and Malmsburie, where it receives two waters,
that is to say, one from by west coming by Foxeleie and Bromleham, which
runs so near to the Auon in the west suburb of Malmsburie, that the town
thereby is almost made an Island. Another from Okeseie park by Hankerton,
Charleton, and Garesden. After this confluence it hastes to Cole park, then
goes it toward the southeast, till it meet with a water coming from southwest
(between Hullauington and Bradfield) by Aston: and soon after with another at
the northside from Binall by Wootton Basset (through the park to Gretenham,
and Idouer bridges) and after the confluence to Dauntseie, Segar, Sutton,
Christmalford, Auon, Calwaies house, and then to west Tetherton. Beneath this
town also it takes in a water increased by two brooks, whereof one coming
from Cleue by Hilmarton, Whitleie house and Bramble (and there receiving
another that comes by Calne) passes on by Stanlie into the Auon, which from
thence forth goes to Chippenham, Rowdon, Lekham, and then receiving Cosham
water, Cosham.
goes to Lacocke, Melsham, and yer it come at Whaddon, crosses two other in
one channel, whereof one rises about Brumham house, and goes to Seen, the
other about the Diuizes, and from thence runs to Potterne wood, Creke wood,
Worton, Maston, Bucklington, and ioining with the other above Litleton, they
run by Semmingto^, and north of Whaddon aforesaid into the maine stream,
whereof I now entreat. From hence our Auon runs to Stauerton, and southwest
of that town meets with the Were that comes from Upton by Dilton, Were.
Brook park (there crossing a rill called Bisse from Westbirie under the
plain) then to north Bradleie, Westbirie under ye plain, never without a
thief or twain.
Trubridge, and so into Auon that goes from thence to Bradford, and within a
mile or there abouts, before it come at Freshford, it meets with the From,
whose description does ensue.

The From rises in the east part of Mendip hills, From.
and from thence runs by Astwti^, the Cole pits, Lie under Mendip,
Whateleie, Elmesbridge, and soon after takes in the Nonneie water, coming
Nonneie.
thence to Walls and Orcharleie bridge, where it receives a pretty brook
descending from From Selwood west of Brackleie, increased with sundry rils,
whereof two come out of Selwood forest (and one of them from the Fratrie)
another out of Long lead park, from Horningsham, and the fourth from Cofleie.
Hence our From goes to Lullington, Beckington, Farleie castle, Board and
Fresh foord, and taking in the Silling brook, falls into the Auon beneath
Bradford, and east of Freshford. From thence going beneath Stoke, Silling.
it receives on the left hand a water coming from southwest, increased by
sundry brooks, whereof one comes from Camelet by Litleton, and Dankerton,
the other from Stone Eston, Midsummer Norton, by Welston, Rodstocke, Wrigleton,
Foscot, and Wellow, and there (taking in a rill from Phillips Norton) it goes
by Clauerton to Hampton, and there it meets with another water coming from
Barthford, whose head is at Litleton from whence it runs by west Kineton to
Castle comb (where it ioineth with a rill rising by north

Here also it takes in a rill by the way from Markesburie by Wilmerton and
Newton, and then going on to Sawford, it meets with one rill soon west of
Northstocke, Swinford.
named Swinford, and another Swinford parts Summerset and Glocestershires in
sunder.
a town in Summerset shire (so called of Caim an English saint, by whose
prayers, as the country once believed, all the adders, snakes and serpents
were turned into stone, their forms reserved, and for a certain space of
ground about the said town, and whereof some store as yet is to be found in
those quaries. But this miracle is so true as the history of Hilda, or that S.
Patrike should chase all venomous creatures

Beside this water, Leland makes mention of Alderleie.
brook, which in some ancient records is also called Auon, and runs by
Barkeleie. In like manner he talks of Douresleie book, whose principal head
is in Douresleie Douresleie.
town: howbeit he says no thing of it more, than that it serves sundry
tucking lucking milles, and goes by Tortworth or four miles further, Torworth.
before it come at the Sauerne. Finally, making mention of an excellent
quarrie of hard stone about Douresleie, he tells of the Tortworth beck, that
runs within a flight shot of Barkeleie town, and falls on the left hand
into Sauerne marches, taking with all the Alderleie or Auon, except I mistake
his meaning, which may soon be done among his confused notes.

The description of the Sauerne, and such waters as discharge themselves into
the same. Chap. 13.
THe Sauerne which Ptolomie calls Sabriana, Sauerne.
Tacitus Sabrina, divides England or that part of the Island, which sometime
was called Lhoegres from Cambria, so called of Camber, the second son of
Brute, as our histories do report. But now that region hight Wales, of the
Germane word Walsh, whereby that nation does use to call all strangers without
respect of country. This river took the name of a certain lady, called
Habren or Hafren, base daughter to Locrinus begotten upon Estrildis daughter to
Humber otherwise called Cumbrus or Umar, and for which some write Chonibrus
king of Scithia, that sometime invaded this Island, and was overthrown here in
the days of this Locrinus, as shall be showed at hand: although I suppose
rather that this lady was called Ine, and that the word Sabrina is compounded
of Aber and Ine, and the letter S added Propter euphoniam: for the mouth or
fall of every river in the British speech is called Aber, whereby Aber Ine is
so much to say as, the fall of Ine. But let us return again to our discourse
of Humber or Umar, which is worthy to be remembered.

For after the death of Locrinus, it came to pass that Guendolena his wife
ruled the kingdom in the nonage of her son: and then getting the said
Estrildis and Habren her daughter into her hands, she drowned them both in this
river. And in perpetual remembrance of her husbands disloialtie toward her,
she caused the stream to be called Habren of the young lady, for which the
Romans in process of time for readiness and mildness of pronunciation, wrote
Sabrina, and we at this time do pronounce the Sauerne. Of the drowning of the
said Abren also I find these verses ensuing: In fluuium praecipitatur Abren,
Nomen Abren, fluuio de virgin, nomeneidem
Nomine corrupto deinde Sabrina datur.


But to return to our Sauerne. It falls into the maine sea between Wales
and Cornwall, which is and shall be called the Sauerne sea, so long as the
river does keep her name. But as the said stream in length of course,
bounty of water, and depth of channel comes far behind the Thames: so for
other commodities, as trade of merchandise, plenty of carriage, and store of
all kind of fish, as salmon, trouts, breames, pikerell, tench, perch, etc: it
is nothing at all inferior or second to the same. Finally, there is nothing
to be discommended in this river, but the opennesse thereof in many places to
the weather, whereby sundry perils often overtake such as fish or sail in small
vessels on the same.

The head of this noble stream is found in the high mounteines of south Wales
called Helennith or Plim limmon; in English, the black mounteins, or moore
heads, from whence also the Wie and the Rhidoll do proceed: and therefore these
three waters are commonly called the three sisters, and have in latitude two
and fifty degrees ten minutes, in longitude fifteen and fifty, as the
description infers. So soon as it is out of the ground, it goes
southeastward, till it come within a mile of Laundlos, where it receives a
channel from by south southwest, called the Dulas, which comes thereinto on
the south side, and southwest of Lan Idlos. It rises (as it should seem) of
diverse heads in the edge of Radnorshire, and taking in sundry small rilles,
it meets at the last with the Brueham brook, Brucham.
and so they go together till they fall into the Sauerne. Beneath Lan Idlos it
takes in the Clewdogh from northwest, Clewdogh.
a water producted by the influence of four pretty brooks, whereof one is
called Bacho, Bacho.
another Dungum Dungum..
coming out of lin Glaslin, the third Lhoid Lhoid.
rising in lin Begilin, and the most southerlie called Bigga. Bigga.
After which confluence our Sauerne proceeds on by Berhlaid toward Landiman,
taking in Couine.
thence to Cairfuse castle, where it meets with the Carnon, Carnon.
and the Taran Taran.
both in one channel, and going not far from the aforesaid fortress. After
this it crosses the Hawes Hawes.
on the north half beneath Abcerhawes, next of all the Dulesse Dulesse. 2.
that rises in the edge of Radnor shire, and meets with it before it come at
Newton in Powisie, otherwise called Trenewith, as I find in British language.
Being come to Trenewith, I cannot eschew (right honorable) to give one note, as
by Mule.
and thereto his passage by Kerie and Lanmereiwtjc. After this also it
proceeds further till it meet with the Kenlet Lenlet.
or the Camalet, Camalet.
which takes in also the Tate Tate.
or Tadbrooke water rising out of the hills a mile from Bishops town, Leland,
who says that it is a pretty brook, running in the vale by Mountgomerie, and
coming within half a mile of the place where Chirbirie priorie stood, it
falls into the Sauerne about a mile from thence. Of the rilles (says he)
that run from the hills thorough Mountgomerie, which are a mile from the Lan
Idlos.
and likewise of the Lan Idlos brook that meets withal within four miles
of the head, I speak not, but think it sufficient to touch those of some
estimation, only leaving the rest to such as may hereafter deal with things
more particularly as time and travel may reveal the truth to them. And
hitherto Leland, whose words I dare not alter. But another notes this Camalet
or Kenlet to run by More, Liddiom, Sned, Churchstocke, Chirbirie, Walcote, and
Winsbirie, and so into the Sauerne.

From hence then, and after this confluence it goes on by Fordon, Leighton,
and Landbreuie toward Meluerleie, and there it meets with sundry waters in
one channel, Tanet. Peuereie or Murnewie.
whereof the one called the Tanet is a very pretty water (whereinto the
Peuereie or Murneweie does fall, which descends from the hills by west of
Matrafall not far from Lhan Filin) the other Auerneie, Auernie.
and ioining beneath Abertannoth, or above Lannamonach near unto the ditch of
Offa, Mordant.
it is not long yer they meet with the Mordant brook, and there loose their
names so soon as they join and mix their waters with it. The head of the
Mordant issues out of the Lanuerdan hills, where diverse say, that the
parish church of cross Oswald or Oswester sometimes stood. Certes, Oswester is
thirteen miles northwest from Shrewesburie, and contains a mile within the
walls. It has in like sort four suburbs or great streets, of which one is
called Stratlan, another Wuliho, the third Beterich, wherein are one hundred
and forty barns standing on a row belonging to the citizens or burgesses, and
the fourth named the Blackegate street, in which are thirty barns maintained
for corn and haie. There is also a brook running thorough the town by the
cross, coming from Simons well, a bow shoot without the wall; Simons beck.
and going under the same between Thorowgate and Newgate, running under the
Black gate. There is another, over whose course the Baderikes or Bederich gate
stands, and therefore called Bederich brook. Bederich.
The third passes by the Willigate or Newgate, and these fall all together
with the Cross brook, a mile lower by south into the Mordant that runs (as
I said) by Oswester. From hence also it goes to Mordant town, and between
Landbreuie and Meluerleie does fall into the Sauerne. After this our principal
stream goes to Sheauerdon castle, Mountford, and Bicton chapel: and here
it receives a water on the left hand, that rises of two heads, whereof one is
above Merton, the other at Ellismere, and ioining between Woodhouses and
Bagleie, the confluence runs on by Radnall, Halton, T^ddesmer, Roiton,
Baschurch, Walford, Grafton, Mitton, and so into the Sauerne. From hence it
runs to Fitz, Eton, or Leiton, Barwtjc, upper Rossall, Shelton, and so to
Shrewsburie, where it crosses the Mele water, whose head (as I hear) is said
to be in Weston.

The Mele therefore rising at Weston, Mele.
goes by Brocton, Worthen, Aston Pigot, Westleie, Afterleie, Haberleie.
and at Lea it meets with the Haberleie water that comes down by
Pontesford and Aunston. After this confluence also it runs to Newenham and
Crokemele, there taking in a rill on the other side that descends by
Westburie and Stretton, and thence going on to Hanwood, Noball, Pulleie,
Bracemele, and Shrewesburie, it falls (as I said) into the open Sauerne. From
hence our Sauerne hastes to Uffington, Preston, and between Chilton and
Brampton takes in the Terne, a fair stream and worthy to be well handled;
if it lay in me to perform it. This river rises in a mere beside Welbridge
park, near unto Ternemere village in Staffordshire. From whence it runs by
the parkes side to Knighton, Norton, Betton, and at Draiton Hales crosses with
a water coming from about Adbaston (where master Brodocke dwells) and
runs by Chippenham and Amming: Terne.
so that the Terne on the one side, and this brook on the other, do enclose a
great part of See Hen. 6. page 649.
Blore heath, where a noble battle was sometime purposed between king Henry
the sixth, and the duke of York: but it wanted execution.

But to proceed. After this confluence, it runs to Draiton Hales, Ternehill
bridge: and yer long taking in a rill from Sandford by Blechleie, it goes to
Stoke Allerton, Peplaw, and Eaton, where it crosses with a brook that rises
about Brinton, and going by Higham, Morton, the great Mere, Forton, Pilson,
Pickstocke, Keinton, Tibberton, and Bolas, it ioineth with the said Terne not
far from Water Upton. Thence passing to Crogenton, it meets with another
brook that comes from Chaltwen Aston, by Newport, Longford, Aldneie, and so
through the Wild moore to Kinsleie and Sleep, and finally into the Terne,
which hastes from thence to Eston bridge, and near unto Walcote takes in the
Roden. This water rises at Halton in Cumbermere lake: Roden.
and coming to Ouenleie, crosses a rill from Cowlemere by Leniall. Thence it
goes to Horton, and (ioining with another rill beneath Nonlaie that comes
from Middle) runs on to Wen, Aston, there crossing a rill beneath Lacon hall
from Prees ward, and so to Lee, Befford, Stanton, Morton Shabree, Painton,
Roden, Rodington, and then into Terne, that runs from thence by Charlton,
Upton, Norton, Barwijc, Acham, and so into the Sauerne two miles beneath
Shrewesburie (as I ween.)

Thus have I described the Terne in such wise as Euerne.
Draiton, where it ioineth with the Euerne that runs from Frodesleieward by
Withiall and Pitchford, Cresfedge, Garneston, Leighton, and between the two
Bildasses crosses the The or Wenlocke water, Wenlocke or The.
and so goes on to Browsleie and Hoord park, where it unites it self with
another

This water arises above Tongcastell, and yer it have run any great distance
from the head, it meets with a rill coming by Sheriff Hales, and Staunton.
Thence it goes on to Hatton, Roiton, and there crossing another from
Woodhouses, coming by Haughton and Euelin, it proceeds to Beckebirie and
Higford, and not omitting Worfe.
(sometime a great stream that runs unto it out of Snowdon poole) and so
passes forth to Badger, Acleton, Worffield: a little from whence (about
Wickin) it takes in another brook into it called Churl, and so goes on to
Rindleford, and then into Sauerne somewhat above Bridgenorth at Penston mill
(except mine information deceive me.) From Bridgenorth our Sauerne descends
to Woodburie, Ouatford, and there taking in the Marbrooke beneath Eaton that
rises above Marbrooke.
and goes by Moruill and Underton, it runs by Didmanston, Hempton, Aueleie,
and beneath in the way to Bargate, crosses with a brook coming from Upton
park, by Chetton, Billingsleie, and Highleie, which being admitted, it holds
on to Areleie, Dowlesse.
Ciarnewood park, Hawbach and Dowlesse. Here also it meets with the Dowlesse
water, a pretty brook issuing out of the Cle hills in Shropshire, very high
to look upon, and three miles or thereabouts from Ludlow, which runs
through Clebirie Lempe.
and taking withal the Lempe, does fall into the Sauerne not far from
Bewdleie.

But to proceed. From Bewdleie our Sauerne hastes directly to Ribford,
Areleie and Redston, and here it meets with a water called Stoure, descending
from Elie, Stoure.
or out of the ponds of Hales Owen in Worcestershire, where it receives a rill
from the left hand, and another from the right, and then goes on to Sturbridge
(taking in there the third water yer long running from Sturton castle) then to
Kniuer Astleie.
as beneath the same it does another. From Witleie then it goes on to Holt
castle, and so to Grimleie, taking in thereabout with the Doure, Doure.
Sulwaie.
and Sulwaie waters, whereof this rises at Chadswijc, and runs by Stoke
priorie, and Droitwich, the other above Chaddesleie, and comes by Dourdale.
After this it goes forth unto Worcester, in old time called Cair Brangon, or
Cair Frangon, where it meets with the Tiber, or Tiberton water, Tiber.
on the right hand above that city, and beneth it near unto Powijc with the
Temde, whose description shall be set down before I proceed or go any further
with the Sauerne.

The Temde, or (as some name it) the Tame rises up in Radnorshire, out of the
Melenith hills, Temde.
and soon after his issue, meeting with a water from Withal, it runs to
Begeldie, Lanuerwaterden, and so to Knighton, which is five or six miles (as I
hear) from his original. From Knighton it goes over the ditch of Offa unto
Standish, Clude.
and crossing a rill that comes from between the park named Clude, (and is
a bound of Radnorshire) it goes to Buckton, Walford, and Lanuarden, where it
meets with the Bardwell or Berfield, and the Clun, both in one channel, of
which I find these descriptions here following word for word in Leland. The
Bardwell or Barfield rises above New Chapel, in the honor of Clun, Barfield
Clun.
hard by the ditch of Offa, and goes by Bucknell. The Clun issues out of the
ground between Lhan Uehan and Maiston, and going on by Bucton, Cluncastell,
Clundon, Purslaw, and Clunbirie, it crosses with a brook that runs along
by Kempton and Brampton. Thence going forth by Clunbirie, Brom, Abcot and
Marlow, it meets with the Bardwell, and so in the Temde, not very far from
Temderton. I suppose that Leland calls the Bardwell by the name of Owke, Owke.
but I will not abide by it because I am not sure of it. After these
confluences therefore, our Temde goes by Trippleton, Dounton, Burrington, and
Broomefield, where it meets with the Oneie, which is an indifferent stream,
Oneie.
and increased with sundry waters, whereof I say as follows.

The first of all is called the Bow. Bow.
It rises (as I learn) in the hills between Hissingten and Shelue, and from
thence comes down by Lindleie and Hardwtjc, Warren.
where it crosses the Warren that issues out of the ground about Rotlie
chapel, and runs by Adston and Wentnor. After the confluence also going on
by Choulton and Cheinies, it takes in the Queneie and Strabroke both in one
channel, Queneie and Strabroke.
whereof the first rises at Lebo^wood, and comes down by the Strettons, till
it pass by Fellanton. The second mounteth about Longuill, and goes by
Rushburie, Newhall, Harton, and Alcaster, from whence it is not long yer it
fall into the Queneie, and so by Stratford into the Oneie, which has borne
that name since the confluence of the Bow and Warren at Hardwtjc, whereof I
spoke before. Finally, the Oneie which some call the Somergill being thus
increased, Somergill.
it runs on to Hawford chapel, Oneibirie, Broomefield, and so into Temde,
and next of all to Ludlow. Corue.
The Temde being thus brought to Ludlow, meets with the Corue, which comes
thorough Coruedale from above Brocton by Morehouses, Shipton, Hungerford, and a
little beneath taking in a rill that comes by Tugford, and Brencost castle,
goes on to Corsham castle, and there crossing another from saint Margarets
Clee, it hieth to Stanton Lacie, and so likewise to Ludlow.

From Ludlow in like sort it goes to Ludford, the Ashfordes, little Hereford,
Burrington, and at Burfford unites it self with the Ladwich that comes
beneath Milburne stoke, Ladwich.
from between Brown, Cleehill, and Stittertons hill, to Middleton, Henleie,
Ladwich, Conam, and so into Temde, which beneath Temdbirie receives another
rill on the other side, and the second on the left hand called The, The.
that comes from above Ricton, Staterton, Hound, Nene, Clebirie, Knighton,
and then into the Temde. From hence the Temde does go by Astham, Lingridge,
Shelleie Welsh, Clifton, Whitburne (and crossing a water that comes from the
Sapies) to Knightwtjc and Bradwaies. Hereabout again it interteineth a rill
that descends from about Kidburie on the right hand, and goes by
Collomatherne, Credeleie, Aufrike, and so into Temde, and then proceeding
forward, the said stream runs to Braunford, and yer long (taking in the
Langherne that rises about Martleie, Langherne.
and passes by Kengewtjc) it goes to Powtjc, and so into the

Thus have I brought all such streams before me that fall into the Sauerne
from the head, until I come to Powijc, whereof (as you may easily perceive) the
Temde is the most excellent. Now it rests that I proceed with the rest of the
discourse intended concerning this our river. Certes, from Powtjc mils which
are about half a mile beneth Worcester, the Sauerne runs on to Kempseie and
Cleueld, whence after it has crossed a brook coming from

The Auon rises at Nauesbie in the borders of Northhamptonshire, Auon 4.
a little side hand of Gillesborow and foot of the hills whereon Nauesbie
stands, and even out of the church yard of the said village. From hence it
goes to Welford, Stamford, Lilburne, Clifton, and Rugbie, by north whereof it
crosses a water called Swiff, which comes from above Swiuethus.
From thence also it goes to Newbold, Wolston, Ruington, and between the
Stonlies takes in the Sow. Souus.
This Sow is a pretty water coming from above Calendon to Whitleie, and soon
after meeting with a riueret from Couentrie, which some do call Shirburne
water, it goes thence to Bagginton, where it takes in a rill called Kinell,
as I have red from Kenelsworth, Kinell.
from whence it runs to Stonleie, and so into the Auon. After this
confluence

But yer it come there, it meets from south east with two waters in one
channel, whereof the least comes to Marton from Bishops Itchington, by
Herburbirie and Thorpe, where it crosses a rill from Southam. Leame.
The other is called Leame, or Lime that descends from about Helladon, or
near unto Catesbie in Northamptonshire, and going by Ouencote, Stoure.
as that being once past the head, it goes by Weston, and yer long crossing a
water from Campden, hanging Aston, and Todnam, it runs to Barcheston,
Aldermaston, Clifford, and so into the Auon.

From hence then the said Auon goes to Luddington, Burton, Bitford, and Cleue,
and being parted from the said town, yer it come at Sawford, it receives the
Arow or Aur, Arow.
which rising in the black hills in Worchestershire, comes by Alchurch,
Beleie park, Ypsleie, Studleie, and then taking in another rill called Alne,
Alne.
out of Fecknam forest, and going by Coughton park, it hastes to Alcester,
Arow, Ragleie, Wheteleie, Bouington, Standford, and so into Auon, which after
this conjunction goes to Uffenton and then to Eouesholme: but yer it come
there it receives two waters in one channel, whereof the first rises about
Willerseie, the other near to Buckland, and ioining beneath Badseie, they fall
into Auon, Pludor.
under the name of Pludor brook, before it come to Eouesholme.

Being past Eouesholme it crosses the Uincell, which rising out of the hills
somewhere about Sudleie, runs two miles further to Winchelcombe, Vinc^lus.
and Gretton, and taking in a rill by the way from Hailes, proceeds on
(going within one quarter of a mile of Hailes abbaie) to Tuddington, or
Doddington, beneath which when it has crossed another rill that comes from
Stanwaie, it goes to Warmington, Sedgeborow, and receiving there the last on
the right hand also (as all above rehearsed) it falls into the Auon, when it
is come by Hinton, unto a town called Hampton, or (as some do write it)
Ampton. After this confluence the Auon goes to Charleton, to Crapthorne (and
there taking in a rill on the left hand) to Fladbirie wike, and almost at
Persore bridge, meets with a branched water that comes by Piddle, whereof
one head is at Alberton, an other at Piddle. Piddle.
From Persore it goes to Birlingham, and soon after carrieng a brook withal
descending from Fakenham, by Bradleie, Himbleton, Huddenton, Crowleie,
Churchhill, Pibleton, Besseford and Desseford, it fleeteth to Eckington,
Bredon, Twining, Mitton, and Tewkesburie, where it ioineth with the Sauerne.

Now to resume the course of the Sauerne, you shall understand, that from
Tewkesburie it goes to Derehirst, the How passage, and soon after receiving
the Chiltenham water that comes thither by Bodenton, Chilus.
Sawton, and Norton, it runs to Ashelworth, Sainthirst; and here it parts
it self till it come to Gloucester, where it unites it self again. But in
the mean time the easterlie branch receives a forked channel, whereof one
head is not far from Leke Hampton, the other about Witcombe, from whence it
goes to Brockworth. The other branch or arm takes in the Leadon that comes
down by Preston, Leadon.
Dimmocke, Pantleie upper Leadon, Leadon court, and there taking in one rill
that comes from Linton by Areknoll, and another beneath it from Tainton by
Rudford, it falls into the said branch on the right side, before it come at
Gloucester.

The Sauerne therefore being past Gloucester, it meets with a little rill on
the right hand, and thence holding on his course by Elmore, Minsterworth,
Longneie, to Framilode, it receives yer it come at this latter the Strowd
brook, which rising not far from Side, Strowd.
goes by Massade, Edgeworth, Frampton, Strowd, and receiving there a water
that comes from Panneswijc Lodge, by Pittescombe on the one side, and another
from Radbridge on the other, it prosecuteth his voyage to Stone house,
Eslington, white Misen, and so toward Framilode, where the said Strowd does
fall into the Sauerne. After the fall of Strowd, the Sauerne goes from thence
to Newenham, and Arlingham, and soon after receiving a water on each side,
whereof one comes from Uleie by Cham and Chambridge, the other by Blackneie
and Catcombe, it goes forth till it meet with another water on each side,
whereof that on the English half is forked, so that one head thereof is to be
found about Boxwell, the other at Horton, and meeting above Tortworthie, they
run by Stone and Barkeleie castle, and so into the Sauerne. That on Newarne.
and so into the Sauerne.

Of such waters as fall into the sea in compass of the Island, between the
Sauerne and the Humber. Chap. 14.
THe Sauerne being thus described, Wie mouth.
not far from Tarendacus chapel, in the mouth of the river Wie, which
ferrie is about three miles over (says Leland) or else Guie alias Wie.
This river Guie or Wie begins (as I said before) on the side of the hills
where the Sauerne does arise, and passing through Wenceland, that is,
southeast by Raiader Guie to Buelt (where the Irwon meets withal) it goes
to Glasburie, Hereford, Monmouth, and finally into the Sauerne sea at
Chepstow: for so they call Monhafren, which seuereth Wales from Summersetshire,
Devonshire, Cornwall: as for the Rhidoll which is the third sister, it has
the shortest course of

Leland writing of this river Guie or Wie says thus; The Wie goes thorough
all Herefordshire by Bradwarden castle, belonging to sir Richard Uehan, and so
to Hereford east, thence eight miles to Rosse, Umber a fish only in the Wie.
a market town in Herefordshire: and in this river be vmbers, otherwise called
grailings. It is also found by common experience, that the salmon

The Guie therefore rises out of the black mounteines of Wales, out of which
the Sauerne springs in Radnorshire, and coming by Lhangerike, and
Raiadargoie, it receives one rill from the west called Darnoll, Darnoll.
and another from by northeast coming Elland.
whose head is near to Comerrstwith, and takes likewise into him the Clardwen
Clardwen.
that divides for a season Radnorshire from Brecknoch, which Clardwen is
likewise increased by the Clarthie within three miles of his head and less,
having his course from southwest and hilly soil adjacent. From Lhanuthell it
goes west of Dissart, where it receives the Ithan, Ithan.
a river rising above Lhanibister, and from whence it runs to Landwie, and
Lambaderne vawr: beneath which it crosses a water on each side, whereof that on
the right hand consists on the Dulesse Dulesse.
and the Cluedoch, Cluedoch.
after their confluence: the other hight Lomaron, whose head is above
Lanihangle, Lamaron.
and in the forest of Blethwag. After these confluences, it runs on
crinkeling in strange manner, under the name of Ithor, till it come to Dissart,
taking in the Hawie Hawie.
on the left side yer it come there, and then into the Wie on the north side,
which directs his course further to Bealt, where it receives the Yrwon,
Yrwon.
a notable stream, descending from the hills above Lanihangle Abergwessen,
and thence coming down by Lanurid Lang marsh, Lanauan, Uechan, Langantan, and
so to Beth or Bealt, being enlarged by the way with sundry fair waters, as
the Weuereie, Weuereie.
whose head is about Lanauan moore, the Dulasse, Dulasse.
or (as some call it) the Dowlasse, that comes from the hills west of the
head of Weuereie. The Comarch whose head and course is west of the Dowlasse on
the north side, and likewise by two other on the southwest, and Dilasse from by
southwest, which last rehearsed falls into him half a mile and more above
the influence of the Comarch Comarch.
which lies on the other side. After this our Yrwon goes to Lhanuareth,
Dulesse.
where it crosses the Dehon Dehon.
on the southwest side, then to Aberedwie, and there receives the Edwie Edwie.
on the northeast, which arises in the hills above Botins chapel, and
comes down by Crigend and Lanhaderne, thence the Guie goes on to
Lanstephan, and there (or a little above) Machaweie.
takes in the Machaweie that comes by castle Pain, and so going on in
process of time with the Leuenni, Leuenni.
whereof Leland in his commentaries does write as here insueth.

The Leuenni, otherwise called the Ever Ever.
or Every, Every.
is a far stream rising in Welsh Talgarth hard by Blaine Leuenni, among the
Atterill hills, from whence it goes to Brecknoch mere, which is two miles
long, and a mile broad, and where men do fish in Vniligneis or botes of one
piece, as they do in Lhin Seuathan, which is four miles from Brecknoch.
Finally, bringing great store of red sand withal, Brennich.
and there with the Brennich water (that has his original issue at Mennith
gader, and is increased with the Trufrin) Trufrin.
it falls into the Wie above Glesbiri^ three miles from Haie, at a place that
of the only fall of this brook is named Aberlenenni, after this the Guie.
Being come to Haie, a pretty town where much Roman coin is found, which they
call Jews money: and after it has passed or crossed a little brook, which
comes from Lanigon, it meets with the Dulesse Dulesse.
that comes also from the Atterill by Kersop, and from thence goes to
Clifford castle (being now entered into Herefordshire, and leaving Radnor,
whereunto it has for a long course been march) then to the Whitneies,
Winferton, Letton, Bradwarden, Broberie, Monington, Biford, Bridgesalers,
Eaton, Brinton, and Hereford, without any influence of river worthy of
memory, and yet with many windlesses, and there meets with a water rising
short of Wormesleie, which goes by Maunsell, Lacie, Brinsop, Crodnell,
Stretton, and Huntington, and soon after into the Wie, beside a little rill
that runs between them both even into Hereford town. From hence in like
sort the Wie hastes to Rotheras church, Hampton, and Mor^^ford, where it
takes in sundry waters in one channel, of which the Lug or Luie Lug.
is the principal, and next of all to be described, before I go any further
with the course of the Wie, whereinto it discharges the channel. It rises in
the edge of the forest of Kemples above Langunlo: from whence it goes to
Momonacht, Pilleth Whitton, Fuldibrooke, Prestaine, so into Herefordshire,
where between Bonie and Beton, or Bitton, it receives in the Somergill, whose
crotched head being march to Radnor forest, directs his stream between the
new and old Radnors, to Knill, to Nash, and so into the Lug, which presently
passes by Kinsham, Shirleie, Ailmister, Kingsland, Eaton chapel, and so into
Lemister, where it crosses the Oneie (a streamelet rising short of Shobden,
and going by Chorlester) a little before it come to the west side of the town.

At Lemister it self in like sort three waters do meet, and almost inuiron
the town, that is to say, the Lug, the Pinfulleie or Pinsell Pinsell.
(a riueret rising Kenbrooke.
which comes out of the black mounteins, from Lemister, otherwise called
Leofminster, of the builder, and also Leonminster, the Lug or Luie goes on to
Eaton, and there takes in a rill beneath Hampton, and above Hope, whereof one
head is between Hatfield and Bickleton, another near unto Marston, and
meeting of both at Humber. From Hampton it goes to Bodenham, Wellington,
Morton, Sutton, Shelwijc, Lugwardin, and Longward, Fromeie.
or From, a pretty water, and worthy to be remembered. It rises about
Wolferelaw, from whence it comes down toward the southest by Edwinsloch to
Bromyard, Auenburie, Bishops From, Castle From, Can From, Laden alias Acton.
to Stretton upon From, and there taking in a water called Laden, coming from
above Bishops Grendon, by Pencombe, Cowarne, Stoke Lacie, Cowarne, and
Engleton, our From goes on to Yarkeleie, Dornington, and Longward,

Being come therefore unto Mordford, it goes to Fawnehope, Hamlacie,
Ballingham, Capull regis, where it receives a water called Treske, from little
Berch by Treske, Treske.
Fawleie, How, Capull Inkeston, Foie, Brampton, Bridstow, Wilton castle, the
Rosse, and there a rill from Bishops Uptonward by Gainar.
brook, Garran.
that rises in Gregwood, short of Arcop, six miles from Monemouth by
northwest: after which these two do run as one to Marston, and almost
Whitchurch, and so into the Wie, which goes from thence to Gunnarew, S.
Michaell, Dixton, and Monemouth, where I will stay a while, till I have
described the Mona.
next of all to be remembered here.

The Mona or Monbecke, rises in the forest of Hene, twenty miles from
Monemouth by west in Eirisland, and going by Creswell, or Craswall chapel not
far from the marches of Brecknocke, and northeast of Hatuill hills, Elkon.
which after it has run a good distance from the head receives first the
Eskle, Eskill.
and passes by La^^hangle and the old Court, from northweast, then the Olcon,
from southwest, which meets withal near Cledoll or Knedoch, and passing by
the old town, it hastes to Altrinis, where it becomes march between
Hereford and Monemouth shires, and takes in a water coming by Trewin, and
likewise the Hordwie Hordwie.
or Hodneie which rises in Brecknocke* among the Saterelles, and runs by
Capell a fin, Lantonie, Cumroie, Michaell church in Monemouthshire, and ioineth
with our Mona at Altrinis, which after this confluence hastes to Walderstone,
Lansillo Langua, between which and Kinechurch it ioineth with the Doure that
rises about the Bache above Dourston, which is six miles above Doure Doure.
abbie, so that it runs through the Gilden dale, by Peterchurch, Fowchurch,
Morehampton, Newcourt, Doure, and beneath Doure takes in the Dulesse, Dulesse.
from southwest and Lanihangle, by Harleswas castle on the one side, and yer
long the Wormesbecke, Wormesbecke.
descending from above Keuernall by Didleie, Deuerox, Workebridge, and
Kenderchurch on the other, and so running all in one channel unto Mona, that
river goes on to Kinech church, Grismond, Cardwaie, Skenfrith, Warnethall,
Perthire, and so to Monemouth, where it meets with the Wie, over each of
which rivers Monemuth town has his particular bridge.

The Guie or Wie therefore being incresed with thus many brooks and waters,
passes on from hence, and going toward Landogo, it meets with the Trollie
Trollie.
beck, whose head is above Lannam ferrie in the north part of Monemouth shire,
and goes from thence by Lhantellio, Lanhangle, Gracediue, Diggestow, Wonastow,
Troie, and so into Wie, that runs also by Wies wood chase, taking in there
the Elwie Elwie.
that comes from above Landelwie by Langowen, Lannissen, Penclase, Trilegh,
and Langogo, where meeting with the aforesaid stream, the Wie directs his
course from thence by Tinterne abbeie (where it crosses a rill from Trile
grange) Chapel hill, Parcasicke, Penterie chapel, Lancante, Chepstowe, and so
into the sea, leaving the Treacle (a chapel standing on a rock) on the hand
between it and Sauerne, over against the point that lies south of Betteslie.
Next unto the Wie, I find a rill of no great course, coming down from Mounton
chapel, by a place of the bishops of Landaffe. Thence passing by Charston
rock, and the point whereon Trinity chapel stands, I come unto the fall
of Trogie, Trogie.
which rises short of Trogie castle, and runs toward the sea, by Landuair,
Dewston, Calicot, and so into the Ocean, over against the Charston rock. The
next fall is of a water that comes from above Penho by saint Brides, Dennie
Island in the midst of the Sauerne, and likewise another little one called
Beuerage.
north and by west of Dennie Island, which lies midwaie between that fall and
Porshot point, and before I touch at Goldcliffe point, I cross another fall of
a fresh brook, whose head is above Landueigo in Wencewood, and course by
Lhanbed, Langston, Lhanwarme, and through the More to Witston.

Next unto this is the Aberwish, or Wiske, Wiske.
in Latin Osca, whereon Caerleon stands, sometime called Chester and Ciuitas
legionum, because the Romans soiourned there, as did afterward Arthur the
great, who also held a noble parliament in the same, whereof Galfride makes
mention Lib. 7. cap. 4. affirming thereto, that in those days the majesty
thereof was such, as that all the forefronts of their houses were in manner laid
over with gold, according to the Roman usage. There was in the same in like
sort a famous university, wherein were 200 philosophers; also two goodly
churches erected in the remembrance of Julius and Aaron, two British martyrs,
whereby it might well be reputed for the third metropoliticall see in Britain.
But to our water, whereof I read that it is furthermore one of the greatest in
Southwales, and huge ships might well come to the town of Caerleon, as they
did in the time of the Romans, if Newport bridge were not a let unto them;
nevertheless, big botes come thereto. It is eight Welsh or twelve English
miles from Chepstow or Strigull, and of some thought to be in base Wenceland,
though other be of the contrary opinion. But howsoever the matter stands,
this river is taken to be the bounds of Brechnockshire, as Renni is middle to
Wenceland and Glamorganshire. But to leave these by-matters, and come to the
description of the water.

You shall understand that the Uske or Wiske, Uske.
in Latin Osca rises in the black mounteins ten miles above Brechnocke toward
Carmardine, the hill being Craie.
on the right hand before it come to Ridburne chapel. Going also from thence
toward Deuinocke, it crosses the Senneie on the same side (which rises above
Capell Senneie) next of all the Camblas, Sennie.
and at Aberbraine, Camblas.
or the Bremich, whose head is three miles from Brechnocke, Brane.
and running by Lanihangle, it meets I say with the Uske, about master
Awbries manor. yster.
Beneath Aber Yster, it receives the Yster, which rises northwest above
Martyr Kinoch, and comes by Battle chapel, and going from thence by
Lanspithed and Newton, it runs in the end to Brechnocke, Hodneie.
where it takes in the Hodneie or Honthie on the one side, whose head is in
Blaine Hodneie, and coming down from thence by Defrune Tertarith.
five miles from Brechnocke, and comes likewise into the very suburbs of the
town, beneath Trenewith, or new Troie, whereby it takes the course.

After these confluences, the Uske proceeds on Kinuricke.
or the fall of a water whose head is in the roots of Menuchdennie hill, and
passage by Cantresse. Thence it goes by Lanhamlaghe, Penkethleie castle,
Lansanfreid, Landettie, Langonider, and soon after receiving the Riangall
Riangall.
(which rises about the hill whereon Dinas castle stands, and runs by
Lanihangle and Tretoure) it passes between Laugattocke and Cerigkhowell, to
Langroinie, and there about crosses the Groinie brook, Groini.
that descends from Monegather, Cledoch vaur.
the second Fidan, Fidan.
and the third Cledochvehan. Cledochveha^.
Of these also the last falls in near to Lanwenarth. From hence the Uske
runs to Abergeuenni town, where it meets with the Kebbie water from by
north, Kebbie. Geuenni.
that rises short of Bettus chapel above the town, and the Geuennie that
descends from above Landilobartholl beneath Birthin. Caer vske stands on
one side of Uske, and Caerleon on the other, but Caer vske by diverse miles
further into the land.
Between Kemmeis and Trostreie it meets with such an other rill that comes
down by Bettus Newith. Thence it goes to Caer Uske or Brenbigeie (whose
bridge, I mean that of Uske, was overthrown by rage of this river, in the six
and twentieth year of king Henry the eight, upon saint Hughes day after a
great snow) but yer it come there, it receives the Birthin on the right hand,
which is a pretty water, descending from two heads, whereof the first is
northwest of Manihilot, as the other is of Lanihangle and Pentmorell.

Next unto this it ioineth with the Elwie above Lanbadocke, Elwie.
whose head is east of Penclase, and running westwards by Penclase, Lanislen,
Langowen (and beneath Landewie taking in a brooket from Ragland castle, that
comes down thither by Ragland park) it bends southwest, until it come at
the Uske, which crinkling toward the south, and going by Lanhowell, meets
with three rilles before it come to Marthenie chapel, whereof the first lies
on the right hand, and the other on the left: the midlemost falling into the
same, not far from Lantressen, as I have been informed. From the mouth of
the Romeneie to the mouth of the Taffe are two miles. Certes the Taffe is the
greatest river in all Glamorganshire, called (by Ptolomie Rhatostathybius, as I
guess) and the city Taffe it self of good countenance, since it is endued with
the cathedral see of a bishop. The course of the water in like manner is very
swift, and brings off such logs and bodies of trees withal from the wooddie
hills, that they do not seldom cruth the bridge in pieces, but for so much
as it is made with timber it is repaired with lighter cost, whereas if it were
of hard stone, all the country about would hardly be able to amend it. It
rises in Brechnockshire among the woodie hills, from two heads, whereof one
is in Monuchdenie, the other west of that mounteine, of which the first called
Taffe vaure, goes by Capell lan vehan, Uainor, and Morlais, the other by
Capell Nantie, and ioining at southwest beneath Morlais castle, they go to
Martyr Tiduill, and toward Lannabor, but by the way it takes in from
northwest a brook called Cunnon, which comes out of Brechnockshire by
Abardare, and afterward the Rodneie coming out of the same quarter (but not
out of the same shire) which runs by Estridinodoch, a crotched brook, and
therefore divided into Rodneie vaure, and Rodneie vehan, that being joined with
the Taffe, does run on withal to Eglefilian, castle Coch, Whitchurch,
Landaffe, Cardiffe, and so into the sea, not far from Pennarth point, where
also the Lay does bid him welcome unto his channel or stream. Furthermore,
from Marthellie it hastes to Kemmeis, and yer it come at Caerleon or Chester
in the south, takes in two waters on the right hand, of which the first
comes down from the north between Landgwie, Landgweth, and by Lhan Henoch,
without any further increase: but the other is a more beautiful stream,
called Auon, and thus described as I find it among my pamphlets. Auon.
The Auon rises in the hills that seem to part Monemouth and Brechenocke
shires in sunder, and after a rill received from Blorench hill on the northside
of the same, running down from thence by Capell Newith and Triuethin, it
receives a water from by south almost of equal course, and from that quarter
of the country, and in process of time anotehr little one from the same side,
yer it come to Lanurgwaie and Lanihangle, from whence it goes to Euennocke and
Penrose, and so in Uske before it go by Caerleon. But here you must note, that
the course of this stream ioining beneath Quenocke chapel, with the other
which descends (as I said) from the hills about four miles above Landgwaie
and Langweth, does make an Island above Caerleon, where Penrose stands, and
much Roman coin is found of all sorts, so that the influence of the one into
the other seems to me to be but a draine devised by man, to keep the city
from the violence of such water as otherwise would often annoie the same.

Being past Caerleon it runs to Crindie, where master Harbert dwells, and
there carieng another brook withal, that rises north of Tomberlow hill, and
descends by Henlis and Bettus chapel, it runs forth to Newport (in Welsh
castle, Newith) and from thence under a bridge, after three or four miles
course to the sea, taking the Ebowith water withal, Ebowith.
which meets with the same almost in the very mouth or fall, and rises in
the edge of Brecknoch shire, or (as Leland says) high Winceland, from two
heads, of which one is called Eberith Uehan, Serowie.
that runs by Trestrent, and is of less race hitherto than the Ebowith, and
from that same quarter. After this confluence it goes to Risleie, Rocheston
castle, next of all thorough a park, and so by Greenefield castle, and is

The Romeneie or Romeneie.
(as some corruptly call it) the Nonneie, is a goodly water, and from the
head a march between Monemouth and Glamorgan shires. The head hereof is above
Egglins Tider vap Hoell otherwise called Fanum Theodori, or the church of
Theodorus, whence comes many springs, and taking

The Lay falls into the sea a mile almost from the Taffe, Lay.
and rises in the hills above Lantrissent (for all the region is very
hilly.) From whence coming Dunelais.
which rises four miles from his fall, Methcoid.
east northeast, and meets withal a little more than a quarter of a mile
from Pont Uelim Uaur, Pedware.
and likewise by west, the Methcoid that comes from Glinne Rodeneie, and
wherein to the Pedware discharges Leland left also as parcel of this coast
who touches it after this manner.

From Taffe to Lay mouth or Ele river a mile, Lay.
from Lay mouth (or rather Penarth, that stands on the west point of it)
Thawan.
to the mouth of Thawan river (from whence is a common passage over unto
Mineheued in Summersetshire of 17 miles) are about seven Wealth miles, which are
counted after this manner. A mile and a half above Thawan is Scilleie hauenet
Scilleie.
(a pretty succor for ships) whose head is in Wenno paroch two miles and a
half from the shore. Barrie.
From Scilleie mouth to Aber Barrie a mile, and thither comes a little rill
of fresh water into Sauerne, This I Will went fifty years agone for x. pounds.
whose head is scant a mile off in plain ground by northeast, and right
against the fall of this beck lies Barrie Island a flight shot from the shore
at the full sea. Half a mile above Aber Barrie is the mouth of Come kidie,
Come kidie
which rises flat north from the place where it goes into the Sauerne, and
serves often for harbor unto sea-farers. Thence to the mouth of Thawan are
three miles, whereunto ships may come at will.

Two miles above Thawan is Colhow, Colhow.
whither a little rill resorteth from Lau Iltuit, thence to the mouth of Alen
four miles, that is a mile to saint Dinothes castle, and three miles further.
Alen.
The Alen rises by northeast up into the land at a place called Lhes Broimith,
or Skirpton, about four miles above the plot where it comes by it self into
Sauerne. From thence to the mouth of Ogur alias Gur Ogur.
three miles. Then come they in process of time unto the Kensike or Colbrooke
river, which is no great thing, Kensike.
since it rises not above three miles from the shore. Auon.
From Kensike to Aber Auon two miles, and herein do ships molested with
weather oftentimes seek harborough. It comes of two arms, whereof that
which lies northeast is called Auon Uaur, the other that lies northwest Auon
Uehan. They meet together at Lhanuoie Hengle, about two miles above Aber Auon
village, which is two miles also from the sea.

From hence to the Neth is about two miles and a half, Neth.
thereon come shiplets almost to the town of Neth from the Sauerne. From the
mouth of Neth unto the mouth of Crimline beck is two miles, and being passed
the same we come unto the Tauie, Tauie.
which descends from the aforesaid hills and falls into the sea by east of
Swanseie. Being past this we come unto the Lichwr, Lochar.
or Lochar mouth, and then gliding by the Worms head, Wandres.
we passed to the Wandresmouth, whereof I find this description following in
Leland. Uendraith Uaur, Uendraith Uehan.
Both Uendraith Uaur and Uendraith Uehan rise in a piece of Carmardineshire,
called Issekenen, that is to say, the low quarter about Kennen river, and
betwixt the heads of these two hills is another hill, wherein be stones of a
greenish color, whereof the inhabitants make their lime. The name of the hill
that Uendraith Uaur rises in, is called Mennith Uaur, and therein is a poole
as in a moorish ground, named Lhintegowen, where the principal spring is, and
this hill is eight or nine miles From Kidwellie: the hill that Uendraith Uehan
springs out of, is called Mennith Uehan, and this water comes by Kidwellie
town.

But about three or four miles yer it come thither, it receives a brook
called Tresgirth, the course whereof is little above a mile from the place
where it goes into Uendraith, and yet it has four or five tucking milles and
three corn milles upon it. At the head of this brook is an hole in the hills
side, where men often enter and walk in a large space. And as for the brook
it self, it is one of the most plentiful and commodious that is to be found
in Wales. All along the sides also of Uendraith Uaur, you shall find great
plenty of sea-coles. There is a great hole by head of Uendraith Uehan, where
men use to enter into vaults of great compass, and it is said, that they may
go one way under the ground to Worms head, and another way to Cairkemen
castle, which is three miles or more into the land. But how true these things
are, it is not in me to determine; yet this is certain, that there is very
good hawking at the Heron in Uendraith Uehan. There are diverse prints of the
passage of certain worms also in the cave, at the head of Uendraith Uehan, as
the inhabitants do fable: but I never heard of any man that saw any worm
there, and yet it is believed that many worms are there. Hitherto out of
Leland. But now to return to mine own course.

Leaving the Lay, Lay.
which some call Elaie, and passing the Pennarth baie, that lies between the
Pennarth and the Lauerocke points, we left Scillie Ilet (which lies on the
mouth of Scillie haven before described) and came unto the Barrie, Barrie.
whose head is above Wrinston castle, and from whence he runs by
Deinspowis, Cadoxton, Barrie, and so into

Being past the Barrie water, Aberthaw
we come to a fall called Aberthaw, which rises two or three miles above
Lansanor, and going by Welsh Newton, it comes at length to Cowbridge, and
from thence goes to Lanblethian, Landoch, Beanpeere, Flimston, Gilston, and
between the east and the west Aberthaw, and into the Sauerne sea. But yer it
come all there it receives a brook called Kensan, or Karnsan, or Kensech, on
the east side, whose head is east of Kensan.
Leland says, that Kensan has two heads, whereof the more northerlie called
Brane, lies in Luenlithan, and runs seven miles before it meet with the
other. Leaving this water we sailed on, casting about the Nash point, omitting
two or three small waters (whereof Leland has already as ye see made mention)
because I have nothing more to add unto their descriptions, except it be, that

The Ogur or Gur, Ogur.
which some call the Ogmur, is a well fair stream (as we were wont to say
in our old English) whose head is in the same hills, where the Rodeneies are
to be found, but much more westerlie, and running a long course yer it come to
any village, it goes at the length beneath Languineuere or Langouodoch, to S.
Brides upon Ogur, Wennie.
half a mile from Ogur or Ogmur castle on the east side of the bank. It
rises five or six miles from this place, among the hills, and coming down
at last by Lanharne, it crosses a rill yer long from northeast, and the
confluence passes forth by Coitchurch, Ogur castle, and so into the Ogur.
Leland writing of the waters that fall into this Ogur says thus. Garrow.
Into the Ogur also resorteth the Garrow two miles above Lansanfride Leuennie.
another called Leuennie rising in the parish of Glin Corug, at northwest, and
then running two miles lower, Corug.
unites it self with the Corug brook, a little short thing, and worthy no
longer speech. From this confluence the Leuennie goes seven miles further yer
it meet with the Ogur on the west side, at Lansanfride, two miles above
Penbowt. And so far Leland. But I wot not what he means by it.

Next unto the Ogur is the Kensig water, Kensig.
that comes down by the Pile and Kensig castle, Margan.
and being past the same we cross the Margan rill, Auon.
where sir Edward Manxell dwelt, and so unto Auon, which having two heads (as
is said) the more easterlie of them comes down by Hauodaport chapel, the
other by Glin Corug, Michaell church, Aber Auon, and so into the sea, yielding
also in time of need a good harbor for ships to lodge and ride in. From hence
we went along by the Cole pits to the mouth of the Neth. Neth.
The Neth is a fair water, rising of diverse heads, whereof the more easterlie
named Nethuehan rises not far from the head of the Kennon, Nethuehan.
and coming down by Penedorin to Aberpirgwin, Nethuaur.
it receives Nethuaur, a little above the town, Trangarth.
which rising not far southeast of the head of Tauie in Brecknoch shire (as
all the rest do) receives the Trangarth, Meltaie.
the Meltaie and the Hepsaie, all which are accounted as members of his head in
one channel, Hepsaie.
about a mile or more before it join with Nethuehan. For as Trangarth rises
east of Nethuaur, so the Melta rises by east of Trangarth, and ioineth with
the same above Istrad wealthy, and a little beneath the same town takes in
the Hepsaie. So that albeit their several risings be half or a whole mile in
sunder, yet have they (in a manner) like distance from Aberpirgwin, and their
final confluence in the edge of Glamorganshire, which they directly do
cross. After these confluences, the maine stream runs in and out by
sundry miles, and through the wooddie soiles, till it meet with Cledaugh,
which ioineth with the same beneath the Resonlaie, and goes withal to
Lanisted, where it takes in the Dulesse, Dulesse.
whose head is above Chapel Krenaunt, in the marches of Brecknoch. Thence it
goes to Cadox town, or between it and Lannistide, then to Neth town,
whither small vessels often come: Cledoch.
and beneath the same receiving the Cledoch that runs by Kelebebilch (and
also Neth abbeie where master Crumwell dwells) it goes on by Coitfranke
forest, Nethwood, Briton ferrie, and so into the sea.

The Tauie rises in the thickest of the black mounteines in Brecknochshire
west of Nethuaur, Tauie.
and coming down west of Calwen chapel, it receives on the east bank a
rill named Coiell that runs thither by Coielburne chapel: Coilus.
and being thus united, the channel passes forth by Istradgunles, Torch.
and then meeting with the Turch or Torch water that comes from the foot of
the black mounteines, and is march to parcel of Caermardinshire, it runs
to Langoge, Lansamled, saint John's, Swanseis, and so into the Baie. Being past
this, we come by another little fall, whose water runs three or four miles
yer it come into Swanseie baie, but without name. Thence we go to the Crimline
beck, whose description I neither have, nor find any great want thereof.
Wherefore going about by Oistermont castle, and Mumbles point, we pass forth
toward the southwest by Penmarch point, till we come to Ilston water, Ilston.
whose head is not far within the land; and yet as it comes thorough the
woodland, and down by Penmarch castle, a rill or two does fall into the
same. Then casting about by Oxwich point, we go onward there by, and sailing
flat north by the Holme (having passed the Wormeslead and S. Kennets chapel)
and then northeast by Whitford point, we went at length to the Lochar or
Loghar, Lochar.
or as Lhoyd names it, the Lichwr, whose indraught for a certene space is
march between Caermardine and Glamorgan shires. It rises above Gwenwie
chapel, from whence it goes to Landbea, and above Amond.
Bettus receives a rill named Amond that enters thereinto from northeast.
Being past Bettus, it passes by Laneddie, Arthelas bridge, and over against
Landilo Talabout, it crosses from by west, the Combwilie Combwilie.
by west of Parkreame, and afterward the Morlais Morlais.
above Langnarch on the same side. Then coming to Loghor castle, it takes in
on the east side, the Lhu, Lhu.
whose course is not above five miles, and thence loosing the name of Lochar,
it is called Burraie, Burraie.
as some guess, until it come to the sea, where it parts it self going on
each side of Bachannie Island, a small thing, and not worthy (for any thing I
read thereof) as yet to be particularly described. From this water we passed
(I say) by Bachannies I Will, to the Aberlheddie water, whose head being in the
hills above Prenacrois, it passes by Lhaneltheie, and thence into the sea.
Then went we to the Dulesse a little rill, Dulesse.
whose head is not far from Trinsaren: thence by the Pembraie and Calicoit
points, Wandres.
till we came about to the Wandres or Uendraith mouth, whose description is
partly touched already; but because it is not such as I would with it to be,
I will here after my own manner deal somewhat further withal. Gwendrath or
Uendraith vaur rises in the lower ground, or not far from the hill Renneth
Uaur, whereon castle Careg stands,

The Towie rises in the mounteines of Elennith four miles by southeast from
Lintiue, Towie.
and two from Lingonon, in a moorith ground four and twenty miles from
Caermardine, and in a forest called Bishops forest, midwaie betwixt
Landwibreuie and Landanuerie castle. For fish, in my opinion, this is much
better than the Taw or Taffe, whose head breeds no fish, but if it be cast
into it, they turn up their bellies, flote aloft, and die out of hand. It
parts Brecknoch from Cardigonshire also for a certain Trausnant.
till it come by the water of Trausnant, that falls thereinto from by cast
out of the confins of Brecknoch, unto Pilin capell, and so to Istrodefine,
Tothee.
where it meets with the Tothee that comes thither from Lhinuerwin where it
rises, and so through Rescoth forest, uniting it self by the way with the
Pescotter, Pescotter.
which mounting out of the ground in the edge of Cardigonshire, runs along
as a limit and march unto the same, till it join with the Tothee, and both
come together beneath Istrodefine Brane.
the other Gutherijc Gutherijc.
(which lies more southerlie of the two) and fall (as I said) into Towie
beneath Landonuereie, which runs on till it meet with the first Dulesse that
goes by Lenurdie, Dulesse.
then with the Morlais, Morlais.
and these on the northwest. Certes the Brane is a pretty brook rising two or
three miles

The Modewie, Modewie.
or (as some pronounce it) Mosheuie, rises of two heads, which ioining above
Lanihangle, the stream runs on till it meet with the Cledoch on the left
hand, Cledoch.
proceeding also further toward Langadocke, it receives not far from thence
the Sawtheie, Sawtheie.
whose two heads descend from the black mounteines or east edge of
Carmardineshire (as mine information leads me.) After this Dulesse. 2.
confluence the second Dulesse does meet with the Towie, whose head is in the
hills above Talthogaie abbeie, northwest from Langadocke full five miles: then
coming down by Landilovaur, Newton; Dinefar castle, and Golden grove,
Dulesse. 3.
it receives the third Dulesse from by north that comes in by Lanihangle and
Drislan castle, Cothie.
and after that the Cothie, whose race is somewhat long, and therefore his
description not utterly to be passed over.

Not far from the head (which is three miles from Landanbreuie, under the
hulke of Blame Icorne, a narrow passage, and therein many heaps of stones) and
somewhat beneath Lana Pinsent chapel, it takes in the Turche beck that
runs thither from above Lanacroies: Turche.
thence it goes to Lansawell, Abergorlech, Breghuangothie, Lannigood, and so
into Towie, which hasting forward by chapel Dewie, receives the Rauelthie
from by north, Rauelthie. Gwilie.
then the Gwilie from northwest, whose head is above Lanie Pinsent, and race by
Canwell, Eluert, Comewilie, and Merling hill, as I have often heard. After this
confluence with the Gwilie, the Towie goes to Caermardine, then to Lanigang,
then to Lanstephan, S. Ismaels, and so into the sea.

Next unto the Towie is the Taue, Taue.
whose head is in the black mounteines, as at the roots of Wrenni vaur hill in
Pembrookeshire, from whence it runs by Lanuurnach, Langludien, Lanualteg,
and taking in the Dudderie from southwest, Dudderie.
out of the same county by Lanbederuelfraie, and Lindwie, it goes to
Eglesware chapel, beneath which it crosses the Marlais by north that runs
by Lanbedie and Whitland. Marlais.
Thence meeting with one rill called Uenni, Uennie.
as I take it, that comes through Cardith forest on the one side, and the
Caire Caire.
on the other that runs into it west of Landowror, it hastes to S. Clares,
Carthkinnie.
where it takes in the Carthkinnie, or Barthkinnie (as Leland calls it) and
the Gow Gow.
or Tow both in one channel, of which the first rises above Capell Bettus,
from whence it runs by Talacouthe, Kilsant, and Langinnin, the other issues
out of the ground above Trologh Bettus, by Midrun, and ioining with the former
a little above S. Clares, they run into the Taue, and from thence to
Lanihangle, and between it and Abercowen, admits finally the Gowen or Gow
stream, Gowen.
which coming likewise from the black mounteines, goes by Ebbernant, and so
into the Taue, who directs his course by Lancharne castle, and then into the
sea.

The next water that we come to is the Gwair, Gwair.
which is but a small thing rising above Lambeder Uelfraie, and going from
thence by east of castle Merhie hill, Cruinuier and Argwaire, it is not long
yer it fall into the sea, and so we leave Cairdinshire, and go over into
Penbrooke. Then passed we by an other coming out of Rathe forest called Coit
Rathe, the water it self rising about Templeton. Thence leaving the Monkeston
rock, we came to Tenbie or Diubechie Piscood, and passing into the port
between the castle and S. Katharines rock, we found it served with two
little back waters, Brechnocke.
of so small countenance, that they are not worthy of any further talk to be
spent in their descriptions: yet the one seems to be called Florence brook,
the other Fresto, Gunfreston standing between them both, whereby their sight
cannot perish. After this we passed between Londie and an other Ilet or rock
lieng by northwest of the same, From Londie to Caldie thirty miles.
to Ludsop point, and so to Abertrewent, where I found a silly fresh water
named Trewend that rises a mile or thereabout within the land. Trewent.
From thence we went southwards by Broad haven, till we came to S. Gowans
point. Then gathering west and by north before we came at Sheep Island, we found
another fresh water, that rises short of Kiriog Maharen, and running south of
Uggarston, Windmill hill, or between it and Castle Norton and Gupton, it
holds on flat west all the way till it come to the Ocean.

Being passed this water, we cast about toward the northwest, by the Poptons
and Pennar, till we came to the Pennar mouth, Pennar.
out of which the salt water issues that in manner inuironneth Penbroke. From
this (omitting sundry salt creekes on both sides of the haven, not appertinent
to our purpose) we came to the fall of two waters in one channel, above whose
confluence Williamston park stands, and whereof one (a mere salt course)
incloseth three parts of Carew castle. The other rising near to Coit Rath
forest is a fresh, and going by Geffraiston, Creswell and Lawrenie, it leaves
the park on the south side, and goes

Now come I to the two swords, Dugledu.
or haven of Milford, whereinto two rivers direct their course from the
northeast called Dugledu or the two swords, Cultell.
and between them both is a rill which they call also Cultlell (that is to
say) the knife. Hereof rises a merry tale of a Welshman, that lieng in this
place abroad all night in the cold weather, and peradventure not very well
occupied, was demanded of his hostess (where he did break his fast the next
morrow) at Leland speaks of a river called Gwilie, Gwilie.
but where it rises or falls, he makes no certain report: wherefore it is

The one of these swords is called Clotheie or Clothie, of which I find this
short and brief description. Clotheie.
The Clothie rises at the foot of Wrennie vaure hill and coming down to
Monachlodge, Langelman, Lannakeuen, and Egremond, it receives a rill from by
northwest before it come at Lanhaddon castle, which comes from above the
moore by Clarbaston and Bletherston, his head arising in the hill west of
Mancloghaie, as Leland does inform me. Dugledie.
named Dugledie, whereof I read as follows. The head of the Dugledie is
somwhere at northwest, betwixt S. Laurences and S. Dugwels, from whence it
runs to Trauegarne, Redbaxton, and taking in a Leland called Gwilie. Gwilie.
Certes it rises short of Walton, and coming by S. Leonards chapel and
Pendergest, it falls I say into the Dugledie, over against the town of
Hauerford or Herford west, but in Welsh Hulford; as Lhoid does set it down.
Beneath Herford it takes in another water from south west, whose head is short
of S. Margarets chapel,

Having thus showed the courses of those few fresh waters that come to Milford
haven, we cast about by the Blockehouse and S. Annes chapel to Gateholme I Will,
Gateholme I Will.
that lies between S. Annes and the Wilocke point, directly over against
Stockeholme Stockeholme I Will.
Island that is situat further off into the sea, toward the southwest, and is
full half so great as the Scalmeie that I elsewhere described. Between the
Willocke point also and the Scalmeie, directly west is the Midland I Will,
Midland I Will.
full so great as the Gateholme. Gresholme.
As for the two rocks that lie by north and south of the Scalmeie, of which the
one is called the Yardland stone, the other Mewstone, it shall not be greatly
requisite to stand on their discourses, since they are such as may hardly be
taken for Islands, and even in like sort we may judge of S. Brides I Will, which is
southwest of Calthrop rode, and likewise of the Gresholme, whereof I find this
short description. The Gresholme lies directly west of Scalmeie, from whence
if you sail thither on the south side, you must needs pass by the Mewstone
rock: if on the north of Scalmeie, you must leave the Yarland stone on your
left hand. Whereto if you note well the situation of these Islands already
named, and confer them with the Ramseie and S. David's land, you shall find them
to produce as it were two dangerous points, including the Brid baie, wherein
(notwithstanding the greatness) are 1000 perils, and no fresh brooks for me
to deal withal. Finally, having doubled the Willocke point, we thought it
not good altogether to leave that baie unsearched, at lestwise to see what
Islands might there be found, and long entered into the same, we beheld one which
the men of the country call S. Brides Island, S. Brides Island.
a very little place and situate near the land, before I came at Galtroie
rode. From thence we went about by the little haven, Doluach haven, Caruaie
haven, Shirelace rock, Carnbuddie, and Earnaie baies, Portelais, and so into
the found between Ramseie and the point. In this sound likewise is a little
I Will, almost annexed to the maine: but in the midst thereof, I mean of the
sound, is a rock called the horse (a mile and more by north of Ribbie rock,
that lies south east of Ramseie) and more unfortunate than ten of Seians
colts, but thanked be God I never came on his back. A fort of dangerous rocks
lieng on a row upon the west end of Southwales called the Bishop and his
clerks.
Thence passing by S. Stephans, and Whitesand baies, we saluted the Bishop and
his clerks, as they went in procession on our left side (being loath to take
any salted holy water at their hands) and came at last to the point called S.
David's head, which Ptolomie calls Octapitanum promontorium, except I be
deceived. But here gentle reader give me leave to stay a while, and insert the
words of Leland touching the land called S. Dewies or S. David's land, whereof
some men may peradventure have use, his words are these. Being therefore past
this haven and point of Demetia, in casting about the coast we come to S.
Dewies or S. David's land, S. Dewie or David a^ one,
which Ptolomie calls Octapitanum promontorium, I read to be separated from
the rest of the country much after this manner, although I grant that there may
be and are diverse other little creekes betwixt Newgale and S. David's head, and
betwixt S. David's and Fischard, beside those that are here mentioned out of a
register of that house.

As we turn therefore from Milford, S. David's land begins at Newgale, a
creek served with a back fresh water. Howbeit there is a baie before this
creek betwixt it and Milford. From hence about four miles is Saluach creek,
otherwise called. Sauerach, Saluach.
whither some fresh water resorteth: the mouth also thereof is a good rescue
for balingers, as it (I mean the register) says. Thence go we to Portelais
three miles, Portelais.
where is a little portlet, whither the Alen Alen.
that comes through saint Dewies close does run. It lies a mile southwest
from S. Dewies, saint Stinans Chapel also is between Portelais, and Portmaw.
Portmaw Maw.
The next is Port Maw, where I found a great estuarie into the land. The
Pendwie Pendwie.
Lannuehan.
is three miles from Pendwie, Tredine.
where is a salt creek, then to Tredine three miles, where is another creek
to Langunda, four miles, Langunda.
and another creek is there in like sort where fishermen catch herrings. Here
also the Gwerne river divides Penbidiane from Fischerdine Kemmeis land.
Fischard.
From Langunda to Fischard at the Gwerne Gwerne.
mouth four miles, and here is a portlet or hauenet also for ships. And thus
much of S. David's land.

Besides this also, Leland in a third book talks of lhinnes and pooles, but
for as much as my purpose is not to speak of lakes and lhinnes, I pass them
over as hasting to Teifie, in Latin Tibius, and after Ptolomie Tuerobius or
Tiuirobius, which is the next river that serves for my purpose. And yet not
forgetting to touch the Gwerne, for after we came from saint David's head, we
coasted along toward the southeast, till we came over against saint Catharins,
where going northwards by the bread haven, Gwerne.
where we found a fresh water named Guin, or Gwerne, whose course is in manner
directly out of the east into the west, from Uremie hills by pont Uaunt and
Lanichair, until it come within a mile of the foresaid town. It rises flat
north of the Perselie hill, from whence it goes by Pont vain, Lauerillidoch,
Neuerne.
where Newport stands. The head of this river is above Capell Nantgwin, from
whence it runs by Whitchurch, but yer it come at Kilgwin, it takes in a
little water that rises short of Wrenie vaure, and thence go forth as one
until they come to Newport. Cardigan haven is the next fall that I did stumble
on, wherein lies a little Island Teifie or Tine.
a noble river which rises in Lintinie, and is fraught with delicate samons,
and herein and not else where in all the rivers of Britain, is the Castor or
Beuer to be found. But to proceed. The very head thereof (I say) is four
miles above Stradflore in Luitie, and after it has run from thence a little
space, it receives a brook from southeast that comes out of Lin Legnant,
and then after the confluence runs on to Stradflore abbeie, beneth which
Miricke.
(that rises above Stradmirich) and soon after with the Landurch Landurch.
(both from the northwest) and finally the Bremich above Tregaron, that
comes in by the east; as Leland has set down.

Near to Landwibreuie also it crosses the Bromis by east northeast, Bromis.
and then goes to Landuair, Cledogh, Matherne.
Kellan, and soon after taking in the Matherne from by east, that parts
Cardigan partly from Carmardine shire, Dulas.
and likewise that Dulas above Lanbedder (which rises above Langibbie, and
goes thence to Bettus) on the northwest, it goes next of all to Lanbedder
town, then to Laniuair, beneath which it crosses the Grauelth, Grauelth.
thence to Pencarocke, Lanibether, Lanlonie, Lanihangle, and Sandissell, and
there it unites it self with the Clethor or Dettor, Clethor.
which comes down thither by Lantisilued chapel, Lanfraine, and finally
Landissell from by north, as I do here affirm. After this confluence it
proceeds on to Landuaie, Alloine, Bangor, Langeler, Landeureog and
Newcastell, yer long taking in the Kerie from by north, Kerie.
whose head is not far from that of Clethor, and whose course is somewhat
enlarged by such rilles as descend into the same. For west of Kenwith two becks
in one channel do fall into it, which be namelesse, and but of a little length.

Beneath Tredwair also it crosses another from by west, that runs along by
Bettus, Euan, and finally meeting with the Teifie, they run as one by Kennarth
(still parting Cardigon shire from Carmardin, as it has done since it met with
the Matherne) and so forth on till they join with the Cheach, Cheach.
which rising southeast above chapel Euan, does part Carmardine and
Brechnocke shire in sunder, till it come unto the Teifie. From this confluence,
and being still a limit unto Cardigon shire, it goes by Marierdine, and so to
Cardigon, taking in one rill from by north descending by Penneralt, by north of
Monardiue or Marierdiue, and two other from by southwest, of which the one
comes in beneath Kilgaron castle, the other from Lantwood northwest of Oswid
Mortemer, which lies southeast of Cardigan, and then going forward between S.
Dogmaile, and Langordinere, it is not long yer it fall into the Irish sea, flat
west and by north from his vprise, and sending us forth from Penlooke into
Cardigon shire, whereunto it has become march ever sithence it came from
Kellam, or confluence with the Matherne.

Being come into Cardigon shire, and having passed the Cardigon point, an Island
of the same denomination lieng by west thereof, we came unto the fall of Airon
three miles beneath Lancleere, Airon.
it rises in the mounteines by a chapel called Blam Peniall belonging to
Landwie breuie about three or four miles from Tiue banks, and runs on by
Lamberwooddie, Langitho, Tregrigaron hill, Treuilian, Talaferne, and soon
after taking in a rill from by south from Siliam by Lanleir it runs by
Istrade, Kilkennen, Lanicharin, and finally into the sea, crossing by the way
the Bidder brook, which coming from Dehewide, Bidder.
does fall into the same, between Lanchairin, and Henuenneie. Arth.
The Arth which is the next fall is no great thing, neither of any long
course, yet somewhat crotched, and it rises three or four miles or more
within the land slopewise, and coming by Lambaderne, and Treueglois, it
falls into the sea, northeast of Aberarth.

Being past the Arth, and having stayed there a while because we found some
harborough, we came next of all unto the Wereie, which rises of two heads, Ris
alias Wereie.
above whose confluence stands a town, named Lanihangle, Redrod, and from
whence it goes by Lanigruthen to Laristed, and so into the Ocean. Then went we
to the Ystwith, which rises in the black mounteins above Comerstwith, from
whence it runs certain miles, Istwith.
until it come unto Ispittie, Istwith, Lananon, Laniler, Lan Nachairne, and so
into the sea, taking withal first the Meleuen, then the Ridall or Redholl not
far from the shore, Redholl.
whereof I have this description. The Ridall rises in the top of Plimlimmon
hill out of a lake named Lin Ridall, from whence going toward Spittie Kinwen,
it crosses one water on the north, and another beneth it on the southeast, and
so goes on by Lanbeder vaure, till it come to Aberistwith, the Istwith, and so
into the Ocean. Having thus viewed the Istwith, and taken our selves again to
the sea, we crossed the Salke or Salique brook, Salique.
whereof I find this memorial.

The Salique brook descends in like sort from the black mounteins, and
going from Ummaboue, toward Gogarth, or Gogirthar, it receives the Massalique,
Massalique.
and from thence goes into the sea, southwest from his original. From hence
we went to the Lerie, an indraught of no great quantity, Lerie.
neither commodious as I guess (yet I may be deceived) for any ship to
harborough in. It rises toward the lower

Thus have I brought my self out of Caerdigan shire unto the Wie, Wie.
which is limit between it and Merioneth for a certain space, and being
entered in the mouth thereof we gat up to the head, minding in the description
of the same to come downward as in Romis.
till it come to Romis, beneath

After this, our maine river goes by Pengos, and beneath the same takes in an
influence from southeast, called the Dulas, and another from the northwest from
thence it hastes on to Magenillet, Deuus, in Welsh or British Dift or Dewie,
whereof the Latin does seem

Being past this we did cast about by the Sarnabigh point, till we came to the
Lingouen beck, and so to the Bar, which is a fair water, and therefore
worthy to be with diligence described, yet it is not called Bar from the head,
but rather Moth or Derie, for so are the two chief heads called out of which
this river descends, and are about six miles west of the Lin, out of which
the Dee has his issue, and between which the Raran vaure hills are situat
and have their being. After the ioining of the two heds of this Bar, as I
name it from the original, it receives a rill from northeast called Cain, and
another beneath the same, coming from Beurose wood, and so holds on toward
the south between Laniltid and Kemmor abbaie, till it meet a little by west of
Dolgelth with the Auon vaure, which coming also out of the Woodland soil, and
taking in a rill from Gwannas, hastes northwestward (by Dolgelth) to join
with the Bar, and being met they receive the Kessilgunt, then the Hirgun, and
after a course of four to five miles it falls into the sea, having watered
the very heart and inward parts of this shire. From hence we cross the Skethie
which runs by Corsogdale and Lanthwie, alias Lanthonie, then the Lambader
which receiving the Artro above Lambader, does fall into the sea, southeast of
the point, and flat south of Landango, which is a town situat on the other
side of the turning.

After this we passed by Aberho, so named of the river Ho, Ho.
that falls there into the sea, and comes thither from the Alps or hills of
Snowdonie, mounteins, no less fertile for grass, wood, cattle, fish and
foul, than the famous Alps beyond the seas, whereof all the writers do make
so honorable report. From hence we sailed by Abermawr or mouth of Mawr, Mawr.
which comes in like sort from Snowdonie, and takes diverse rivers with him
whose names I do not know. Artro.
Then unto the Artro a brook, whose head comes from by north east, and in
his course receives the Gedar on the north side, and so holds on till it
fall into the sea, after a few windlesses which it makes as it passes. After
this we come to Traith vehan, which is the fall of the Drurid, a pretty river
coming from the marches of Caernaruonshire, which passing by Festimog, soon
after takes in the Cunwell, then the Uelenrid; and so holds on to Deckoin,
where it falls into the said Traith. For of the other two rilles that lie by
south hereof, and have their issue also into the same, I make but small
account, because their quantity is not great. Next unto this we have Traith
mawr, whereinto the Farles has his issue, Farles.
a river proceeding from Snowdonie or the Snowdon hills, descending by
Bethkelerke and Lanwrothen, without mixture of any other water in all his
course and passage. It is parcel of the march also between Merioneth and
Caernaruon shires. From Traith mawr we pass by the Krekith, and come to
another water descending from the north by Lanstidwie, and after that to the
Moie, whose mouths are so near together, that no more than half a mile of
the land does seem to keep them in sunder.

Then come we unto the Erke, Erke.
a pretty brook descending from Madrtjn hills, into whose mouth two other of no
less quantity than it self do seem to have their confluence, and whose
courses do come along from the west and northwest; the most southerlie being
called Girch, and the other the Hellie: except my memory do fail me. Then
casting about toward the south (as the coast lies) we saw the Abersoch or
mouth of the Soch river upon our right hand, Soch.
in the mouth whereof, or not far by south thereof lie two Islands, of which
the more northerlie is called Tudfall, and the other Penrtjn: as Leland did
observe. I would set down the British names of such towns and villages as
these waters pass by; but the writing of them (for want of the language) is so
hard to me, that I choose rather to show their falls and risings, than to
corrupt their denominations in the writing: and yet now and then I use such
words as our Englishmen do give unto some of them, but that is not often,
where the British name is easy to be found out and sounded.

After this, going about by the point, and leaving Gwelin I Will on the right
hand, we come to Daron river, Daron.
whereupon stands Aberdaron a quarter of a mile from the shore betwixt
Aberdaron and Uortigernes vale, where the compass of the sea gathers in a
head, and enters at both ends. Then come we about the point to Edarne beck,
Edarne beck.
a mile and more south of Newin. And ten or twelve miles from hence is the
Uennie brook, whose course is little above so many miles; and not far from
it is the Liuan, a far less water, coming also from the east: and next unto
that another, wherinto the Willie by south and the Carrog by north after their
conjunction do make their common influence. Having passed this

Then come we (says Leland) to Gwiniwith mirith (or Horse brook) two miles
from Moilethon, and it rises at a Well so called full a mile from thence.
Moilethon is a bow shot from Aberpowle, from whence ferrie botes go to the
Termone or Angleseie. Aberpowle runs three miles into the land, Conte.
and Gegeine.
Aber Gegeine comes out of a mounteine a mile above, Torronnen.
and Bangor (thorough which a rill called Torronnen has his course) almost a
mile above it. Aber Ogwine is two miles above that; Ogwine.
it rises at Tale linne, Ogwine poole, five miles above Bangor in the east
side of Withow. Aber Auon is two miles above Aberogwene, Auon.
and it rises in a poole called Lin man Auon, three Lannar Uehan.
Auon lan var Uehan rises in a mounteine thereby, and goes into the sea, two
miles above Duegeuelth. Duegeuelth.
Auon Duegeuelth is three miles above Conweie, which rising in the mounteins a
mile off, goes by it self into Meneie salt arm. On the said shore also lies
Conweie, and this river does run betwixt Penmaine Maur, and Penmaine Uehan. It
rises about three miles from Penmaclon hills which lie about sixty miles from
Conweie abbeie, now dissolved out of a lake called Lin Conweie, and on the

This river (which Ptolomie calls Toesobius, Teec.
as I take it) after the deriuation thereof from the head, passes on the west
side by Spittieuan and Tiherio, beneath which it takes in a stream coming
from the east out of Denbighshire, derived from three heads, and of the
greatest called Nag. Soon after also another, and then the third, which
comes in from the west by Lanpen Mawr: next of all the Leder Ligow.
proceeding from two lakes, that is, the Mumber and the Ligow. On the right
hand as we still descend, is the Coid, then the Glin, and a little lower we
meet with the Lin Gerioneth: and after we be past another on the right side, we
come to the Perloid, which comes out of Lin Cowlid, to the Ygan, to the
Idulin, to the castle Water on the left, and then to the Melandider on the
right, without the sight of any other, till we come almost to Conweie, where
we find a notched stream coming from by west, and called Guffen or Gyffin
into the same by one channel on the norrtheast side of the town, beneath
Guffin or Gyffin, and over against Lansanfraid in Denbighshire; so far as I
now remember. Some part of Carnaruonshire stretches also beyond Aber Conweie,
or the fall of Conweie, Ormeshed.
and it is called Ormeshed point, wherein also is a rill, whose fall into the
sea is between Penrin and Landright. And thus we have made an end of the
chief waters which are to be found in this county.

The next is a corner of Denbigh, by which we do as it were step over into
Flintshire, and whose first water is not great, yet it comes from southwest,
and falls into the north or Irish sea called Virginium, beneath Landilas; as
the next that comes south from Bettas does the like three miles beneath
Abergele, Gele.
and is not only called Gele (as the name it self imports) but also noted
to take his course through the Canges. Having thus gone over the angle of
Denbighshire, that lies between those of Carnaruon and Flint, we come next of
all unto Aber Cluide, or the fall of Clotha or Glota, which is a stream not to
be shortly entreated of. It rises among certain hills, which lie not far
distant from the confines of Merioneth and Denbighshires. Southeast from his
fall, and having run four or five miles from the head, it comes about to
Darwen, taking in the Maniton on the left hand, Maniton.
and the Mespin on the right: and soon after the third from bywest, whose head
is not far from Gloucanocke. Beneath Ruthen also it takes in the Leueneie:
and after that another, and the third, all on the right hand, Cluedoch.
and so holds on till it meet with the Cluedoch, then with the Ystrade, which
passes by Whitchurch on the left hand. After which we come to the Wheeler on
the right, and so to his ioining with the Elwie, which is beneath S. Asaphes, a
bishops see that is environed with them both. Elwie.
This Elwie rises above Gwitherne, and beneath Lanuair takes in the Alode,
which comes from lin Alode, by Lanfannan, and ioineth with him five miles
beneath Langrenew. The Cluda therefore and the Elwie being met, the confluence
passes on to the sea by Rutland castle, where it takes in the Sarne, which
comes from by east, and has a course almost of sixteen miles. From hence we
took sea toward the Dee mouth: and as we passed by the rest of the shore, we
saw the fall of a little brook near Basing Work, of another near to Flint,
of the third at Yowleie castle, which with his two arms in manner includes
it; and the fourth beneath Hawarden hold, which in like sort goes round about
the same, and from whence we came to the Dee, where we landed and took up our
lodging in Chester. In this place also it was no hard matter to deliver and set
down the names of such rivers and streams as are also to be found in
Angleseie, finding my self to have some leisure and fit opportunity for the
same: and imagining a iourneie thither also, as unto the other places mentioned
in this description, whither as yet it has not been my hap to travel: I
thought it not amiss to take it also in hand, and perform it after this manner.

Ferrieng therefore over out of Carnaruonshire to Beaumarise, I went by land
without crossing of any river or stream worthy memory, till I came to the
Brant, which has his fall not far from the southest point of that Island.
This Brant rises far up in the land, not far from Lauredenell, and holding
on his course southward to Lanthoniell Uaall, it goes on to Bodoweruch,
Langainwen, and so into the sea.

The next fall we came unto was called Maltrath, and it is producted by the
confluence of two rivers, the Geuennie and the Gint, who join not far from
Langrestoll. This also last rehearsed has his head near to Penmoneth, the
other being forked rises in the hilly soil above Tregaion and Langwithlog:
so that part of the Island obteineth no small commodity and benefit by their
passage. Next unto this we came unto the Fraw, Fraw.
whose head is near to Langinewen, and passage by Cap Maer; after which it
falls into a lake, from whence it goes east of Aberfraw, and so into the
sea. The next river has no name

This place being viewed, I came back again by the aforesaid bridge, into the
maine of Angleseie, and going northwards I find a fall enforced by three
riuerets, each one having his course almost south Linon.
of the second Allo; Allo.
but the third is altogether namelesse for aught that I can learn, wherefore
it shall not be necessary to spend any time in the further searching of his
course. Being past this, we went northwards till we came to the point, and then
going eastward, we butted upon the fall of a certain confluence growing by the
ioining of the

The Dee or Deua (as Ptolomie calls it) is a noble river, Dee or Deua.
and breeder of the best trout, whose head is in Merioneth shire, about three
miles above the lake, situate in the county of Penthlin, and called Lin
Tegnis, whose stream yet very small, by reason of the shortness of his
course, falls into the said lake, not far from Lanullin. There are sundry
other waters which come also into the said lake, which is four or flue miles
in length, and about two miles over; as one Trowerin.
and from thence running into the Trowerin, a pretty stream, and not a little
augmented by the Kelme and Monach which fall by north into the same, and
ioineth with the Dee south of Lanuair; from whence forth it loses the name,
and is afterward called Dee. East of Bala in like sort, it receives the
Ruddoch, then the Cleton, and so passing on by Landright to Langar, Ruddoch.
it meets with a confluence proceeding from the Alwen and the Giron, Cleton.
of which this rises in the hills above Langham, the other in the mounteins
about five or six miles by northwest of Lanihangle in Denbighshire, where (as I
guess) it falls into the ground; and afterward rising again between
Lanihangle and Bettus, it holds on about two miles, and then ioineth with the
Giron, full six miles above Dole, and before it come to the Dee. From hence the
Dee goes by Lansanfraid, and the marches of Merioneth into Denbighshire, and
so to Langellon, Dinas, Bren, etc: keeping his course by certain windlesses;
Gristioneth.
till he receive the Gristioneth, descending by Ru^bon, then another est of the
same; the third, Keriog.
from by west called Keriog (whose head is not far from the bounds of
Merioneth and course by Lanarmon, Lansanfraid, and Chirke) the fourth from
south east out of Shropshire, called Morlais, and so passes as bounds between
Denbighshire, and the Outliggand of Flintshire, to wit by Bistocke on the one
side and Bangor on the other, till it come to Worthenburie: whereabout it
receives a channel descending from four influences, of which one comes by
Penlie chapel, the second from Hamnere, which goes down by Emberhall, and
falls in a little by east of the other; the third from Blackmere (by
Whitchurch) etc: and the fourth from between Chad and Worsall. These two later
meeting above nether Durtwich, do hold on to Talerne, as mine information
instructs me.

From Wrothenburie the Dee goes northwestwards toward Shocklige, meeting by
the way with the confluence of the Cluedoch Cluedoch.
(or Dedoch original mother to those trouts for which the Dee is commended)
and descends from Capell Moinglath) and the Gwinrogh, Gwinrogh.
that runs through Wrexham, both ioining a mile and more beneath Wrexham,
not far from Hantwerne. Soon after also our maine river receives another
beck from by east, which is bound on the northwest side to the Outliggand of
Flintshire, and so passes on between Holt castle and Ferneton, Almere and
Pulton, as march between Denbighshire and Cheshire, and then takes in the
Alannus or Alen; Alannus.
a pretty river and worthy to be described. The head of this Alen the refore
is in Denbighshire, and so disposed that it rises in two several places, each
being two miles from other, the one called Alen Mawr, the other Alen Uehan, as
I do find reported. They meet also beneath Landegleie, and run northwards till
they come beyond Lanuerres, where meeting with a rill coming from by west, it
runs on to the Mold to Horsheth, and so in and out to Greseford, taking the
Cagidog from southwest with it by the way; then to Traue Alen, and so into the
Dee, a mile and more above the fall of Powton beck, which also descends from
southwest out of Flintshire, and is march unto the same, even from the very
head. After which confluence the Dee having Chestershire on both sides, goes
to Aldford with a swift course, where it meets with the Beston brook,
whereof I do find this description following.

The Beston water rises in the wooddie soil between Beston.
Spruston and Beston castle with a forked head, and leaving Beston town on
the northeast, it goes to Tarneton, and to Hakesleie, where it divides it
self in such wise, that one branch thereof runs by Totnall, Goldburne, and
Leehall, to Alford, and so into the Dee, the other by Stapleford, Terwine,
Barrow, Picton, and Therton, where it brancheth again, sending forth one arm
by Stanneie poole, and the park side into Merseie arm, toward the northwest,
and another by southwest, which comes as it were back again, by Stoke,
Croughton, Backeford, Charleton, Upton, the Baits, and so under a bridge to
Chester ward, where it falls into the Dee arm at Flocks brook, excluding
Wirall on the northwest as an Island, which lies out like a leg between the
Merseie and the Dee arms, and including and making another fresh Island within
the same, whose limits by northwest are between Thorneton, Chester, and
Aldford, on the northeast Thorneton and Hakesleie, and on the southeast
Hakesleie and Aldford, whereby the form thereof does in part resemble a
triangle. And thus much of the Dee, which is a troublesome stream

This abbeie of Bangor stood sometime in English The situation of ye monastery
of Bangor.
by hither and south of the river Dee. It is now ploughed ground where that
house stood, by the space of a Welsh mile (which reaches unto a mile and an
half English) and to this day the tillers of the soil there do plow up bones
(as they say) of those monks that were slain in the quarrel of Augustine,
and within the memory of man some of them were taken up in their rotten weeds,
which were much like unto those of our late black monks, as Leland set it
down: yet Erasmus is of the opinion,

Being past the Dee we sailed about Wirall, passing by Hibrie or Hilbree Island,
and Leuerpole, Nasse, making our entry into Merseie arm by Leuerpole haven,
where we find a water falling out between Wiuer.
than the which I read of no river in England that fetches more or half so
many windlesses and crinklings, before it come at the sea. It rises at Buckle
hills, which lie between Ridleie and Buckle towns, and soon after making a
lake of a mile and more in length called Ridleie poole, it runs by Ridleie
to Chalmondlie.

Thence it goes to Wrenburie, where it takes in a water out of a moore that
comes from Marburie: and beneth Sandford bridge the Combrus from Combermer or
Comber lake: Combrus.
and finally the third that comes from about Moneton, and runs by
Langerslaw, then between Shenton and Atherlie parkes, and so into the Wiuer,
which waters all the west part of England, and is no less notable than the
first Auon or third Duze, whereof I have spoken already. After these
confluences it hastes also to Audlem, Hawklow, and at Barderton crosses the
Betleie water, Betleie.
that runs by Duddington, Widdenberie, and so by Barderton into the
aforesaid stream. Thence it goes to Nantwich, but yer it come at Marchford
bridge, it meets with a rill called Salopbrooke (as I guess) coming from
Caluerleie ward, Salop.
and likewise beneath the said bridge, Lee and Wuluarne.
with the Lee and the Wuluarne both in one channel, whereof the first rises at
Weston, the other goes by Copnall. From thence the Wiuer runs on to
Minchion and Cardeswijc, and the next water that falls into it is the Ash
Ash.
(which passes by Darnall Grange) and afterward going to Warke, the vale
Royal, and Eaton, it comes finally to Northwich where it receives the
Dane, to be described as follows. Dane.
The Dane rises in the very edges of Chester, Darbishire, and Staffordshire,
and coming by Warneford, Swithamleie and Bosleie, is a limit between Stafford
and Darbie shires, almost even from the very head, which is in Maxwell forest.

It is not long also yer it do meet with the Bidle water, Bidle.
that comes by Congerton, and after the confluence goes unto Swetham, the
Heremitage, Cotton and Croxton, there taking in two great waters, Whelocke.
whereof the one is called Whelocke, which coming from the edge of the county
by Morton to Sandbach, crosses another that descends from church Cawhlton,
and after the confluence goes to Warmingham, ioining also beneath Midlewish
with the Croco or Croxston, the second great water, whose head comes out of a
lake above Bruerton (as I hear) and thence both the Whelocke and the Croco go
as one unto the Dane, Croco.
at Croxton, as the Dane does from thence to Bostocke, Dauenham, Shebruch,
Shurlach, and at Northwich into the foresaid Wiuer. After this confluence the
Wiuer runs on to Barneton, and there in like sort receives two brooks in
one channel, whereof one comes from above Allostocke, by Holme and Lastocke,
the other from beyond Birtles mill, Piuereie.
by Chelford (where it takes in a rill called Piuereie) thence to over Peuer,
Waterlesse.
Holford, and there crossing the Waterlesse brook (growing of two becks and
ioining at nether Tableie) it goes forth to Winshambridge, and then meeting
with the other, after this confluence they proceed till they come almost at
Barneton, where the said channel ioineth with a pretty water running thorough
two lakes, whereof the greatest lies between Comberbach, Rudworth and
Marburie. But to go forward with the course of the maine river. After these
confluences our Wiuer goes to Warham, Actonbridge, and Dutton, over against
which town, on the other side it meets with a rill, coming from Cuddington:
also the second going by Norleie, and Gritton, finally the third soon after
from Kimfleie, and then proceeds on in his passage by Asheton chapel,
Frodesham, Rockesauage, and so into the sea: and this is all that I do find of
the Wiuer, whose influences might have been more largely set down, if mine
injunctions had been amply delivered, yet this I hope may suffice for his
description, and knowledge of his course.

The Merseie rises among the Peke hills, Merseie.
and from thence going down to the Woodhouse, and taking sundry rilles
withal by the way, it becomes the confines between Chester and
Darbishires. Going also toward Goitehall, Goite.
it meets with a fair Frith.
and beneath Berdhall, the Set Set.
that rises above Thersethall and runs by Ouerset. After this confluence
also the Merseie goes to Goite hall, Tame.
which divides Chestershire and Lancastershire in sunder, and whose head is in
the very edge of Yorkshire, from whence it goes southward to Sadleworth
Firth, then to Mukelhirst, Stalie hall, Ashdon Underline, Dunkenfield, Denton,
Reddish, and so at Stockford into the Merseie stream, which passes forth in
like sort to Diddesbirie, receiving a brook by the way that comes from Lime
park, by Brumhall park and Chedle.

From Diddesbirie it proceeds to Norden, Irwell.
Ashton, Aiston, Flixston, where it receives the Irwell a notable water, and
therefore his description is not to be omitted before I do go forward any
further with the Merseie, although it be not nauigable by reason of sundry
rocks and shalowes that lie dispersed in the same. It rises above Bacop, and
goes thence to Rosendale, and in the way to Aitenfield it takes in a water
from Haselden. After this confluence it goes to Newhall, Brandlesham, Brurie,
and above Raeus, or Rache.
a fair stream and to be described when I have finished the Irwell, as also
the next unto it beneath Ratcliffe, because I would not have so many ends at
once in hand wherewith to trouble my readers. Being therefore past these two,
our Irwell goes on to Clifton, Leland speaks of the Corue water about
Manchester; but I know nothing of his course.
Hollond, Edgecroft, Strengwaies, and to Manchester, where it unites it self
with the Yrke, Yrke.
that runs thereinto by Roiton Midleton, Heaton hill, and Blackeleie.
Beneath Manchester also it meets Medlocke.
that comes thither from the northeast side of Oldham, and between Claiton
and Garret Halles, and so between two parkes, falling into it about Holne.
Thence our Irwell going forward to Woodsall, Whicleswt^c, Ecles Barton, and
Deuelhom, it falls near unto Flixton, into the water of Merseie, where I
will stay a while withal, till I have brought the other unto some pass, of
which I spoke before.

The Rache, Rache.
Rach or Rish consists of sundry waters, Beile.
that comes thither by Milneraw chapel. After this confluence also, it
meets with a rill near unto Rachedale, and soon after with the Sprotton
Sprotton.
water, and then the Sudleie Sudleie.
brook, whereby his channel is not a little increased, which goes from thence
to Grisehirst and so into the Irewell, before it come at Ratcliffe. Bradsha.
The second stream is called Bradsha. It rises of two heds, above Tureton
church, whence it runs to Bradsha, and yer long taking in the Walmesleie
beck, Walmesleie.
they go in one channel till they come beneath Bolton in the More. From hence
(receiving a water that comes from the roots of Rauenpike hill by the way) it
goes by Deane and Bolton in the More, and so into Bradsha water, which takes
his way to Leuermore, Farnworth, Leuerlesse, and finally into the Irwell,
which I before described, and whereof I find these two verses to be added at
the last: Irke, Irwell, Medlocke, and Tame,
When they meet with the Merseie, do loose their name.


Now therefore to resume our Merseie, you shall understand that after his
confluence with the Irwell, he runs to Partington, and not far from thence
interteineth the Gles, Gles.
or Glesbrooke water, increased with sundry arms, whereof one comes from
Lodward, another from above Houghton, the third from Hulton park, and the
fourth from Shakerleie: and being all united near unto Leigh, the confluence
goes to Holcroft, and above Holling green into the swift Merseie. After this
increase the said stream in like sort runs to Rigston, and there admits
the Bollein or Bolling brook water into Bolleiu brook.
his society, which rising near the Chamber in Maxwell forest goes to
Ridge, Sutton, Bollington, Prestbirie, and Newton, where it takes in a water
coming from about Pot Chapel, which runs from thence by Adlington,
Woodford, Wimesleie, Ringeie, Birkin.
and Ashleie, there receiving the Birkin brook that comes from between
Allerton and Marchall, by Mawberleie, and soon after the Marus or Mar, Mar.
that comes thereinto from Mar town, by Rawstorne, and after these
confluences goes on to Downham, and over against Rixton beneath Crosford
bridge into the Merseie water, which proceeding on, admits not another that
meets with all near Lim before it go to Thelwall. Thence also it goes by
Bruche and so to Warrington, a little beneath crossing a brook that comes
from Par by Browseie, Bradleie, and Saukeie on the one side, and another on the
other that comes thither from Gropenhall, and with these it runs on to
nether Walton, Acton grange, and so to Penkith, where it interteineth the Bold,
Bold.
and soon after the Grundich Grundich.
water on the other side, that passes by Preston, and Daresbirie. Finally our
Merseie going by Moulton, it falls into Lirepoole, or as it was called of old
Liuerpoole haven, when it is past Runcorne. And thus much of the Merseie,
comparable unto the Wiuer, and of no less fame than most rivers of this Island.

Being past these two, we come next of all to the Tarbocke water, Tarbocke.
that falls into the sea at Harbocke, without finding any mo till we be past
all Wirall, out of Lirepoole haven, and from the black rocks that lie upon
the north point of the aforesaid Island. Then come we to the Altmouth, Alt or
Ast.
whose fresh rising not far into the land, comes to Feston, and soon after
receiving another on the right hand, that passes into it by Aughton, it is
increased no more before it come at the sea. Neither find I any other falls
till I meet with the mouth of the Yarrow and Duglesse, which have their
recourse to the sea in one channel as I take it. Duglesse or Duiesse.
The Duglesse comes from by west of Rauenspike hill, and yer long runs by
Andertonford to Worthington, and so (taking in two or three rilles by the way)
to Wigen, where it receives two waters in one channel, of which one comes in
south from Brin park, the other from northeast. Being past this, it receives
one on the north side from Standish, and another by south from Hollond, and
then goes on toward Rufford chapel taking the Taud withal, that descends
from above Skelmersdale town, Tand or Skelinere.
and goes through Lathan park, belonging (as I hear) unto the earl of
Derbie. Merton.
It meets also on the same side, with Merton mere water, in which mere is
one Island called Netholme beside other, and when it is past the hanging bridge,
it is not long yer it fall into the Yarrow.

The Yarrow Yarrow.
rises of two heads, whereof the second is called Bagen Bagen.
brook, and making a confluence beneath Helbie wood, it goes on to Burgh,
Eglestan, Crofton, and then ioineth next of all with the Dugglesse, after which
confluence, the maine stream goes forth to Bankehall, Charleton, How, Leland
writing of the Yarrow, says thus of the same, so far as I now remember. Into
the Dugglesse also runs the Yarrow, which comes within a mile or
thereabout of Chorleton town, that parts Lelandshire from Derbieshire. Under
the foot of Chorle also I find a rill named Ceorle, and about a mile and a
half from thence a notable quarreie of stones, whereof the inhabitants do
make a great boast and price. And hitherto Leland.

The Ribble, Ribble.
a river very rich of salmon and Iampreie, does in manner inuiron Preston in
Andernesse, and it rises near to Kibbesdale above Gisborne, from whence it
goes to Sawleie or Salleie, Chathburne, Woodington, Clithero castle, Odder.
and beneath Mitton meets the Odder at northwest, which rises not far from
the cross of Greet in Yorkshire, and going thence to Shilburne, Newton,
Radholme park, and Stony hirst, it falls yer long into the Ribble water.
From hence the Ribble water Calder.
but it meets with the Calder from southeast. This brook rises above Holme
church in Yorkshire, which lies by east of Lancastershire, and goes by
Towleie and Burneleie, where it receives a trifling rill, thence to Higham,
and yer long crossing one water that comes from Wicoler by Colne, and another
by and by named Pidle brook, Pidle.
that runs by New church in the Pidle, it meets with the Calder, which
passes forth to Paniam; and thence receiving a beck on the other Henburne.
where the Henburne brook does join withal, that goes by Akington
chapel, Dunkinhalgh, Rishton, and so into the Calder, as I have said before.
The Calder therefore being thus enlarged, runs forth to Read, where
master Nowell dwells, to Whallie, and soon after into Ribble, that goes
from this confluence to Salisburie hall, Ribchester, Osbastin, Samburie,
Keuerden, Law, Ribbles bridge, and then takes in the Darwent, Darwent.
before it Blackeburne Rodlesworth.
it goes through Houghton park, by Houghton town, to Walton hall, and so
into the Ribble. As for the Sannocke brook, Sannocke.
it rises somewhat above Longridge chapel, goes to Broughton town, Cotham,
Lee hall, and so into Ribble. And here is all that I have to say of

The Wire rises eight or ten miles from Garstan, Wire.
out of an hill in Wiresdale forest, from whence it runs by Shireshed
chapel, and then going by Wadland, or Waddiler, Grenelaw castle (which
belongs to the earl of Darbie) Garstan, and Kirkland hall, it first receives
the second Calder, that comes down by Edmerseie chapel, then another
channel increased with sundry waters, Calder. 2.
which I will here describe before I proceed any further with the Wire. I
suppose that the first water is called Plimpton brook, it rises south of
Gos^^er, and comes by Cawford hall, Plimpton.
and yer long receiving the Barton Barton.
beck, it proceeds forward till it ioineth with the Brook rill that comes
from Bowland forest, Brook.
by Clanghton hall, where master Brooke-hales does lie, and so through Mersco
forest. After this confluence the Plime or Plimpton water meets with the
Calder, and then with the Wire, which passes forth to Michaell church, and
the Raw cliffes, and above Thorneton crosses the Skipton that goes by Potton,
then into the Wire rode, Skipton.
and finally through the sands into the sea, according to his nature. When we
were past the fall of the Wire, we coasted up by the salt cotes, to Coker
mouth, Coker.
whose head, though it be in Weresdale forest, not far from that of the Wire,
yet the shortness of course deserves no description. The next is Cowdar,
Cowdar.
which is coming out of Wire dale, as I take it, is not increased with any
other waters more than Coker, and therefore I will rid my hands thereof so much
we sooner.

Being past these two, Lune.
I came to a notable river called the Lune or Loine, or (as the book of
statutes has) Lonwire Anno 13 Ric. 2. cap. 19, and gives name to Lancaster,
Lonecaster, or Lunecaster, where much Roman money is found, and that of
diverse stamps, whose course does rest to be described as follows; and
whereof I have two descriptions. The first being set down by Leland, as master
Moore of Catharine hall in Cambridge delivered it unto him. The next I exhibit
as it was given unto me, by one that has taken pains (as he says) to search
out and view the same, but very lately to speak of. The Lune (says master
Moore) of some commonly called the Loine, rises at Crosseho, in Dent dale, in
the edge of Richmondshire out of three heads. North also from Dent dale is
Garsdale, an vplandish town, wherein are seen many times great store of red
dear that come down to feed from the mounteins into the valleys, and thereby
runs a water, which afterward comes to Sebbar vale, where likewise is a
brook meeting with Garsdale water, so that a little lower they go as one into
Dent dale beck, which is the river that afterward is called Lune, or Lane, as
I have very often noted it. Beside these waters also before mentioned, it
receives at the foot of Sebbar vale, a great brook, which comes out of the
Worth, between Westmerland and Richmondshire, which taking with him the
aforesaid channels, does run seven miles yer it come to Dent dale foot. From
hence it enters into Lansdale, corruptly so called, peradventure for
Lunesdale, and runs therein eight or nine miles southward, and in this dale
is Kirbie. Hitherto master Moore, as Leland has exemplified that parcel of
his letters. But mine other note writes hereof in this manner. Burdecke.
Burbecke water rises at Wustall head, by west, and going by Wustall foot to
Skaleg, Breder.
it admits the Breder that descends thither from Breder dale. From hence
our Burbecke goes to Breder dale foot, and so to Tibarie, where it meets
with four rilles in one bottom, of which one comes from besides Oxton,
another from between Rasebecke and Sunbiggin, the third and fourth from each
side of Langdale: and after the general confluence made, goes toward
Roundswath, Barrow.
above which it unites it self with the Barrow. Thence it runs to Howgill,
Delaker, Firrebanke, and Killington, beneath which it meets with a water
coming from the Moruill hills, and afterward crossing the Dent brook, Dent.
that runs thither from Dent town, beneath Sebbar, they continue their
course as one into the Burbecke, from whence it is called Lune. From hence it
goes to Burbon chapel, where it takes in another rill coming from by east,
then to Kirbie, Lansdale, and above Whittenton crosses a brook coming from
the county stone by Burros, and soon after beneath Tunstall and Greteie,
Greteie.
which descending from about Ingelborow hill, passes by Twiselton, Ingleton,
Thorneton, Burton, Wratton, and near Thurland castle, touches finally with
the Lune, which brancheth, and soon after unites it self again. After this
also it goes on toward New park, Wennie.
and receives the Wennie, and the Hinburne Hinburne.
both in one channel, of which this rises north of the cross of Greteie, and
going by Benthams and Roberts Rheburne.
Wraie takes in the Rheburne that rises north of Wulfecrag. After this
confluence also above New park, it makes his gate by Aughton, Laughton,
Skirton, Lancaster, Excliffe, Awcliffe, Soddaie, Orton, and so into the sea.
Thus have you both the descriptions of Lune, make your conference or election
at your pleasure, for I am sworn to neither of them both.

The next fall is called Docker, Docker.
and peradventure the same that Leland does call the Kerie, Kerie.
which

Being past this, we find a forked arm of the Sprota.
and comes down by west of Skelmer park, so that these two brooks have the
aforesaid park between them, and fall into the fourth east of Barneside, not
very far in sunder. The fourth or last called Ken.
out of Ken moore, in a poole of a mile compass, very well stored with fish,
the head whereof, as of all the baronie of Kendall is in Westmerland, and going
to Stauelope, it takes in a rill from Chappleton Inges. Then leaving Colnehead
park by east, it passes by Barneside, to Kendall, Helston, Sigath,
Siggeswijc, Leuenbridge, Milnethorpe, and so into the sea. Certes this Ken is a
pretty deep river, and yet not safely to be adventured upon, with boats and
balingers, Winstar.
The other piece of the forked arm, is called Winstar, the head whereof is above
Winstar chapel, and going down almost by Carpmaunsell, and Netherslake, it
is not long yer it fall into the sea, or sands, for all this coast, and a gulf
from the Ramside point to the Mealenasse, is so pestered with sands, that it is
almost incredible to see how they increase. Those also which inuiron the
Kenmouth, are named Kensands: Winander.
from whence it goes to Cangridge, where it makes a mere: then to Ambleside,
and taking in yer it come there, two rilles on the left hand, and one on the
right that comes by Clapergate, it makes (as I take it) the greatest mere,
or fresh water in England; for I read it is ten miles in length. Finally,
coming to one small channel above Newbridge, it reaches not above six miles
yer fall into the sea. There is in like sort a water, called the Fosse that
rises near unto Arneside, Fosse.
and Tillerthwates, and goes forth by Grisdale, Satrethwate, Rusland,
Powbridge, Bowth, and so falls with the Winander water into the maine sea. On
the west side of the Fosse also comes another through Furnesse felles, and
from the hills by north thereof, which yer long making the Thurstan lake not
far from Hollinhow, and going by Bridge end, in a narrow channel, passes
forth by Nibthwaits, Blareth, Cowlton, and Spark bridge, and so into the sea.
Spark.
Having passed the Leven or Conisands, or Conistonesands, or Winander fall (for
all is one) I come to the Lew, Lew.
which rises at Cewike chapel, and falls into the sea beside Plumpton. The
Rawther Rawther.
descending out of low Furnesse, has two heads, whereof one comes from
Penniton, the other by Ulmerstone abbeie, and ioining both in one channel, they
hasten into the sea, whither all waters direct their voyage,. Then come we to
another rill southwest of Aldingham, descending by Glaiston castle; and
likewise the fourth that rises near Lindell, and running by Dawlton castle
and Furnesse abbeie, not far from the Barrow head, it falls into the sea
over against Waueie and Waueie chapel, except mine aduertisements misleade me.

The Dodon, Dodon.
which from the head is bound unto Cumberland and Westmerland, comes from the
Shire stone hill bottom, and going by Blackehill, Southwake, S. John's, Uffaie
park, and Broughton, it falls into the faltwater, between Kirbie, and
Mallum castle. And thus are we now come unto the Rauenglasse point, and well
entered into Cumberland county.

Coming to Rauenglasse, I find hard by the town a water coming from two
heads, and both of them in lakes or pooles, whereof one issues out of Denocke
or Deuenocke mere, Denocke.
and is called Denocke water, the other named Eske from Eske poole which
runs by Eskedale, Dalegarth, and soon after meeting with the Denocke, Eske.
between Mawburthwate and Rauenglasse, falls into the sea. On the other side
of Rauenglasse also comes the Mite brook, Mite.
from Miterdale as I read. Then find we another which comes from the hills,
and at the first is forked, but soon after making a lake, they gather again
into a smaller channel: finally meeting with the Brenge, Brenge.
they fall into the sea at Carleton southeast, as I ween of Drig. The Cander,
Cander.
or (as Leland names it) the Calder, comes out of Copeland forest, by
Cander, Sellefield, and so into the sea. Then come we to Ever water, descending
out of a poole above Coswaldhow, and thence going by Euerdale, it crosses a
water from Arladon, and after proceeds to Egremond, S. John's, and taking in
another rill from Hide, it is not long yer it meets with the sea.

The next fall is at Moresbie, whereof I have no skill. From thence therefore
we cast about by saint Bees to Derwentset haven, whose water is truly written
Dargwent or Deruent. Dargwent.
It rises in the hills about Borrodale, from whence it goes unto the Grange,
thence into a lake, in which are certain Islands, and so unto Keswtjc, where it
falls into the Bure, whereof the said lake is called Bursemere, Burthmeere.
or the Burthmere poole. In like sort the Bure or Burthmere water, rising among
the hills goes to Tegburthesworth, Forneside, S. John's, and Threlcoe: and there
meeting with a water from Grisdale, by Wakethwate, called Grise, it runs to
Burnesse, Grise.
Keswtjc, and there receives the Darwent. From Keswtjc in like sort it goes
to Thorneswate (and there making a plash) to Armanswate, Isell, Huthwate and
Cokermouth, Cokar.
and here it receives the Cokar, which rising among the hills comes by
Lowsewater, Brakenthwate, Lorton, and so to Cokarmouth town, from whence it
hastes to Bridgeham, and receiving a rill called the Wire, on the south side
that runs by Dein, it leaves Samburne and Wirketon behind it, and enters
into the sea.

Leland says that the Wire is a creek where ships lie often at rode, Wire.
and that Wirketon or Wirkington town does take his name thereof. He adds
also Elmus.
But to proceed. The Elm ri^eth in the mines above Amautree, and from Amautre
goes to Yeresbie, Harbie, Brow, and there taking in a rill on the left hand
coming by Torpennie, it goes to Hatton castle, Alwarbie, Birthie, Dereham,
and so into the sea. Thence we go about by the chapel at the Croco.
The second is named Wampoole brook, Uanius.
and this rises of two heads, whereof one is about Cardew. Thence in like sort
it goes to Thuresbie, Croston, Owton, Gamlesbie, Wampall, the Larth, and
between Whiteridge and Kirbie into the saltwater. From hence we double the

The Eden well fraught with famon, Eden.
descends (as I hear) from the hills in Athelstane moore at the foot of
Husstat Moruell hill, where Swale also rises, and southeast of Mallerstang
forest. From thence in like manner it goes to Mallerstang town, Pendragon
Helbecke.
because it comes from the Derne and Elinge mounteins by a town of the same
denomination. The other is named Bellow, Bellow.
and descends from the east mounteins by Sowarsbie, and these two on the
northeast: the third falls from Rauenstandale, by Newbiggin, Smardale,
Soulbie, Blaterne, and so into Eden, that goes from thence by Orne.
and taking in the Orne about Burelles on the one side, and the Morton beck on
the other, it hastes to Applebie, Moreton.
thence to Cowlbie, where it crosses the Dribecke, Dribecke.
thence to Bolton, and Kirbie, and there meeting with the Trowt beck, Trowt
beck.
and beneath the same with the Liuenet Linenet.
(whereinto falls an other water from Thurenlie meeting withal beneath
Clebron) it runs finally into Eden. After the confluences also the Eden
passes to Temple, and soon after meeting with the Milburne and Blincorne
Milburne. Blincorne.
waters, Ulse.


This water comes out of a lake, which is fed with six rils, Mark.
whereof one is called the Mark, and near the fall thereof into the plash is
a town of the same name; Harteshop.
the second hight Harteshop, and runs from Harteshop hall by Depedale; the
third is Paterdale Paterdale.
rill; the fourth Glent Roden, Roden.
the fifth Glenkguin, Glenkguin.
but the sixth runs into the said lake, south of Towthwate. Afterward when
this lake comes toward Pole town, it runs into a small channel, and going
by Barton, Dalumaine, it takes in a rill by the way from Daker castle.
Thence it goes to Stockebridge, Yoneworth, and soon after meets with a
pretty brook called Loder, Loder.
coming from Thornethwate by Bauton, and here a rill; then by Helton, and
there another; thence to Askham, Clifton, and so ioining with the other called
Ulse, they go to Brougham castle, Nine churches, Hornebie, and so into Eden,
taking in a rill (as it goes) that comes down from Pencath. Being past
Hornebie, our Eden runs to Langunbie, and soon after receiving a rill that
comes from two heads, and ioining beneath Wingsell, it hastes to Lasenbie,
then to Kirk Oswald (on each side whereof comes in a rill from by east)
thence to Nonneie, and there a rill, Anstable, Cotchill, Corbie castle,
Wetherall, Newbie: where I will stay, till I have described the Irding, and
such waters as fall into the same before I go to Carleill.

The Irding arises in a moore in the borders of Tindale, Irding.
near unto Horse head crag, where it is called Terne beck; Terne.
until it come to Spicrag hill, that divides Northumberland and Gillesland in
sunder, from whence it is named Irding. Being therefore come to Ouerhall, it
receives the Pultrose beck, Pultrose.
by east, and thence goes on to Ouerdenton, Netherdenton, Leuercost, and
Castelstead, where it takes in the Cambocke, Cambocke.
that runs by Kirk Cambocke, Askerton castle, Walton, and so into Irding,
which goes from thence to Irdington, Newbie, and so into Eden. But a little
before it come there, Gillie.
it crosses with the Gillie that comes by Tankin, and soon after falls
into it. After these confluences, our Eden goes to Linstocke castle, (and
here it interteineth a brook, coming from Cotehill ward by Aglionbie) and
then unto Carleill, which is now almost environed with four waters.

For beside the Eden it receives the Peder, Pedar alias Logus.
which Leland calls Logus from southeast. This Peder rises in the hills
southwest of Penruddocke, from whence it goes to Penruddocke, then to
Grastocke castle, Cateleie, and Kenderside hall, and then taking in a water
from Unthanke, it goes to Cathwade, Pettrelwaie, Newbiggin, Carleton, and so
into Eden, northeast of Carleill. But on the north side the Bruferth brook
does swiftly make his entrance, running by Leuerdale, Bruferth.
Scalbie castle, and Housedon; as I am informed. The third is named Candan (if
not Deua after Leland) which rising about the Skidlow hills, runs to
Mosedale, Caldbecke, Warnell, Saberham, Rose castle, Dawston, Brounston,
Harrington, and west of Carleill falls into Eden, which going from thence by
Grimsdale, Kirk Andros, Beaumont, falls into the sea beneath the Rowcliffe
castle. And thus much of the Eden, which Leland nevertheless describes after
another sort, whose words I will not let to set down here in this place, as I
find them in his commentaries.

The Eden, after it has run a pretty space from his head, Wise after Leland.
meets in time with the Ulse water, which is a great brook in Westmerland,
and rising above Maredale, a mile west of Loder, it comes by the late
dissolved house of Shappe priorie, Loder.
theee miles from Shappe, and by Brampton village into Loder or Lodon. Certes
this stream within half a mile of the head, becomes a great lake for two
miles course, and afterward waxing narrow again, it runs forth in a mean
and indifferent bottom. The said Eden in like sort receives the Aimote about
three miles beneath Brougham castle, Aimote.
and into the same Aimote falls the Dacor beck (already touched) which
rises by northwest in Materdale hills, four miles above Dacor castle, Dacor.
and then going through Dacor park, it runs by east a good mile lower into
Eimote, a little beneath Delamaine, which stands on the left side of Dacor.
In one of his books also he says, how Carleill stands between two
streams, Deua.
that is to say the Deua, which comes thither from by southwest, and also
the Logus tha descends from the southeast. He adds moreover how the Deua in
times past was named Uala or Bala, Uala.
and that of the names of these two, Lugibala for Caerleill has been derived,
etc. and thus much Leland. But where he had the cause of this his conjecture as
yet I have not read. Of this am I certain, that I use the names of most rivers
hete and elsewhere described, accordingly as they are called in my time,
although I omit not to speak here and there of such as are more ancient, where
just occasion moves me to remember them, for the better understanding of our
histories, as they do come to hand.

Black Leven Leven.
and white Leven waters, fall into Lamford.
and the Eske, Eske.
the last confluence being not a full mile from the maine sea. The white and
black Leven ioining therefore above Bucknesse, the confluence goes to Bracken
hill, Kirkleuenton, and at Tomunt Tomunt.
water meets with the Eske. In like sort the Kirsop Kirsop.
ioining with the Lidde Lidde.
out of Scotland at Kirsop foot, running by Stangerdike side, Harlow,
Hathwater, and taking in the Eske above the Mote, it loses the former name,
and is called Eske, until it

Having thus gone thorough the rivers of England, now it rests that we
proceed with those which are to be found upon the Scottish shore, in such order
as we best may, until we have fetched a compass about the same, and come unto
Barwike, whence afterward it shall be easy for us to make repair unto the
Thames, from which we did set forward in the beginning of our voyage. The first
river that I met withal on the Scottish coast, Eske.
is the Eske, after I

On the north side also we have the Ruan, the Arde, the Cassile Dune, the
Burwin, the Cluide (whereupon sometime stood the famous city of Alcluide, and
whereinto runs the Carath) the Hamell, the Dourglesse, and the Lame. From
hence in like manner we came unto the Leuind mouth, whereunto the Blake on the
southwest and the Lomund lake, with his fleeting Isles and fish without finnes
(yet very holesone) does seem to make his issue. This lake of

Next unto this is the Leave, Leave.
the Rage, the Long, Long.
the Goile, and the Heke, Goile, Heke.
which for the exceeding greatness of their heads, are called lakes. Then have
we the Robinseie, Robinseie.
the Foreland, the Tarbat, Forlan Tarbat.
the Lean, Lean.
and the Abir, Abir.
whereunto the Spanseie, the Loine, the Louth, the Arc, Arc.
and the Zefe Zefe.
do fall, there is also the Sell, Sell.
the Zord, Zord.
the Owin, Owin.
the Newisse, Newisse.
the Orne Orne.
the Lang, Lang.
the Drun, Drun.
the Hew, Hew.
the Brun, Brun.
the Kell, Kile.
the Dowr, Dowr.
the Faro, Faro.
the Nesse, Nesse.
the Herre, Herre.
the Con, Con.
the Glass, Glass.
the Maur, Maur.
the Urdall, Urdall.
the Fers (that comes out of the Caldell) the Fairsoke, which two latter lie
a little by west of the Orchades, and are properly called rivers, because they
issue only from springs; but most of the other takes, because they come from
linnes and huge pooles, or such low bottomes, fed with springs, as seem to
have no access, but only recesse of waters, whereof there be many in
Scotland.

But to proceed. Having once past Dungisbie head in Cathnesse, we shall yer
long come to the mouth of the Wifle, a pretty stream, coming by south of the
mounteins called the Maidens pappes. Then to the Browre, the Clin, the Twin
(whereinto runs three rivers, Fesse.
the Shin, the Sillan, and Carew) the Nesse, Calder.
which beside the plenty of samon found therein is never frosen, Wifle.
nor suffers ice to remain there, that is cast into the poole. Browre.
From thence we come unto the Narding, Clin.
the Finderne, the Spaie (which receives the Uine) the Fitch, Twin.
the Bulich, Shin.
the Arrian, the Leuin, and the Bogh, from whence we sail until we come about
the Buquhan head, Sillan.
and so to the Down, and Dee: which two streams bring forth the greatest
samons that are to be he had in Scotland, Carew.
and most plenty of the same. Nesse.
Then to the north Eske, whereinto the Esmond runs above Brechin, Narding.
the south Eske, then the Louen and the Taw, Spaie.
which is the finest river for water that is in all Scotland, Down.
and whereunto most rivers and lakes do run. Dee.
As Farlake, Yrth, Goure, Eske.
Loich, Cannach, Linell, Loion, Irewer, Erne, and diverse other besides small
rillets which I did never look upon.

Then is there the lake Londors, upon whose mouth saint Andrews does stand,
the lake Lewin, unto whose stream two other lakes have recourse in Fifland,
and then the Firth or Fortha, which some do call the Pictish and Scottish sea,
whither the kingdom of the Northumbers was sometime extended, and with the
river last mentioned (I mean that comes from Londors) includes all Fife,
the said Fortha being full of oisters and all kinds of huge fish that use to
lie in the deep. How many waters run into the Firth, called by Ptolomie Loxa,
it is not in my power justly to declare: yet are there both rivers, rills, and
lakes that fall into the same, as Clacke, Clacke.
Alon, Alon.
Dune, Dune.
Kerie, Kerie.
Cambell, Cambell.
Cumer, Cumer.
Tere, Tere.
Man, Man.
Torkeson, Torkesan.
Rosham, Rosham.
Mushell, Mussell.
Blene, Blene.
and diverse other which I call by these names, partly after information, and
partly of such towns as are near unto their heads. Finally, when we are
past the Haie, then are we come unto the Twede, Twede.

whereinto we entered, leaving Barwike on the right hand and his appurtenances,
wherein Halidon hill stands, and contains a triangle of so much ground
beyond the said river, as is well near four miles in length, and three miles
in breadth in the broad end: except mine information do fail me.

The Twede (which Ptolomie names Toualsis or Toesis, and between which and
the Tine the county of Northumberland is in manner enclosed, and watered with
sundry noble rivers) is a noble stream and the limes or bound between
England and Scotland, whereby those two kingdoms are now divided in sunder. It
rises about Drimlar in Eusbale (or rather out of a fair well (as Leland
says) standing in the moss of an hill called Airstane, or Harestan in Twede
dale ten miles from Pibble) and so coming by Pibble, Lander, Dribiwgh, Lelse,
Warke, Norham and Hagarstone, it falls into the sea beneath Barwike, as I
hear. Thus says Leland. But I not contented with this so short a discourse of
so long a river and brief description of so fair a stream, will ad somewhat
more of the same concerning his race on the English side, and rehearsal of
such rivers as fall into it. Coming therefore to Ridam, it receives between
that and Carham a beck, which descends from the hills that lie by west of
Windram. Going also from Ridam by Longbridgham

Certes there is no head of any river that is named Till, Till.
but the issue of the furthest water that comes hereinto, rises not far
from the head of Uswaie in the Cheuiot hills, where it is called Brennich,
Brennicia did sometime take the name. From thence it goes to Hartside, Ingram,
Branton, Crawleie, Hedgeleie, Beueleie, and Bewije, beneath which it receives
one water coming from Rodham by west, and soon after a second descending from
the Middletons, and so they go as one with the Bromish, Bromis.
by Chatton to Fowbreie (where they cross the third water falling down by
north from Howborne by Hescibridge) thence to Woller, there also taking in a
rill that rises

It rises on the west side of the Cocklaw hill, Bobent.
and Whitaker.
and crossing the Whitaker on the other side from Scotland beneath Cawmill, it
runs to Ordo, to Barwike, and so into the Ocean, leaving (as I said) so much
English ground on the northwest ripe, as lies in manner of a triangle between
Cawmils, Barwike, and Lammeton,

Being past this noble stream, we came by a rill that descends from Bowsden
by Barington. Then by the second which arises between Middleton and Detcham
or Dereham, and runs by Eskill and the Rosse, next of all to Warnemouth of
whose back water I read as follows. The Warn or Gwerne rises southwest of
Crokelaw, and going by Warneford, Warn.
Bradford, Spindlestone, and Bud^^, it leaves Newton on the right hand, and so
falls into the Ocean after it has run almost nine miles from the head within
the land, and received a rill beneath Yessington, which comes down between
Newland and Olchester, and has a bridge beneath the confluence, which leads
over the same. From Warnemouth, we sailed by Bamborow castle, and came at last
to a fall between Bedwell and Newton. The maine water that serves this issue,
rises above Carleton from the foot of an hill, which seems to part the head
of this and that of Warn in sunder. It runs also by Carleton, Tonleie,
Oxford, Brunton, and Tuggell, and finally into the sea, as to his course
apperteineth.

From this water we went by Dunstanbugh castle, Aile, or Alne, alias Chain.
unto the Chalne or Alnemouth, which is served with a pretty riueret called
Alne, the head whereof rises in the hills west of Alnham town, and called by
Ptolomie, Celnius. From thense also it runs by Rile, Kile, Estington, and
Whittingham, where it crosses a rill coming from by south, and beneath the
same, the second that descends from Eirchild at Brone, and likewise the third
that rises at Newton, and runs by Edlingham castle and Lemmaton (all on
the southeast side or right hand) and so passes on further, till it meet with
the fourth, coming from above Shipleie from by north, after which confluence
it goes to Alnewije, and then to Denntie, receiving there a rillet from by
south and a rill from by north, and thence going on to Bilton, between
Ailmouth town and Wooddon, it sweepeth into the Ocean.

The Cocket Cocket.
is a goodly river, the head also thereof is in the roots of Kemblespeth hills,
from whence it goes to Whiteside, and there meeting with the Uswaie Uswaie.
(which descends from the north) it goes a little further to Linbridge, and
there receives the Ridleie by southwest, and after that with another, called
(as I think) the Hoc, which comes from the Woodland and hilly soil by
Allington, and falls into the same, west of Park head. It ioineth also yer
long with the Ridland, Ridlcie.
which comes in north by Bilstone, and then hieth to Sharpton, to Harbotle,
where it crosses the Yardop water by south, Yardop.
then to Woodhouse, and swallowing in a little beck by the way from southwest,
to Bickerton, to Tossons, Newton, and running apace toward Whitton tower, it
takes a brook withal that comes in northwest of Alnham, near Elthaw, and
goes by Skarnewood, over nether Trewhet, Snitter, and Throxton, and soon
after unites it self with the Cocket, It may, be Leland mistaketh Tickington
water for one of these.
from whence they go together to Rethburie, or Whitton tower, to Halie, to
Brinkehorne, Welden, taking withal soon after the Tod or burn called Tod,
which falls in from by south, then to Elihaw, Felton (receiving thereabout
the Fareslie brook, that goes by Wintring by south east, and Sheldike water,
that goes by Hason, to Brainsaugh by north) and from thence to Morricke
Warkworth ca^^ell, and so into the sea.

There is furthermore a little fall, between Hawkeslaw and Drurith, which
rises about Stokes wood goes by east Cheuington, and Whittington castle, and
afterward into the Ocean. Lune.
The Lune is a pretty brook rising west of Espleie, from whence it goes to
Tritlington, Ugham, Linton, and yer long in the sea. Wansbecke (in old time
Diua) is far greater than the Lune. wansbecke.
It issues up west and by north of west Whelpington, thence it runs to
Kirk Whelpington, Wallington, Middleton, and Angerton. Here it meets with a
water running from about Farnelaw by the grange, and Hartburne on the north,
and then going from Angerton, it runs by Moseden to Mitforth, and there in
like manner crosses the Font, Font.
which issuing out of the ground about Newbiggin, goes by Nonneie Kirk,
Witton castle, Stanton, Nunriding, Newton, and so into the Wansbecke, which
runs in like manner from Mitford to Morpheth castle (within two miles
whereof it ebbeth and flows) the new Chapel, Bottle castle, Shepwash, and
so into the sea, three miles from the next haven which is called Blithe.

Blithe water rises about kirk Heaton, and goes by Belfe, Blithe.
Ogle, and (receiving the Port alias the Brocket, that springs east of S.
Oswolds) passes by Portgate, Whittington, Fennike hall, Madfennes, Hawkewell,
the Grange, and Dis^^ngtons. After it has taken in the Pont from the east
(whose head is not far from that of Hartleie stream) and is past Hartleie.


The Time or Tinna, North Tine.
a river notably stored with samon, and other good fish, and in old time
called Alan, rises of two heads, whereof that called north Tine, is the first
that follows to be described. It springs up above Belkirke in the hills,
Shele.
and thence Rid.


The Rid therefore rises within three miles of the Scottish march, as Leland
says, and comes through Riddesdale, whereunto it gives the name. Another
writes how it rises in the roots of the Carter, and Shelop.
or Petop from the north and the Cheslop Cheslop.
on the south, beside sundry other wild rits namelesse and obscure, as one on
the north side next unto the Potop or Spelhop; another by south out of
Riddesdale, the third west of Burdop, the fourth runs by Wullaw to
Rochester, then two from southwest, another from by north which goes by
Durtburne, and is called Dirt or Durth, then the Smalburne from the 3. Burns.
Shitlington.
beck by west which also receives the Yare on the south side of Shitlington)
another also beneath this on the same side, made by the confluence of Works
burn, and Middle burn, at Roseburne, beside the third called Morleis or
Morelee above, and Simons burn beneath Shepechase, and likewise the Swine from
by forth that runs by Swinburne castle, next of all the Riall from the
northeast, which comes by Erington, and so holding his course directly
southwarde, it goes by S. Oswolds through the Pictithwall, to Wall, and so
into south Tine, beneath Accam, and northwest (as I do ween) of Hexham.

The south Tine arises in the Cheuiot hills, Tine. S.
and yet it has gone far from the head, it meets with Esgill on the east,
Esgin.
and another rill on the west, and so going by the houses toward Awsten moore,
it ^ometh with Schud from by west, and soon after with the Uent from by east
above Lowbier. From Lowbier it goes to Whitehalton, Uent.
to Kirk Haugh (crossing the Gilders beck Gilders beck.
on the one side, and the Alne on the other) to Thornehope, where it is
enlarged with a water on each side, to Williamstone, and almost at Knaresdale,
Knare.
takes in the Knare, and then runs withal to Fetherstone angle. At
Fetherstone angle likewise it meets with Hartleie water, by southwest coming
from Sibins or Sibbenes, another a little beneath from southeast, and thence
when it comes to Billester castle, it carries another withal from by west,
Thirlewall called Rippall which rises in the forest of Lowes, and goes by
the Waltowne, Blinkinsop, and Widon, and after which confluence it takes in
another from by north rising west of Swinsheld, which goes by Grenelegh to
Haltwestell: thence going by Unthanke, it crosses another rill from by south,
descending from thee hills that lie north of Todlewood, and then proceeding
unto Wilmotteswije, it admits the Wilmots beck from the south, and another
running by Bradleie hall on the north side of Beltingham; after which it
meets with the Alen a proper water, and described after this manner.

The Alen or Alon has two heads, East Alen.
whereof one is called east Alen, the other west Alen. The first of them rises
southeast of Sibton Sheles, and going by Sundorp, it takes in a rill withal
from by est; after which confluence it runs to Newshele, Allington, Caddon,
Old town, and in the course to Stauertpele, meets with the west Alen. The
west Alen rises in Killop low hills above Whe^ele^e sheles, West Alen.
from whence it goes to Spartwell, Hawcopole, Owston, and taking in a rill
thereabouts, if proceeds on to Permandbie, and crossing there another rill in
like manner from by west, it goes by Whitefield, and ioining soon after with
the est Alen, they run as one to Stauert poole, Plankford, and so into the Tine
between Beltingham and Lees, from whence the Tine runs on by Lees Haddon,
Woodhall, Owners, Whernebie, Costleie, and so by Warden, till it cross the
north Tine, and come to Hexham, from whence it goes to Dilstan, crossing two
waters by the way, whereof one comes from by south, and is called the Wolsh,
which holds her course by Sielehall, and Newbiggin receives another coming
from Grimbridge: the other called Dill so me what lower descending from
Hedleie, and running by Rising, till it fall into the south side of our stream
from Dilstan, it goes to Bywell castle, over against which it receives a
rill that runs by Hindleie, thence it hastes to Eltingham, Pruddo, Willam,
(and there it meets with another beck) then to Reton, Blaidon, and next of
all ioineth with the Darwent, from by south.

This river rises above Knewdon, and Rudlamhope in Northumberland, Darwent.
from two heads: the northerlie being called Dear, and the southerlie the
Guent: and ioining so well yer long in channel as in name, they run on to
Humsterworth, new Biggin, Blankeland, Acton, Aspersheles, Blackheadlie,
Brentfield side, Pansheles, E^chester, and there taking in a water from Hedlere
in Northumberland, near to Black hall in the bishoprike, it goes on to Spen,
Holl inside, Wickham Swalwell, and so into Tine, which passes from thence by
Elswijc, and meeting with another water coming from Shildraw, by Rauensworth
castle to Redhugh, it goes on to Newcastell, Fellin, Netherheworth, Walker,
Waswon, Hedburne, and next to Ierco or Girwie, where Beda dwelled in an abbeie;
now a gentleman's place (although the church be made a parish church, whereunto
diverse towns resort, as moonke Eaton where Beda was borne, which is a mile
from thence, Southsheles, Harton, Westhow, Hebburne, Hedworth, Wardleie,
Fellin, Follinsbie, the Heworthes) and from thence to the south and
Northsheles, and so into the sea, five miles by northwest of Weremouth, and (as
I guess) some what more.

Beneath the confluence in like sort of both the Leland gesseth that the name
of the brook should rather be Cole than Corue, Corue.
and in my judgment his conjecture is very likely; for in the life of S.
Oswijn (otherwise a feeble authority) the word Colbridge is always used for
Corbridge, whereof I thought good to leave this short

Ptolomie, writing of the Were, calls it Uedra, a river well known unto Beda
the famous priest, who was brought up in a monastery that stood upon Were.
It rises of three heads in Kelloppeslaw hill, whereof the most southerlie is
called Burdop, Burdop.
the middlemost Wallop, Wallop.
and the northerliest Kellop, Kellop.
which uniting themselves about S. John's chapel, or a little by west thereof,
their confluence runs through Stanhope park, by east Yare, and so to
Frosterleie. But yer it come there, it receives three rilles from the north in
Weredale, whereof one comes in by Stanhope, another west of Woodcroft hall,
and the third at Frosterleie before mentioned. Wascrop.
there taking in the Wascropburne, beside another at Bradleie, the third at
Harpleie hall (and these on the north side) and the fourth between Witton and
Witton castle called Bedburne, coming by Hamsterleie, Bedburne.
whereby this river does now wax very Leland says) rises six miles by west
of Akeland castle, and running south thereof, passes by west Akeland, S.
Helens Akeland, S. Andrews Akeland, and bishops Akeland, and then into the
Were which goes to Newfield, and Willington. Near unto this place also and
somewhat beneath Sunderland, the Were, crosses one brook from southest by
Het, Croxseie, Cronefurth, Tursdale, and Coxdale, and two other from by
northwest in one botome, whereof the first comes from above Ash by Langleie:
the other called Coue, from above Kinchleie by Newbiggin, Lanchester, north
Langlie, and through Bear park, and so meeting beneath Relleie or Hedleie
with the other, they fall both as one into the Were, between south Sunderland
and Burnall. From hence our river goes on to Howghwell, Shirkeleie, old
Duresme (and there taking in the Pidding brook Pidding brook.
by northeast) it goes to Duresme, Finkeleie, Harbarhouse, Lumleie castle
(where it meets with the Pilis, Pilis.
whose heads are united between Pelton and Whitwell (and after called Hedleie)
and from thence to Lampton, Harroton, the Bedikes, Ufferton, Hilton park,
Bishops, Weremouth, and so into the sea, between north Sunderland and north
Weremouth town, which now is called moonke Weremouth of the monastery
sometime standing there, wherein Beda read and wrote many of his books, as to
the world appears. This mouth of Were is eight miles from Durham, and six
from Newcastell. Being thus passed the Were, and entered into the Bishoprijc,
yer we come at the mouth of the These, almost by two miles, over passing a rill
that runs by castle Eden, and Hardwijc, and likewise Hartlepoole town,
which lies over into the sea in manner of a byland or peninsula, we meet with a
pretty fall, which grows by a river that is increased with two waters,
whereof one rises by northwest about Moretons, and goes by Stotfeld and
Claxton, the other at Dawlton, going by Breerton, Owtham, and Grettam, finally
ioining within two miles of the sea, they make a pretty portlet: but I know
not of what security.

The These, Thesis.
a river that bears and feeds an excellent samon, rises in the Black
lowes, above two miles flat west of the southerlie head of Were called Burdop,
and south of the head of west Alen, and thence runs through Tildale forest:
and taking in the Langdon water from northwest it runs to Durtpit chapel,
to Newbiggin, and so to Middleton, receiving by west of each of these a rill
coming from by north (of which the last is called Hude) and likewise the Lune
afterward by southwest Hude.
that rises at three several places, whereof the first is in the borders of
Westmerland and there called Arnegill beck, the second more southerlie, named
Lunebecke, and the third by south at Bandor Skarth hill, Lune.
and meeting all above Arnegill Arnegill.
house, they run together in one bottom to Lathekirke bridge, and then into
the These. Having therefore met with these, it runs to Mickelton (and there
taking in the Skirkwith water) it goes to Rombald kirk (crossing Skirkewith.
there also one rill and the Bander brook by south Bander
west) and then going to Morewood hag, and Morewood park, till it come to
Bernards castle.

Here also it receives the Thuresgill water coming east of Rere cross in
Yorkshire, Rere cross.
from the spittle in Stanmore by Crag almost southwest, and being united with
the These, it goes by Stratford, Eglesdon, Rokesbie, Thorpe, Wickliffe,
Ouington, Winston, and between Barfurth and Gainfurth meets with another
rill, that comes from Langleie forest, between Rabie castle and Standorpe,
of whose name I have no knowledge. But to proceed. The These being past
Ramforth, runs between Persore and Cliffe, and in the way to Croffs bridge
takes in the Skerne a pretty water, which rises about Trimdon, Skerne.
and goes by Fishburne, Bradburie, Preston, Braforton, Skirmingham, the
Burdons, Haughton and Darlington, and there finally meeting with the Cock
beck or Dare, it falls in the These beneath Stapleton, before it come at
Croffs bridge, and (as it should seem) is the same which Leland calls
Gretteie or Grettie. From thence it runs to Sockburne, nether Dunsleie,
Middleton row, Newsham, Yarne (crossing a brook from Leven bridge) called
Leven or Leuinus in Latin, whose crinkling course is notable, and the stream
of some called Thorpe, which I find described in this manner.

The Thorpe rises of sundry heads, Thorpe alias Leuand.
wereof one is above Pinching Thorpe, from whence it goes to Nonnethorpe, and
so to Stokesleie. The second has two branches, and so placed, that Kildale
stands between them both: finally, meeting beneath Easbie they go by Eaton,
and likewise unto Stokesleie. The last has also two branches, whereof one
comes from Inglesbie, and meets with the second Trawthorne.
and there takes in another rill coming from Potto, thence to Crawthorne
brook, Leuanton, Milton, Hilton, Inglesbie, and so into the These, between
Yarne and Barwtjc, whereof I made mention before. After this confluence our
These hastes on to Barwtjc, Presston, Thorn abbeie, and Arsham, which
stands on Leland describing this river speaks of the Wiske, which should
come thereinto from by south under Wiske bridge, by Danbie, and Northalarton,
and should

Next of all we come unto the high Cliffe water, which rising above Hutton,
goes by Gisborow, and there receives another stream coming from by
southeast, and then continuing on his course, it is not long yer it fall into
the sea. The next is the Scaling water, which descends from Scaling town,
from whence we come to the Molemouth, not far from whose head stands
Molgraue castle: then to Sandford creek, Eske.
and next of all to Eske mouth, Ibur.
yer long into the sea.

There is also a creek on each side of Robin Whoodes baie, of whose names and
courses I have no skill, saving that Fillingale the town does stand between
them both. There is another not far from Scarborow, on the north side called
the Harwood brook. It runs through Harwood dale by Cloughton, Buniston, and
soon after meeting with another rill on the southwest, they run as one into
the ocean sea. From Scarborow to Bridlington, by Flamborow head, we met with no
more falls.

Being come about the Spurn head, I meet yer long with a river that rises
short of Withersie, and goes by Fodringham and Wisted, from thence to another
that comes by Rosse, Halsham, Carmingham: then to the third, which rises
above Humbleton, and goes to Esterwtjc, Heddon, and so into the Humber. The
fourth springs short of Sprotleie, goes by Witton, and falls into the
water of Humber at Merslete, as I hear.

The next of all is the Hull water, Hull.
which I will describe also here, and then cross over unto the southerlie
shore. The furthest head of Hull water rises at Kilham, from whence it goes
to Lewthorpe creek, and so to Fodringham, a little beneath which it meets
with sundry waters, whereof one falls in on the northest side, coming from
about Lisset; the second on the northwest bank from Nafferton; the third from
Emmeswell and Kirkeburne: for it has two heads which joined beneth little
Drifield, and the fourth which falls into the same: so that these two latter
run unto the maine river both in one channel, as experience has confirmed.
From hence then our Hull goes to to Ratseie, to Goodalehouse, and then taking
in a water from Hornesie mere, it goes on through Beuerleie meadows, by
Warron, Stoneferrie, Hull, and finally into the Humber. Of the rill that
falls into this water from south Netherwijc, by Skirlow, and the two rilles
that come from Cottingham and Woluerton, I say no more, since it is enough to
name them in their order.

The description of the Humber or Isis, and such watercourse as do increase
her channel. Chap. 15.
THere is no river called Humber from the head. Humber.
Wherefore that which we now call Humber, Ptolomie Abie, Leland Aber, as he
gesseth, has the same denomination no higher than the confluence of Trent with
the Ouze, as beside Leland sundry ancient writers have noted before us both.
Certes it is a noble arm of the sea, and although it be properly to be called
Ouze or Ocellus even to the Nuke beneath Ancolme, yet are we contented to call
it Humber of Humbrus or Umar, a king of the Scithians, who invaded this I Will in
the time of Locrinus, thinking to make himself monarch of the same. But as God
has from time to time singularly provided for the benefit of Britain, so in
this business it came to pass, that Humber was put to flight, his men slain:
and furthermore, whilst he attempted to save himself by hasting to his ships
(such was the prease of his nobility that followed him into his own vessel,
and the rage of weather which hastened on his fatal day) that both he and
they were drowned together in that arm. And this is the only cause wherefore
it has been called Humber, as our writers say; and whereof I find these
verses: Dum fugit obstat ei flumen submergitur illic,
Deque suo tribuit nomine nomen aquae.


This river in old time parted Lhoegres or England from Albania, which was the
portion of Albanactus, the youngest son of Brute. But since that time the
limits of Lhoegres have been so enlarged, first by the prowess of the Romans,
then by the conquests of the English, that at this present day, the Twede on
the one side, and the Solue on the other, be taken for the principal bounds
between us and those of Scotland. In describing therefore the Humber, I must
needs begin with the Ouze, whose water brings forth a very sweet, fat and
delicat samon, as I have been informed, beside sundry other kinds of fish,
which we want here on the south and southwest coasts and rivers of our land,
whereof I may take occasion to speak more at large hereafter.

The Ure therefore rises in the furthest parts of all Richmondshire, Ure alias
Ouze, or Isis.
among the Coterine hills, in a moss, toward the west fourteen miles beyond
Midleham. Being therefore issued out of the ground, it goes to Holbecke,
Hardraw, Hawshouse, Butterside, Askebridge (which Leland calls the Askaran,
and says thereof and the Bainham, that they are but obscure bridges) then to
Askarth, through Wanlesse Burn.
by south west (as it did the Wile, Wile.
from very deep scarrie rocks, before at Askaran) and diverse other wild
rilles not worthy to be remembered. From Masham, it hastes unto Tanfield
(taking in by the way a rill by southwest) then to another Tanfield, to Newton
hall, and Northbridge, at Skell.
which being incorporat with the same, they run as one to Thorpe, then to
Alborow, and soon after receive the Swale. Swale.


Here (says Leland) I am brought into no little streict, what to conjecture of
the meeting of Isis and Ure, for some say that the Isis and the Ure do meet
at Borowbridge, which to me does seem to be very unlikely, since Isurium
takes his denomination of Isis and Vro, for it is often seen that the less
rivers do mingle their names with the greater, as in the Thamesis and other is
easy to be found. Neither is there any more mention of the Ure after his
passage under Borowbridge, but only of Isis or the Ouze in these days,
although in old time it held unto York it self, which of the Ure is truly
called Urewtjc (or York short) or else my persuasion does fail me. I have
red also Ewerwtjc and Yorwtjc. But to proceed, and leave this superfluous
discourse.

From Borowbridge, the Ouze goes to Aldborough, and (receiving the Swale by
the way) to Aldworke, taking in Usburne water, from the southwest, then to
Linton upon Ouze, to Newton upon Ouze, and to Munketun, meeting with the Nid
yer long, and so going withal to the Redhouses, to Popleton, Fosse.
Clifton, York (where it crosses the Fosse) to Foulfoorth, Middlethorpe,
Acaster, and Acaster, Kelfleet, Welehall, Barelebie, Selbie, Turmonhall,
Skurthall, Hokelath, Hoke, Sandhall, Redness, Whitegift,

The course of the Ouze being thus described, Ouze.
and as it were simply without his influences, now will I touch such rivers as
fall into the same also by themselves, contrary to my former proceeding,
imagining a voyage from the Rauenspurne, until I come near to the head of
These, and so southwards about again by the bottom of the hilly soil until
I get to Buxston, Sheffeld, Scrobie, and the very south point Hull or Hulne.
The course of the Hull, a stream abounding with sturgeon and lampreie, as
also the rivers which have their issue into the same, being (as I say) already
described, I think it not amiss, as by the way to set down what Leland
says thereof, to the end that his travel shall not altogether be lost in this
behalf; and for that it is short, and has one or two things worthy to be
remembered contained in the same.

The Hulne (says he) rises of three several heads, whereof the greatest is
not far from Oriefield, now a small village sixteen miles from Hull. Certes it
has been a goodly town, and therein was the palace of Egbright king of the
Northumbers, and place of sepulture of Alfred the noble king sometime of that
nation, who died there 727, the nineteen Call. of Iulie, the twentieth of his
reign, and whose toombe or monument does yet remain (for ought that I do
know) to the contrary with an inscription upon the same written in Latin
letters. Near unto this town also is the Danefield, wherein great numbers of
Danes were slain, and buried in those hills, which yet remain there to be
seen over their dones and carcasses. The second head (says he) is at
Estburne, and the third at Emmeswell, and meeting all together not far from
Orifield, the water there begins to be called Hulne, as I have said already.

From hence also it goes through Beuerleie meadows, and coming at the last
not far from an arm led from the Hulne by man's hand (and able to bear great
vessels) almost to Beuerleie town, which in old time either hight or stood in
Deirwald, until John of Beuerleie (whom Leland names out of an old author to
be the first doctor or teacher of divinity that ever was in Oxford, and (as it
should seem also by an ancient monument yet remaining) to be of an hostell
where the university college now stands; and therefore they write him,
Sometime fellow of that house) began to be of fame, of whom it is called
Beuerleie (as some affirm) to this day. In deed all the country between the
Deirwent and the Humber was sometime called Deira, and the lower part Caua
Deira in respect of the higher soil, but now it is named the east Riding. But
what is this to my purpose? The Hulne therefore being come almost to Beuerleie
town, and meeting thereabout also with the Cottingham Cottingham.
beck coming from Westwood by the way, it hastes to Kingston upon Hulne or
Hull, and so into the Humber without any manner impeachment.

The Fowlneie rises about Godmanham, Fowlncie.
from whence it goes by Wighton, Hareswell, Seton, Williams bridge, and soon
after spreading it self, one arm called Skelfleet goes by Cane Cawseie to
Brownefleet and so into the Ouze. Skelfleet.
The other passes by Sandholme, Gilberts dike, Scalbie chapel, Blacketoff,
and so into the aforesaid Ouze, leaving a very pretty Island, which is a
parcel (as I hear) of Walding fen more, though otherwise obscure to us that
dwell here in the south.

The Darwent rises in the hills that lie west of Robin Whoodes baie, Darwent.
or two miles above Aiton bridge, west from Scarborow as Leland says: and yer
it has run far from the head, it receives two rilles in one bottom from by
west, which join withal about Longdale end. Thence they go together to
Broxeie, and at Hacknesse take in another water coming from about Silseie.
Afterward it comes to Aiton, then to Haibridge, and there crosses the
Kenford that descends from Roberteston. Kenford.
After this also it goes on to Potersbrumton where it takes in one rill, as
it does another beneath running from Shirburne, and the third yet lower on the
further bank, that descends from Brumton. From these confluences it runs
to Fowlbridge, Axbridge, Yeldingham bridge, and so to Cotehouse, receiving by
the way many waters, and yielding great plenty of delicate samons to such as
fish upon the same. Leland reckoning up the names of the several brooks,
numbreth them confusedly after his accustomed order. The Darwent (says he)
receives diverse streams, as the Shirihutton. Shirihutton.
The second is the Crambecke, Crambecke.
descending from Hunderskell castle (so called Tanquam a centum fontibus, or
multitude of springs that rise about the same) and goes the Rye, Rye.
which coming out of the Blackemoore, passes by Rivers abbeie, taking in the
Ricoll Ricoll.
on the left hand, then the Seven, Seven.
the Costeie, Costeie.
and Pickering Pickering.
brook. The Seuin also (says he) rises in the side of Blackemoore, and
thence goes by Sinnington four miles from Pickering, and about a mile above a
certain bridge over Rye goes into the stream. The Costeie in like sort
springs in the very edge of Pickering town, at a place called Keld head,
and goes into the Pocklington.
and an other small rill or two, of whose names I have no knowledge. Hitherto
Leland. But in mine opinion, it had been far better to have described them
thus. Of those waters that fall into the Darwent beneath Cotehouse, the first
comes from Swenton, the second from Ebberston,

But to proceed after mine own manner. Being past Cotehouse, and yer the
Darwent come at Wickham, Rye.
it crosses the Rye, which rises of two heads, and ioining west of Locton
they run through Glansbie Costeie.
it meets at the last with an other stream increased by the falls of six
waters and more yer it come into the Darwent. The most easterlie of these is
called Seven, Seven.
and rises (as is aforesaid) in Blackemoore, from whence it goes by
Sinnington, Murton, Normanbie, Newsound, How, and so into the Rye. The second
named Dou has his original likewise in Blackemoore, Dou or Dove.
and descending by Rasmore, Keldon and Edston (where it receives the
Hodgebecke, Hodgebecke.
that Ricoll.
that goes by Careton, and whereof Ridall (as some think, but falsely) does
seem to take the name. Then Fesse, Fesse.
which rises above Bilisdale chapel, and meets with the Rye at the Shaking
bridge, from whence they go together under the Rye bridge, to Riuis abbeie, and
thence (after it has crossed a beck from the west) through a park of the
earl of Rutlands to Newton, Muniton, and so to Sawton or Holbecke.
that comes thithex from by west by Gilling castle, and Stangraue, from
whence it goes on to Brabie, next into the Seven, then into the Rye, and so
into the Darwent, which from thence does run to Wickham.

Being past Wickham, it meets with a water that comes thereinto from
Grinston to Setterington at southeast, and thence it goes on the Malton and
Malton (where the proverb says that a bushel alias Butterham) bridge,
Stamford bridge, Kexbie bridge Sutton, Ellerton, Aughton, Bubwith, Wresill,
Babthorpe, and so into the Ouze, wherewith I finish the description of Darwent:
saving that I have to let you understand how Leland heard that an arm ran some
time from the head of Darwent also to Scarborow, till such time as two hills
betwixt which it ran, did shalder and so choke up his course.

The Fosse (a slow stream yet able to bear a good vessel) rises in Nemore
Calaterio, Fosse:
that is, Galters wood or Cawood, among the wooddie hills, and in his descent
from the higher ground, he leaves Crake castle, on his west side: thence he
goes by Marton abbeie, Marton, Stillington, Farlington, Towthorpe, Erswtjc,
Huntington, and at York into the Ouze. The Kile rises flat north at Newborow,
Kile.
from whence it goes by Thorneton on the hill, Ruskell park, Own, Tollerton,
and so into the Ouze about Newton upon Ouze. Swale.
The Swale is a right noble river, and march in some places between
Richmondshire and Westmerland, it rises not far from Pendragon castle in the
hills above Kirkedale, and from this town it goes to Kelde chapel, Carret
house, Crackepot, Whiteside, and near unto Yalen takes in the Barneie water,
Barneie.
which comes from the north east. Thence it goes by Harcaside to Reth (where
it meets with the Arcleie) Arcleie.
and so to Flemington, Grinton, Marrike (taking in the Holgate that comes
from by south: Holgate.
and in the way to Thorpe, the Mariske beck, Mariske beck.
or peradventure Applegarth water, as Leland calls it, that descends from
the north) then to Thorpe, Applegarth, Richmond, Easbie and Brunton.

Here by north it interteineth two or three waters in one channel, called
Rauenswath water, whereof the two furthest do join not far from the
Dawltons, Rauenswath.
and so go by Rauenswath, Hartfoorth, Gilling, and at Skebie meet with the
third, coming from Richmond beaconward. By west also of Brunton, the Swale
meets with the The, The.
running from Resdale, and being past Brunton, it goes to Caterijc bridge
beneath Brunton, then to Ellerton, Kirkebie, Langton parua, Thirtoft, Anderbie
steeple: and before it come unto Gatenbie, it meets with the Bedall brook,
alias Lemings beck, Bedall alias Leming.
that comes west of Kellirbie, by Cunstable, Burton, Langthorpe, Bedall, and
Leming chapel. From Gattenbie likewise it goes to Mawbie, and at Brakenbirie
receives the Wiske, Wiske.
which is a great water, rising between two parkes above Swanbie in one place,
and southeast of Mountgrace abbeie in another; and after the confluence which
is about Siddlebridge, goes on between the Rughtons to Appleton, the Smetons,
Birtbie, Hutton Coniers, Danbie, Wijc, Yafford, Warlabie, and taking in there a
rill from Brunton Aluerton, it proceeds to Otterington, Newly, Kirbie Wiske,
Newson, and Blackenburie, there meeting (as I said) with the Swale, that
runs from thence by Skipton bridge, Catton, Topcliffe, and Raniton, and
above Eldmire meets with sundry other rilles in one bottom, whereof the
northwesterlie is called Cawdebec: Cawdebec Kebecke.
the south easterlie Kebecke, which join est of Thorneton moore, and so go to
Thorneton in the street, Kiluington, Thruske, Sowerbie, Grastwijc, and soon
after crossing another growing of the mixture of the Willow, and likewise of
the Cuckewold beckes, Cuckwolds beck.
which join above Bridforth, and running on till it come almost at Dawlton, it
makes confluence with the Swale, and go thence as one with all their samons by
Thorneton bridge, Mitton upon Swale, and so into the Ouze.

The Skell rises out of the west two miles from Founteines abbeie, Skell.
and comes (as Leland says) with a fair course by the one side of Rippon,
as the Ure does on the other. And on the banks hereof stood the famous abbeie
called Founteines or Adfontes, so much renowned for the lusty monks that
sometimes dwelled in the same. It receives also the Lauer water (which rises
three miles from Kirbie, Lauer.
and meets withal near unto Rippon) and finally falls into the Ure, a
quarter of a mile beneath Rippon town, and almost midwaie between the North
and Huicke bridges.

The Nidde, Nidde.
which the book of statutes called Nidor (anno 13. Edw. 1) and thereto notes
it to be enriched with store of samon, as are also the Wheof and Air, rises
among those hills that lie by west northwest Killingale.
it goes after the confluence by Bilton park, Gnaresbridge, Washford,
Cathall, Willesthorpe, Munketon, or Nonmocke, and so into the Ouze, fourteen
miles beneath Gnaresborow, being increased by the way with very Leland having
said thus much of the Nidde, adds here unto the names or two other waters,
that is to say, the Cover Cover.
and the Burn, Burn.
which do fall likewise into the Ure or Ouze. But as he says little of the
same, so among all my pamphlets, I can gather no more of them, than that the
first rises six miles above Couerham by west, and falls into the Ure, a
little beneath Middleham bridge, which is two miles beneath the town of
Couerham. As for the Burn, it rises at

The Wharffe or Gwerfe arises above Ughtershaw, Wharfe alias Gwerfe.
from whence it runs to Beggermons, Rosemill, Hubberham, Backden,
Starbotton, Kettlewell, Cunniston in Kettlewell, and here it meets with a
rill coming from Haltongill chapel, by Arnecliffe, and ioining withal
northeast of Kilneseie crag, it passes over by the lower grounds to
Girsington, and receiving a rill there also from Padside.
and the Washburne Washburne.
(both in one stream from Lindleie Cockebecke.
Aberfoorth, Leadhall, and Grimston, it runs to Exton, Kirbie Wharfe,
Uskell, Rither, Nunapleton, and so into the Ouze beneath Cawood, a castle
belonging to the archbishop of York, where

The Air or Arre rises out of a lake or tarne south of Darnbrooke, Air.
wherein (as I hear) is none other fish but red trowt, and perch. Leland says
it rises near unto Orton in Crauen, wherefore the ods is but little. It goes
therefore from thence to Mawlam, Hamlith, Kirbie, Moldale, Calton hall, Areton,
and so forth till it come almost to Gargraue, there crossing the Otterburne
Otterburne.
water on the w^st, and the Winterburne Winterburne.
on the north, which at Flasbie receives a rill from Helton, as I hear. Being
past Gargraue, our Air goes on to Eshton, Elswood, and so forth on, first
receiving a brook from southwest (whereof one branch comes by Marton, the
other by Thorneton, which meet about Broughton) then another from northeast,
that runs by Skipton castle. After this confluence it hastes by manifold
windlesses, which caused thirteen bridges at the last to be over the same
within a little space, to Newbiggin, Bradleie, and Kildwijc, by south east
whereof it meets with one water from Mawsis, and Glusburne or Glukesburne,
Glike.
called Glike; another likewise a little beneath from Seton, beside two rilles
from by north, after which confluence it runs by Reddlesden, and over
against this town the Lacocke Lacocke.
and the Worth Worth.
do meet withal in one channel, as the Moreton Moreton.
water does on the north, although it be somewhat lower. Thence it goes to
Rishfoorth hall, and so to Bungleie, where it takes a rill from Denholme park
to Shipeleie, and there crossing another from Thorneton, Leuenthorpe, and
Bradleie, it goes to Caluerleie, to Crystal, and so to Leedes, where one
water runs there into by north from Wettlewood, and two other from by south
in one channel, whereof the first has two arms, of which the one comes from
Pudseie chapel, the other from Adwalton, their confluence being made above
Farnesleie hall. The other likewise has two heads, whereof one is above
Morleie, the other comes from Domingleie, and meeting with the first not far
southwest of Leedes, they fall both into the Air, and so run with the same to
Swillington, and there taking in the Rodwell beck south of the bridge, it
proceeds to Ollerton, Castleford, Brotherton and Ferribridge, there receiving
the Went, a beck from Pontefract or Pomfret, Redwell. Went.
which rises of diverse heads, whereof one is among the cole pits. Thence to
Beall, Berkin, Kellington, middle Hodleseie, Templehirst, Gowldall, Snath,
Rawcliffe, Newland, Army, and so into the Ouze with an indifferent course. Of
all the rivers in the north, Leland (in so many of his books as I have seen)
says least of this. Mine annotations also are very slender in the particular
waters wherbie it is increased: wherefore I was compelled of necessity to
conclude even thus with the description of the same, and had so left it in
deed, if I had not received one other note more to ad unto it (even when the
leaf was at the press) which says as follows in manner word for word.

There is a noble water that falls into Air, whose head (as I take it) is
about Stanford. From whence it goes to Creston chapel, to Lingfield, and
there about receiving one rill near Elfrabright bridge, and also the Hebden by
northwest, it goes to Brearleie hall, Hebden.
and so taking in the third by north, it proceeds on eastward by Sorsbie
bridge chapel (and there a rill from southwest) and so to Coppeleie hall.
Beneath this place I find also that it receives one rill from Hallifax, which
rises from two heads, and two other from southwest, of which one comes by
Baresland, and Staneland in one channel, as I read. So that after this
confluence the aforesaid water goes on toward Cowford bridge, and as it takes
in two rilles above the same on the north side, so beneath that bridge there
falls into it a pretty arm increased by sundry waters coming from by
south, as from Marsheden chapel, from Holinesworth chapel, and Kirke-Heton,
each one growing of sundry heads; whereof I would say more, if I had more
intelligence of their several gates and passages.

But to proceed. From Cowford bridge it runs to Munfeld, and receiving yer
long one rill from Leuersage hall, and another from Burshall by Dewesburie, it
goes on northeast of Thornehull, south of Horbirie thorns, and thereabout
crossing one rill from by south from Woller by new Milner Dam, and soon after
another from northwest, called Chald; Chald.
rising in the Peke hills, whereon Wakefield stands, and likewise the third
from southeast, and Waterton hall, it goes by Warmefield, Newland, Alto^^es,
and finally into the Air, west of Castelworth, as I learn. What the name of
this river should be as yet I hear not, and therefore no marvel that I do
not set it down, yet is it certain that

The Trent is one of the most excellent rivers in the land, Trent.
not only for store of samon, sturgeon, and sundry other kinds of delicate
fish wherewith it does abound, but also for that it is increased with so
Foulebrooke.
by Shelton, and finally making a confluence they go to Hanfleet, where they
meet with another on the same side, that descends from Leland takes to be
the very Trent it self, saying: that it rises in the hills above Newcastell,
as may be seen by his commentaries.

But to proceed. At Trentham, or not far from thence, it crosses a riueret
from northeast, whose name I know not, and thence going to Stone Aston, Stoke
Burston, the Sandons and Weston, a little above Shubburne and Hawood, it
receives the Sow, a great channel increased with sundry waters, which Sow.
The Sow descends from the hills, above Whitemoore chapel, and goes by
Charleton, and Stawne; and beneath Shalford ioineth with another by northeast
that comes from bishops Offeleie, Egleshall, Chesbie, Raunton. After this
confluence also it runs by Bridgeford, Tillington, and Stafford, beneath
which town it crosses the Penke beck, that rises above Nigleton, Penke.
and Berwood, and above Penke bridge unites it self with

From Shubburne the Trent goes on to little Harwood (meeting by the way one
rill at Ousleie bridge, and another south of Riddlesleie) thence by Blithe.
which rises among the hills in Whateleie moore, above Weston Conie, and
thence going to the same town, it comes to Druicote, alias Dracote,
Painsleie, Gratwitch, Grimleie, Aldmaston, Hamsteed, Ridware, and finally into
the Trent, directly west of Yoxhall, which runs also from thence, and
leaving kings Bromleie in a park (as I take it) on the left hand, and the
Black water coming from Southton and Lichfield on the right, goes
streightwaie to Catton, where it meets with the Tame, Tame.
whose course I describe as follows.

It rises in Staffordshire (as I remember) not far from Petteshall, and
goes forth by Hamsted, toward Pirihall and Brimichams Aston, taking in by the
way a rill on each side, whereof the first grows through a confluence of two
waters, the one of them coming from Tipton, the other from Aldburie, and so
running as one by Wedburie till they fall into the same. The latter comes
from Woolfhall, and ioineth with it on the left hand. After this, and when it
is past the aforesaid places, it crosses in like sort a rill from Smethike
ward: thence it goes to Yarneton hall, beneath which it meets with the Rhee,
and thence through the park, at Park hall by Watercote, Rhee. Cote.
crossing finally the Cole, whose head is in the forest by Kingesnorton wood,
and has this course, whereof I now give notice. It rises (as I said) in the
forest by Kingesnorton wood, and going by Yareleie and Kingeshirst, it meets
between that and the park, with a water running between Helmedon and Sheldon.

Thence it passes on to Coleshull, by east whereof it ioineth with a brook,
Blithe.
mounting southwest of Golthull called Blithe, which going by Henwood and
Barston, crosses on each side of Temple Balshall, a rill, whereof one comes
thorough the Queens park or chase that lies by west of Kenelworth, and the
other by Kenelworth castle it self, from about Haselie park. After which
confluences it proceeds in like manner to Hampton in Arden, and the
Packingtons, and so to Coleshull, where it meets with the Cole, that going a
little further, unites it self with the Burn on the one side (whereinto
runs a water coming from Ansleie on the east) Burn.
and soon after on the other does fall into the Tame, that which some call
the Rhee, Rhee.
a common name to all waters that move and run from their head. For (...) in
Greek is to flow and run, although in truth it is proper to the sea only to
flow. Leland names the Brimicham water, whose head (as I hear) is above
Norffield, so that his course should be by Kingesnorton, Bremicham, Budston
hall, till it fall beneath Yarneton into the Tame it self, that runs after
these confluences on by Lee, Kingesbirie park, and going by east of Oraiton,
Basset park, to Falkesleie bridge, it meets with another water called Burn,
also coming from Hammerwich church, by Chesterford, Shenton, Thickebrowne, and
the north side of Oraition, Basset park, whereof I spoke before. From hence our
Tame runs on to Tamworth, there taking in the Anchor by east, whose
description I had in this manner delivered unto me.

It rises above Burton, from whence it goes by Nonneaton, Anchor.
Witherleie and Atherstone. Yer long also it takes in a water from northeast,
which comes by Huglescote, Shapton, Cunston, Twicrosse (uniting it self with
a water from Bosworth) Ratcliffe, and so to the Anchor, which after this
confluence passes by Whittendon, Crindon, Pollesworth, Armington, Tamworth,
and so into Tame, that hastes to Hopwash, Comberford hall, Telford, and soon
after crossing a rill that rises short of Swinfield hall, and comes by
Festirike, it runs not far from Eroxhall, and so to Catton, thereabout
receiving his last increase not worthy to be omitted. This brook is named
Mese, Mese.
and it rises in the great park that lies between Worthington, and
Smothike, from whence also it goes by Ashhie de la Souche, Packington, Mesham,
and Stretton, and therabout crossing a rill about Nethersale grange, from
Ouersale by east, it proceeds by Chilcote, Clifton, Croxall, into the Them,
and both out of hand into the maine river a mile above Repton. Leland writing
of this river (as I erst noted) says thereof in this wise. Into the Them
also runs the Bremicham brook, which rises four or five miles about
Bremicham in the Black hills in Worcestershire, and goes into the aforesaid
water a mile above Crudworth bridge. Certes (says he) this Bremicham is a
Leland. Now to resume the Trent, which being grown to some greatness, goes
on to Walton, Drakelow, and there crossing a water that comes by Nowbold
hall, it runs to Stapenell, Winshull, Wightmere, and Newton South, where it
receives two channels within a short space, to be described

The first of these is called the Dou or Dove, it rises about the three shires
mere, Dou.
and is as it were limes between Stafford and Darbishires, until it come at
the Trent. Descending therefore from the head, it goes by Earlesbooth,
Pilsburie grange; Hartington, Wolscot, Eaton, Hunsington grange; and above
Thorpe receives the Manifold water, Manifold.
so called, because of the sundry crinckling rills that it receives, and
turnagaines that it self shows before Hansleie.
where it falls into the ground: and afterward mounting again is received
into the Manifold, north of Throwleie (as I hear) which goes from thence to
Ilam, and above Thorpe does cast it self into Dou. Having therefore Churne.
even here to be described before I go any further. It rises a good way
above Delacrasse abbie, and coming thither by Hellesbie wood, it takes in the
Dunsmere, Dunsmere.
between

Thence it goes to the Walgrange, and a little beneath receives the Yendor
that comes from above Harton, Yendor.
thence to Cheddleton, and having crossed the Ashenhirst brook above Cnutes
hall, Aula Canuti. Ashenhirst.
it runs by Ypston, Froghall, Below hill, Alton castle, Preestwood, and at
Rowcester falls into the Dou, which yer long also receives a rill from
Crowsden, Teine.
and then going to Eton meets first with the Teine that comes thither from
each side of Chedleie by Uttoxeter or Uncester.
and then going on to Merchington, Sidberie, Cawlton, it crosses a brook from
Sidmister college, by Saperton. From this confluence in like sort it passes
forth to Tilberie castle, Mars^on, and at Edergton meets with the water
that comes from Yeldersleie by Longford (where into runs another that
comes from Hollington) and so to Hilton. These waters being thus joined, and
many ends brought into one, the Dou it self falls yer long likewise into
the Trent, above Newton Souch. So that the maine river being thus enlarged,
goes onwards with his course, and between Willington and Repton meets with
two waters on sundry sides, whereof that which falls in by Willington,
rises near Dawberie Lies, and runs by Trusselie and Ash: the other that
enters above Repton, descends from Hartesburne, so that the Trent being
past these, hastes to Twiford, Inglebie, Staunton, Weston, Newton, and Aston,
yer long also meeting with the Darwent; next of all to be dispatched. Darwent.
The Darwent, or (to use the very British word) Dowrgwine (but in Latin
Fluuius Dereuantanus) rises plain west, near unto the edge of Darbishire,
above Blackwell a market town, and from the head runs to the New chapel,
within a few miles after it be risen. From hence moreover it goes by Howden
house, Darwent chapel, Yorkshire bridge, and at Witham bridge does cross
the Neue or Nouius that comes from Newstole hill, Neue.
by Netherburgh, Hope (crossing there one rill from Castelton, another from
Bradwell, and the third at Hathersage, from Stony ridge hill) and so goes on
to Padleie, Stockehall, receiving a rill by the way from by west, to Stony
Middleton, and Baslow, and having here taken in the Burbrooke on the one side,
and another from Halsop on the other, Burbroke.
it goes to Chatworth and to Rowseleie, where it is increased with the Wie
coming from by west, and also a rill on the east, a little higher. But I will
describe the Wie before I go any further.

The Wie rises above Buxston well, Wie.
and there is increased with the Hawkeshow, Hawkeshow.
and the Wile Wile.
brook, whose heads are also further distant from the edge of Darbishire than
that of Wie, and races somewhat longer, though neither of them be worthy to be
accounted long. For the Wile, having two heads, the one of them is not far
above the place where Wilebecke abbeie stood, the other is further off by west,
about Wilebecke town: and finally ioining in one they run to Cuckneie
village, where receiving a beck that comes down from by west, it holds on
two miles further, there taking in the second rill, and so resort to Rufford,
or the Manbecke. Unto this also do other two rills repair, Rufford alias
Manbecke.
whereof the one goes through and the other hard by Maunsfield, of which two
also this latter rises west about four miles, and runs forth to Clipston
(three miles lower) and so likewise to Rufford, whereof I will speak
hereafter. In the mean time to return again to the Wie. From Buxston well,
it runs to Staddon, Cowdale, Cowlow, New meadow, Milhouses, Bankewell, and
Haddon hall, beneath which it receives the Lath kell, Lathkell.
that runs by Ouerhaddon, and the Bradford, Bradford.
both in one bottom after they be joined in one at Alport. And this is the
first great water that our Darwent does meet withal. Being therefore past the
Rowsleies, the said Darwent goes to Stancliffe, Darleie in the peake,
Wensleie, Smitterton hall, and at Matlocke takes in a rill by northeast, as it
does another at Crumford that goes by Boteshall.

From Mattocke, it proceeds to Watston, or Watsond, Well bridge, Alderwash,
and ioineth with another stream called Amber coming in from by north by Amber
bridge, Amber.
whose description shall ensue in this wise, as I find it. The head of Amber is
above Edleston hall, or (as Leland says) est of Chesterfield, and coming from
thence by Middleton to Ogston hall, it takes withal another brook,
descending from Hardwijc wood, by Alton and Streton. Thence it goes to Higham,
Brackenfield, and above Dale bridge meets with a brook running from
Hucknalward to Shireland park side, there crossing the Moreton beck, Moreton.
and so to Alferton, except I name it wrong. From Dale bridge it goes by
Wingfeld, to Hedge, Fritchlin, and so into Darwent, taking the water withal
that descends from Swanswtjc by Pentridge, as Leland does remember. From this
confluence likewise it runs to Belper, where it meets with a rill coming
from Morleie park: thence to Makenie, and at Duffeld, Eglesburne.
receives the Eglesburne, which arises about Wirkesworth or Oresworth, but in
the same parish out of a rock, and comes in by Turnedich. From Duffeld, it
passes to Bradsall, Darleie abbeie, and at Darbie takes in a rill coming
from Mirkaston Sora, or Surus.


It rises in Leicestershire above Wigton, and thence goes to Sharneford,
Sapcote, and beneath Staunton takes in a rill that comes by Dounton and
Broughton Astleie. Thence to Marleborow, and before it come to Eston, crosses
another on the same side (descending by Burton, Glen, Winstow, Kilbie and
Blabie) then to Leircester town, Belgraue, Burstall, Wanlip; and yer it come
at Cussington or Cositon, crosses the Eye, Eye.
which rises near Leland calls one of these rilles Croco.
going by Knawstow, Somerbie; Pickwell, Whitesonden; and beneath (a little)
receives a rill on the right hand from Coldnorton. Thence to Stapleford, and
soon after crossing a brook from above Sproxton, Coson, Garthorpe and Saxbie,
it runs to Wiuerbie, Brentingbie; and yer it come at Milton, meets with
two other small rilles, from the right hand whereof one comes from about
Caldwell by Thorpe Arnold, and Waltham in the Would; the other from Skaleford
ward, and Warke, Urke, or Wr^ke.
From hence also it goes to Asterbie, Radgale, Habie, Trussington, Ratcliffe;
and soon after crosses sundry waters not very far in sunder, whereof one
comes from Oueston, by Twiford, Ashbie, and Gadesbie; another from Losebie,
by Baggraue, and Crawston, and ioining with the first

These things being thus brought together, and we now resuming the discourse of
the same river, it does after his meeting with the Some, proceed withal to
Barton, where it takes in the Erwash, which rises about Kirbie, Erwash.
and thence goes to Sel^^on, Wansbie, Codnor castle, Estwood, and crossing a
water from Be^all, runs to Coshall, Trowe^ (and there taking in another rill
coming from Henor by Shipleie) it proceeds on to Stapleford, long Eaton, and
so into the Trent. This bring soon it goes to Clifton, and yer it come at
Wilford, it meets with a brook that passes from Staunton by Bonnie and
Rodington, and thence to Notingham, where it crosses the Line, wh^^ rises
above Newsted; and passing by Papple (...), H^eknall, Bafford, Radford and
Linton, next of all to Thorpe and Farmdon, where it brancheth and makes an
Island, and into the smaller of them goes a brook from Beuer castle, which
rising between east Well and Eaton in Leircester is called the Dene, Dene.
and from thence runs by Bramston to Knipton, and beneath Knipton meets
with a brook that comes by west of ^roxston, and thence holds on with his
course, between Wille^^horpe and Beuer castle aforesaid* and so to
Bottesworth, Normanton, Killington* Shilton, there receiving the Snite from by
south (whose head is near Clauston, Snite.
and course from thence by Hickling, Langer, Whalton, Orston, and Flareborow)
and yer long another coming from Bingham, and Sibthorpe. Thence our Trent
runs to Coxam, Hawton, Newarke castle, and so to Winthorpe, where the
branches are reunited, and thence go on by Holme to Cromwell (and soon after
taking in a brook coming from Bilsthorpe, by Kersall, Cawnton, Norwell and
Willowbie) to Carlton, and to Sutton, there making a little I Will, then to
Grinton, where it touches a stream on each side, whereof one comes from
Morehouse by Weston and Gresthorpe, another from Langthorpe, by Collingham, and
Bosthorpe. From hence likewise it passes to Clifton, Newton, Kettlethorpe,
Torkeseie, Knath, Guinsborow, Waltrith, Stockwith; and leaving Axholme on the
left hand, it takes withal Hogdike water out of the I Will, and so goes forth
to Wildsworth, Eastferrie, Frusworth, Burringham, Guinmeis, Hixburgh, Burton,
Walcote, and at Ankerburie into the Humber, receiving the swift Dove by the
way, which for his nobleness is not to be ouerpassed, especially for that
Anno 1536 Hen. 8, 28, it was (by Gods providence) a stay of great bloodshed
like to have fallen out between the kings side and the rebels of the north,
in a quarrel about religion. For the night before the battle should have
been stricken, and without any apparent cause (a little shower of rain A
miracle.
excepted far impossible upon such a sudden to have made so great a water)
the said river arose so high, and ran with such vehemency, that on the morrow
the armies could not join to try and fight it out: after which a pacification
insued, and those countries were left in quiet. Secondly, the description
hereof is not to be ouerpassed, because of the fine grass which grows upon
the banks thereof, which is so fine and batable, that there goes a proverb
upon the same; so often as a man will commend his pasture, to say that there is
no better feed on Dove bank: that makes it also the more famous.

The Dove therefore rises in Yorkshire among Dove.
the Peke hills, and having received a water coming by Ingbirchworth (where
the color thereof is very black) it goes to Pennistone, which is four
miles from the head: then by Oxspring to Thurgoland, and soon after (ioining
by the way with the Midhop water, Midhop.
that runs by Midhop chapel, and Hondshelfe) it meets with another
coming from Bowsterston chapel. Then goes it by Waddesleie wood to
Waddesleie bridge, and at Aluerton receives the Bradfeld water. Then passes
it to Crokes, and so to Sheffeld castle (by east whereof it receives a brook
from by south that comes through Sheffeld Cowleie.
Next of all it goes to Rotheram, where it meets with the Rother, Rother.
a goodly water, whose head is in Darbieshire about Pilsleie, from whence it
goes under the name of Doleie, till it come at Rotheram, by north Winfield
church, Wingerworth, and Foreland hall, twelve miles from Rotheram, to
Chesterford, where it meets with the Iber, Iber.
and Brampton Brampton.


The Crawleie rises not far from Hardw^jc, Crawleie.
and going by Stanesbie and Woodhouse, it receives above Netherhorpe, one
water on the one side coming Gunno.
where it takes in the Gunno from by east. Thence to Boughton, uniting it
self therabout with another by west from Gledles, called Mesebrooke,
Mesebrooke.
which divides Yorkshire from Darbieshire, and so Hampall.
which rises east

But before I deal with the description of the Idle, I will add somewhat of
the Rume, a fair water. For though the description thereof be not so exactlie
delivered me as I looked for; yet such as it is I will set down, conferring it
with Lelands book, and helping their defect so much as to me is possible. It
rises by south of Maunsfield, five miles from Rumford abbeie, and when the
stream comes near the abbeie, it casts it self abroad and makes a fair
lake. After this it comes again into a narrow channel, and so goes on to
Rumford village, carrieng the Budbie and the Gerberton waters withal. Budbie
Gerberton.
From thence, and with a meetlie long course, it goes to Bawtrie or Uautrie, a
market town in Nottinghamshire, five miles from Doncaster, and so into the
Trent. Beneath Rumford also comes in the Girt, which goes unto Southwell
milles, Girt.
and so into the Trent. Now as concerning our Idle.

The Idle, which some call Brier stream, Idle.
rises at Sutton in Ashfield, from whence it runs to Maunsfield, Clipston
and Allexton, where it takes in a water that rises in the forest, one mile
north of Bledworth, and runs on by Rughford abbeie, till it come to
Allexton. Manbecke.
The forresters call this Manbecke, whereof Leland also speaks, who
describes it in this manner. Manbrooke rises somewhere about Linthirst wood,
from whence it goes to Blisthorpe, and so to Allerton. But to proceed. The
Idle having taken in the Manbecke, it runs to Bothomsall, by Boughton, and
Perlethorpe: but yer it come there, it meets the Meding Maiden, or Midding
brook, which rising about Teuersall, Meding beck.
goes to Pleasleie, Nettleworth, Sawcan, Warsop, Budleie, Thursbie,
Bothomsall, and so into the Idle. After this it proceeds to Houghton, west
Draiton, but yer it touch at Graunston or Gaunston, it takes in the Wily,
Wily.
which comes from Clown, to Creswell, Holbecke, Woodhouse, Wilebecke,
Normenton, Elsleie, Graunston, and so into the Idle. Being thus increased, the
Idle runs on to Idleton, Ordsall, Retford, Bollam, Tilneie, Matterseie
abbeie, and so to Bawtrie, where it meets another from the shire Oaks, that
rises above Geitford, passes on to Worksop (or Radfurth) Osberton, Blithe.
Bilbie, and Blithe, there uniting it self with three rilles in one bottom,
whereof one comes from Waldingwell to Careleton, and so thorough a park to
Blithe town, another from by west Furbecke three miles, and so to Blithe: but
the third out of the White water near to Blithe, and there being united they
pass on to Scrobie, and so into the Idle.

From hence it runs on to Missen, to Sadlers bridge, and next of all to
Santoft, where it meets with the Sandbecke, Sandbecke.
which rising not far from Sandbecke town, passes by Tickhill, Rosington
bridge, Brampton, Rilholme, Lindholme, and one mile south of Santoft into the
Idle water, which runs from thence to Thorn, where it meets with the
Dove, and so with it to Crowleie. Finally, inuironing the I Will of Areholme, it
goes unto Garthorpe, Focorbie, and so into the Trent. Leland writing of the
Wily, Wile, or Gwilie (as some write it) says thus thereof. The Wile has two
heads, whereof one is not far above the place where Wilbecke abbeie stood;
the other rises further off by west above Welbecke or Wilebecke town:
finally ioining in one, they run to Cuckeneie village, where crossing a
beck that comes in from by west, it holds on two miles further, there
taking in the second rill, and so resort to Rufford. To this river likewise
(says he) do two other waters repair, whereof the one goes hard by
Maunsfield (rising four miles from thence by west) and then comes three
miles lower to Rufford; the other (so far as I remember) goes quite through
the town.

Of such falls of waters as join with the sea, between Humber and the
Thames. Chap. 16.
Having in this manner described the Ouze, and such rivers as fall into the
same: now it rests that I proceed in my Ancolme.
which rises east of Mercate Rafing, and from thence goes by middle Rafing.
Then receiving a short till from by south, it runs on under two bridges, by
the way, till it come to Wingall, northeast;

Being past Ancolme, K^lis.
we go about the Nesse, and so to the fall of the water which comes from
Keledie, by Cotham abbeie, Nersham abbeie, Thorneton,

Saltflete water has but a short course: for rising among the Cockeringtons,
it comes to the sea, Saltflete.
at Saltflete haven: howbeit the next unto it is of a longer race, for it
rises (as I take it) at Cawthorpe

Maplethorpe water rises at Tharesthorpe, and going by Markeleie, Folethorpe,
Maplethorpe.
and Truthorpe, it is not long yer it meet with the Germane Ocean. Then come we
to the issue that comes from above

Now come I to the course of the Witham, a famous river, whereof goes the
beword, frequented of old, and also of Ancolme, which I before described:
Ancolme ele, and Witham pike,
Search all England and find not the like.
Leland calls it Lindis, diverse the The, Lindis, witham, The.
and I have read all these names my self: and thereto that the Lincolneshire
men were called in old time Coritani, and their head city Lindus, Lindon, or
Linodunum, in which region also Ptolomie places Rage, which some take to be
Notingham, except my memory do fail me. It rises among the Wickhams, in the
edge of Lincolnshire, and (as I take it) in south-Wickham paroch, from whence
it goes to Co^sterworth, Easton, Kirkestoke Paunton, and Paunton Houghton, and
at Grantham takes in a rill from by southwest, as I hear. From Grantham it
runs to Man, Thorpe, Bolton, and Barneston, where crossing a beck from
northeast, it proceeds further southwest ward by Mereston, toward Faston
(there also taking in a brook that rises about Denton, and goes by
Sidbrooke) it hastes to Dodington, Clapale, Barmebie, Beckingham, Stapleford,
Bassingham, Thursbie, and beneath Amburgh crosses a water that comes from
Stogilthorpe by Somerton castle.

After this confluence also, our Witham goes still forth on his way to the
Hickhams, Boltham, Bracebridge, and Lincoln it self, for which the Normans
write Nicholl by transposition of the letters, or (as I may better say)
corruption of the word. But yer it come there, it makes certain pooles
(whereof one is called Swan poole) and soon after dividing it self into
arms, they run both thorough the lower part of Lincoln, each of them having a
bridge of stone over it, thereby to pass through the principal street: and as
the bigger arm is well able to bear their fisher botes, so the lesser is not
without his several commodities. At Lincoln also this noble river meets
with the Fosse dike, whereby in great floods vessels may come from the Trents
side to Lincoln. Fosse dike.
For between Torkseie, where it begins, and Lincoln city, where it
ends, are not above seven miles, as Leland has remembered. Bishop Atwater
began to cleanse this ditch, thinking to bring great vessels from Trent to
Lincoln in his time: but since he died before it was performed, there has no
man been since so well minded as to prosecute his purpose. The course moreover
of this our stream following, from Lincoln to Boston is fifty miles by
water: but if you mind to ferrie, you shall have but 24. For there are four
common places where men are ferried over; as Short ferrie, five miles from
Lincoln, Tatersall ferrie, eight miles from Short ferrie, Dogdike ferrie a
mile, Langreth ferrie five miles, and so many finally to Boston.

But to go forward with the course of Lindis (whereof the whole province has
been called Lindeseie) when it is past Linclone, it goes by Shepewash,
Wassingburg, Fiskerton, and soon after takes in sundry rivers in one
channel, whereby his greatness is very much increased. From this confluence
it goes to Bardolfe, and there receiving a rill (descending from betwee^e
Sotbie and Randbie, and going by Harton) it slideth forth by Tupham to
Tatersall castle, taking up there in like sort three small rills by the way,
whereof I have small notice as yet: and therefore I refer them unto a further
consideration to be had of them hereafter, if it shall please God that I may
live to have the filling of these rude pamphlets yet once again, and somewhat
more leisure to peruse them than at this time is granted. Finally, being past
Tatersall, and Dogdike ferrie, the Witham goes toward Boston, and thence into
the sea. Thus have I briestie dispatched this noble river Witham. But having
another note delivered me thereof from a friend, I will yield so far unto his
gratification, that I will remember his travel here, and set down also what
he has written thereof, although the river be sufficiently described alredie.

Into Witham therefore from by north, and seven miles beneath Lincoln, Witham.
there falls a fair water, Hake.
Snarford, Resbie, Stainton, and at Bullington meets with a water on each
side, whereof one comes from Haiton and Turxington, the other from Sudbrooke,
and likewise beneath Birlings with the third coming from Barkeworth by
Stansted, and ioining all in one, soon after it is not long yer it fall into
the channel of Witham, and so are never more heard of. There is also a brook
by southwest, that comes from Kirbie to Cateleie, Bane.
which rises above Burgh, and near unto Ludford goes down to Dunnington,
Stanigod, Hemmingsbie, Bamburgh, Fillington, Horn castle (where it crosses a
rill from Belchworth) Thornton, Marton, Halton, Kirkebie, Comsbie, Tatersall,
and so to Dogdike ferrie.

Above Boston likewise it takes in a water coming from Lusebie by
Bolingbrooke, Stickeford, Stickneie, Sibbeseie and Hildrike. And to Boston
Bollingborow. Sempringham.
called Bollingborow, or (after some, I wot not upon what occasion)
Sempringham water, the third from Bridge end, the

Having thus set forth the rivers that fall into the Witham, Wiland.
now come we to the Wiland or Welland, whereunto we repair after we be past
Boston, as drawing by little and little toward the Girwies, which inhabit in the
fennes (for Gir in the old Saxon speech does signify deep fennes and
marshes) and Hugh of Peterborow writes. This stream rises about Sibbertoft,
and running between Bosworth and Howthorpe, it goes to Feedingworth, Merson,
Bubberham, Trussell, Herborow (receiving there the Braie, Braie.
which comes from Braiebrooke castle) to Bowton, Weston, Wiland, Ashleie,
Medburne, Rokingham, and Cawcot, where a riueret called little Eye meets
withal, coming from east Norton by Alexstone, Stock, Faston, and Dry
stock. From Cawcot it goes to Gritto, Harringworth, Seton, Wauerlie,
Duddington, Collie Weston, Eston, and there ioineth with the third called
Warke, Warke.
not far from Ketton, which comes from Lie by Preston, Wing, Lindon,
Luffenham, etc. Thence it goes on by Tinwell, to Stanford (crossing the Brook
water, Brook water Whitnell.
and Whitnelbecke, both in one bottom) and from Stanford by Talington, Maxeie,
to Mercate, Deeping, Crowland (where it almost meets with the Auon) then to
Spalding, Whapland, and so into the sea.

Leland writing of this Wiland, adds these words which I will not omit, since
in mine opinion they are worthy to be noted, for better consideration to be
had in the said water and his course. The Wiland (says he) going by Crowland,
at Newdrene divides it self into two branches, of which one goes up to
Spalding called Newdrene, Newdrene.
and so into the sea at Fossedike Stow: the other named the South South.
into Wisbech. This latter also parts it self two miles from Crowland,
Writhlake.
and sends a rill called Writhlake by Thorneie, where it meets with an arm
of the Nene, that comes from Peterborow, and holds course with the broad
stream, till it be come to Murho, six miles from Wisbech, where it falls
into the South.

Out of the South in like sort falls another arm called Sheep eye, Sheep
eye.
and at Hopelode (which is fourteen miles from Lin) did fall into the sea.
But now the course of that stream is ceased, whereupon the inhabitants
sustain many grievous floods, because the mouth is stanched, by which it had
access before into the sea. Hitherto Leland. Of the course of this river also
from Stanford, I note this furthermore out of another writing in my time. Being
past Stanton (says he) it goes by Burghleie, Uffington, Tallington, Maxeie,
Deeping, east Deeping, and coming to Waldram hall, it brancheth into two
arms, whereof that which goes to Singlesole, receives the Nene out of
Cambridgeshire, and then going by Dowesdale, Trekenhole, and winding at last to
Wisbech, it goes by Liuerington, saint Mary's, and so into the sea. The other
arm hastes to Crowland, Clowthouse, Bretherhouse, Pikale, Cowbecke and
Spalding. Here also it receives the Baston dreane, Longtost dreane, Deeping
dreane, and thence goes by Wickham into the sea, taking withal on the right
hand sundry other dreanes. And thus far he.

Next of all, when we are past these, we come to another fall of water into the
Wash, which descends directly from Whaplade dreane to Whaplade town in
Holland: but because it is a water of small importance, I pass from thence, as
hasting to the Nene, of both the more noble river: and about the midst
thereof in place is a certain swallow, so deep and so cold in the midst of
summer, that no man dare diue to the bottom thereof for coldness, and yet for
all that in winter never found to have been touched with frost, much less to
be covered with ise. The next therefore to be described is the Auon, Auon.
otherwise called Nene, Nene.
which the said author describes after this manner. The Nene begins four
miles above Northampton in Nene mere, where it rises out of two heads, which
join about Northampton. Of this river the city and country bears the name,
although we now pronounce Hampton for Auondune, which error is committed also
in south Auondune, as we may easily see. In another place Leland describes
the said river after this manner. The Auon rises in Nene mere field, and going
by Oundale and Peterborow, it divides it self into three arms, whereof one
goes to Horneie, another to Wisbech, the third to Ramseie: and afterward being
united again, they fall into the sea not very far from Lin. Finally, the
descent of these waters leave here a great sort of Islands, whereof of Elie,
Crowland, and Merfland, are the chief. Hitherto Leland.

Howbeit, because neither of these descriptions touch the course of this river
at the full, I will set down the third, which shall supply whatsoever the
other do want. The Auon therefore arising in Nenemere field, is increased with
many rilles, before it come at Northhampton, and one above Kings thorpe, from
whence it goes to Dallington, and so to Northhampton, where it receives the
Wedon. And here I Vedunus.
till I have described this river. The Wedon therefore rises at Faulesse in
master Knightlies pooles, and in Badbie plashes also are certain springs that
resort unto this stream. Faulesse pooles are a mile from Chareton, where the
head of Chare river is, that runs to Banberie. There is but an hill called
Alberie hill between the heads of these two rivers.

From the said hill therefore the Weldon directs his course to Badbie,
Newenham, Euerton, Wedon, Florus (a pretty water rising of four heads, Florus.
whereof the one is at Dauentrie, another at Watford, the third at long Bucke,
the fourth above Whilton) and then passes on to Heiford, Kislingberie, Upton,
and so to Northhampton, where it falls into the Auon, receiving finally by
the way the Bugbrooke water at He^ford, ^ugius.
Pat^hall water near ^islingberie, and finally Preston water beneath Upton,
which running from Preston by Wootton, meets at the last Kilis.
which going by Ardingworth, Daisborow, Rusheton, Newton, Gaddington, Boughton,
Warketon, Kettering, Berton, and Burton, meets there with Rothwell Rother.
which runs west of Kettering to Hisham, the greater Haridon, and then into
the Auon.

Being therefore past Burton, our maine stream goes to Higham Ferries,
Artleborow, Kingsted, Woodford, and (meeting thereby with Cranford rill) to
Thraxston, north whereof it ioineth also with the Ocleie water, Ocleie.
that comes from Sudborow and Lowicke, to old Umkles, Waden ho, Pilketon,
Took (where it takes in the Liueden beck) and so to Oundell, Cotterstocke,
Tansoner, and between Corbie.
which rising at Corbie, goes by Weldon, Deneshap, Bulwich, Bletherwijc,
Fineshed, Axthorpe, Newton, Tothering, and so into the Auon. After this, the
said Auon goes to Elton, Massington, Yerwell, Sutton, Castor, Allerton, and so
to Peterborow, where it divides it self into sundry arms, and those into
several branches and draines, among the fennes and meadows, not possible
almost to be numbered, before it meet with the sea on the one side

The Ouze, which Leland calls the third Isis, Isis 3.
falls into the sea between Mersland and Downeham. The chief head of this
river arises near to Stanes, from whence it comes to Brackleie (sometime a
noble town in Northampton shire, but now scarcely a good village) and there
taking in on the left hand one water coming from the park between Sisam and
Astwell (which runs by Whitfield and Sisa.
Tinweston) and another on the right from Imleie, it goes on by Westbirie,
Imelus.
Fulwell, water Stretford, Buckingham, and Berton, beneath which town the Erin
falls into it, whereof I find this short description to be inserted here.
Erin.
The Erin rises not far from Hardwijc Northamptonshire, from hence it goes
by H^th, Gunford, Godderington, Twiford, Steeple C^adon, and yer it come at
Padbirie, meets with the Garan^^brooke descending from Garan.
Garanburge, and so they go together by Padbirie, till they fall into the Ouze,
which carries them after the confluence to Thorneton bridge (where they cross
another fall of water coming from Whitlewood forest by Luffe^d, Le^amsted and
Fosent) and so to Beachampton, Culuerton, Stony Stratford, and Woluerton.

Here the Ouze meets with a water (called, Verus.
as Leland coniectureth, the Uere or Were) on the left hand, as you go
downwards, that comes between Wedon and Wexenham in Northamptonshire, and
goes by Towcester, and Alderton, and not far from Woluerton and Hauersham
into the foresaid Ouze, which goes also from hence to Newportpaganell, where
in like sort I must stay a while till I have described another water, named
the Clee, by whose issue the said stream is not a little increased. Cle alias
Claius.
This river rises in the very confines between Buckingham and Bedfordshires,
not far from Whippesnade, and going on toward the northwest, by Eaton and
Laiton, it comes to Linchlade, where it enters wholly into Buckinghamshire,
and so goes on by Hammond, Brickle, Fennie Stratford, Simpson, Walton and
Middleton, beneath which it receives the Saw from above Halcot, and so goes
on till it meet with the Ouze near unto Saw.
Newport, as I have said. Being united therefore, we set forward from the said
town, and follow this noble river, to Lathbirie, Thuringham, Filgrane,
Lawndon, Newington, Bradfield on the one side, and Turueie on the other, till
it come at length to Bedford after many windlesses, and then meets with
another stream, which is increased with so many waters, that I was enforced
to make an imagined stay here also, and view their several courses, supposing
my self to look down from the highest steeple in Bedford, whence (as best
mean to view any country wheresoever) I note the same as follows.

Certes on the east side, where I began this speculation, I saw one that came
from Potton, and met withal near Becliswade: another that grew of two waters,
whereof one descended from Baldocke, the other from Hitchin, which joined beneth
Arleseie, and thence went to Langford and Edworth. The third which I beheld had
in like sort two heads, whereof one is not far from Wood end, These rise not
far from Michelborow and one of them in Higham park.
the other from Wooburne (or Howburne) and ioining about Flitwijc, they go to
Flitton (where they receive Antill brook) and so by Chiphill, and Chicksand,
they come to Shafford, from whence taking the aforsaid Langford water with
them, they go forth by Becliswade, Sandy, Blumham, and near unto Themisford
are united with the Ouze. And now to our purpose again.

After this the Ouze goes by Berkeford, to Winteringham (meeting there with
the Wareslie beck) and so runs to S. Neotes (or saint Needs, Verus or the
Were.
in old time Goluesburg, as Capgraue says In vita Neoti) to Paxston, Offordes,
Stoueus.
and so to Godmanchester, in old time called Gumicester, which (as it should
seem) has been a town of far greater countenance than at this present it
is; for out of the ruins thereof much Roman coin is found, and sometimes
with the image of C. Antius which has long hair, as the Romans had before
they received barbars into their city, and thereunto the bones of diverse men
of far greater stature than is credible to be spoken of in these days. But
what stand I upon these things? From hence therefore our water goes on to
Huntingdon, Stoueus.
Wilton, saint Iues, Holiwell, and Erith, receives in the mean time the Stow
(near unto little Paxton) and likewise the Ellen, and the Emmer, Helenus.
Elmerus.
in one channel a little by west of Huntingdon.

Finally, the maine stream spreading abroad into the Fennes, I cannot tell
into how many branches, neither how many Ilets are enforced by the same;
although of Isles, Marshland, Ancarig or Ancarie be the chief, and of which
this later is called A cruda terra, or store of bushes says Hugo le Blanc)
sometime growing in the same, and Ancartjc because sundry Ancres have lived
and borne great swaie therein. But howsoever this case stands, this is
certain, that after it has thus delited it self with ranging a while about
the pleasant bottoms and lower grounds, it meets with the Granta, from whence
it goes with a swift course unto Downeham. Between it also and the Auon, are
sundry large meeres or plashes, Riuelus.
that comes from above Broughton, Wiston, and great Riuelleie) are said to be
greatest. Of all the rivers that run into this stream, that called Granta
(whereof the whole county in old time was called Grantabrycshire, Granta.
as appears by the register of Henry prior of Canturburie) is the most noble
and excellent, which I will describe even in this place, notwithstanding

The very furthest head and original of this river is in Henham, a large
park belonging to the earl of Sussex, wherein (as the townsmen say) are
four springs that run four sundry ways into the maine sea. Leland sought
not the course of John Caius the learned physician, and some other are of the
opinion, that this river coming from Newport, is properly to be called the
Rhee: but I may not so easily dissent from Leland, whose judgment in my mind
is by a great deal the more likely. Harken therefore what he says.

The head of Grantha or Granta, is in the pond at Babren.
which is a mile from Cambridge. But yer it come altogether to Trompington, it
meets with the Barrington water, as Leland calls it, but some other the
Rhee Rhee.
(a common name to all waters in the Saxon speech) whereof I find this
description, to be touched by the way. The Rhee rises short of Ashwell in
Hertfordshire, and passing under the bridge between Gilden Mordon and Downton,
and leaving Tadlow on the west side (as I remember) it goes toward Crawden,
Malton, Barrington, Haselingfield, and so into Granta, taking sundry rills
with him from south and southwest, as Wendie water southwest of Crawden,
Whaddon brook southwest of Orwell, Mildred beck southwest of Malton, and
finally the Orme which comes out of Armington or Ormendum well, and goes by
Fulmere and Foxton, and falls into the same between Barrington and
Harleston, or Harston; as they call it.

Now to proceed with our Granta. From Trompington on the one side, and
Grantcester on the other, it hastes to Cambridge ward, taking the Burn with
it by the way, which descends from a castle of the same denomination,
wherein the Picotes and Peuerels sometime did inhabit. Thence it goes by
sundry colleges in Cambridge, as the queens college, the kings college, Clare
hall, Trinity college, S. John's, etc: unto the high bridge of Cambridge, and
between the town and the castle to Chesterton, and receiving by and by the
Stoure, or Sture (at whose bridge the most famous mart in England is yearly
holden and kept) from Chesterton it goes to Ditton, Sturus.
Milton, and yer long meeting with two rilles (from Bottesham and Wilberham, in
one bottom) it runs to Horningseie, and Water Bech: and finally here
ioining with the Bulbecke water, it goes by Dennie, and so forth into the
Ouze, Bulbecke.
fifteen miles from Cambridge, as Leland has set down. And thus much of the
third Isis or Ouze, out of the aforesaid author: whereunto I have not only
added somewhat of mine own experience, but also of other men's notes, whose
diligent observation of the course of this river has not a little helped me in
the description of the same. Now it rests that we come nearer to the coast of
Northfolke, and set forth such waters as we pass by upon the same, wherein I
will deal so preciselie as I may: and so far will I travel therein, as I
hope shall content even the curious reader: or if any fault be made, it shall
not be so great, but that after some travel in the finding, it shall with ease
be corrected.

The first river that therefore we come unto, after we be past the confluence
of Granta, and the Ouze, and within the jurisdiction of Northfolke, is called
the Burn. Burn.
This stream rises not very far from Burn Bradfield, above the greater
Wheltham, and from thence it goes on to Nawnton, Bury, Farneham Martin,
Farneham Alhallowes, Farneham Genouefa, Hengraue, Flemton, Lackeford,
Icklingham, and to Milden hall: a little beneath which, it meets with the
Dale water, Dale.
that springs not far from Catilege, and going by Asheleie, Moulton (a
benefice as the report goes not very well provided for) to Kenford, Kenet,
Bradingham, Frekenham, it falls at the last not far from Iselham into the
Burn, from whence they go together as one into the Ouze. With the Burn also
there ioineth a water coming from about Lidgate, a little beneath Iselham, and
not very far from Mildenhall.

The Dune head, Dunus.
and rising of Wauenheie, are not much in sunder: for as it is supposed, they
are both not far distant from the bridge between Lopham and Ford, whereby the
one runs east and the other west, as I have been informed. The Dune goes
first of all by Feltham, then to Hopton, and to Kinets hall, where it meets
with a water coming out of a lake short of Banham (going by Quiddenham,
Herling, Gasthorpe) and so on, both in one channel, they run to Ewston. Here
they meet in like sort, with another descending from two heads, whereof the one
is near unto Pakenham, the other to Tauestocke, as I hear. Certes these heads
join above Ilesworth, not far from Stow Langtoft, from whence they go to
Yxworth, Thorpe, Berdwell, Hunnington, Fakenham, and so into the Dune at
Ewston; as I said. From hence also they hasten to Downeham, which of this river
does seem to borow his name. South Ree rill I pass over as not worthy the
description, because it is so small.

Next unto this river on the south side is the Braden, or Bradunus, Bradunus
forte.
which rises at Bradenham, and goes by Necton, north Peckenham, south
Peckenham, Kirsingham, Bedneie, Langford, Igbor, Munford, North Old,
Stockebridge, Ferdham, Helgie, and so into the Ouze. Linus.
The nearest unto this is another which rises about Lukeham, and from thence
comes to Lexham, Massingham, Newton, the castle Acre, Acres, Nerboe,
Pentneie, Wrongeie, Rounghton (which at one time might have been my Congunus.
Bawseie, Gaiwood, whereof let this suffice. And now give ear to the rest since
I am past the Ouze. Being past the mouth or fall of the Ouze, we meet next of
all with the Rising chase water, Rising.
which Ptolomie (as some think) does call Metaris, and Ingeli.
and also the Ingell that comes from about Snetsham. From hence we go by the
point of saint Edmund, and so hold on our course till we come unto the Burn,
which falls into the sea by south from Waterden, and going between the
Crakes to Burnham Thorpe, and Burnham Norton, it strikes at the last into the
sea; east of Burnham Norton a mile at the least, except my conjecture do fail
me. Glouius.
The Glow or Glowie rises not far from Baconsthorpe, in the hundred of
Tunsted;

The Wantsume rises in Northfolke at Galesend in Holt hundred, Wantsume.
from whence it goes to Watersend. Townton, Skelthorpe, Farneham, Pensthorpe,
Rieburg, Ellingham, and Billingsford. And here it receives two waters in one
bottom, of Yocus.
After this the said Wantsume goes on by Ringland, and so to Norwich the
pontifical see of the bishop, to whom Venta or (as Leland adds) Venta
Icenorum. But to proceed. Beneath Norwich also it receives two waters in one
channel, which I will severally describe, according to their courses, noting
their confluence to be at Bixleie, within two miles of Norwich, except my
annotation deceive me. The first of these has two heads whereof one mounteth up
southwest of Whinborow, goes by Gerneston, Hierus.
and is the very Hiere or Yare that drowneth the name of Wantsume, Gern^.
so soon as he meets withal. The other head rises at Woo^ in Mitford
hundred, and after confluence with the Hiere at Caston, going by Brandon,
Bixton, Berford, Erleham, Cringlefield (not far from Bixleie as I said) does
meet with his companion, which is the second to be described as follows. It
has two heads also that meet northwest of Therstane; and hereof the one
comes from Findon hall, by Wrenningham from about Wotton, by Hemnall,
Fretton, Stretton, and Tasborow, till they join at Therston, as I gave notice
aforehand. From Therston therefore they go together in one to Newton,
Shotesham, Dunston, Castor, Arminghale, Bixleie, Lakenham, and Trowse, and then
fall into the Wantsume beneath Norwich, which hereafter is named Hiere. The
Hiere, Yare, or Gare therefore proceeding in his voyage, as it were to salute
his grandame the Ocean, goes from thence by Paswijc, Surlingham, Claxton, and
Yardleie; and here it meets again with another riueret descending from about
Shotesham to Therstane, Shedgraue, Hockingham, and so into Gare or Yare,
whereof Yardleie the town receives denomination. After this it goes to
Frethorpe, and above Burgh castle meets with the Waueneie, Wauen.
and so into the sea.

Into this river also falls the Bure, Bure.
which rising at a town of the same name, passes by Milton, Buresdune,
Corpesteie, Marington, Blekeling, Bure, Alesham, Brampton, Buxton, Horsted,
Werxham bridge, Horning, Raneworth; and beneath Bastewijc receives the Thurine
which rises above Rolesbie; Thurinus.
then to Obie, Clipsbie (there also receiving another from Filbie) Rimham,
Castor, and by Yarmouth into the Ocean. The Waueneie before mentioned, rises on
the south side of Brisingham, and is a limit between Northfolke and Suffolk.
Going therefore by Dis, Starten, not far from Octe, it meets with the Eye,
which rises near Ockold, or between it and Braisworth, and goes on by
Brom, Wauen.
Octe, and so into the Waueneie. From thence our Waueneie runs by Silam,
Brodish, Nedam, Harleston, Rednam, Alborow, Flixton, Bungeie, Sheepemedow,
Barsham, Beckles, Albie, and at Whiteacre (as I hear) parts in twain, or
receiving Milford water (which is most likely) it goes along by Somerleie,
Hormingfleet, S. Olaues, (there receiving the Frithstane or Fristan brook,
Einus.
out of low or little England) Fristan Fritha.
and Burgh castle, where it meets with the Hiere, and from thencefoorth
accompanies it (as I said) unto the sea. Willingham water comes by Hensted,
Einsted, or Enistate, and falls into the sea by south of Kesland.

The Cokell rises south southwest of Cokeleie town in Blithe hundred, Cokelus.
and near unto Hastelworth it meets with the rill that comes from Wisset,
and so going on together by Wenhaston, and Bliborow, it falls into the sea at
an haven between Roidon and Walderswicke. A little rill runs also thereinto
from Eston by Sowold, and another from Dunwich, by Walderswijke: and hereby it
wants little that Eston Nesse is not cut off and made a pretty Island.

The Ford rises at Poxford, Ford.
and going by Forderleie, and Theberton, it falls at last into the Mismere
creek. Orus.
Into the Oreford haven runs one water coming from Aldborow ward, by a
narrow passage from the north into the south. By west whereof (when we are past
a little I Will) it receives the second, descending from between Talingston and
Framingham in Plomes hundred; Fromus
which coming at last to Marleford, meets with a rill southwest of Farnham
called the Gleme (that comes by Rendlesham, Glema.
the Gleinhams) and so passing forth, it takes another at Snapesbridge,
coming from Carleton by Saxmundham, Sternefield and Snape. Then going to Iken
(where it meets with the third rill at the west side) I^^n, or Ike.
it fetches a compass by Sudburne east of Orford, and so into the haven. Next
unto this by west of Orford, there runs up another creek by Butleie,
whereinto the waters coming from Cellesford, and from the Ike, do run both in
one bottom. And thus much of Orford haven.

The Deue rises in Debenham, Deua.
in the hundred of Hertesmeere, and from thence goes to Mickford, Winston,
Cretingham, Lethringham, Wickham, Clarus fons.
and meeting soon after with Brightwell

Ure rises not far from Bacton, Urus.
in Hertesmeere hundred, and thense descends into Stow hundred by Gipping
Newton, Dagworth, Stow (beneath which it meets with a water coming from
Rattlesden, by one house) and so going on to Nedeham (through Bosmeere and
Claidon hundreds) to Blakenham, Bramford, Ypswich, receiving beneath

The Sture or Stoure parts Essex from Suffolk, Sturus.
as Houeden says, and experience confirms. It arises in Suffolk, out of a
lake near unto a town called Stourmeere. For although there come two rilles
unto the same, whereof the one descends from Thixlo, the Wratings and Ketton,
the other from Horshed park, by Hauerill, etc: yet in summer time they are
often dry, so that they cannot be said to be perpetual heads unto the
aforesaid river. Ptolomie, Edomania, for thereon toward the mouth stands a
pretty town named Manitree, which carries some shadow of that ancient name
thereof unto this day, if my conjecture be any thing) arises at Stouremeere,
which is a poole containing twenty acres of ground at the least, the one side
whereof is full of alders, the other of reeds, wherein the great store of fish
there bred, is not a little succored. From this mere also it goes to
Bathorne bridge, to

For on Essex side it has one from Hemsted, which goes by Bumsted, and
Birdbrooke: another rising short of Foxerth, that runs by water Beauchampe,
Brundon, and falls into the same at Badlington, west of Sudburie: and the
third that glideth by Horkesleie, and meets withal west of Boxsted. On the
north, or upon Suffolk side, it receives one descending from Catiledge, by
Bradleie, Thurlow, Wratting, Kiddington, and at Hauerell falls into this
Sture. The second descends northward from Posling field, and ioineth
therewith east of Clare. It was in old time called Cicux or Ceuxis, and it
meets with the Stoure in such wise that they seem to make a right angle, in
the point almost whereof stands a ruinous castle. Howbeit as sithence which
time this water (in some men's judgment) has been named Clarus (not so much
for the greatness as cleerenesse of the stream) even so the Stoure it self
was also called Ens as they say, and after their confluence the whole Clarens,
which gives denomination to a duchy of this Island of no small fame and
honor. But these are but mere fables, since the word Clare is derived from the
town, wherein was an house of religion erected to one Clara, and Clarens
brought from the same, because of an honor the prince had in those parties:
which may suffice to know from whence the name proceeds. The third arises of
two heads, whereof one comes from Wickham brook, the other from Chedbar in
Risbie hundred, and ioining about Stanfield, it goes by Hawton, Somerton,
Boxsted, Stansted, and north of Foxerth falls into Stoure. The fourth issues
from between the Waldingfields, and goes by Edwardstone, Boxsted, Alington,
Polsted, Stoke, and so at south Boxsted falls into the same. The fifth rises
northwest of Cockefield, and goes to Cockefield, Laneham, Brimsleie, Midling,
Kettle baston
and receiving Kettle Baston water southwest of Chelsworth (and likewise the
Breton that comes from Bretenham, by Hitcheham, and Bisseton street on the
south east of the same town) it goes in by Nedging, Aldham, Hadleie, Lainham,
Shellie, Higham, and so into the Stoure. The sixth is a little rill descending
southwest from Chapel. The seventh rises between Chapel and Bentleie, and
going between Tatingston, and Whetsted, Holbrooke, and Sutton, it falls at
length into Stoure, and from thence is never heard of.

As for Ocleie Drill, that rises between Ocleie, Ocleie.
and Wikes parkes, and so goes into the Stoure, on Essex side, west of
Harwich, and east of Ree I Will; I pass it over, because it is of it self but a
rill, and not of any greatness, till it come to the mill above Ramseie
bridge, where I was once almost drowned (by reason of the ruinous bridge which
leads over the stream being there very great) as an arm of the sea that
continually ebbeth and flows. Next unto this, Mosa.
we came to another that runs south of Beaumont by Moss, and falls into
the sea about the midst of the Baie, betwixt Harwich and the Naze. Betwixt
the Naze also and the mouth of Colne, is another rill, which rises at little
Bentleie, and thence goes to Tendering thorpe, through Clacton park by great
Holland, Claco.
and east of little Holland, into the deep sea.

The Colne has three heads, Colunus.
whereof one is at Ouington that goes by Tilberie, and east of Yeldam falls
into the chief head which rises about Redgewell in Essex, from whence also it
goes to Yeldam and Hedingham, otherwise called Yngham: also Hedningham or
Heuedingham, or Heuedingham of the super^oritie which accrued thereunto,
because the chief lords of the same from time to time kept residence in the
town. For Heued or Head signifies The chief, in the old English language,
which in the name of this and many other towns and villages yet standing in
England cannot esilie be forgotten. The third falls in south of Yeldam, and
being once met all in one channel, and called the Colne, it goes (as I said)
to Hedningham, Hawsted, Earls Colne, Wakes Colne, Fordon, Bardfold, Colchester,
in old time Camalodunum, and so into the sea at Brickleseie. Some think that
Colchester and Camalodunum are sundry cities and situat in diverse, places
whereby Maldon (or Ithancester out of whose ruins the said town of Maldon was
erected) should rather be Camalodunum than Colchester, but hereof I cannot
Leland says) Maldon should be written Malodunum, it were a likelihood that
there assertions should be probable. Some reason also may be gathered for the
same out of Dion, and such as make the Thames mouth to take his beginning at
Colchester water. But I dare not presume to conclude any thing hereof, least I
should seem rashly to take hold of every conjecture. This I rely upon
rather as a more certeintie, that in the first edition of this treatise I was
persuaded, that the sea entering Colunus also (whereof Leland thinks
Colchester to take his name, and not A colonia Romanorum, although I may not
consent to him herein) do run many salt creekes beneath Fingering ho, of
whose names since I do not know, nor whether they be served with any
backewaters or not, I give over to entreat any further and likewise of their
positions. Into that of Maldon runs many fair waters, whereof I will say
so much as I know to be true in manner by experience.

There is a pretty water that begins near unto Gwinbach or Winbeche church
in Essex, Gwin or Pant.
a town of old, and yet belonging to the Fitzwaters, taking name of Gwin,
which is beautiful or fair, and Ba^he that signifies a wood: and not without
cause, since not only the hills on each side of the said rillet, but all the
whole paroch has sometime abounded in woods; but now in manner they are
utterly decayed, as the like commodity is every where, not only thorough
excessive building for pleasure more than profit,

I might take occasion to speak of another rill which falls into the Rother
from Bendish hall: but because it is for the most part dry in summer I pass
it over. Yet I will not omit to speak also of the manor which was the chief
lordship sometime of a parish or hamlet called Bendishes, now worn out of
knowledge, and united partly to Radwinter, and partly to Ashdon. It belonged
first to the Bendishes gentlemen of a very ancient house yet extant, of which
one laieng the said manor to morgags to the moonks of Feuersham, at such time
as K. Edward the third went to the siege of Calis, thereby to furnish himself
the better toward the service of his prince, it came to pass that he stayed
longer beyond the sea than he supposed. Whereupon he came before his day to
confer with his creditors, who commending his care to come out of debt, willed
him in friendly manner not to suspect any hard dealing on their behalfes,
considering his business in service of the king was of it self cause
sufficient, to excuse his delaie of payment upon the day assigned. Hereupon he
went over again unto the siege of Calis. But when the day came, the moonks for
all this made seizure of the manor, and held it continually without any
further recompense, maugre all the friendship that the aforsaid Bendish could
make. The said gentleman also took this cousening part in such choler, that he
wrote a note yet to be seen among his evidences, whereby he admonishes his
posterity to beware how they trust either knave moonke or knave friar, as one
of the name and bescended from him by lineall descent has more than once
informed me. Now to resume our springs that meet and join with our Pant.

The next is named Froshwell.
Froshwell. And of this spring does the whole hundred bear the name* and
after this confluenc^ the river it self where unto it falls (from by north)
so far as I remember. Certes, all th^se, saving the first and second, are
within your lordships town aforesaid. The stream therefore running from hence
(and now, as I said, called Froshwell, of Frosh, which signifies a frog)
hastes immediately unto old Sandford, then through new Sandford park, and
afterward with full stream (receiving by the way, the Finch brook that
comes thorough Finchingfield) alias the Gwin. From Blackwater it goes to
Coral, Easterford, Braxsted and Wickham, where it meets with the Barus, and
so going together as one, they descend to Heiebridge, and finally into the
salt water above Maldon, and at hand as is aforesaid. As Barus.
it rises in a stately park of Essex called Bardfield, belonging to sir
Thomas Wroth whilst he lived, who has it to him and his heirs males for
ever, from the crown. Being risen, it hastes directly to old Saling
Brainctree, crossing a rillet by the way coming from Rain, black Notleie,
white Notleie, Falkeburne, Wittham, and falls into the Blackewater beneath
Braxsted on the south.

Beside this, Chelmer.
the said Pant or Gwin receives the Lind^s.
and falls into the Chelmer by northeast at Tilteie aforesaid, and another
coming from southwest, rising southeast from Lindsell at much Eiston. From
thence then holding on still with the course, it goes to Candfield the more,
Dunmow, little Dunmow, Falsted, Lies, both Waltams, Springfield, and so to
Chelmeresford. Here upon the south side I find the issue of a water that rises
five miles (or thereabouts) south and by west of the said town, from whence it
goes to Munasing, Roxford.
whereof let this suffice.

From hence the Chelmer goes directly toward Maldon by Badow, Owting, Woodham
water, Bilie, and so to Blackwater northwest of Maldon, receiving nevertheless
yer it come fully thither, a beck also that goes from Lee park, to little
Lees, great Lees, Lee
Hatfield, Peuerell, Owting, and so into Blackwater (whereof I spoke before) as
Maldon stream does a rill from by south over against saint Osithes, and also
another by Bradwell. After which the said stream growing also to be very
great, passes by the Tolshunts, Tollesbie, and so forth into the maine sea
near unto Merseie: between which fall and the place where Salute water
enters into the land, Plautus abode the coming of Claudius sometime into
Britain, when he being hardly beeset, did ^^nd unto him for aid and speedy
succor, who also being come did not only rescue his legate, but in like
manner wan Colchester, and put it to the spoil, if it be Camalodunum.

The Burn rises somewhere about Ronwell, Burn.
and thence goes to Hull bridge, south Fambridge, Kirk shot ferrie, and so to
Foulness. And as this is the short course of that river, so it brancheth, and
the south arm thereof receives a water coming from Haukewell, to great
Stanbridge, and beneath Pakesham does meet by south with the said arm, and so
finish up his course, as we do our voyage also about the coast of England.

Thus have I finished the description of such rivers and streams as fall into
the Ocean, according to my purpose, although not in so precise an order and
manner of handling as I might, if information promised had been accordingly
performed; or others would, if they had taken the like in hand. But this will I
say of that which is here done, that from the Solueie by west, which parts
England and Scotland on that side; to the Twede, which separateth the said
kingdoms on the east: if you go backward, contrary to the course of my
description, you shall find it so exact, as beside a very few by-riuers, you
shall not need to use any further advise for the finding and falls of the
aforesaid streams. For such has been my help of master Sackfords cards,
and conference with other men about these, that I dare pronounce them to be
perfect and exact. Furthermore, this I have also to remember, that in the
courses of our streams, I regard not so much to name the very town or
church, as the limits of the paroch. And therefore if I say it goes by such a
town, I think my duty discharged, if I hit upon any part or parcel of the
paroch. This also has not a little troubled me, I mean the evil writing of
the names of many towns and villages: of which I have noted some one man, in
the description of a river, to write one town two or three manner of ways,
whereby I was enforced to choose one (at adventure most commonly) that seemed
the likeliest to be sound in mine opinion and judgment.

Finally, whereas I minded to set down an especial chapter of ports and
creeks, lieng on each coast of the English part of this I Will; and had provided
the same in such wise as I judged most convenient: it came to pass, that the
greater part of my labor was taken from me by stealth, and therefore as
discouraged to meddle with that argument, I would have given over to set down
any thing therefore at all: and so much the rather, for that I see it may
prove a spur unto further mischief, as things come to pass in these days.
Nevertheless, because a little thereof is passed in the beginning of the
book, I will set down that parcel thereof which remains, leaving the
supply of the rest either to my self hereafter, (if I may come by it) or to
some other that can better perform the same.

Of such ports and creeks as our seafaring-men do note for their benefit upon
the coasts of England. Chap. 17.
IT may be that I have in these former chapters omitted sundry havens to be
found

In Northumberland therefore we have Berwike, Northumberland.
Holy Island, Bamborow, Bedwell, Donstanborow,

In the bishoprijc, Durham.
Sonderland, Stocketon, Hartlepoole, These.

In Yorkshire, Yorkshire.
Dapnam sands, Steningreene, Stays, Runswike, Robinhoods baie, Whitbie,
Scarborow, Fileie, Flamborow, Bricklington, Horneseie beck, Sister kirk,
Kelseie, Cliffe, Pattenton, Holmes, Kenningham, Pall, Hidon, Hulbrige,
Beuerleie, Hull, Hasell, Northferebie, Bucke creek,

In Lincolneshire, Lincolneshire.
Selbie, Snepe, Turnebrige, Rodiffe, Catebie, Stockwith, Torkeseie, Gainsborow,
Southferebie, Barton a good point, Barrow a good haven, Skatermill a good port,
Penningham, Stalingborow a good haven, Guimsbie a good port, Clie, March
chapel, Saltfleete, Wilgripe, Mapleford, saint Clements, Wenfleete, Friscon,
Toft, Skerbike, Boston, Frompton, Woluerton, Fossedike a good haven.

In Northfolke, Northfolke.
Linne a good haven, Snatchham, Hitchham, Desingham good, Thunstone, Thorneham
good, Brankester good, Burnham good, with diverse towns and villages thereto
belonging, Wells good, Strikeie, Marston, Blakeleie town, Withon Claie,
Blakelie haven good, Salthouse creek, Sheringham hith, Roughton, Cromer,
Beston, Trinningham, Mounsleie, Bromwall, Haseborow, Wakesham, Eckelles,
Winterton, Custer, Helmesleie, Okell, Upton, Waibridge,

In Suffolk, Suffolk.
Becles, Bongeie, Southton, Corton, Gorton, Laistow a good port, Kirtill,
Pakefield, Kasseldon, Bliborow, Coffe hith, Eston, Walderswijc, Donewich, Swold
haven, Sisewell, Thorpe, Alborow, Orford a good haven, Balseie good, Felixstow,
Colneie, Sproten, Ypswich, Downambridge good, Pinnemill, Shoteleie, Cataweie,
Barfold.

In Esse^ we have Dedham, Essex.
Maning tree, Thorn, Wrabbesnes, Ramseie, Harwich, Douercourt, Handford,
Okeleie, Kirbie, Thorpe, Brichwill, Walton mill, Walton hall, Ganfleete,
Newhauen good, S. Osithes, Bentleie good, Bricleseie, Thorlington (where good
ships of a hundred tun or more be made) Alsford, Wiuenhall, Colchester, Cold
hith, Rough hedge, Fingering ho, east Merseie, west Merseie, Salcot, Goldanger,
Borow, Maldon, Stanesgate, Sudmester, S. Peter's, Burnham, Crixseie, Aldon,
Clements green, Hulbridge, Pacleston, Barling, little Wakering, much Wakering,
south Sudburie, Wakeringham, Melton, Papper hill, or Lee, Bea^^fleete, Pidseie
range, Fobbing, Hadleie good, Mucking, Stanford, and Tilberi^ ferrie.

In Kent, Kent.
Harling, Cliffe, Tanfleete, Stokehow, Snodlond, Melhall, Maidston, Ailessord,
New hith, Rochester, Gelingham, Reinham, Upchurch, Halsted, Quinborow, Milton,
Feuersham, Whit^^aple, Herne, Margate, Brodestaier, Ramsgate; and many of
these good creekes: also Sandwich, Dover, Hide, reasonable ports, although none
of the best.

In Sussex we have Smalade with the creekes adioining to the same, Sussex.
Ridon, Appledoure, Rye a good haven, and Winchelseie nothing at all inferior
to the same, and so many shires only are left unto me at this time,
wherefore of force I must abruptly leave off to deal any further with the
rest, whose knowledge I am right sure would have been profftable: and for the
which I hoped to have reaped great thanks at the hands of such sea-faring-men,
as should have had use hereof.

Desunt caetera.
Of the air, soil, and commodities of this Island. Cap. 18.
THe air (for the most part) throughout the Island is such, The air of
Britain.
as by reason in manner of continual clouds, is reputed to be gross, and
nothing so pleasant as that is of the maine. Howbeit, as they which affirm
these things, have only respect to the impediment or hinderance of the sun
beams, by the interposition of the clouds and often engrossed air: so
experience teaches us, that it is no less pure, wholesome, and commodious,
than is that of other countries, and (as Caesar himself hereto adds) much
more temperate in summer than that of the Galls, from whom he adventured
hither. Neither is there any thing found in the air of our region, that is
not usually seen amongst other nations lieng beyond the seas. Wherefore, we
must needs confess, that the situation of our Island (for benefit of the
heavens) is nothing inferior to that of any country of the maine, where so
ever it lie under the open firmament. And this Plutarch knew full well, who
affirms a part of the Elistan fields to be found in Britain, and the Isles
that are situate about it in the Ocean.

The soil of Britain is such, The soil.
as by the testimonies and reports both of the old and new writers, and
experience also of such as now inhabit the same, is very fruitful; and such
in deed as brings forth many commodities, whereof other countries have
need, and yet it self (if fond niceness were abolished) needless of those
that are daily brought from other places. Nevertheless it is more inclined to
feeding and grasing, than profitable for tillage, and bearing of corn; by
reason whereof the country is woonderfullie replenished with neat, and all
kind of cattle: and such store is there also of the same in every place, that
the fourth part of the land is scarcely manured for the provision and
maintenance of grain. Certes this fruitfulness was not unknown unto the
Britons long before Caesar's time, which was the cause wherefore our
predecessors living in those days in manner neglected tillage, and lived by
feeding and grasing only. The grasiers themselves also then dwelled in
mooueable villages by companies, whose custom was to divide the ground amongst
them, and each one not to depart from the place where his lot lay (a thing
much like to the Irish Criacht) till by eating up of the country about him,
Criacht.
he was enforced

But where our ground is not so good as we would wish, we have (if need be)
sufficient help to cherish our ground withal, and to make it more fruitful,
For beside the compest that is carried out of the husbandmens yards, ditches,
ponds, doouehouses, or cities and great towns: we have with us a kind of white
marle, which is of so great force, that if it be Pliny speak, Marle.
lib. 17. cap. 6, 7, 8, where he affirms that our marle indureth upon the
earth by the space of fourscore years: insomuch that it is laid upon the same
but once in a man's life, whereby the owner shall not need to travel twice in
procuring to commend and better his soil. He calls it Marga, and making
diverse kinds thereof, he finally commends ours, and that of France, above
all other, Hedui and Pictones did in his time, or as some of our days also do
practice: albeit diverse do like better to cast on lime, but it will not so
long endure, as I have heard reported.

There are also in this Island great plenty of fresh rivers and streams,
Plenty of rivers.
as you have heard already, and these thoroughly fraught with all kinds of
delicate fish accustomed to be found in rivers. The whole I Will Hills.
of which some (though not very many) are of exceeding height, and diverse
extending themselves very far from the beginning; as we may see by Shooters
hill, which rising east of London, and not far from the Thames, runs along
the south side of the Island westward, until it come to Cornwall. Like unto
these also are the Crowdon hills, which though under diverse names (as also the
other from the Peke) do run into the borders of Scotland. What should I speak
of the Cheniot Here lacks
to Here lacks
miles at the least in length? of the Cle hills in Shropshire, which come
within four miles of Ludlow, and are divided from some part of Worcester by
the Teme? of the Grames in Scotland, and of our Chiltren, which are eighteen
miles at the least from one end of them, which reach from Henlie in Oxfordshire
to Dunstable in Bedfordshire, and are very well replenished with wood and
corn? notwithstanding that the most part yield a sweet short grass,
profitable for sheep. Wherein albeit they of Scotland do somewhat come behind
us, yet their outward defect is inwardly recompensed, not only with plenty
of quarries (and those of sundry kinds of marble, hard stone, and fine
alabaster) but also rich mines of metal, as shall be showed hereafter.

In this Island likewise the winds are commonly more strong and fierce, Winds.
than in any other places of the maine, which Cardane also espied: and that is
often seen upon the naked hills, not guarded with trees to bear and keep it
off. That grievous inconvenience also inforceth our nobility, Building.
gentry, and communaltle, to build their houses in the valleys, leaving the
high grounds unto their corn and cattle, least the cold and stormy blasts of
winter should breed them greater annoiance: whereas in other regions each one
desires to set his house aloft on the hill, not only to be seen a far off,
and cast forth his beams of stately and curious workmanship into every
quarter of the country; but also (in hot habitations) for coldness sake of
the air, since the heat is never so vehement on the hill top as in the vallie,
because the reuerberation of the sun beams either reaches not so far as
the highest, or else becomes not so strong as when it is reflected upon the
lower soil.

But to leave our buildings unto the purposed place (which notwithstanding have
very much increased, Husbandry amended.
I mean for curiosity and cost, in England, Wales, and Scotland, within these
few years) and to return to the soil again. Certeinelie it is even now in
these our days grown to be much more fruitful, than it has been in times
past. The cause is for that our countriemen are grown to be more painful,
skillful, and careful through recompense of gain, than heretofore they have
been: insomuch that my Synchroni or time fellows can reap at this present
great commodity in a little room; whereas of late years, a great compass
has yielded but small profit, and this only through the idle and negligent
occupation of such, as daily manured and had the same in occupieng. I might
set down examples of these things out of all the parts of this Island, that is
to say, many of England, more out of Scotland, but most of all out of Wales:
in which two last rehearsed, very little other food and liuelihood was wont
to be looked for (beside flesh) more than the soil of it self, and the cow
gave; the people in the mean time living idelie, dissolutelie, and by picking
and stealing one from another. All which vices are now (for the most part)
relinquished, so that each nation manureth her own with triple commodity, to
that it was before time.

The pasture of this Island is according to the nature and bounty of the soil,
Pasture.
whereby in most places it is plentiful, very fine, batable, and such as
either fatteth our cattle with speed, or yields great abundance of milk and
cream: whereof the yellowest butter and finest cheese are made. But where the
blue claie abounds (which hardly drinks up the winters water in long
season) there the grass is spearie, rough, and very apt for bushes: by which
occasion it comes nothing so profitable unto the owner as the other. The best
pasture ground of all England is in Wales, and of all the pasture in Wales that
of Cardigan is the chief. I speak of the same which is to be found in the
mounteines there, where the hundred part of the grass growing is not eaten,
but suffered to rot on the ground, whereby the soil becomes matted, and
diverse bogges and quick moors made withal in long continuance: because all
the cattle in the country are not able to eat it down. If it be to be
accounted good soil, on which a man may lay a wand over night, and on the
morrow find it hidden and ouergrowen with grass: it is not hard to find
plenty thereof in many places of this land. Nevertheless, such is the
fruitfulnes of the aforsaid county that it far surmounteth this proportion,
whereby it may be compared for batablenesse with Italy, which in my time is
called the paradise of the world, although by reason of the wickedness of such
as dwell therein it may be called the sink and draine of hell: so that whereas
they were wont to say of us that our land is good but our people evil, they
did but only speak it; whereas we know by experience that the soil of Italy
is a noble soil, but the dwellers therein far off from any

Our meadows, Meadows.
are either bottomes (whereof we have great store, and those very large,
because our soil is hilly) or else such as we call land meads, and borrowed
from the best and fattest pasturages. The first of them are yearly and often
overflowed by the rising of such streams as pass through the same, or violent
falls of land-waters, that descend from the hills about them. The other are
seldom or never overflowed, and that is the cause wherefore their grass is
Carrucata or Carruca which is a waine load, and, as I remember, used by Pliny
lib. 33. cap. 11.) in low meadows we have sometimes three, but commonly two
or upward, as experience has often confirmed.

Of such as are twice mowed I speak not, since their later math is not so
wholesome for cattle as the first; although in the mouth more pleasant for the
time: for thereby they become oftentimes to be rotten, or to increase so fast
in blood, that the garget and Phlebotomie or otherwise. Some superstitious
fools suppose that they which die of the garget are ridden with the night
mare, and therefore they hang up stones which naturally have holes in them,
and must be found unlooked for; as if such a stone were an apt cockeshot for
the devil to run through and solace himself withal, whilst the cattle go
scotfree and are not molested by him. But if I should set down but half the
toies

The yield of our corne-ground is also much after this rate following. Corn.
Through out the land (if you please to make an estimat thereof by the acre) in
mean and indifferent years, wherein each acre of rye or wheat, well tilled
and dressed, will yield commonly Eldred Danus writes of in his De imperio
Iudaeorum in Aethiopia surmounteth, where he says that in the field near to
the Sabbatike river, called in old time Gosan, the ground is so fertile, that
every grain of barleie growing does yield an hundred kernels at the least
unto the owner.

Of late years also we have found and taken up a great trade in planting of
hops, whereof our moorie hitherto and unprofitable grounds do yield such
plenty and increase, that their are few farmers or occupiers in the country,
which have not gardens and hops growing of their own, and those far better
than do come from Flanders unto us. Certes the corruptions used by the
Flemings, and forgerie daily practiced in this kind of ware, gave us occasion
to plant them here at home: so that now we may spare and send many over unto
them. And this I know by experience, that some one man by conversion of his
moorie grounds into hopyards, whereof before he had no commodity, does raise
yearly by so little as twelve acres in compass two hundred marks; all
charges borne toward the maintenance of his family. Which industry God
continue! though some secret friends of Flemings let not to exclaim against
this commodity, as a spoil of wood, by reason of the poles, which
nevertheless after three years do also come to the fire, and spare their
other fuel.

The cattle which we breed are commonly such, Cattle.
as for greatness of bone, sweetness of flesh, and other benefits to be
reaped by the same, give place unto none other: as may appear first by our
oxen, whose largeness, height, weight, tallow, hides, and horns are such, as
none of any other nation do commonly or may easily exceed them. Our sheep
likewise for good taste of flesh, quantity of lims, finesse of fleece caused by
their hardness of pasturage, and abundance of increase (for in many places
they bring forth two or three at an eaning) give no place unto any, more than
do our goats, who in like sort do follow the same order, and our dear come
not behind. As for our conies, I have seen them so fat in some soiles,
especially about Meall and Disnege, Meall and Disnege.
that the grease of one being weighed, has peised very near six or seven
ounces. All which benefits we first refer to the grace and goodness of God,
and next of all unto the bounty of our soil, which he has endued with so
notable and commodious fruitfulness.

But as I mean to entreat of these things more largely hereafter, so will I
touch in this place one benefit which our nation wants, Wine.
and that is wine; the fault whereof is not in our soil, but the negligence of
our countriemen (especially of the south parts) who do not inure the same to
this commodity, and which by reason of long discontinuance, is now become
unapt to bear any grapes almost for pleasure and shadow, much less then the
plain fields or several vineyards for advantage and commodity. Yet of late
time some have assaied to deal for wine, as to your lordship also is right
well known. But since that liquor when it comes to the drinking has bin
found more hard, than that which is brought from beyond the sea, and the cost
of planting and keeping thereof so chargeable, that they may buie it far better
cheap from other countries: they have given over their enterprises without
any consideration, that as in all other things, so neither the ground it self
in the beginning, nor success of their travel can answer their expectation at
the first, until such time as the soil be brought as it were into
acquaintance with this commodity, and that provision may be made for the more
easiness of charge, to be employed upon the same.

If it be true, that where wine does last and endure well, there it will grow
no worse: I muse not a little wherefore the planting of vines should be
neglected in England. That this liquor might have grown in this Island
heretofore, first the charter that Probus the emperor gave equally to us, the
Galls, and Spaniards, is one sufficient testimony. And that it did grow here,
beside the testimony of Beda lib. 1. cap. 1. the old notes of tithes for wine
that yet remain in the accounts of some parsons and vicars in Kent, and
elsewhere, besides the records of sundry suits, commensed in diverse
ecclesiastical courts, both in Kent, Surrie, etc: also the enclosed parcels
almost in every abbeie yet called the vineyardes, may Canutus sometime king of
this land, with other soil there about unto certain of his knights, with the
liberty of a Guild which thereof was called Knighten Guild. The truth is (says
John Stow our country man, and diligent traveler in the old estate of this my
native city) that it is now named Port soken ward, and given in time past to
the religious house within Algate. Howbeit first Otwell, the Archouell, Otto,
and finally Le I Will des vignes. And good record appears, that the bishop
there had yearly three or four tun at the least given him Nomine decimae,
beside whatsoever ouer-summe of the liquor did accrue to him by leases and
other excheats, whereof also I

The time has been also that wad, Wad.
wherewith our country men died their faces (as Caesar says) that they might
seem terrible to their enemies in the Madder.
coveting to resemble therein the Ethiopians, Rape.
as Pliny says li. 22. cap. 1. and also madder have been (next unto our tin
and woolles) the chief commodities, and merchandise of this realm. I find
also that rape oil has been made within this land. But now our soil either
will not or at the leastwise may not bear either wad or madder: I say not
that the ground is not able so to do, Flax.
which by law ought to be sown in every countrie-towne in England, more or
less: but I see no success of that good and wholesome law, since it is rather
contemptuously rejected than otherwise dutifullie kept in any place of
England.

Some say that our great number of laws do Aristotle) does seem to carry
some reason withal, for (as Cornelius Gallus has:)

Euentus varios res noua semper habet. Eleg. 2.
But very many let not to affirm, that the greedy corruption of the
promoters on the one side, facility in dispensing with good laws, and first
breach of the same in the lawmakers and superiors, and private respects of their
establishment on the other, are the greatest causes why the inferiors regard
no good order, being always so ready to offend without any faculty one way,
Principes long magis exemplo quam culpa peccare solent.
as they are otherwise to presume, upon the examples of their betters when any
hold is to be taken. But as in these things I have no skill, so I wish that
fewer licenses for the private commodity but of a few were granted (not that
thereby I deny the maintenance of the prerogative royal, but rather would
with all my heart that it might be yet more honorably increased) and that
every one which by feeed friendship (or otherwise) does attempt to procure
oughts from the prince, that may profit but few and prove hurtful to many,
might be at open assizes and sessions denounced enemy to his country and
commonwealth of the land.

Glass also has been made here in great plenty before, and in the time of
the Romans; and the said stuff also, beside fine scissers, sheeres, collars of
gold and silver for women's necks, cruses and cups of amber, were a parcel of
the tribute which Augustus in his days laid upon this Island. In like sort he
charged the Britons with certain implements and vessels of iuorie (as Strabo
says) Whereby it appears that in old time our countriemen were far more
industrious and painful in the use and application of the benefits of their
country, than either after the coming of the Saxons or Normans, in which they
gave themselves more to idleness and following of the wars.

If it were requisite that I should speak of the sundry kinds of moold, as the
cledgie or claie, whereof are diverse sorts (red, blue, black and white) also
the red or white sandy, the lomie, Earths.
rosellie, grauellie, chalkie or black, I could say that there are so many
diverse veins in Britain, as else where in any quarter of like quantity in
the world. Howbeit this I must needs confess, that the sandy and cledgie do
bear great swaie: but the claie most of all, as has been, and yet is always
seen and felt through plenty and dearth of corn. For if this latter (I mean
the claie) do yield her full increase (which it does commonly in dry years
for wheat) then is there general plenty: whereas if it fail, then have we
scarsitie, according to the old rude verse set down of England, but to be
understood of the whole Island, as experience does confirm: When the sand
does serve the claie,
Then may we sing well a way,
But when the claie does serve the sand,
Then is it merry with England.


I might here entreat of the famous valleys in England, of which one is called
the vale of White horse, Uallies.
another of Eouesham, commonly taken for the granarie of Worcestershire, the
third of Ailesbirie that goes by Tame, the roots of Chilterne hills, to
Donstable, Newport panell, Stony Stratford, Buckhingham, Birstane park, etc.
Likewise of the fourth of Whitehart or Blackemoore in Dorsetshire. The fifth of
Ringdale or Renidale, corruptly called Ringtaile, that lies (as mine author
says) upon the edge of Essex and Cambridgeshire, and also theo Marshwood vale:
but for so much as I know not well their several limits, I give over to go any
further in their description. In like sort it should not be amiss to speak of
our fennes, Fennes.
although our country be not so full of this kind of soil as the parties
beyond the seas, to wit, Narbon, etc: and thereto of other pleasant botoms, the
which are not only endued with excellent rivers and great store of corn and
fine fodder for neat and horses in time of the year (whereby they are
exceeding beneficial unto their owners) but also of no small compass and
quantity in ground. For some of our fens are well known to be either of ten,
twelve, sixteen, twenty, or thirty miles in length, that of the Girwies yet
passing all the rest, which is full 60 (as I have often read.) Wherein also
Elie the famous I Will stands, which is seven miles every way, and whereunto
there is no access but by three causies, whose inhabitants in like sort by an
old privilege may take wood, sedge, turfe, etc; to burn: likewise haie for
their cattle, and thatch for their houses of custom, and each occupier in his
appointed quantity through out the I Will; albeit that covetousness has now
begun somewhat to abridge this

Finally, I might discourse in like order of the large commons, Commons.
laid out heretofore by the lords of the soiles for the benefit of such poor,
as inhabit within the compass of their manors. But as the true intent of the
giuers is now in most places defrauded, in so much that not the poor tenants
inhabiting upon the same, but their landlords have all the commodity and
gain, so the tractation of them belongs

Illa quidem long celebris splendore, beata,
Glebis, lacte, fauis, supereminet insula cunctis,
Quas regit ille Deus, spumanti cuius ab ore
Profluit oceanus, etc. And a little after.
Testis Lundonia ratibus, Wintonia Baccho,
Herefordia grege, Worcestria fruge redundans,
Batha lacu, Salabyra feris, Cantuaria pisce,
Eboraca syluis, Excestria clara metallis,
Norwicum Dacis hybernis, Cestria Gallis,
Cicestrum Norwagenis, Dunelmia praepinguis,
Testis Lincolnia gens infinita decore,
Testis Eli formosa situ, Doncastria visu, etc.
Of the four high ways sometime made in Britain by the princes of this
Island. Cap. 19.
THere are, which indeuoring to bring all things to their Saxon original, do
affirm, Antoninus; and those that have written of the several iournies from
hence to Rome: although peradventure not in so direct an order as they were at
the first established. For my part, if it were not that I desire to be short in
this behalf, I could with such notes as I have already collected for that
purpose, make a large confutation of diverse of their opinions concerning these
passages, and thereby rather ascribe the original of these ways to the Romans
than either the British or Saxon princes. But since I have spent more time in
the tractation of the rivers than was allotted unto me, and that I see great
cause (notwithstanding my late alleged scruple) wherefore I should hold with
our Galfride before any other; I will omit at this time to discourse of these
things as I would, and say what I may for the better knowledge of their
courses, proceeding therein as follows.

First of all I ^ind, that Dunwallon king of Britain, about 483 years before
the birth of our savior Jesus Christ, seeing the subjects of his realm to be
in sundry wise oppressed by thieves and robbers as they traveled to and fro;
and being willing (so much as in him lay) to redress these inconveniences,
caused his whole kingdom to be surueied; and then commanding four principal
ways to be made, which should lead such as traveled into all parts thereof,
from sea to sea, he gave sundry large privileges unto the same, whereby they
became safe, and very much frequented. And as he had regard herein to the
security of his subjects, so he made sharp laws grounded upon justice, for
the suppression of such wicked members as did offer violence to any traueler
that should be met withal or found within the limits of those passages. How
and by what parts of this Island these ways were conveyed at the first, it is
not so wholly left in memory: but that some question is moved among the
learned, concerning their ancient courses. Howbeit such is the shadow remaining
hitherto of their extensions, that if not at this present perfectly, yet
hereafter it is not impossible, but that they may be found out, and le^t
certain unto posterity. It seems by Galfride, that the said Dunwallon did
limit out those ways by dooles and marks, which being in short time altered
by the avarice of such irreligious persons as dwelt near, and incroched upon
the same (a fault yet justly to be found almost in every place, even in the
time of our most gracious and sovereign Lady Elizabeth, wherein the lords of
the soiles do unite their small occupieng, only to increase a greater
proportion of rent; and therefore they either remove, or give license to erect
small tenements upon the high ways sides and commons; whereunto, in truth,
they have no right: and yet out of them also do raise a new commodity) and
question moved for their bounds before Belinus his son, he to avoid all
further controversy that might from thencefoorth ensue, caused the same to be
paued with hard stone of eighteen foot in breadth, ten foot in depth, and in
the bottom thereof huge flint stones also to be pitched, least the earth in
time should swallow up his workmanship, and the higher ground ouer-grow their
rising crests. He endued them also with larger privileges than before,
protesting that if any man whosoever should presume to infringe his peace, and
violate the laws of his kingdom in any manner of wise, near unto or upon
those ways, he should suffer such punishment without all hope to escape (by
freendship or mercy) as by the statutes of this realm lately provided in
those cases were due unto the offenders. The names of these four ways are the
Fosse, the Gwethelin or Watling, the Erming, and the Ikenild.

The Fosse goes not directly but slopewise over the greatest part of this
Island, Fosse.
beginning at Dotnesse or Totnesse in Devonshire, where Brute sometime landed,
or (as Ranulphus says, which is more likely) at the point of Cornwall, though
the eldest writers do seem to note the contrary. From hence it goes
thorough the middle of Devonshire and Summersetshire, and comes to Bristow,
from whence it runs manifestly to Sudberie market, Tetburie, and so forth
holds on as you go almost to the midde way between Gloucester and
Cirnecester, (where the wood fails, and the champeigne country appears
toward Cotteswald) straight as a line until you come to Cirnecester it self.
Some hold opinion that the way, which lies from Cirnecester to Bath, should
be the very Fosse; and that betwixt Cirnecester and Gloucester to be another of
the four ways, made by the Britons. But ancient report grounded upon great
likelihood, and confirmed also by some experience, judges that most of the
ways crossed each other in this part of the realm. And of this mind is Leland
also, who learned it of an abbat of Cirnecester that showed great likelihood by
some records thereof. But to proceed. From Cirnecester, Alfred of Beuerleie,
who extends it unto Cathnesse in Scotland) it is said to have an end.

The Watlingstreet begun (as I said) by Dunwallo, but finished by Gutheline,
Watling street.
of whom it is directly to be called Gutheline street, though now corrupted
into Watlingstreet, begins at Dover in Verolaminm or Uerlamcester, now saint
Albons, where, in the year of grace, one thousand five hundred thirty and
one, the course thereof was found by a man that dug for gravel wherewith to
mend the high way. It was in this place eighteen foot broad, and about ten
foot deep, and stoned in the bottom in such wise as I have noted before, and
peradventure also on the top: but these

Here by the way I must touch the opinion of a traveler of my time, who
notes the said street to go another way, insomuch that he would have it to
Leland, and other men's collections.

The next tidings that we hear of the Watlingstreet, are that it goes
thorough or near by the park at Pomfret, as the common voice also of the
country confirms. Thence it passes hastily over Castelford bridge to
Aberford, which is five miles from thence, and where are most manifest tokens
of this street and his broad crest by a great way together, also to York, to
Witherbie, and then to Borowbridge, where on the left hand thereof stood
certain monuments, or pyramides of stone, sometimes placed there by the
ancient Romans. These stones (says Leland) stand eight miles west from Bowis,
and almost west from Richmond is a little thorough fare called Maiden castle,
situate apparantlie upon the side of this street. And here is one of those
pyramides or great round heaps, which is three score foot compass in the
bottom. There are other also of less quantities, and on the very top of each
of them are sharp stones of a yard in length; but the greatest of all is
eighteen foot high at the least, from the ground to the very head. He adds
moreover, how they stand on an hill in the edge of Stanes m^^e, and are as
bounds between Richmondshire, and Westmerland. But to proceed. This street
lieng a mile from Gilling, and two miles from Richmond comes on from
Borowbridge to Catericke, eighteen miles; that is, twelve to Leuing, and six
to Catericke; then eleven miles to Greteie or Gritto, five miles to Bottles,
eight miles to Burgh on Stanes moore, four miles from Applebie, and five to
Browham, where the said street comes thorough Winfoll park, and over the
bridge on Eiemouth and Loder, and leaving Perith a quarter of a mile or more on
the west side of it, goes to Carleill seventeen miles from Browham, which
has been some notable thing. Hitherto it appears evidently, but going from
hence into Scotland, I hear no more of it, until I come to Cathnesse, which
is two hundred and thirty miles or thereabouts out of England.

The Erming street, which some call the Lelme, stretches out of the east,
Erming street.
as they say, into the southeast, that is, from Meneuia or S. David's in Wales
unto Southampton, whereby it is somewhat likely indeed that these two ways, I
mean the Fosse and the Erming, should meet about Cirnecester, as it comes
from Gloucester, according to the opinion conceived of them in that country. Of
this way I find no more written, and therefore I can say no more of it,
except I should endeavor to drive away the time, in alleging what other men say
thereof, whose minds do so far disagree one from another, as they do all
from a truth, and therefore I give them over as not delighting in such dealing.

The Ikenild or Rikenild began somewhere in the south, Ikenild.
and so held on toward Cirnecester, then to Worcester, Wicombe, Brimcham,
Lichfield, Darbie, Chesterfield; and crossing the Watlingstreet somewhere in
Yorkshire, stretched forth in the end unto the mouth of the Tine, where it
ended at the maine sea, as most men do confess. I take it to be called the
Ikenild, because it passed thorough the kingdom of the Icenes. For albeit that
Leland and other following him do seem to place the Icenes in Norffolke and
Suffolk; yet in mine opinion that can not well be done, since it is manifest
by Tacitus, that they lay near unto the Silures, and (as I guess) either in
Stafford and Worcester shires, or in both, except my conjecture do fail me.
The author of the book, entitled Eulogium historiarum, does call this street
the Lelme. But as herein he is deceived, so have I dealt withal so faithfully
as I may among such diversity of opinions; yet not denieng but that there is
much confusion in the names and courses of these two latter, the discussing
whereof I must leave to other men that are better learned than I.

Now to speak generally of our common high ways through the English part of
the I Will (for of the rest I can say nothing) you shall understand that in the
claie or cledgie soil they are often very deep and troublesome in the winter
half. Wherefore by authority of parliament an order is taken for their yearly
amendment, whereby all sorts of the common people do imploie their travel for
six days in summer upon the same. And albeit that the intent of the statute is
very profitable for the reparations of the decayed places, yet the rich do so
cancel their portions, and the poor so loiter in their labors, that of all
the six, scarcely two good days works are well performed and accomplished in a
parish on these so necessary affairs. Besides this, such as have

Of the general constitution of the bodies of the Britons.
SUch as are bred in this Island are men for the most part of a good complexion,
tall of stature, strong in body, white of color, and thereto of great
boldness and courage in the wars. As for their general comeliness of
person, the testimony of Gregory the great, at such time as he saw English
capteins sold at Rome, shall easily confirm what it is, which yet does
differ in sundry shires and soiles, as also their proportion of members, as we
may perceive between Herefordshire and Essex men, or Cambridge shire and the
Londoners for the one, and Pokington and Sedberrie for the other; these latter
being distinguished by their noses and heads, which commonly are greater there
than in other places of the land. As concerning the stomachs also of our nation
in the field, they have always been in sovereign admiration among foreign
princes: for such has been the estimation of our soldiers from time to time,
since our Isle has been known unto the Romans, that wheresoever they have
served in foreign countries, the chief brunts of service have been reserved
unto them. Of their conquests and bloody battles woone in France, Germany,
and Scotland, our histories are full: and where they have been overcome, the
victorers themselves confessed their victories to have been so dearly
bought, that they would not gladly covet to overcome often, after such
difficult manner. In martial prowess, there is little or no difference
between Englishmen and Scots: for albeit that the Scots have been often and
very greeuouslie overcome by the force of our nation, it has not been for
want of manhood on their parts, but through the mercy of God showed on us, and
his justice upon them, since they always have begun the quarrels, and offered us
mere injury with great despite and cruelty.

Leland noting somewhat of the constitution of our bodies, says these words
grounding (I think upon Aristotle, who writes that such as dwell near the
north, are of more courage and strength of body than skilfulnesse or wisdom.)
The Britons are white in color, strong of body, and full of blood, as people
inhabiting near the north, and far from the equinoctial line, where the
soil is not so fruitful, and therefore the people not so feeble: whereas
contrariwise such as dwell toward the course of the sun, are less of
stature, weaker of body, more nice, delicate, fearful by nature, blacker in
color, and some so black in deed as any crow or raven. Thus says he.
Howbeit, as those which are bred in sundry places of the maine, do come
behind us in constitution of body, so I grant, that in pregnancie of wit,
nimblenesse of limbs, and politic inventions, they generally exceed us:
notwithstanding that otherwise these gifts of theirs do often degenerate into
mere subtlety, instabilitie, unfaithfulness, and cruelty. Yet Alexander ab
Alexandro is of the opinion, that the fertilest region does bring forth the
dullest wits, and contrariwise the harder soil the finest heads. But in mine
opinion, the most fertile soil does bring forth the proudest nature, as we
may see by the Campanians, who (as Cicero also says) had Penes eos ipsum
domicilium superbiae. But nether of these opinions do justly take hold of us,
yet has it pleased the writers to say their pleasures of us. And for that we
dwell northward, we are commonly taken by the foreign historiographers, to be
men of great strength and little policy, much courage and small shift, because
of the weak abode of the sun with us, whereby our brains are not made hot
and warmed, as Pachymerus notes lib. 3: affirming further, that the people
inhabiting in the north parts are white of color, blockish uncivil, fierce
and warlike, which qualities increase, as they come nearer unto the pole;
whereas the contrary pole gives contrary gifts, blackness wisdom,
civility, weakness, and cowardice, thus says he. But alas, how far from
probability or as if there were not one and the same conclusion to be made of
the constitutions of their bodies, which dwell under both the poles. For in
truth his assertion holds only in their persons that inhabit near unto and
under the equinoctial. As for the small tariance of the sun with us, it is
also confuted by the length of our days. Non vi sed virtute, non armis sed
ingenio vinct^n^tur A^^gli.
Wherefore his reason seems better to uphold that of Alexander ab Alexandro
before alleged, than to prove that we want wit, because our brains are not
warmed by the tariance of the sun. And thus also does Comineus burden us
after a sort in his history, and after him Bodinus. But thanked be God, that
all the wit of his countriemen, if it may be called wit, could never compass
to do so much in Britain, as the strength and courage of our Englishmen (not
without great wisdom and forecast), Caesar) because of the smalnesse of their
stature: howbeit, for all their greatness (says he) and at the first brunt in
the wars, they show themselves to be but feeble, neither is their courage of
any force to stand in great calamities. Certes in accusing our wisdom in this
sort, he does (in mine opinion) increase our commendation. For if it be a
virtue to deal vprightlie with singleness of mind, sincerely and plainly,
without Comineus and his countrymen to be reputed vicious, of whom this
proverb has of old time been used as an ear mark of their dissimulation,
Galli ridendo fidem frangunt. etc.

How these latter points take hold in Italy, I mean not to discuss. How they
are daily practiced in many places of the maine, and he accounted most wise
and politic, that can most of all dissemble; here is no place justly to
determine (neither would I wish my countrymen to learn any such wisdom) but
that a king of France could say; Qui nescit dissimulare, nescit regnare, or
viuere, their own histories are testimonies sufficient. Galen, the noble
physician, transferring the forces of our natural humors from Frontinus also
notes. As for that which the French write of their own manhood in their
histories, I make little account of it: for I am of the opinion, that as an
Italian writing of his credit; A papist entreating of religion, a Spaniard of
his meekness, or a Scot of his manhood, is not to be builded on; no more is a
Frenchman to be trusted in the report of his own affairs, wherein he does
either dissemble or exceed, which is a foul vice in such as profess to deal
vprightlie, Neither are we so hard to strangers as Horace would seem to make
us, since we love them so long as they abuse us not, and make account of them so
far forth as they despise us not. And this is generally to be verified, in
that they use our privileges and commodities for diet, apparel and trade of
gain, in so ample manner as we our selves enjoy them: which is not lawful for
us to do in their countries, where no stranger is suffered to have work, if
an home-borne be without. But to proceed with our purpose.

With us (although our good men care not to live long, but to live well) some
do live an hundred years, very many unto four score: as for three score, it
is taken but for our entrance into age, so that in Britain no man is said to
wax old till he draw unto threescore, at which time God speed you well comes
in place; as Epaminondas sometime said in mirth, affirming that until thirty
years of age, You are welcome is the best salutation; Salutations according to
our ages.
and from thence to threescore, God keep you; but after threescore, it is best
to say, God speed you well: for at that time we begin to grow toward our
iournies end, whereon many a one have very good leave to go. These two are
also noted in us (as things apperteining to the firm constitutions of our
bodies) that there has not been seen in any region so many carcasses of
the dead to remain from time to time without corruption as in Britain: and
that after death by slaughter or otherwise, such as remain unburied by four
or five days together, are easy to be known and discerned by their friends
and kindred; whereas Tacitus and other complain of sundry nations, saying,
that their bodies are Tam fluidae substantiae, that within certain hours the
wife shall hardly know her husband, the mother her son, or one friend
another after their lives be ended. In like sort the comeliness of our living
bodies do continue from middle age (for the most) even to the last gasp,
specially in mankind. And albeit that our women through bearing of children
do after forty begin to wrinkle apace, yet are they not commonly so wretched
and hard favored to look upon in their age, as the French women, and diverse
of other countries with whom their men also do much participate; and there to
be so often waiward and peevish, that nothing in manner may content them.

I might here add somewhat also of the mean stature generally of our women,
whose beauty commonly exceeds the fairest of those of the maine, their
comeliness of person and good proportion of limbs, most of theirs that come
over unto us from beyond the seas. This nevertheless I utterly mislike in the
poorer sort of them, for the wealthier do sildome offend herein: that being of
themselves without government, they are so careless in the education of their
children (wherein their husbands also are to be blamed) by means whereof very
many of them neither fearing God, neither regarding either manners or
obedience, do oftentimes come to confusion, which (if any correction or
discipline had been used toward them in youth) might have proved good members
of their commonwealth and country, by their good service and industry. I
could make report likewise of the natural vices and virtues of all those that
are borne within this Island, but as the full tractation hereof craves a better
head than mine to set forth the same, so will I give place to other men that
list to take it in hand. Thus much therefore of the constitutions of our
bodies: and so much may suffice.

How Britain at the first grew to be divided into three portions. Cap. 21.
AFter the coming of Brutus into this Island (which was, as you have read in
the foresaid treatise, about the year of Goropius after his manner do utterly
deny our history in this behalf) he made a general surueis of the whole
Island from side to side, by such means to view and search out not only the
limits and bounds of his dominions, but also what commodities this new atchiued
conquest might yield unto his people. Ferthermore, finding out at the last also
a conuenable Trinobantum, although the Welshmen do call it still Trenewith.
This city was builded (as some write) much about the tenth year of his
reign, so that he lived not above fifteen years after he had finished the
same. But of the rest of his other acts attempted and

To the eldest therefore, Locrine.
whose name was Locrine, Lhoegria.
but in our language England: of such English Saxons as made conquest of the
same. This portion also is included on the south with the British sea, on the
est with the Germane Ocean, on the north with the Humber, and on the west with
the Irish sea, and the rivers Dee and Sauerne, whereof in the general
description of this Island I have spoken more at large. To Camber Camber.
his second son he Cambria.
toward the west (which parcel in these days contains Southwales and
Northwales) with sundry Islands adjacent to the same, the whole being in manner
cut off and separated from England or Lhoegria by the said streams, whereby it
seems also a peninsula or by-land, if you respect the small hilly portion of
ground that lies indifferently between their maine courses, or such branches
(at the least) as run and fall into them. The Welshmen or Britons call it by
the ancient name still unto this day, but we Englishmen term it Wales: which
denomination we have from the Saxons, who in time past did use the word Walsh
in such sort* as we do Strange: for as we call all those strangers that are
not of our nation, so did they name them Walsh which were not of their country.

The third and last part of the Island he allotted unto Albanact his yoongest
son (for he had but three ill all, Albanact.
as I have said before) whose portion seemed for circuit to be more large than
that of Camber, and in manner equal in greatness with the dominions of
Locrinus. But if you have regard to the several commodities that are to be
reaped by each, you shall find them to be not much discrepant or differing one
from another: for what soever the first and second have in plenty of corn,
fine grass, and large cattle, this latter wants not in exceeding store of
fish, rich metal, quarries of stone, and abundance of wild foul: so that in
mine opinion, there could not be a more equal partition then this made by
Brute, and after the aforesaid manner. This later parcel at the first, took
the name of Albanactus, who called it Albania. But now a small portion only
of the region (being under the regiment of a duke) reteineth the said
denomination, the rest being called Scotland, of certain Scots that came over
from Ireland to inhabit in those quarters. Albania.
It is divided from Lhoegres also by the Solue and the Firth, yet some do note
the Humber; so that Albania (as Brute left it) contained all the north part of
the Island that is to be found beyond the aforesaid stream, unto the point of
Cathnesse.

To conclude, Brute having divided his kingdom after this manner, and therein
contenting himself as it were with the general title of the whole, it was not
long after yer he ended his life; and being solemnly interred at his new
city by his three children, they parted each from other, and took possession
of their provinces. Locrine king also of Scotland.
But Scotland after two years fell again into the hands of Locrinus as to the
chief lord, by the death of his brother Albanact, who was slain by Humber
king of the Scithians, and left none issue behind him to succeed him in that
kingdom.

After what manner the souereigntie of this I Will does remain to the princes of
Lhoegres or kings of England. Chap. 22.
IT is possible that some of the Scottish nation, reading the former chapter,
will take offense with me for meaning that the principality of the north parts
of this I Will has alwais belonged to the kings of Lhoegres. The Scots always
desirous to shake off ye English subjection, have often made cruel and odious
attempts so to do, but in vain.
For whose more ample satisfaction in this behalf, I will here set down a
discourse thereof at large, written by diverse, and now finally brought into
one treatise, sufficient (as I think) to satisfy the reasonable, although not
half enough peradventure to content a wrangling mind, since there is (or at the
leastwise has been) nothing more odious among some, than to hear that the
king of England has ought to do in Scotland.

How their historiographers have attempted to shape many colored excuses to
avoid so manifest a title, all men may see that read their books
indifferently, whereunto I refer them. For my part there is little or
nothing of mine herein, more than only the collection and abridgement of a
number of fragments together, wherein cheeflie I have used the help of
Nicholas Adams a lawier, who wrote thereof (of set purpose) to king Edward the
sixth, as Leland did the like to king Henry the eight, John Harding unto Edward
the fourth; beside three other, whereof the first dedicated his treatise to
Henry the fourth, the second to Edward the third, and the third to Edward the
first, as their writings yet extant do abundantly bear witness. The title
also that Leland gives his book, which I have had written with his own hand,
begins in this manner: These remembrances following are found in chronicles
authorized, Hereunto you have heard already, what division Brute made of this
Island not long before his death, whereof each of his children, so soon as he was
interred, took seizure and possession. Howbeit, after two years it Adams) it
evidently appears, that the entire seigniorie over Albania consisted in
Locrinus, according to which example

Ebranke the lineall heir from the body of this Locrine, that is to say, the
son of Mempris, son of Madan, son of the same Locrine builded in Albania
the castle of Maidens, now called Edenborough (so called of Aldan sometime king
of Scotland, but at the first named Cair Minid Agnes. 1. the castle Hector
Boethius confesses: whereby it most evidently appears, that our Ebranke was
then thereof seized. This Ebranke reigned in the said state over them a long
time; after whose death Albania (as annexed to the empire of Britain)
descended to the only king of Britons, until the time of the two sisters
sons, Morgan and Conedage, lineall heirs from the said Ebranke,

From him the same lineallie descended to the only king of Britons, until
(and after) the reign of Gorbodian, who had issue two sons, Ferrex, and
Porrex. This Porrex requiring like division of the land, affirming the former
partitions to be rather of law than favor, was by the hands of his elder
brother (best loved of queen mother) both of his life and hoped kingdom
beerea^ed at once. Whereupon their unnatural mother, using her natural malice
for the death of her one son (without regard of the loosing of both)
miserably slew the other in his bed mistrusting no such treason.

Cloten, by all writers, as well Scottish as other, was the next inheritour to
the whole empire: but lacking power (the only mean in those days to obtain
right) he was contented to divide the same among four of his kinsmen; so that
Scater had Albania. But after the death of this Cloten, his son Dunwallo
Mulmutius made war upon these four kings, and at last overcame them, and so
recovered the whole dominion. In token of which victory, he caused himself to
be crowned with a crown of gold, the very first of that metal (if any at
all were before in use) that was worn among the kings of this nation. This
Dunwallo erected temples, wherein the people should assemble for prayer; to
which temples he gave benefit of sanctuary. He made the law for wager of
battle, in cases of murder and felony, whereby a thief that lived and made
his art of fighting, should for his purgation fight with the true man whom he
had robbed, believing assuredly, that the gods (for then they supposed many)
would by miracle assign victory to none but the innocent party. Certes the
privileges of this law, and benefit of the latter, as well in Scotland as in
England, be inioied to this day, few causes by late positive laws among us
excepted, wherein the benefit of wager of battle is restreined. By which
obedience to his laws, it does manifestly appear, that this Dunwallo was
then seized of Albania, now called Scotland. This Dunwallo reigned in this
estate over them many years.

Beline and Brenne the sons also of Dunwallo, did after their fathers death
favorably divide the land between them; so that Beline had Lhoegres, and
Brenne had Albania: but for that this Brenne (a subject) without the consent of
his elder brother and lord, adventured to marry with the daughter of the king
of Denmark; Beline seized Albania into his own hands, and thereupon caused the
notable ways priuileged by Dunwallons laws to be newly wrought by men's
hands, which for the length extended from the further part of Cornwall, unto
the sea by north Cathnesse in Scotland. In like sort to and for the better
maintenance of religion in those days, he constituted ministers called
archflamines, in sundry places of this Island (who in their several functions
resembled the bishops of our times) the one of which remained at Ebranke now
called York, and the whole region Caerbrantonica (whereof Ptolomie also
speaks but not without wresting of the name) whose power extended to the
uttermost bounds of Albania, whereby likewise appears that it was then within
his own dominion. After his death the whole I Will was inioied by the only
kings of Britain, until the time of Uigenius and Peridurus lineall heirs
from the said Beline, who favorably made partition, so that Uigenius had all
the land from Humber by south, and Peridurus from thence northwards all
Albania, etc. This Uigenius died, and Peridurus suruiued, and thereby obtained
the whole, from whom the same quietly descended, and was by his posterity
accordingly inioied, until the reign of Coell the first of that name. In his
time an obscure nation (by most writers supposed Scithians) passed by seas from
Ireland, and arrived in that part of Britain called Albania: against whom
this Coell assembled his power, and being entered Albania to expel them, one
Fergus in the night disguised, entered the tent of this Coell, and in his bed
traitorouslie slew him.

This Fergus was therefore, in reward of his great prowess, made there king,
whereupon they sat down in that part, with their wives and children, and called
it Scotland, and themselves Scots: from the beginning of the world, four
thousand six hundred and seauenteene years after the Scottish account, which by
just computation and confession of all their own writers, is six hundred
years lacking ten, after that Brutus had reigned over the whole Island, the
same land being inioied by him and his posterity before their coming, during
two and fifty descents of the kings of Britain, which is a large
prescription. Certes this intrusion into a land so many hundred years before
inhabited, and by so many descents of kings quietly inioied, is the best
title that all their own writers can allege for them. But to proceed. Fergus
hereupon immediately did divide Albania also among his capteins and their
soldiers: whereby

The lands of Cathnes lieng against Orkneie, Out of Hector Boecius lib. 5.
between Dummesbeie and the water of Thane, was given unto one Cornath, a
captain and his people. The lands between the water of Thane and Nes, now
called Rosse, being in breadth from Cromart to the mouth of the water of Locht,
were given to Lutorke, another captain and his people. The lands between
Berouicum potius a Berubio promontorio.
and in their obedience, whose captain called Beringer builded the castle and
town of Berwicke upon Twede, and these people were called Picts, upon whom by
the death of this Coell, these Scots had opportunity to use wars, whereof they
ceased not, until such time as it pleased God to appoint another Coell king of
Britons, against whose name, albeit they hoped for a like victory to the
first, yet he prevailed and ceased not his war, until these Scots were
utterly expelled out

Upon this their new arrival, new war was made upon them by this Sisilt king
of Britons, in which war Reuther their new king died, and Thereus succeeded,
against whom the war of Britons ceased not, until he freely submitted
himself to the said Sicill king of Britons at Ebranke, that is York, where
shortly after the tenth year of his reign he died. Finnane brother of Iosine
succeeded by their election to the kingdom of Scots, who shortly after
(compelled by the wars of the same Sicill) declared himself subject, and for
the better assurance of his faith and obeisance to the king of Britons,
delivered his son Durstus into the hands of this Sicill: who fantasieng the
child, and hoping by his own succession to alter their subtlety (I will not
say duplicitie says Adams) married him in the end to Agasia his own daughter.

This Durstus was their next king; Durstus.
but for that he had married a Briton woman, (though indeed she was a kings
daughter) the Scots hated him for the same cause, for which they ought rather
to have liked him the better, and therefore not only traitorouslie slew him;
but further to declare the end of their malice, dishinherited (as much as in
them was) the issues of the same Durstus and Agasia. Hereupon new war sproong
between them and us, which ceased not until they were contented to receive
Edeir to their king, the next in blood then living, descended from Durstus and
Agasia, and thereby the blood of the Britons, of the part of the mother, was
restored to the crown of Albania: so that nature, whose law is immutable,
caused this bond of love to hold. For shortly after this Edeir attended upon
Cassibelane king of Britons, for the repulse of Julius Caesar, as their own
author Boethius, confesses, who commanded the same as his subject But Julius
Caesar, after his second arrival, by treason of Androgeus prevailed against
the Britons, and thereupon pursued this Edeir into Scotland; and (as himself
says in his commentaries) subdued all the I Will of Britain. Which though the
living Scots deny it, their dead writers confess that he came beyond Calender
wood, and cast down Camelon, the principal city of the Picts. And in token
of this victory, not far from Carron, builded a round temple of stone, which
remained in some perfection until the reign of our king Edward called the
first after the conquest, by whom it was subverted: but the monument thereof
remains to this day.

Marius the son of Aruiragus, Marius.
being king of all Britain, in his time one Roderike a Scithian, with a great
rabble of needy soldiers, came to the water of Frith in Scotland, which is
an arm of the sea, dividing Pentland from Fiffe: against whom Marius
assembled a power, by which he slew this Rodericke, and discomfited his people
in Westmerland: but to those that remained alive, he gave the country of
Cathnesse in Scotland, which proves it be within his own dominion.

Coell the son of this Marius had issue Lucius, Coelus.
counted the first christian king of this nation: he converted the three
archflamines of this land into bishopriks, and ordained bishops unto each of
them. The first remained at London, and his power extended from the furthest
part of Cornwall to Humber water. The second dwelled at York, and his power
stretched from Humber to the furthest part of all Scotland. The third aboded at
Caerleon upon the river of Wiske in Glamorgan in Wales, and his power extended
from Seuerne through all Wales. Some write that he made but two, and turned
their names to archbishops, the one to remain at Canturburie, the other at
York: yet they confess that he of York had jurisdiction through all
Scotland: either of which is sufficient to prove Scotland to be then under his
dominion.

Seuerus, by birth a Roman, Seuerus.
but in blood a Briton (as some think) and the lineall heir of the body of
Androge^s son of Lud, and nephue of Cassibelane, was shortly after emperor
and king of Britons, in whose time the people to whom his ancester Marius gave
the land of Cathnesse in Scotland, conspired with the Scots, and received them
from the Isles into Scotland. But hereupon this Seuerus came into Scotland, and
meeting with their faith and false hearts together, drove them all out of the
maine land into Isles, the uttermost bounds of all great Britain. But
notwithstanding this glorious victory,

Antoninus Bassianus borne of a Briton woman, Bassianus.


Coill, Coill.
descended of the blood of the ancient kings of this land, was shortly after
king of the Britons, whose only daughter and heir called Helen, was married
unto Constantius a Roman, who daunted the rebellion of all parts of great
Britain; and after the death of this Coill was in the right of his wife king
thereof, and reigned in his state over them thirteen or fourteen years.

Constantine the son of this Constance, and Constantine.
was next king of Britons, by the right of his mother, who passing to Rome to
receive the empire thereof, deputed one Octauius king of Wales, and duke of the
Gewisses (which some expound to be afterward called west Saxons) to have the
government of this dominion. But abusing the kings innocent goodness, this
Octauius defrauded this trust, and took upon him the crown. For which
traitorie albeit he was once vanquished by Leonine Traheron, great uncle to
Constantine: yet after the death of Hector Boethius says) was for their
rebellion; and rebellion properly could it not be, except they had been
subjects. He suffered the Picts also to remain his subjects, who made solemn
oaths to him, never after to erect any peculiar king of their own nation, but
to remain under the old empire of the only king of Britain. I had once an
epistle by Leland exemplified (as he says) out of a very ancient record which
bears title of Helena unto her son Constantine, and enters after this
manner; Domino semper Augusto filio Constantino, matter Helena semper Augusta,
etc. And now it repents me that I did not exemplify and conueigh it into
this treatise whilst I had his books. For thereby I might have had great light
for the estate of this present discourse: but as then I had no mind to have
traveled in this matter; nevertheless, if hereafter it come again to light I
would wish it were reserved. It follows on also in this manner (as it is
translated out of the Greek) Veritatem sapientis animus non recusat, nec fides
recta aliquando patitur quamcunque iacturam, etc.

About five and forty years after this (which was long time after the death
of this Maximius) with the help of Gouan or Gonan and Helga, the Scots newly
arrived in Albania, and there created one Fergus the second of that name to be
there king. But because they were before banished the continent land, they
crowned him king on their adventure in Argile, in the fatal chair of marble,
the year of our Lord, four hundred and two and twenty, as they themselves
do write.

Maximian son of Leonine Traheron, brother to king Coill, Maximian.
and uncle to Helene, was by lineall succession next king of Britons: but to
appease the malice of Dionothus king of Wales, who also claimed the kingdom,
he married Othilia eldest daughter of Dionothus, and afterward assembled a
great power of Britons, and entered Albania, inuading Gallowaie, Mers,
Annandale, Pentland, Carrike, Kill, and Cuningham, and in battle slew both
this Fergus then king of Scots, and Durstus the king of Picts, and exiled all
their people out of the continent land: whereupon the few number of Scots then
remaining a live, went to Argile, and there made Eugenius their king. When this
Maximian had thus obtained quietness in Britain, he departed with his cousine
Conan Meridocke into Armorica, where they subdued the king, and depopulated the
country, which he gave to Conan his cousine, to be afterward inhabited by
Britons, by the name of Britain the less: and hereof this realm took name
of Britain the great, which name by consent of foreign writers it keeps unto
this day.

After the death of Maximian, dissension being moved between the nobles of
Britain, the Scots swarmed together again, and came to the wall of Adrian,
where (this realm being divided in many factions) they overcame one. And
hereupon their Hector Boethius (as an hen that for laieng of one eg, will make a
great cakeling) solemnlie triumphing for a conquest before the victory,
alleges that hereby the Britons were made tributaries to the Scots, and yet
he confesses that they won no more land, by that supposed conquest, but the
same portion between them and Humber, which in the old partitions before was
annexed to Albania. It is hard to be believed, that such a broken nation as the
Scots at that time were, returning from banishment within four years before,
and since in battle loosing both their kings, and the great number of their
best men, to be thus able to make a conquest of great Britain; and very
unlikely if they had conquered it, they would have left the hot sun of the
south parts, to dwell in the cold snow in Scotland. Incredible it is, that if
they had conquered it, they would not have deputed officers in it, as in cases
of conquest behooves. And it is beyond all belief, that great Britain, or
any other country, should be won without the coming of any enemy into it:
as they did not, but tarried finally at the same wall of Adrian, whereof I
spoke before.

But what need I speak of these defenses, when the same Boecius scantly
trusts his own belief in this tale. For he says that Galfride, and
sundry other authentike writers, diversely vary from this part of his story,
wherein his own thought accuses his conscience of untruth: herein also he
further forgetting how it behooves a lier to be mindful of his assertion, in
the fourth chapter next following, wholly bewraieth himself, saying that the
confederat kings of Scots and Picts, upon civil wars between the Britons
(which then followed) hoped shortly

Constantine of Britain, descended from Conan king thereof, cousine of Brutes
blood to this Maximian, and his nearest heir was next king of Britain, he
immediately pursued the Scots with wars, and shortly in battle slew their
king Dongard, in the first year of his reign, whereby he recovered Some
think the Seimors to come from this man by lineall descent and I suppose no
less.


Uter called also Pendragon, brother to Aurilambrose

Finally, the said Arthur holding his royal feast at Cairleon, had there all
the kings that were subjects unto him, among which, Angusian the said king of
Scots did his due service and homage, so long as he was with him for the realm
of Scotland, and bare king Arthurs sword before him. Malgo shortly after
succeeded in the whole kingdom of great Britain, who upon new resistance
made, subdued Ireland, Island, the Orchads, Norwaie and Denmark, and made
Ethelfred a Saxon king of Bernicia, that is, Northumberland, Louthian, and much
other land of Scotland, which Ethelfred by the sword obtained at the hands of
the wilful inhabitants, and continued true subject to this Malgo.

Cadwan succeeded in the kingdom of great Britain, who in defense of his
subjects the Scots, made war upon this Ethelfred, but at the last they
agreed, and Cadwan upon their rebellion gave all Scotland unto this Ethelfred,
which he thereupon subdued and inioied: but afterward in the reign of Cadwallo
that next succeeded in great Britain, he rebelled. Whereupon the same Cadwallo
came into Scotland, and upon his treason reseised the country into his own
hands, and having with him all the vicerois of the Saxons, which then inhabited
here as his subjects, in singular battle he slew the same Ethelfred with his
own hands.

Oswald was shortly after by Cadwallos gift made king of Bernicia, and he as
subject to Cadwallo, and by his commandment discomfited the Scots and Picts,
and subdued all Scotland. Oswie the brother of this Oswald, was by the like
gift of Cadwallo, made next king of Bernicia, and he by like commandment
newly subdued the Scots and Picts, and held them in that obeisance to this
Cadwallo, during eight and twenty years. Thus Cadwallo reigned in the whole
monarchy of great Britain, having all the seven kings thereof, as well Saxons
as others his subjects: for albeit the number of Saxons from time to time
greatly increased, yet were they always either at the first expelled, or else
made tributarie to the only kings of Britons for the time being, as all their
own writers do confess.

Cadwallader was next king of the whole great Britain, he reigned twelve
years over all the kings thereof, in great peace and tranquillity: and then
upon the lamentable death of his subjects, which died of sundry diseases
innumerablie, he departed into little Britain. His son and cousine Iuor and
Iue, being expelled out of England also by the Saxons, went into Wales, where
among the Britons they and their posterity remained princes. Upon this great
alteration, and wars being through the whole dominion between the Britons
and Saxons, the Scots thought time to slip the collar of obedience, and
thereupon entered in league with Charles then king of France, establishing it in
this wise.

1 The injury of Englishmen done to any of these people, shall be
perpetually holden common to them both.

2 When Frenchmen be invaded by Englishmen, the Scots shall send their army in
defense of France, so that they be supported with money and vittels by the
French.

3 When Scots be invaded by Englishmen, the Frenchmen shall come upon their
own expenses, to their support and succor.

4 None of the people shall take peace or truce with Englishmen, without the advice of other, etc.

Many disputable opinions may be had of war without the praising of it,
Nicholas Adams.
as only admittable by enforced necessity, and to be used for peace sake
only, where here the Scots sought war for the love of

Osbright king of England, with Ella his subject, and a great number of Britons
and Saxons shortly

The water of Frith shall be march between Scots and Englishmen in the east
parts, and shall be named the Scottish sea.

The water of Cluide to Dunbriton, shall be march in the west parts between
the Scots and I am free march, as passengers may ken,
To Scots, to Britons, and Englishmen.


Not many years after this, Hinguar and Hubba, two Danes, with a great number
of people, arrived in Scotland, and slew Constantine, whom Osbright had before
made king: whereupon Edulfe or Ethelwulfe, then king of England, assembled his
power against Hinguar and Hubba, and in one battle slew them both; but such of
their people as would remain and become christians, he suffered to tarry: the
rest he banished or put to death, etc.

This Ethelwulfe granted the Peter pence, of which albeit Peter and Paul had
little need and less right: yet the payment thereof continued in this realm
ever after until now of late years. But the Scots ever since unto this day
have, and yet do pay it, by reason of that grant, which proves them to be
then under his obeisance.

Alured or Alfred succeeded in the kingdom of England, and reigned nobly over
the whole monarchy of great Britain: he made laws, that persons
excommunicated should be disabled to sue or claim any property; which law
Gregour, whom this Alured had made king of Scots, obeyed; and the same law as
well in Scotland as in England is holden to this day, which also proves him
to be high lord of Scotland.

This Alured constreined Gregour king of Scots also to break the league with
France, for generally he concluded with him, and served him in all his wars,
as well against Danes as others, not reserving or making any exception of the
former league with France.

The said Alured, after the death of Gregour, had the like service and
obeisance of Donald king of Scots with five thousand horssemen, against one
Gurmond a Dane that then infested the realm, and this Donald died in this
faith and obeisance with Alured.

Edward the first of that name called Chifod son of this Alured succeeded his
father, and was the next king of England: against whom Sithrtic a Dane and the
Scots conspired; but they were subdued, and Constantine their king brought to
obeisance. He held the realm of Scotland also of king Edward, and this does
Marian their own countrieman a Scot confess: beside Roger Houeden, and
William of Malmesberie.

In the year of our Lord 923, the same king Edward was president and governor
of all the people of England, Cumberland, Scots, Danes, and Britons.

King Athelstane in like sort conquered Scotland, and as he lay in his tents
beside York, whilst the wars lasted, the king of Scots feined himself to
be a minstrell, and harped before him only to epsy his ordinance and his
people. But being (as their writers confess) corrupted with money, he sold his
faith and false heart together to the Danes, and aided them against king
Athelstane at sundry times. Howbeit he met with all their untruths at
Broningfield in the west country, as is mentioned in the ninth chapter of the
first book of this description, where he discomfited the Danes, and slew
Malcolme deputy in that behalf to the king of Scots: in which battle the
Scots confess themselves to have lost more people than were remembered in any
age before. Then Athelstane following his good luck, went throughout all
Scotland and wholly subdued it, and being in possession thereof, gave land
there lieng in Annandale by his deed, the copy whereof does follow:

I king Athelstane, gives unto Paulam, Oddam and Roddam, als good and als
fair, as ever they mine were, and thereto witness Mauld my wife.

By which course words, not only appears the plain simplicity of men's
doings in those days: but also a full proof that he was then seized of
Scotland. At the last also he received homage of Malcolme king of Scots: but
for that he could not be restored to his whole kingdom, he entered into
religion, and there shortly after died.

Then Athelstane, for his better assurance of that country there after,
thought it best to have two stringes to the bow of their obedience, and
therefore not only constituted on Malcolme to be their king, but also
appointed one Indulph son of Constantine the third, to be called prince of
Scotland, to whom he gave much of Scotland: and for this Malcolme did homage
to Athelstane.

Edmund brother of Athelstane succeeded next king of England, to whom this
Indulph then king of Scots not only did homage, but also served him with ten
thousand Scots, for the expulsion of the Danes out of the realm of England.

Edred or Eldred brother to this Edmund succeeded next king of England: Some
refer this to an Edward.
he not only received the homage of Irise then king of Scots, but also the
homage of all the barons of Scotland.

Edgar the son of Edmund, brother of Athelstane,

This Edgar gave unto the same Keneth the country of Louthian in Scotland,
which was before seized into the hands of Osbright king of England for their
rebellion, as is before declared. He inioined Keneth their said king also once
in every year

Moreover, Lawful age and wardship of heirs.
Edgar made this law, that no man should succeed to his patrimony or
inheritance holden by knights service, until he accomplished the

In the year of our Lord 974, Kinald king of Scots, and Malcolme king of
Cumberland, Macon

Edward, the son of this Edgar, was next king of England, in whose time this
Keneth king of Scots caused Malcolme king of Scotland to be poisoned. Whereupon
king Edward made war against him, which ceased not until this Keneth
submitted himself, and offered to receive him for prince of Scotland, whom
king Edward would appoint. Hereupon king Edward proclaimed one Malcolme to be
prince of Scotland, who immediately came into England, and there did homage
unto the same king Edward.

Etheldred, brother of this Edward succeeded next over England, against whom
Swain king of Denmark conspired with this last Malcolme then king of Scots.
But shortly after, this Malcolme sorrowfully submitted himself into the
defense of Etheldred: who considering how that which could not be amended, must
only be repented, benignlie received him. By help of whose service at last
Etheldred recovered his realm again out of the hands of Swain, and reigned
over the whole monarchy eight and thirty years.

Edmund surnamed Ironside, son of this Etheldred, was next king of England,
in whose time Canutus a Dane invaded the realm with much cruelty. But at the
last he married with Emme sometime wise unto Etheldred and mother of this
Edmund. Which Emme, as arbitratrix between her natural love to the one, and
matrimonial duty to the other, procured such amity between them in the end,
that Edmund was contented to divide the realm with Canutus: and keeping to
himself all England on this side Humber, gave all the rest beyond Humber, with
the seigniorie of Scotland to this Canutus. Whereupon Malcolme then king of
Scots (after a little accustomable resistance) did homage to the same Canutus
for the kingdom of Scotland. Thus the said Canutus held the same over of this
Edmund king of England by the like services, so long as they lived together.
This Canutus in memory of this victory, and glory of his seigniorie over the
Scots, commanded Malcolme their king to build a church in Buchquhan in
Scotland, (where a field between him and them was fought) to be dedicated to
Olauus patron of Norwaie and Denmark, which church was by the same Malcolme
accordingly performed.

Edward called the Confessor, son of Etheldred, and brother to Edmund
Ironside, was afterward king of England: he took from Malcolme king of Scots
his life and his kingdom, and made Malcolme soon to the king of Cumberland
and Northumberland king of Scots, who did him homage and fealty.

This Edward perused the old laws of the realm, and somewhat added to some of
them: as to the law of Edgar for the wardship of the lands until the heir
should accomplish the age of one and twenty years. He added, To whom the
marriage of the ward pertains.
that the marriage of such heir should also belong to the lord of whom the
same land was holden. Also, that every woman marrieng a free man, should
(notwithstanding she had no children by that husband) enioie the third part of
his inheritance during her life: with many other laws which the same Malcolme
king of Scots obeyed, and which as well by them in Scotland, as by us in
England be observed to this day, and directly proves the whole to be then
under his obeisance.

By reason of this law, Malcolme the son of Duncane next inheritor to the
crown of Scotland, being within age, was by the nobles of Scotland delivered
as ward to the custody also of king Edward. During whose minority, one
Makebeth a Scot traitorouslie usurped the crown of Scotland. Against whom the
said Edward made war, in which the said Mackbeth was overcome and slain.
Whereupon the said Malcolme was crowned king of Scots at Scone, in the eight
year of the reign of king Edward aforesaid. This Malcolme also by tenor of
the said new law of wardship, was married unto Margaret the daughter of Edward
son of Edmund Ironside and Agatha, by the disposition of the same king
Edward, and at his full age did homage to this king Edward the Confessor for
the kingdom of Scotland.

Moreover, Edward the Confessor.
Edward of England, having no issue of his body, and mistrusting that Harald
the son of Goodwine, descended of the daughter of Harald Harefoot the Dane,
would usurp the crown, if he should leave it to his cousine Edgar Eatling
(being then within age) and partly by the petition of his subjects, who before
had sworn never to receive any kings over them of the Danish nation, did by
his substantial will in writing (as all our clergy writers affirm) demise
the crown of great Britain unto

Furthermore, William Bastard.
this William, called the Bastard and the Conqueror, supposed not his conquest
perfect till he had likewise subdued the Scots. Wherefore to bring the Scots to
just obeisance after his coronation, as heir testamentarie to Edward the
Confessor; he entered Scotland, where after a little resistance

William surnamed Rufus, William Rufus.
son to this William called the Conqueror, succeeded next in the throne of
England, to whom the said Malcolme king of Scots did like homage for the whole
kingdom of Scotland. But afterward he rebelled, and was by this William Rufus
slain in plain field.

Henry called Beauelerke the son of William called the Conqueour, Henry 1.
after the death of his brother William Rufus, succeeded to the crown of
England, to whom the same Edgar king of Scots did homage for Scotland: this
Henry Beauclerke married Mawd the daughter of Malcome II. of Scots, and by her
had issue Mawd afterward empress.

Alexander the son of Malcolme brother to this Mawd was next king of Scots,
he did like homage for the kingdom of Scotland to this Henry the first, as
Edgar had done before him.

Mawd called the empress, Mawd.
daughter and heir to Henry Beauclerke and Mawd his wife, received homage of
David, brother to her and to this Alexander next king of Scots, before all the
temporal men of England for the kingdom of Scotland. This Mawd the empress
gave unto David in the marriage, Mawd the daughter and heir of Uoldosius earl
of Huntingdon and Northumberland. And herein their evasion appears, by which
they allege that their kings homages were made for the earldom of Huntingdon.
For this David was the first that of their kings was earl of Huntingdon, which
was since all the homages of their kings before recited, and at the time of
this marriage, and long after the said Alexander his brother was king of Scots,
doing the homage aforesaid to Henry Beauclerke son to the aforesaid lady, of
whom I find this epitaph worthy to be remembered: Ortu magna, viro mayor, sed
maxima partu,
Hic iacet Henrici filia, sponsa, parens.


In the year of our Lord 1136, and first year of the reign of king Stephan,
the said David king of Scots being required to do his homage, refused it: for
so much as he had done homage to Mawd the empress before time;
notwithstanding the son of the said David did homage to king Stephan.

Henry called Fitz empress, Henry 2.
the son of Mawd the empress daughter of Mawd, daughter of Malcolme king of
Scots, was next king of England. He received homage for Scotland of Malcolme
son of Henry, son of the said David their last king. Which Malcolme after
this homage attended upon the same king Henry in his wars against Lewis then
king of France. Whereby appears that their French league was never renewed
after the last division of their country by Osbright king of England. But
after these wars finished with the French king, this Malcolme being again in
Scotland rebelled: whereupon king Henry immediately seized Huntingdon and
Northumberland into his own hands by confiscation, and made wars upon him in
Scotland: during which the same Malcolme died without issue of his body.

William brother of this Malcolme was next king of Scots, he with all the
nobles of Scotland (which could not be now for any earldom) did homage to
the son of Henry the second; Because they were taken from him before.
with a reservation of the duty to king Henry the second his father. Also the
earldom of Huntingdon was (as ye have heard) before this forfeited by
Malcolme his brother, and never after restored to the crown of Scotland.

This William did afterward attend upon the same Henry the second, in his
wars in Normandy against the French king (notwithstanding their French
league) and then being licenced to depart home in the tenth of this prince, and
upon the fifteenth of February he returned, and upon the sixteenth of October
did homage to him for the realm of Scotland. In token also of his perpetual
subjection to the crown of England, he offered up his cloak, his faddle, and
his spear at the high altar in York: whereupon he was permitted to depart
home into Scotland, where immediately he moved cruel war in Northumberland
against the same king Henry, being as yet in Normandy. But God took the
defense of king Henry's part, and delivered the same William king of Scots into
the hands of a few Englishmen, who brought him prisoner to king Henry into
Normandy in the twentieth year of his reign. But at the last, at the suit of
David his brother, Richard bishop of saint Andrews, and other bishops and
lords, he was put to this fine for the amendment of his trespass; to wit, to
pay ten thousand pounds sterling, and to surrender all his title to the
earldome of Huntingdon, Cumberland, and Northumberland into the hands of king
Henry, which he did in all things accordingly, sealing his charters thereof
with the great seal of Scotland, and signets of his nobility yet to be seen:
wherein it was also comprised, that he and his successors should hold the
realm of Scotland of the king of England and his successors for ever. And
hereupon he once again did homage to the same king Henry, which now could not
be for the earldom of Huntingdon, the right whereof was already by him
surrendered. And for the better assurance of this Hector Boethius says, that
this trespass was amended by fine of twenty thousand pounds sterling, and
that the erledome of Huntingdon, Cumberland, and Northumberland were delivered
as morgage into the hands of king Henry, until other ten thousand pounds
sterling should be to him paid, which is so far from Hector was (while he
lived) from well meaning to our country. But if we grant that it is true, yet
proves he not that the money was paid, nor the land otherwise redeemed, or
ever after came to any Scottish kings hands. And thus it appears that the
earldom of Huntingdon was never occasion of the homages of the Scottish kings
to the kings of England, either before this time or after.

This was done 1175. Moreover I read this note Robertus Montanus or Montensis
that lived in those days, and was (as I take it) confessor to king Henry. The
king of Scots does homage to king Henry for the kingdom of Scotland, and is
sent home again, his bishops also did promise to do the like to the
archbishop of York, and to acknowledge themselves to be of his province and
jurisdiction. By virtue also of this composition the said Robert says, that
Rex Angliae dabat honores, episcopatus, abbatias, and alias dignitates in
Scotia, vel saltem that is, The king of England gave honors, bishopriks,
abbatships, and other dignities in Scotland, or at the leastwise they were not
given without his advise and counsel.

At this time Alexander bishop of Rome (supposed to have general jurisdiction
ecclesiastical through christendom) established the whole clergy of
Scotland (according to the old laws) under the jurisdiction of the archbishop
of York.

In the year of our Lord 1185, in the month of

In the two and twentieth year of the reign of king Henry the second, Gilbert
son of Ferguse prince of Galwaie, did homage and fealty to the said king
Henry, and left Dunecan his son in hostage for conservation of his peace.

Richard surnamed Coeur de Lion, because of his stoutnesse, and son of this
Henry was next king

This king Richard was taken prisoner by the duke of Ostrich, for whose
redemption the whole realm was taxed at great sums of money, unto the which
this William king of Scots (as a subject) was contributorie, and paid two
thousand marks sterling.

In the year of our Lord 1199, John king of England sent to William king of
Scots, to come and do his homage, which William came to Lincoln in the month
of December the same year, and did his homage upon an hill in the presence of
Hubert archbishop of Canturburie, and of all the people there assembled, and
thereunto took his oath and was sworn upon the cross of the said Hubert: also
he granted by his charter confirmed, that he should have the marriage of
Alexander his son, as his liegeman, always to hold of the king of England:
promising moreover that he the said king William and his son Alexander,
should keep and hold faith and allegiance to Henry son of the said king
John, as to their chief lord against all manner of men that might live and die.

Also whereas William king of Scots had put John bishop of saint Andrew out of
his bishoprike, pope Clement wrote to Henry king of England, that he should
move and induce the same William; and if need required by his royal power and
prerogative over that nation, to compel him to leave his rancor against the
said bishop, and suffer him to have and occupy his said bishoprike again.

In the year of our Lord 1216, and five and twentieth of the reign of Henry,
son to king John, the same Henry and the queen were at York at the feast
of Christmasse, for the solemnization of a marriage made in the feast of saint
Stephan the martyr the same year, between Alexander king of Scots, and
Margaret the kings daughter, and there the said Alexander did homage to Henry
king of England for all the realm of Scotland.

In bulls of diverse popes were admonitions given to the kings of Scots, as
appears by that of Gregory the fifth and Clement his successor, that they
should observe and truly keep all such appointments, as had been made
between the kings of England and Scotland. And that the kings of Scotland
should still hold the realm of Scotland of the kings of England, upon pain of
curse and interdiction.

After the death of Alexander king of Scots, Alexander his son, being nine
years of age, was by the laws of Edgar, in ward to king Henry the third, and
by the nobles of Scotland brought to York, and there delivered unto him.
During whose minority king Henry governed Scotland, and to subdue a commotion
in this realm, used the aid of five thousand Scotishmen. But king Henry died
during the nonage of this Alexander, whereby he received not his homage, which
by reason and law was respited until his full age of one and twenty years.

Edward the first after the conquest, son of this Henry was next king of
England; immediately after whose coronation, Alexander king of Scots, being
then of full age, did homage to him for Scotland at Westminster, swearing (as
all the rest did) after this manner.

I. D. N. king of Scots shall be true and faithful unto you lord E. by the
grace of God king of England, the noble and superior lord of the kingdom of
Scotland, and unto you I make my fidelity for the same, kingdom, the which I
hold and claim to hold of you. And I shall bear you my faith and fidelity of
life and lim, and worldly honor against all men, faithfully I shall knowledge
and shall do you service due unto you of the kingdom of Scotland aforesaid,
as God me so help and these holy euangelies.

This Alexander king of Scots died, leaving one only daughter called Margaret
for his heir, who before had married Hanigo, son to Magnus king of Norwaie,
which daughter also shortly after died, leaving one only daughter her heir,
of the age of two years, whose custody and marriage by the laws of king
Edgar, and Edward the confessor, belonged to Edward the first: whereupon the
nobles of Scotland were commanded by our king Edward to send into Norwaie, to
conueie this young queen into England to him, whom he intended to have married
to his son Edward: and so to have made a perfect union long wished for
between both realms. Hereupon their nobles at that time considering the same
tranquillity that many of them have since refused, stood not upon shifts and
delays of minority nor contempt, but most gladly consented, and thereupon
sent two noble men of Scotland into Norwaie, for her to be brought to this king
Edward, but she died before their coming thither, and therefore

After the death of this Margaret, the Scots were destitute of any heir to
the crown from this Alexander their last king, at which time this Edward
descended from the body of Mawd daughter of Malcolme sometime king of Scots,
being then in the greatest broile of his wars with France, minded not to take
the possession of that kingdom in his

The Balioll in this wise made king of Scotland, did immediately make his
homage and fealty at Newcastell upon saint Steeuens day (as did likewise all
the lords of Scotland, each one setting his hand to the composition in writing)
to king Edward of England for the kingdom of Scotland: but shortly after
defrauding the benign goodness of his superior, he rebelled, and did very
much hurt in Leland touching the same rehearsal, writes thereof in this manner.

In the year of our Lord 1295, the same John The Scots dream that this was
the stone whereon Jacob slept when he fled into Mesopotamia.
and sent it to the abbeie of Westminster, commanding to make a chair thereof
for the priests that should sing mass at the high altar: which chair was
made, and stands yet there at this day to be seen.

In the year of our Lord 1296, the king held his parliament at Berwike: and
there he took homage singularly of diverse of the lords and nobles of
Scotland. And for a perpetual memory of the same, they made their letters
patents sealed with their seals, and then the king of England made William
Warreine earl of Surrie and Southsax lord Warden of Scotland, Hugh of
Cressingham treasuror, and William Ormesbie justice of Scotland, and forthwith
sent king John to the Tower of London, and John Comin, and the earl Badenauth,
the earl of Bohan and other lords into England to diverse places on this side
of the Trent.

And after that, in the year of our Lord 1297, at the feast of Christmas, the
king called before him the said John king of Scots, although he had committed
him to ward: and said that he would burn or destroy their castles, towns and
lands, if he were not recompensed for his costs and damages sustained in the
wars; but king John and the other that were in ward, answered that they had
nothing, since their lives, their deaths, and goods were in his hands. The king
upon that answer moved with pity, granted them their lives; so that they
would do their homage, and make their oath solemnly at the high altar (in the
church of the abbeie of Westminster) upon the eucharist, that they and every
of them should hold and keep true faith, obedience, and allegiance to the said
king Edward and his heirs kings of England for ever. And where the said king
of Scots saw the kings banner of England displaied, he and all his power should
draw thereunto. And that neither he or any of his from thencefoorth should
bear arms against the king of England or any of his blood. Finally, the
king rewarding with great gifts the said king John and his lords, suffered them
to depart. But they went into Scotland alwaie imagining (notwithstanding this
their submission) how they might oppress king Edward, and disturb his realm.
The Scots sent also to the king of France for succor and help, who sent them
ships to Berwike furnished with men of arms, the king of England then being in
Flanders.

In the year of our Lord 1298, the king went into Scotland with a great host,
and the Scots also assembled in great number, but the king fought with them at
Fawkirke on S. Marie Magdalens day, where were slain threescore thousand
Scots, and Willain Walleis that was their captain fled, who being taken
afterward, was hanged, drawn, and quartered at London, for his trespasses.

After this the Scots rebelled again, and all the lords of Scotland chose
Robert Bruise to be king, except only John Commin earl of Carrike, who would
not consent thereto because of his oath made to the king of England. This was
done upon the nine and twentieth of January, 1306.
Wherefore Robert Bruise slew him at Dumfrise, and then was crowned at Schone
abbeie. Hereupon the king of England assembled a

Edward borne at Carnaruan son of this Edward, was next king of England, who
from the beginning of his reign enioied Scotland peaceably, doing in all
things as is above said of king Edward his father, until toward the later end
of his reign, about which time this Robert Bruise conspired against

Edward borne at Windsore son of Edward the second was next king of England,
at the age of fifteen years, in whose minority the Scots practiced with
Isabell mother to this Edward, and with Roger Mortimer earl of the March to
have their homages released: whose good will therein they obtained, so that for
the same release they should pay to this king Edward thirty thousand pounds
starling,

Howbeit, shortly after causeless conceiving cause of displeasure, this David
procured to dissolve this same estate tailee, and thereupon not only rebelled
in Scotland, but also invaded England, whilst king Edward was occupied about
his wars in France. But this David was not only expelled England in the end,
but also thinking no place a sufficient defense to his untruth, of his own
accord fled out of Scotland: whereby the countries of Annandale, Gallowaie,
Mars, Teuidale, Twedale, and Ethrike were seized into the king of Englands
hands, and new marches set between England and Scotland at Cockbu^nes path and
Sowtrie hedge. Which when this David went about to recover again, his power
was discomfited, and himself by a few Englishmen taken and brought into
England, where he remained prisoner eleven years after his said apprehension.

During this time, king Edward enioied Scotland peaceably, and then at the
contemplation and weary suit of his sorrowful sister, wife of this David, he
was contented once again to restore him to the kingdom of Scotland. Whereupon
it was concluded, that for this rebellion David should pay to king Edward, the
sum of one hundred thousand marks starling, and there to destroy all his
holds and fortresses standing against the English borders, and further assure
the crown of Scotland to the children of this king Edward for lack of heir
of his own body, all which things he did accordingly. And for the better
assurance of his obeisance also, he afterward delivered into the hands of king
Edward sundry noble men of Scotland in this behalf as his pledges. This is
the effect of the history of David, touching his delings. Now let us see what
was done by Edward Balioll, whereof our chronicles do report, that in the
year of our Lord 1326, Edward the third, king of England, was crowned at
Westminster, and in the fifth year of his reign Edward Balioll right heir to
the kingdom of Scotland came in, and claimed it as due to him. Sundry lords
and gentlemen also, which had title to diverse lands there, either by
themselves, or by their wives, did the like. Whereupon the said Balioll and
they went into Scotland by sea, and landing at Kinghorns with 3000 Englishmen,
discomfited 10000 Scots, and flue 1200, and then went forth to Dunfermeline,
where the Scots assembled against them with 40000 men, and in the feast of
saint Laurence, at a place called Gastmore (or otherwise Gladmore) were slain
five earls, thirteen barons, a hundred and three score knights, two thousand
men of arms, and many other; in all forty thousand: and there were stain on
the English part but thirteen persons only, if the number be not corrupted.

In the eight year of the reign of king Edward, he assembled a great host,
and came to Berwike upon Tweed, and laid siege thereto. To him also came Edward
Balioll king of Scots, with a great power to strengthen and aid him against the
Scots, who came out of Scotland in four batels well armed and araied.

Edward king of England, and Edward king of Scots, apparrelled their people
either of them in four battles: and upon Halidon hill, beside Berwike, met
these two hoasts, and there were discomfited of the Scots five and twenty
thousand and seven hundred, whereof were slain eight earls, a thousand and
three hundred knights and gentlemen. This victory done, the king returned to
Berwike, and then the town with the castle were yielded up unto him. In the
eight year of the reign of king Edward of England, Edward Balioll king of
Scots came to Newcastell upon Tine, and did homage for all the realm of
Scotland.

In the year of our Lord 1346, David Bruise by the provocation of the king of
France rebelled, and came into England with a great host unto Neuils cross:
but the archbishop of York, with diverse temporal men, fought with him; and
the said king of Scots was taken, and William earl of Duglas with Morrise
earl of Strathorne were brought to London, and many other lords slain, which
with David did homage to Edward king of England.

And in the thirtith year of the kings reign, and the year of our Lord 1355,
the Scots woone the town of Berwicke, but not the castle. Hereupon the king
came thither with a great host, and anon the town was yielded up without any
resistance.

Edward Balioll, considering that God did so many marvelous and gracious
things for king Edward, at his own will gave up the crown and the realm of
Scotland to king Edward of England at Rokesborough, by his letters patents. And
anon after the king of England, in presence of all his lords spiritual and
temporal, let crown himself king there of the realm of Scotland, and
ordained all things

Richard the son of Edward, called the Black prince, son of this king
Edward, was next king of England, who for that the said Jane, the wife of the
said king David of Scotland was deceassed without issue, and being informed how
the Scots devised to their uttermost power to break the limitation of this
inheritance touching the crown of Scotland, made forthwith war against them,
wherein he burnt Edenbrough, spoiled all their country,

Henry the fourth of that name was next king of England, he continued these
wars begun against them by king Richard, and ceased not until Robert king
of Scots (the third of that name) resigned his crown by appointment of this
king Henry, and delivered his son James, being then of the age of nine
years, into his hands to remain at his custody, wardship and disposition, as
of his superior

Henry the fifth of that name, son to this king Henry the fourth, was next
king of England. He made wars against the French king, in all which this
James then king of Scots attended upon him, as upon his superior lord, with a
convenient number

Henry the sixth, the son of this Henry the fifth, was next king of England,
to whom the seigniorie

This James king of Scots at his full age, did homage to the same king Henry
the sixth, for the kingdom of Scotland at Windsore, in the month of January.

Since which time, until the days of king Henry the seventh, grandfather to
our sovereign lady that now is, albeit this realm has been molested with
diversity of titles, in which unmeet time neither law nor reason admit
prescription to the prejudice of any right: yet did king Edward the fourth
next king of England, by preparation of war against the Scots in the latter end
of his reign, sufficiently by all laws induce to the continuance of his
claim to the same superiority over them.

After whose death, unto the beginning of the reign of our sovereign lord
king Henry the eight, exceeded not the number of seven and twenty years,
about which time the impediment of our claim of the Scots part, chanced by the
nonage of James their last king, which so continued the space of one and
twenty years. And like as his minority was by all law and reason an
impediment to himself to make homage; so was the same by like reason an
impediment to the king of this realm to demand any, so that the whole time of
intermission of our claim in the time of the said king Henry the eight, is
deduced unto the number of thirteen years. And thus much for this matter.

Of the wall sometime builded for a partition between England and the Picts
and Scots. Chap. 23.
Having hitherto discoursed upon the title of the kings of England, unto the
Scottish kingdom: I have now thought good to add here unto the description of
two walls that were (in times past) limits unto both the said regions, and
therefore to be touched in this first book, as generally appertinent unto the
estate of the whole Island; and no less famous than that which Anastasius
Dicorus made afterward from the Euxine unto the Thracian sea, containing 420
furlongs in length, and twelve foot in breadth, and distant from Constantinople
280 furlongs, albeit that of Hadrian was made of turffe and timber. The author
therefore of the first wall was Hadrian the emperor, The first beginner of the
Picts wall.
who (as Aelius Spartianus says) erected the same of four score miles in
length, twelve foot in height, and eight in breadth, to divide the barbarous
Britons from the more civil sort, which then were generally called by the
name of Romans over all.

After his time Seuerus the emperor coming The finisher of the wall.
again into this I Will (where he had served before in repression of the tumults
here begun, after the death of Lucius) amongst other things he made another
wall (but of stone) between eighty and a hundred miles from the first, and of
thirty two miles in length, reaching on both sides also to the sea, of whom
the Britons called it S. Murseueri, or Gwall Seueri, that is, The wall of
Seuerus, or Seuerus dale, which later indureth until these days in fresh
memory, by reason of the ruins and square stones there often found, whose
inscriptions declare the authors of that work. It is worthy the noting also,
how that in this voyage he lost 50000 men in the Scottish side, by one occasion
and other, which hinderance so incensed him, that he determined utterly to
extinguish their memory from under heaven, and had so done in deed, if his
life had endured but until another year. Sextus Aurelius writing of Seuerus,
The wall goes not streict by a line, but in and out in many places.
adds, how that the wall made by this prince contained two and thirty miles,
whereby the breadth of this Island there, and length of the wall contains
only so many miles, as may be gathered by his words. But cheeflie for the
length of the wall, Spartianus who touching it among other things says of
Seuerus as follows: Britanniam (quod maximum eius imperij decus est) muro per
transuersam insulam ducto, vtrinque ad finem oceani muniuit, that is, He
fortified Britain (which is one of the chief acts recorded of his time) with
a wall made overthwart the I Will, that reached on both sides even to the very
Ocean.

That this wall was of stone also, The stuff of the wall.
the ruins thereof (which have ministered much matter to such as dwell near
thereunto in their buildings) is trial sufficient. Hereby in like sort it
comes to pass, that where the soil about it is least inhabited, there is
most mention of the said wall, which was wrought of squared stone, as until
this day may evidently be confirmed. Howbeit, these two walls were not the
only partitions between these two kingdoms, since Julius Capitolinus in vita.
Antonini Pij does write of another that Lollius Vrbicus made beyond the same,
Two other walls.
of turffe, in the time of the said prince, who (for his victories in Britain)
was also called Britannicus, which nevertheless was often thrown down by A
rampire.
This only remains certain, that the walls made by Hadrian and Seuerus,
were ditched with notable ditches and rampires made in such wise, that the
Scottish adversary had much a do to enter and scale the same in his assaults.
And yet for all this, I read that the Scots oftentimes pulled

Beginning therefore with the course thereof, from the west sea, The course of
the wall from west to east.
I find that it runs from Bolnesse to Burgh, about four miles, and likewise
from thence within half a mile of Carleill, and less on the north side, and
beneath the confluence of the Peder and the Eden. From hence it goes to
Terrebie, a village about a mile from Caerleill, then through the baronie of
Linstocke, and Gillesland, on the north side of the river Irding or Arding, and
a quarter of a mile from the abbeie of Leuercost. Thence three Leland says,
that it goes within a mile of Newcastell, and then crooketh up toward Tinmouth
unto Wallesend, three miles from the mouth of the said river, so called because
the aforesaid wall did end at the same place. And thus much I read of the
Pictish wall. As for the Roman coin that is often found in the course
thereof, the curious bricks about the same near unto Caerleill, beside the
excellent cornellines and other costly stones already intailed for seals
oftentimes taken up in

In like manner I would gladly also have set down the course of Offaes ditch,
which was march between the Mercian dominions, and the Welshmen in his time:
but for so much as the tractation thereof is not to be referred to this place,
because it is not a thing general to the whole Island, I omit to speak of that
also. Yet thus much will I note here, as well by the report of one (who says
how he did tread it out) that he followed it from the Dee to Kirnaburgh hill
through Treuelach forest, by est of Crekith Cauch hill, Montgomerie castle,
the New castle and Discoid, and having brought it hitherto, either lost it, or
sought after it no further: as by the testimony of another, who writing
thereof, says, that it stretched from the south side by Bristow, along under
the mounteins of Wales northwards, over the river of Sauerne, and to the very
mouth also of the Dee, where it falls into the sea. And so much of such
things as concern the general estate of the whole Island, which labor herein
I could very well have spared, and would, if Quintus had performed the request
of Cicero his brother, who promised to send him over a sound advertisement of
the condition of Britain in those days: as appears in the second book of
his familiar epistles, where he says; Modo mihi date Britanniam, quam pingam
coloribus tuis penicillo meo, etc. But sithence that was not performed, and the
treatise of Demetrius and other of the same argument are perished, which were
of some value, let this trifle (I beseech you) not be rejected, till some other
man of better skill shall have drawn a more absolute piece of workmanship,
whereunto my unskillfulness (I hope) shall prove no hinderance.

Of the maruels of England. Chap. 24.
SUch as have written of the woonders of our country in old time, have spoken
(no doubt) of many things, which deserve no credit at all: and therefore in
seeking thanks of their posterity by their travel in this behalf; they have
reaped the reward of just reproach, and in steed of fame purchased unto
themselves naught else but mere discredit in their better and more learned
treatises. The like commonly happens also to such, as in respect of lucre
do publish unprofitable and pernicious volumes, whereby they do consume their
times in vain, and in manifold wise become prejudicial unto their common
wealths. For my part I will not touch any man herein particularly, no not our
Demetrius, of whom Plutarch speaks in his oracles (if those books were
written by him, for some think that Plutarch never wrote them, although
Eusebius lib. 4. cap. 8. does acknowledge them to be his) which Demetrius left
sundry treatises behind him, containing wonderful things collected of our
Island. But since that in my time they are found to be false, it should be far
unmeet to remember them any more: for who is he which will believe, that
infernal spirits can die and give up their ghosts like mortal men? though
Saxo seem to consent unto him in this behalf. In speaking also of the out
Isles, he says thus: Beyond Britain are many desolate Islands, whereof some
are dedicated to the Gods, some to the noble Heroes. I sailed (says he) by the
help of the king unto one that lay near hand, only to see and view the
same, in which I found few inhabitants, and yet such as were there, were
reputed and taken for men of great piety and holiness. During the time also
that I remained in the same, it was vexed with great storm and tempest, which
caused me not a little to doubt of my safe return. In the end, demanding of
the inhabitants what the cause should be of this so great and sudden mutation
of the air? they answered, that either some of the Gods, or at the least of
the Heroes were lately deceased: for as a candle (said they) hurts none
whilst it burns, but being stenderlie put out annoieth many with the
filthy savor: so these Gods, whilst they lived, were either not hurtful, or
very beneficial to mankind; but being once deceassed, they so move the
heavens and air, that much mischief does ensue eftsoons upon the same.

Being also inquisitiue of the state of other Isles not far off, they told him
further, how there was one hard by, wherein Saturn being overtaken with a dead
sleep, was watched by Briarous as he lay, which Saturn also had many
spirits attending upon him in sundry functions and offices. By which Demetrius
is interlaced. But of such writers as we have too too many, so among the said
rabble Geruase of Tilberie is not the least famous, a man as it were even sold
to utter matters of more admiration than credit to the world. For what a tale
tells he in his De otio imperiali, of Wandleburie hills, that lie within
sight and by south of Cambridge (where the Uandals encamped sometime, when they
entered into this Island) and of a spirit that would of Four woonders of
England.
In writing therefore of the woonders of England, I find that there are four
notable things, which for their rareness amongst the common sort, are taken
for the four miracles and woonders

The first of these is a vehement and strong wind, which issues out of the
hills called the Peke, so violent and strong, that at certain times if a man
do cast his cote or cloak into the cave from whence it issues, it drives
the same back again, hoising it aloft into the open air with great force and
vehemency. Of this also Giraldus speaks.

The second is the miraculous standing or rather hanging of certain stones
upon the plain of Salisburie, whereof the place is called Stonehenge. And to
say the truth, they may well be woondered at, not only for the manner of
position, whereby they become very difficult to be numbered, but also for their
greatness and strange manner of lieng of some of them one upon another, which
seems to be with so tickle hold, that few men go under them without fear of
their present ruin. How and when these stones were brought thither, as yet I
can not read; howbeit it is most likely, that they were raised there by the
Britons, after the slaughter of their nobility at the deadly banquet, which
Hengist and his Saxons provided for them, where they were also buried, and
Uortigerne their king apprehended and led away as captive. I have heard that
the like are to be seen in Ireland; but how true it is as yet I can not
learn. The report goes also, that these were brought from thence, but by what
ship on the sea, and carriage by land, I think few men can safely imagine.

The third is an ample and large hole under the ground, which some call Carcer
Aeoli, but in English Chedderhole, whereinto many men have entered and walked
very far. Howbeit, as the passage is large and nothing no^some: so diverse
that have adventured to go into the same, could never as yet find the end of
that way, neither see any other thing than pretty riuerets and streams,
which they often crossed as they went from place to place. This Chedder-hole or
Chedder rock is in Summersetshire, and thence the said waters run till they
meet with the second Ax that rises in Owkie hole.

The fourth is no less notable than any of the other. For westward upon
certain hills a man shall see the clouds gather together in fair weather
unto a certain thickness, and by and by to spread themselves abroad and water
their fields about them, as it were upon the sudden. The causes of which
dispersion, as they are utterly unknown: so many men conjecture great store
of water to be in those hills, and very near at hand, if it were needful to
be sought for.

Besides these four maruelles, there is a little rockie I Will in Aber Barrie (a
riueret that falls into the Sauerne sea) called Barrie, which has a rift or
clift next the first shore; whereunto if a man do lay his ear, he shall
hear such noises as are commonly made in smiths forges, to wit, clinking of
iron bars, beating with hammers, blowing of bellowses, and such like: whereof
the superstitious sort do gather many toies, as the gentiles did in old time
of their lame god Uulcans pot. The river that runs by Chester changes her
channel every month: the cause whereof as yet I can not learn; neither does
it swell by force of any land-floud, but by some vehement wind it often
ouer-runneth her banks. In Snowdonie are two lakes, whereof one bears a
moouable Island, which is carried to and fro as the wind blows. The other has
three kinds of fishes in it, as eeles, trowts, and perches: but herein rests
the wonder, that all those have but one eye a piece only, and the same
situate in the right side of their heads. And this I find to be confirmed also
by authors: There is a well in the forest of Gnaresborow, whereof the said
forest does take the name; which water, beside that it is cold as Stix, in a
certain period of time known, conuerteth wood, flesh, leaves of trees, and
moss into hard stone, without alteration or changing of shape. The like also
is seen there in frogs, worms, and such like living creatures as fall into
the same, and find no ready issue. Of this spring also Leland writes thus; A
little above March (but at the further bank of Nide river as I came) I saw a
well of wonderful nature called Dropping well, because the water thereof
distilleth out of great rocks hard by into it continually, which is so cold,
and thereto of such nature, that what thing soever falls out of those rocks
into this pit, or grows near thereto, or be cast into it by man's hand, it
turns into stone. It may be (says he) that some sand or other fine ground
issues out with this water from these hard rocks, which cleaving unto those
things, gives them in time the form of stones etc. Near unto the place where
Winburne monastery sometimes stood, also not far from Bath there is a fair
wood* whereof if you take any piece, and pitch it into the ground thereabouts,
or throw it into the water, within twelve months it will turn into hard
stone. In part of the hills east southeast of Leland says) and the grain
which is growing therein does come to very good perfection till it be ready
to be cut down: but even then, or about that time it vanishes away and
becomes altogether unprofitable. Is it any wonder (think you) to tell of
sundry causes near to Browham, on the west side of the river Aimote, wherein
are halles, chambers, and all offices of household cut out of the hard rock? If
it be, then may we increase the number of maruels very much by a rehearsal

In the parish of Landsarnam in Wales, and in the side of a stony hill, is a
place wherein are four

There is a well not far from stony Stratford, which conuerteth many things
into stone; and an other in Wales, which is said to double or triple the force
of any edge tool that is quenched in the same. In Tegenia, a parcel of
Wales, there is a noble well (I mean in the parish of Kilken) which is of
marvelous nature, and much like to another well at Seuill in Spain: for
although it be six miles from the sea, it ebbeth and flows twice in one day,
always ebbing when the sea does use to flow, and in flowing likewise when the
sea does use to ebb; whereof some do fable, that this well is lady and
mistress of the ocean. Not far from thence also is a medicinable spring
called Schinant of old time, but now Wenefrides well, in the edges whereof
does breed a very odoriferous and delectable moss, wherewith the head of the
smeller is maruellouslie refreshed. Other wells and watercourse we have
likewise, which at some times burst out into huge streams, though at other
seasons they run but very softly, whereby the people gather some alteration
of estate to be at hand. And such a one there is at Henleie, and an other at
Croidon; and such a one also in the golden dale beside Anderne in Picardie,
whereof the common sort imagine many things. Some of the greater sort also
give over to run at all in such times, whereof they conceive the like opinion.
And of the same nature, though of no great quantity, is a pit or well at
Langleie park in Kent, whereof (by good hap) it was my luck to read a notable
history in an ancient chronicle that I saw of late. What the foolish people
dream of the hell Kettles, it is not worthy the rehearsal; yet to the end
the lewd opinion conceived of them may grow into contempt, I will say thus
much also of those pits. There are certain pits, or rather three little
pooles, a mile from Darlington, and a quarter of a mile distant from the These
banks which the people call the Kettles of hell, or the devils Kettles, as if
he should sees souls of sinful men and women in them. They add also, that
the spirits have often been heard to cry and yell about them, with other like
talk savoring altogether of pagan infidelity. The truth is, and of this
opinion also was Cutbert Tunstall late bishop of Durham, a man (notwithstanding
the baseness of his birth, being begotten by one Tunstall upon a daughter of
the house of the Comers, as Leland says) of great learning and judgment,
that the cole-mines in those places are kindled, or if there be no coals, there
may a mine of some other unctuous matter be set on fire, which being here and
there consumed, the earth falls in, and so does leave a pit. Indeed the
water is now and then warm (as they say) and beside that it is not clear:
the people suppose them to be an hundred fadam deep. The biggest of them also
has an issue into the These, as experience has confirmed. For doctor Bellows
alias Belzis made report, how a ducke marked after the fashion of the duckes of
the bishoprike of Durham, was put into the same betwixt Darlington and These
bank, and afterward seen at a bridge not far from master Clereuar house. If
it were worth the noting, I would also make relation of many wooden crosses
found very often about Halidon, whereof the old inhabitants conceived an
opinion that they were fallen from heaven; whereas in truth, they were made and
borne by king Oswald and his men in the battle wherein they prevailed
sometimes against the British infidels, upon a superstitious imagination, that
those crosses should be their defense and shield against their adversaries.
Beda calls the place where the said field was fought, Heaven field; it lies
not far from the Pictish wall, and the famous monastery of Hagolstad. But more
of this elsewhere. Neither will I speak of the little hillets seen in many
places of our I Will, whereof though the unskillful people babble many things:
yet are they nothing else but Tumuli or graves of former times, as appears by
Roger Bacon our countrieman notes it to grow plentiouslie in Tuthill fields
about London. I have heard of it to be within compass Sfera Cauallo, whereof
Mathiolus and the herbarists do write, albeit that it has not been my luck
at any time to behold it. Pliny calls it Aethiopis: and Aelianus, Oppianus,
Kyramis, and Trebius have written many superstitious things thereof, but
especially our Chemists, who make it of far more virtue than our smiths do
their fern seed, whereof they babble many woonders, and prate of such effects
as may well be performed indeed when the fern bears seed, which is commonly
Ad calendas Graecas, for before it will not be found. But to proceed. There is
a well in Darbieshire called Tideswell (so named of the word tide, or to ebb
and flow) whose water often seems to rise and fall, as the sea which is
forty miles from it does usually accustom to ebb and flow. And hereof an
opinion is grown that it keeps an ordinary course as the sea does.
Howbeit, since diverse are known to have watched the same, it may be that at
sometimes it rises, but not continually; and that it so does I am fully
persuaded to believe. But even enough of the woonders of our country, least I
do seem by talking longer of them, woonderouslie to ouershoot my self, and
forget how much does rest behind of the description of my country. As for
those that are to be touched of Scotland, the description of that part shall in
some part remember them.

The Contents of the second Book.
1 Of the ancient and present estate of the church of England. 2 Of the number
of bishoprikes and their several circuits. 3 Of universities. 4 Of the
partition of England into shires and counties. 5 Of degrees of people in the
commonwealth of England. 6 Of the food and diet of the English. 7 Of their
apparel and attire. 8 Of the high court of parliament and authority of the
same. 9 Of the laws of England since her first inhabitation. 10 Of provision
made for the poor. 11 Of fundrie kinds of punishment appointed for
malefactors. 12 Of the manner of building and furniture of our houses. 13 Of
cities and towns in England. 14 Of castles and holds. 15 Of palaces belonging
to the prince. 16 Of armor and munition. 17 Of the navy of England. 18 Of
faires and markets. 19 Of parkes and warrens. 20 Of gardens and orchards. 21 Of
waters generally. 22 Of woods and marshes. 23 Of baths and hot wells. 24 Of
antiquities found. 25 Of the coins of England.
Of the ancient and present estate of the church of England. Chap. 1.
THere are now two provinces only in England, of which the first and greatest
is subject to the sea of Canturburie, comprehending a part of

In old time there were three archbishops, and so many provinces in this I Will;
of which one kept at London, another at York, and the third at Caerlheon upon
Uske. But as that of London was translated to Canturburie by Augustine, and
that of York remains (notwithstanding that the greatest part of his
jurisdiction is now bereft him and given to the Scottish archbishop) so that of
Caerlheon is utterly extinguished, and the government of the country united
to that of Canturburie in spiritual cases: after it was once before removed to
S. David's in Wales by David successor to Dubritius, and uncle to king Arthur,
in the 519 of Grace, to the end that he and his clearkes might be further off
from the cruelty of the Saxons, where it remained till the time of the
Bastard, and for a season after, before it was annexed unto the sea of
Canturburie.

The archbishop of Canturburie is commonly called primat of all England; and
in the coronations of the kings of this land, and all other times, wherein it
shall please the prince to wear and put on his

Of their practices with mean persons I speak not, neither will I begin at
Dunstane the author of all their pride and presumption here in England. But for
so much as the dealing of Robert the Norman against earl Goodwine is a rare
history, and deserves to be remembered, I will touch it in this place;
protesting to deal withal in more faithful manner than it has heretofore
been delivered unto us by the Norman writers, or French English, who

These Norman clerks, and their friends, being

But to proceed. This affirmation of the archbishop being greatly soothed out
with his crafty utterance (for he was learned) confirmed by his French friends,
(for they had all conspired against the earl) and thereunto the king being
desirous to revenge the death of his brother, bred such a grudge in his mind
against Goodwine, that he banished him and his sons clean out of the land. He
sent also his wife the earls daughter prisoner to Wilton, with one only
maiden attending upon her, where she lay almost a year before she was
released. In the mean season, the rest of the peers, as Siward earl of
Northumberland surnamed Digara or Fortis, Leofrijc earl of Chester, and other
went to the king, before the departure of Goodwine, indeuouring to perfuade him
unto the reuocation of his sentence; and desiring that his cause might he heard
and discussed by order of law. But the king incensed by the archbishop and his
Normans would not hear on that side, saying plainly, and swearing by saint
John the evangelist (for that was his common oath) that earl Goodwine should
not have his peace till he restored his brother Alfred alive again unto his
presence. With which answer the peers departed in choler from the court, and
Goodwine toward the coast.

Coming also unto the shore and ready to take shipping, he kneeled down in
presence of his conduct (to wit at Bosenham in the month of September, from
whence he intended to sail into Flanders unto Baldwine the earl) and there
prayed openly before them all, that if ever he attempted any thing against
the kings person of England, or his royal estate, that he might never come
safe unto his cousine, nor see his country any more, but perish in this
voyage. And herewith he went aboard the ship that was provided for him, and so
from the coast into the open sea. But see what followed. He was not yet gone a
mile way from the land, before he saw the shore full of armed soldiers, sent
after by the archbishop and his friends to kill him yer he should depart and go
out of the country: which yet more incensed the hearts of the English against
them.

Being come also to Flanders, he caused the earl, the French king, and other
of his friends, among whom also the emperor was one, to write unto the king
in his behalf; but all in vain: for nothing could be obtained from him, of
which the Normans had no liking, whereupon the earl and his sons changed
their minds, obtained aid, and invaded the land in sundry places. Finally
ioining their powers they came by the Thames into Southwarke near London where
they lodged, and looked for the king to encounter with them in the field. The
king seeing what was done, commanded the Londoners not to aid nor vittell
them. But the citizens made answer, how the quarrel of Goodwine was the cause
of the whose realm, which he had in manner given over unto the spoil of the
French: and thereupon they not only vittelled them abundantly, but also
received the earl and his chief friends into the city, where they lodged
them at their ease, till the kings power was ready to join with them in
battle.

Great resort also was made unto them from all places of the realm, so that
the earls army was woonderfullie increased, and the day and place chosen
wherein the battle should be fought. But when the armies met, the kings side
began some to flee to the earl, other to lay down their weapons, and not a
few to run away out right; the rest telling him plainly that they would
never fight against their own countriemen, to maintain Frenchmens quarrels.
The Normans also seeing the sequel, fled

In the mean season the earls power would have set upon the king, either to
his slaughter, or apprehension; but he stayed them, saying after this manner:
The king is my son (as you all know) and it is not for a father to deal so
hardly with his child, neither a subject with his sovereign; it is not he
that has hurt or done me this injury, but the proud Normans

The king (after he had paused a pretty while) seeing his old father in law to
lie groueling at his feet,

Wherein it is much to read, how many bills

After this also the earl lived almost two years, and then falling into an
apoplexy, as he sat with the king at the table, he was taken up and carried
into the kings bedchamber, where (after a few days) he made an end of his
life. And thus much of our first broile raised by the clergy, and practice of
the archbishop. I would entreat of all the like examples of tyranny, practiced
by the prelates of this see, against their lords and souereignes: but then I
should rather write an history than a description of this Island.

Wherefore I refer you to those reports of Anselme and Becket, sufficiently
penned by other, the which Anselme also making a show, Anselme.
as if he had bin very unwilling to be placed in the sea of Canturburie, gave
this answer to the letters of such his friends, as did make request unto him to
take the charge upon him. Secularia negotia nescio, quia seire nolo, eorum
namque occupationes horreo, liberum affectans animum. Voluntati sacrarum
intendo scripturarum, vos dissonantiam facitis, verendumque est ne aratrum
sanctae ecclesiae, quod in Anglia duo boues validi and pari fortitudine, ad
bonum certantes, id est rex and archiepiscopus, debeant trahere, nunc oue
vetula cum tauro indomito iugata, distorqueatur a recto. Ego ouis vetula, qui
siquietus essem, verbi Dei lacte, and operimento lanae, aliquibus possem
fortassis non ingratus esse, sed sime cum hoc tauro coniungitis, videbitis pro
disparilitate trahentium, aratrum non recte procedere, etc. Which is in English
thus: Of secular affairs I have no skill, because I will not know them, for I
even abhor the troubles that rise about them, as one that desires to have his
mind at liberty. I apply my whole endeavor to the rule of the scriptures, you
lead me to the contrary. And it is to be feared least the plough of holy
church, which two strong oxen to equal force, and both like earnest to contend
unto that which is good (that is the king and the archbishop) ought to draw,
should thereby now swerve from the right forrow, by matching of an old sheep
with a wild untamed bull. I am that old sheep, who if I might be quiet, could
peradventure show my self not altogether ungrateful to some, by feeding them
with the milk of the word of God, and covering them with wool: but if you
match me with this bull, you shall see that thorough want of equality in
draught the plough will not go to right, etc: as follows in the process of
his letters. Thomas Becket.
The said Thomas Becket was so proud, that he wrote to king Henry the second,
as to his lord, to his king, and to his son, offering him his counsel, his
reverence, and due correction, etc. Others in like sort have protested, that
they owght nothing to the kings of this land, but their counsel only,
reserving all obedience unto the sea of Rome.

And as the old cock of Canturburie did crew in this behalf, so the young
cockerels of other sees did imitate his demeanor, as may be seen by this one
example also in king Stephans time, worthy to be remembered; unto whom the
bishop of London would not so much as swear to be true subject: wherein also
he was maintained by the pope, as appears by these letters.

Eugenius episcopus seruus seruorum Dei, dilecto in Christo filio Stephano
illustri regi Angloru^ salute^, and apostolic a^ benedictione^. Adhaec superna
prouide^tia in ecclesiapontifices ordinauit, vt Christianus populus ab eis
pascua vitae reciperet, and tam principes seculares, quam inferioris
conditionis homines, ipsis pontificibus tanquam Christi vicarijs reuerentiam
exhiberent. Venerabilis siquidem frater noster Robertus London episcopus,
tanquam vir sapiens and honestus, and relligionis amator, a nobilitate tua
benign tractandus est, and pro collata a Deo prudentia propensius honorandus.
Quia ergo, sicut in veritate comperimus cum animae suae salute, ac snae ordinis
periculo, fidelitate quae ab eo requiritur astringi non potest: volumus, and ex
paterno tibi affectu consulimus, quatenus praedictum fratrem nostrum super hoc
nullatenus inquietes, immo pro beati Petri and nostra reuerentia, eum in amorem
and gratiam tuam recipias. Cum autem illud iuramentum praestare non possit,
sufficiat discretioni tuae, vt simplici and veraci verbo promittat, quod
laesionem tibi velterrae tuae non inferat: Vale. Dat. Meldis 6. call. Iulij.

Thus we see, that kings were to rule no further than it pleased the pope to
like of; neither to challenge more obedience of their subjects than stood also
with their good will and pleasure. He wrote in like sort unto queen Mawd about
the same matter, making her Samsons calfe (the better to bring his purpose to
pass) as appears by the same letter here ensuing.

Solomone attestante, didicimus quod mulier sapiens aedificat domum; insipiens
autem constructam destruet manibus. Gaudemus pro te, and deuotionis studium in
Domino collaudamus; quoniam sicut relligiosorum relatione accepimus, timorem

Is it not strange, that a peevish order of religion (devised by man) should
break the express law of God, who commands all men to honor and obeie
their kings and princes, in whom some part of the power of God is manifest and
laid open unto us? And even unto this end the cardinal of Hostia also

Humilis Dei gratia Hostiensis episcopus, Londinensis ecclesiae canoniois
spiritu^ consilij in Domino. Forfitan naturalem.
venerabilem filium nostrum Robertum, eiusdem ecclesiae archidiaconum, in
pastorem and episcopum animarum suarum susceperit and elegerit. Nouimus quidem
eum esse personam, quam

Hereby you see how king Stephan was dealt withal. And albeit the archbishop
of Canturburie is not openly to be touched herewith, yet it is not to be
doubted, but he was a dooer in it, so far as might tend to the maintenance of
the right and prerogative of holy church. And even no less unquietness had
another of our princes with John of Arundell, who fled to Rome for fear of his
head, and caused the pope to write an ambitious and contumelious letter unto
his fouereigne about his restitution. But when (by the kings letters yet
extant) and beginning thus; Thomas proditionis non expers nostrae regiae
maiestati insidias fabricauit, the pope understood the botome of the matter, he
was contented that Thomas should be deprived, and another archbishop chosen in
his sted.

Neither did this pride state at archbishops and bishops, but descended lower,
even to the rake-helles of the clergy and puddels of all ungodliness. For
beside the injury received of their superiors, how was K. John dealt withal
by the vile Cistertians at Lincoln in the second of his reign? Certes, when
he had (upon just occasion) conceived some grudge against them for their
ambitious demeanor; and upon denial to pay such sums of moneie as were
allotted unto them, he had caused seizure to be made of such horses, swine,
neat, and other things of theirs, as were maintained in his forests. They
denounced him as fast amongst themselves with bell, book and candle, to be
accurssed and excommunicated. Thereunto they so handled the matter with the
pope and their friends, that the kings was feign to yield to their good graces:
insomuch that a meeting for pacification was appointed between them at
Lincoln, by means of the present archbishop of Canturburie, who went often
between him and the Cistertian commissioners before the matter could be
finished. In the end, the king himself came also unto the said commissioners
as they sat in their chapter house, and there with tears fell down at their
feet, craving pardon for his trespasses against them, and heartily requiring
that they would (from thencefoorth) commend him and his realm in their prayers
unto the protection of the almighty, and receive him into their fraternity:
promising moreover full satisfaction of their damages sustained; and to build
an house of their order in whatsoever place of England it should please them to
assign. And this he confirmed by charter, bearing date the seven and twentieth
of November, after the Scottish king was returned into Scotland, and departed
from the king. Whereby (and by other the like, as between John Stratford and
Edward the third, etc:) a man may easily conceive how proud the cleargie-men
have been in former times, as wholly presuming upon the primassie of their
pope. More matter could I allege of these and the like brotles, not to be
found among our common historiographers: howbeit to serving the same unto
places more convenient, I will cease to speak of them at this time, and go
forward with such other things as my purpose is to speak of. At the first
therefore there was like and equal authority in both our archbishops: but as
he of Canturburie has long since obtained the prerogative above York
(although I say not without great trouble, suit, some bloodshed and
contention) so the archbishop of York is nevertheless written printate of
England, as one contenting himself with a piece of a title at the least, when
(all) could not be gotten. And as he of Canturburie crowns the king, so this
of York does the like to the queen, whose perpetual chapleine he is; and
has been from time to time, since the determination of this controversy, as
writers do report. The first also has under his jurisdiction to the number of
one and twenty inferior bishops, Twenty one bishoprikes under ye see of
Canturburie. Only four sees under the archbishop of York.
the other has only four, by reason that the churches of Scotland are now
removed from his obedience unto an archbishop of their own, whereby the
greatness and circuit of the jurisdiction of York is not a little diminished.
In like sort each of these seven and twenty sees have their cathedral
churches, wherein the deanes Deanes
(a calling not known in England before the conquest) do bear the chief
rule, being men especially chosen to that vocation, both for their learning
Canonries
as heretofore under the popish regiment. Howbeit those that are chosen to the
same are no idle and unprofitable persons (as in times past they have been
when most of these livings were either furnished with strangers, especially
out of Italy, boys, or such idiots as had least skill of all in discharging
of those functions, whereunto they were called by virtue of

These churches are called cathedral, because the bishops dwell or lie near
unto the same, as bound to keep continual residence within their
jurisdictions, for the better oversight and governance of the same: the word
being derived A cathedra, that is to say a chair or seat where he rests,
and for the most

But as the number of christians increased, so first Ordinary sermons.
the canons do make certain ordinary sermons by course, whereunto great
numbers of all estates do orderly resort: and upon the working days thrice
in the week, one of the said canons, or some other in his steed, Ordinary
expositions of the scriptures
does read and expound some piece of holy seripture, whereunto the people do
very reverently repair. The bishops themselves in like sort are not idle in
their callings, for being now exempt from court and council, which is one (and
a no small) piece of their felicity (although Richard archbishop of
Canturburie thought otherwise, as yet appears by his letters to pope
Alexander, Epistola44. Petri Blesensis, where he says; Because the clergy of
his time were somewhat narrowly looked unto, Supra dorsum ecclesiae fabricant
peccatores, etc:) they so apply their minds to the setting forth of the word,
The bishops preach diligently, whose predecessors heretofore have been
occupied in temporal affairs.
that there are very few of them, which do not every sundaie or offener
resort to some place or other, within their jurisdictions, where they expound
the scriptures with much gravity and skill; and yet not without the great
mistaking and contempt of such as hate the word. Of their manifold translations
from one see to another I will say nothing, which is not now done for the
benefit of the flock, as the preferment of the party favored, and advantage
unto the prince, a matter in time past much doubted of, to wit, whether a
bishop or pastor might be translated from one see to another; and left
undecided, till prescription by royal authority made it good. For among
princes a thing once done, is well done, and to be done oftentimes, though
no warrant be to be found therefore.

They have under them also their archdeacons, Archdecons.
some one, diverse two, and many four or mo, as their circuits are in
quantity, which archdeacons are termed in law the bishops eyes: and these
(beside their ordinary courts, which are holden within so many or more of
their several deanries by themselves or their officials once in a month at
the least) do keep yearly two visitations or synods (as the bishop does in
every third year, wherein he confirms some children, though most care but a
little for that ceremony) in which they make diligent inquisition and search,
as well for the doctrine and behavior of the ministers, as the orderly
dealing of the parishioners in resorting to their parish churches and
conformity unto religion. They punish also with great severity all such
trespassers, either in person or by the pursse (where permutation of penance is
thought more grievous to the offender) as are presented unto them: or if the
cause be of the more weight, as in cases of heresy, pertinacie, contempt, and
such like, they refer them either to the bishop of the diocese, or his
chancellor, or else to sundry grave persons set in authority, High
commissioners.
by virtue of an high commission directed unto them from the prince to that
end, who in very courteous manner do see the offenders gently reformed, or
else seuerlie punished, if necessity so enforce.

Beside this, A prophecy or conference.
in many of our archdeaconries we have an exercise lately begun, which for
the most part is called a prophecy or conference, and erected only for the
examination or trial of the diligence of the clergy in their study of holy
scriptures. Howbeit, such is the thirsty desire of the people in these days
to hear the word of God, that they also have as it were with zealous violence
intruded themselves among them (but as hearers only) to come by more
knowledge through their presence at the same. Herein also (for the most part)
two of the yoonger sort of ministers do expound each after other some piece of
the scriptures ordinarily appointed unto them in their courses (wherein they
orderly go through with some one of the evangelists, or of the epistles, as it
pleases the whole assembly to choose at the first in every of these
conferences) and when they have spent an hour or a little more between them,
then comes one of the better learned sort, who being a graduat for the most
part, or known to be a preacher sufficiently authorized, and of a sound
judgment, supplieth the room of a moderator, making first a brief rehearsal
of their discourses, and then adding what him thinks good of his own
knowledge, whereby two hours are thus commonly spent at this most profitable
meeting. When all is done, if the first speakers have showed any piece of
diligence, they are commended for their travel, and encouraged to go forward.
If they have been found to be slack, or not sound in delivery of their
doctrine, their negligence and error is openly reproved before all their
brethren, who go aside of purpose from the laity, after the exercise ended, to
judge of these matters, and consult of the next speakers and quantity of the
text to be handled in that place. The laity never speak of course (except
some vain and busy head will now and then intrude themselves with offense)
but are only hearers; and as it is used in

But alas! as satan the author of all mischief has in sundry manners
heretofore hindered the erection and maintenance of many good things: so in
this he has stirred up adversaries of late unto this most profitable exercise,
who not regarding the commodity that rises thereby so well to the hearers as
spekers; but either stumbling (I cannot tell how) at words and terms, or at
the least wise not liking to here of the reprehension of vice, or peradventure

Our elders or ministers and deacons (for subdeacons and the other inferior
orders, Ministers and deacons.
sometime used

With us also it is permitted, that a sufficient man may (by dispensation from
the prince) hold two livings, not distant either from other above thirty
miles; whereby it comes to pass, that as her majesty does reap some
commodity by the faculty, so

Many exclame against such faculties, as if there were mo good preachers that
want maintenance, than livings to maintain them. In deed when a living is
void, there are so many suitors for it, that a man would think the report to
be true and most certain: but when it comes to the trial, who are
sufficient, and who not, who are stayed men in conversation, judgment, and
learning; of that great number you shall hardly find one or two, such as they
ought to be: and yet none more earnest to make suit, to promise largely, bear
a better show, or find fault with the state of things than they. Nevertheless,
I do not think that their exclamations if they were wisely handled, are
altogether grounded upon rumors or ambitious minds, if you respect the state of
the thing it self, and not the necessity growing through want of able men, to
furnish out all the cures in England, which both our universities are never
able to perform. For if you observe what numbers of preachers Cambridge and
Oxford do yearly send forth; and how many new compositions are made in the
court of first fruits, by the deaths of the last incumbents: you shall soon
see a difference. Wherefore, if in country towns and cities, yea even in
London it self, four or five of the little churches were brought into one, the
inconvenience would in great part be redressed.

And to say truth, one most commonly of these small livings is of so little
value, that it is not able to maintain a mean scholar; much less a learned
man, as not being above ten, twelve, sixteen, seventeen, twenty, or thirty
pounds at the most, toward their charges, which now (more than before time) do
go out of the same. I say more than before, because every small trifle, noble
man's request, or courtesy craved by the bishop, does impose and command a
twentieth part, a three score part, or two pence in the pound, etc: out of our
livings, which hitherto has not been usually granted, but by consent of a
synod, wherein things were decided according to equity, and the poorer sort
considered of, which now are equally burdened.

We pay also the tenths of our livings to the prince yearly, according to
such valuation of each of them, as has been lately made: which nevertheless
in time past were not annual but voluntary, and paid at request of king or
pope. Hereupon also hangs a pleasant story though done of late years, to
wit 1452, at which time the clergy seeing the continual losses that the king
of England sustained in France, upon some motion of relief made, granted in an
open convocation to give him two tenths toward the recovery of Bordeaux, which
his grace very thankefullie received. It fortuned also at the same time that
Uincentius Clemens the popes factor was here in England, who hearing what the
clergy had done, came into the convocation house also in great have and less
speed, where, in a solemn oration he earnestly required them to be no less
favorable to their spiritual father the pope, and mother the sea of Rome,
than they had showed themselves unto his vassal and inferior, meaning their
sovereign lord in temporal jurisdiction, etc. In delivering also the cause of
his suit, he showed how greeuouslie the pope was disturbed by cutthrotes,
varlots, and harlots, which do now so abound in Rome, that his holiness is in
daily danger to be made away amongst them. To be short when this fine tale
was told, one of the company stood up and said unto him; My lord we have heard
your request, and as we think it deserves little consideration and less ear,
for how would you have us to contribute to his aid in suppression of such, as
he and such as you are do continual uphold, it is not unknown in this house
what rule is kept in Rome.

I grant (quoth Uincent) that there wants just reformation of many things in
that city, which would have been made sooner, but now it is too late:
nevertheless I beseech you to write unto his holiness, with request that he
would leave and abandon that Babylon, which is but a sink of mischief, and
keep his court elsewhere in place of better fame. And this he shall be the
better able also to perform, if by your liberality extended toward him, unto
whom you are most bound, he be encouraged thereto. Many other words passed to
and fro amongst them, howbeit in the end Uincent overcame not, but was
dismissed without any penie obtained. But to return to our tenths, a paiement
first as devised by the pope, and afterward taken up as by the prescription of
the king, whereunto we may join also our first fruits, which is one whole
years commodity of our living, due at our entrance into the same, the tenths
abated

They pay likewise subsidies with the temporaltie, but in such sort, that if
these pay after four shillings for land, the clergy contribute commonly
after six shillings of the pound, so that of a benefice of twenty pounds by
the year, the incumbent thinks himself well acquitted, if all ordinary
paiments being discharged he may reserve thirteen pounds six shillings eight
pence toward his own sustentation,

Some of them also, after the marriages of their children, will have their
proportions qualified, or by freendship get themselves quite out of the book.
But what stand I upon these things, who have rather to complain of the injury
offered by some of our neighbors of the laity, which daily endeavor to bring
us also within the compass of their fifteens or taxes Meliusinquirendum, as if
our livings were not racked high enough already.

The other paiments due unto the archbishop and bishop at their several
visitations (of which the first is double to the latter) and such also as the
archdeacon receives at his synods, etc: remain still as they did without any
alteration, only this I think be added within memory of man, that at the
coming of every prince, his appointed officers do commonly visit the whole
realm under the form of an ecclesiastical inquisition, in which the clergy
do usually pay double fees, as unto the archbishop. Hereby then, and by
those already remembered, it is found that the church of England, is no less
commodious to the princes coffers than the state of the laity, if it do not
far exceed the same, since their paiments are certain, continual, and
seldom abated, howsoever they gather up their own duties with grudging,
murmuring, suit, and slanderous speeches of the paiers, or have their livings
otherwise hardly valued unto the uttermost farding, or shrewdly cancelled by
the covetousness of the patrones, of whom some do bestow aduousons of
benefices upon their bakers, butlers, cooks, good archers, falconers, and
horssekeepers, in sted of other recompense, for their long and faithful
service, which they imploie afterward unto their most advantage.

Certes here they resemble the pope very much, for as he sends out his
idols, so do they their parasites, pages, chamberleins, stewards, grooms, and
lackies; and yet these be the men that first exclame of the insufficiency of
the ministers, as hoping thereby in due time to get also their glebes and
grounds into their hands. In times past bishopriks went almost after the same
manner under the lay princes, and then under the pope, so that he which helped
a clerk unto a see, was sure to have a present or purse fine, if not an
annual pension, besides that which went to the popes coffers, and was thought
to be very good merchandise. Hereof one example may be touched, as of a thing
done in my yoonger days, whilst queen Marie bare the swaie and governed in
this land. After the death of Stephan Gardener, the sea of Winchester was void
for a season, during which time cardinal Poole made seizure upon the revenues
and commodities of the same, pretending authority thereunto Sede vacant, by
virtue of his place. With this act of his the bishop of Lincoln called White
took such displeasure, that he stepped in like a mate, with full purpose (as
he said) to keep that see from ruin. He wrote also to Paulus the fourth pope,
requiring that he might be preferred thereunto, promising so as he might be
Compos voti, to pay to the popes coffers 1600 pounds yearlie during his
natural life, and for one year after. But the pope nothing liking of his
motion, and yet desirous to reap a further benefit, first showed himself to
stomach his simonicall practice very grieuouslie, considering the
dangerousnesse of the time and present estate of the church of England, which
hoong as yet in balance ready to yield any way, saving forth right, as he
alleged in his letters. By which reply he so terrified the poor bishop, that
he was driven unto another issue, I mean to recover the popes good will, with
a further sum than stood with his ease to part withal. In the end when the
pope had gotten this fleece, a new devise was found, and means made to and by
the prince, that White might be bishop of Winchester, which at the last he
obtained, but in such wise as that the pope and his nearest friends did lose
but a little by it. I could if need were set down a report of diverse other
the like practices, but this shall suffice in steed of all the rest, least in
reprehending of vice I might show my self to be a teacher of ungodliness, or
to scatter more ungracious seed in lewd ground already choked with wickedness.

To proceed therefore with the rest, I think it good also to remember, that
the names usually given unto such as feed the flock remain in like sort as
in times past, so that these words, parson, vicar, curat, and such are not yet
abolished more than the canon law it self, which is daily pleaded, as I have
said elsewhere; although the statutes of the realm have greatly infringed the
large scope, and brought the exercise of the same into some narrower limits.

This being done, we proceed unto the communion, if any communicants be to
receive the eucharist, if not we read the decalog, epistle and gospel with the
Nicene creed (of some in derision called the dry communion) and then proceed
unto an homily or sermon,

Certes this translation of the service of the church into the vulgar tongue,
has not a little offended the pope almost in every age, as a thing very often
attempted by diverse princes, but never generally obtained, for fear least the
confenting thereunto might breed the overthrow (as it would in deed) of all his
religion and hierarchy: nevertheless in some places where the kings and
princes dwelled not under his nose, it was performed maugre his resistance,
Uratislaus duke of Bohemia, would long since have done the like also in his
kingdom, but not daring to venture so far without the consent of the pope, he
wrote unto him thereof, and received his answer inhibitorie unto all his
proceeding in the same.

Gregorius septimus Vratislao Bohemorum duci, etc. Quia nobilitas tua postulat,
quod secundu^ Sclauonica^ lingua^ apud vos diuinum celebrari annueremus
officium, scias nos huic petitioni tuae nequaquam possefauere, ex hoc nempe se
voluentibus liquet, non immerito sacram scripturam optimo Deo placuisse
quibusdam locis esse occultam; ne si ad liquidum cunctis pateret, forte
vilesceret, and subiaceret despectui, aut praue intellecta a mediocribus in
errorem induceret. Neque enim ad excusationem iuuat, quod quidam viri hoc quod
simplex populus quaerit patienter tulerunt, seu incorrectum dimiserunt: cum
primitiua ecclesia multa dissimulauerit, quae a sanctis patribus postmodum,
firmata christianitate and religione crescente, subtili examinatione correcta
sunt: vnde id ne fiat, quod a vestris imprudenter exposcitur, authoritate beati
Petri inhibemus; teque ad honorem optimi Dei huic vanae temeritati viribus
totis resistere praecipimus, etc. Datum Romae, etc.

I would set down two or three more of the like instruments passed from that
see unto the like end, but this shall suffice, being less common than the
other, which are to be had more plentifully.

As for our churches themselves, belles, and times of morning and evening
prayer, remain as in times past, saving that all images, shrines, tabernacles,
roodlofts, and monuments of idolatry are removed, taken down, and defaced;
only the stories in glass windows excepted, which for want of sufficient
store of new stuff, and by reason of extreme charge that should grow by the
alteration of the same into white panes throughout the realm, are not
altogether abolished in most places at once, but by little and little suffered
to decaie, that white glass may be provided and set up in their rooms.
Finally, whereas there was wont to be a great partition between the quire
and the body of the church; now it is either very small or none at all: and
to say the truth altogether needless, since the minister says his service
commonly in the body of the church, with his face toward the people, in a
little tabernacle of wainscot provided for the purpose: by which means the
ignorant do not only learn diverse of the psalms and usual prayers by
heart, but also such as can read, do pray together with him: so that the
whole congregation at one instant powere out their petitions unto the living
God, for the whole estate of his church in most earnest and fervent manner. Our
holy and festival days are very well reduced also unto a less number; for
whereas (not long since) we had under the pope four score and fifteen, called
festival, and thirty Profesti, beside the sundaies, they are all brought unto
seven and twenty: and with them the superfluous numbers of idle waks, guilds,
fraternities, church-ales, helpe-ales, and soule-ales, called also dirge-ales,
with the heathnish rioting at bride-ales, are well diminished and laid aside.
And no great matter were it if the feasts of all our apostles, evangelists, and
martyrs, with that of all saints, were brought to the holy days that follow
upon Christmasse, Easter, and Whitsuntide; and those of the virgin Marie, with
the rest utterly removed from the calendars, as neither necessary nor
commendable in a reformed church.

The apparel in like sort of our clergy men is comlie, Apparel.
and in truth, more decent than ever it was in the popish church: before the
universities bound their graduats unto a stable attire, afterward usurped also
even by the blind sir John's. For if you peruse well my chronology ensuing, you
shall find, that they went either in diverse colors like plaiers, or in
garments of light hew, as yellow, red, green, etc: with their shoes piked,
their hair crisped, their girdles armed with silver; their shoes, spurs,
bridles, etc: Hospitality.
Touching hospitality, there was never any greater used in England, since by
reason that marriage is permitted to him that will choose that kind of life,
their meat and drink is more orderly and frugallie dressed; their furniture
Marriage.
If you say that their wives be fond, after the deceasse of their husbands,
and bestow themselves not so advisedly as their calling requires, which God
knows these curious surueiors make small account of in truth, Threadbare
gowns from whence they come.
Not a few also find fault with our threadbare gowns, as if not our patrones
but our wives were causes of our woe. But if it were known to all, that I know
to have been performed of late in Essex, where a minister taking a benefice
Number of churches in France.
wherein (as Machiauell writes) are eighteen archbishoprikes, one hundred
forty and six bishoprikes, 740 abbeys, eleven universities, 1000700 steeples
(if his report be sound.) Some are of the opinion, that if sufficient men in
every town might be sent for from the universities, this mischief would
soon be remedied; but I am clean of another mind. For when I consider
whereunto the gifts of felowships in some places are grown: Pretty packing.
the profit that arises at sundry elections of scholars out of grammar
schools, to the posers, schoolemasters, and preferrers of them to our
universities, the gifts of a great number of almeshouses builded for the maimed
and impotent soldiers, by princes and good men heretofore moved with a
pitiful consideration of the poor distressed: how rewards, pensions, and
annuities also do reign in other cases, whereby the giver is brought sometimes
into extreme misery, and that not so much as the room of a common souldior
is not obtained oftentimes, without a What will you give me? I am brought into
such a mistrust of the sequel of this devise, that I dare pronounce (almost
for certain) that if Homer were now alive, it should be said to him: Tuque
licet venias musis comitatus Homere,
Si nihil attuleris ibis Homere for as.


More I could say, and more I would say of these and other things, were it
not that in mine own judgment I have said enough already for the
advertisement of such as be wise. Nevertheless, before I finish this chapter,
I will add a word or two (so briefly as I can) of the old estate of
cathedral churches, which I have collected together here and there among the
writers, and whereby if shall easily be seen what they were, and how near
the government of ours do in these days approach unto them, for that there is
an irreconciliable ods between them and those of the papists, I hope there is
no learned man indeed, but will acknowledge and yield unto it.

We find therefore in the time of the primitive church, Old estate of
cathedral churches.
that there was in every see or jurisdiction one school at the least,
whereinto such as were catechistes in christian religion did resort. And hereof
as we may find great testimony for Alexandria, Antioch, Rome, and Jerusalem;
so no small notice is left of the like in the inferior sort, if the names of
such as taught in them be called to mind, and the histories well read which
make report of the same. These schools were under the jurisdiction of the
bishops, and from thence did they and the rest of the elders choose out such as
were the ripest scholars, and willing to serve in the ministry, whom they
placed also in their cathedral churches, there not only to be further
instructed in the knowledge of the word, but also to invre them to the
delivery of the same unto the people in sound manner, to minister the
sacraments, to visit the sick and brethren imprisoned, and to perform such
other duties as then belonged to their charges. The bishop himself and elders
of the church were also hearers and examiners of their doctrine, and being in
process of time found meet workmen for the lords harvest, they were forthwith
sent abroad (after imposition of hands, and prayer generally made for their
good proceeding) to some place or other then destitute of her pastor, and other
taken from the school also placed in their rooms. What number of such clerks
belonged now and then to some one see, the chronology following shall easily
declare: and in like sort what officers, widows, and other persons were daily
maintained in those seasons by the offerings and oblations of the faithful, it
is incredible to be reported, if we compare the same with the decaies and
ablations seen and practiced at this present. But

Of the number of bishoprikes and their several circuits. Chap. 2.
Having already spoken generally of the state of our church, now will I touch
the sees severally, saying so much of each

The jurisdiction of Canturburie therefore, exected first by Augustine the
moonke, Canturburie.
in the time of Ethelbert king of Kent, if you have respect to her provincial
regiment, extends it self over all the south and west parts of this Island,
and Ireland, as I have noted in the chapter precedent, and few shires there are
wherein the archbishop has not some peculiars. But if you regard the same
only that was and is proper unto his see, from the beginning, it reaches but
over one parcel of Kent, which Rudburne calls Cantwarland, the jurisdiction
of Rochester including the rest: so that in this one county the greatest
archbishoprike and the least bishoprike of all are linked in together. That of
Canturburie has under it one archdeaconrie, who has jurisdiction over eleauen
deanries or a hundred sixty one parish churches; and in the popish time in
sted of the 3093 pounds, eighteen shillings, halfepenie, farthing, which it
now paieth unto her majesty, under the name of first fruits, there went out of
this see to Rome, at every alienation 10000 ducates or florens, beside 5000
that the ne^h elect did usually pay for his pall, each ducat being then worth
an English crown or thereabout, as I have been informed.

The sea of Rochester is also included within the limits of Kent, Rochester.
being erected by Augustine in the 604 of Grace, and reign of Ceolrijc over
the West Saxons. The bishop of this see has one archdeacon, under whose
government in causes ecclesiastical are three deanries, or 132 parish
churches: so that hereby it is to be gathered, that there are 393 parish
churches in Kent, over which the said two archdeacons have especial cure and
charge. He was wont to pay also unto the court of Rome at his admission to
that see 1300 ducats or florens, as I read, which was an hard valuation,
considering the smalnesse of circuit belonging to his see. Howbeit, in my time
it is so far from ease by diminution, that it is raised to 1432 crowns, etc:
or as we resolve them into our pounds, 358 pounds, three shillings, six pence,
halfe-pennie, farthing, a reckoning a great deal more preciselie made than
any bishop of that see does take any great delight in. He was crosse-bearer
in times past unto the archbishop of Canturburie. And there are and have been
few sees in England, which at one time or other have not fetched their bishops
for the most part from this see: for as it is of it self but a small thing in
deed, so it is commonly a preparatiue to an higher place. But of all that ever
possessed it, Thomas Kempe had the best luck, who being but a poor man's son
of Wie (unto which town he was a great benefactor) grew first to be doctor of
both laws, then of divinity; and afterward being promoted to this see, he was
translated from thence to Chichester, thirdly to London, next of all to York,
and finally after seven and twenty years to Canturburie, where he became
also cardinal, deacon, and then priest in the court of Rome, according to this
verse, Bis primas, ter praeses, bis cardine functus. Certes I note this man,
because he bare some favor to the furtherance of the gospel, and to that end
he either builded or repared the pulpit in Paul's churchyard, and took order
for the continual maintenance of a sermon there upon the sabbath, which does
continue unto my time, as a place from whence the soundest doctrine is always
to be looked for, and for such strangers to resort unto as have no habitation
in any parish within the city where it stands.

The sea of London was erected at the first by Lucius, London.
who made it of an archeflamine and temple of Jupiter an archbishops see, and
temple unto the living God, and so it continued, until Augustine translated
the title thereof to Canturburie. The names of the archbishops of London are
these; Theon, Eluan, Cadoc, Owen, Conan, Palladius, Stephan, Iltutus
restitutus, anno 350, Theodromus, Theodredus, Hilarious, Fastidius, anno 420,
Guittelinus, Vodinus slain by the Saxons, and Theonus Junior. But for their
just order of succession as yet I am not resolved, nevertheless the first
bishop there was ordained by Augustine the moonke, in the year of Christ 604,
in the time of Ceolrijc, after he had removed his see further off into Kent: I
woote not upon what secret occasion, if not the speedy hearing of news from
Rome, and readiness to flee out of the land, if any trouble should betide him.
For jurisdiction it includes Essex, Middlesex, and part of Herefordshire,
which is neither more nor less in quantity than the Indic. 1. 598 of Inuber
as I find, whilst he held that part of the said kingdom under his
government. Afterward when the Danes had sundry times defaced it, it was
repared and made up with hard stone, but in the end it was taken down, and
wholly reedified by Mawrice bishop of that see, and sometimes chapleine to the
bastar^^ Henry the first,

The first beginning of the sea of Chichester was in Chichester
the I Will of Seals or Seolseie, and from thence translated

The bishop of Winchester was sometime called Winchester
bishop of the west Saxons, and of Dorchester, which town was given to Birinus
and his successors, by Kinigils and Oswald of the Northumbers, in whose time it
was erected by Birinus and his fellows. In my time it has jurisdiction only
over Hamshire, Surrie, Iardeseie, Gardeseie, and the Wight, containing eight
deaneries, two hundred seventy and six parish churches, and beside all this he
is perpetual prelate to the honorable order of the Garter, devised by Edward
the third: he paid in old time to Rome 12000 ducates or florens, but now his
first fruits are 2491 pounds nine shillings eight pence half penie.
Canturburie was said to be the higher rack, but Winchester has borne the name
to be the better mangier. There are also which make Lucius to be the first
founder of an house of prayer in Winchester, as Kinigils did build the second,
and Kinwaldus his son the third; but you shall see the truth hereof in the
chronology ensuing. And hereunto if the old catalog of the bishops of this see
be well considered of, and the acts of the greatest part of them indifferently
weighed, as they are to be read in our histories, you shall find the most
egregious hypocrites, the stoutest warriors, the cruellest tyrants, the
richest monimoongers, and politic counselors in temporal affairs to have, I
wot not by what secret working of the divine providence, been placed herein
Winchester, since the foundation of that see, which was erected by Birinus 639
(whom pope Honorius sent hither out of Italy) and first planted at
Dorchester, in the time of Kinigils, then translated to Winchester, where it
does yet continue.

Salisburie was made the chief see of Shirburne by bishop Harman (predecessor
to Osmond) Salisburie.
who brought it from Shirburne to that city; it has now Barkeshire, Wilshire,
and Dorsetshire under her jurisdiction. For after the death of Hedda, which was
704, Winchester was divided in two, so that only Hamshire and Surrie were
left unto it, and Wilton, Dorset, Barkeshire, Summerset, Deuon and Cornewill
assigned unto Shirburne till other order was taken. Bishop Adelme did first sit
in that bishoprike (704 as I said) and placed his chair at Shirburne upon the
said division. And as many learned bishops did succeed him in that room,
before and after it was removed to Sarum; so there was never a more noble
ornament to that see than bishop Iuell, of whose great learning and judgment
the world it self bears witness, notwithstanding that the papists prefer S.
Osmond (as they call him) because he builded the minster there, and made the
portesse called Ordinale ecclesiastici officij, which old preests were wont to
use. The bishops also of this see were sometimes called bishops of Sunning, of
their old mansion house near unto Reading (as it should seem) and among those
that lived before the said Iuell, one Roger builded the castle of the Uies in
the time of Henry the first, taken in those days for the strongest hold in
England, as unto whose gate there were regals and gripes for six or seven port
cullises. Finally this see paid unto Rome 4000 florens, but unto her majesty
in my time 1367 pounds twelve shillings eight pence, as I did find of late.

Excester has, Devonshire and Cornwall, Excester.
sometime two several bishopriks, but in the end brought into one of
Cornwall, and from thence to Excester in the time of the Bastard or soon
after. It began upon this occasion, Anno Gratiae 905, in a provincial council
holden by the elder Edward and Plegimond archbishop of Canturburie, among the
Gewises, wherein it was found, that the sea of Winchester had not only been
without her pastor by the space of seven years, but also that her jurisdiction
was far greater than two men were able well to govern; therefore from the
former two, to wit, Winchester and Shirburne, three other were taken, whereby
that see was now divided into five parts; the latter three being Wells,
Kirton, and Cornwall: this of Cornwall having her see then at saint Patroks,
not far from North Wales upon the river Helmouth: he

Bath, Bath.
whose see was sometime at Wells, before John the bishop there annexed the
church of Bath unto it, which was 1094, has Summersetshire only, and the
valuation thereof in the court of Rome was four hundred and thirty florens:
but in her majesty's books I find it five hundred thirty and three pounds, and
about one od shilling: which declares a precise examination of the estate of
that see. Of the erection The bishoprike of Shirburne divided into three.
By this means Frithstan was placed at Winchester, and Ethelme at Shireburne,
both of them being then void. Shireburne also sustained the subdiuision; so
that Werstane was made bishop of Cridioc or Devonshire (whose see was at
Kirton)

Worcester sometime called Episcopatus Wicciorum (that is, Worcester.
the bishoprike of the Wiccies or Huiccies) has Worcester, and part of
Warwikeshires. And before the bishoprike of Gloucester was taken out of the
same, it paid to the pope two thousand ducats of gold Martij 31, being
thursdaie (as appears by the register of that house) after long plee holden
for the aforesaid see of Canturburie in the court of Rome, wherein most money
did oftenest prevail. This is also notable of that see, that five Italians
succeeded each other in the same, by the popes provision; as Egidius, Syluester,
Egidius his nephue (for nephues might say in those days; Father shall I call
you uncle? And uncles also; Son I must call thee nephue) Julius de Medices,
afterward pope Clement, and Hieronymus de Nugutijs, men very likely, no
doubt, to benefit the common people by their doctrine. Some of these being at
the first but poor men in Rome, and yet able by selling all they had to make a
round sum against a rainie day, came first into favor with the pope, then
into familiarity, finally into orders; and from thence into the best livings
of the church, far off where their parentage could not easily be heard of,
nor made known unto their neighbors.

Gloucester has Glocestershire only, Gloucester.
wherein are nine deanries, and to the number of 294 parish churches, as I find
by good record. But it never paid any thing to Rome, because it was erected by
king Henry the eight, after he had abolished the usurped authority of the
pope, except in queen Mary's, if any such thing were demanded, as I doubt not
but it was: yet is it worth yeerelie 315 pounds, seven shillings three pence,
as the book of first fruits declares.

Hereford has Herefordshire and part of Shropshire, Hereford.
and it paid to Rome at every alienation 1800 ducats at the least, but in my
time it paieth unto her majesty's cofers 768 pounds, ten shillings, ten pence,
half penie, farthing. In this see there was a bishop sometime called John
Bruton, upon whom the king then reigning, by likelihood for want of competent
maintenance, bestowed the keeping of his wardrobe, which he held long time with
great honor, as his register says. A wonderful preferment that bishops
should be preferred from the pulpit, to the custody of wardrobes: but such was
the time. Nevertheless his honorable custody of that charge is more solemnlie
remembered, than any good sermon that ever he made, which function peradventure
he committed to his suffragane, since bishops in those days had so much
business in the court, that they could not attend to doctrine and exhortation.

Lichefield, whereunto Couentrie was added, Lichfield.
in the time of Henry the first, at the earnest suit of Robert bishop of that
see, has Staffordshire, Darbishire, part of Shropshire, and the rest of
Warwikeshire, that is void of subjection to the sea of Worcestershire. It was
erected in the time of Peada king of the south Mercians, which lay on this
side the Trent, and therein one Dinas was installed, about the year of Grace
656, after whom Kellac first, then Tunher an Englishman succeeded, this later
being well learned, and consecrated by the Scots. In the time of the bastard, I
wot not upon what occasion, one Peter bishop of this see translated his chair
to Chester, and there held it for a season, whereby it came to pass that the
bishops of Lichfield were for a while called bishops of Chester. But Robert his
successor not likeing of this president, removed his chair from Chester to
Couentrie, and there held it whilst he lived, whereby the original division
of the bishoprike of Lichfield into Lichefield, Chester, and Couentrie, does
easily appear, although in my time Lichfield and Couentrie be united, and
Chester remains a bishoprike by it self. It paid the pope at Quasi mortuorum
campus, because of the

Oxford has Oxfordshire only, a very young jurisdiction, erected by king
Henry the eight, and where in the time of queen Marie, one Goldwell was
bishop, who (as I remember) was a Jesuit, dwelling in Rome, and more conversant
(as the constant fame

Elie has Cambridgshire, and the I Will of Elie. Elie.
It was erected 1109 by Henry the first, being before a rich and wealthy
abbeie. One Heruie also was made bishop there, as I have found in a register,
belonging sometime to that house being translated from Bangor. Finally it paid
to the pope at every Nuncio here in England, stayed his consecration by his
letters for a time, and in the mean season committed his examination to the
archbishop of Canturburie, and the bishop of Rochester, who felt and dealt so
favorably with him in golden reasoning, that his worthiness was commended to
the popes holiness, and to Rome he goes. Being come to Rome the pope himself
apposed him, and after secret conference utterly disableth his election, till
he had proved by substantial argument and of great weight before him also,
that he was not so lightly to be rejected. Which kind of reasoning so well
pleased his holiness, that Ex mera plenitudine potestatis, he was made capable
of the benefice and so returns into England; when he came home, this bishop
being in the kings presence told him how he had done he wist not what in
preferring so unmeet a man unto so high a calling. With which speech the king
was so offended, that he commanded him out of hand to avoid out of his
presence. In like sort the lady Wake then duchess of Lancaster, standing by,
and hearing the king her cousine to gather up the bishop so roundly, and
thereto an old grudge against him for some other matter, does presently pick
a quarrel against him about certain lands then in his possession, which he
defended and in the end obtained against her by plee and course of law yer long
also before happened in a part of her house, for which she accused the bishop, and
in the end by verdict of twelve men found that he was privy unto the fact of
his men in the said fact, wherefore he was condemned in nine hundred pounds
damages, which he paid every penie.

Nevertheless, being sore grieved, that she had (as he said) wrested out such
a verdict against him, and therein packed up a quest at her own choice: he
takes his horse, goes to the court, and there complains to the king of his
great injury received at her hands. But in the delivery of his tale, his
speech was so blockish, and terms so evil fauoredlie (though maliciously)
placed, that the king took yet more offense with him than before; insomuch
that he led him with him into the parliament house, for then was that court
holden, and there before the lords accused him of no small misdemeanor toward
his person by his rude and threatening speeches. But the bishop egerlie denies
the kings objections, which he still avouches upon his honor; and in the end
confirms his allegations by witness: whereupon he is banished from the kings
presence during his natural life by verdict of that house. In the mean time
the duchess hearing what was done, she begins a new to be dealing with
him: and in a brabling fraie between their servants one of her men was slain:
for which he was called before the magistrate, as chief accessarie unto the
fact. But he fearing the sequel of his third cause by his success had in the
two first, hides himself after he had sold all his moouables, and committed
the money unto his trusty friends. And being found guilty by the inquest, the
king seizes upon his possessions, and calls up the bishop to answer unto the
trespass. To be short, upon safeconduct the bishop comes to the kings
presence, where he denies that he was accessarie to the fact, either before,
at, or after the deed committed, and thereupon craves to be tried by his
peers. But this petition Vnde timor and turba (says my note) in Anglia. For
the king inhibited the bringing in and receipt of all processes, bills, and
whatsoever instruments should come from Rome: such also as adventured contrary
to this prohibition to bring them in, were either dismembered of some joint, or
hanged by the necks. Which rage so incensed the pope, that he wrote in very
vehement manner to the king of England, threatening far greater cursses, except
he did the sooner stay the fury of the lady, reconcile himself Stephan
Birchington does deliver it,

The sea of Norwich called in old time Episcopatus Donnicensis, Dononiae,
Norwich.
or Eastanglorum, was erected at Felstow or Felixstow, where Felix of Burgundy
(sometime schoolmaster to Sigebert of the East Angles, by whose persuasion
also the said Sigebert erected the university at Cambridge) being made bishop
of the East Angles first placed his see, afterward it was removed from thence
to Donwich, and thence to Helmham, Anno 870, about the death of Celnothus

Peterborow, Peterborow.
sometimes a notable monastery, has Northampton and Rutland shires under her
jurisdiction, a diocese erected also by king Henry the eight. It never paid
first fruits to the pope before queen mary's days (if it were then delivered)
whereof I doubt, because it was not recorded in his ancient register of tenths
and fruits, although peradventure the collectors left it not ungathered, I wot
not for what purpose; it yields now four hundred and fifty pounds, one
penie abated. I have seen and had an ancient iarror of the lands of this
monastery, which agrees very well with the history of Hugo le Blanc monk
of that house. In the charter also of donation annexed to the same, I saw one
of Wulfhere king of Mercia, signed with his own, and the marks of Sigher king
of Sussex, Sebbie of Essex, with the additions of their names: the rest of the
witnesses also insued in this order: Ethelred brother to Wulfehere, Kindburg
and Kindswith sisters to Wulfhere, Deusdedit archbishop, Ithamar bishop of
Rochester, Wina bishop of London, Iarnman bishop of Mearc, Wilfride and Eoppa
preests, Saxulfe the abbat.


Then all the earls and eldermen of England in order; and after all these, the
name of pope Agatho, who confirmed the instrument at the suit of Wilfride
archbishop of York, in a council holden at Rome 680, of a hundred and five
and twenty bishops, wherein also these churches were appropriated to the said
monastery, to wit, Breding, Reping, Cedenac, Swinesheued, Lusgerd,
Edelminglond, and Barchaing: whereby we have in part an evident testimony how
long the practice of appropriation of benefices has been used to the
hinderance of the gospel, and maintenance of idle moonks, an humane invention
grounded upon hypocrisy.

Bristow has Dorsetshire sometime belonging to Salisburie, Bristow.
a see also lately erected by king Henry the eight, who took no small care
for the church of Christ, and therefore eased a number of ancient sees of some
part of their huge and ouer-large circuits, and bestowed those portions
deducted, upon such other erections as he had appointed for the better regiment
and feeding of the flock: the value thereof is three hundred four score and
three pounds, eight shillings, and four pence (as I have been informed.

Lincoln of all other of late times was the greatest; Lincoln.
and albeit that out of it were taken the sees of Oxford and Peterborow, yet it
still reteineth Lincoln, Leicester, Huntingdon, Bedford, Buckingham shires,
and the rest of Hertford; so that it extends from the Thames unto the Humber,
and paid unto the pope five thousand ducats (as appears by his note) at
every alienation. In my time, and by reason of her diminution it yields a
tribute to whom tribute belongs, of the valuation of eight hundred ninety
and nine pounds, eight shillings, seven pence farthing. It began since the
conquest, about the beginning of William Rufus, by one Remigius, who removed
his see from Dorchester to Lincoln (not without license well paid for unto the
king.) And thus much of the bishopriks which lie within Lhoegres or England, as
it was left unto Locrinus. Now it follows that I proceed with Wales.

Landaffe, Landaffe.
or the church of Taw has ecclesiastical jurisdiction in Glamorgan, Monmouth,
Brechnoch, and Radnor shires. And although it paid seven hundred

S. David's has Penbroke and Caermardine shires, S. David's.
whose liuerie or first fruits to the sea of Rome was one thousand and five
hundred ducats, at the hardest (as I think.) For if record be of any
sufficient credit, it is little above the value of four hundred fifty and
seven pounds, one shilling, and ten pence farthing, in our time, and so it
paieth unto her majesty's coffers; but in time past I think it was far
better. The present bishop misliketh very much of the cold situation of his
cathedral church; and therefore

Bangor is in North Wales, Bangor.
and has Caernaruon, Angleseie, and Merioneth shires under her jurisdiction.
It paid to Rome 126 ducats, which is very much. For of all the bishoprikes in
England it is now the least for revenues, and not worth above one hundred and
one and thirty pounds, and

S. Asaphes has Prestholme and part of Denbigh S. Asaphes.
and Flintshires under her jurisdiction in causes ecclesiastical, which being
laid together do amount to little more than one good county, and therefore in

The sea of York was restored about the year of York.
Grace 625, which after the coming of the Saxons lay desolate and neglected,
howbeit at the said time Iustus archbishop of Canturburie ordained Paulinus to
be first bishop there, in the time of Eadw^jn king of Northumberland. This
Paulinus sat six years yer he was driven from thence, and after whose
expulsion that seat was void long time, whereby Lindeffarne grew into credit,
and so remained until the days of Oswie of Northumberland, who sent Wilfred
the priest over into France, there to be consecrated archbishop of York: but
whilst he tarried over long in those parts, Oswie impatient of delaie preferred
Ceadda or Chad to that room, who held it three years, which being expired
Wilfred recovered his room, and held it as he might, until it was severed in
two, to wit, York, Hagulstade, or Lind^ffarne, where Eata was placed, at which
time also Egfride was made bishop of Lincoln or Lindsie in that part of Mercia
which he had gotten from Woolfhere. Of it self it has now jurisdiction over
Yorkshire, Notinghamshire (whose shire town I mean the new part thereof with
the bridge was builded by king Edward the first surnamed the elder before the
conquest) and the rest of Lancastershire only not subject to the sea of
Chester; and when the pope bare authority in this realm, it paid unto his see
1000 ducates, beside 5000 for the pall of the new elect, which was more than he
could well spare of late, considering the curtailing and diminution of his see,
thorough the erection of a new metropolitan in Scotland, but in my time it
yields 1609 pounds nineteen shillings two pence to her majesty, whom God
long preserve unto us to his glory, her comfort, and our welfares.

Chester upon Dee, otherwise called Westchester, Chester.
has under her jurisdiction in causes ecclesiastical, Chestershire,
Darbishire, the most part of Lancastershire (to wit unto the Ribell) Richmond
and a part of Flint and Denbigh shires in Wales, was made a bishoprike by king
H. 8. anno regni 33. Iulij 16, and so has continued since that time, being
valued 420 pounds by the year beside od twenty pence (a streict reckoning) as
the record declares.

Durham has the county of Durham and Northumberland Durham.
with the Dales only under her jurisdiction, and hereof the bishops have
sometimes been earls palantines and ruled the roast under the name of the
bishoprike and succession of S. Cuthbert. It was a see (in mine opinion) more
profitable of late unto her majesty's coffers by 221 pounds eighteen shillings
ten pence sarthing, and yet of less countenance than her provincial,
nevertheless the sunneshine thereof (as I hear) is now somewhat eclipsed and
not likely to recover the light, for this is not a time wherein the c^^rch may
look to increase in her estate. I hear also that some other flitches have
forgone the like collops, but let such matters be scanned by men of more
discretion. Capgraue says how that the first bishop of this see was called
bishop of Lindseie (or Lincoln) and that Ceadda lay in Liechfield of the
Mercians in a mansion house near the church. But this is more worthy to be
remembered, that Cuthred of the Northumbers, and Alfred of the Westsaxons
bestowed all the land between the These and the Tine now called the bishoprike
upon S. Cuthbert, beside whatsoever belonged to the sea of Hagulstade. Edgar of
Scotland also in the time of the Bastard gave Coldingham and Berwike withal
their appurtenances to that house; but whether these donations be extant or no
as yet I cannot tell. Yet I think not but that Leland had a sight of them,
from whom I had this ground. But whatsoever this bishoprike be now, in
external and outward appearance, sure it is that it paid in old time 9000
ducates at every alienation to Rome, as the record expresses. Aidan a Scot or
Irishman was the first bishop of this see, who held himself (as did many of
his successors) at Colchester and in Lindeffarne I Will, till one came that
removed it to Durham. And now judge you whether the allegatlon of Capgraue be
of any account or not.

Caerleill was erected 1132 by Henry the first, Caerleill.
and hereof one Ethelwoolfe confessor to Osmond bishop of Sarum was made the
first bishop, having Cumberland and Westmerland assigned to his share; of the
deaneries and number of parish churches contained in the same as yet I have no
knowledge, more than of many other. Howbeit hereof I am sure, that
notwithstanding the present valuation be Liber formularum literarum curiae
Romanae, octo capitulorum, episcopatus Cardocensis. And thus much generally of
the names and numbers of our bishoprikes of England, whose tenths in old time
yearly amounting unto 21111 pounds, twelve shillings one penie half penie
farthing, of current

Certes I take this not to be one quarter of his gains gotten by England in
those days, for such commodities were raised by his courts holden here, so
plentifully gat he by his perquisits, as elections, procurations, appeals,
preuentions, pluralities, tot quots, trialities, tollerations, legitimations,
bulls, seals, preests, concubines, eating of flesh and white

Beside all these, we have another bishoprike yet in England almost slipped out
of my remembrance, Man.
because it is very obscure, for that the bishop thereof has not wherewith to
maintain his countenance sufficiently, and that is the sea of Mona or Man,
sometime named Episcopatus Sodorensis, whereof one Wimundus was ordained the
first bishop, and John the second, in the troublesome time of king Stephan. The
gift of this prelacie rests in the earls of Darbie, who nominate such a one
from time to time thereto as to them does seem convenient. Howbeit if that see
did know and might reap her own commodities, and discern them from other
men's possessions (for it is supposed that the mother has devoured the
daughter) I doubt not but the state of her bishop would quickly be amended.
Having therefore called this later see after this manner unto mind, I suppose
that I have sufficiently discharged my duty concerning the state of our
bishoprike, and manner how the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the church of
England is divided among the shires and counties of this realm. Whose bishops
as they have been heretofore of less learning, and yet of greater port and
doings in the commonwealth, than at this present, so are they now for the
most part the best learned that are to be found in any country of Europe,
since neither high parentage, nor great riches (as in other countries) but
only learning and virtue, commended somewhat by freendship, do bring them to
this honor.

I might here have spoken more at large of diverse other bishopriks, sometime
in this part of the Island, as of that of Caerlheon tofore overthrown by
Edelfred in the behalf of Augustine the moonke (as Malmesburie says) where
Dubritius governed, which was afterward translated to S. David's, and taken for
an archbishoprike: secondly of the bishoprike of Leircester called Legerensis,
whose fourth bishop (Unwon) went to Rome with Offa king of Mercia: thirdly of
Ramsbirie or Wiltun, and of Gloucester (of which you shall read in Matthew. Westminster.
Gloucester a very ancient bishoprike.
489) where the bishop was called Eldad: also of Hagulstade, one of the members
whereinto the sea of York was divided after the expulsion of Wilfrid. For (as
I read) when Egfrid the king had driven him away, he divided his see into two
parts, making Bosa over the Deiranes that held his see at Hagulstade or
Lindfarne: and Eatta over the Bernicians, who sat at York: and thereto
placing Edhedus over Lindseie (as is before noted) whose successors were
Ethelwine, Edgar, and Kinibert, notwithstanding that one Se^ulfus was over
Lindseie before Edhedus, who was bishop of the Mercians and middle England,
till he was banished from Lindseie, and came into those quarters to seek his
refuge and succor.

I could likewise entreat of the bishops of Whiteherne, or Ad Candidam Casam,
an house with the country wherein it stood belonging to the province of
Northumberland, but now a parcel of Scotland, also of the erection of the late
see at Westminster by Henry the eight. But as the one so the other is ceased,
and the lands of this later either so divided or exchanged for worse tenures,
that except a man should see it with his eyes, and point out with his finger
where every parcel of them is bestowed, but a few men would believe what is
become of the same. I might likewise and with like ease also have added the
successors of the bishops of every see to this discourse of their cathedral
churches and places of abode, but it would have extended this treatise to an
unprofitable length. Nevertheless I will remember the same of London my native
city, after I have added one word more of the house called Ad Candidam Casam,
in English Whiteherne, which takes denomination of the white stone wherewith it
was builded, and was seen far off as standing upon an hill to such as did
behold it.

The names and successions of so many archbishops and bishops of London, as
are extant, and to be had, from the faith first received.
Archbishops.
Theon. Eluanus. Cadocus. Ouinus. Conanus. Palladius. Stephanus. Iltutus.
Restitutus, who lived 350 of grace. Tadwinus alias Theodwinus, Tacwinus and
Tatwinus. Tidredus alias Theodred. Hilarious. Fastidius lived Anno Dom. 430.
Vodinus, slain by the Saxons. Theonus.
The sea void many years.
Augustine the moonke, sent over by Gregory the great, till he removed his
see to Canturburie, to the intent he might the sooner flee, if persecution
should be raised by the infidels, or hear from, or send more speedily unto
Rome, without any great fear of the interception of his letters.
Bishops.
Melitus.
The sea void for a season.
Wina. Erkenwaldus. Waldherus. Ingaldus. Egulphus. Wigotus. Eadbricus. Edgarus.
Kiniwalchus. Eadbaldus. Eadbertus. Oswinus. Ethelnothus. Cedbertus. Cernulphus.
Suiduiphus. Eadstanus. Wulfsinus* Ethelwaldus. Elstanus. Brithelmus* Dunstanus.
Tidricus. Alwijnus. Elswoldus. Robertus a Norman. Wilhelmus a Norman. Hugo a
Norman.
I read also of a bishop of London called Elsward, or Ailward, who was abbat of
Eouesham, and bishop of London at one time, and buried at length in Ramseie,
howbeit in what order of succession he lived I can not tell, more than of
diverse other above remembered, but in this order do I find them.

The sea void twelve years.
1 Mauricius. 2 Richardus Beaumis. 3 Gilbertus vniuersalis a notable man for
three things, avarice, riches, and learning. 4 Robertus de Sigillo. 5 Richardus
Beaumis. 6 Gilbertus Folioth. 7 Richardus. 8 Wilhelmus de sancta Maria. 9
Eustathius Falconberg. 10 Rogerus Niger. 11 Fulco Bascet. 12 Henricus Wingham.
Richardus Talbot electus. 15 Richard. Grauesend. 16 Radulfus Gandacensis. 17
Gilbertus Segraue. 18 Richardus de Newport. 19 Stephanus Grauesend. 20 Richard.
Bintworth. 21 Radulfus Baldoc who made the tables hanging in the vesterie of
Paul's. 22 Michael. 23 Simon. 24 Robertus. 25 Thomas. 26 Richardus. 27 Thomas
Sauagius. 28 Wilhelmus. 29 Wilhelm. Warham. 30 Wilhelmus Barnes. 31 Cuthbertus
Tunstall. 32 Johannes Stokesleie. 33 Richardus fitz James. 34 Edmundus Boner,
removed, imprisoned. 35 Nicholas Ridleie removed and burned. Edm. Boner,
restored, removed, and imprisoned. 36 Edmundus Grindall. 37 Edwinus Sands. 38
Johannes Elmer.
Having gotten and set down thus much of the bishops, I will deliver in like
sort the names of the deanes, until I come to the time of mine old master now
living in this present year 1586, who is none of the least ornaments that have
been in that seat.

Deanes.
1 Wulmannus, who made a distribution of the psalms contained in the whole
psalter, and appointed the same daily to be read amongst the prebendaries. 2
Radulfus de Diceto, whose noble history is yet extant in their library. 3
Alardus Bucham. 4 Robertus Watford. 5 Martinus Patteshull. 6 Hugo de Marinis. 7
Radulfus Langfort. 8 Galfridus de Berie. 9 Wilhelmus Sta^man. 10 Henricus
Cornell. 11 Walterus de Salerne. 12 Robertus Barton. 13 Petrus de Newport. 14
Richardus Talbot. 15 Galfredus de Fering. 16 Johannes Chishull. 17 Herueus de
Boreham. 18 Thomas Eglesthorpe. 19 Rogerus de Lalleie. 20 Wilhelmns de
Montfort. 21 Radulfus de Baldoc postea episcopus. 22 Alanus de Cantilup postea
cardinalis. Johan. Sandulfe electus. Richardus de Newport electus. 23 Magister
Vitalis. 24 Johannes Euerisdon. 25 Wilhelmus Brewer. 26 Richardus Kilmingdon.
27 Thomas Trullocke. 28 Johannes Appulbie. 29 Thomas Ever. 30 Thomas Stow. 31
Thomas More. 32 Reginaldus Kenton. 33 Thomas Lisieux alias Leseux. 34 Leonardus
de Bath. 35 Wilhelmus Say. 36 Rogerus Ratcliffe. 37 Thom. Winterburne. 38
Wilhelmus Wolseie. 39 Robert Sherebroke. 40 Ioha^nes Collet, founder of Paul's
school. Richardus Paceus. Richardus Sampson. Johannes Incent. Wilhelmus Maius
resignauit. Johannes Fakenham alias Howman resignauit. Henricus Colus,
removed, imprisoned. Wilhelmus Maius, restored. Alexander Nouellus.
And thus much of the archbishops, bishops, and deanes of that honorable see. I
call it honorable, because it has had a succession for the most part of
learned and wise men, albeit that otherwise it be the most troublesome seat in
England, not only for that it is near unto check, but also the prelates
thereof are much troubled with suitors, and no less subject to the reproaches of
the common sort, whose mouths are always wide open unto reprehension, and
eyes ready to epsy any thing that they may reprove and carpe at. I would
have done so much for every see in England, if I had not had consideration of
the greatness of the volume, and small benefit rising by the same, unto the
commodity of the readers: nevertheless I have reserved them unto the
publication of my great chronology, if (while I live) it happen to come abroad.

Of Universities. Chap. 3.
THere have been heretofore, Many universities sometime in England.
and at sundry times, diverse famous universities in this Island, and those
even in my Three universities in England.
to wit, one at Oxford, the second at Cambridge, and the third in London; of
which, the first two are the most famous, I mean Cambridge and Oxford, for
that in them the use of the toongs, philosophy, and the liberal sciences,
Peter Martyr did often affirm) to maintenance only of such convenient numbers
of poor men's sons as the several stipends bestowed upon the said houses are
able to support.

When these two schools should be first builded, and who were their original
founders, When the universities were builded uncertain.
as yet it is uncertain: nevertheless, as there is great likelihood
Cantabrigia was not so called of Cantaber, but Cair Grant of the finisher of
the work, or at the leastwise of the river that runs by the same, and
afterward by the Saxons Grantcester. An other sort affirm that the river is
better written Canta than Granta, etc: but why then is not the town called
Canta, Cantium, or Cantodunum, according to the same? All this is said only
(as I think) to deface the memory of Cantaber, who do^^^ting from the
Brigants, or out of Biscaie, called the said town after his own and the name
of the region from whence he came. Neither has it been a rare thing for the
Spaniards heretofore to come first into Ireland, and from thense over into
England, since the chronology shall declare that it has been often seen, and
that out of Britain, they have gotten over also into Scithia, and
contrariwise; coasting still through Yorkshire, which of them also was called
Brigantium, as by good testimony appears.

Of these two, Oxford fifty miles from London.
that of Oxford (which lies west and by north from London) stands most
pleasantly, being in^^roned in manner round about with woods on the hills
aloft, and goodly rivers in the bottoms and valleys beneath, whose courses
would breed no small commodity to that city, and country about, if such
impediments were removed as greatly annoie the same, and hinder the carriage
which might be made thither also from London. That of Cambridge is distant from
London about forty and six miles north and by east, Cambridge six and forty
miles from London.
and stands very well, saving that it is somewhat near unto the fens,
whereby the wholesomenesse of the air there is not a little corrupted. It is
excellently well served with all kinds of provision, but especially of
freshwater fish and wildfoule, by reason of the river that passes thereby; and
thereto the I Will of Elie, which is so near at hand. Only wood is the chief
want to such as study there, wherefore this kind of provision is brought them
either from Essex, and other places thereabouts, as is also their cole; or
otherwise the necessity thereof is supplied with gall (a bastard kind of
Mirtus as I take it) and seacole, whereof they have great plenty led thither
by the Grant. Moreover it has not such store of meadow ground as may suffice
for the ordinary expenses of the town and university, wherefore the
inhabitants are enforced in like sort to provide their haie from other
villages-about, which minister the same unto them in very great abundance.

Oxford is supposed to contain in longitude eighteen degrees and eight and
twenty minutes, Longitude and latitude of both.
and in latitude one and fifty degrees and fifty minutes; whereas that of
Cambridge standing more northerlie, has twenty degrees and twenty minutes in
longitude, and thereunto fifty and two degrees and fifteen minutes in
latitude, as by exact supputation is easy to be found.

The colleges of Oxford, for curious workmanship and private commodities, are
much more stately, magnificent, and commodious than those of Cambridge: and
thereunto the streets of the town for the most part more large and comely.
But for uniformity of building, orderly compaction, and politic regiment,
the town of Cambridge, as the newer workmanship, Cambridge burned not long
since.
exceeds that of Oxford (which otherwise is and has been the greater of the
two) by many a fold (as I guess) although I know diverse that are of the
contrary opinion. This also is certain, that whatsoever the difference be in
building of the town streets, the townsmen of both are glad when they may
match and annoie the students, by incroching upon their liberties, and keep
them bare by extreme sale of their wares, whereby many of them become rich
for a time, but afterward fall again into poverty, because that goods evil
gotten do seldom long endure.

Castles also they have both, and in my judgment is hard to be said, whether
of them would be the stronger, if each were accordingly repared: howbeit that
of Cambridge is the higher, both for manner of building and situation of ground,
since Oxford castle stands low and is not so apparent to our fight. That of
Cambridge was builded (as they say) by Gurguintus, sometime king of Britain,
but the other by the lord Robert de Oilie, a noble man which came in with the
conqueror, whose wife Editha, a woman given to no less superstition than
credulity, began also the abbeie of Oseneie near unto the same, upon a fond
(but yet a rare) occasion, which we will here remember, though it be beside my
purpose, to the end that the reader may see how ready the simple people De
pardieux, if old Robert will give me leave, I will do what I can to bring
these souls to rest. Hereupon she consulted, craved, wept, and became so
importunate with her husband, that he joined with her, and they both began that
synagog 1120, which afterward proved to be a notable den. In that church also
lies this lady buried with

In each of these universities also is likewise a church dedicated to the
virgin Marie, wherein once in the year, to wit, in Iulie, the scholars are
holden, and in which such as have been called to any degree in the year
precedent, do there receive the accomplishment of the same, in solemn and
sumptuous

The common schools of Cambridge also are far more beautiful than those of
Oxford, only the divinity school at Oxford excepted, which for fine and
excellent workemenship, comes next the moold of the kings chapel in
Cambridge, than the which two with the chapel that king Henry the seventh
did build at Westminster, there are not (in mine opinion) made of lime and
stone three more notable piles within the compass of Europe.

In all other things there is so great equality between these two
universities, as no man can imagine how to set down any greater; so that they
seem to be the body of one well ordered common wealth, only divided by
distance of place, and not in friendly consent and orders. In speaking
therefore of the one, I can not but describe the other; and in commendation of
the first, I can not but extol the latter; and so much the rather, for that
they are both so dear unto me, as that I can not readily tell unto whether of
them I owe the most good will. Would to God my knowledge were such, as that
neither of them might have cause to be ashamed of their pupil; or my power so
great, that I might woorthilie requite them both for those manifold kindnesses
that I have received of them. But to leave these things, and proceed with other
more convenient for my purpose. The manner to live in these universities, is
not as in some other of foreign countries we see daily to happen, where the
students are enforced for want of such houses, to dwell in common innes, and
tauerns, without all order or discipline. But in these our colleges we live in
such exact order, and under so precise rules of government, as that the famous
learned man Erasmus of Roterodame being here among us 50 years passed, did not
let to compare the trades in living of students in these two places, even with
the very rules and orders of the ancient moonks: affirming moreover in flat
words, our orders to be such as not only came near unto, but rather far
exceeded all the monastical institutio^s that ever were devised.

In most of our colleges there are also great numbers of students, of which
many are found by the revenues of the houses, and other by the purueiances and
help of their rich friends; whereby in some one college you shall have two
hundred scholars, in others and hundred and fifty, in diverse a hundred and
forty, and in the rest less numbers; as the capacity of the said houses is
able to receive: so that at this present, of one sort and other, there are
about three thousand students nourished in them both (as by a late surueie it
manifestly appeared.) They were erected by their founders at the first, only
for poor men's sons, whose parents were not able to bring them up unto
learning: but now they have the least benefit of them, by reason the rich do
so incroch upon them. And so far has this inconvenience spread it self,
that it is in my time an hard matter for a poor man's child to come by a
fellowship (though he be never so good a scholar and worthy of that room.)
Such packing also is used at elections, that not he which best deserves, but
he that has most friends, though he be the woorst scholar, is always surest
to speed; which will turn in the end to the overthrow of learning. That some
gentlemen also, whose friends have been in times past benefactors to certain
of those houses, do intrude into the disposition of their estates, without all
respect of order or estatutes devised by the founders, only thereby to place
whom they think good (and not without some hope of gain) the case is too too
evident: and their attempt would soon take place, if their superiors did not
provide to bridle their endeavors. In some grammar schools likewise, which send
scholars to these universities, it is lamentable to see what briberie is used;
for yer the scholar can be pr^ferred, such bribage is made, that poor men's
children are commonly shut out, and the richer sort received (who in time past
thought it dishonor to live as it were upon alms) and yet being placed, most
of them study little other than histories, tables, dice, and trifles, as men
that make not the living by their study the end of their purposes, which is a
lamentable hearing. Beside this, being for the most part either gentlemen, or
rich men's sons, they often bring the universities into much slander. For
standing upon their reputation and liberty, they ruffle and roist it out,
exceeding in apparel, and banting riotous company (which draws them from
their books unto an other trade.) And for excuse when they are charged with
breach of all good order, think it sufficient to say, that they be gentlemen,
which greeueth many not a little. But to proceed with the rest.

Every one of these colleges have in like manner their professors or readers of
the toongs and several sciences, Readers in private houses.
as they call them, which daily trade up the youth there abiding priuatlie in
their halles, to the In aream) there to try their skilles, and declare how
they have profited since their coming thither.

Moreover, Public readers maintained by the prince.
in the public schools of both the universities, there are found at the
princes charge (and that very largely) five professors and readers, that
Study of the quadriuials and perspectiues neglected.
and the Greek toongs. And for the other lectures, as of philosophy, logike,
rhetorike, and the quadriuials, although the latter (I mean arythmetike,
music, geometry, and astronomy, and with them all skill in the perspectiues
are now smallie regarded in either of them) the universities themselves do
allow competent stipends to such as read the same, whereby they are
sufficiently provided for, touching the maintenance of their estates, and no

These professors in like sort have all the rule of disputations and other
school exercises, which are daily used in common schools severally assigned
to each of them, and such of their hearers, as by their skill showed in the said
disputations, are thought to have atteined to any convenient ripeness of
knowleledge, according to the custom of other universities, although not in
like order, are permitted solemnlie to take their deserved degrees of school
in the same science

The first degree, Sophisters.
is that of the general sophisters, from whence when they have learned more
sufficiently the rules of logike, rhetorike, and obtained thereto competent
skill in philosophy, and in the mathematicals, they ascend higher unto the
estate of Batchelers of art.
after four years of their entrance into their sophistry. From thence also
giving their minds to more perfect knowledge in some or all the other liberal
sciences, and the toongs, they rise at the last (to wit, after other three or
four years) to be called masters of art, each of them being at that time
reputed for a doctor in his faculty, Masters of art.
if he profess but one of the said sciences (beside philosophy) or for his
general skill, if he be exercised in them all. After this they are permitted
to choose what other of the Batcheler of divinity.
but not before he has been master of art by the space of seven years,
according to their statutes.

The next and last degree of all is the doctorship Doctor.
after other three years, for the which he must once again perform all such
exercises and acts as are before remembered, and then is he reputed able to
govern and teach others, and likewise taken for a doctor. I have read that
John of Beuerleie was the first doctor that ever was in Oxford, as Beda was in
Cambridge. But I suppose herein that the word doctor is not so strictly to be
taken in this report as it is now used, since every teacher is in Latin called
by that name, as also such in the primitive church as kept schools of
catechists, wherein they were trained up in the rudiments and principles of
religion, either before they were admitted unto baptism, or any office in the
church.

Thus we see, that from our entrance into the university unto the last degree
received, is commonly eighteen or peradventure twenty years, in which time
if a student has not obtained sufficient learning, thereby to serve his own
turn, and benefit his common wealth, let him never look by tarieng longer to
come by any more. For after this time and 40 years of age, the most part of
students do commonly give over their woonted diligence, and live like drone
bees on the fat of colleges, withholding better wits from the possession of
their places, and yet doing little good in their own vocation and calling. I
could rehearse a number (if I listed) of this sort, as well in the one
university as the other. But this shall suffice in sted of a larger report,
that long continuance in those places is either a sign of lack of friends, or
of learning, This Fox builded Corpus Christ^ college in Oxford.
or of good and upright life, as bishop Fox sometime noted, who thought it
sacrilege for a man to tarry any longer at Oxford than he had a desire to
profit.

A man may (if he will) begin his study with the law, or physike (of which
this gives wealth, the other honor) so soon as he comes to the university,
if his knowledge in the toongs and ripeness of judgment serve therefore:
which if he do, then his first degree is bacheler of law, or physic, and for
the same he must perform such acts in his own science, as the bachelors or
doctors of divinity, do for their parts, the only sermons except, which
belong not to his calling. Finally, this will I say, that the professors of
either of those faculties come to such perfection in both universities, as the
best students beyond the sea do in their own or else where. One thing only I
mislike in them, and that is their usual going into Italy, from whense very
few without special grace do return good men, whatsoever they pretend of
conference or practice, So much also may be inferred of lawiers.
chiefelie the physicians who under pretense of seeking of foreign simples do
oftentimes learn the framing of such compositions as were better unknown than
practiced, as I have heard often alleged, and therefore it is most true that
doctor Turner said; Italy is not to be seen without a guide, that is, without
special grace given from God, because of the licentious and corrupt behavior
of the people.

There is moreover in every house a master or provost, who has under him a
president, and certain censors or deanes, appointed to look to the behauior
and manners of the students there, whom they punish very severely if they make
any default, according to the quantity and quality of their trespasses. And
these are the usual names of governors in Cambridge. Howbeit in Oxford the
heads of houses are now and then called presidents in respect of such bishops
as are their visitors and founders. In each of these also they have one or more
thresurers whom they call Bursarios or Bursers beside other officers, whose
charge is to see unto the welfare and maintenance of these houses. Over each
university also there is a several chancellor, whose offices are perpetual,
howbeit their substitutes, whom we call vicechancelors, are changed every
year, as are also the proctors, taskers, masters of the streates and other
officers,

And thus much all this time of our two universities in each of which I have
received such degree as they have vouchsafed rather of their favor than my
desert to yield and bestow upon me, and unto whose students I wish one thing,
the execution whereof cannot be prejudicial to any that means well, as I am
resolutelie persuaded, and the case now stands in these our days. When any
benefice

To these two also we may in like sort ad the third, London.
which is at London (serving only for such as study the laws of the realm)
where there are sundry famous houses, of which three are called by the name of
Ins of the court, the rest of the chancerie, and all builded before time for
the furtherance and commodity of such as apply their minds to our common
laws. Grammar schools.
also there are great number of Grammar schools through out the realm, and
those very liberally endued, for the better relief of poor scholars, so
that there are not many corporat towns now under the queens dominion, that
hain not one Gramar school at the least, with a sufficient living for a
master and usher appointed to the same.

There are in like manner diverse collegiat churches as Windsor, Wincester,
Eaton, Westminster Windsor. Winchester. Eaton. Westminster.
(in which I was sometime an unprofitable Grammarian under the reverend father
master Nowell now deane of Paul's) and in those a great number of poor
scholars, daily mainteened by the liberality of the founders, with meat,
books, and apparel, from whence after they have been well entered in the
knowledge of the Latin and Greek toongs, and rules of versifieng (the trial
whereof is made by certain apposers yearly appointed to examine them) they
are sent to certain especial houses in each university, where they are
received the trained up, in the points of higher knowledge in their private
hals, till they be adjudged meet to show their faces in the schools, as I have
said already. And thus much have I thought good to note of our universities,
and likewise of colleges in the same, whose names I will also set down here,
with those of their founders, to the end the zeal which they bare unto
learning may appear, and their remembrance never perish from among the wise
and learned.

Of the colleges in Cambridge with their founders.
Years of the foundations. Colleges. Founders. 1546 1 Trinity college. by
King Henry 8. 1441 2 The kings college. K. Henry 6. Edward 4. Henry 7. and
Henry 8. 1511 3 S. John's. L. Margaret grandmother to Henry 8. 1505 4 Christ's
college. K. Henry 6. and the lady Margaret aforesaid. 1446 5 The queens
college. Lady Margaret wife to king Hentie 6. 1496 6 Jesus college. John
Alcocke bishop of Elie. 1342 7 Bennet college. The brethren of a popish guild
called Corporis Christi. 1343 8 Pembroke hall. Maria de Valentia, countess of
Pembroke. 1256 9 Peter college. Hugh Balsham bishop of Elie. 1348 1557 10
Gundeuill and Cauius college. Edmund Gundeuill parson of Terrington, and John
Caius doctor of physic. 1354 11 Trinity hall. William Bateman bishop of
Norwich. 1326 12 Clare hall. Richard Badow chancellor of Cambridge. 1459 13
Catharine hall. Robert Woodlarke doctor of divinity. 1519 14 Magdalen college.
Edw. duke of Buckingham, and Thom. lord Awdlie 1585 15 Emanuell college. Sir
Water Mildmaie, etc. The description of England. Of colleges in Oxford.
Years. Colleges. Founders. 1539 1 Christ's church. by King Henry 8. 1459 2
Magdalen college. William Wainflet first fellow of Merton college then scholar
at Winchester, He founded also a good part of Eaton college, and a free schole
at Wainflet where he was borne.
and afterward bishop there. 1375 3 New college. William Wickham bishop of
Winchester. 1276 4 Merton college. Walter Merton bishop of Rochester. 1437 5
All souls college. Henry Chicheleie archbishop of Canturburie. 1516 6 Corpus
Christi college. Richard Fox bishop of Winchester. 1430 7 Lincoln college.
Richard Fleming bishop of Lincoln. 1323 8 Auriell college. Adam Brown almoner
to Edward 2. 1340 9 The queens college. R. Eglesfeld chapleine to Philip
queen of England, wife to Edward 3. 1263 10 Balioll college. John Balioll king
of Scotland. 1557 11 S. John's. Sir Thomas White knight. 1556 12 Trinity
college. Sir Thomas Pope knight. 1316 13 Excester college. Walter Stapleton
bishop of Excester. 1513 14 Brazen nose. William Smith bishop of Lincoln. 873
15 University college. William archdeacon of Duresine. 16 Gloucester college.
John Gifford who made it a cell for thirteen moonks. 17 S. Marie college. 18
Jesus college now in hand Hugh ap Rice doctor of the civil law.

There are also in Oxford certain hostels or hals, which may rightwell be
called by the names of colleges, if it were not that there is more liberty in
them, than it to be seen in the other. I mine opinion the livers in these are
very like to those that are of Ins in the chancerie, their names also are
these so far as I now remember.

Brodegates. Heart hall. Magdalen hall. Alburne hall. Postminster hall. S. Marie
hall. White hall. New In. Edmond hall.
The students also that remain in them, are called hostelers or halliers.
Hereof it came of late to pass, that the right reverend father in God Thomas
late archbishop of Canturburie being brought up in such an house at Cambridge,
was of the ignorant sort of Londoners called an hosteler, supposing that he had
served with some inholder in the stable, and therefore in despite diverse hanged
up bottles of haie

Besides these there is mention and record of diverse other hals or hostels,
that have been there in times past, as Beef hall, Mutton hall, etc: whose
ruins yet appear: so that if antiquity be to be judged by the show of
ancient buildings, which is very Erection of colleges in Oxford the overthrow
of hals.
Therein are also many dwelling houses of stone yet standing, that have been
hals for students of very antike workmanship, beside the old walls of sundry
other, whose plots have been converted into gardens, since colleges were
erected.

In London also the houses of students at the Commonlaw are these.
Sergeants In. Graies In. The Temple. Lincolnes In. David's In. Staple In.
Furniuals In. Cliffords In. Clements In. Lions In. Barnards In. New In.
And thus much in general of our noble universities, whose lands some greedy
gripers do gape wide for, and of late have (as I hear) propounded sundry
reasons, whereby they supposed to have prevailed in their purposes. But who are
those that have attempted this suit, other than such as either hate learning,
piety, and wisdom; or else have spent all their own, and know not otherwise
than by incroching upon other men how to maintain themselves? When such a
motion was made by some unto king Henry the eight, he could answer them in
this manner; Ah sirrah, I perceive the abbeie lands have fleshed you and set your
teeth on edge, to ask also those colleges. And whereas we had a regard only
to pull down sin by defacing the monasteries, you have a desire also to
overthrow all goodness by subversion of colleges. I tell you sirs that I judge
no land in England better bestowed than that which is given to our
universities, for by their maintenance our realm shall be well governed when
we be dead and rotten. As you love your welfares therefore, follow no more this
vein, but content your selves with that you have already, or else seek
honest means whereby to increase your liuelods, Now abbeies be gone, our
dingthrifts pry after church and college possessions.
for I love not learning so ill, that I will impair the revenues of any one
house by a penie, whereby it may be vpholden. In king Edwards days likewise
the same suit was once again attempted (as I have heard) but in vain, for
says the duke of Summerset among other speeches tending to that end, who also
made answer there unto in the kings presence by his assignation; I flerning
decaie, which of wild men makes civil, of blockish and rash persons wise and
godly counselors, of obstinat rebels obedient subjects, and of evil men good
and godly christians; what shall we look for else but barbarism and tumult?
For when the lands of colleges be gone, it shall be hard to say, whose staff
shall stand next the door, for then I doubt not but the state of bishops, rich
farmers, merchants, and the nobility shall be assailed, by such as live to
spend all, and think that what so ever another man has is more meet for them,
and to be at their commandment, than for the proper owner that has sweat and
labored for it. In queen Mary's days the weather was too warm for any such
course to be taken in hand, but in the time of our gracious queen Elizabeth, I
hear that it was after a sort in talk the third time, but without success as
moved also out of season, and so I hope it shall continue for ever. For what
comfort should it be for any good man to see his country brought into the
estate of the old Goths and Uandals, who made laws against learning, and
would not suffer any skillful man to come into their council house, by means
whereof those people became savage, tyrants, and merciless helhounds, till
they restored learning again,

Of the partition of England into shires and counties. Chap. 4.
IN reding of ancient writers, as Caesar, Tacitus, and others, Nouantae,
Selgouae, Dannonij, Gadeni, Oradeni, Epdij, Cerones, Carnonacae, Careni,
Cornabij, Caledonij, Decantae, Logi, Mertae, Vacomagi, Venicontes, Texali or
Polij, Denani, Elgoui, Brigantes Parisi, Ordouici alias Ordoluci, Cornauij,
Coritaui, Catieuchlani, Simeni, Trinouantes, Demetae, and Kentishmen, and such
like. But (...) the several places where most of them lay, are not yet very
perfectly known unto the learned of these days, I do not mean to pronounce
my judgment upon such doubtful cases, least that in so doing I should but
increase conjectures, and leading peradventure the reader from the

It shall suffice therefore to begin with such a ground Alfred brought England
into shires, which the Britons divided by cantreds, and the first Saxons by
families.
as from whence some better certeintie of things

Into how many shires the said Alfred did first make this partition of the
Island, it is not yet found out, howbeit if my conjecture be any thing at all,
I Shire and share all one.
This prince therefore having made the general partition of his kingdom into
shires, or shares, he divided again the same into lathes, as lathes into
hundreds, and hundreds into tithings, or denaries, as diverse have written; and
master Lambert following their authorities, has also given out, saying almost
after this manner in his description of Kent; The Danes (says he) both before,
and in the time of king Alfred, had flocked by the sea coasts of this Island in
great numbers, sometimes wasting and spoiling with sword and fire, wheresoever
they might arrive, and sometime taking great booties with them to their ships,
without doing any further hurt or damage to the country. This inconvenience
continuing for many years together, Englishmen noisome to their own country.
caused our husbandmen to abandon their tillage, and gave occasion and
hardiness to evil disposed persons, to fall to the like pillage, as
practicing to follow the Danes in these their thefts and robberies. And the
better to cloak their mischief withal, they feigned themselves to be Danish
pirates, and would sometime come a land in one port, and sometime in another,
driving daily great spoils (as the Danes had done) unto their ships before
them. The good king Alfred therefore (who had maruellouslie traveled in
repelling the barbarous Danes) espieng this outrage, and thinking it no less
the part of a politic prince, to root out the noisome subject, than to hold
out the foreign adversary: by the advice of his nobility, and the example of
Moses (who followed the counsel of Iethro his father in law to the like
effect) divided the whole realm into certain parts or sections, which (of the
Saxon word Schyran, signifieng to cut) he termed shires, or as we yet speak,
shares, or portions, of which some one has forty miles in length (as Essex)
and almost so many broad, Hereford four and twenty in length, and twenty in
breadth, and Warwike six and thirty in length, etc: and some of them also
contain ten, twelve, thirteen, sixteen, twenty, or thirty hundreds, more
or less, as some hundreds do sixteen, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty or
sixty towns, out of which the king was always to receive an hundred able men
to serve him in the wars, or a hundred men able to be pledges, and over each
of the portions he appointed either an earl or alderman, Earl and alderman.
or both, to whom he committed the government of the same. These shires also
he brake into lesser parts, whereof some were called lathes, of the word
Gelathian, which is to assemble together; other hundreds, for that they enioied
jurisdiction over an hundred pledges; and other tithings, because there were in
each of them to the number of ten persons, whereof every one from time to time
was suertie for others good abearing. He provided also that every man should
procure himself to be received into some tithing, to the end, that if any
were found of so small and base a credit, that no man would become pledge or
suertie for him, he should forthwith be committed to prison, least otherwise
he might happen to do more harm abroad. Hitherto master Lambert. By whose
words we may gather very much of the state of this Island in the time of
Alfred, whose institution continued after a sort until the coming of the
Normans, who changed the government of the realm in such wise (by bringing in
of new officers and offices, after the manner of their countries) that very
little of the old regiment remained more than the bare names of some officers
(except peradventure in Kent) so that in these days it is hard to set down
any great certeintie of things as they stood in Alfreds time, more than is
remembered and touched at this present.

Some as it were roming or rouing at the name Lath, What a lath is
do say that it is derived of a barn, which is called in old English a lath,
as they conjecture. From which speech in like sort some derive the word
Laistow, as if it should be truly written Lath stow, a place wherein to lay
up or lay on things, of whatsoever condition. But hereof as yet I cannot
absolutely be satisfied, although peradventure some likelihood in their
judgments may seem to be therein. Other upon some further consideration
affirm that they were certain circuits in every county or shire containing
an appointed number of towns, whose inhabitants always assembled to know and
understand of matters touching their portions, in to some one appointed place
or other within their limits, especially whilst the causes were such as
required not the aid or assistance of the whole county. Leetes.
Of these lathes also (as they say) some shires had more, some less, as they
were of greatness. And M. Lambert seems to be of the opinion, that the leets
of our time (wherein these pledges be yet called Franci plegij of the word Free
burgh) do yield some shadow of that politic institution of Alfred. But since
my skill is so small in these cases that I dare not judge any thing at all as

The hundred and the wapentake is all one, as I read in some, Hundred or
wapentake.
and by this division not a name appertinent to a set number of towns (for
then all hundreds should be of equal quantity) but a limited jurisdiction,
within the compass whereof were an hundred persons called pledges Denarie or
tithing.
(as I said) or ten denaries, Tithing man in Latin
in Latin Decurio, Decurio.
but now in most places a borsholder Borsholder.
or burgholder, as in Kent; where every tithing is moreover named a burgh or
burrow, Burrow.
although that in the West country he be still called a tithing man, and his
circuit a tithing, as I have heard at large. I read furthermore Leland and
other, that if any small matter did fall out worthy to be discussed, the
Twelve men.
according unto justice. For this purpose likewise in every hundred were
twelve men chosen of good age and wisdom, and those sworn to give Rapiendo,

In my time there are found to be in England forty shires, Forty shires in
England thirteen in Wales.
and likewise thirteen in Wales, and these latter erected of late years by
king Henry the eight, who made the Britons or Welshmen equal in all respects
unto the English, and brought to pass that both nations should indifferently
be governed by one law, which in times past were ordered by diverse, and those
far discrepant and disagreing one from another: as by the several view of the
same is yet easy to be discerned. The names of the shires in England are
these, whereof the first ten lie between the British sea and the Thames, as
Polydor also does set them down. Kent. Sussex. Surreie. Hampshire.
Barkeshire. Wilshire. Dorsetshire. Summerset. Deuon. Cornwall.
There are moreover on the northside of the Thames, and between the same and
the river Trent, which passes through the midst of England (as Polydor
says) sixteen other shires, whereof six lie toward the east, the rest toward
the west, more into the mddest of the country. Essex, sometime all forest save
one hundred. Middlesex. Hartfordshire. Suffolk. Norffolke. Cambridgeshire in
which are 12 hundreds. Bedford. Huntington where in are four hundreds.
Buckingham. Oxford. Northampton. Rutland. Leircestershire. Notinghamshire.
Warwike. Lincoln.
We have six also that have their place westward toward Wales, whose names
ensue. Gloucester. Hereford. Worcester. Shropshire. Stafford. Chestershire.
And these are the thirty two shires which lie by south of the Trent. Beyond
the same river we have in like sort other eight, as Darbie. York. Lancaster.
Cumberland. Westmerland. Richemond, wherein are five wapentaxes, and when it is
accounted as parcel of Yorkshire (out of which it is taken) then is it
reputed for the whole Riding. Durham. Northumberland.
So that in the portion sometime called Lhoegres, there are now forty shires.
In Wales furthermore are thirteen, whereof seven are in Southwales: Cardigan,
or Cereticon. Penmoroke, or Penbrooke. Caermardine, wherein are 9. hundreds or
commots. Glamorgan. Monmouth. Breckenocke. Radnor.
In Northwales likewise are six, that is to say Angleseie. Carnaruon.
Merioneth. Denbigh. Flint. Montgomerie.
Which being added to those of England yield fifty and three shires or
counties, so that under the queens Majesty are so many counties, whereby it
is easily discerned, that her power far exceeds that of Offa, who of old
time was highly honored for that he had so much of Britain under his
subjection as afterward contained thirty nine shires, when the division was
made, whereof I spoke before.

This is moreover to be noted in our division of shires, Od parcels of shires.
that they be not always counted or laid together in one parcel, whereof I
have great marvel. But since the occasion has grown (as I take it) either by
privilege or some like occasion, it is better briefly to set down how some
of these parts lie than to spend the time in seeking a just cause of this their
od division. First therefore I note that in the part of Buckinghamshire
between Amondesham, and Beconsfield, there is a piece of Hartfordshire to be
found, environed round about with the county of Buckingham, and yet this patch
is not above three miles in length and two in breadth at the very most. In
Barkeshire also between Ruscombe and Okingham is a piece of Wilshire, one mile
in breadth and four miles in length, whereof one side lies on the Laden
river. In the borders of Northamptonshire directly over against Luffeld a
town in Buckkinghamshire,

With Oxfordshire diverse do participate, in so much that a piece of
Glocestershire, lies half in Warwikeshire and half in Oxfordshire, not very
far from Horneton. Such another patch is there, of Glocestershire not far from
long Compton, but lieng in Oxford county: and a piece of Worcestershire,
directly between it and Glocestershire. Gloucester has the third piece upon
the north side of the Winrush near

But to proceed with our purpose. Over each of these Lieutenants.
shires in time of necessity is a several lieutenant chosen under the prince,
who being a noble man of calling, has almost regal authority over the same
for the time being in many cases which do concern his office: Shiriffes.
otherwise it is governed by a shiriffe Quaestor comitatus or Prouinciae. This
officer is resident and dwelling somewhere within the same county, and called
also a vicount, Quasi vicarius comitis or Procomes, in respect of the earl (or
as they called him in time past the alderman) that bears

In the election also of these magistrates, diverse able persons as well for
wealth as wisdom are named by the commons, at a time and place appointed for
their choice, whose names being delivered to the Undershiriffes.
holds the shire courts and law days under him, upon sufficient caution unto
the high shiriffe for his true execution of justice, preservation from
impeachment, and yielding of account when he shall be thereunto called. There
are likewise under him certain bailiffes, Bailiffes.
whose office is to serve and return such writs and processes as are directed
unto them from the high shiriffe: to make seizure of the goods and cattels, and
arrest the bodies of such as do offend, presenting either their persons unto
him, or at the leastwise taking sufficient bond, or other assurance of them for
their dutiful appearance at an appointed time, when the shiriffe by order of
law ought to present them to the judges according to his charge. High
constables.
In every hundred also are one or more high constables according to the
quantity thereof, who receiving the writs and injunctions from the high
shiriffe under his seal, or from any other officers of the prince, either for
the provision of vittels or for other causes, or private purueiance of cates for
the maintenance of the royal family, do forthwith charge the petie
constables of every town within their limits, Petie constables.
with the execution of the same.

In each county likewise are sundry law days holden at their appointed
seasons, of which some retain the old Saxon name, and are called Motelagh,
Motelagh, Shiriffes turn.
of the word motes and law. They have also an other called the shiriffes turn,
which they hold twice in their times, in every hundred, according to the old
order appointed by king Edgar (as king Edward reduced the folkmote ordained by
king Arthur to be held yearly on the first of May, until the first of
every month) and in these two latter such small matters as often arise amongst
the inferior sort of people, are heard and well determined. They have finally
their quarter sessions, wherein they are assisted by the justices and gentlemen
of the country, and twice in the year gaile delivery, Gaile delivery or
great assizes.
at which time the judges ride about in their circuits, into every several
county (where the nobility and gentlemen with the justices there resiant
associat them) and minister the laws of the realm, with great solemnity and
justice. Howbeit in doing of these things, they retain still the old order of
the land in use before the conquest. For they commit the full examination of
all causes there to be heard, to the consideration of twelve sober, grave, and
wise men, chosen out of the same county; and four of them of necessity out
of the hundred where the action lies, or the defendant inhabiteth (which
number they call an inquest) and Inquests.
of these inquests there are more or less impanneled at every assise, as the
number of cases there to be handled does crave and require, albeit that some
one inquest has often diverse matters to consider of. And when they have (to
their uttermost power) consulted and debated of such things as they are charged
withal, they return again to the place of justice, with their verdict in
writing, according whereunto the judge does pronounce his sentence, be it for
life or death, or any other matter what soever is brought before him. It is
also very often seen, that such as are nominated to be of these inquests, do
after their charge received seldom or never eat or drink, until they have
agreed upon their verdict, and yielded it up unto the judge of whom they
received the charge; by means whereof sometimes it comes to pass that
diverse of the inquest have been welneere famished, or at least taken such a
sickness thereby, as they have hardly avoided. And this comes by practice,
when the one side fears the sequel, and therefore conueieth some one or more
into the jury, that will in his behalf never yield unto the rest, but of set
purpose put them to this trouble.

Certes it is a common practice (if the under shiriffe be not the better man)
for the craftier or stronger side to procure and pack such a quest, as he
himself shall like of, Atteinct.
whereby he is sure of the issue before the charge be given: and beside this if
the matter do justly proceed against him, it is a world to see now and then
how the honest yeomen that have Bona fide discharged their consciences shall be
sued of an atteinct, and bound to appear at the Star chamber, with what
rigor they shall be carried from place to place, county to county, yea and
sometime in carts, which has and does cause a great number of them to
abstain from the assizes, and yield to pay their issues, rather than they
would for their good meaning be thus disturbed and dealt withal. Sometimes
also they bribe the bailiffes to be kept at home, whereupon poor men, not
having in their pursses wherewith to bear their costs, are impanelled upon
iuries, who very often have neither reason nor judgment to perform the
charge they come for. Neither was this Nisi prius, but very seldom of an
atteinct, whereas now an hundred and more of the first and one or two of the
later are very often perceived, and some of them for a cause arising of six

Beside these officers before mentioned, there are sundry other in every
county, as crowners, whose duty is to inquire of such as come to their death
by violence, to attach and present the plees of the crown, Justices of peax
and quorum.
beside sundry gentlemen, where the number of lawiers will not suffice (and
whose revenues do amount to above twenty pounds by the year) appointed by
especial commission from the prince, to look unto the good government of her
subjects, in the counties where they dwell. And of these the least skillful in
the law are of the peace, the other both of the peace and quorum, otherwise
called of Oier and Determiner, so

They meeting also and together with the shiriffes, do hold their aforesaid
sessions at four times in the year, Quarter sessions.
whereof they are called quarter sessions, and herein they inquire of sundry
trespasses, and the common annoiances of the kings liege people, and diverse
other things, determining upon them as justice does require. There are also a
third kind of sessions holden by the high constables and bailiffes before
mentioned, Petie sessions.
called petie sessions, wherein

I might here deliver a discourse of sundry rare customs and courts, surnamed
barons, yet maintained and holden in England: but for so much as some of the
first are beastly, and therefore by the lords of the soiles now living
converted into money, being for the most part devised in the beginning either
by malicious or licentious women, in mere contempt and slavish abuse of their
tenants, under pretense of some punishment due for their excesses, I pass over
to bring them unto light, as also the remembrance of sundry courts baron
likewise holden in strange manner; yet none more absurd and far from law than
are kept yearlie at Kings hill in Rochford, and therefore may well be called a
lawless court, as most are that were devised upon such occasions. This court
is kept upon wednesdaie ensuing after Michaelmasse day after midnight, so that
it is begun and ended before the rising of the sun. When the tenants also are
altogether in an alehouse, the steward secretly steals from them with a
lantern under his cloak, and goes to the Kings hill, where sitting on a
molehill he calls them with a very soft voice, writing their appeerance upon
a piece of paper with a cole, having none other light than that which is
enclosed in the lantern: so soon as the tenants also do miss the steward,
they run to the hill with all their might, and there answer all at once, Here
here, whereby they escape their amercements: which they should not do if he
could have called over his bill of names before they had missed him in the
alehouse. And this is the very form of the court devised at the first (as the
voice goes) upon a rebellion made by the tenants of the honor of Raibie
against their lord, in perpetual memory of their disobedience showed. I could
beside this speak also of some other, but since one has taken upon him to
collect a number of them into a particular treatise, I think it sufficient for
me to have said so much of both.

And thus much have I thought good to set down generally of the said counties
and their manner of governance, although not in so perfect order as the cause
requires, because that of all the rest there is nothing wherewith I am less
acquainted than with our temporal regiment, which (to say truth) smallie
concerns my calling. What else is to be added after the several shires of
England with their ancient limits (as they agreed with the division of the land
in the time of Ptolomie and the Romans) and commodities yet extant, I reserve
unto that excellent treatise of my friend W. Cambden, who has traveled
therein very far, and whose work written in Latin shall in short time (I
hope) he published, to the no small benefit of such as will read and peruse the
same.

Of degrees of people in the commonwealth of England. Chap. 5.
WE in England divide our people commonly into four sorts, as gentlemen,
citizens or burgesses, yeomen, which are artificers, or laborers. Of gentlemen
the first and chief (next the king) be the prince, dukes, marquesses, earls,
viscounts, and barons: and these are called gentlemen of the greater sort, or
(as our common usage of speech is) lords and noblemen: and next unto them be
knights, esquiers, and last of all they that are simply called gentlemen; so
that in effect our gentlemen are divided into their conditions, whereof in this
chapter I will make particular rehearsal.

The title of prince does peculiarly belong with us to the kings eldest
son, who is called prince of Wales, and is the heir apparent to the crown;
as in France the kings eldest son has the title of Dolphine, and is named
peculiarly Monsieur. So that the prince is so termed of the Latin word
Princeps, since he is (as I may call him) the chief or principal next the
king. The kings yoonger sons be but gentlemen by birth (till they have
received creation or donation from their father of higher estate,

The title of duke comes also of the Latin word Dux, a ducendo, Duke.
because of his valor and power over the army: in times past a name of office
due to the emperor, consul, or chief governor of the

In old time he only was called marquess, Marquess.
Qui habuit terram limitaneam, a marching province upon the enemies countries,
and thereby bound to keep and defend the frontiers. But that also is changed
in

The name of earl likewise was among the Romans a name of office, Earl.
who had Comites sacri palatij, comites aerarij, comites stabuli, comites
patrimonij, largitionum, scholarum, commerciorum, and such like. But at the
first they were called Comites, which were joined in commission with the
proconsull, legate, or judges for Cicero epistola ad Quintum fratrem
remembers, where he says; Atque inter hos quos tibi comites, and adiutores
negotiorum publicorum dedit ipsa respublica duntaxat finibus his praestabis,
quos ante praescripsi, etc. After this I read also that every president in his
charge was called Comes, but our English Saxons used the word Hertoch and earl
for Comes, and indifferently as I guess, since the name of duke was not in use
before the conquest. Goropius says, that Comes and Uiscont.
to wit the viscont, called either Procomes, or Vicecomes: and in time past
governed in the county under the earl, but now without any such service or
office, it is also become a name of dignity next after the earl, and in
degree before the baron. His relief also by the great charter is one hundred
pounds, as that of a baronie a hundred marks, and of a knight flue at the most
for every fee.

The baron, Baron.
whose degree answered to the dignity of a senator in Rome, is such a free
lord as has a lordship Baronia, that is, for performance of such service.
These Bracton (a learned writer of the laws of England in king Henry the
thirds time) terms Barons, quasi robur belli. The word Baro indeed is older
than that it may easily be found from whence it came: for even in the oldest
histories both of the Germans and Frenchmen, written since the conquest, we
read of barons, and those are at this day called among the Germans Liberi vel
Ingenui, or Freihers in the Germane tongue as some men do conjecture, or (as
one says) the citizens and burgesses of good towns and cities were called
Barons. Nevertheless by diligent inquisition it is imagined, if not
absolutely found, that the word Baro and Filius in the old Scithian or Germane
language are all one; so that the kings children are properly called Barons,
from whom also it was first translated to their kindred, and then to the
nobility and officers of greatest honor indifferently. That Baro and Filius
signifies one thing, it yet remains to be seen, although with some
corruption: for to this day, even the common sort do call their male children
barnes here in England, especially in the north country, where that word is
yet accustomablie in use. And it is also grown into a proverb in the south,
when any man susteineth a great hinderance, to say, I am beggered and all my
barnes. In the Hebrew tongue (as some affirm) it signifies Filij solis, and
what are the nobility in every kingdom but Filij or serui regum? But this is
far fetched, wherefore I conclude, that from hensefoorth the original of the
word Baro shall not be any more to seek: and the first time that ever I red
thereof in any English history, is in the reign of Canutus, who called his
nobility and head officers to a council holden at Cirnecester, by that name,
1030, as I have elsewhere remembered. Howbeit the word Baro does not always
signify or is attributed to a noble man by birth or creation, for now and then
it is a title given unto one or other with his office, as the chief or high
tribune of the excheker is of custom called lord chief baron, who is as it
were the great or principal receiver of accounts next unto the lord treasuror,
as they are under him are called Tribuni aerarij, and rationales. Hereunto I may
ad so much of the word lord, which is an addition going not seldom and in like
sort with sundry offices, and to continue so long as he or they do execute
the same, and no longer.

Unto this place I also refer our bishops, Bishops.
who are accounted honorable, called lords, and hold the same room in the
parliament house with the barons, albeit for honor sake the right hand of the
prince is given unto them, and whose countenances in time past were much more
glorious than at this present it is, because those lusty prelates sought after
earthly estimation and authority with far more diligence than after the
lost sheep of Christ, of which they had small regard, as men being otherwise
occupied and void of leisure to attend upon the same. Howbeit in these days
their estate remains no less reverend than before, and the more virtuous
they are that be of this calling, the better are they esteemed with high and
low. They retain also the ancient name (lord) still, although it be not a
littie impugned by such as love either to hear of change of all things, or can
abide no superiors. For notwithstanding it be true, that in respect of
function, the office of the eldership is equally distributed between the
bishop and the minister, 1. Sam. b 15. 1. Reg. a 7.
yet for civil gouernements sake, the first have more authority given unto
them by kings and princes, to the end that the rest may thereby be with more
ease retained within a limited compass of uniformity, than otherwise they
would be, if each one were suffered to walk in his own course. This also is
more to be marvelled at, that very many call for an alteration of their
estate, crieng to have the word lord abolished, their civil authority taken
from them, and the present condition of the church in other things reformed;
whereas to say truly, few of them do agree upon form of discipline and
government of the church succedent: wherein they re^enable the Capuans, of
whom Liuic does speak in the slaughter of their senate. Neither is it
possible to frame a whole monarchy after the pattern of one town or city,
or to stir up such an exquisite face of the church as we imagine or desire,
since our corruption is such that it will never yield to so great perfection:
for that which is not able to be performed in a private house, will much less
be brought to pass in a commonwealth and kingdom, before such a prince be
found as Xenophon describes, or such an orator as Tullie has devised. But
whither am I digressed from my discourse of bishops, whose estates do daily
decaie, and suffer some diminution? Herein nevertheless Johannes Bohemus in
his De omnium gentium moribus, De Asia, cap. 12
and others do express; and this also found beside their reports, that in
time past every bishop, abbat, and pelting prior were placed before the earls
and barons in most statutes, charters, and records made by the prince, as may
also No Greek, no grace.
much more then to be utterly ignorant or nothing conversant in them. As Been
con, been can, been le.
the later end of king Henry, were able to to do any more, and very hardly
so much, so void were they of further skill, and so unapt to serve at all.

Dukes, Duke, marquess, earl, viscont.
marquesses, earls, visconts, and barons, either be created of the prince, or
come to that honor by being the eldest sons or highest in succession to their
parents. For the eldest son of a duke during his fathers life is an earl, the
eldest son of an earl is a baron, or sometimes a viscont, according as the
creation is. The creation I call the original donation and condition of the
honor given by the prince for good service done by the first ancestor, with
some advancement, which with the title of that honor is always given to him
and his heirs males only. The rest of the sons of the nobility by the
rigor of the law be but esquiers: yet in common speech all dukes and marquesses
sons, and earls eldest sons be called lords, the which name commonly
does agree to none of lower degree than barons, yet by law and use these be
not esteemed barons.

The baronie or degree of lords does answer to the degree of senators of Rome
Barons.
(as I said) and the title of nobility (as we use to call it in England) to
the Roman Patricij. Also in England no man is commonly created baron, except
he may dispend of yearly revenues a thousand pounds, or so much as may
fully maintain and bear out his countenance and port. But visconts, earls,
marquesses, and dukes exceed them according to the proportion of their degree
and honor. But though by chance he or his son have less, yet he keeps
this degree: but if the decaie be excessive and not able to maintain the
honor, as Senatores Romani were amoti a senatu: so sometimes they are not
admitted to the upper house in the parliament although they keep the name of
lord still, which can not be taken from them upon any such occasion. The most
of these names have descended from the French invention, in whose histories we
shall read of them eight hundred years passed.

This also is worthy the remembrance, that Otto the first emperor of that
name, Of the second degree of gentlemen.
indeuouring to restore the decayed estate of Italy unto some part of her
pristinate magnificence, did after the French example give Di gnitates and
praedia to such knights and soldiers as had served him in the wars, whom he
also adorned with the names of dukes, marquesses, earls, valuasors or
capteins, and valuasines.

His Praedia in like manner were tributes, Praedia.
tolles, portage, bankage, stackage, coinage, profits by saltpits, milles,
watercourse (and whatsoever emoluments grew by them) and such like. But at
that present I read not that the word Baro was brought into those parts. And as
for the valuasors, it was a denomination applied unto all degrees of honor
under the first three (which are properly named the kings capteins) so that
they are called Maiores, minores, and minimi valuasores. This also is to be
noted, that the word captain has two relations, either as the possessor
thereof has it from the prince, or from some duke, marquess, or earl, for
each had capteins under them. If from the prince, Valuasores.
then are they called Maiores valuasores, if from any of his three peers,
then were they Minores valuasores: but if any of these Valuasors do
substitute a deputy, those are called Minimi valuasores, and their deputies
also Valuasini, without regard unto which degree the valuasor does apperteine:
but the word Valuasor is now grown out of use, wherefore it suffices to have
said thus much of that function.

Knights be not borne, Knights.
neither is any man a knight by succession, no not the king or prince: but
they are made either before the battle, to encourage them the more to
adventure and try their manhood: or after the battle ended, as an advancement
for their courage and prowess already showed (and then are they called
Milites;) Milites.
or out of the wars for some great service done, or for the singular virtues
which do appear in them, and then are they named Equites aurati, as common
custom intends. They are made either by the king himself, or by his
commission and royal authority given for the same purpose: or by his
lieutenant in the wars. This order seems to answer in part to that which
the Romans called Equitum Romanorum. For as Equites Romani were chosen Ex
censu, that is, Equite^ aurati.
according to their substance and riches; so be knights in England most
commonly according to their yearly revenues or abundance of riches,
wherewith to maintain their estates. Yet all that had Equestrem censum, were
not chosen to be knights, and no more be all made knights in England that may
spend a knights lands, but they only whom the prince will honor. Sometime
diverse ancient gentlemen, burgesses, and lawiers, are called unto knighthood
by the prince, and nevertheless refuse to take that state upon them, for which
they are of custom punished by a fine, that redoundeth unto his cofers, and to
say truth, is oftentimes more profitable unto him than otherwise their service
should Equites Romani had Equum publicum of custom bestowed upon them, the
knights of England have not so, but bear their own charges in that also, as
in other kind of Cheualier, and the Latins Equitem, or Equestris ordinis virum.
And when any man is made a knight, he kneeling down is stricken of the king or
his substitute with his sword naked upon the back or shoulder, the prince,
etc: saying, Soyes cheualier au nom de Dieu. And when he rises up the king
says Aduances bon cheualier. This is the manner of dubbing knights at this
present, and the term (dubbing) is the old term for that purpose and not
creation, howbeit in our time the word (making) is most in use among the common
sort.

At the coronation of a king or queen, Knights of the bath.
there be other

The other order of knighthood in England, Knights of the garter.
and the most honorable is that of the garter, instituted by king Edward the
third, who after he had gained many Don Petro unto it (by the help of the
prince of Wales and duke of Aquitaine his eldest son called the Black
prince) he then invented this society of honor, and made a choice out of his
own realm and dominions, and throughout all christendom of the best, most
excellent and renowned persons in all virtues and honor, and adorned them with
that title to be knights of his order, giving them a garter garnished with gold
and precious stones, to ^^eare (...) on the left leg only: also a kirtic,
gown, cloak, chaperon colla^, and other solemn and magnifi^^^ apparel, both
of stuff and fashion exquisite and here^call to wear at high feasts and as to
so high and princely an order apperteineth. Of this company also he and his
successors kings and queens of England, be the souereignes, and the rest by
certain statutes and laws amongst themselves be taken as brethren and
fellows in that order, to the number of six and twenty, as I find in a
certain treatise written of the same, an example whereof I have here inserted
word for word, as it was delivered unto me, beginning after this manner.

I might at this present make a long tractatio^ of the round table and estate
of the knights thereof, Round table.
erected sometimes by Arthur the great monarch, of this Island; and thereunto
entreat of the number of his knights, and ceremonies belonging to the order,
but I think in so doing that I should rather set down the latter inventions
of other men, than a true description of such ancient actions as were performed
in deed. I could furthermore with more facility describe the roialtie of
Charles the great and his twelve peers, with their solemn rites and vsages:
but unto this also I have no great devotion, considering the truth hereof is
now so stained with errors and fables inserted into the same by the lewd
religious sort, that except a man should profess to lie with them for
company, there is little sound knowledge to be gathered hereof worthy the
remembrance. In like manner diverse as well subjects as princes have attempted to
restore again a round table in this land (as for example Roger lord Mortimer
at Killingworth) Roger Mortimer.
but such were the excesiue charges apperteining thereunto (as they did make
allowance) and so great molestation daily insued thereupon, beside the
breeding of sundry quarrels among the knights, and such as resorted hitherto
from foreign countries (as it was first used) that in fine they gave it over,
and suffered their whole inventions to perish and decaie, till Edward the third
devised an other order not so much pestered with multitude of knights as the
round table, but much more honorable for princely port and countenance, as
shall appear hereafter.

The order of the garter therefore was devised in the time of king Edward the
third, The occasion of the devise.
and (as some write) upon this occasion. The queens majesty then living,
being departed from his presence the next way toward her lodging, he following
soon after happened to find her garter, which slacked by chance and so fell
from her leg, unespied in the throng by such as attended upon her. His grooms
and gentlemen also passed by it, disdaining to stoop and take up such a
trifle: but he knowing the owner, commanded one of them to stay and reach it
up to him. Why and like your grace (says a gentleman) it is but some woman's
garter that has fallen from her as she followed the queens majesty. What
soever it be (quoth the king) take it up and give it me. So when he had
received the garter, he said to such as stood about him: You my masters do
make small account of this blue garter here (and therewith held it out) but if
God lend me life for a few months, Peradventure but a blue ribben.
I will make the proudest of you all to reverence the like. And even upon this
slender occasion he gave himself to the devising of this order. Certes I have
not read of any thing, that having had so simple a beginning has grown in
the end to so great honor and estimation. But to proceed. After he had studied
awhile about the performance of his devise, and had set down such orders as he
himself invented concerning the same, he proclaimed a royal feast to be holden
at Windsore, whither all his nobility resorted with their ladies, where he
published his institution, and forthwith invested an appon^^^d number into the
before said fellowship, whose names ensue, himself being the sovereign and
principal of that company. Next unto himself also he placed. Edward prince
of Wales. Henry duke of Lancaster. N. earl of Warw. N. capt. de Bouche. N.
earl of Stafford. N. earl of Sarum. N. lord Mortimer. Sir John Lisle. Sir
Bartholomew Burwash. N. son of sir John Beauchamp. Sir N. de Mahun. S. Hugh
Courtneie. S. Thomas Holland. Sir John Graie. Sir Rich. Fitzsimon. Sir Miles
Stapleton. Sir Thomas Wale. Sir Hugh Wrotesley. Sir Neale Lording. Sir John
Chandos. S. James Dawdleie. Sir Otho Holland. Sir Henry Eme. Sir Sanchet
Dambricourt. Sir Walter Pannell alias Paganell.


What order of election, Election.
and what estatutes were prescribed unto the elected at this first institution,
as yet I can not exactlie understand; neither can I learn what every prince
afterward added thereunto before the six and thirtith year of king Henry the
eight, and third of king Edward the sixth: wherefore of necessity I must resort
unto the estate of the said order as it is at this present, which I will set
down so briefly as I may. When any man therefore is to be elected (upon a
room found void for his admission) N. have elected and chosen you amongst
other to be one of the companions of the said Order, as your deserts do
condignelie require. Wherefore we will that with convenient diligence upon the
sight hereof, you repair unto our presence, there to receive such things as to
the said order apperteineth. Dated under our signet at our manner of N. etc.
These letters are the exemplification of certain, which (as it should seem)
were written An. 3. Edwardi fexti at Greenewich Aprilis Edward duke of
Summerset uncle to the king. The marq. of Northhampton. Earl of Arundell L.
Chamberleine. Earl of Shrewesburie. L. Russell lord privy seal. L. S. John
lord great master. Sir John Gage. S. Anthony Wingfield. Sir William Paget.


Being elected, Admission.
preparation is made for his installing at Windsore (the place appointed
always for this purpose) whereat it is required that his banner be set up, of
two yardes and a quarter in length, and three quarters in breadth, besid^ ^^he
fringe. Secondly his sword of whatsoever length him seems good. Thirdly his
helm, which from the charnell upwards ought to be of three inches at the
least. Fourthlie the crest; with mantels to the helm belonging, of such
convenient stuff and bigness, as it shall please him to appoint.

Item a plate of arms at the back of his sta^^, and crest with mantels and
beasts supportant, to be graven in the metal.

Item lodging scutcheons of his arms, inuironned with a garter, and painted in
paper or cloth of buckram, which when he trauelleth by the way are to be fixed
in the common Ins where he does lodge, as a testimony of his presence and
states from time to time as he did travel.

Item two mantels, one to remain in the college at Windsore, the other to use
at his pleasure, with the scutcheon of the arms of S. George in the garter
with laces, tasselets, and knops of blue silk and gold belonging to the same.

Item a surcote or gown of red or crimosine velvet, with a whood of the same,
lined with white sarcenet or damask.

Item a collar of the garter of thirty ounces of gold Troie weight.

Item a tablet of S. George, richly garnished with precious stones or
otherwise.

Item a garter for his (left) leg, having the buckle and pendant garnished with
gold.

Item a book of the statutes of the said order.

Item a scutcheon of the arms of S. George in the garter to set upon the
mantell. And this furniture is to be provided against his installation.

When any knight is to be installed, he has with his former letters,
Installation.
a garter sent unto him, and when he comes to be installed, he is brought
into the chapter house, where incontinently his commission is read before the
sovereign, or his deputy, and the assembly present: from hence he is lead by
two knights of the said order, accompanied with the other of the nobility, and
officers toward the chapel, having his mantell borne before him, either by a
knight of the order, or else the king at arms, to whom it secondarilie
apperteineth to bear it. This mantell shall be delivered unto him for his
habit, Mantell.
after his oath taken before his stall, and not before: which done, he shall
return unto the chapter house, where the sovereign, or his deputy, shall
deliver him his collar, and so he shall have the full possession of his habit.
As for his stall, it is not given according unto the calling and countenance of
the receiver, Stall.
but as the place is that happens to be void, so that each one called unto
this knighthood (the sovereign, and emperors, and kings, and princes always
excepted) shall have the same seat, which became void by the death of his
predecessor, howsoever it fall out: whereby a knight only oftentimes does sit
before a duke, without any murmuring or grudging at his room, except it
please the sovereign, once in his life only to make a general alteration of
those seats, and to set each one according to his degree.

Now as touching the apparel of these knights, it remains such as king
Edward, the first deviser of this order left it, that is to say, every year
one of the colors, that is to say, scarlet, sanguine in grain, blue and white.
In like sort the kings grace has at his pleasure the content of cloth for his
gown and whood, lined with white satine or damask, and multitude of garters
with letters of gold.

The prince has five yardes of cloth for his gown and whood, A timber
contains forty skins, peltes, or felles.
and garters with letters of gold at his pleasure, beside five timber of the
finest miueuer.

A duke has five yardes of woolen cloth, five timber of mineuer, 120 garters
with title of gold.

A marquis has five yards of woollen cloth, five timber of mineuer, 110
garters of silk.

An earl five yardes of woollen cloth, five timber of mineuer, and 100 garters
of silk.

A viscount five yardes of woollen cloth, five timber of mineuer, 90 garters of
silk.

A baron five yardes of woollen cloth, three timber of mineuer gresse, 80
garters of silk.

A banneret five yards of woollen cloth, three timber of mineuer, 70 garters of
silk.

A knight five yards of woollen cloth, three timber of mineuer, 60 garters of
silk.

The bishop of Winchester chapleine of the garter, has eight and twenty
timber of mineuer pure, nineteen timber gresse, three timber and a half of

The chancellor of the order five yards of woollen cloth, three timber of
mineuer pure.

The register of the order five yardes of woollen cloth, three timber of
mineuer pure. And this order to be holden generally among the knights of this
company, which are six and twenty in number, and whose patron in time of
superstition was supposed to be S. George, of whom they were also called S.
Georges knights as I have heard reported. Would

Furthermore at his installation he is solemnly sworn, Installation.
the manner whereof I have thought good also to annex, in this manner. You being
chosen to be one of the honorable company of the order of the Garter, shall
promise and swear upon the holy euangelies by you bodily touched, to be
faithful and true to the kings majesty, and to observe and keep

As touching the estatutes belonging to this order they are many, Estatutes.
and therefore not to be touched here. Howbeit if any doubt do arise above
the interpretation of them, the king who is the perpetual

And for the better understanding what is meant by a gentleman of blood,
Gentleman of blood.
he is defined to descend of three descents of nobleness, that is to say, of
name and of arms both by father and mother.

There are also four degrees of reproach, Degrees of reproach
which may inhibit from the entrance into this order: of Apparel.
Moreover touching the wearing of their aforesaid apparel, it is their custom
to wear the same, when they enter into the chapel of S. George or be in the
chapter house of their order, or finally do go about any thing apperteining
to that company.

If any knight of this order be absent from this solemnity upon the even and
day of S. George, Sick or absent.
and be enforced not to be present either through bodily sickness, or his
absence out of the land: he does in the church, chapel, or chamber where he
is remaining, provide an honorable stall for the kings majesty in the right
hand of the place with a cloth of estat, and cushions, and scutchion of the
garter, and therein the arms of the order. Also his own stall of which side
soever it be distant from the kings or the emperors in his own place,
appointed so nigh as he can, after the manner and situation of his stall at
Windsore, there to remain, the first evening prayer on the even of S. George,
or three of the clock, and likewise the next day during the time of the
divine service, until the morning prayer, and the rest of the service be
ended: and to wear in the mean time his mantell only, with the George and
the lace, without either whood, collar or surcete. Or if he be so sick that he
do keep his bed, he does use to have that habit laid upon him during the
times of divine service aforesaid.

At the service time also upon the morrow after S. George, Offering.
two of the chief knights (saving the deputy of the sovereign if he himself
be absent) shall offer the kings banner of arms, then other two the sword with
the hilts forwards, which being done the first two shall return again, and
offer the helm and crest, having at each time two heralds of arms going
before, according to the statutes. The lord deputy or lieutenant unto the
kings grace, for the time being, alone and assisted with one of the chief
lords, does deliver at his offering a piece of gold, and having all the king
of arms and heralds going before him, he so proceeds to the offering. When
he has thus offered for the prince, he returns with like solemnity unto his
stall, and next of all goes again with one herald to offer for himself,
whose oblation being made, every knight according to their stals, with an
herald before him proceeds to the offering.

What solemnity is used at the burial of any knight of the Garter, Burial.
it is but in vain to declare: wherefore I will show generally what is done
at the disgrading of one of these knights, if through any grievous offense he
be separated from this company. Whereas otherwise the sign of the order is
never taken from him until death do end and finish up his days. Therefore
when any such thing is done, promulgation is made thereof after this manner
ensuing.

Be it known unto all men that N. N. knight of the most noble order of the
Garter, is found guilty of the abominable and detestable crime of high
treason, Disgrading.
for he has most traitorouslie conspired against our most high and mighty
prince sovereign of the said order, contrary to all right, his duty, and the
faithful oath, which he has sworn and taken. For which causes therefore he
has deserved to be deposed from this noble order, and fellowship of the
Garter. For it may not be suffered that such a traitor and disloiall member
remain among the faithful knights of renowned stomach and bountiful prowes,
or that his arms should be mingled with those of noble chivalry. Wherefore
our most excellent prince and supreme of this most honorable order, by the advice and counsel of his colleagues, wills and commands that his arms
which he before time has deserved shall be from henceforth be taken away and
thrown down: and he himself clean cut off from the socieitie of this
renowned order, and never from this day reputed any more for a member of the
same, that all other by his example may hereafter beware how they commit the
like trespass, or fall into such notorious infamy and rebuke. This notice
being given, there resorteth unto the party to be disgraded certain officers
with diverse of his late fellows appointed, which take from him his George,
and other inuestiture, after a solemn manner.

And hitherto of this most honorable order, hoping that no man will be offended
with me, in uttering thus much. For since the noble order of the Toison Dor or
golden fleese, with the ceremonies apperteining unto the creation and
inuestiture of the six and Vincentius Lupan. lib. 1. de Mag. Franc. cap. de
equitibus ordinis, where he calls them Cheualliers sans reproach, and thereto
adds that their chain is commonly of two hundred crowns at the least, and
honor thereof so great, that it is not lawful for them to sell, give, or lay
the same to morgage (would Sans reproach, but their general deling in our time
with all men, will not suffer some of the best of their own countries to have
that opinion of them) I trust I have not given any cause of displeasure,
briefly to set forth those things that apperteine unto our renowned order of
the Garter, in whose compass is written commonly, Some think that this was
the answer of the queen, when the king asked what men would think of her, in
losing the garter after such a manner.
Honi soit qui mal y pense, which is so much to say, as, Evil come to him
that evil thinks: a very sharp imprecation, and yet such

There is yet an other order of knights in England called knights Bannerets,
Bannerets.
who are made in the field with the ceremony of cutting away the point of his
penant of arms, and making it as it were a banner, so that being before but a
bacheler knight, he is now of an higher degree, and allowed to displaie his
arms in a banner as barrons do. Howbeit these knights are never made but in
the wars, the

Esquire (which we call commonly squire) is a French word, Esquire.
and so much in Latin as Scutiger vel armiger, and such are all those which
bear arms, or armoires, testimonies of their race from whence they be
descended. They were at the first costerels or bearers of the arms of barons,
or knights, and thereby being instructed in martial knowledge, had that name
for a dignity given to distinguish them from common soldiers called Gregarij
milites when they

Gentlemen be those whom their race and blood, Gentlemen.
or at the least their virtues do make noble and known. The Latins call them
Nobiles and generosos, as the French do Nobles or Gentlehommes. The etymology
of the name expounds the efficacy of the word: for as Gens in Latin
betokens the race and surname: so the Romans had Cornelios, Sergios, Appios,
Curios, Papyrios, Scipiones, Fabios, Aemilios, Iulios, Brutos, etc: of which,
who were Agnati, Gentiles, gentlemen of that or that house and race.

Moreover as the king does dubbe knights, and creates the barons and higher
degrees, so gentlemen whose ancestors are not known to come in with William
duke of Normandy (for of the Saxon races yet remaining we now make none
account, much less of the British issue) do take their beginning in England,
after this manner in our times. Who soever studieth the laws of the realm,
Lawiers students in universities.
who so abides in the university giving his mind to his book, or professes
physic Physicians.
and the liberal sciences, or beside his service in the room of a captain
Capteins.
in the wars, or good counsel given at home, whereby his commonwealth is
benefited, can live without manuell labor, and thereto is able and will bear
the port, charge, and countenance of a gentleman, he shall for money have a
cote and arms bestowed upon him by heralds (who in the charter of the same do
of custom pretend antiquity and service, and many gaie things) and thereunto
being made so good cheap be called master, which is the title that men give to
esquiers and gentlemen, and reputed for a gentleman ever after. Which is so
much the less to be disalowed of, for that the prince does loose nothing by
it, the gentleman being so much subject to taxes and public paiments as is the
yeoman or husbandman, which he likewise does bear the gladlier for the saving
of his reputation. Being called also to the wars (for with the government of
the commonwealth he medleth little) what soever it cost him, he will both
arraie and arm himself accordingly, and show the more manly courage, and all
the tokens of the person which he represents. No man has hurt by it but
himself, who peradventure will go in wider buskens than his legs will bear,
or as our proverb says, now and then bear a bigger sail than his boat is
able to sustain.

Certes the making of new gentlemen bred great strife sometimes amongst the
Romans, I mean when those which were Noui homines, were more allowed of for
their virtues newly seen and showed, than the old smell of ancient race,
lately defaced by the cowardice and evil life of their nephues and defendants
could make the other to be. But as envy has no affinity with justice and
equity, so it forces not what language the malicious do give out, against
such as are exalted for their wisdoms. This nevertheless is generally to be
reprehended in all estates of gentilitie, and which in short time will turn to
the great ruin of our country, and that is the usual sending of noblemens
and mean gentlemen's sons into Italy, from whence they bring home nothing
but mere atheism, infidelity, vicious conversation, and amibitious and proud
behavior, whereby it comes to pass that they return far worsse men than
they went out. A gentleman at this present is newly come out of Italy, who
went thither an earnest protestant, but coming home he could say after this
manner: Faith and truth is to be kept, where no loss or hinderance of a further
purpose is sustained by holding of the same; and forgiveness only to be
showed when full revenge is made. Another no less forward than he, at his
return from thence could ad thus much; He is a fool that makes account of
any religion, but more fool that will loose any part of his wealth, or will
come in trouble for constant leaning to any: but if he yield to loose his life
for his possession, he is stark mad, and worthy to be taken for most fool of
all the rest. This gaie booty gate these gentlemen by going into Italy, and
hereby a man may see what fruit is afterward to be looked for where such
blossoms do appear. I care not (says a third) what you talk to me of God,
so as I may have the prince and the laws of the realm on my side. Such men as
this last, are easily known; for they have learned in Italy, to go up and
down also in England, with pages at their heels finely apparelled, whose
face and countenance shall be such as shows the master not to be blind in his
choice. But least I should offend too much, I pass over to say any more of
these Italionates and their demeanor, which alas is too open and manifest to
the world, and yet not called into question.

Citizens and burgesses have next place to gentlemen, Citizens and burgesses.
who be those that are free within the cities, and are of some likely
substance to bear office in the same. But these citizens or burgesses are to
serve the common wealth in their cities and boroughs, or in corporat towns
where they dwell. And in the common assembly of the realm wherein our laws
are made, for in the counties they bear but little swaie (which assembly is
called the high court of parliament) the ancient cities appoint four, and the
boroughs two burgesses to have voices in it, and give their consent or dissent
unto such things as pass or stay there in the name of the city or borow, for
which they are appointed.

In this place also are our merchants Merchants.
to be installed, as amongst the citizens (although they often change estate
with gentlemen, as gentlemen do with them, by a mutual conversion of the one
into the other) whose number is so increased in these our days, that their
only maintenance is the cause of the exceeding prices of foreign wares,
which otherwise when every nation was permitted to bring in her own
commodities, were far better cheap and more plentifully to be had. Of the
want our commodities An. 9. Edward 3. by a noble estatute made in that behalf,
but upon what occasion the general execution thereof is stayed or not called
on, in good sooth I cannot tell. This only I know, that every function and
several vocation strives with other, which of them should have all the water
of commodity run into her own cesterne.

Yeomen Yeomen.
are those, which by our law are called Legales homines, free men borne
Euglish, and may dispend of their own free land in yearly revenue, to the
sum of forty shillings sterling, or six pounds as money goes in our times.
Some are of the opinion by Cap. 2. Rich. 2. an. 20. that they are the same
which the French men call varlets, but as that phrase is used in my time it is
far unlikely to be so. The truth is that the word is derived from the Saxon
term Zeoman or Geoman, which signifies (as I have read) a settled or staid
man, such I mean as being married and of some years, betaketh himself to
stay in the place of his abode for the better maintenance of himself and his
family, whereof the single sort have no regard, but are likely to be still
fleeting now hither now thither, which argues want of stabilitie in
determination and resolution of judgment, for the execution of things of any
importance. This sort of people have a certain pre-eminence, and more
estimation than laborers and the common sort of artificers, and these
commonly live wealthilie, keep good houses, and travel to get riches. They
are also for the most part farmers to gentlemen (in old time called Pagani, and
opponuntur militibus, and therefore Persius calls himself Semipaganus) or at
the leastwise artificers, and with grasing, frequenting of markets, and keeping
of servants (not idle servants as the gentlemen do, but such as get both their
own and part of their masters living) do come to great wealth, in so much that
many of them are able and do buie the lands of unthrifty gentlemen, and
often setting their sons to the schools, to the universities, and to the Ins
of the court; or otherwise leaving them sufficient lands whereupon they may
live without labor, do make them by those means to become gentlemen: these
were they that in times past made all France afraid. And albeit they be not
called master as gentlemen are, or sir as to knights apperteineth, but only
John and Thomas, etc: yet have they been found to have done very good
service: and the kings of England in foughten battles, Englishmen on foot and
Frenchmen on horssebacke best.
were wont to remain among them (who were their footmen) as the French kings
did amongst their horssemen: the prince thereby showing where his chief
strength did consist.

The fourth and last sort of people in England are Capite censi or Proletarij.
day laborers, poor husbandmen, and some retailers (which have no free land)
copy holders, and all artificers, as tailers, shomakers, carpenters,
brickmakers, No slaves nor bondmen in England.
masons, etc. As for slaves and bondmen we have none, naie such is the
privilege of our country by the especial grace of God, and bounty of our
princes, that if any come hither from other realms, so soon as they set foot
on land they become so free of condition as their masters, whereby all note of
servile bondage is utterly removed from them, wherein we resemble (not the
Germans who had slaves also, though such as in respect of the slaves of other
countries might well be reputed free, but) the old Indians and the Taprobanes,
who supposed it a great injury to nature to make or suffer them to be bond,
whom she in her woonted course does product and bring forth free. This
fourth and last sort of people therefore have neither voice nor authority in
the common wealth, but are to be ^uled, and not to rule other: yet they are not
altogether neglected, for in cities and corporat towns, for default of yeomen
they are feign to make up their inquests of such manner of people. And in
villages they are commonly made churchwardens, sidemen, aleconners, now and
then constables, and many times inioie the name of hedboroughes. Unto this
sort also may our great swarms of idle serving men be referred, of whom there
runs to proverb; Young serving men old beggars, because service is none
heritage. These men are profitable to none, for if their condition be well
perused, they are enemies to their masters, to their friends, and to
themselves: for by them oftentimes their masters are encouraged unto unlawful
exactions of their tenants, their friends brought unto poverty by their rents
inhanced, and they themselves

Oh how many trades and handicrafts are now in England, whereof the common
wealth has no need? how many needful commodities have we

1 The prince, monarch, and head governor, which is called the king, or (if
the crown fall to the woman) the queen: in whose name and by whose authority
all things are administered.

2 The gentlemen, which be divided into two sorts, as the baronie or estate of
lords (which contains barons and all above that degree) and also those that
be no lords, as knights, esquiers, and simple gentlemen, as I have noted
already. Out of these also are the great deputies and high presidents chosen,
of which one serves in Ireland, as another did sometime in Calis, and the
captain now at Berwike; as one lord president does govern in Wales, and the
other the north parts of this Island, which later with certain counselors and
judges were erected by king Henry the eight. But for so much as I have touched
their conditions elsewhere, it shall be mough to have remembered them at this
time.

3 The third and last sort is named the yeomanrie, of whom and their sequel,
the laborers and artificers, I have said somewhat even now. Whereto I ad that
they be not called masters and gentlemen, but goodmen, as goodman Smith,
goodman Coot, goodman Cornell, goodman Mascall, goodman Cockswet, etc: and in
matters of law these and the like are called thus, Giles Iewd yeoman, Edward
Mountford yeoman, James Cock yeoman, Herrie Butcher yeoman, etc: by which
addition they are exempt from the vulgar and common sorts. Cato calls them
Aratores and optimos ciues rei publicae, of whom also you may read more in the
book of common wealth which sir Thomas Smith sometime penned of this land.

Of gentlemen also some are by the prince chosen, and called to great offices
in the common wealth, of which said offices diverse concern the whole realm;
some be more private and peculiar to the kings house. And they have their places
and degrees, prescribed by an act of parliament made An. 31 Henr. octaui, after
this manner ensuing.

These four the lord Chancellor, the lord Treasuror (who is Supremus aerarij
Anglici quaestor or Tribunus aerarius maximus) the lord President of the
council, and the lord Privy seal, being persons of the degree of a baron or
above, are in the same act appointed to sit in the parliament and in all
assemblies or council above all dukes, not being of the blood royal,
Videlicet the kings brother, uncle, or nephue.

And these six, the lord great Chamberleine of England: the lord high Constable
of England: the lord Marshall of England: the lord Admiral of England: the
lord great master or Steward of the kings house: and the lord Chamberleine: by
that act are to be placed in all assemblies of council, after the lord privy
seal, according to their degrees and estats: so that if he be a baron, then he
is to sit above all barons: or an earl, above all earls.

And so likewise the kings secretary, being a baron of the parliament, has
place above all barons, and if he be a man of higher degree, he shall sit and
be placed according thereunto.

The rehearsal of the temporal nobility of England, according to the
anciencie of their creations, or first calling to their degrees, as they are to
be found at this present.
The Marquise of Winchester. No duke in England. Earls.
The earl of Arundell. The earl of Oxford. The earl of Northumberland. The
earl of Shrewesburie. The earl of Kent. The earl of Derbi^. The earl of
Worcester. The earl of Rutland. The earl of Cumberland. The earl of Sussex.
The earl of Huntingdon. The earl of Bath. The earl of Warwike. The earl of
Southampton. The earl of Bedford. The earl of Penbrooke. The earl of
Hertford. The earl of Leicester. The earl of Essex. The earl of Lincoln.
The viscont Montague. Uisconts.
The viscont Bindon.
The lord of Abergeuennie. Barons.
The lord Awdeleie. The lord Zouch. The lord Barkeleie. The lord Morleie. The
lord Dacres of the south. The lord Cobham. The lord Stafford. The lord Greie of
Wilton. The lord Scroope. The lord Dudleie. The lord Latimer. The lord
Stourton. The lord Lumleie. The lord Mountioie. The lord Ogle. The lord Darcie
of the north. The lord Mountegle. The lord Sands. The lord Uaulx. The lord
Windsore. The lord Wentwoorth. The lord Borough. The lord Mordaunt. The lord
Cromwell. The lord Euers. The lord Wharton. The lord Rich. The lord Willowbie.
The lord Sheffeld. The lord Paget. The lord Darcie of Chichester. The lord
Howard of Effingham. The lord North. The lord Chaundos. The lord of Hunsdon.
The lord saint John of Bletso. The lord of Buckhirst. The lord Delaware. The
lord Burghleie. The lord Compton. The lord Cheineie. The lord Norreis.
Bishops in their anciencie, as they sat in parliament, in the fifth of the
Queens majesty's reign that now is.
The archbishop of Canturburie. Clergy.
The archbishop of York. London. Durham. Winchester.
The rest had their places in senioritie of consecration.

Chichester. Landaffe. Hereford. Elie. Worcester. Bangor. Lincoln. Salisburie.
S. David's. Rochester. Bath and Wells. Couentrie and Lichfield. Excester.
Norwich. Peterborough. Carleill. Chester. S. Assaph. Gloucester.
And this for their placing in the parliament house. Howbeit, when the
archbishop of Canturburie siteth in his provincial assembly, he has on his
right hand the archbishop of York, and next unto him the bishop of Winchester,
on the left hand the bishop of London: but if it fall out that the archbishop
of Canturburie be not there by the vacation of his see, then the archbishop of
York is to take his place, who admits the bishop of London to his right
hand, and the prelat of Winchester to his left, the rest sitting always as
before, that is to say, as they are elders by consecration, which I thought
good also to note out of an ancient president.

Of the food and diet of the English. Chap. 6.
THe situation of our region, lieng near unto the north, does cause the heat
of our stomaches to be of somewhat greater force: therefore our bodies do
crave a little more ample nourishment, than the inhabitants of the hotter
regions are accustomed withal, whose digestive force is not altogether so
vehement, because their internal heat is not so strong as ours, which is kept
in by the coldness of the air, that from time to time (specially in winter)
does enuiron our bodies.

It is no marvel therefore that our tables are oftentimes more plentifully
garnished than those of other nations, and this trade has continued with us
even since the very beginning. For before the Romans found out and knew the
way unto our country, our predecessors fed largely upon flesh and milk,
whereof there was great abundance in this I Will, because they applied their
chief studies unto pasturage and feeding. After this manner also did our Welsh
Britons order themselves in their diet so long as they lived of themselves, but
after they became to be united and made equal with the English they framed
their appetites to live after our manner, so that at this day there is very
little difference between us in our diets.

In Scotland likewise they have given themselves (of late years to speak of)
unto very ample and large diet, wherein as for some respect nature does make
them equal with us: so otherwise they far exceed us in over much and
distemperate gormandize, and so ingrosse their bodies that diverse of them do
often become unapt to any other purpose than to spend their times in large
tabling and belly cheer. Against this pampering of their carcasses does
Hector Boethius in his description of the country very sharply inueigh in
the first chapter of that treatise. Henry Wardlaw also bishop of S. Andrews,
noting their vehement alteration from competent frugalitie into excessive
gluttony, to be brought out of England with James the first (who had been
long time prisoner there under the fourth and fifth Henry's, and at his return
carried diverse English gentlemen into his country with him, whom he very
honorably preferred there) does vehemently exclame against the same in open
parliament holden at Perth 1433, before the three estats, and so brings his
purpose to pass in the end by force of his learned persuasions, that a law was
presently made there for the restreint of superfluous di^t, amongst other
things baked meats (dishes never before this man's days seen in Scotland) were
generally so provided

In old time these north Britons did give themselves universally to great
abstinence, and in time of wars their soldiers would often feed but once or
twice at the most in two or three days (especially if they held themselves in
secret, or could have no issue out of their bogges and marises, through the
presence

From thencefoorth also unto our days, and even in this season wherein we
live, there is no restreint of any meat, either for religions sake or public
order in England, but it is lawful for every man to feed upon what soever he
is able to purchase, except it be upon those days whereon eating of flesh is
especially forbidden by the laws of the realm, which order is taken only
to the end our numbers of cattle

In number of dishes and change of meat, the nobility of England (whose cooks
are for the most part musical headed Frenchmen and strangers) do most exceed,
since there is no day in manner that passes over their heads, wherein they have
not only beef, mutton, veale, lamb, kid, porke, conie, capon, pig, or so
many of these as the season yields: but also some portion of the red or
fallow dear, beside great variety of fish and wild foul, and thereto sundry
other delicates wherein the sweet hand of the seafaring Portingale is not
wanting: so that for a man to dine with one of them, and to taste of every dish
that stands before him (which few use to do, but each one feeds upon that
meat him best likes for the time, the beginning of every dish notwithstanding
being reserved unto the greatest personage that sits at the table, to whom
it is drawn up still by the waiters as order requires, and from whom it
descends again even to the lower end, whereby each one may taste thereof) is
rather to yield unto a conspiracy with a great deal of meat for the speedy
suppression of natural health, then the use of a necessary mean to satisfy
himself with a competent repast, to sustain his body withal. But as this
large feeding is not seen in their gests, no more is it in their own persons,
for since they have daily much resort unto their tables (and many times
unlooked for) and thereto retain great numbers of servants, it is very
requisite and expedient for them to be somewhat plentiful in this behalf.

The chief part likewise of their daily provision is brought in before them
(commonly in silver vessel if they be of the degree of barons, bishops and
upwards) and placed on their tables, whereof when they have taken what it
pleases them, the rest is reserved, and afterward sent down to their serving
men and waiters, who feed thereon in like sort with convenient moderation,
their reuersion also being bestowed upon the poor, which lie ready at their
gates in great numbers to receive the same. This is spoken of the principal
tables whereat the nobleman, his lady and guestes are accustomed to sit,
beside which they have a certain ordinary allowance daily appointed for
their hals, where the chief officers and household servants (for all are not
permitted by custom to wait upon their master) and with them such inferior
guestes do feed as are not of calling to associat the noble man himself (so
that besides those before mentioned, which are called to the principal table,
there are commonly forty or three score persons fed in those hals, to the
great relief of such poor suitors and strangers also as often be partakers
thereof and otherwise like to dine hardly. As for drink it is usually filled
in pots, gobblets, iugs, bols of silver in noble men's houses, also in fine
Uenice glasses of all forms, and for want of these elsewhere in pots of earth
of sundry colors and moulds whereof many are garnished with silver) or at
the leastwise in pewter, all which notwithstanding are seldom set on the
table, but each one as necessity urges, calls for a cup of such drink as
him lists to have: so that when he has tasted of it he delivered the cup
again to some one of the standers by, who making it clean by pouring out the
drink that remains, restores it to the cupbord from whence he fetched the
same. By this devise (a thing brought up at the first by Mnesteus of Athens, in
conservation of the honor of Orestes, who had not yet made expiation for the
death of his adulterous parents Egistus and Clitemnestra) much idle tippling is
furthermore cut off* for if the full pots should continually stand at the
elbow or near the trencher, diverse would always be dealing with them,
whereas now they drink seldom and only when necessity urges, and so avoid
the note of great drinking, or often troubling of the seruitours with filling
of their bols. Nevertheless in the noble men's hals, this order is not used,
neither in any man's house commonly under the degree of a knight or esquire of
great revenues. It is a world to see in these our days, wherein gold and silver
most abounds, how that our gentilitie as lothing those metals (because of
the plenty) do now generally choose rather the Uenice glasses both for our
wine and beer, than any of those metals or stone wherein before time we have
been accustomed to drink, but such is the nature of man generally that it
most coueteth things difficult to be atteined; and such is the estimation of
this stuff, that many become rich only with their new trade Murrhina vasa,
whereof now no man has knowledge. And as this is seen in the gentilitie, so
in the wealthy communaltie the like desire of glass is not neglected, whereby
the gain gotten by their purchase is yet much more increased to the benefit of
the merchant. The poorest also will have glass if they may, but since the
Uenecian To. Bacon.
that a fall should nothing hurt it in such manner, yet it might peradventure
bunch or batter it, nevertheless that inconvenience were quickelie to be
redressed by the hammer. But whither am I slipped?

The gentlemen and merchants keep much about one rate, and each of them
contenteth himself with four, five, or six dishes, when they have but small
resort, or peradventure with one, or two, or three at the most, when they have
no strangers to accompany Pliny calls Mel ex arundinibus, a devise not
common nor greatly used in old time at the table, but only in medicine,
although it grew in Arabia, India and Sicilia) do generally bear the swaie,
besides infinite devises of our own not possible for me to remember. Of the
potato and such venerous roots as are brought out of Spain, Portingale, and
the In^ies to furnish up our bankets, I speak not, wherein our Mures of no
less force, and to be had about Crosbie Rauenswath, do now begin to have place.

But among all these, the kind of meat which is obtained with most difficulty
and cost, is commonly taken for the most delicat, and thereupon each guest
will soonest desire to feed. And as all estats do exceed herin, I mean for
strangeness and number of costly dishes, so these forget not to use the like
excess in wine, in so much as there is no kind to be had (neither any where
more store of all sorts than in England, although we have none growing with us
but yearly to the proportion of 20000 or 30000 tun and upwards,
notwithstanding the daily restreincts of the same brought over unto us) whereof
at great meetings there is not some store to be had. Neither do I mean this
of small wines only, as Claret, White, Red, French, etc: which amount to about
fifty six sorts, according to the number of regions from whence they come: but
also of the thirty kinds of Italian, Grecian, Spanish, Canarian, etc: whereof
Ueruage, Cate pument, Raspis, Muscadell, Romnie, Bastard Tire, Oseie, Caprike,
Clareie and Malmeseie are not least of all accounted of, because of their
strength and valor. For as I have said in meat, so the stronger the wine is,
the more it is desired, by means whereof in old time, the best was called
Theologicum, because it was had from the clergy and religious men, unto whose
houses many of the laity would often send for bottels filled with the same,
being sure that they would neither drink nor be served of the worst, or such
as was any ways mingled or brued by the vintener: naie the merchant would
have thought that his soul should have gone streightwaie to the devil, if he
should have served them with other than the best. Furthermore when these have
had their course which nature yields, fundrie sorts of artificial stuff, as
ypocras and wormwood wine must in like manner succeed in their turns, beside
stale ale and strong beer, which nevertheless bear the greatest brunt in
drinking, and are of so many sorts and ages as it pleases the bruer to make
them.

The beer that is used at noble men's tables in their fixed and standing
houses, Beer.
is commonly of a year old, or peradventure of two years tunning or more,
but this is not general. It is also brued in March and therefore called March
beer, but for the household it is usually not under a months age, each one
coveting to have the same stale as he may, so that it be not sour, and his
bread new as is possible so that it be not hot.

The artificer Artificer.
and husbandman make greatest account of such meat as they may soonest come by,
and have it quickliest ready, except it be in London when the companies of
every trade do meet on their quarter days, at which time they be nothing
inferior to the nobility. Their food also consists principally in beef
and such meat as the butcher sells, that is to say, mutton, veale, lamb,
porke, etc: whereof he finds great store in the markets adioining, beside
souse, brawne, bacon, fruit, pies of fruit, fowls of sundry sorts, cheese,
butter, eggs, etc: as the other wants it not at home, by his own provision,
which is at the best hand, and commonly least charge. In feasting also this
latter sort, I mean the husbandmen do exceed after their manner: especially
at bridales, purifications of women, and such od meetings, where it is
incredible to tell what meat is consumed and spent, each one bringing such a
dish, or so many with him as his wife and he do consult upon, but always
with this consideration, that the leefer friend shall have the better
provision. This also is commonly seen at these bankets, that the good man of
the house is not charged with any thing saving bread, drink, sauce, houseroome
and fire. But the artificers in cities and good towns do deal far otherwise,
for albeit that some of them do suffer their jaws to go often before their
claws, and diverse of them by making good cheer do hinder themselves and
other men: yet the wiser sort can handle the matter well enough in these
iunkettings, and therefore their frugalitie deserves commendation. To conclude,
both the artificer and the husbandman are sufficiently liberal, and very
friendly at their tables, and when they meet, they are so merry I have dined
so well as my lord mayor.
of London, with whom when their bellies be full they will not often stick to
make comparison, because that of a subject there is no public officer of any
city in Europe, that may compare in port and countenance with him during the
time of his office.

I might here talk somewhat of the great silence that is used at the tables of
the honorable and wiser sort, generally over all the realm (albeit that too
much deserves no commendation, for it belongs to gests neither to be muti
nor loquaces) likewise of the moderate eating and drinking that is daily
seen, and finally of the regard that each one has to keep himself from the
note of surffetting and drunkenness (for which cause salt meat, except beef,
bacon, Primus incundus, tollerabilis estque secundus,
Tertius est vanus, sed fetet quatriduanus.


The bread through out the land is made of such Bread.
grain as the soil yields, nevertheless the gentilitie commonly provide
themselves sufficiently of wheat for their own tables, whilst their
household and poor neighbors in some shires are enforced to content
themselves with rye, or barl^ie, yea and in time of dearth many with bread
made either of beans, peason, or otes, or of altogether and some acornes among,
of which scourge the poorest do soonest taste, since they are least able to
provide themselves of better. I will not say that this extremity is often so
well to be seen in time of plenty as of dearth, but if I should I could
easily bring my trial. For albeit that there be much more ground eared now
almost in every place, than has been of late years, yet such a price of
corn continues in each town and market without any just cause (except it be
that landlords do get licenses to carry corn out of the land only to keep
up the pieces for their own private gains and ruin of the commonwealth)
that the artificer and poor laboring man, is not able to reach unto it, but is
driven to content himself with horssecorne, A famine at hand is first seen in
the horse manger when the poor do fall to horssecorne.
I mean, beans, peason, otes, tares, and lintels: and theerfore it is a true
proverb, and never so well verified as now, that hunger sets his first foot
into the horse manger. If the world last a while after this rate, wheat and
rye will be no grain for poor men to feed on, and some catterpillers there
are that can say so much already.

Of bread made of wheat we have sundry sorts, daily brought to the table,
whereof the first and most excellent is the mainchet, which we commonly call
white bread, in Latin Primarius panis, Primarius panis.
whereof Budeus also speaks, in his first book De ass, and our good workmen
deliver commonly such proportion, that of the flower of one bushel with
another they make forty cast of manchet, of which every lofe weighs eight
ounces into the oven and six ounces out, as I have been informed. The second
is the cheat or wheaton bread, Cheat bread.
so named because the color thereof resembles the graie or yellowish wheat,
being clean and well dressed, and out of this is the coursest of the bran
(usually called gurgeons or pollard) taken. The raueled is a kind of cheat
bread also, Rauelled bread.
but it reteineth more of the gross, and less of the pure substance of the
wheat: and this being more slightly wrought up, is used in the halles of the
nobility, and gentry only, The size of bread is very ill kept or not at
all looked unto in the country towns and markets.
whereas the other either is or should be baked in cities and good towns of an
appointed size (according to such price as the corn does bear) and by a
statute provided by king John in that behalf. The raueled cheat therefore is
generally so made that out of one bushel of meal, after two and twenty
pounds of bran be sisted and taken from it (whereunto they ad the gurgeons that
rise from the manchet) they make thirty cast, every lofe weighing eighteen
ounces into the oven and sixteen ounces out: and beside this they so handle
the matter that to every bushel of meal they ad only two and twenty or
three and twenty pound of water, washing also in some houses there corn
before it go to the mill, whereby their manchet bread is more excellent in
color and pleasing to the eye, than otherwise it would be. The next sort is
named brown bread of the color, Brown bread.
of which we have two sorts, one baked up as it comes from the mill, so that
neither the bran nor the flower are any whit diminished, this Celsus called
Autopirus panis, lib. 2. and puts it in the second place of nourishment. The
other has little or no flower left therein at all, howbeit he callech it Panem
Cibarium, Panis Cibarius.
and it is not only the woorst and weakest of all the other sorts, but also
appointed in old time for servants, slaves, and the inferior kind of people to
feed upon. Hereunto likewise, because it is dry and brickle in the working
(for it will hardly be made up handsomelie into loaves) some add a portion of
rye meal in our time, whereby the rough dryness or dry roughnes thereof is
somewhat qualified, and then it is named miscelin, that is, bread made of
mingled corn, albeit that diverse do sow or mingle wheat and rye of set
purpose at the mill, or before it come there, and sell the same at the markets
under the aforesaid name.

In champeigne countries much rye and barleie Summer wheat and win^er bar^eie
very rare in England.
but especially where wheat is scant and geson. As for the difference that is
between the summer and winter wheat, most husbandmen know it not, since they
are neither acquainted with summer wheat, nor winter barleie: yet here and
there I find of both sorts, specially in the north and about Kendall, where
they call it March wheat, and also of summer rye, but in so small quantities as
that I dare not pronounce them to be greatly common among us.

Our drink, Drink.
whose force and continuance is partly Malt.
and the making of our beer, wherein they have shot so far

Our malt is made all the year long in some great towns, but in gentlemen's
and yeomens Making of malt.
who commonly make sufficient for their own expenses only, the winter half
is thought most meet for that commodity: howbeit the malt that is made when
the willow does bud, is commonly worst of all, nevertheless each one
indeuoureth to make it of the best barleie, which is steeped in a cesterne, in
greater or less quantity, by the space of three days and three nights,
until it be thoroughly soked. This being done, the water is drained from it
by little and little, till it be quite gone. Afterward Coming. When it
begins therefore to shoot in this manner, they say it is come, and then
forthwith they spread it abroad, first thick, and afterward thinner and
thinner upon the said floor (as it comes) and there it lies (with turning
every day four or five times) by the space of one and twenty days at the
least, the workman not suffering it in any wise to

The best malt is tried by the hardness and color, for if it look fresh with
a yellow hew, and thereto will write like a piece of chalk, after you have
bitten a kirnell in sunder in the midst, then you may assure your self that
it is dried down. In s^^^^ places it is dried at leisure with wood alone, or
straw alone, in other with wood and straw together, but of all the straw
dried, is the most excellent. For the wood dried malt when it is brued, beside
that the drink is higher of color, it does hurt and annoie the head of him
that is not used thereto, because of the smoke. Such also as use both
indifferently do bark, cleave, and dry their wood in an oven, thereby to
remove all moisture that should procure the fume, and this malt is in the
second place, and with the same likewise, that which is made with dried firze,
broom, etc: whereas if they also be occupied green, they are in manner so
prejudicial to the corn, as is the moist wood. And thus much of our malts, in
bruing whereof some grind the same somewhat grossly, and in seething well the
liquor that shall be put unto it, they add to every nine quarters of malt
one of headcorne, which consists of sundry grain, as wheat, and otes
groond. But what have I to do with this matter, or rather so great a
quantity, wherewith I am not acquainted. Nevertheless, since I have taken
occasion to speak of bruing, I will exemplify in such a proportion as I am
best skilled in, because it is the usual rate for mine own family, and once
in a month practiced by my wife and her maid servants, who proceed withal
after this manner, as she has off informed me.

Having therefore groond eight bushels of good Bruing of beer.
malt upon our querne, where the toll is saved, she adds unto it half a
bushel of wheat meal, and so much of otes small groond, and so tempereth or
mixeth them with the malt, that you cannot easily discern the one from the
other, otherwise these later would clunter, fall into lumps, and thereby become
unprofitable. The first liquor which is full eighty gallons, according to the
proportion of our furnace, she makes boiling hot, and then powers it softly
into the malt, where it rests (but without stirring) until her second liquor
be almost ready to boil. This done she lets her mash run till the malt be
left without liquor, or at the leastwise the greatest part of the moisture,
which she perceives by the stay and soft issue thereof, and by this time her
second liquor in the furnace is ready to sees, which is put also to the malt
as the first woorst also again into the furnace whereunto she adds two
pounds of the best English hops, and so lets them sees together by the
space of two hours in summer, or an hour and an half in winter, whereby it
gets an excellent color, and continuance without impeachment, or any
superfluous tartness. Charwoore.
But before the puts her first woort into the furnace, or mingleth it with
the hops, she takes out a vessel full, of eight or nine gallons, which she
shuts up close, and suffers no air to come into it till it become yellow,
and this she reserueth by it self unto further use, as shall appear hereafter
calling it Brackwoort or Charwoort, and as she says it adds also to the
color of the drink, whereby it yields not unto amber or fine gold in hew
unto the eye. By this time also her second woort is let run, and the first
being taken out of the furnace and placed to cool, she returns the middle
woort unto the furnace, where it is stricken over, or from whence it is taken
again, when it begins to boil and mashed the second time, whilst the
third liquor is heat (for there are three liquors) and this last put into the
furnace, when the second is mashed again. When she has mashed also the last
liquor (and set the second to cool by the first) she lets it run, and
then seetheth it again with a pound and an half of new hops, or peradventure
two pounds as she sees cause by the goodness or baseness of the hops, and
when it has sodden in summer two hours and in winter an hour and an half,
she strikes it also and reserueth it unto mixture with the rest when time
does serve therefore. Finally when she sets her Computatis computandis
able to perform) may endure no deeper cut, the charges whereof grows in this
manner. I value my malt at ten shillings, my wood at four shillings which I
buie, my hops at twenty pence, the spice at two pence, servants wages two
shillings six pence with meat and drink, and she wearing of my vessel at
twenty pence, so that for my twenty shillings I have ten score gallons of
beer or more, notwithstanding

In this trade also our bruers observe very diligently

In some places of England, there is a kind of drink made of apples, which
they call cider Cider.
or pomage, but that of pears is named pirrie, Perrie.
and both are groond and pressed in presses made for the nonce. Certes these
two are very common in Sussex, Kent, Worcester, and other steeds, where these
sorts of fruits do abound, howbeit they are not their only drink at all
times, but referred unto the delicate sorts of drink, as metheglin Metheglin.
is in Wales, whereof the Welshmen make no less account (and not without cause
if it be well handled) than the Greeks did of their Ambrosia or Nectar, which
for the pleasantness thereof, was supposed to be such as the gods themselves
did delight in. There is a kind of swish swash mad also in Essex, and diverse
other places, with honicombs and water, which the homely country wives,
putting some pepper and a little other spice among, call mead, Mead.
very good in mine opinion for such as love to be loose bodied at large, or a
little eased of the cough, otherwise it differs so much from the true
metheglin, as chalk from cheese. Truly it is nothing else but the washing of
the combs, Hydromel.
when the honey is wroong out, and one of the best things that I know belonging
thereto is, that they spend but little labor and less cost in making of the
same, and therefore no great loss if it were never occupied. Hitherto of the
diet of my countrymen, and somewhat more at large peradventure than many men
will like of, wherefore I think good now to finish this tractation, and so
will I, when I have added a few other things incident unto that which goes
before, whereby the whole process of the same shall fully be delivered, and my
promise to my friend in this behalf performed.

Heretofore there has been much more time spent in eating and drinking than
commonly is in these days, Less time spent in eating than heretofore.
for whereas of old we had breakefasts in the forenoone, beuerages, or nuntions
after dinner, and thereto rear suppers generally when it was time to go to
rest (a toie brought into England by hardy Canutus and a custom whereof
Athenaeus also speaks lib. 1, albeit Hippocrates speak but of twice at the
most lib. 2. De rat. vict. in feb. ac.) Now these od repasts thanked be God are
very well left, and each one in manner (except here and there some young hungry
stomath that cannot fast till dinner time) contenteth himself with dinner and
supper only. The Normans misliking the gormandise of Canutus, ordained after
their ^rriuall, that no table should be covered above once in the day, which
Huntingdon imputes to their avarice: but in the end either waxing weary of
their own frugalitie, or suffering the cockle of old custom to ouergrow the
good corn of their new constitution, they fell to such liberty, Canutus a
glutton, but the Normans at the last exceeded him in that vice.
that in often feeding they surmounted Canutus surnamed the hardy. For whereas
he covered his table but three or four times in the day, these spread their
clothes five or six times, and in such wise as I before rehearsed. They brought
in also the custom of long and stately sitting at meat, whereby their feasts
resembled those ancient pontifical bankets whereof Macrobius speaks lib. 3.
cap. 13. and Plin. lib. 10. cap. 10. and which for sumptuousness of fare, long
sitting and curiosity showed in the same, exceeded all other men's feasting,
which fondness is not yet left with us, notwithstanding that it proves very
beneficial for the physicians, who most abound, where most excess and
misgouernement of our bodies do appear, although it be a great expense of
time, and worthy of reprehension. For the nobility, gentlemen, and
merchantmen, especially at great meetings do sit commonly till two or three
of the clock at afternoon, Long sitting reprehended.
so that with many is an hard matter, to rise from the table to go to evening
prayer, and return from thence to come time enough to supper. For my part I am
persuaded that the purpose of the Normans at the first was to reduce the
ancient Roman order or Danish custom in feeding once in the day, Socrates,
who said unto the Atheniens, Orient sole consilium, occidente conuiuium est
cogitandum, although a little something was allowed in the morning to young
children which we now call a breakefast. Plato called the Siciliens monsters,
for that they used to eat twice in the day. Among the Persians only the king
dined when the sun was at the highest, Arhianus notes it as a rare thing li.
4. cap. 16. that the Tyrhenians had taken up an ill custom to feed twice in a
day. Howbeit at the last they fell generally to allow of suppers toward the
setting of the sun in all places, Plutarch says) did feed before that time,
he incurred a note of reprehension as if he had been gluttonous and given unto
the belly, 8. Sympos. 6. Their slaves in like sort were glad, when it grew to
the tenth foot, for then were they sure soon after to go to meat. In the
Marius for that he gave himself to drink before the That is at three of the
clock at afternoon.
ninth hour of the day: for thinking three hours to be too little for the
filling of his belly, he began commonly at eight, which was an hour too
soon. Afterward Sex horae tantum rebus tribuantur agendis,
Viuere post illas, littera Zetha monet.


Whereunto Maximus Planudes (except my memory fail me) adds this scholie
after his manner, Martial divided his day, and with him the whole troop of the
learned and wiser sort, these verses following do more evidently declare:
Prima salutantes, atque altera (...), Li. 4. epig. 8.

Exercet raucos tertia causidicos.
In quintam varios extendis Roma labores,
Sexta quies lassis, septima finis erit.
Sufficit in nonam nitidis octaua palestris,
Imperat extructos frangera nona thoros.
Hora libellorum decima est Eupheme meorum,
Temperat Ambrosias cum tua cura dapes.
Et bonus aethereo laxatur Nectare Caesar,
Ingentique tenet pocula parca manu.
Tunc admitteiocos: gressu timet ire licenti,
Ad matutinum nostra Thaleia Iouem.


Thus we see how the ancient manner of the Gentiles was to feed but once in the
day, and that toward night, till gluttony grew on and altered this good
custom. I might (...) remember also their manner in pulling off their shoes
when they sat down to meat, whereof Martial says: Deposui soleas, affertur
protinus ingens
Inter lactucas oxygarmuque, liber, etc.
And Tullie also remembers where he says Seruum a pedibus ad te misi, which
office grew of the said custom, as Seruus ad limina did of keeping the door,
though in most houses both these were commonly one man's office, also Ad pocula
of attending on the cup. But because the good writers of our time have observed
these phrases and such like with their causes and descriptions, in their
infinite and several treatises, I shall not need to discourse any farther
upon them. With us the nobility, gentry, and students, do ordinarily go to
dinner at eleven before noone, and to supper at five, or between five and six
at afternoon. The merchants dine and sup seldom before twelve at noone, and
six at night especially in London. The husbandmen dine also at high noone as
they call it, and sup at seven or eight: but out of the term in our
universities the scholars dine at ten. As for the poorest fort they generally
dine and sup when they may, so that to talk of their order of repast, it were
but a needless matter. I might here take occasion also to set down the
variety used by antiquity in their beginnings of their diets, wherein almost
every nation had a several fashion, some beginning of custom (as we do in
summer time) with salets at supper, and some ending with lettice, some making
their entry with eggs, and shutting up their tables with mulberies, as we do
with fruit and conceits of all sorts. Diverse (as the old Romans) began with a
few crops of rue, as the Uenetians did with the fish called Gobius, the Belgies
with butter (or as we do yet also) with butter and eggs upon fish days. But
whereas we commonly begin with the most gross food, and end with the most
delicate, the Scot thinking much to leave the best for his meniall servants
makes his entrance at the best, so that he is sure thereby to leave the worst.
We use also our wines by degrees, so that the hotest comes last to the table,
but to stand upon such toies would spend much time, and turn to small profit,
wherefore I will deals with other things more necessary for this turn.

Of their apparel and attire. Chap. 7.
AN Englishman, indeuoring sometime to write of our attire, made sundry
platformes for his purpose, supposing by some of them to find out one steadfast
ground whereon to build the sum of his discourse. But in the end (like an
orator long without exercise) when he saw what a difficult piece of work he
had taken in hand, he gave over his travel, and only drue the picture of a
naked man, unto whom he gave a pair of sheares in the one hand, and a piece
of cloth in the other, to the end he should shape his apparel after such
fashion as himself liked, since he cuold find no kind of garment that could
please him any while together, and this he called an Englishman. Andrew Board.
Certes this writer (otherwise being a lewd popish hypocrite and ungracious
priest) showed himself herein not to be altogether Strange cu^s.
For my part I can tell better how to inueigh against this enormitie, than
describe any certeintie Much cost upon the body, and little upon the soul
many suits of apparel has the one and how little Beards.
of which some are shaven from the chin like those of pique de vant (O fine
fashion!) or now and then suffered to grow long, the barbers being grown to be
so cunning in this behalf as the tailors. And therefore if a man have a lean
and straight face, a marquess Ottons cut will make it broad and large; if it
be platter like, a long slender beard will make it seem the narrower; if he be
wesell becked, then much hear left on the cheeks will make the owner look
big like a bowdled hen, and so grim as a goose, if Cornelis of Chelmeresford
say true: many old men do wear no beards at all. Some lusty courtiers also
and gentlemen of courage, do wear either rings of gold, stones, or pearl in
their ears, whereby they imagine the workmanship of God not to be a little
amended. But herein they rather disgrace than adorn their persons, as by their
niceness in apparel, for which I say most nations do not unjustly deride
us, as also for that we do seem to imitate all nations round about, us
wherein we be like to the Polypus or Chameleon; and thereunto bestow most cost
upon our arses, and much more than upon all the rest of our bodies, as women
do likewise upon their heads and shoulders. Excess in women.
In women also it is most to be lamented, that they do now far exceed the
lightness of our men (who nevertheless are transformed from the cap even to
the very shoo) and such staring attire as in time past was supposed meet for
none but light housewiues only, is now become an habit for chaste and sober
matrones. What should I say of their doublets with pendant codpeeses on the
breast full of iags and cuts, and sleeves of sundry colors? their galligascons
to bear out their bums and make their attire to sit plum round (as they term
it) about them? their fardingals, and diversely colored nether stocks of
silk, ierdseie, and such like, whereby their bodies are rather deformed than
commended? I have met with some of these trulles in London so disguised, that
it has passed my skill to discern whether they were men or women.

Thus it is now come to pass, that women are become men, and men transformed
into monsters: and those good gifts which almighty God has given unto us to
relieve our necessities withal (as a nation turning altogether the grace of
God into wantonness, for Luxuriant animi rebus plerunque secundis) not
otherwise bestowed than in all excess, as if we wist not otherwise how to
consume and wast them. I pray God that in this behalf our sin be not like
unto that of Sodoma and Gomorha, Eze^h. 16.
whose errors were pride, excess of diet, and abuse of Gods benefits
abundantly bestowed upon them, beside want of charity toward the poor, and
certain other points which the prophet shuts up in silence. Certes the
commonwealth cannot be said to flourish where these abuses reign, but is
rather oppressed by vnteasonable exactions made upon rich farmers, and of poor
tenants, wherewith to maintain the same. Neither was it ever merier with
England, than when an Englishman was known abroad by his own cloth, and
contented himself at home with his fine carsie hosen, and a mean slop: his
coat, gown, and cloak of brown blue or puke, with some pretty furniture of
velvet or furre, and a doublet of sad tawnie, or black velvet, or other
comely silk, without such cuts and gawrish colors as are worn in these
days, and never brought in but by the consent of the French, who think
themselves the gaiest men, when they have most diversities of iagges and change
of colors about them. Attire of merchants.
Certes of all estates our merchants do least alter their attire, and
therefore are most to be commended: for albeit that which they wear be very
fine and costly, yet in form and color it represents a great piece of the
ancient gravity apperteining to citizens and burgesses, albeit the yoonger
sort of their wives both in attire and costly housekeeping can not tell when
and how to make an end, as being women in deed in whom all kind of curiosity
is to be found and seen, and in far greater measure than in women of higher
calling. I might here name a sort of hewes devised for the nonce, wherewith to
please fantastical heads, as gooseturd green, pease porrige tawnie,
popingaie blue, lusty gallant, the devil in the head (I should say the
hedge) and such like: but I pass them over thinking it sufficient to have said
thus much of apparel generally, when nothing can particularly be spoken of
any constancy thereof.

Of the high court of parliament, and authority of the same. Chap. 8.
IN speaking of parliament The parliament house divides the estate of the realm
into nobility and the commons.
and corrupted religion either dissanulled or reformed, which commonly is
divided into two houses or parts, the higher or upper house consisting of the
nobility, including all even unto the baron and bishop: the lower called the
nether house Centuriatis or Tribunitijs comitijs, the same is and may be done
by authority of our parliament house, which is the head and body of all the
realm, and the place wherein every particular person is intended to be
present, if not by himself, yet by his advocate or atturneie. For this cause
also any thing there enacted is not to be misliked, but obeyed of all men
without contradiction or grudge. By the space of forty dais, before this
assembly be begun, Time of summons.
the prince sends his Of the upper house.
as well ecclesiastical as temporal, do attend upon the prince, who rides
thither in person, as it were to open the door of their authority; and being
come into the place, after prayers made, and causes showed, wherefore some not
present are enforced to be absent, each man takes his place according to his
degree. The house it self is curiously furnished with tapisterie, and the
king being set in his throne, the spiritual lords take up the side of the
house which is on the right hand of the prince, Places of the peers.
and the temporal lords the left, I mean, so well dukes and earls, as
viscounts and barons, as I before remembered. In the midst and a pretty
distance from the prince, lie certain sackes stuffed with wool or hair,
whereon the judges of the realm, the master of the rols, and secretaries of
estate do sit. Howbeit these judges have no voice in the house, but only
show what their opinion is of such and such matters as come in question among
the lords, if they be commanded so to do: as the secretaries are to answer
such letters or things passed in the council, whereof they have the custody
and knowledge. Finally, the consent of this house is given by each man
severally, first for himself being present, then severally for so many as
he has letters and proxies directed unto him, saying only; Content or Not
content, without any further debating. Of the number assembled in the lower
house, Of the lower house.
I have already made a general report in the chapter precedent, and their
particulars shall follow here at hand. These therefore being called over by
name do choose a speaker, Speaker.
who is as it were their mouth, and him they present unto the prince, in whom
it is either to refuse or admit him by the lord chancellor, who in the princes
name does answer unto his oration, made at his first entrance and presentation
into the house, wherein he declares the good liking that the king has
conceived of his choice unto that office and function. Being admitted, he
makes five requests unto that honorable assembly, Petitions of the speaker.
first that the house may (as in times past) enjoy her former liberties and
privileges: secondly, that the congregates may frankelie show their minds upon
such matters as are to come in question: thirdly, that if any of the lower
house do give any cause of offense during the continuance of this assembly,
that the same may inflict such punishment upon the party culpable, as to the
said assembly shall be thought convenient: fourthlie, if any doubt should
arise among them of the lower house, that he in their name might have free
access and recourse unto his majesty and lords of the higher house, to be
further instructed and resolved in the same: fiftlie and last, he craves
pardon for himself, if in his going to and fro between the houses, he forget
or mistake any thing, requiring that he may return and be better informed in
such things as be did fail in without offense: unto which petitions the lord
chancellor does answer as apperteineth, and this is done on the first day,
or peradventure the second, if it could not be conveniently performed in the
first.

Beside the lord chancellor there is another in the upper house called the
clerk of the parliament, Clerk of the parliament.
whose office is to read the bills. For every thing that comes in
consultation in either house, is first put in writing in paper, which being
read, he that lists rises up and speaks either with it or against it, and
so one after another so long as they shall think good; that done they go to
another, and so to the third, etc: the instrument still wholly or in part raced
or reformed, as cause moves for the amendment of the same if the substance be
reputed necessary. In the upper house the lord chancellor demands if they
will have it engrossed, that is to say, put in parchment, which done, it is
read the third time, and after debating of the matter to and fro if the more
part do conclude withal, upon the utterance of these words, Are ye contended
that it be enacted or no? the clerk writes underneath So it baille aux
commons, and so when they see time they send such bills approved to the
commons by some of them that sit on the wool sackes, who coming into the
house, and demanding license to speak, do use this kind of words or the like
to the speaker, as sir Thomas Smith does deliver and set them down, whose
only direction I use, and almost word for word in this chapter, requiting him
with the like borowage as he has used toward me in his discourse of the
sundry degrees of estates in the commonwealth of England, which (as I hope)
shall be no discredit to his travel. Master speaker, my lords of the upper
house have passed amongst them, and think good that there should be enacted by
parliament such an act, and such an act (reading their titles in such sort as he
received them) they pray you

The speaker sits in a chair erected somewhat higher than the rest, Of the
nether house.
that he may see and be seen of Le commons ont assentus: so if the lords agree
upon any bill sent unto them from the commons, it is subscribed after this
manner, Les seigniours ont assentus. If it be not agreed on after thrice
reading, there is conference required and had between the upper and nether
houses, by certain appointed for that purpose upon the points in question,
whereupon if no final agreement by the more part can be obtained, the bill Le
roy veult. If the prince like not of them, it is written upon them Le roy
aduisera. And so those acts are dashed, as the other from thenceforoth are
taken and holden for law, and all imprinted except such as concern some private
persons, which are only exemplified under the seal of the parliament, as
privileges to his use. And this is the sum of the manner after which our
parlements in England are holden, without which no forfaiture of life, member
or lands of any Englishman, where no law is ordained for the same before hand,
is auailable or can take place amongst us. And so much in manner out of the
third chapter of the second book of the commonwealth of England written by
sir Thomas Smith: whereunto I will annex a table of the counties, cities,
boroughs and ports, which send knights, burgesses, and barons to the parliament
house, and does ensue as follows.

The names of counties, cities, boroughs, and ports, sending knights, citizens,
burgesses, and barons to the parliament of England.
Bedford.
KNights. 2 The borough of Bedford. 2
Buckingham.
Knights. 2 The borough of Buckingham. 2 The borough of Wickombe. 2 The borough
of Ailesburie. 2
Barckeshire.
Knights. 2 The borough of New Windsore. 2 The borough of Reading. 2 The
borough of Wallingford. 2 The borough of Abington. 2
Cornwall.
Knights. 2 The borough of Launceston alias Newport. 2 The borough of Leskerd.
2 The borough of Lostwithiell. 2 The borough of Dunheuet. 2 The borough of
Truro. 2 The borough of Bodmin. 2 The borough of Helston. 2 The borough of
Saltash. 2 The borough of Camelford. 2 The borough of Portighsam alias Portlow.
2 The borough of Graunpount. The borough of Eastlow. 2 The borough of Prurie. 2
The borough of Tregonie. 2 The borough of Trebenna alias Bossinnie. 2 The
borough of S. Ies. 2 The borough of Fowaie. 2 The borough of Germine. 2 The
borough of Michell. 2 The borough of saint Mary's. 2
Cumberland.
Knights. 2 The city of Caerleill. 2
Cambridge.
Knights. 2 The borough of Cambridge. 2
Chester.
Knights. 2 The city of Chester. 2
Darbie.
Knights. 2 The borough of Darbie. 2
Deuon.
Knights. 2 The city of Excester. 2 The borough of Totnes. 2 The borough of
Plimmouth. 2 The borough of Bardnestable. 2 The borough of Plimton. 2 The
borough of Tauestocke. 2 The borough of Dartmouth, Clifton, and Herdines. 2
Dorsetshire.
Knights. 2 The borough of Poole. 2 The borough of Dorchester. 2 The borough of
Linne. 2 The borough of Melcombe. 2 The borough of Waiemouth. 2 The borough of
Bureport. 2 The borough of Shaftesburie. 2 The borough of Warham. 2
Essex.
Knights. 2 The borough of Colchester. 2 The borough of Malden. 2
Yorkshire.
Knights. 2 The city of York. 2 The borough of Kingston upon Hull. 2 The
borough of Knaresborough. 2 The borough of Skardborough. 2 The borough of
Rippon. 2 The borough of Hudon. 2 The borough of Boroughbridge. 2 The borough
of Thuske. 2 The borough of Aldebrough. 2 The borough of Beuerleie. 2
Glocestershire.
Knights. 2 The city of Gloucester. 2 The borough of Cirencester. 2
Huntingtonshire.
Knights. 2 The borough of Huntingdon. 2
Hertfordshire.
Knights. 2 The borough of saint Albons. 2
Herefordshire.
Knights. 2 The city of Hereford. 2 The borough of Lempster. 2
Kent.
Knights. 2 The city of Canturburie. 2 The city of Rochester. 2 The borough
of Maidstone. 2 The borough of Quinborough. 2
Lincoln.
Knights. 2 The city of Lincoln. 2 The borough of Bostone. 2 The borough of
great Grinesbie. 2 The borough of Stamford. 2 The borough of Grantham. 2
Leicestershire.
Knights. 2 The borough of Leicester. 2
Lancastershire.
Knights. 2 The borough of Lancaster. 2 The borough of Preston in Andernes. 2
The borough of Liuerpoole. 2 The borough of Newton. 2 The borough of Wigan. 2
The borough of Clithero. 2
Middlesex.
Knights. 2 The city of London. 4 The city of Westminster. 2
Monmouth.
Knights. 2 The borough of Monmouth. 1
Northhampton.
Knights. 2 The city of Peterborough. 2 The borough of Northhampton. 2 The
borough of Barkleie. 2 The borough of Higham Ferres. 1
Notingham.
Knights. 2 The borough of Notingham. 2 The borough of Estreatford. 2
Norffolke.
Knights. 2 The city of Norwich. 2 The borough of Linne. 2 The borough of
great Iernemouth. 2 The borough of Thetford. 2 The borough of castle Rising. 2
Northumberland.
Knights. 2 The borough of New castle upon Tine. 2 The borough of Morpeth. 2
The borough of Barwike. 2
Oxford.
Knights. 2 The city of Oxford. 2 The borough of Bamburie. 2 The borough of
Woodstocke. 2
Rutland.
Knights. 2
Surrerie.
Knights. 2 The borough of Southwarke. 2 The borough of Blechingleigh. 2 The
borough of Rigate. 2 The borough of Guildford. 2 The borough of Gatton. 2
Stafford.
Knights. 2 The city of Lichfield. 2 The borough of Stratford. 2 The borough
of New castle under Linne. 2 The borough of Tamworth. 2
Salop.
Knights. 2 The borough of Salop. 2 The borough of Bruges alias Bridgenorth. 2
The borough of Ludlow. 2 The borough of Wenlocke. 2
Southhampton.
Knights. 2 The city of Winton. 2 The borough of Southhampton. 2 The borough
of Portesmouth. 2 The borough of Peterfield. 2 The borough of Stockebridge. 2
The borough of Christ church. 2
Suffolk.
Knights. 2 The borough of Ippeswich. 2 The borough of Dunwich. 2 The borough
of Ortford. 2 The borough of Aldeborough. 2 The borough of Sudburie. 2 The
borough of Eya. 2
Summerset.
Knights. 2 The city of Bristow. 2 The city of Bath. 2 The city of Wells. 2
The borough of Taunton. 2 The borough of Bridgewater. 2 The borough of Minched.
2
Sussex.
Knights. 2 The city of Chichester. 2 The borough of Horsham. 2 The borough of
Midhurst. 2 The borough of Jews. 2 The borough of Shorham. 2 The borough of
Brember. 2 The borough of Stening. 2 The borough of Eastgrenesteed. 2 The
borough of Arundell. 2
Westmerland.
Knights. 2 The borough of Appulbie. 2
Wilton.
Knights. 2 The city of New Sarum. 2 The borough of Wilton. 2 The borough of
Dounton. 2 The borough of Hindon. 2 The borough of Heitesburie. 2 The borough
of Westburie. 2 The borough of Caine. 2 The borough of Devises. 2 The borough
of Chipenham. 2 The borough of Malmesburie. 2 The borough of Cricklade. 2 The
borough of Budwin. 2 The borough of Ludgesale. 2 The borough of Old Sarum. 2
The borough of Wotton Basset. 2 The borough of Marleborough. 2
Worcester.
Knights. 2 The city of Worcester. 2 The borough of Withee. 2
Warwike.
Knights. 2 The city of Couentrie. 2 The borough of Warwike. 2
Barons of the ports.
Hastings. 2 Winchelseie. 2 Rye. 2 Rumneie. 2 Hithe. 2 Dover. 2 Sandwich. 2
Mountgomerie.
Knights. 1 The borough of Mountgomerie. 1
Flint.
Knights. 1 The borough of Flint. 1
Denbigh.
Knights. 1 The borough of Denbigh. 1
Merionneth.
Knights. 1 The borough of Hauerfordwest. 1
Carneruan.
Knights. 1 The borough of Carneru^^e. 1
Angleseie.
Knights. 1 The borough of Beaumares. 1
Carmarden.
Knights. 1 The borough of new Carmarden. 1
Pembroke.
Knights. 1 The borough of Pembroke. 1
Cairdigan.
Knights. 1 The borough of Cairdigan. 1
Brecknoch.
Knights. 1 The borough of Brecknoch. 1
Radnor.
Knights. 1 The borough of Radnor. 1
Glamorgan.
Knights. 1 The borough of Cardiffe. 1
The sum of the foresaid number of the common house videlicet, of
Knights. 90. Citizens. 46. Burgesses. 289. Barons. 14. 439.
Of the laws of England since her first inhabitation. Chap. 9.
THat Samothes Samothes.
or Dis gave the first laws to the Celtes (whose kingdom he erected about the
fifteenth of Nimbrote) the testimony of Berosus is proof sufficient For he
not only affirms him to publish the same in the fourth of Ninus, but also
adds thereto, how there lived none in his days of more excellent wisdom,
nor politic invention than he, whereof he was named Samothes, as some other do
affirm. What his laws were, it is now altogether unknown, Albion.
as most things of this age; but that they were altered again at the coming
of Albion, no man can absolutely deny, since new lords use commonly to give
new laws, and conquerors abolish such as were in use before them.

The like also may be affirmed of our Brute, Brute.
notwithstanding that the certain knowledge so well of the one as of the other
is perished, and nothing worthy memory left of all their doings. Somewhat
yet we have of Mulmutius, Mulmutius.
who not only subdued such princes as reigned in this land, but also brought
the realm to good order, that long before had been torn with civil discord.
But where his laws are to be found, and which they be from other men's, no man
living in these days is able to determine.

Certes, there was never prince in Britain, of whom his subjects conceived
better hope in the beginning, than of Bladudus, and yet I read of none that
made so ridiculous an end: in like sort there has not reigned any monarch in
this I Will, whose ways were more feared at the first, than those of Dunwallon
The praise of Dunwallon.
(king Henry the fifth excepted) and yet in the end he proved such a prince,
as after his death there was in manner no subject, that did not lament his
funerals. And this only for his policy in governance, Mulmutius, which
endured in execution among the Britons, so long as our homelings had the
dominion of this I Will. Afterward when the comeling Saxons had once obtained the
superiority of the kingdom, the majesty of those Non penitus cecidit, tamen
potuit cecidisse videri, as Leland says, and the decrees themselves had
utterly perished in deed at the very first brunt, had they not been
preserved in Wales, where they remained amongst there likes of the Britons, and
not only until the coming of the Normans, but even until the time of Edward
the first, who obteining the souereigntie of that portion, endeavored very
earnestly to extinguish those of Mulmutius, and to establish his

But as the Saxons at their first arrival did what they could to abolish the
British laws, so in process of time they yielded a little to relent, and not
so much to abhor and mislike of the laws of Mulmutius, as to receive and
embrace the same, especially at such time as the said Saxon princes entered
into amity with the British nobility, and after that began to join in
matrimony with the British ladies, as the British barons did with the Saxon
frowes, Mulmutius (which Gildas sometime translated into Latin) to be first
expounded unto them, and in this perusal if they found any there already
framed, that might serve their turns, they forthwith revived the same, and
annexed them to their own.

But in this dealing, the diligence of Alfred is most of all to be commended,
who not only chose out the best, but gathered together all such whatsoever
the said Mulmutius had made: and then to the end they

As for the Normans, who for a season neither regarded the British, nor cared
for the Saxon statutes, they also at the first utterly misliked of them, till
at the last, when they had well weied that one kind of regiment is not
convenient for all peoples, and that no stranger, being in a foreign country
newly brought under obedience, could make such equal ordinances, as he might
thereby govern his new commonwealth without some care and trouble: they fell
in with such a desire to see by what rule the state of the land was governed in
time of the Saxons, that having perused the same, they not only commended
their manner of regiment, but also admitted a great part of their laws (now
current under the name of S. Edwards laws, and used as principles and grounds)
whereby they not only qualified the rigor of their own, and mitigated their
almost intolerable burden of servitude which they had lately laid upon the
shoulders of the English, but also left us a greeat number of the old Mulmutian
laws, whereof the most part are in use to this day as I said, albeit that we
know not certeinlie how to distinguish them from others, that are in strength
amongst us.

After Dunwallon, the next lawgiuer was Martia, Martia.
whom Leland surnameth Proba; and after him John Bale also, who in his
Centuries does justly confess himself to have been helped by the said
Leland, as I my self do likewise for many things contained in this treatise.
She was wife unto Gutteline king of the Britons: and being made protectrix of
the realm, after her husbands deceasse in the nonage of her son, and seeing
many things daily to grow up among her people worthy reformation, she
devised sundry and those very politic laws, for the governance of her
kingdom, which her subjects when she was dead and gone, did name the Martian
statutes. Who turned them into Latin, as yet I do not read, howbeit (as I
said before of the laws of Mulmutius) so the same Alfred caused those of this
excellently well learned lady (whom diverse commend also for her great
knowledge in the Greek tongue) to be turned into his own language, whereupon
it came to pass that they were daily executed among his subjects, afterward
allowed of (among the rest) by the Normans, and finally remain in use in
these our days, notwithstanding that we can not disseuer them also very
readily from the other.

The seventh alteration of laws was practiced by the Saxons, for I ouerpasse
the use of the civil ordinances used in Rome, finally brought hither by the
Romans, and yet in perfect notice among the Ciuilians of our country, though
never generally nor fully received by all the several regions of this Island.
Certes there are great numbers of these later, which yet remain in sound
knowledge, and are to be read, being comprehended for the most part under the
names of the Martian Martian law.
and the Saxon law. Saxon law.
Beside these also I read of the Dane law, Dane law.
so that the people of middle England were ruled by the first, the west Saxons
by the second; as Essex, Norffolke, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, and part of
Herfordshire were by the third* of all the rest the most inequall and
intolerable. And as in these days what soever the prince in public assembly
commanded upon the necessity of his subjects, or his own voluntary
authority, was counted for law: so none of them had appointed any certain
place, whereunto his people might repair at fixed times for justice, but
caused them to resort commonly to their palaces, where in proper person they
would often determine their causes, and so make shortest work, or else commit
the same to the hearing of other, and so dispatch them away. Neither had they
any house appointed to assemble in for the making of their ordinances, as we
have now at Westminster. Wherefore Edmund gave laws at London and Lincoln,
Ethelred at Habam, Alfred at Woodstock and Wannetting, Athelstane in Excester,
Grecklade, Feuersham, and Thundersleie, Canutus at Winchester, etc: other in
other places, whereof this may suffice.

Among other things also used in the time of the Saxons, it shall not be amiss
to set down the form of their Ordalian law, which they brought hither with
them from beyond the seas out of Scithia, and used only in the trial of
guilty and vnguiltinesse. Certes it contained not an ordinary proceeding by
days and terms, as in the civil and common law we see practiced in these
days; but a short dispatch and trial of the matter by fire or water, whereof
at this present I will deliver the circumstance, as I have faithfully
translated it out of an ancient volume, and conferred with an imprinted copy,
lately published by M. Lambert, and now extant to be read. G. Pachymerus
remembers in the first book of his history (which begins with the empire
of M. Paleologus) where he notes his own sight and view in that behalf. But
what stand I hereupon?

The Ordalian (says the aforesaid author) was a certain manner of purgation
used two ways, Ordalian law. Fire.
whereof Ordalium, sometimes of three, and then named treble Ordalium, and
whosoever did bear or tread on the same without hurt of his body he was
adjudged giltlesse, otherwise if his skin were

There were in like sort two kinds of trial by the water, Water.
that is to say, either by hot or cold: and in this trial the party thought
culpable, was either tumbled into some pond or huge vessel of cold water,
wherein if he continued for a season, without wrestling or struggling for life,
he was forthwith acquitted as guiltless of the fact whereof he was accused: but
Here begins the execution of justice, whereby the guilty or unguilty are
tried by hot iron. Then it follows: After accusation lawfully made, and
three days spent in fasting and prayer, the priest being clad in all his holy
vestures, saving his vestiment, shall take the iron laid before the altar with
a pair of tongs, and singing the hymn of the three children, that is to say,
O all ye works of God the Lord, and in Latin Benedicite omnia opera, etc: he
shall carry it solemnly to the fire (already made for that purpose) and
first say these words over the place where the fire is kindled, whereby this
purgation shall be made in Latin as insueth: Benedic Domine Deus locum istum,
vt sit nobis in eo sanitas, sanctitas, castitas, virtus, and victoria, and
sanctimonia, humilitas, bonitas, lenitas, and plenitudo legis, and obedientia
Deo patri, and filio, and spiritui sancto. Haec benedictio sit super hunc
locum, and super omnes habitantes in eo. In English: Bless thou O Lord this
place, that it may be to us health, holiness, chastity, virtue, and victory,
pureness, humility, goodness, gentleness, and fullness of the law, and
obedience to God the father, the son, and the holy ghost. This blessing be
upon this place, and all that dwell in it. Then follows the blessing of the
fire. Domine Deus pater omnipotens, lumen indeficiens, exaudi nos, quia tu es
conditor omnium luminum. Benedic Domine hoc lumen, quod ante sanctificatum est,
qui illuminasti omnem hominem venientem in hunc mundum (vel mundum) vt ab eo
lumine accendamur igne claritatis tuae. Et sicut igne illuminasti Mosen, ita
nunc illumina corda nostra, and sensus nostros, vt ad vitam aeternam mereamur
peruenire, per Christum, etc. Lord God father almighty, light everlasting,
hear us, since thou art the maker of all lights. Bless O Lord this light, that
is already sanctified in thy sight, which have lightened all men that come into
the world (or the whole world) to the end that by the same light we may be
lightened with the shining of thy brightness. As thou did lighten Moses, so
now illuminate our hearts, and our senses, that we may deserve to come to
everlasting life, through Christ our, etc. This being ended let him say the
Pater noster, etc: then these words: Saluum fac seruum, etc. Mitte ei auxilium
Deus, etc. De Sion tuere eum, etc. Dominus vobiscum, etc. That is, O Lord save
thy servant, etc. Send him help O God from thy holy place, etc. Defend him
out of Sion, etc. Lord hear, etc. The Lord be with you, etc.

The prayer. Benedic Domine sancte pater, omnipotens Deus, per inuocationem
sanctissimi nominis tui, and per aduentum filij tui, atque per donum spiritus
paracleti, ad manifestandum verum iudicium tuum, hoc genus metalli, vt sit
sanctificatum, and omni daemonum falsitate procul remota, veritas very iudicij
tui fidelibus tuis manifesta fiat, per eundem Dominum, etc. In English: Bless
we beseech thee O Lord, holy father, everlasting God, through the invocation
of thy most holy name, by the coming of thy son, and gift of the holy
ghost, and to the manifestation of thy true judgment, this kind of metal,
that being hallowed, and all fradulent practices of the devils utterly
removed, the manifest truth of thy true judgment may be revealed, by the same
Lord Jesus, etc.

After this, let the iron be laid into the fire, and sprinkled with holy
water, and whilst it heateth, let the priest go to mass, and do as order
requires: and when he has received the host, he shall call the man that is to
be purged (as it is written hereafter) first adiuring him, and then permitting
him to communicate according to the manner.

The office of the mass.
Iustus es Domine, etc. O Lord thou art just, etc.

The Prayer.
Absolve quaesumus Domine delicta famuli tui, vt a peccatorum suorum nexibus,
quae pro sua fragilitate contraxit, tua benignitate liberetur, and in hoc
iudicio quoad meruit, iustitia tua praeueniente, ad veritatis censuram
peruenire mereatur, per Christum Dominum, etc. That is: Pardon we beseech thee
O Lord, the sins of thy servant, that being delivered from the burden of his
offenses, wherewith he is entangled, he may be cleared by thy benignity, and
in this his trial (so far as he has deserved, thy mercy preventing him) he
may come to the knowledge of the truth, by Christ our Lord, etc.

The Gospel. Mar. 10.
IN illo tempore, cum egressus esset Jesus in via, procurrens quidam genuflexo
ante eum, rogabat eum dicens, Magister bone, quid faciam vt vitam aeternam
percipiam? Jesus autem dixit ei, Quid me dicis bonum? etc. In those days when
Jesus went forth toward his iourneie, and one meeting him in the way running,
and kneeling unto him, asked him saying: Good master what shall I do that I
may possess eternal life? Jesus said unto him, Why call thou me good.
etc. Then follows the secret, and so forth all of the rest of the mass. But
before the party does communicate, the priest shall use these words unto him:
Adiuro te per patrem, and filium, I adjure thee by the father, the son, and
the holy Ghost, by the true christendom which thou have received, by the
holy relikes which are in this church, and by the baptism wherewith the
priest has regenerated thee, that thou presume not by any manner of means to
communicate, nor come Here let the priest suffer him to communicate, saying;
Corpus hoc, and sanguis Domini nostri Jesus Christi, sit tibi ad probationem
hodie. This body and this blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, The cup yet in use.
be unto thee a trial this day. The prayer: Perceptis Domine Deus noster
sacris muneribus, supplices deprecamur, vt huius participatio sacramenti a
proprijs nos reatibus expediat, and in famulo tuo veritatis sententiam
declaret, etc. Having received O Lord God these holy mysteries, we humbly
Then shall follow Kyrieleson, the Letanie, and certain Psalms, and after all
them Oremus: Let us pray. Deus qui per ignem signa magna ostendens, Abraham
puerum tuum de incendio Chaldaeorum quibusdam pereuntibus eruisti, Deus qui
rubum ardere ante conspectum Mosis and minime comburi permisisti, Deus qui de
incendio fornacis Chaldaicis plerisque succensis, tres pueros tuos illaesos
eduxisti, Deus qui incendio ignis populum Sodomae In English thus: O God, which
in showing great tokens by fire did deliver Abraham thy servant from the
burning of the Chaldeis, whilst other perished; O God which sufferedst the
bush to burn in the sight of Moses, and yet not to consume; O God which
deliueredst the three children from bodily harm in the furnace of the
Chaldeis, whilst diverse were consumed; O God which by fire did wrap the
people of Sodom in their destruction, After this the priest shall sprinkle the
iron with holy water, saying: The blessing of God the father, the son, and
the holy ghost, be upon this iron, to the revelation of the just judgment of
God. And forthwith let him that is accused bear it, by the length of nine
foot, and then let his hand be wrapped and sealed up for the space of three
days: after this if any corruption or raw flesh appear where the iron touched
it, let him be condemned as guilty: if it be whole and sound, let him give
thanks to God. And thus much of the fiery Ordalia, Water.
whereunto that of the water has so precise relation, that in setting forth
of the one, I have also described the other, wherefore it shall be but in vain
to deal any further withal.

Hitherto also (as I think) sufficiently of such laws as were in use before
the conquest. Now it rests that I should declare the order of those, that
have been made and received since the coming of the Normans, referred to the
eight alteration or change of our manner of governance, and thereunto do
produce three score and four several courts. But for as much as I am no
lawier, and therefore have but little skill to proceed in the same
accordingly, it shall suffice to set down some general discourse of such as
are used in our days, and so much as I have gathered by report and common
heare-saie.

We have therefore in England sundry laws, Civil law.
and first of all the civil, used in the chancerie, admeraltie, and diverse
other courts, in some of which, the severe rigor of justice is often so
mitigated by conscience, that diverse things are thereby made easy and
tolerable, which otherwise would appear to be mere injury and extremity.

We have also a great part of the Canon law daily practiced among us, Canon
law.
especially in cases of tithes, contracts of matrimony, and such like, as are
usually to be seen in the consistories of our bishops and higher courts of
the two archbishops, where the exercise of the same is very hotly followed.
The third sort of laws that we have are our own, and those always so
variable, and subject to alteration and change, that often in one age, diverse
judgments do pass upon one manner of case, whereby the saying of the poet,
Tempora mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis, may very well be applied unto
such, as being urged with these words; Lawiers of England not always constant
in judgment.
In such a year of the prince, this opinion was taken for sound law; do
answer nothing else, but that the judgment of our lawiers is now altered, so
that they say far otherwise. The regiment that we have therefore after our
own ordinances, depends upon three laws, to wit, Statute law, Common law,
Customarie law, and Prescription, according to the triple manner of our trials
and judgments, which is by parliament, verdict of twelve men at an assise, or
wager of battle, of which the last is little used in our days, as no appeal
does hold in the first and last rehearsed. But to return to my purpose.

The first is delivered unto us by parliament, which court, Parliament law.
being for the most part holden at Westminster near London, is the highest of
all other, and consists of three several sorts of people, that is to say,
the nobility, clergy, and commons of this realm. And thereto is not
summoned, but upon urgent occasion when the prince does see his time, and that
by several writs, dated commonly full six weeks before it begin to be
holden. Such laws as are agreed upon in the higher house by the lords
spiritual and temporal, and in the lower house by the commons and body of
the realm (whereof the convocation of the clergy holden in Powles, or if
occasion so require in Westminster church; is a member) there speaking by the
mouth of the knights of the shire and burgesses, remain in the end to be
confirmed by the prince, who commonly resorteth thither of custom, upon the
first and last days of this court, there to understand what is done, and give
his royal consent to such statutes as him likes of. Coming therefore thither
into the higher house, and having taken his throne, the speaker of the
parliament (for one is always appointed to go between the houses, as an
indifferent mouth for both) reads openly the matters there determined by the
said three estates, and then craves the princes consent and final
confirmation Il nous plaist) but to the rest Il ne plaist, whereby the latter
are made void and frustrate. That also which his majesty likes of, is hereby
authorized, confirmed, and ever after holden for law, except it be repealed in
any the like assembly. The number of the commons assembled in the lower
house, beside the clergy, Number of congregates in the parliament.
chosen out of the body of the same for that only purpose, saving that for
Wales one only is supposed sufficient in every county, whereby the number
before mentioned is made up. There are likewise forty and six citizens, 289
burgesses, and fourteen barons, so that the whole assembly of the laity of
the lower house, consists of four hundred thirty and nine persons, if

The Common law stands upon sundry maxims or principles, Common law.
and years or terms, which do contain such cases as by great study and
solemn

Customarie law consists of certain laudable customs used in some private
country, Customarie law.
intended first to begin upon good and reasonable considerations, as gauell
kind, which is all the male children equally to inherit, and continued to this
day in Kent: where it is only to my knowledge retained, and no where else in
England. It was at the first devised by the Romans, as appears by Caesar in
his commentaries, wherein I find, that to break and daunt the force of the
rebellious Germans, they made a law that all the male children (or females for
want of males which holds still in England) should have their fathers
inheritance equally divided amongst them. By this means also it came to
pass, that whereas before time for the space of sixty years, they had put
the Romans to great and manifold troubles, within the space of thirty years
after this law made, their power did wax so feeble, and such discord fell out
amongst themselves, that they were not able to maintain wars with the
Romans, nor raise any just army against them. For as a river running with one
stream is swift and more plentiful of water than when it is drained or drawn
into many branches: so the lands and goods of the ancestors being dispersed
amongst their issue males, of one strong there were raised sundry weak,
whereby the original or general strength to resist the adversary, became
infeebled and brought almost to nothing. Vis vnita (says the philosopher)
fortior est eadem dispersa, and one good pursse is better than many evil, and
when every man is benefited alike, each one will seek to maintain his
private estate, and few take care to provide for public welfare.

Burrow kind, is where the yoongest is preferred before the eldest, which is
the custom of many countries of this region; also the woman to have the third
of her husbands possessions, the husband that marieth an heir to have such
lands as move by her during his natural life, if he survive her, and has a
child by her which has been heard cry thorough four walls, etc: of such like
to be learned elsewhere, and sometimes frequented generally over all.

Prescription is a certain custom, Prescription.
which has continued time out of mind, but it is more particular than
customarie law, as where only a parish or some private person does prescribe
to have common, or a way in another man's soil, or tithes to be paid after
this or that manner, I mean otherwise than the common course and order of the
law requires, whereof let this suffice at this time, in steed of a larger
discourse of our own laws, least I should seem to enter far into that
whereof I have no skill. For what has the meditation of the law of God to do
with any precise knowledge of the law of man, since they are several trades,
and incident to diverse persons?

There are also sundry usual courts holden once in every quarter of the
year, which we commonly call terms, Term.
of the Latin word Terminus, wherein all controversies are determined, that
happen within the Queens dominions. These are commonly holden at London,
except upon some great occasion they be transferred to other places. At what
times also they are kept both for spiritual and temporal dealing, the table
ensuing shall easily declare. Finally how well they are followed by suitors,
the great wealth of lawiers without any travel of mine can readily express.
For as after the coming of the Normans the nobility had the start, and after
them the clergy: so now all the wealth of the land does flow unto our common
lawiers, of whom some one having practiced little above thirteen or fourteen
years is able to buie a purchase of so many 1000 pounds: which argues that
they war rich apace, and will be richer if their clients become not the more
wiser and wary hereafter. It is not long, since a sergeant at the law (whom I
could name) was arrested upon an extent, for three or four hundred pounds, and
another standing by did greatly marvel that he could not spare the gains of
one term for the satisfaction of that duty. The time has been that our
lawiers did sit in Powles upon stools against the pillars and walls to get
clients, but now some of them will not come from their chambers to the
Guildhall in London under ten pounds or twenty nobles at the lest. And one
being demanded why he made so much of his travel, answered, that it was but
folly for him to go so far, when he was assured to get more money by sitting
still at home. A friend of mine also had a suit of late of some valor, and to
be sure of counsel at his time, he gave unto two lawiers (whose names I
forbear to deliver) twenty shillings a piece, telling them of the day and
hour wherein his matter should be called upon. Deceit.
To be short, they came not unto the bar at all, whereupon he stayed for that
day. On the morrow after he met them again, increased Many of our lawiers
stoop not at small fees.
then standing upon the hazard. But enough of these matters, for if I should
set down how little law poor men can have for their small fees in these
days, and the great murmurings that are on all sides uttered against their
excessive taking of

This furthermore is to be noted, that albeit the princes heretofore reigning
in this land have erected sundry courts, especially of the chancerie at York
Poor men contentious.
refuse to have his cause heard so near home, but indeuoureth rather to his
utter undoing to travel up to London, thinking there soonest to prevail
against his adversary, though his case be never so doubtful. But in this toie
our Welshmen do exceed of all that ever I heard, for you shall here and there
have some one od poor David of them given so much to contention and strife,
Promooters seek matters to set lawiers on work withal.
how a number of poor men are daily abused and utterly undone, by sundry
varlets that go about the country, as promoters or brokers between the petty
foggers of the law, and the common people, only to kindle and epsy coals
of contention, whereby the one side may reap commodity, and the other spend
and be put to travel. But of all that ever I knew in Essex, Denis and Mainford
excelled, till John of Ludlow, alias Mason came in place, unto whom in
comparison they two were but children: for this last in less than three or
four years, did bring one man (among many elsewhere in other places) almost
to extreme misery (if beggerie be the uttermost) that before he had the
shauing of his beard, was valued at two hundred pounds (I speak with the
least) and finally feeling that he had not sufficient wherewith to sustain
himself and his family, and also to satisfy that greedy rauenour, which
still called upon him for new fees, he went to bed, and within four days made
an end of his woeful life, even with care and pensiveness. After his death
also he so handled his son, that there was never sheep shorn in May, so
near clipped of his fleece present, as he was of many to come: so that he was
compelled to let away his land, because his cattle and stock were consumed,
and he no longer able to occupy the ground. But hereof let this suffice, and
in steed of these enormities, a table shall follow of the terms containing
their beginnings and endings, as I have borrowed them from my friend John Stow,
whose study is the only store house of antiquities in my time, and he
worthy therefore to be had in reputation and honor.

A man would imagine that the time of the execution of our laws, The times of
our terms no hinderance to justice.
being little above one quarter, or not fully a third part of the year, and
the appointment of the same to be holden in one place only, to wit, near
London in Westminster, and finally the great expenses employed upon the same,
should be no small cause of the stay and hinderance of the administration of
justice in this land: but as it falls out they prove great occasions and the
stay of much contention. The reasons of these are soon to be conceived, for
as the broken sleeue does hold the elbow back, and pain of travel cause
many to sit at home in quiet; so the shortness of time and fear of delaie
does drive those oftentimes to like of peace, who otherwise would live at
strife, and quickelie be at ods. Some men desirous of gains would have the
terms yet made shorter, that more delaie might engender longer suit; other
would have the houses made larger, and more offices erected, wherein to
minister the laws. But as the times of the terms are rather too short than
too long by one return a piece: so if there were smaller rooms and fowler
ways unto them, they would enforce many to make pawses before they did
rashly enter into plee. But since my purpose is not to make an ample discourse
of these things, it shall suffice to deliver the times of the holding of our
terms, which insueth after this manner.

A perfect rule to know the beginning and ending of every term, with their
returns.
HIlarie term begins the three and twentieth day of January (if it be not
sundaie) otherwise the next day after, and is finished the twelfe of
February, it has four returns.

Octabis Hilarij. Quind. Hilarij. Crastino Purific. Octabis Purific.
Easter term begins seventeen days after Easter, ends four days after
the Ascension day, and has five returns.

Quind. Pasch. Tres Paschae. Mense Paschae. Quinque Paschae. Crast. Ascension.
Trinity term begins the fridaie after Trinity sundaie, and ends the
wednesdaie fortnight after, in which time it has four returns.

Crast. Trinitatis. Octabis Trinitatis. Quind. Trinitatis. Tres Trinitatis.
Michaelmasse term begins the ninth of October (if it be not sundaie) and
ending the eight and twentieth of November, it has eight returns.

Octabis Michael. Quind. Michael. Tres Michael. Mense Michael. Crast. anima.
Crast. Martini. Octa. Martini. Quind. Martini.
Note also that the escheker, which is Fiscus or aerarum publicum principis,
opens eight days before any term begin, except Trinity term, which
opens but four days before.

And thus much for our usual terms as they are

Michaelmas term.
S. Faith. S. Edward. S. Luke. Simon and Iu. All Souls. S. Martin. Edmund.
Katharine. S. Andrew. Conception of the virgin Marie.
It is to be remembered that the first day following every of these feasts
noted in each term, the court of the arches is kept in Bow church in the
forenoone. And the same first day in the afternoon is the admeraltie court
for civil and seafaring causes kept in Southwarke, where justice is ministered

The second day following every one of the said feasts, the court of audience
of Canturburie is kept in the consistory in Paul's in the forenoone. And the
self day in the afternoon, in the same place is the prerogative court of
Canturburie holden.

The third day after any such feast in the forenoone, the consistory court of
the bishop of London is kept in Paul's church in the said consistory, and the
same third day in the afternoon is the court of the delegates,

Hilarie term.
S. Hilarie. S. Wolstan. Conversion of S. Paul. S. Blase. S. Scolastic. S.
Valentine Ashwednes. S. Matthie. S. Chad. Pepet. and Fell. S. Gregory.
Annu^ciation of our Lady.
Note that the four first days of this term be

Easter term. The fifteenth day after Easter.
S. Alphege. S. Mark. Invention of the cross. Gordian. S. Dunstan. Ascension
day.
In this term the first sitting is alwaie kept the mondaie being the fifteenth
day after Easter, and so forth after the feasts here noted, which next follow
by course of the year after Easter, and the like space being kept between
other feasts.

The rest of the lawdaies are kept to the third of the Ascension, which is the
last day of this term. And if it happen that the feast of the Ascension of our
Lord, do come before any of the feasts aforesaid, then they are omitted for
that year. And likewise i^ any of those days come before the fifteenth of
Easter, those days are omitted also.

Trinity term.
Trinity sundaie. Corpus Christi. Boniface bish. S. Barnabie. S. Butolph. S.
John. S. Paul. Translat. Thomas. S. Swithune. S. Margaret. S. Anne.
Here note also that the lawdaies of this term are altered by mean of
Whitsuntide, and the first sitting is kept always on the first lawdaie after
the feast of the holy Trinity, and the second session is kept the first
lawdaie after the idolatrous and papisticall feast day called Corpus Christi,
except Corpus Christi day fall on some day aforenamed: which chances
sometime, and then the fitter day is kept. And after the second session
account four days or thereabout, and then look which is the next feast day,
and the first lawdaie after the said feast shall be the third session. The
other law days follow in order, but so many of them are kept, as for the time
of the year shall be thought meet.

It is also generally to be observed, that every day is called a lawdaie
that is not sundaie or holy day: and that if the feast day being known of
any court day in any term, the first or second day following be sundaie,
then the court day is kept the day after the said holy day or feast.

Of provision made for the poor. Chap. 10.
THere is no commonwealth at this day in Europe, wherein there is not great
store of poor people, and those necessarily to be relieved by the welthier
sort, which otherwise would starve and come to utter confusion. Three sorts of
poor.
With us the poor is commonly divided into three sorts, so that some are
poor by impotencie, as the fatherless child, the aged, blind and lame, and
the diseased person that is judged to be incurable: the second are poor by
casualtie, as the wounded soldier, the decayed householder, and the sick
person visited with grievous and painful diseases: the third consists of
thriftlesse poor, as the riotour that has consumed all, the vagabund that
will abide no where, but runs up and down from place to place (as it were
seeking work and finding none) and finally the roge and strumpet which are
not possible to de divided in sunder, but run too and fro over all the
realm, chiefly keeping the champaine soiles in summer to avoid the scorching
heat, and the woodland grounds in winter to eschew the blustering winds.

For the first two sorts, that is to say, the poor by impotencie, and the
poor by casualtie, which are the true poor in deed, and for whom the word
does bind us to make some daily provision: there is order taken through out
ouerie parish in the realm, that weekelie collection shall be made for their
help and sustentation, to the end they should not scatter abroad, and by
begging here and there ann^ie both town and country. Authority also is given
unto the suffices in every county, and great penalties A thing often seen.
By other men's occasion (as one way for example) when some covetous man, such
I mean as have the cast or right vein, daily to make beggars enough whereby
to pester the land, espieng a further commodity in their commons, holds, and
(...), does find such means as thereby to wipe many out of their occupiengs,
and turn the same unto his private gains. Hereupon it follows, that
although the wise and better At whose hands shall the blood of these men be
required?
do either forsake the realm for altogether, and seek to live in other
countries, as France, Germany, Barbary, India, Moscouia, and very Calecute,
complaining of no (...) to be left for them at home, do so behave themselves
that they are worthily to be accounted among the second sort: yet the greater
part commonly having nothing to stay upon are wilful, and there upon do
either prove idle beggars, or else continue stark thieves till the gallows
do eat them up, which is a lamentable case.

Such as are idle beggars through their own default are of two sorts, and
continue their estates either by casual or mere voluntary means: those that
are such by casual means, are in the beginning tustlie to be referred either
to the first or second sort of poor before mentioned: but degenerating into the
thristlesse sort, they do what they can to continue their misery, and with
such impediments as they have to straie and wander about, as creatures
abhorring all labor and every honest exercise. Certes I call these casual
means, not in respect of the original of their poverty, but of the
continuance of the same, from whence they will not be delivered, such is their
own ungracious lewdness, and froward disposition. The voluntary means
proceed from outward causes, as by making of corosiues, and applieng the same
to the more fleshie parts of their bodies: and also laieng of ra^^bane,
sper^wort, crowfoot, and such like unto their whole members, thereby to raise
pitiful and odious sores, and move the hearts of the goers by such places
where they lie, to yerne at their misery, and thereupon bestow large alms
upon them. How artificially they beg, what forcible speech, and how they
select and choose out words of vehemency, whereby they do in manner conjure or
adsure the goer by to pity their cases, I pass over to remember, as judging
the name of God and Christ to be more conversant in the mouths of none: and yet
the presence of the heavenly majesty further off from no men than from this
ungracious company. Which makes me to think that punishment is far meeter
for them than liberality or alms, and since Christ wills us cheeflie to
have a regard to himself and his poor members.

Unto this nest is another sort to be referred, more sturdie than the rest,
which having sound and perfect lims, do yet notwithstanding sometime
counterfeit the possession of all sorts of diseases. Diverse times in their
apparel also they will be like serving men or laborers: oftentimes they can
play the mariners, and seek for ships which they never lost. But in fine,
they are all thieves and caterpillars in the commonwealth, and by the word of
God not permitted to eat, since they do but lick the sweat from the true
laborers brows, and beereue the godly poor of that which is due unto them,
to maintain their excess, consuming the charity of well disposed people
bestowed upon them, after a most wicked and detestable manner.

It is not yet full threescore years since this trade began: but how it has
prospered since that time, it is easy to judge, for they are now supposed of
one sex and another, to amount unto above 10000 persons; as I have heard
reported. Moreover, in counterfeiting the Egyptian roges, they have devised a
language among themselves, which they name Canting, but other pedlers French, a
speech compact thirty years since of English, and a great number of od words
of their own devising, without all order or reason: and yet such is it as none
but themselves are able to understand. The first deviser thereof was hanged by
the neck, a just reward no doubt for his deserts, Thomas Harman.
and a common end to all of that profession. A gentleman also of late has
taken great pains to search out the secret practices of this ungracious rabble.
And among other things he sets down and describes three and twenty sorts
of them, whose names it shall not be amiss to remember, whereby each one may
take occasion to read and know as also by his industry what wicked people they
are, and what villainy remains in them.

The several disorders and degrees amongst our idle vagabonds.
1 Rufflers. 2 Uprightmen. 3 Hookers or Anglers. 4 Roges. 5 Wild roges. 6
Priggers or pransers. 7 Palliards. 8 Fraters. 9 Abrams. 10 Freshwater mariners,
or whipiacks. 11 Dummerers. 12 Drunken tinkers. 13 Swadders or pedlers. 14
Iarkemen or patricoes.
Of women kind.
1 Demanders for glimmar or fire. 2 Baudie baskets. 3 Mortes. 4 Autem mortes. 5
Walking mortes. 6 Doxes. 7 Delles. 8 Kinching mortes. 9 Kinching cooes.
The punishment that is ordained for this kind of people is very sharp, and
yet it can not restreine them from their gadding: wherefore the end must needs
be martial law, to be exercised upon them, as upon thieves, robbers, despisers
of all laws, and enemies to the commonwealth and welfare of the land. What
notable roberies, pilferies, murders, rapes,

Of sundry kinds of punishments appointed for malefactors. Chap. 11.
IN cases of felony, manslaghter, roberie, murder, rape, piracie, and such
capital crimes as are not reputed for treason or hurt of the estate, our
sentence pronounced upon the offender is to hang till he be dead. For of other
punishments used in other countries we have no knowledge or use, and yet so few
grievous crimes committed with us as else where in the world. To use torment
also or question by pain and torture in these common cases with us is greatly
abhorred, since we are found alwaie to be such as despise death, and yet abhor
to be tormented, choosing rather frankelie to open our minds than to yield our
bodies unto such servile halings and tearings as are used in other countries.
And this is one cause wherefore our condemned persons do go so cheerefullie to
their deths, for our nation is free, stout, hautie, prodigal of life and
blood, as six Thomas Smith says lib. 2. cap. 25. de republica, and therefore
cannot in any wise digest to be used as villanes and slaves, in suffering
continually beating, servitude, and servile torments. No, our gailers are
guilty of fellonie by an old law of the land, if they torment any prisoner
committed to their custody for the revealing of his accomplices.

The greatest and most grievous punishment used in England, for such as offend
against the state, is drawing from the prison to the place of execution upon an
hardle or sled, where they are hanged till they be half dead, and then taken
down and quartered alive, after that their members and bowels are cut from
their bodies, and thrown into a fire provided near hand and within their own
sight, even for the same purpose. Sometimes, if the trespass be not the more
heinous, they are suffered to hang till they be quite dead. And when soever
any of the nobility are convicted of high treason by their peers, that is to
say, equals (for an inquest of yeomen passes not upon them, but only of the
lords of the parliament) this manner of their death is converted into the loss
of their heads only, notwithstanding that the sentence do run after the
former order. In trial of cases concerning treason, fellonie, or any other
grievous crime not confessed, the party accused does yield, if he be a noble
man, to be tried by an inquest (as I have said) and his peers: if a gentleman,
by gentlemen: and an inferior, by God and by the country, to wit, the
yeomanrie (for combat or battle is not greatly in use) and being condemned of
fellonie, manslaughter, etc: he is eftsoons hanged by the neck till he be
dead, and then cut down and buried. But if he be convicted of wilful murder,
done either upon pretended malice, or in any notable robbery, he is either
hanged alive in chains near the place where the fact was committed (or else
upon compassion taken first strangled with a rope) and so continues till his
bones consume to nothing. We have use neither of the wheel nor of the bar,
as in other countries; but when wilful manslaughter is perpetrated, beside
hanging, the offender has his right hand commonly stricken off before or near
unto the place where the act was done, after which he is led forth to the
place of execution, and there put to death according to the law.

The word fellon is derived of the Saxon words Fell and One, that is to say, an
evil and wicked one, a one of vntamable nature, and lewdness not to be
suffered for fear of evil example and the corruption of others. In like sort
in the word fellonie are many grievous crimes contained, as breach of prison
An. 1 of Edward the second. Dissigurers of the princes liege people An. 5. of
Henry the fourth. Hunting by night with painted faces and visors An. 1. of
Henry the seventh. Rape or stealing of women and maidens An. 3. of Henry the
eight. Conspiracy against the person of the prince An. 3. of Henry the
seventh. An. 17. of Henry the eight. Carieng of horses or mares into Scotland
An. 23. of Henry the eight. Sodomie and buggerie An. 25. of Henry the eight.
Stealing of hawks eggs An. 31. of Henry the eight. Coniuring, sorcerie,
witchcraft, and digging up of crosses An. 33. of Hen. 8. Prophesieng upon
arms, cognisances, names and badges An. 33. of Hen. 8. Casting of slanderous
bills An. 37. Hen. 8. Wilful killing by An. 1. of Edw. the sixth. Departure of a
soldier from the field An. 2. of Edward the sixth. Diminution of coin, all
offenses within case of praemunire, embeselling of records, goods taken from
dead men by their servants, stealing of what soever cattle, robbing by the
high way, upon the sea, or of dwelling houses, letting out of ponds, cutting
of pursses, stealing of dear by night, counterfeitors of coin, evidences,
charters, and writings, and diverse other needless to be remembered. If a woman
poison her husband P, the rewalting of the trees growing upon the grounds of
the offenders and loss of all his mooueables. Many trespasses also are
punished by the cutting Canutus was the first that gave authority to the
clergy to punish whoredom, who at that time found fault with the former
laws as being too severe in this behalf. For before the time of the said
Canutus, the adulterer forfeited all his goods to the king, and his body to be
at his pleasure; and the adulteress was to lose her eyes or nose, or both, if
the case were more than common: whereby it appears of what estimation marriage
was amongst them, since the breakers of that holy estate were so greeuouslie
rewarded. But afterward the clergy dealt more favorably with them, shooting
rather at the punishments of such priests and clearkes as were married, than the
reformation of adultery and fornication, wherein you shall find no example
that any severity was showed, except upon such lay men as had defiled their
nuns. As in theft therefore so in adultery and whoredom I would wish the
parties trespassant, to be made bond or slaves unto those that received the
injury, to sell and give where they listed, or to be condemned to the galleys:
for that punishment would prove more bitter to them than half an hours
hanging, or than standing in a sheet, though the weather be never so cold.

Manslaughter in time past was punished by the pursse, wherein the quantity or
quality of the punishment was rated after the state and calling of the party
killed: so that one was valued sometime at 1200, another at 600, or 200
shillings. And by an estatute made under Henry the first, a citizen of London
at 100, whereof elsewhere I have spoken more at large. Such as kill themselves
are buried in the field with a stake driven through their bodies.

Witches are hanged or sometimes burned, but thieves are hanged (as I said
before) generally on the gibbet or gallows, saving in Halifax where they are
beheaded after a strange manner, and whereof I find this report. Halifax law.
There is and has been of ancient time a law or rather a custom at Halifax,
that who soever does commit any fellonie, and is taken with the same, or
confess the fact upon examination: if it be valued by four constables to
amount to the sum of thirteen pence half penie, he is forthwith beheaded
upon one of the next market days (which fall usually upon the tuesdaies,
thursdaies, and saturdaies) or else upon the same day that he is so convicted,
if market be then holden. The engine wherewith the execution is done, is a
square block of wood of the length of four foot and an half, which does
ride up and down in a slot, rabet, or regal between two pieces of timber,
that are framed and set upright of five yardes in height. In the nether end of
the sliding block is an ax keied or fastened with an iron into the wood, which
being drawn up to the top of the frame is there fastened by a wooden pin (with
a notch made into the same after the manner of a Samsons post) unto the midst
of which pin also there is a long rope fastened that comes down among the
people, so that when the offender has made his confession, and has laid his
neck over the neathermost block, every man there present does either take
hold of the rope (or puts forth his arm so near to the same as he can
get, in token that he is willing to see true justice executed) and pulling out
the pin in this manner, the head block wherein the ax is fastened does fall
down with such a violence, that if the neck of the transgressor were so big
as that of a bull, it should be cut in sunder at a stroke, and roll from the
body by an huge distance. If it be so that the offender be apprehended for an
ox, oxen, sheep, kine, horse, or any such cattle: the self beast or other
of the same kind shall have the end of the rope tied somewhere unto them, so
that they being driven do draw out the pin whereby the offender is executed.
Thus much of Halifax law, which I set down only to show the custom of that
country in this behalf.

Roges and vagabonds are often stocked and whipped, scolds are ducked upon
cuckingstooles in the water. Such fellons as stand mute and speak not at their
arraignement are pressed to death by huge weights laid upon a board, Mute.
that lies over their breast, and a sharp stone under their backs, and these
commonly hold their peace, thereby to save their goods unto their wives and
children, which if they were condemned should be confiscated to the prince.
Thieves that are saved by their books and clergy, Clergy.
for the first offense, if they have stolen nothing else but oxen, sheep,
money, or such like, which be no open robberies, as by the high way side, or
assailing of any man's house in the night, without putting him in fear of his
life, or breaking up of his walls or doors, are burned in the left hand, upon
the brawne of the thombe with an hot iron, so that if they be apprehended
again, that mark bewraieth them to have been arraigned of fellonie before,
whereby they are sure at that time to have no mercy. I do not read that this
Pirates.
Pirates and robbers by sea are condemned in the court of the admeraltie, and
hanged on the shore at low water mark, where they are left till three tides
have over washed them. Finally, such as having walls and banks near unto the
sea, and do suffer

And thus much in part of the administration of instice used in our country,
wherein notwithstanding that we do not often hear of horrible, merciles,

Our third annoiers of the commonwealth are roges, which do very great
mischief in all places where they become. For whereas the rich only suffer
injury by the first two, these spare neither rich nor poor: but whether it be
great gain or small, all is fish that comes to net with them, and yet I say
both they and the rest are trussed up apace. For there is not one year
commonly, wherein three hundred or four (...) of them are not devoured and
eaten up by the gallows in one place and other. It appears by Cardane (who
writes it upon the report of the bishop of Lexouia) in the geniture of king
Edward the sixth, how Henry the eight, executing his laws very severely
against such idle persons, I mean great thieves, petty thieves and roges, did
hang up threescore and twelve thousand of them in his time. He seemed for a
while greatly to have terrified the rest: but since his death the number of
them is so increased, yea although we have had no wars, which are a great
occasion of their breed (for it is the custom of the more idle sort, having
once served or but seen the other side of the sea under color of service to
shake hand with labor, for ever, thinking it a disgrace for himself to
return unto his former trade) that except some better order be taken, or the
laws already made be better executed, such as dwell in vplandish towns and
little villages shall live but in small safety and rest. For the better
apprehension also of thieves and mankillers, there is an old law in England
very well provided, whereby it is ordered, that if he that is robbed, or any
man complain and give warning of slaughter or murder committed, the constable
of the village whereunto he comes and cries for succor, is to raise the
parish about him, and to search woods, groves, and all suspected houses and
places, where the trespasser may be, or is supposed to lurk; and not finding
him there, he is to give warning unto the next constable, and so one constable
after search made to advertise another from parish to parish, till they come to
the same where the offender is harbored and found. It is also provided, that if
any parish in this business do not her duty, but suffers the thief (for
the avoiding of trouble sake) in carrieng him to the gaile; if he should be
apprehended, or other letting of their work, to escape the same parish, is not
only to make fine to the king, but also the same with the whole hundred
wherein it stands, to repaie the party robbed his damages, and leave his
estate harmless. Certes this is a good law, howbeit I have known by mine own
experience, fellons being taken to have escaped out of the stocks, being
rescued by other for want of watch and guard, that thieves have been let pass,
because the covetous and greedy parishoners would neither take the pains, nor
be at the charge to carry them to prison, if it were far off, that when hue
and cry have been made even to the faces of some constables, they have said;
God restore your loss, I have other business at this time. And by such means
the meaning of many a good law is left unexecuted, malefactors imboldened, and
many a poor man turned out of that which he has swet and taken great pains
for, toward the maintenance of himself and his poor children and family.

Of the manner of building and furniture of our houses. Chap. 12.
THe greatest part of our building in the cities and good towns of England
consists

The claie wherewith our houses are impanelled is either white, red, or blue,
and of these the first does participat very much with the nature of our
chalk, the second is called lome, but the third eftsoons changes color so
soon as it is wrought, notwithstanding that it look blue when it is thrown
out of the pit. Of chalk also we have our excellent Asbestos or

In plastering likewise of our fairest houses over our heads, we use to lay
first a lain or two of white mortar tempered with hair upon laths, which are
nailed one by another (or sometimes upon reed or wickers more dangerous for
fire, and made fast here and there with saplaths for falling down) and
finally cover all with the aforesaid plaster, which beside the delectable
whiteness of the stuff it self, is laid on so even and smoothly, as
nothing in my judgment can be done with more exactness. The walls of our
houses on the inner sides in like sort be either hanged with tapisterie, arras
work, or painted cloths, wherein either diverse histories, or herbs, beasts,
knots, and such like are stained, or else they are seeled with oak of our own,
or wainescot brought hither out of the east countries, whereby the rooms are
not a little commended, made warm, and much more close than otherwise they
would be. As for stooues we have not hitherto used them greatly, yet do they
now begin to be made in diverse houses of the gentry and wealthy citizens,
who build them not to work and feed in as in Germany and else where, but now
and then to sweat in, as occasion and need shall require it. This also has
been common in England, contrary to the customs of all other nations, and
yet to be seen (for example in most streets of London) that many of our
greatest houses have outwardly been very simple and plain to sight, which
inwardly have been able to receive a duke with his whole train, and lodge
them at their ease. Hereby moreover it is come to pass, that the fronts of our
streets have not been so uniform and orderly builded as those of forrei^e
cities, where (to say truth) the vtterside of their mansions and dwellings
have often more cost bestowed upon them, than all the rest of the house, which
are often very simple and uneasy within, as experience does confirm. Of old
time our country houses in steed of glass did use much lattise and that made
either of wicker or fine rifts of oak in chekerwise. I read also that some of
the better sort, in and before the times of the Saxons (who notwithstanding
used some glass also since the time of Benedict Biscop the moonke that brought
the feat of glasing first into this land) did make panels of horn in steed of
glass, and fix them in wooden calmes. But as horn in windows is now quite
laid down in every place, so our lattises are also grown into less use,
because glass is come to be so plentiful, and within a very little so good
cheap if not better then the other.

I find obscure mention of the specular stone also to have been found and
applied to this use in England, but in such doubtful sort as I dare not
affirm it for certain. Nevertheless certain it is that antiquity used it
before glass was known, under the name of Selenites. And how glass was first
found I care not greatly to remember even at this present, although it be
directly beside my purposed matter. In Syria phenices which bordereth upon
Jury, and near to the foot of mount Carmell there is a moore or marris,
wherout rises a brook called sometime Belus, and falls into the sea near to
Ptolemais. This river was fondly ascribed unto Baall, and also honored under
that name by the infidels, long time before there was any king in Israel. It
came to pass also as a certain merchant sailed that way laden with Nitrum,
the passengers went to land for to repose themselves, and to take in some store
of fresh water into their vessel. Being also on the shore they kindled a fire,
and made provision for their dinner, but because they wanted treuets or slones
whereon to set their kettels on, ran by chance into the ship, and brought great
pieces of Nitrum with him, which served their turn for that present. To be
short, the said substance being hot, and beginning to melt, it mixed by chance
with the gravel that lay under it; and so brought forth that shining
substance which now is called glass, and about the time of Semiramis. When the
company saw this, they made no small account of their success, and forthwith
began to practice the like in other mixtures, whereby great variety of the
Job, but for the rest I refer me to the common opinion conceived by writers.
Now to turn again to our windows. Heretofore also the houses of our princes
and noble men were often glased with Berill (an example whereof is yet to be
seen in Sudleie castle) and in diverse other places with fine crystal, but
this especially in the time of the Romans, whereof also some fragments have
been taken up in old

The ancient manours and houses of our gentlemen are yet and for the most part
of strong timber, in framing whereof our carpenters have been and are
worthily preferred before those of like science among all other nations.
Howbeit such as be lately builded, are co^monlie either of brick or hard
stone, or both; their rooms large and comely, and houses Vitruuius, Leo
Baptista, and Serlo. Nevertheless, their estimation more

The furniture of our houses also exceeds, and is grown in manner even to
passing delicacie: and herein I do not speak of the nobility and gentry
only, but likewise of the lowest sort in most places of our south country,
that have any thing at all to take to. Certes in noble men's houses it is not
rare to see abundance of Arras, rich haugings of tapistrie, silver vessel, and
so much other plate, as may furnish sundry cupbords, to the sum oftentimes
of a thousand or two thousand pounds at the least: whereby the value of this
and the rest of their stuff does grow to be almost inestimable. Likewise in
the houses of knights, gentlemen, merchantmen, and some other wealthy
citizens, it is not geson to behold generally their great provision of
tapistrie, Turkey work, pewter, brass, fine linen, and thereto costly
cupbords of plate, worth five or six hundred or a thousand pounds, to be deemed
by estimation. But as herein all these sorts do far exceed their elders and
predecessors, and in neatness and curiosity, the merchant all other; so in
time past, the costly furniture stayed there, whereas now it is descended yet
lower, even unto the inferior artificers and many farmers, who by virtue of
their old and not of their new leases have for the most part learned also to
garnish their cupbords with plate, their joined beds with tapistrie and silk
hangings, and their tables with carpets and fine naperie, whereby the wealth of
our country (God be praised therefore, and give us grace to imploie it well)
does infinitely appear. Neither do I speak this in reproach of any man,
God is my judge, but to show that I do reioise rather, to see how God has
blessed us with his good gifts; and whilst I behold how that in a time wherein
all things are grown to most excessive prices, and what commodity so ever is
to be had, is daily plucked from the communaltie by such as look into every
trade, we do yet find the means to obtein and atchiue such furniture as
heretofore has been impossible. There are old men yet dwelling in the village
where I remain, Three things greatly amended in England.
which have noted three things to be maruellouslie altered in England within
their sound remembrance; and other three things too too much increased. One is,
Chimnies.
the multitude of chimnies lately exected, whereas in their young days there
were not about two or three, if so many in most vplandish towns of the realm
(the religious houses, and manor places of their lords always excepted, and
peradventure some great personages) but each one made his fire against a
reredosse in the hall, where he dined and dressed his meat.

The second is the great (although not general) amendment of lodging, for
(said they) our fathers (yea and we our selves also) have lien full often upon
straw pallets, Hard lodging
on rough mats covered only with a sheet under couerlets made of dagswain or
hopharlots (I use their own terms) and a good round log under their heads in
steed of a bolster or pillow. If it were so that our fathers or the good man of
the house, had within seven years after his marriage purchased a matteres or
flockebed, and thereto a sack of chafe to rest his head upon, he thought
himself to be as well lodged as the lord of the town, that peradventure lay
seldom in a bed of down or whole feathers; so well were they contented, and
with such base kind of furniture: which also is not very much amended as yet
in some parts of Bedfordshire, and elsewhere further off from our southern
parts. Pillowes (said they) were thought meet only for women in childbed. As
for servants, if they had any sheet above them it was well, for seldom had
they any under their bodies, to keep them from the pricking straws that ran
often through the canuas of the pallet, and rased their hardened hides.

The third thing they tell of, Furniture of household.
is the exchange of vessel, as of treene platters into pewter, and wooden
spoones into silver or tin. For so common were all sorts of treene stuff in
old time, that a man should hardly find four pieces of pewter (of which one
was peradventure a salt) in a good farmers house, and yet for all this
frugalitie (if it may so be justly called) they were scarce able to live and
pay their rents at their days without selling of a cow, This was is the time
of general idleness.
or an horse, or more, although they paid but four pounds at the uttermost by
the year. Such also was their poverty, that if some one od farmer or
husbandman had been at the alehouse, a thing greatly used in those days,
amongst six or seven of his neighbors, and there in a bravery to show what
store he had, did cast down his pursse, and therein a noble or six shillings
in silver unto them (for few such men then cared for gold because it was not so
ready payment, and they were often enforced to give a penie for the exchange of
an angel) it was very likely that all the rest could not Sors pro sort,
that is, the principal only for the principal; but now beside that which is
above the principal properly called Vsura, we challenge Foenus, that is
commodity of soil, and fruits of the earth, if not the ground it self. In
time past also one of the hundred was much, from thence it rose unto two,
called in Latin Vsura, Ex sextante; three, to wit Ex quadrante; then to four,
to wit Ex triente; then to five, which is Ex quincunce; then to six, called Ex
semisse, etc: as the account of the Assis arises, and coming at the last unto
Vsura ex ass, it amounts to twelve in the hundred, and therefore the Latins
call it Centesima, for that in the hundred month it doubleth the principal;
but more of this elsewhere. See Cicero against Verres, Demosthenes against
Aphobus, and Athenaeus lib. 13. in fine: and when thou have read them well,
help I pray thee in lawful manner to hang up such as take Centu^ pro cento,
By the year.
for they are no better worthy as I do judge in conscience. Forget not also
such landlords as use to value their leases at a secret estimation given of the
wealth and credit of the taker, whereby they seem (as it were) to cat them up
and deal with bondmen, so that if the leassee be thought to be worth an
hundred pounds, he shall pay no less for his new term, or else another to
enter with hard and doubtful covenants. I am sorry to report it, much more
grieved to understand of the practice; but most sorrowful of all to understand
that men of great port and countenance are so far from suffering their
farmers to have any gain at all, that they themselves become grasiers,
butchers, tanners, sheepmasters, woodmen, and denique quid non, thereby to
enrich themselves, and bring all the wealth of the country into their own
hands, leaving the communaltie weak, or as an idol with broken or feeble
arms, which may in a time of peace have a plausible show, but when necessity
shall enforce, have an heavy and bitter sequel.

Of cities and towns in England. Cap. 13.
AS in old time we read that Six and twenty cities in England.
there were eight and twenty flamines and archflamines in the south part of
this I Will, and so many great cities under their jurisdiction: so in these our
days there is but one or two fewer, and each of them also under the
ecclesiastical regiment of some one bishop or archbishop, who in spiritual
cases have the charge and oversight of the same. So many cities therefore are
there in England and Wales, as there be bishopriks and archbishopriks. For
notwithstanding that Lichfield and Couentrie, and Bath and Wells, do seem to
extend the aforesaid number unto nine and twenty: yet neither of these couples
are to be accounted, but as one entier city and see of the bishop, since one
bishoprike can have relation but unto one see, and the said see be situate but
in one place, after which the bishop does take his name. It appears by our
old and ancient histories, that the cities of this southerlie portion have
been of exceeding greatness and beauty, whereof some were builded in the
time of the Samotheans, and of which not a few in these our times are quite
decayed, and the places where they stood worn out of all remembrance. Such
also for the most part as yet remain are maruellouslie altered, insomuch that
whereas at the first they were large and ample, now are they come either unto a
very few houses, or appear not to be much greater in comparison than poor
and simple villages. Antoninus the most diligent writer of the thorough fares
of Britain, notes among other these ancient towns following, as Sitomagus,
Sitomagus. Nouiomagus. Neomagus Niomagus.
which he places in the way from Norwich, as Leland supposes (wherein they
went by Colchester) to London, Nouiomagus that lies between Carleill and
Canturburie, within ten miles east of London, and likewise Neomagus and
Niomagus which take their names of their first founder Magus, the son of
Samothes, and second king of the Celtes that reigned in this Island; and not A
profunditate, only, as Bodinus affirms out of Pliny, as if all the towns
that ended in Magus should stand in holes and low grounds: which is to be
disprooued in diverse cities in the maine, as also here with us. Of these
moreover sir Thomas Eliot supposes Neomagus to have stood somewhere about
Chester; and George Lilly in his book of the names of ancient places, judges
Niomagus to be the very same that we do now call Buckingham, and lies far
from the shore. And as these and sundry other now perished took their
denomination of this prince, so there are diverse causes, Salisburie of Sarron.
which move me to conjecture, that Salisburie does rather take the first name
of Sarron the son of the said Magus, than of Caesar, Caradoc or Seuerus (as
some of our writers do imagine) or else at the least wise of Salisburge of the
maine, from whence some Saxons came to inhabit in this land. And for this later
not unlikely, since before the coming of the Saxons, the king of the
Suessionenses had a great part of this Island in subjection, as Caesar says;
and in another place that Sarronium. Sarrous burg.
and mine opinion is but one man's judgment, I will not stand now upon the
proof of this matter, least I should seem to take great pains in adding new
conjectures unto old, in such wise to deteine the heads of my readers about
these trifles, that otherwise peradventure Greater cities in times past when
husbandmen also were citizens.
the towns and villages either were not at all (but all sorts of people
dwelled in the cities indifferently, an image of which estate may yet be seen
in Spain) or at the lestwise stood not so thick, as they did afterward in the
time of the Romans, but chiefly after the coming of the Saxons, The cause of
the increase of villages.
and after them the Normans,

1. London otherwise called Trenouanton. Cair Lud. Londinum or Longidinium.
Augusta of the legion Augusta that
2 York otherwise called Cairbranke. Vrouicum or Yurewijc. Eorwijc or
Eoforwijc. Yeworwijc. Leouitius places york in Scotland de eclipsibus.
Eboracum. Victoria of the legion victrix that lay there sometime. A legion
contained sixty centuries, thirty manipuli, three cohortes.

3 Canturburie Duroruerno alias Duraruenno. Dorobernia. Cantwarbirie.
4 Colchester Cair Colon. Cair Colden. Cair Colkin of Coilus. Cair Colun, of
the river that runs thereby. Colonia, of the colonie planted there by the
Romans. Coloncester. Camulodunum. Plin. lib. 2. ca. 75. Tacitus. Ptolome.

5 Lincoln Cair Lud Coit, of the woods that stood about it. Cair Loichoit, by
corruption. Lindum. Lindocollinum.
6 Warwijc had sometime 9 parish churches. Cair Guttelin. Cair Line or Cair
Leon. Cair Gwair. Cair Vmber. Cair Gwaerton.
7 Chester upon Vske was a famous university in the time of Arthur. Cair
legion. Carlheon. Cairlium. Legecester. (...) legionum.
8 Carleill Cair Lueill. Cair Leill. Lugibalia. Cair Doill.
9 S. Albanes Cair Maricipit. Cair Municip. Verolamium. Verlamcester. Cair
Wattelin, of the street whereon it stood.
10 Winchester. Cair Gwent. Cair Gwin. Cair Wine. Venta Simenorum.
11 Cisceter. Cair Churne. Cair Kyrne. Cair Kery. Cair Cery. Cirnecester.
Churnecester.
12 Silcester. Cair Segent. Selecester. Cair Segent stood upon the Thames, not
far from Reding.

13 Bath. Cair Badon. Thermae. Aquae solis.
14 Shaftesbyry Cair Paladour. Septonia.
15 Worcester. Wigornia. Cair Gworangon. Brangonia. Cair Frangon. Woorkecester.
16 Chichester. Cair Key or Kair Kis. Cair Chic.
17 Bristow Cair Odernant Badon. Oder. Cair Bren. Venta Belgarum. Brightstow.
18 Rochest. Durobreuis, corruptly Rofcester. Roffa. Durobrouis. Dubobrus.
Durobrius.

19 Portchester. Cair Peris. Cair Poreis.
20 Cairmarden Cair Maridunum. Cair Merdine. Maridumum. Cai^ Marlin. Cair
Prid^in.
21 Gloucester Cair Clowy. Cair Glow. Claudiocestria.
22 Leircester. Cair Beir. Cair Leir. Cair Lirion. Wirall, test. Matthew. West.
895.
23 Cambridge. Grantabric. Cair Grant.
24 Cair Vrnach, peradventure Burgh castle. 25 Cair Cucurat. 26 Cair Draiton,
now a slender village. 27 Cair Celennon. 28 Cair Megwaid.
As for Cair Dorme (another whereof I read likewise) it stood somewhere upon
the Nene in Huntingdon shire, but now unknown, fith it was twice raced to the
ground, first by the Saxons, then by the Danes, so that the ruins thereof are
in these days not extant to be seen. And in like sort I am ignorant where
most of them stood, that are noted with Alcluid over and beside these before
mentioned, sometime builded by Ebracus of Britain, as the fame goes, and
finally destroyed by the Danes, about the year of Grace 870. It stood upon
the banks of the river Cluda, to wit, between it and the blanke on the north,
and the Lound lake on the west, and was sometime march between the Britons and
the Picts, and likewise the Picts and the Scots; nevertheless, the castle (as
I hear) does yet Dombrittain or Dunbritton, so that it is not an hard matter
by these few words to find where Alcluid stood. I could here, if leisure
served, and have of the printer not require dispatch, deliver the ancient names
of sundry other towns, of which Stafford in time past was called Stadtford,
and therefore (as I guess) builded or the name altered by the Saxons, Kinebanton
now Kimbalton. But if any man be desirous to see more of them, let him Houeden
in the life of Henry the second, and there he shall be furthor satisfied of
his desire in this behalf.

It should seem when these ancient cities flourished, that the same town,
When Albane was martyred Asclepiodotus was legate in Britain.
which we now call saint Albons, did most of all excel: but chiefly in the
Romans time, and was not only nothing inferior to London it self, but rather
preferred before it, because it was newer, and made a Municipium of the Romans,
whereas the other was old and ruinous, and inhabited only by the Britons, as
the most part of the Island was also in those days. Good notice hereof also is
to be taken by Matthew Paris, and others before him, out of whose writings I
have thought good to note a few things, whereby the majesty of this ancient
city may appear unto posterity, and the former estate of Uerlamcester not
lie altogether (as it has done hitherto) raked up in forgetfulness, through
the negligence of such as might have deserved better of their successors, by
leaving the description thereof in a book by it self, since many particulars
thereof were written to their hands, that now are lost and perished. Tacitus in
the foureteenth book of his history makes mention of it, showing that in the
rebellion of the Britons, the Romans there were miserably distressed, Eadeth
clades (says he) municipio Verolamio fuit. And hereupon Nennius in his catalog
of cities casts it Cair municip, as I before have noted. Sullomaca and Barnet
all one, or not far in sunder.
Ptolonie speaking of it, does place it among the Catye^chlanes, but Anto^^nus
makes it one end twenty Italian miles from London, placing Sullomaca nine
mile from thence, whereby it is evident, that Sullomaca stood near to Barnet,
if it were not the very same. Of the old compass of the walls of Verolamlum
there is now small knowledge to be had by the ruins, but of the beauty of the
city it self you shall partly understand by that which follows at hand,
after I have told you for your better intelligence what Municipium Romanorum
is: for there is great difference between that and Colonia Romanorum, since
Colonia alio traducitur a ciuitate Roma, but Municipes aliunde in ciuitatem
veniunt, suisque, iuribus and legibus viuuni: moreover their soil is not
changed into the nature of the Roman, but they live in the steadfast freendship
and protection of the Romans, as did sometime the Ceretes who were the first
people which ever obtained that privilege. The British Verolamians therefore,
having for their noble service in the wars deserved great commendations at
the hands of the Romans, they gave unto them the whole freedom of Romans,
whereby they were made Municipes, and became more free in truth than their
Colonies could be. To conclude therefore, Municipium is a city in franchised
and endued with Roman privileges, without any alteration of her former
inhabitants or privileges; whereas a Colonie is a company sent from Rome into
any other region or province, to possess either a city newly builded, or to
replenish the same from whence her former citizens have been expelled and
driven out. Now to proceed.

In the time of king Edgar it fell out, that one Eldred was abbat there; who
being desirous to enlarge that house, it came into his mind to search about in
the ruins of Verolamium (which now was overthrown by the fury of the Saxons
and Danes) to see if he might there come by any curious pieces of work,
wherewith to garnish his building taken in hand. To be short, he had no sooner
begun to dig among the rubbis, but he found an exceeding number of pillars,
pieces of antike work, thresholds, door frames, and sundry other pieces of
fine masonrie for windows and such like, very convenient for his purpose. Of
these also some were of porphyrite stone, some of diverse kinds of marble,
touch, and alabaster, beside many curious devises of hard metal, in finding
whereof he thought himself an happy man, and his success to be greatly
guided by S. Albane. Besides these also he found sundry pillars of brass, and
sockets of latton, alabaster and touch, all which he laid aside by great heaps,
determining in the end (I say) to lay the foundation of a new abbaie, but God
so prevented his determination, that death took him away, before his building
was begun. After him succeeded one Eadmeerus, who followed the doings of
Eldred to the uttermost: and therefore not only perused what he had left with
great diligence, but also caused his pioners to search yet further, within the
old walls of Verolamium, where they not only found infinite other pieces of
excellent workmanship, but came at the last to certain vaults under the
ground, in which stood diverse idols, and not a few altars, very
superstitiouslie and religiously adorned, as the pagans left them belike in
time of necessity. These images were of sundry metals, and some of pure
gold, their altars likewise were richly covered, all which ornaments Edmerus
took away, and not only converted

He found likewise in a stone wall two old books, whereof one contained the
rites of the gentiles, about the sacrifices of their gods, the other (as they
now say) the martyrdom of saint Albane, This sounds like a lie.
both of them written in old British letters, which either because no man then
living could read them, or for that they were not worth the keeping, were both
consumed to ashes, saving that a few notes were first taken out of this later,
concerning the death of their Albane. Verolamium, whereof infinite other tokens
have been found since that time, and diverse within the memory of man, of
passing workmanship, the like whereof has no whers else been seen in any
ruins within the compass of this I Will, either for cost or quantity of stuff.

Furthermore, whereas many are not afraid to say that the Thames came
sometimes by this city, indeed it is nothing so; but that the Uerlume
(afterward called Uere and the Mure) did and does so still (whatsoever Gildas
talks hereof, whose books may be corrupted in that behalf) there is yet
evident proof to be confirmed by experience. For albeit that the river be now
grown to be very small by reason of the ground about it, which is higher than
it was in old time; yet it keeps in manner the old course, and runs
between the old city that was, and the new town that is standing on
Holmehirst crag, as I beheld of late. Those places also which now are meadow
Humfrey Lhoid our country man calls corruptly Stagnum enaximum for Stagnum
maximum) at the first belonged to the king, and thereby Offa in his time did
reap no small commodity. It continued also until the time of Alfrijc the
seventh abbat of that house, who bought it outright of the king then living,
and by excessive charges drained it so narrowly, that within a while he left
it dry (saving that he reserved a channel for the river to have her usual
course, which he held up with high banks) because there was always contention
between the moonks and the kings servants, which fished on that water unto the
kings behoof.

In these days therefore remains no manner mention of this poole, but only
in one street, which yet is called Fishpoole street, whereof this may suffice
for the resolution of such men, as seek rather to yield to an inconvenience,
than that their Gildas should seem to mistake this river.

Having thus digressed to give some remembrance of the old estate of
Verolamium, it is now time to return again unto my former purpose. Certes I
would gladly set down with the names and number of the cities, all the towns
and villages in England and Wales, with their true longitudes and latitudes,
but as yet I cannot come by them in such order as I would: howbeit the tale of
our cities is soon found by the bishoprikes, since every see has such
prerogative given unto it, as to bear the name of a city, and to use
Regaleius within her own limits. Which privilege also is granted to sundry
ancient towns in England, especially northward, where more plenty of them is
to be found by a great deal than in the south. The names therefore of our
cities are these:

London. York. Canturburie. Winchester. Cairleill. Durham. Elie. Norwich.
Lincoln.
Worcester. Gloucester. Hereford. Salisburie. Excester. Bath. Lichfield.
Bristow. Rochester.
Chester. Chichester. Oxford. Peterborow. Landaffe. S. David's. Bangor. S.
Asaph.
Whose particular plots and models with their descriptions shall ensue, if it
may be brought to pass, that the cutters can make dispatch of them before this
chronology be published. Of towns and villages likewise thus much will I
say, that there were greater store in old time (I mean within three or four
hundred year passed) than at this present. And this I note out of diverse
records, charters, and donations (made in times past unto sundry religious
houses, as Glassenburie, Abbandon, Ramseie, Elie, and such like) and whereof in
these days I find not so much as the ruins. Leland in sundry places
complains likewise of the decaie of parishes in great cities and towns,
missing in some six, or eight, or twelve churches and more, of all which he
gives particular notice. For albeit that the Saxons builded many towns and
villages, and the Normans well more at their first coming, yet since the first
two hundred years after the latter conquest, they have gone so fast again to
decaie, that the ancient number of them is very much abated. Ranulph the
moonke of Chester tells of general surueie made in the fourth, sixteenth,
and nineteenth of the reign of William Conqueror, surnamed the Bastard,
wherein it was found, that (notwithstanding the Danes had ouerthrow^e a great
many) there were to the number of 52000 towns, 45002 parish churches, Edw. 4.
45120 parish churches, and but 60216 knights fees,

Certes this misfortune has not only happened Homer writes) was called
Hetacompolis, because it contained an hundred cities, but now it is so
unfurnished that it may hardly be called Tripolis. Diodorus Siculus says,
that Egypt had once 18000 cities, which so decayed in process of time, that
when Ptolomeus Lagus reigned, there were not above 3000: but in

But to leave this lamentable discourse of so

It is so, that our soil being divided into champaine ground and woodland, the
houses of the first lie uniformly builded in every town together with
streets and lanes, whereas in the woodland countries (except here and there in
great market towns) they stand scattered abroad, each one dwelling in the
midst of his own occupieng. And as in many and most great market towns,
there are commonly three hundred or four hundred families or mansions, and
two thousand communicants, or peradventure more: so in the other, whether they
be woodland or champaine, we find not often above forty, fifty, or three
score households, and two or three hundred communicants, whereof the greatest
part nevertheless are very poor folks, offentimes without all manner of
occupieng, since the ground of the pa^ish is gotten up into a few men's hands,
yea sometimes into the tenure of one, two or three, whereby the rest are
compelled either to be hired servants unto the other, or else to beg their
bread in misery from door to door.

There are some (says Leland) which are not so favorable when they have
gotten such lands, as to let the houses remain upon them to the use of the
poor; but they will compound with the lord of the soil to pull them down for
altogether, saying that if they did let them stand, they should but toll
beggars to the town, thereby to surcharge the rest of the parish, and lay more
burden upon them. But alas these pitiful men see not that they themselves
hereby do lay the greatest log upon their neighbors necks. For since the
prince does commonly loose nothing of his duties accustomable to be paid, the
rest of the parishioners that remain must answer and bear them out: for they
plead more charge other ways, saying; I am charged already with a light
horse, I am to answer in this sort and after that manner. And it is not yet
altogether out of knowledge, that where the king had seven pounds thirteen
shillings at a task gathered of fifty wealthy householders of a parish in
England: now a gentleman having three parts of the town in his own hands,
four households do bear all the aforesaid payment, or else Leland is deceived
in his Commentaries lib. 13. lately come to my hands, which thing he
especially noted in his travel over this I Will. A common plague and enormitie,
both in the heart of the land and likewise upon the coasts. Certes a great
number complain of the increase of poverty, laieng the cause upon God, as
though he were in fault for sending such increase of people, or want of wars
that should consume them, affirming that the land was never so full, etc: but
few men do see the very root from whence it does proceed. Yet the Romans
found it out, when they flourished, and therefore prescribed limits to every
man's tenure and occupieng. Homer commends Achilles for overthrowing of five
and twenty cities: but in mine opinion Ganges is much better preferred by
Suidas for building of three score in Inde, where he did plant himself. I
could (if need required) set down in this place the number of religious houses
and monasteries, with the names of their founders that have been in this
Island: but since it is a thing of small importance, I pass it over as
impertinent to my purpose. Yet herein I will commend sundry of the monastical
votaries, especially moonkes, for that they were authors of many goodly
borowes and endwares, near unto their dwellings, although otherwise they
pretended to be men separated from the world. But alas their covetous minds one
way in enlarging their revenues, and carnal intent an other, appeered herin
too too much. For being bold from time to time to visit their tenants, they
wrought often great wickedness, and made those endwares little better than
brodelhouses, especiallio where nunries were far off, or else no safe access
unto them. But what do I spend my time in the rehearsal of these
filthinesses? Would to God the memory of them might perish with the
malefactors! My purpose was also at the end of this chapter to have set down a
table of the parish churches and market towns thorough out all England and
Wales: but since I can not perform the same as I would, I am forced to

Shires. Market towns. Parishes. Middlesex. 3 73 London within the walls, and
without. 120 Surrie. 6 140 Sussex. 18 312 Kent. 17 398 Cambridge. 4 163
Bedford. 9 13 Huntingdon. 5 78 Rutland. 2 47 Barkeshire. 11 150 Northhampton.
10 326 Buckingham. 11 196 Oxford. 10 216 Southhampton. 18 248 Dorset. 19 279
Norffolke. 26 625 Suffolk. 25 575 Essex. 18 415

Of castles and holds. Chap. 14.
IT has been of long time a Aristotle utterly denies that any castle at
all can be profitable to a common wealth well governed. Timotheus of Corinthum
affirms, that a castle in a common wealth is but a breeder of tyrants. Pyrhus
king of Epire being received also on a time into Athens, among other courtesies
showed unto him, they led him also into their castle of Pallas, who at his
departure gave them great thanks for the friendly intertainment; but with this
item, that they should let so few kings come into the same as they might, least
(says he) they teach you to repent too late of your great gentleness.
Caietanus in his commonwealth has finally no liking of them, as appears in
his eight book of that most excellent treatise. But what have I to deal
whether they be profitable or not, since my purpose is rather to show what
plenty we have of them, which I will perform so far as shall be needful?

There have been in times past great store of castles and places of defense
within the realm of England, of which some were builded by the Britons, many
by the Romans, Saxons, and Danes, but most of all by the barons of the realm,
in and about the time of king Stephan, who licenced each of them to build so
many as them listed upon their own demeasnes, hoping thereby that they would
have employed their use to his advantage and commodity But finally when he
saw that they were rather fortified against himself in the end, than used in
his defense, he repented all too late of his inconsiderate dealing, since now
there was no remedy but by force for to subdue them. After his decease king
Henry the second came no sooner to the crown, but he called to mind the
inconvenience which his predecessor had suffered, and he himself might in
time sustain by those fortifications. Therefore one of the first things he did
was an attempt to race and deface the most part of these holds. Certes he
thought it better to hazard the meeting of the enemy now and then in the
plain field, than to live in perpetual fear of those houses, and the
rebellion of his lords upon every light occasion conceived, who then were full
so strong as he, if not more strong; and that made them the readier to
withstand and gainesaie many of those proceedings, which he and his
successors from time to time intended. Hereupon therefore he caused more than
eleven hundred of their said castles to be raced and overthrown, whereby the
power of his nobility was not a little restreined. Since that time also, not a
few of those which remained, have decayed, partly by the commandment of
Henry the third, and partly of themselves, or by conversion of them into the
dwelling houses of noble men, their martial fronts being removed: so that at
this present, there are very few or no castles at all maintained within
England, saving only upon the coasts and marches of the country for the
better keeping back of the foreign enemy, when soever he shall attempt to
enter and annoie us.

The most provident prince that ever reigned in this land, for the
fortification thereof against all outward enemies, was the late prince of
famous memory king Henry the eight, who beside that he repared most of such
as were already standing, builded sundry out of the ground. For having shaken
off the more than servile yoke of popish tyranny, and espieng that the
emperor was offended for his divorce from queen Catharine his aunt, and
thereto understanding that the French king had coupled the Dolphin his son
with the popes niece, and married his daughter to the king of Scots (whereby he
had cause more justly to suspect than safely to trust anis one of them all as
Lambert says) he determined to stand upon his own defense, and therefore with
no small speed, and like charge, he builded sundry blockehouses, castles, and
platformes upon diverse frontiers of his realm, but chiefly the east and
southeast parts of England, whereby (no doubt) he did very much qualify the
conceived grudges of his adversaries, and utterly put off their hasty purpose
of invasion. But would to God he had cast his eye toward Harwich, and the
coasts of Norffolke and Suffolk, where nothing as yet is done! albeit there
be none so fit and likely places for the enemy to enter upon, as in those
parts, where, at a full sea they may touch upon the shore and come to land
without resistance. And thus much briefly for my purpose at this present. For
I need not to make any long discourse of castles, since it is not the nature of
a good Englishman to regard to be caged up as in a coope, and hedged in with
stone walls, but rather to meet with his enemy in the plain field at
handstrokes, where he may trauaise his ground, choose his plot, and use the
benefit of sun shine, wind and weather, to his best advantage and commodity.
Isocrates also says that towers, walls, The best keepers of kingdoms.
bulworkes, soldiers, and plenty of armor, are not the best keepers of
kingdoms; but friends, love of subjects, and obedience unto martial
discipline, If I were in my castle of Bungeie,
Upon the water of Waueneie,
I would not set a button by the king of Cockneie,
I repute them but as toies, the first mere vain, the second fondly uttered
if any such thing were said, as many other words are and have been spoken of
like holds (as Wallingford, etc:) but now grown out of memory, and with small
loss not heard of among the common sort. Certes the castle of Bungeie was
overthrown by the aforesaid prince, the same year that he overthrew the
walls and castle of Leircester, also the castles of Treske and Malesar,
apperteining to Roger Mowbraie, and The wandles in time past were called
windles.
This nevertheless concerning two of them is not to be omitted, to wit, that
the one near unto Cambridge now Gogmagogs hill, was called Windleburie before
Tacitus.

Of palaces belonging to the prince. Chap. 15.
IT lies not in me to set down exactlie the number and names of the palaces
belonging to the prince, nor to make any description of her graces court, since
my calling is and has been such, as that I have scarcely presumed to peep
in at her gates, much less then have I adventured to search out and know the
estate of those houses, and what magnificent behavior is to be seen within
them. Yet thus much will I say generally of all the houses and honors
perteining to her majesty, that they are builded either of square stone or
brick, or else of both. And thereunto although their capacity and hugeness be
not so monstrous, as the like of diverse foreign princes are to be seen in the
maine, and new found nations of the world: yet are they so curious, neat, and
commodious as any of them, both for conueiance of offices and lodgings, and
excellency of situation, which is not the least thing to be considered of in
building. Those that were builded before the time of king Henry the eight,
retain to these days the show and image of the ancient kind of workmanship
used in this land: but such as he erected after his own devise (for he was
nothing inferior in this trade to Adrian the emperor and Iustiman the
lawgiuer) King Hen. 8. not inferior to Adrian and Iustiman.
do represent another manner of pattern, which as they are supposed to excel
all the rest that he found standing in this realm, so they are and shall be a
perpetual president unto those that do come after, to follow in their works
and buildings of importance. Certes masonrie did never better flourish in
England than in his time. And albeit that in these days there be many goodly
houses erected in the sundry quarters of this Island; yet they are rather
curious to the eye like paper work, than substantial for continuance: whereas
such as he did set up excel in both, and therefore may justly be preferred
far above all the rest. The names of those which come now to my remembrance,
and are as yet reserved to her majesty's only use at pleasure are these: for
of such as are given away I speak not, neither of those that are utterly
decayed, as Bainards castle in London builded in the days of the Conqueror
by a noble man called William Bainard, whose wife Inga builded the priorie of
little Donemow in the days of Henry the first; neither of the tower royal
there also, etc: since I see no cause wherefore I should remember them and many
of the like, of whose very ruins I have no certain knowledge. Of such I say
therefore as I erst mentioned, we have first of all White hall at the west end
of London White hall.
(which is taken for the most large and principal of all the rest) was first a
lodging of the archbishops of York, then pulled down, begun by cardinal
Woolseie, and finally enlarged and finished by king Henry the eight. By east
of this stands Durham place, sometime belonging to the bishops of Durham, but
converted also by king Henry the eight into a palace royal, and lodging for
the prince. Of Summerset place I speak not, yet if the first beginner thereof
(I mean the lord Edward, the learned and godly duke of Summerset) had lived,
I doubt not but it should have been well finished and brought to a sumptuous
end: but as untimely death took him from that house and from us all, so it
proved the stay of such proceeding as was intended about it. Whereby it
comes to pass that it stands as he left it. Neither will I remember the
Tower of London, which is rather an armorie and house of munition, and
thereunto a place for the safekeeping of offenders, than a palace royal for a
king or queen to soiourne in. Yet in times past I find that Belline held his
abode there, and thereunto extended the site of his palace in such wise, that
it stretched over the Broken wharfe, and came further into the city, in so
much that it approached near to Bellines gate, and as it is thought some of the
ruins of his house are yet extant, howbeit patched up and made warehouses in
that tract of ground in our times. S. James.
S. James sometime a nonrie, was builded also by the same prince. Her grace
has also Oteland, Oteland. Ashridge. Hatfield. Enueeld. Richmond. Hampton.
Woodstocke.
Ashridge, Hatfield, Hauering, Enueeld, Eltham, Langleie, Richmond builded by
Henry the fifth, Hampton court (begun sometime by cardinal Woolseie, and
finished by her father) and thereunto Woodstocke, erected by king Henry the
first, in which the queens majesty delights greatly to soiourne,
notwithstanding that in time past it was the place of a parcel of her
captivity, when it pleased God to try her by affliction and calamity.

For strength Windlesor or Winsor is supposed to be the chief, (...)
a castle builded in time past by king Arthur, or before him by Aruiragus, as
it is thought, and repared by Edward the third, who erected also a notable
college there. After him diverse of his successors

Greenewich was first builded by Humfreie duke of Gloucester, Greenewich.
upon the Thames side four miles east from London, in the time of Henry the
sixth, and called Pleasance. Afterward it was greatly enlarged by king Edw. 4.
garnished by king Hen. 7. and finally made perfect by king Hen. 8. the only
Phoenix of his time for fine and curious masonrie.

Not far from this is Dartford, Dartford.
and not much distant Eltham.
Eltham (as I take it) was builded by king Henry the third, if not before.
There are beside these moreover diverse other. But what shall I need to take
upon me to repeat all, and tell what houses the queens majesty has? since all
is hirs, and when it pleases her in the

The court of England, Of the court.
which necessarily is holden always where the prince lies, is in these days
one of the most renowned and magnificent courts that (...)
to the singular commendation of both sorts and sexes of our courtiers here in
England, that there are very few of them, which have not the use and skill of
sundry speeches, beside an excellent vein of writing before time not
regarded. Would to God the rest of their lives and conuersations were
correspondent to these gifts! for as our common courtiers (for the most part)
are the best learned and endued with excellent gifts, so are many of them the
worst men when they come abroad, that any man shall either hear or read of.
Truly it is a rare thing with us now, to hear of a courtier which has but
his own language. And to say how many gentlewomen and ladies there are, that
beside sound knowledge of the Greek and Latin toongs, are thereto no less
skillful in the Spanish, Italian, and French, or in some one of them, it
rests not in me: since I am persuaded, that as the noble men and gentlemen do
surmount in this behalf, so these come very little or nothing at all behind
them for their parts, which industry God continue, and accomplish that which
otherwise is wanting!

Beside these things I could in like sort set down the ways and means,
whereby our ancient ladies of the court do shun and avoid idleness, some of
them exercising their fingers with the needle, other in caulworke, diverse in
spinning of silk, some in continual reading either of the holy scriptures,
or histories of our own or foreign nations about us, and diverse in writing
volumes of their own, or translating of other men's into our English and Latin
tongue, whilst the yoongest sort in the mean time apply their lutes,
citharnes, prickesong, and all kind of music, which they use only for
recreation sake, when they have leisure, and are free from attendance upon the
queens majesty, or such as they belong unto. How many of the eldest sort
also are skillful in surgerie and distillation of waters, beside sundry other
artificial practices perteining to the ornature and commendations of their
bodies, I might (if I listed to deal further in this behalf) easily declare,
but I pass over such manner of dealing, least I should seem to glauer, and
currie favor with some of them. Nevertheless this I will generally say of
them all, that as each of them are cuning in something whereby they keep
themselves occupied in the court, so there is in manner none of them, but when
they be at home, can help to supply the ordinary want of the kitchen with a
number of delicat dishes of their own devising, wherein the Portingall is
their chief counselor, as some of them are most commonly with the clearke of
the kitchen, who uses (by a trick taken up of late) to give in a brief
rehearsal of such and so many dishes as are to come in at every course
throughout the whole service in the dinner or supper while: which bill some do
call a memorial, other a billet, but some a fillet, because such are commonly
hanged on the file, and kept by the lady or gentlewoman unto some other
purpose. But whither am I digressed?

I might finally describe the large allowances in offices, and yearly
liueries, and thereunto the great plenty of gold and silver plate, the
several pieces whereof are commonly so great and massy, and the quantity
thereof so abundantly serving all the household, that (as I suppose) Cyniras,
Cresus, and Crassus had not the like furniture: naie if Midas were now living
and once again put to his choice, I think he could ask no more, or rather
not half so much as is there to be seen and used. But I pass over to make
such needless discourses, resolving my self, that even in this also, as in
all the rest, the exceeding mercy and loving kindness of God does
wonderfully appear toward us, in that he has so largely endued us with
these his so ample benefits.

In some great princes courts beyond the seas, and which even for that cause
are likened unto hell by diverse learned writers that have spent a great part
of their time in them, as Henricus Cornelius Agrippa, one (for example) who in
his epistle Ad aulicum dam says thus: An non in inferno es amice, qui es in
aula, vbi daemonum habitatio est, qui illic suis artibus humana licet effigy
regnant, atque vbi scelerum schola est, and animatum iactura ingens, ac
quicquid vspiam est perfidiae ac doli, quicquid crudelitatis and incleme^tiae,
quicquid effraenatae superbiae, and rapacis auariciae, quicquid obscenae
libidinis, faedissimae impudicitiae, quicquid nefandae impietatis, and morum
pessimorum, totum illic aceruatur cumulatissime, vbi stupra, raptus, incestus,
adulteria, principum and nobilium ludi sunt, vbi fastus and tumor, ira, liuor,
faedaque cupido cum socijs suis

I might speak here of the great trains and Trains of attendants.
which attend upon the nobility of England in their several liueries, and
with differences of cognisances on their sleeves, whereby it is known to whom
they apperteine. I could also set down what a goodly sight it is to see them
muster in the court, which being filled with them does yield the contemplation
of a noble variety unto the beholder, much like to the show of the pecocks
tail in the full beauty, or of some meadow garnished with infinite kinds and
diversity of pleasant

The discipline of firm peace also that is maintained within a certain
compass of the princes palace, is such, as is nothing inferior to that we see
daily practiced in the best governed holds and fortresses. And such is the
severe punishment of those that strike within the limits prohibited, that
without all hope of mercy, benefit of clergy, or sanctuary, they are sure to
loose their right hands at a stroke, and that in very solemn manner, the form
whereof I will set down, and then make an end of this chapter, to deal with
other matters.

At such time therefore as the party transgressing is convicted by a
sufficient inquest impanelled for the same purpose, Striking within the court
and palace of the prince.
and the time come of the execution of the sentence, the sergeant of the kings
wood-yard provides a square block, which he brings to some appointed place,
and therewithal a great beetle, staple, and cords, wherewith to fasten the
hand of the offender unto the said block, until the whole circumstance of his
execution be performed. The yeoman of the scullarie likewise for the time
being, does provide a great fire of coals hard by the block, wherein the
fearing irons are to be made ready against the chief surgeon to the prince or
his deputy shall occupy the same. Upon him also does the sergeant or chief
farrour attend with those irons, whose office is to deliver them to the said
surgeon when he shall be ready by searing to use the same. The groom of the
salarie for the time being or his deputy is furthermore appointed to be ready
with vinegar and cold water, and not to depart from the place until the arm
of the offender be bound up and fully dressed. And as these things are thus
provided, so the sergeant surgeon is bound from time to time to be ready to
execute his charge, and sear the stumpe, when the hand is taken from it. The
sergeant of the cellar is at hand also with a cup of red wine, and likewise the
chief officer of the pantrie with manchet bread to give unto the said party
after the execution done, and the stumpe seared, as the sergeant of the ewerie
is with clothes, wherein to wind and wrap up the arm, the yeoman of the
poultrie with a cock to lay unto it, the yeoman of the chandrie with seared
cloths, and finally the master cook or his deputy with a sharp dressing
knife, which he delivers at the place of execution to the sergeant of the
larder, who does hold it upright in his hand, until the execution be
performed by the public officer appointed thereunto. And this is the manner of
punishment ordained for those that strike within the princes palace, or limits
of the same. Which should first have been executed on sir Edmund Kneuet, in
the year 1541. But when he had made great suit to save his right hand for the
further service of the king in his wars, and willingly yielded to forgo his
left, in the end the king pardoned him of both, to no small benefit of the
offender, and publication of the bountiful nature that remained in the prince.
The like privilege almost is given to churches and churchyards, although in
manner of punishment great difference do appear. For he that bralleth or
quarelleth in either of them, is by and by suspended Abingressu ecclesiae,
until he be absolved: as he is also that strikes with the fist, or lays
violent hands upon any whom so ever. But if he happen to smite with staff,
dagger, or any manner of weapon, and the same be sufficiently found by the
verdict of twelve men at his arrainement, beside excommunication, he is sure to
loose one of his ears without all hope of release. But if he be such a one as
has been twice condemned and executed, whereby he has now none ears, then
is he marked with an hot iron upon the cheek, and by the letter F, which is
seared deep into his slesh, he is from thencefoorth noted as a common
barratour and fraie maker, and thereunto remains excommunicate, till by
repentance he deserve to be absolved. To strike a clearke also (that is to
say) a minister, is plain excommunication, and the offender not to be
absolved but by the prince or his especial commission. Such also is the
general estate of the excommunicate in every respect, that he can yield not
testimony in any matter so long as he so stands. No bargain or sale that
he makes is available in law, neither any of his acts whatsoever pleadable,
whereby he lives as an outlaw and a man altogether out of the princes
protection, although it be not lawful to kill him, nor any man otherwise
outlawed, without the danger of fellonie.

Of armor and munition. Chap. 16.
HOw well or how strongly

Our armor differs not from that of other nations, and therefore consists
of corslets, almai^e riuets, shirts of maile, iackes quilted and covered over
with leather, fustian, or canuas, over thick plates of iron that are sowed in
the same, and of which there is no town or village that has not her
convenient furniture. The said armor and munition likewise is kept in one
several place of every town, appointed by the consent of the whole parish,
where it is always ready to be had and worn within an hours warning.
Sometime also it is occupied, when it pleases the magistrate either to view
the able men, and take note of the well keeping of the same, or finally to see
those that are enrolled to exercise each one his several weapon, at the charge
of the townsmen of each parish according to his appointment. Certes there is
almost no village so poor in England (be it never so small) that has not
sufficient furniture in a readiness to set forth three or four soldiors, as
one archer, one gunner, one pike, and a bilman at the least. No there is not so
much wanting as their very liueries and caps, which are least to be accounted
of, if any have required: so that if this good order may continue, it shall be
impossible for the sudden enemy to find us unprovided. As for able men for
service, thanked be God, we are not without good store, for by the musters
taken 1574 and 1575, our number amounted to 1172674, and yet were they not so
narrowly taken, but that a third part of this like multitude was left vnbilled
and uncalled. What store of munition and armor the queens majesty has in
her storehouses, it lies not in me to yield account, since I suppose the same
to be infinite. And whereas it was commonly said after the loss of Calis, that
England should never recover the store of ordinance there lest and lost: that
same is at this time proved false, since even some of the same persons do now
confess, that this land was never better furnished with these things in any
kings days that reigned since the conquest.

The names of our greatest ordinance are commonly these.
Robinet, whose weight is two hundred pounds, and it has one inch and a
quarter within the mouth. Falconet weighs five hundred pounds, and his
wideness is two inches within the mouth. Falcon has eight hundred pounds, and
two inches and a half within the mouth. Minion poiseth eleauen hundred pounds,
and has three inches and a quarter within the mouth. Sacre has fifteen
hundred pounds, and is three inches and a half wide in the mouth. Demie
Culuerijn weighs three thousand pounds, and has four inches and a half
within the mouth. Culuerijn has four thousand pounds, and five inches and an
half within the mouth. Demie Canon six thousand pounds, and six inches and an
half within the mouth. Canon seven thousand pounds, and eight inches within
the mouth. E. Canon eight thousand pounds, and seven inches within the mouth.
Basiliske 9000 pounds, eight inches, and three quarters within the mouth. By
which proportions also it is easy to come by the weight of every shot, how
many scores it does flee at point blanke, how much powder is to be had to the
same, and finally how many inches in height each bullet ought to carry.
The names of the greatest ordinance. Weight of the shot. Scores of carriage.
Pounds of powder. Height of bullet. Robinet. has 1. li. 0 1 Falconet. 2. li.
14 2 1 2/4 Falcon. 2.. 16 2 2 Minion. 4.. 17 4 3 Sacre. 5 18 5 3 Demie
Culuerijn. 9 20 9 4 Culuerijn. 18 25 18 5 Demie canon. 30 38 28 6 Canon. 60 20
44 7 E. Canon. 42 20 20 6 Basiliske. 60 21 60 8

I might here take just occasion to speak of the princes armories. But what
shall it need? since the whole realm is her armorie, and therefore her
furniture infinite. The Turk had one gun made by one Orban a Dane, the caster
of his ordinance, which could not be drawn to the siege of Constantinople,
Cymbalae pro galeis pro scutis tympana^ pulsant.

I would write here also of our manner of going (...)
or how should a man write any thing to the purpose of that wherewith he is
nothing acquainted? This nevertheless will I add of things at home, that
seldom shall you see any of my countriemen above eighteen or twenty years
old to go without a dagger at the least at his back or by his side, although
they be aged burgesses or magistrates of any

I might also entreat of our old manner of warfare used in and before the time
of Caesar, when as the chief brunt of our fight was in Essedis or wagons; but
this I also pass over, noting nevertheless out of Propertius, that our said
wagons were gorgeous and gaily painted, which he sets down in these four
verses ensuing, Arethusae ad Lycotam, lib. 4. eleg. 3. Te modo viderunt
iteratos Bactra per ortus,
Te modo munito Sericus hostis equo,
Hibernique Getae, pictoque Brittannia curru,
Vstus and Eoa discolor Indus aqua.


Of the navy of England. Chap. 17.
THere is nothing that has brought me into more admiration of the power and
force of antiquity, than their diligence and care had of their Polybius, that
at one skirmish on the sea the Romans lost seven Herodot) was able to receive
two hundred and thirty soldiers, and some of them three hundred. These were
called triremes, and were indeed galleys that had three rows of ores on
every side; for the word Nauis is indifferently applied so well to the
galleys as ship, as to the conversant in histories is easy to be found. In old
time also they had galleys of four rows, five rows, six, seven, eight,
nine, twelve, yea fifteen rows of ores on a side; judge you then Pliny lib.
7. notes one Damasthenes to be the first maker of the galleys with two rows
called biremes: Thucidides refers the triremes to Ammocles of Corinthum; the
quadriremes were devised by Aristotle of Carthage; the quinquiremes by
Nestchthon of Salamina; the gallie of six rows by Xenagoras of Syracusa: from
this to the tenth Nesigiton brought up; Alexander the great caused one to be
made of twelve; Ptolomeus Soter of fifteen; Demetrius the son of Antigonus
of thirty; Ptolom Philad of forty; Ptol. Triphon of fifty: all which above
four were none other (in mine opinion) than unwieldy carts, and more serving
for pleasure and to gaze upon, than any use in the wars for which they should
be devised. But of all other I note one of forty rows, which Ptolo.
Philopater builded, containing 200 and eighty cubits in length, and eight and
forty cubits in breadth: it held also four thousand ores, four hundred
mariners, and three thousand soldiers, so that in the said vessel were seven
thousand and four hundred persons: a report incredible, if truth and good
testimony did not confirm the same. I must needs confess therefore, that the
ancient vessels far exceeded ours for capacity: nevertheless if you regard
the form, and the assurance from peril of the sea, and therewithal the
strength and nimblenesse of such as are made in our time, you shall easily
find that ours are of more value than theirs: for as the greatest vessel is
not always the safest, so that of most huge capacity is not always the
aptest to shift and brook the seas: as might be seen by the great Henry, the
hugest vessel that ever England framed in our times. Neither were the ships of
old like unto ours in mould and manner of building above the water (for of low
galleys in our seas we make small account) nor so full of ease within, since
time has engendered more skill in the wrights, and brought all things to more
perfection than they had in the beginning. And now to come unto our purpose at
the first intended.

The navy of England may be divided into three sorts, of which the one
serves for the wars, the other for burden, and the third for fishermen,
which get their living by fishing on the sea. How many of the first order are
maintained within the realm, it passes my cunning to express; yet since it
may be parted into the navy royal and common fleet, I think good to speak
of those that belong unto the prince, and so much the rather, for that their
number is certain and well known to very many. Certes there is no prince in
Europe that has a more beautiful or gallant sort of ships than the queens
majesty of England at this present, and those generally are of such exceeding
force, that two of them being well appointed and furnished as they ought, will
not let to encounter with three or four of those of other countries, and
either bowge them or put them to flight, if they may not bring them home.

Neither are the moulds of any foreign barks so conveniently made, to brook
so well one sea as another lieng upon the shore in any part of the continent
as those of England. And therefore the common report that strangers make of our
ships amongst themselves is daily confirmed to be true, which is, that for
strength, assurance, nimblenesse and swiftness of sailing, there are no
vessels in the world to be compared with ours. And all these are committed to
the regiment and safe custody of the admerall, who is so called (as some
imagine) of the Greek word Almiras a capiteine on the sea, for so says
Zonaras in Basilio Macedone and Basilio Porphyriogenito, though other fetch it
from Ad mare the Latin words, another sort from Amyras the Saracen magistrate,
or from some French deriuation: but these things are not for this place, and
therefore I pass them over. The queens highness has at this present (which
is the four and twentieth of her reign) already made and furnished, to the
number of four or five and twenty great ships, which lie for the most part in
Gillingham rode, beside three galleys, of whose particular names and furnitures
(so far forth as I can come by them) it shall not be amiss to make report at
this time.

The names of so many ships belonging to her majesty as I could come by at
this present.
The Bonaduenture. Elizabeth Jonas. White Bear. Philip and Marie. Triumph.
Bull. Tiger. Antlope. Hope. Lion. Victory. Marie Rose. Foresight. Swift suit.
Aid. Handmaid. Dread naught. Swallow. Genet. Bark of Bullen. Achates. Falcon.
George. Revenge.
It is said, that as kings and princes have in the young days of the world,
and long since framed themselves to erect every year a city in some one
Anchialus and Tharsus in one day) so her grace does yearly build one ship
or other to the better defense of her frontiers from the enemy. But as of this
report I have no assured certeintie, so it shall suffice to have said so much
of these things: yet this I think worthy further to be added, that if they
should all be driven to service at one instant) which God forbid) she should
have a power by sea of about

Beside these her grace has other in hand also, of whom hereafter as their
turns do come about, I will not let to leave some further remembrance. She
has likewise three notable galleys: the Speed well, the Try right, and the
Black gallie, with the fight whereof and rest of the navy royal, it is
incredible to say how greatly her grace is delighted: and not Solinus
speaks, so far as I remember: nevertheless it may be gathered by his words,
The Britons fasted all the while they were at the sea in these ships.
how the upper parts of them above the water only were framed of the said
wickers, and that the Britons did use to fast all the whiles they went to the
sea in them: but whether it were done for policy or superstition, as yet I
do not read.

In the beginning of the Saxons regiment we had some ships also, but as their
number and mould was little and nothing to the purpose, so Egbert was the first
prince that ever thoroughly began to know this necessity of a navy, and use
the service thereof in the defense of his country. After him also other
princes, as Alfred, Edgar, Ethelred, etc: endeavored more and more to store
themselves at the full with ships of all quantities, but chiefly Edgar, for he
provided a navy of 1600 alias 3600 sail, which he divided into four parts,
and sent them to abide upon four sundry coasts of the land to keep the same
from pirates. Next unto him (and worthy to be remembered) is Etheldred, who made
a law, that every man holding 310 hidelands, should find a ship furnished to
serve him in the wars. Howbeit, and as I said before, when all their name was
at the greatest, it was not comparable for force and sure building, to that
which afterward the Normans provided; neither that of the Normans any thing
like to the same that is to be seen now in these our days. For the iourneies
also of our ships, you shall understand, that a well builded vessel will run
or sail commonly three hundred leagues or nine hundred miles in a week, or
peradventure some will go 2200 leagues in six weeks and an half. And suerlie,
if their lading be ready against they come thither, there be of them that will
be here, at the west Indies, and home again in twelve or thirteen weeks from
Colchester; although the said Indies be eight hundred leagues from the cape or
point of Cornwall, as I have been informed. This also I understand by report
of some travelers, that if any of our vessels happen to make a voyage to
Hispaniola or new Spain, called in time past Quinquezia and Haiti, and lies
between the north tropike and the equator, after they have once touched at the
Canaries, (which are eight days sailing or two hundred and fifty leages from
S. Lucas de Barameda in Spain) they will be there in thirty or forty dates,
and home again in Cornwall in other eight weeks, which is a goodly matter,
beside the safety and quietness in

Of faires and markets. Chap. 18.
THere are (as I take it) few great towns in England, that have not their
weekelie markets, one or more granted

I could (if I would) exemplify in many, but I will touch no one
particularly, since it is rare to see in any country town (as I said) the
assise of bread well kept according to the statute. And yet if any country
baker happen to come in among them on Romulus and Remus suck their she woolfe
or sheepheards wife Lupa, with such eger and sharp devotion, as these men hale
at hufcap, till they be red as cocks, and little wiser than their combs. But
how am I fallen from the market into the alehouse? In returning therefore unto
my purpose, I find that in corn great abuse is daily suffered, to the great
prejudice of the town and country, especially the poor artificer and
householder, which tilleth no land, but laboring all the week to buie a
bushel or two of grain on the market day, can there have none for his money:
because bodgers, loders, and common carriers of corn do not only buie up
all, but give above the price, to be served of great quantities. Shall I go
any further? Well I will say yet a little more, and somewhat by mine own
experience.

At Michaelmasse time poor men must make money of their grain, that they may
pay their rents. So long then as the poor man has to sell, rich men will
bring out none, but rather buie up that which the poor bring, under pretense
of seed corn, or alteration of grain, although they bring none of their own,
because one wheat often sown without change of seed, will soon decaie and be
converted into darnell. For this cause therefore they must needs buie in the
markets, though they be twenty miles off and where they be not known,
promising there if they happen to be espied (which God wot is very seldom) to
send so much to their next market, to be performed I wot not when.

If this shift serve not (neither does the fox use always one tracke for
fear of a snare) they will compound with some one of the town where the
market is holder, who for a pot of hufcap or merry go down, will not let to
buie it for them, and that in his own name. Or else they wage one poor man or
other, Suborned bodgers.
to become a bodger, and thereto get him a license upon some forged surmise,
which being done, they will feed him with money, to buie for them till he has
filled their lofts, and then if he can do any good for himself so it is, if
not, they will give him somewhat for his pains at this time, and reserve him
for an other ^eare. How many of the like prouiders stumble upon Bodgers
licenced.
blind creekes at the sea coast, I wot not well, but that some have so done
and yet do under other men's wings, the case is too too plain. But who dare
find fault with them, when they have once a license? yea though it be but to
serve a mean gentleman's house with corn, who has cast up all his tillage,
because he boasts how he can buie his grain in the market better cheap,
than he can sow his land, as the rich grasier often does also upon the like
devise, because grasing requires a smaller household and less attendance and
charge. If any man come to buie a bushel or two for his expenses unto the
market cross, answer is made; Forsooth here was one even now that bad me money
for it, and I hope he will have it. And to say the truth, these bodgers are
fair chapmen, for there are no more words with them, but Let me see it, what
shall I give you, knit it up, I will have it, go carry it to such a chamber,
and if you bring in twenty seem more in the week day to such an Inn or
sollar where I lay my corn, I will have it and give you pence or more in
every bushel for six weeks day of payment than an other will. Thus the
bodgers bear away all, so that the poor artificer and labourer cannot make
his provision in the markets, since they will hardly now adays sell by the
bushel, nor break their measure; and so much the rather, for that the buier
will look (as they sai^) for so much over measure in a bushel as the bodger
will do in a quarter. Naie the poor man cannot off get any of the farmer at
home, because he provides altogether to serve the bodger, or has an hope
grounded upon a greedy and insatiable desire of gain, that the sale will be
better in the market: so that he must give two pence or a groate more in a
bushel at his house than the last market craved, or else go without it, and
sleep with an hungry belly. Of the common carriage of corn over unto the
parts beyond the seas I speak not; or at the leastwise if I should, I could
not touch it alone but needs must join other provision withal, whereby not
only our friends abroad, but also many of our adversaries and countriemen
the papists are abundantly relieved (as the report goes) but since I see it
not, I will not so trust

By this time the poor occupier has all sold his crop for need of money,
being ready peradventure to buie again yer long. And now is the whole sale of
corn in the great occupiers hands, who hitherto have threshed little or none
of their own, but bought up of other men, so much as they could come by.
Henceforth also they begin to sell, not by the quarter or load at the first,
for marring the market, but by the bushel or

It is a world also to see how most places of the realm are pestered with
purueiours, who take up eggs, butter, cheese, pigs, capons, hens, chickens,
hogs, bakon, etc: in one market, under pretense of their commissions, and
suffer their wives to sell the same in another, or to pulters of London. If
these chapmen be absent but two or three market days, then we may perfectly
see these wares to be more reasonably sold, and thereunto the crosses
sufficiently furnished of all things. In like sort, since the number of
bu^termen have so much increased, and since they travel in such wife, that
they come to men's houses for their butter faster than they can make it; it is
almost incredible to see how the price of butter is augmented: whereas when the
owners were enforced to bring it to the market towns, and fewer of these
butter buiers were stirring, our butter was scarslie worth eighteen pence the
gallon, that now is worth three shillings four pence, and perhaps five
shillings. Whereby also I gather that the maintenance of a superfluous number of
dealers in most trades, ^illage always excepted, is one of the greatest causes
why the prices of things become excessive: for one of them do co^monlie use to
out bid another. And whilst our country commodities are commonly bought and
sold at our private houses, I never look to see this enormitie redressed; or
the markets well furnished.

I could say more but this is even enough, and more peradventure than I shall
be well thanked for: yet true it is though some think it no trespass. This
moreover is to be lamented, that one general measure is not in use throughout
all England, but every market town has in manner a several bushel, and the
lesser it be, the more sellers it draws to resort unto the same. Such also is
the covetousness of many clearkes of the market, that in taking view of
measures, they will alwaie so provide, that one and the same bushel shall be
either too big or too little at their next coming, and yet not depart without
a fee at the first: so that what by their mending at one time and empairing the
same at another, the country is greatly charged, and few just measures to be
had in any steed. It is often found likewise, that diverse unconscionable
dealers have one measure to sell by, and another to buie withal, the like is
also in weights and yet all sealed and bronded. Wherefore it were very good
that these two were reduced unto one standard, that is, one bushel, one pound,
one quarter, one hundred, one tale, one number: so should things in time fall
into better order, and fewer causes of contention be moved in this land. Of
the complaint of such poor tenants as pay rent corn unto their landlords, I
speak not, who are often dealt withal very hardly. For beside that in the
measuring of ten quarters, for the most part they lose one through the
iniquity of the bushel (such is the greediness of the appointed receivers
thereof) fault is found also with the goodness and cleanness of the grain.
Whereby some piece of money must needs pass unto their purses to stop their
mouths withal, or else my lord will not like of the corn; Thou art worthy to
loose thy lease, etc. Or if it be cheaper in the market, than the rate allowed
for it is in their rents, then must they pay money and no corn, which is no
small extremity. And thereby we may see how each one of us indeuoureth to
fleece and eat up another.

Another thing there is in our markets worthy to be looked unto, and that is
the recariage of grain from the same into losts and sollars, of which before I
gave some intimation: wherefore if it were ordered, that every seller should
make his market by an hour, or else the bailie or clearke of the said market
to make sale thereof according to his discretion, without liberty to the farmer
to fet up their corn in houses and chambers, I am persuaded that the prices of
our grain would soon be abated. Again, if it were enacted that each one
should keep his next market with his grain, and not to run six, eight, ten,
fourteen, or twenty miles from home to sell his corn, where he does find
the highest price, and thereby leaves his neighbors unfurnished, I do not
think but that our markets would be far better served

To conclude therefore, in our markets all things are to be sold necessary for
man's use, and there is I. Stow, and the reports of others.

Of Parkes and Warrens. Chap. 19.
IN every shire of England there is great plenty of parkes, whereof some here
and there, to wit, welnere to the number of two hundred Pliny deemeth them to
be wild, Martial is also of the same opinion, where he says, Imbelles damae
quid nisi praeda sumus? And so in time past the like controversy was about
bees, which the lawiers call Feras, tit. de acquirendo rerum dominio, and lib.
2. instit. But Pliny attempting to decide the quarrel calls them Medias
interferas and placidas aues. But whither am I so suddenly digressed? In
returning therefore unto our parks, I find also the circuit of these enclosures
in like manner contain often times a walk of four or five miles, and
sometimes more or less. Whereby it is to be seen what store of ground is
employed upon that vain commodity, which brings no manner of gain or
profit to the owner, since they commonly give away their flesh, never taking
penie for the same, except the ordinary fee and parts of the dear given unto
the keeper by a custom, who beside three shillings four pence, or five
shillings in money, has the skin, head, vmbles, chine, and shoulders: whereby
he that has the warrant for an whole bucke, has in the end little more than
half, which in my judgment is scarcely equal dealing; for venison in
England is neither bought nor sold, as in other countries, but maintained
only for the pleasure of the owner and his friends. Albeit I heard of late of
one ancient lady, which makes a great gain by selling yeerelie her husbands
venison to the cooks (as another of no less name will not stick to ride to
the market to see her butter sold) but not performed without infinite scoffs
and mockes, even of the poorest pezzants of the country, who think them as
odious matters in ladies and women of such countenance to sell their venison
and their butter, as for an earl to feel his oxen, sheep, and lambs, whether
they be ready for the butcher or not, or to sell his wool unto the clothier,
or to keep a tan-house, or deal with such like affairs as belong not to men
of honor, but rather to farmers, or grasiers; for which such, if there be any
may well be noted (and not unjustly) to degenerate from true nobility, and
betake themselves to husbandry. And even the same enormitie took place
sometime among the Romans, and entered so far as into the very senate, of
whom some one had two or three ships going upon the sea, pretending provision
for their houses; but in truth following the trades of merchandise, till a law
was made which did inhibit and restrain them. Liuie also tells of another
law which passed likewise against the senators by Claudius the tribune, and
help only of C. Flaminius, that no senator, or he that had been father to
any senator should possess any ship or vessel above the capacity of three
hundred amphoras, which was supposed sufficient for the carriage and recariage
of such necessities as should apperteine unto his house: since further trading
with merchandises and commodities does delcare but a base and covetous mind,
not altogether void of envy, that Tillage and mankind diminished by parkes.
and to be had among them, beside a more copious procreation of humane issue,
whereby the realm was always

Certes if it be not one curse of the Lord, to have our country converted in
such sort from the furniture of mankind, The decaie of the people is the
destruction of a kingdom.
into the walks and shrowds of wild beasts, I know not what is any. How many
families also these great and small games (for so most keepers call them) have
eaten up and are likely hereafter to devour, some men may conjecture,

King Henry the eight, one of the noblest princes that ever reigned in this
land, lamented often that

Privileges and faculties also are another great cause of the ruin of a common
wealth, and diminution of mankind: for whereas law and nature does permit all
men to live in their best manner, and whatsoever trade they be exercised in,
there comes some privilege or other in the way, which cutteth them off from
this or that trade, whereby they must needs shift soil, and seek unto other
countries. By these also the greatest commodities are brought into the hands of
few, who imbase, corrupt, and yet raise the prices of things at their own
pleasures. Example of this last I can give also in books, which (after the
first impression of any one book) are for the most part very negligentlie
handled: whereas if another might print it so well as the first, then would men
strive which of them should do it best; and so it falls out in all other
trades. It is an easy matter to prove that England was never less furnished
with people than at this present; for it the old records of every manor be
sought, and search made to find what tenements are fallen, either down, or
into the lords hands, or brought and united together by other men: it will
soon appear, that in some one manor seuenteen, eighteen, or twenty houses
are shrunk. I know what I say by mine own experience: notwithstanding that
some one cotage be here and there erected of late, which is to little purpose.
Of cities and towns either utterly decayed, or more than a quarter or half
diminished, though some one be a little increased here and there; of towns
pulled down for sheepe-walks, and no more but the lordships now standing in
them, beside those that William Rufus pulled down in his time; I could say
somewhat: but then I should swerve yet further from my purpose, whereunto I now
return.

We had no parkes left in England at the coming of the Normans, who added
this calamity also to the servitude of our nation, making men of the best sort
furthermore to become keepers of their game, whilst they lived in the mean
time upon the spoil of their revenues, and daily overthrew towns, villages,
and an infinite sort of families, for the maintenance of their venerie. Neither
was any park supposed in these times to be stately enough, that contained
not at the least eight or ten hidelands, that is, so many hundred acres or
families (or as they have been always called in some places of the realm
carrucats or cartwares) of which one was sufficient in old time to maintain an
honest yeoman.

King John traveling on a time northwards, to wit 1209 to war upon the king
of Scots, because he had married his daughter to the earl of Bullen without
his consent: in his return overthrew a great number of parkes and warrens, of
which some belonged to his barons, but the greatest part to the abbats and
prelates of the clergy. For hearing (as he traveled) by complaint of the
country, how these enclosures were the chief decaie of men, and of tillage in
the land, he swear with an oath that he would not suffer wild beasts to feed
upon the fat of his soil, and see the people perish for want of ability to
procure and buie them food that should defend the realm. Howbeit, this act of
his was so ill taken by the religious and their adherents, that they inuerted
his intent herein to another end; affirming most slanderouslie how he did it
rather of purpose to spoil the corn and grass of the commons and catholics
that held against him of both estates, and by so doing to impouerish and bring
the north part of the realm to destruction, because they refused to go with
him into Scotland. If the said prince were alive in these days, wherein Andrew
Board says there are more parks in England than in all Europe (over which he
traveled in his own person) and saw how much ground they consume, I think he
would either double his oaths, or lay the most of them open that tillage might
be better looked unto. But this I hope shall not need in time, for the owners
of a great fort of them begin now to smell out, that such parcels might be
employed to their more gain, and therefore some of them do grow to be
disparked.

Next of all we have the frank chase, which takes something both of park and
forest, and is given either by the kings grant or prescription. Walie or
Waldie, because they frequented the woods, and there made sacrifice among the
oaks and thickets. So that if my conjecture in this behalf be any thing at
all, the aforesaid town takes denomination of of Wald and end, as if I should
say, The end of the wooddie soil; for being once out of that parish, the
champaine is at hand. Or it may be that it is so called of Wald and dene: for I
have read it written in old evidences Waldaene, with a diphthong. And to say
truth, Dene is the old Saxon word for a vale or low bottom, as Dune or Don is
for an hill or hilly soil. Certes if it be so, then Walden takes her name of
the woodie vale, in which it sometime stood. But the first deriuation likes me
better, and the highest part of the town is called also Chipping Walden, of
the Saxon word gipping, which signifies Leaning or hanging, Gipping, of going
up to any place.
and may very well be applied thereunto, since the whole town hangs as it
were upon the sides of two hills, whereof the lesser runs quite through the
midst of the same. I might here for further confirmation of these things
bring in mention of the Wald of Kent: but this may suffice for the use of the
word Wald, which now differs much from Would. For as that signifies a woodie
soil, so this betokens a soil without wood, or plain champaine country,
without any store of trees, as may be seen in Cotswold, Porkewold, etc.
Beside this I could say more of our forests, and the aforesaid enclosures
also, and therein to prove by the book of forest law, that the whole county
of Lancaster has likewise been forest heretofore. Also how William the
Bastard made a law, that whosoever did take any wild beast within the kings
forest should lose an ear; as Henry the first did punish them either by life
or lim: which ordinance was confirmed by Henry the second and his peers at
Woodstocke, whereupon great trouble insued under king John and Henry the
third, as appears by the chronicles: but it shall suffice to have said so
much as is set down already.

Howbeit, that I may restore one antiquity to light, which has hitherto lien
as it were raked up in the embers of oblivion, I will give out those laws that
Canutus made for his forest: whereby many things shall be disclosed
concerning the same (whereof peradventure some lawiers have no knowledge) and
diverse other notes gathered touching the ancient estate of the realm not to
be found in other. But before I deal with the great charter (which as you may
perceive, is in many places imperfect by reason of corruption, and want also
of congruitie, crept in by length of time, not by me to be restored) I will not
another brief law, which he made in the first year of his reign at
Winchester, afterward inserted into these his later constitutions, canon 32,
and begins thus in his own Saxon tongue; Ic will that elc one, etc: I will
and grant tha each one shall be worthy of such venerie as he by hunting can
take either in the plains or in the woods, within his own fee or dominion;
but each man shall abstain from my venerie in every place, where I will that
my beasts shall have firm peace and quietness, upon pain to forfet so much
as a man may forfet. Hitherto the statute made by the aforesaid Canutus, which
was afterward confirmed by king Edward surnamed the Confessor; and ratified by
the Bastard in the fourth year of his reign. Now follows the great charter
it self in such rude order and Latin as I find it word for word, and which I
would gladly have turned into English, if it might have sounded to any
benefit of the unskillful and unlearned.

Incipiunt constitutiones Canuti regis de foresta.
HAe sunt sanctiones de foresta, quas ego Canutus rex cum consilio primariorum

1 Sint iam deinceps quatuor ex liberalioribus hominibus, Pegened.
qui habent saluas suas debitas consuetudines (quos Angli Pegened appellant) in
qualibet regni mei prouincia constituti, ad iustitiam distribuedam, vna cum
poena merita and materijs fornestae cuncto populo meo, tam Anglis quam Danis

2 Sint sub quolibet horum, quatuor ex mediocribus hominibus (quos Angli
Lespegend Lespegend. Nunc sort Tringald.
nuncupant, Dani vero young men vocant) locati, qui ^uram and onus tum viridis
tum veneris suscipiant.

3 In administranda autem iustitia nullatenus volo vt tales se intromittant:
mediocresque tales post ferarum curam susceptam, pro liberalibus semper
Ealdermen.
quos Dani Ealdermen appellant.

4 Sub horum iterum quolibet sint duo minutorum hominum, Tineman.
quos Tineman Angli dicunt, hi nocturnam curam and veneris and viridis tum
seruilia opera subibunt.

5 Si talis minutus seruus fuerit, tam cito quam inforesta nostra locabitur,
liber esto, omnesque hos ex sumptibus nostris manutenebimus.

6 Habeat ettam quilibet primariorum quolibet Michni Angli appellant, Michni.
duos equos, vnum cum sella, alterum sine sella, vnum gladium, quinque lanceas,
vnum cuspidem, vnum scutum, and ducentos solidos argenti.

7 Mediocrium quilibet vnum equum, vnam lanceam, vnum scutum, and 60 solidos
argenti.

8 Minutorum quilibet, vnum lanceam, vnam arcubalistam, and 15 solidos argenti.

9 Sint omnes tam primarij, quam mediocres, and minuti, immunes, liberi, and
quieti ab omnibus prouincialibus Hundred laghe Hundred law.
Angli dicunt, and ab omnibus armorum oneribus, quod Warscot Angli dicunt,
Warscot.
and forincesis querelis.

10 Sint mediocrium and minutorum causae, and carum correctiones, tam
criminalium quam ciuilium per prouidam sapientiam and rationem primariorum
iudicatae and decisae: primariorum vero enormia si quae fuerint (ne scelus
aliquod remaneat

11 Habeant hi quatuor vnam regalem potestatem (salve semper nobis nostra
praesentia) quaterque in anno generales forestae demonstrationes and viridis
and veneris forisfactiones, Muchehunt.
quas Muchehunt dicunt, vbi teneant omnes, calumniam de materia aliqua tangente
forestam, eantque ad triplex iudicium, Ofgangfordell. Purgatio ignis, triplex
ordali^.
quod Angli Ofgangfordell dicunt. Ita autem acquiratur illued triplex iudicium,
Accipiat secura quinque, and sit ipse sextus, and sic iurando acquirat triplex
iudicium, aut triplex iuramentum. Sed purgatio ignis nullatenus admittatur,
nisi vbi nuda veritas nequit aliter inuestigari.

12 Liberalis autem homo. Pegen.
1. Pegen, modo crimen suum non sit inter maiora, habeat fidelem hominem qui
possit pro eo iurare iur amentum. Forathe.
1. Forathe: si autem non habet, ipsemet iuret, nec pardonetur ei aliquod
iuramentum.

13 Si aduena vel peregrinus qui de longinquo venerit sit calumniatus de
foresta, and talis est sua inopia vt no possit habere plegium ad primam
calumniam, qualem * nullus Anglus iudicare potest: tunc subeat captionem regis,
and ibi expectet quousque vadat ad iudicium ferri and aquae: attamen si quis
extraneo aut peregrino de long venienti * * sibi ipsi nocet si aliquod
iudicium iudicauerint.

14 Quicunque coram primarios homines meos forestae in falso testimonio
steterit and victus fuerit, non sit dignus imposterum stare aut portare
testimonium, quia legalitatem suam perdidit, and pro culpa soluat regi december
solidos, quos Dani vocant Halfehang, alias Helfehang.
Halsehang.

15 Si quis vim aliquam primarijs forestae meae intulerit, si liberalis sit
amittat libertatem and omnia sua, si villanus abscindatur dextra.

16 Si alteruter iterum peccauerit, reus sit mortis.

17 Si quis autem contra primarium pugnauerit, in plito emendet secundum
pretium sui ipsius, quod Angli Pere and pite dicunt, Pere and Pite.
dicunt, and soluat primario quadraginta solidos.

18 Si pacem quis fregerit ante mediocres forestae, quod dicunt Gethbrech,
Gethbrech.
emendet regi december solidis.

19 Si quis mediocrium aliquem cum ira percusserit, emendetur prout interfectio
ferae regalis mihi emendari solet.

20 Si quis delinquens in foresta nostra capietur, poenas luet secundum modum
and genus delicti.

21 Poena and forisfactio non vna eademque erit liberalis (quem Dani Ealderman
Ealderman.
vocant) and illiberalis: domini and serui: noti and ignoti: nec vna eademque
erit causarum tum ciuilium tum criminalium, ferarum forestae, and ferarum
regalium: viridis and veneris tractatio: nam crimen veneris ab antiquo inter
maiora and non immerito numerabatur viridis vero (fractione chaceae nostrae
regalis excepta) ita pusillum and exiguum est, quod vix earespicit nostra
constitutio: qui in hoc tamen deliquerit, sit criminis forestae reus.

22 Si liber aliquis feram forestae ad cursum impulerit, sieve casu, sieve
praehabita voluntate, ita vt cursu celeri cogatur fera anhelare, december solidis
regi emendet, si illiberalis dupliciter emendet, si seruus careat corio.

23 Si vero harum aliquot interfecerit, soluat dupliciter and persoluat, sitque
pretij sui reus contra regem.

24 Sed si regalem feram, Staggon or Stagge.
quam Angli Staggon appellant, alteruter coegerit anhelare, alter per vnum
annum, alter per duos careat liberate naturali: si vero seruus, pro vtlegato
habeatur, quem Angli Frendlesman vocant. Frendlesman.


25 Si vero occiderit, amittat liber scutum libertatis, si sit illiberalis
careat liberate, si seruus vita.

26 Episcopi, abbates, and barons mei non calumniabuntur pro venatione, si non
regales feras occiderint: and siregales, restabunt rei regi pro libito suo,
sine certa emendatione.

27 Sunt aliae (praeter feras forestae) bestlae, quae dum inter septa and sepes
forestae continentur, emendationi fubiacent: quales sunt capreoli, lepores, and
cuniculi. Sunt and alia quam plurima animalia, quae qua^quam infra septa
forestae viuunt, and oneri and curae mediocrium subiacent forestae, tamen
nequaqua^ censeri possunt, Bubali olim in Anglia.
qualia sunt bubali, vaccae, and similia. Vulpes and lupi, nec forestae nec
veneris habentur, and proinde eorum interfectio nulli emendationi subiacet. Si
tamen infra limits occiduntur,

28 Bosco nec subbosco nostro sine licentia primariorum forestae nemo manum,
apponat, quod si quis fecerit reus sit fractionis regalis chaceae.

29 Si quis vero ilicem aut arbore^ aliquam, quae victum feris suppeditat
sciderit, Ilices aliquando in Brita^nia nisi intelligatur de quercu.
praeter fractionem regalis chaceae, emendet regi viginti solidis.

30 Volo vt monis liber homo pro libito suo habeat

31 Nullus mediocris habebit nec custodiet canes, Greihounds.
quos Angli Greihounds appellant. Liberali vero, dum genuiscissio eorum facta
fuerit coram primario forestae licebit, aut sine genuiscissione dune remoti
sunt a limitibus forestae per december miliaria: quando vero propius venerint,
emendet

32 Velteres vero quos Langeran appellant, quia manifest constat in ijs nihil
esse periculi, Uelter Langeran.
cuilibet licebit sine genuiscissione, eos custodire. Idem de canibus quos
Ramhundt vocant. Ramhundt.


33 Quodsi casu inauspicato huiusmodi canes rabidi fiant and vbique vaga^tur,
negligentia dominorum, Pretium hominis mediocris.
emendetur regi pro illicitis, etc. Quodsi intra septa forestae reperiantur,
talis exquiratur herus, and emendet secundum pretium hominis mediocris, quod
secundum legem Werinorum. 1. Churingorum, est ducentorum solidorum.

34 Si canis rabidus momorderit feram, tunc emendet secundum pretiu^ hominis
liberalis, quod est duodecies solidis centum. Pretium liberi hominis.
Si vero fera regalis morsa fuerit, reus sit maximi criminis.

And these are the constitutions of Canutus concerning the forest, very
barbarously translated by those that took the same in hand. Howbeit as I find
it so I set it down, without any alteration of my copy in any jot or tittle.

Of gardens and orchards. Chap. 19.
AFter such time as Calis was woone from the French, and that our countriemen
had learned to trade into diverse countries (whereby they grew rich) they began
to wax idle also, and thereupon not only left off their former painfulnesse
and frugalitie, but in like sort gave themselves to live in excess and
vanity, whereby many goodly commodities failed, and in short time were not
to be had amongst us. Such strangers also as dwelled here with us, perceiving
our sluggishnesse, and espieng that this idleness of ours might redound to
their great profit, forthwith employed their endeavors to bring in the supply
of such things as we lacked, continually from foreign countries; which yet more
augmented our idleness. For having all things at reasonable prices as we
supposed, by such means from them, we thought it mere madness to spend either
time or cost about the same here at home. And thus we became enemies to our
own welfare, as men that in those days reposed our felicity in following the
wars, wherewith we were often exercised both at home and other places. Besides
this, the natural desire that mankind has to esteem of things far sought,
because they be rare and costly, and the irksome contempt of things near
hand, for that they are common and plentiful, has borne no small swaie also
in this behalf amongst us. For hereby we have neglected our own good gifts of
God, growing here at home as vile and of no valor, and had every trifle and
toie in admiration that is brought hither from far countries, ascribing I wot
not what great forces and solemn estimation unto them, until they also have
waxen old, after which they have been so little regarded, if not more despised
amongst us than our own. Examples hereof I could set down many, and in many
things, but since my purpose is to deal to this time with gardens and orchards,
it shall suffice that I touch them only, and show our inconstancy in the
same, so far as shall seem and be convenient for my turn. I comprehend
therefore under the word garden, all such grounds as are wrought with the spade
by man's hand, for so the case requires. Of wine I have written already
elsewhere sufficiently, which commodity (as I have learned further, since
the penning of that book) has been very plentiful in this Island, not only
in the time of the Romans, but also since the conquest, as I have seen by
record: yet at this present have we none at all or else very little to speak
of growing in this Island: which I impute not unto the soil, but the negligence
of my countrymen. Such herbs, fruits, and roots also as grow yeerelie out of
the ground, of seed, have been very plentiful in this land, in the time of
the first Edward, and after his days: but in process of time they grew also
to be neglected, so that from Henry the fourth till the latter end of Henry
the seventh, and beginning of Henry the eight, there was little or no use of
them in England, but they remained either unknown, or supposed as food more
meet for hogs and savage beasts to feed upon than mankind. Whereas in my time
their use is not only resumed among the poor commons, I mean of melons,
pompions, gourds, cucumbers, radishes, skirets, parsneps, carrets, cabbages,
nauewes, turnips, and all kinds of salad herbs, but also fed upon as deintie
dishes at the tables of delicate merchants, gentlemen, and the nobility, who
make their provision yearly for new seeds out of strange countries, from
whence they have them abundantly. Neither do they now stay with such of
these fruits as are wholesome in their kinds, but adventure further upon such
as are very dangerous and hurtful, as the verangenes, mushroms, etc: as if
nature had ordained all for the belly, or that all things were to be eaten,
for whose mischiefous operation the Lord in some measure has given and
provided a remedy.

Hops in time past were plentiful in this land, afterward also their
maintenance did cease, and now being revived, where are any better to be
found? where any greater commodity to be raised by them? only poles are
accounted to be their greatest charge. But since men have learned of late to sow
ashen keys in ashyards by themselves, that inconvenience in short time will be
redressed. Madder has grown abundantly in this Island, but of long time
neglected, and now a little revived, and offers it self to prove no small
benefit unto our country, as many other things else, which are now fetched
from us; as we before time when we gave our selves to idleness, were glad to
have them other. If you look into our gardens annexed to our houses, how
woonderfullie is their beauty increased, not only with flowers, which
Colmella calls Terrena sydera, Pingit and in varios terrestria sydera flores,
and variety of curious and costly workmanship, but also with rare and
medicinable herbs sought up in the land within these forty years: so that
in comparison of this present, the ancient gardens were but dunghils and
laistowes to such as did possess them. How art also helps nature in the
daily coloring, dubling and enlarging the proportion of our flowers, it is
incredible to report: for so curious Salsa parilla, Mochoacan, etc: but I
forbear so to do, because I covet to be brief. And truly the estimation and
credit that we yield and give unto compound medicines made with foreign drugs,
is one great cause wherefore the full knowledge and use of our own simples
has been so long raked up in the imbers. And as this may be verified, so to be
one sound conclusion, for the greater number of simples that go unto any
compound medicine, the greater confusion is found therein, because the
qualities and operations of very few of the particulars are thoroughly known.
And even so our continual desire of strange drugs, whereby the physician and
apothecarie only has the benefit, is no small cause that the use of our
simples here at home does go to loss, and that we tread those herbs under
our feet, whose forces if we knew, and could apply them to our necessities, we
would honor and have in reverence as to their case behooves. Alas what have we
to do with such Arabian and Grecian stuff as is daily brought from those
parties, which lie in another clime? And therefore the bodies of such as dwell
there, are of another constitution, than ours are here at home? Certes they
grow not for us, but for the Arabians and Grecians. And albeit that they may
by skill be applied unto our benefit, yet to be more skillful in them than in
our own, is folly; and to use foreign wares when our own may serve the turn
is more folly; but to despise our own and magnify about measure the use of
them that are sought and brought from far, is most folly of all: for it
sauoureth of ignorance, or at the leastwise of negligence, and therefore
worthy of reproach.

Among the Indians, who have the most present cures for every disease, of
their own nation, there is small regard of compound medicines, and less of
foreign drugs, because they neither know them nor can use them, but work
woonders even with their own simples. With them also the difference of the
clime does show her full effect. For whereas they will heal one another in
short time with application of one simple, etc: if a Spaniard or Englishman
stand in need of their help, they are driven to have a longer space in their
cures, and now and then also to use some addition of two or three simples at
the most, whose forces unto them are thoroughly known, because their exercise
is only in their own, as men that never sought or heard what virtue was in
those that came from other countries. And even so did Marcus Cato the learned
Roman endeavor to deal in his cures in sundry diseases, wherein he not only
used such simples as were to be had in his own country, but also examined and
learned the forces of each of them, wherewith he dealt so diligently, that in
all his life time, he could atteine to the exact knowledge but of a few, and
thereto wrote of those most learnedlie, as would easily be seen, if those his
books were extant. For the space also of 600 years, the colewort only was a
medicine in Rome for all diseases, so that his virtues were thoroughlie known
in those parts.

In Plinies time the like affection to foreign drugs did rage among the Romans,
whereby their own did grow in contempt. Crieng out therefore of this extreme
folly, lib. 22. cap. 24, he speaks after this manner: Non placent remedia tam
long nascentia, non enim nobis gignuntur, immo ne illis quidem, alioquin non
venderent; siplacet etiam superstitionis gratia emantur, quoniam supplicamus,
etc. Salutem quidem sine his posse constare, vel obid probabimus, vt tanto
magis sui tandem pudeat. For my part I doubt not, if the use of outlandish
drugs had not blinded our physicians of England in times passed, but that the
virtues of our simples here at home would have been far better known, and so
well unto us, as those of India are to the practisioners of those parts, and
thereunto be found more profitable for us than the foreign either are or may
be. This also will I ad, that even those which are most common by reason of
their plenty, and most vile because of their abundance, are not without some
universal and especial efficacy, if it were known, for our benefit: since
God in nature has so disposed his creatures, that the most needful are the
most plentiful, and serving for such general diseases as our constitution
most commonly is affected withal. Great thanks therefore be given unto the
physicians of our age and country, who not only endeavor to search out the
use of such simples as our soil does yield and bring forth, but also to
procure such as grow elsewhere, upon purpose so to acquaint them with our
clime, that they in time through some alteration received from the nature of
the earth, may likewise turn to our benefit and commodity, and be used as
our own.

The chief workman, or as I may call him the Carolus Clusius, the noble
herbarist, whose industry has woonderfullie stirred them up unto this good
act. For albeit that Matthiolus, Rembert I* obell, and other have traveled
very far in this behalf, yet none has come near to Clusius, much less
gone further in the finding and true descriptions of such herbs as of late are
brought to light. I doubt not but if this man were in England but one seven
years, he would reveal a number of herbs growing with us, whereof neither

And even as it fares with our gardens, so does it

We have in like sort such workmen as are not only excellent in graffing the
natural fruits, but also in their artificial mixtures, whereby one tree
brings forth sundry fruits, and one and the same fruit of diverse colors
and tastes, dallieng as it were with nature and her course, as if her whole
trade were perfectly known unto them: of hard fruits Hesperides were in times
past so greatly accounted of because of their delicacie: yet if it were
possible to have such an equal judge, as by certain knowledge of both were
able to pronounce upon them, I doubt not but he would give the price unto the
gardens of our days, and generally over all Europe, in comparison of those
times, wherein the old exceeded. Pliny and other speak of a rose that had
three score leaves growing upon one button: but if I should tell of one which
bare a triple number unto that proportion, I know I shall not be believed, and
no great matter though I were not, howbeit, such a one was to be seen in
Antwarpe 1585, as I have heard, and I know who might have had a slip or stallon
thereof, if he would have ventured ten pounds upon the growth the same, which
should have been but a tickle hazard, and therefore better undone, as I did
always imagine. For mine own part, good reader, let me boast a little of my
garden, which is but small, and the whole Area thereof little above 300 foot of
ground, and yet, such has been my good luck in purchase of the variety of
simples, that notwithstanding my small ability, there are very near three
hundred of one sort and other contained therein, no one of them being common or
usually to be had. If therefore my little plot, void of all cost in keeping
be so well furnished, what shall we think of those of Hampton court, None
such, Tibaults, Cobham garden, and sundry other apperteining to diverse
citizens of London, whom I could particularly name, if I should not seem to
offend them by such my demeanor and dealing?

Of waters generally. Chap. 21.
THere is no one commod^tie in England, whereof I can make less report than of
our waters. For albeit our soil abound with water in all places, and that in
the most ample manner: yet can I not find by some experience that almost any
one of our rivers has such od and rare qualities as diverse of the many are
said to be endued withal. Vitruuius writes of a well in Paphlagonia, whose
water seems as it were mixed with wine, and adds thereto that diverse
become drunk by superfluous taking of the same. The like force is found In
amne Licesio, a river of Thracia, upon whose banks a man shall hardly miss
to find some traveler or other sleeping for drunkenness, by drinking of that
liquor. Near also unto Ephesus are certain wells, which taste like sharp
vinegar, and therefore are much esteemed of by such as are sick and evil at
ease in those parts. At Hieropolis is a spring of such force (as Strabo) says)
that the water thereof mixed with certain herbs of choice, does color wool
with such a gloss, that the die thereof contendeth with skarlet, murreie, and
purple, and often overcomes the same. The Cydims in Tarsus of Cilicia, is of
such virtue, that who so batheth himself therein, shall find great case of the
gowt that runs over all his ioints. In one of the fortunate Pomponius the
Cosmographer) are two springs, one of the which brings immoderate laughter to
him that drinks thereof, the other sadness and restraint of that effect,
whereby the last is taken to be a sovereign medicine against the other, to the
great admiration of such as have beholden it. At Susis in Persia there is a
spring, which makes him that drinks down any of the water, to cast all his
teeth: but if he only wash his mouth withal, it makes them fast, and his
mouth to be very healthful. Caieranus Strabo) that the water and air of a
region may qualify the courage of some men, but none can make them
effeminate, nor any other thing because of such corruption in them, sooner
than superfluous wealth, and inconstancy of living and behavior, which is a
bane unto all natures, lib. 4. All which, with many other not now coming to
Johannes du Choul does make in his description of Pilats lake, In monte Pilati
in Gallia, or Boccatius of the Scaphigi^lo in the Appenine hills, or Foelix
Malliolus of Pila^s lake In monte fracto (where, Iacobus de Voragino bishop of
Gene, and Ioachimus Vadianus in Pompon* Melam do also make mention) since I
take them but for fables, and far unworthy that any good man should stain
his paper with such frivolous matters as are reported of them, being devised at
the first by Satanas the father of lies, for the holding of the ignorant and
credulous in their superstitions and errors. Such also is the tale that goes
of Wenefrids well, and nothing inferior to that of Mercury near to port
Caperia in Rome, wherein such as went by would dip branches of baie, and
sprinkle the same upon themselves: and so many as stood about them, calling
upon Mercury, and craving pardon for their sins, as if that ceremony had
been of force unto forgiveness and remission of their trespasses. And so it
appears partly by Cicero, who (being a man neither thinking well of their
own gods nor liking of the augures) does write in his first De legibus
(except my memory fail me) aspersione aquae labem tolli corpoream, and
castimoniam corporis praestari, which makes me to think further, that they
thought it equal with our late holie-water, wherewith it may be compared. I
might further also (if I would) make relation of diverse wells, which have
wrought many miracles in time of superstition, as S. Butolphs well in
Hadstocke, S. Germans well at Falkeburne, Holy well at S. Albones and London,
and sundry other in other places: but as their virtues are now found out to be
but baits to draw men and women unto them, either for gain unto the places
where they were, or satisfaction of the lewd disposition of such as hunted
after other gain, so it shall suffice to have touched them far off. Only this
will I ad, that we have no hurtful waters, no not unto our sheep, though it
please Cardan to avouch otherwise; for our waters are not the causes but the
signs of their infections when they drink, as I elsewhere have noted in the
chapter of cattle, as also that we have a spring near Saffron Walden, and not
far from the house of the lord Audleie, which is of such force, that it
loses the body of him that drinks thereof in very genelt manner, and beside
that is very delectable and pleasant to be taken, as I have found by
experience. I hear also of two wells near London, of which the one is very
excellent water, the other will bear no soap, and yet so situat that the one
is hard by the other. And thus much of waters.

Of woods and marshes. Chap. 22.
IT should seem by ancient Great abundance of wood sometime in England.
records, and the testimony of sundry authors, that the whole countries of
Lhoegres and Cambria, now England and Wales, have sometimes been very well
replenished with great woods and groves, although at this time the said
commodity be not a little decayed in both, and in such wise that a man shall
often ride ten or twenty miles in each of them, and find very little or rather
none at all, except it be near unto towns, gentlemen's houses, and villages,
where the inhabitants have planted a few elmes, oaks, hasels, or ashes about
their dwellings for their defense from the rough winds, and keeping of the
stormy weather from annoiance of the same. This scarsitie at the first grew
(as it is thought) either by the industry of man, for maintenance of tillage
(as we understand the like to be done of late by the Desire of much wealth and
ease abateth manhood, and overthrows a manly courage.
which is a sore alteration. In those the courage of the owner was a sufficient
defense to keep the house in safety, but now the assurance of the timber,
double doors, locks and bolts must defend the man from robbing. Now have we
many chimnies and yet our tenderlings complain of rheumes, catarhs and poses.
Then had we none but reredosses, and our heads did never ache. For as the smoke
in those days

Of the curiousness of these piles I speak not, since our workmen are grown
generally to such an excellency of devise in the frames now made, that they
far pass the finest of the old. And such is their husbandry in dealing with
their timber, that the same stuff which in time past was rejected as crooked,
unprofitable, and to no use but the fire, does now come in the fronts and best
part of the work. Whereby the common saying is likewise in these days verified
in our mansion houses, which erst was said only of the timber for ships,
that no oak can grow so crooked but it falls out to some use, and that
necessary in the navy. It is a world to see moreover how diverse men being
bent to building, and having a delectable vein in spending of their goods by
that trade, do daily imagine new devises of their own to guide their
workmen withal, and those more curious and excellent always than the former.
In the proceeding also of their works, how they set up, how they pull down,
how they enlarge, how they restreine, how they ad to, how they take from,
whereby their heads are never idle, their purses never shut, nor their books
of account never made perfect. Destruunt, aedificant, mutant quadrata rotundis
says the poet. So that if a man should well consider of all the od crotchets
in such a builders brain, he would think his head to have even enough of
those affairs only, and therefore judge that he should not well be able to
deal in any other. But such commonly are our workemasters, that they have
beside this vein before mentioned, either great charge of merchandises, little
less business in the commonwealth, or finally no small dealings otherwise
incident unto them, whereby gain arises, and some trouble often among withal.
Which causes me to wonder not a little how they can play the parts so well of
so many sundry men, whereas diverse other of greater forecast in appearance
can seldom shift well or thrive in any one of them. But to our purpose.

We have many woods, forests, and parks, which cherish trees abundantly,
although in the woodland countries there is almost no hedge that has not some
store of the greatest sort, beside infinite numbers of hedgerowes, groves, and
springs, that are maintained of purpose for the building and provision of such
owners as do possess the same. Howbeit as every soil does not bear all
kinds of wood, so there is not any wood, park, hedgerow, grove, or forest,
that is not mixed with diverse, as oak, ash, hasell, hawthorne, birch, beech,
hardbeame, hull, sorfe, quicken aspe, poplers, wild cherie, and such like,
whereof oak has always the pre-eminence, as most meet for building and the
navy, whereunto it is reserved. This tree brings forth also a profitable
kind of mast, whereby such as dwell near unto the aforesaid places do cherish
and bring up innumerable herds of swine. In time of plenty of this mast, our
red and fallow dear will not let to participat thereof with our hogs, more
than our nete: yea our common pultrie also if they may come unto them. But as
this abundance does prove very pernicious unto the first, so these eggs which
these latter do bring forth (beside blackenesse in color and bitterness of
taste) have not seldom been found to breed diverse diseases unto such persons
as have eaten of the same. The like have I seen where hens do feed upon the
tender blades of garlike.
I might ad in like sort the profit ensuing by the bark of this wood, whereof
our tanners have great use in dressing of leather, and which they buie yearly
in May by the fadame, as I have often seen: but it shall not need at this time
to enter into any such discourse, only this I wis^^ that ^ur sole and upper
leathering may have their due time, and not be hasted on by extraordinary
slights, as with ash, bark, etc. Whereby as I grant that it se^meth outwardly
to be very thick and well done: so if you respect the sadness thereof, it
does prove in the end to be very hollow and not able to hold out water.
Nevertheless we have good laws for redress of this enormitie, but it comes
to pass in these as in the execution of most penal statutes. For the gains
to be gotten by the same being given to one or two hungry and unthrifty
persons, they make a show of great reformation at the first, and for a little
while, till ^hey find that following of suit in law against the offenders is
somewhat too chargeable and tedious. This therefore perceived, they give over
the law, and fall to the admission of gifts and rewards to wink at things
past, and when they have once gone over their ground with this kind of tillage,
then do they tender licenses, and offer large dispensations unto him that
shall ask the same, thereby to do what him lists in his trade for an
yearly pension, whereby the bribour now grows to some certain revenues,
and the tanner to so great liberty

Of elm we have great store in every high way and elsewhere, yet have I not
seen thereof any together in woods or forests, but where they have been
first planted and then suffered to spread at their own wills. Yet have I
known great woods of beech and hasell in many places, especially in
Barkeshire,

Ash comes up every where of it self, and with every kind of wood. And as
we have very great plenty and no less use of these in our husbandry, so are
we not without the plane, the vgh, the sorfe, the chestnut, the line, the
black cherrie, and such like. And although that we enjoy them not in so great
plenty now in most places, as in times past, or the other before remembered: yet
have we sufficient of

The fur, frankincense, and pine, we do not altogether want, especially the
fur, whereof we have some store in Chatleie moore in Darbishire, Shropshire,
Andernesse, and a moss near Manchester, not far from Leircesters house:
although that in time past not only all Lancastershire, but a great part of
the coast between Chester and the Solme were well stored. As for the
frankincense and pine, they have been planted only in colleges and
cloisters, by the clergy and religious heretofore. Wherefore (in mine
opinion) we may rather say that we want them altogether: for except they grew
naturally, and not by force, I see no cause why they should be accounted for
parcel of our commodities. We have also the aspe, whereof our fletchers make
their arrows. The several kinds of poplars of our turners have great use for
bolles, treies, troughs, dishes, etc. Also the alder, whose bark is not
unprofitable to die black withal, and therefore much used by our country
wives in coloring their knit hosen. I might here take occasion to speak of
the great sales yeerelie made of wood, whereby an infinite quantity has bin
destroyed within these few years: but I give over to travel in this behalf.
Howbeit thus much I dare affirm, that if woods go so fast to decaie in the
next hundred year of Grace, as they have done and are like to do in this,
sometimes for increase of sheepwalks, and some maintenance of prodigality and
pomp (for I have known a well burnished gentleman This gentleman caught such
an heat with this sore load that he was feign to go to Rome for physic, yet
it could not save his life, but he must needs die homewards.
that has borne threescore at once in one pair of galigascons to show his
strength and bravery) it is to be feared that the fennie bote, broom, turffe,
gall, heath, firze, brakes, whinnes, ling, dies, hassacks, flags, straw, sedge,
reed, rush, and also seacole will be good merchandise even in the city of
London, whereunto some of then even now have gotten ready passage, and taken
up their innes in the greatest merchants parlours. A man would think that our
laws were able enough to make sufficient provision for the redress of this
error and enormitie likely to ensue. But such is the nature of our
countriemen, that as many laws are made, so they will keep none; or if they
be urged to make answer, they will rather seek some crooked construction of
them to the increase of their private gain, than yield themselves to be guided
by the same for a common wealth and profit to their country. So that in the
end whatsoever the law says we will have our wills, whereby the wholesome
ordinances of the prince are contemned, the travel of the nobility and
counselors as it were derided, the common wealth impouerished, and a few
only enriched by this perverse dealing. Thus many thousand persons do
suffer hinderance by this their lewd behauior. Hereby the wholesome laws of the
prince are often defrauded, and the good meaning magistrate in consultation about
the common wealth utterly neglected. I would wish that I might live no longer
than to see four things in this land reformed, that is: the want of discipline
in the church: the covetous dealing of most of our merchants in the preferment
of the commodities of other countries, and hinderance of their own: the
holding of faires and markets upon the sundaie to be abolished and referred to
the wednesdaies: and that every man, in whatsoever part of the champaine soil
enioieth forty acres of land, and upwards, after that rate, either by free
deed, copy hold, or fee farm, might plant one acre of word, or sow the same
with oak mast, hasell, beech, and sufficient provision be made that it may be
cherished and kept. But I fear me that I should then live too long, and so
long, that I should either be weary of the world, or the world of me; and yet
they are not such things but they may easily be brought to pass.

Certes every small occasion in my time is enough to cut down a great wood,
and every trifle suffices to lay infinite acres of corn ground unto pasture.
As for the taking down of houses, a small fine will bear out a great many.
Would to God we might once take example of the Romans, who in restreint of
superfluous grasing, made an exact limitation, how many head of cattle each
estate might keep, and what numbers of acres should suffice for that and other
purposes. Neither was wood ever better cherished or mansion houses maintained,
than by their laws and statutes. Such also was their care in the maintenance
of navigations, that it was a great part of the charge of their consuls,
yeerelie to view and look unto the hills whereon great timber did grow, least
their unnecessary faults for the satisfaction of the private owner, and his
covetous mind might prove a prejudice unto the common wealth, in the
hinderance of sufficient stuff for the furniture of their navy. Certes the
like hereof is Suetonius writes of the consulship of Bibulus and Caesar. As for
the wood that Ancus Martius dedicated toward the maintenance of the common
navy, I pass it over, as having elsewhere remembered it unto another end. But
what do I mean to speak of these, since my purpose is only to talk of our
own woods? Well, take this then for a final conclusion in woods, that beside
some countries are already driven to sell their wood by the pound, which is an
heavy

Marises and fennie bogges we have many in England, Marises and tennes.
though not now so many as some of the old Roman writers do specify, but more
in Wales, if you

Of baths and hot wells. Chap. 23.
AS almighty GOD has in most plentiful manner bestowed infinite, and those
very notable benefits upon this I Will of Britain, whereby it is not a little
enriched: so in hot and natural baths (whereof we have diverse in sundry
places) it manifestly appears that he has not forgotten England. There are
sundry baths therefore to be found in this realm, of which the first is
called saint Uinconts, the second Halliewell; both being places (in my opinion)
more obscure than the other two, and yet not seldom sought unto by such as
stand in need. For albeit the fame of their forces be not so generally spread,
yet in some cases they are thought to be nothing inferior to the other, as
diverse have often affirmed by their own experience and trial. The third
place wherein hot baths are to be found is near unto Buxston, a town in
Darbishire, situat in the high Peke, not passing sixteen miles from
Manchester, or Markechesterford, and twenty from Darbie, where, about eight or
nine several wells are to be seen; of which three are counted to be most
excellent: but of all, the gratest is the hotest, void of corruption, and
compared (as Jones says) with those of Summersetshire, so cold indeed, as a
quart of boiling water would be made if five quartes of running water were
added thereunto; whereas on the other side, those of Bath likened unto these,
have such he at appropriated unto them, as a gallon of hot water has when a
quart of cold is mixed with the same. Hereupon the effect of this bath works
more temperatlie and pleasantly (as he writes) than the other. And albeit
that it makes not so great speed in cure of such as resort unto it for help:
yet it deals more effectually and commodiouslie than those in
Summersetshire, and infer withal less grievous accidents in the restreining
of natural issues, strengthening the affeebled members, assisting the lively
forces, dispersing annoious oppilations, and qualifieng of sundry griefs, as
his experience has often confirmed. The like virtues have the other two, but not
in such measure: and therefore their operation is not so speedily perceived.
The fourth place where baths are, is kings Newnam, and within certain miles of
Couentrie, the water whereof (as it is thought) proceeds from some rock of
allume, and this I understand by diverse glouers which have been there, and
also by mine own experience, that it has a taste much like to allume liquor,
and yet nothing unpleasant nor unsavory in the drinking. There are three wells
in all, but the chiefest and best of them rises out of an hill, and runs
toward the south, and from thence infinite plenty of water without any notable
diminution of the spring is daily carried into sundry parties of the realm,
and droonke by such as have need to occupy the same. Of the other two, one is
reserved for such as be comely personages and void of loathsome diseases: the
other is left common for tag and rag; but cleansed daily as the other is,
whereby it becomes the wholesomer. Many diseases also are cured in the same,
as the palsy, dimnesse of sight, dullness of hearing, but especially the
collike and the stone, old sores and green wounds; so

The last place of our baths, is a city in Summersetshire, which takes his
name of the hot waters there to be seen and used. At the first it was called
Cair Bledud, and not Cair Bledune, as some would have it, for that is the old
name of the ancient castle at Malmesburie, which the Saxons named Yngleburne.
Ptolomie afterward called it Thermae, other Aquae solis, or Scamannia, or
Acmancester, but now it hight generally Bath in English, and under that name
it is likely to continue. The city of it self is a very ancient thing, no
doubt, as may yet appear by diverse notable antiquities ingraued in stone, to
be seen in the walls thereof; and first of all between the south gate and the
west, and betwixt the west gate and the north.

The first is the antike head of a man, made all flat, with great locks of
hair, much like to the coin that I have seen of Antius the Roman. The
second between the south and the north gate is an image, as I take it, of
Hercules, for he held in each hand a serpent, and so does this. Thirdly there
stands a man on foot with a sword in his one hand, and a buckler stretched
out in the other. There is also a branch that lies folded and wreathed into
circles, like to the wreath of Alcimedon. There are moreover two naked images,
whereof the one imbraceth the other, beside sundry antike heads, with ruffeled
hair, a greiehound running, and at his tail certain Roman letters, but so
defaced that no man living can read them at this present. There is moreover the
image of Lacaon, environed with two serpents, and an other inscription, and all
these between the south and the west gates, as I have said before.

Now, between the west and north gate are two inscriptions, of which some
words are evident to be read, the residue are clean defaced. There is also the
image of a naked man, and a stone in like sort, which has Cupidines and
labruscas intercurrentes, and a table having at each hand an image vined and
finely flourished both above and beneath. Finally (saving that I saw afterward
the image of a naked man grasping a serpent in each hand) there was an
inscription of a toome or burial, wherein these words did plainly appear,
Vixit annos xxx: but so defusedlie written, that letters stood for whole words,
and two or three letters combined into one. Certes I will not say whether
these were set into the places where they now stand by the gentiles, or brought
thither from other ruins of the town it self, and placed afterward in those
walls, in their necessary reparations. But howsoever the matter stands, this
is to be gathered by our histories, that Bladud first builded that city there,
and peradventure might also kindle the sulphurous veins, of purpose to burn
continually there in the honor of Minerua: by which occasion the springs
thereabout did in process of time become hot and not unprofitable, for sundry
kinds of diseases, Indeed the later pagans dreamed, that Minerua was the chief
goddess and gouernesse of these waters, because of the neerenesse of her
temple unto the same. Solinus adds furthermore, Chap. 25.
how that in her said temple, the fire which was continually kept, did never
consume into dead sparkles; but so soon as the embers thereof were cold, The
Pyritis is found almost in every vein of metal in great plenty,
diversities and color, and sometimes mixed with that metal of whose
excrements it consists.
they congealed into clots of hard stone: all which I take to be nothing else
than the effect of the aforesaid fire, of the sulphurous vein kindled in the
earth, from whence the waters do come. That these baths or waters are derived
from such, the marchasites, which the Grecians call Pyritis, per antonomasiam
(for being smit with the iron, it yields more sparks than any flint or
calcedonie, and therefore seems to deserve the name above the rest) and
besides these other stones mixed with some copper, and daily found upon the
mounteins thereabouts will bear sufficient witness, though I would write the
contrary. Doctor Turner also the father of English physic, and an excellent
divine, supposes that these springs do draw their forces from sulphur: or if
there be any other thing mingled withal, he gesseth that it should be salt
peter, because he found an obscure likelihood of the same, even in the cross
bath. But that they participate with any allume at all, he could never till
his dieng day be endured to believe. I might here (if I

There are two springs of water (as Leland says) in the west south west part
of the town, Cross bath.
whereof the biggest is called the cross bath, of a certain cross that was
erected sometime in the midst thereof.

The common bath, or as some call it, the hot bath, Common bath.
is two hundred foot, or thereabout from the cross bath, less in compass
within the wall than the other, and with only seven arches, wrought out of
the

The kings bath is very fair and large, King bath.
standing almost in the middle of the town, at the west end of the cathedral
church. It is compassed about with a very high stone wall, and the brims
thereof are mured round about, where in be two and thirty arches for men and
women to stand in separatlie, who being of the gentry for the most part, Hot
houses in some count^res little ^etter than brodels.
do resort thither indifferently, but not in such lascivious sort as unto
other baths and hot houses of the maine, whereof

As for the color of the water of all the bathes, it is most like to a deep
blew, Color of the water of the baths.
and reeketh much after the manner of a seething pot, Taste of the water.
commonly yielding somewhat a sulpherous taste, and very unpleasant savor.
The water also that runs from the two small baths, goes by a dike into the
Auon by west, and beneath the bridge: but the same that goes from the kings
bath turns a mill, and after goes into Auon above Bath bridge, where it
loses both force and taste, and is like unto the rest. In all the three baths a
man may evidently see how the water bubbleth up from the springs. Fall or
issue of the water.
This is also to be noted, that at certain times all entrances into them is
utterly prohibited, that is to say, at high noone, and midnight: for at those
two seasons, and a while before and after, they boil very fervently, and
become so hot that no man is able to endure their heat, or any while sustain
their force and vehement working. They purge themselves furthermore from all
such filth as the diseased do leave in each of them, wherefore we do forbear
the rash entrance into them at that time: and so much the rather, for that we
would not by contraction of any new diseases, depart more greeuouflie affected
than we came unto the city, which is in deed a thing that each one should
regard. For these causes therefore they are commonly shut up from half an
hour after ten of the clock in the forenoone, Hot good to enter into baths at
all seasons.
to half an hour after one in the afternoon, and likewise at midnight: at
which times the keeper of them resorteth to his charge, opens the gates, and
leaves (or should leave) free passage unto such as come unto them. Hitherto
Leland.

What cost of late has been bestowed upon these baths by diverse of the
nobility, gentry, communaltie, and clergy, it lies not in me to declare:
yet as I hear, they are not only very much repared and garnished with
sundry curious pieces of workmanship, partly touching their commendation,
and partly for the ease and benefit of such as resort unto them; but also
better ordered, clenlier kept, and more friendly provision made for such
poverty as daily repaireth thither. But notwithstanding all this, such is the
general estate of things in Bath, that the rich men may spend while they
will, and the poor beg whilst they list for their maintenance and diet so
long as they remain there: and yet I deny not but that there is very good
order in that city for all degrees. But where shall a man find any equal
regard of poor and rich, though God does give these his good gifts freely,
and unto both alike? I would here entreat further of the customs used in these
baths, what number of physicians daily attend upon those waters, for no man
(especially such as be able to interteine them) does enter into these baths
before he consult with the physician; also, what diet is to be observed, what
particular diseases are healed there, and to what end the comers thither do
drink oftimes of that medicinable liquor: but then I should exceed the limits
of a description. Wherefore I pass it over to others, hoping that some man yer
long will vouchsafe to perform that at large, which the famous clearke Doctor
Turner has briefly yet happily begun, touching the effects and working of
the same. For hitherto I do not know of many that have traveled in the
natures of those baths of our country, with any great commendation; much
less of any that has revealed them at the full for the benefit of our
nation, or commodity of strangers that resort unto the same.

Of antiquities found. Chap. 24.
Having taken some occasion to speak here and there in this treatise of
antiquities, it shall not be amiss to deal yet more in this chapter, with some
of them apart, and by themselves, whereby the secure authority of the Romans
over this Island may in some cases more manifestly appear. For such was their
possession of this Island on this side of the Tine, that they held not one or
two, or a few places only under their subjection, but all the whole country
from east to west, from the Tine to the British sea, so that there was no
region void of their governance: notwithstanding that until the death of
Lucius, and extinction of his issue, they did permit the successors of Lud and
Cimbalme to reign and rule amongst them, though under a

Before the coming of the Romans, there was a kind of copper money current
here in Britain, as Caesar confesses in the fifth book of his Commentaries,
but I find not of what manner it was. Hereto he Victoria, or Altera Roma
(because of the beauty and fine building of the same) I my self can partly
witness, that have seen, and often had of them, if better testimony were
wanting. The like I may affirm of Colchester, where those of Claudius,
Adrian, Traian, Vespasian, and other, are oftentimes plowed up, or found by
other means: also of Cantorburie, Andredeschester (now decayed) Rochester, then
called Durobreuum, Winchester, and diverse other beyond the Thames, which for
brevity sake I do pass over in silence. Only the chief of all and where
most are found in deed, is near unto Carleon and Cairgwent in Southwales,
about Kenchester, three miles above Hereford, Aldborow, Ancaster, Bramdon,
Dodington, where a spur and piece of a chain of gold were found in king
Henry the eight his days, besides much of the said Roman coin, Binchester,
Camalet, Lacocke upon Auon, and Lincoln, Dorchester, Warwike, and Chester,
where they are often had in very great abundance. It seems that Ancaster
has been a great thing, for many square and colored pauements, vaults, and
arches are yet found, and often laid open by such as dig and plow in the fields
about the same. And amongst these, one Uresbie or Roscbie, a plowman, did ere
up not long since a stone like a trough, covered with another stone, wherein
was great foison of the aforesaid coins. The like also was seen not yet
forty years agone about Grantham. But in king Henry the eight his days, an
husbandman had far better luck at Harleston, two miles from the aforesaid
place, where he found not only great plenty of this coin, but also an huge
brass pot, and therein a large helmet of pure gold, richly fretted with
pearl, and set with all kind of costly stones: he took up also chains much
like unto beads of silver, all which, as being (if a man might guess any
certeintie by their beauty) not likely to be long hidden, he presented to
queen Katharine then lieng at Peterborow, and therewithal a few ancient
rolls of parchment written long agone, though so defaced with mouldinesse, and
rotten for age, that no man could well hold them in his hand without falling
into pieces, much less read them by reason of their blindness.

In the beginning of the same kings days also at Killeie a man found as he
eared, an arming girdle, harnessed with pure gold, and a great massy pomell
with a cross hilt for a sword of the same metal, beside studs and harness
for spurs, and the huge long spurs of like stuff, whereof one doctor Ruthall
got a part into his hands. The boroughs or buries, whereof I spoke before, were
certain plots of ground, wherein the Roman soldiers did use to lie when they
kept in the open fields as chosen places, from whence they might have easy
access unto their adversaries, if any outrage were wrought or rebellion
moved against them. And as these were the usual aboads for those able legions
that served daily in the wars, so had they other certain habitations for the
old and forworne soldiers, whereby diverse cities grew in time to be
replenished with Roman colonies, as Cairleon, Colchester, Chester, and such
other, of which, Colchester bare the name of Colonia long time, and wherein A.
Plautius builded a temple unto the goodesse of Uictorie (after the departure of
Claudius) which Tacitus calls Aram sempiternae dominationis, a perpetual
monument of that our British servitude. But to return unto our borowes, they
were generally walled about with stone walls, and so large in compass that
some did contain thirty, forty, three score, or eighty acres of ground
within their limits: they had also diverse gates or ports unto each of them,
and of these not a few remain to be seen in our time, as one for example not
far from great Chesterford in Essex, near to the limits of Cambridgshire,
which I have often viewed, and wherein the compass of the very wall with the
places where the gates stood is easy to be discerned: the like also is to be
seen at a place within two miles south of Burton, called the Borow hills. In
these therefore and such like, and likewise at Euolsburg, Sterbirie a place
where en army has lien.
and eared up by a plough, but of such massy greatness, that it weighed
better than twenty ounces, as I have heard reported. But if I should stand in
these things until I had said all that might be spoken of them, both by
experience and testimony of Leland in his Commentaries of Britain, and the
report of diverse yet living, I might make a greater chapter than would be
either convenient or profitable to the reader: wherefore so much only shall
serve the turn for this time

Of the coins of England. Chap. 25.
THe Saxon coin before the conquest is in manner utterly Copper money.
who first brought it to three shillings and four pence, and afterward our
silver coin unto brass and copper Solidus, so I read more manifestly of
another which is the 48 part of a pound, and this also current among the Saxons
of our I Will, so well in gold as in silver, at such time as 240 of their penies
made up a just pound, five pence went to the shilling, and four shillings to
the ounce. But to proceed with my purpose. After the death of K. Henry, Edward
his son began to restore the aforesaid coin again unto fine silver: so
queen Marie his successor did continue his good purpose, notwithstanding that
in her time the Spanish money was very common in England, by reason of her
marriage with Philip king of Spain.

After her decease the lady Elizabeth her sister, Silver restored.
and now our most gracious queen, souereigue and princess, did finish the
matter wholly, utterly abolishing the use of copper and brazen coin, and
converting the same into guns and great ordinance, she restored sundry coins
of fine silver, as pieces of halfepenie farding, of a penie, of three half
pence, pieces of two pence, of three pence, of four pence (called the groat)
of six pence usually named the testone, and shilling of twelve pence, whereon
she has imprinted her own image, and emphaticall superscription. Our gold is
either old or new. Old gash.
The old is that which has remained since the time of king Edward the third,
or been coined by such other princes as have reigned since his deceasse,
without any abasing or diminution of the finesse of that metal. Thereof also
we have yet remaining, the riall, the George noble, the Henry riall, the
salut, the angel, and their smaller pieces, as halfes or quarters, though
these in my time are not so common to be seen. I have also beheld the
sovereign of twenty shillings, and the piece of shirtie shillings, I have
heard likewise of pieces of forty shillings, three pounds, five pounds, and
ten pounds. But since there were few of them coined, and those only at the
commandment of kings, yearly to bestow where their majesty's thought good in
lie of new years gifts and rewards: it is not requisite that I should remember
them here amongst our current moneys.

The new gold is taken for such as began to be coined in the latter days of
king Henry the eight, New gold.
at which time the finesse of the metal began to be very much alaied, and is
not likely to be restored for ought that I can see: and yet is it such as has
been coined since by his successors princes of this realm, in value and
goodness equal and not inferior to the coin and current gold of other
nations, where each one does covet chiefelie to gather up our old finer gold:
so that the angels, rials, and nobles, are more plentifully seen in France,
Italy, and Flanders, than they be by a great deal within the realm of
England, if you regard the paiments which they daily make in those kinds of
our coin. Our pieces now current are of ten shillings, five shillings, and two
shillings and six pence only: and those of sundry stamps and names, as half
souereigns (equal in weight with our current shilling, whereby that gold is
valued at ten times so much silver) quarters of souereigns (otherwise called
crowns) and half crowns: likewise angels, half angels, and quarters of
angels, or if there be any other, in good sooth I know them not, as one
scarcely acquainted with any silver at all, much less then (God it wot) with
any store of gold.

The first current shilling or silver pieces of twelve pence stamped within
memory, were coined by K. Henry the eight in the twentieth year of his
reign, and those of five shillings, and of two shillings and six pence, and
the half shilling by king Edward the sixth: but the od pieces above remembered
under the groat by our high and mighty princess queen Elizabeth, the name of
the groat, penie, two pence, half penie, and farding, in old time the greatest
silver moneys if you respect their denominations only, being more ancient
than that I can well discuss of the time of their beginnings. Yet thus much I
read, that king Edward the first in the eight year of his reign, did first
coin the penie and smallest pieces of silver roundwise, which before were
square, and wont to bear a double cross with a crest, in such sort that the
penie might easily be broken, either into halfes or quarters: by which shift
only the people came by small moneys, as half pence and fardings, that
otherwise were not stamped nor coined of set purpose.

Of foreign coins we have all the ducats, the single, double, and the double
double, the crusadoes, with the long cross and the short: the portigue, a
piece very solemnly kept of diverse, and yet often times abased with washing,
or absolutely counterfeited: and finally the French and Flemish crowns,
only current among us, so long as they hold weight. But

In old time we had sundry mints in England, and those commonly kept in
abbaies and religious Homer writes) who had (says he) rough pieces of brass
and iron in steed of coin, wherewith they purchased their wines.

The contents of the third book.
1 Of cattle kept for profit. 2 Of wild and tame fowls. 3 Of fish usually
taken up on our coasts. 4 Of savage beasts and vermines. 5 Of hawks and
ravenous fowls. 6 Of venomous beasts. 7 Of our English dogs and their
qualities. 8 Of our saffron, and the dressing thereof. 9 Of quarries of stone
for building. 10 Of sundry minerals. 11 Of metals to be had in our land. 12
Of precious stones. 13 Of salt made in England. 14 Of our account of time and
her parts. 15 Of principal faires and markets. 16 Of our innes and
thorowfaires.
Of cattle kept for profit. Chap. 1.
THere is no kind of tame cattle usually to be seen in these parts of the
world, whereof we have not some, and that great store in England; as horses,
oxen, sheep, goats, swine, and far surmounting the like in other countries, as
may be proved with ease. For where are oxen commonly more large of bone,
horses more decent and pleasant in pase, kine more commodious for the pale,
sheep more profitable for wool, swine more wholesome of flesh, and goats
more gainefull to their keepers, than here with us in England? But to speak of
them peculiarly, I suppose that our kine are so abundant in yield of milk,
whereof we make our butter and cheese, as the like any where else, and so apt
for the plough in diverse places as either our horses or oxen. And albeit they
now and then twin, yet herein they seem to come short of that commoditle which
is looked for in other countries, to wit, in that they bring forth most
commonly but one calfe at once. The gains also gotten by a cow (all charges
borne) has been valued at twenty shillings yearly: but now as land is
inhanced, this proportion of gain is much abated, and likely to decaie more
and more, if ground arise to be yet deerer, which God forbid, if it be his will
and pleasure. I heard of late of a cow in Warwikshire, belonging to Thomas
Bruer of Studleie, which in six years had sixteen calfes, that is, four at
Oxen.
In like manner our oxen are such as the like are not to be found in any
country of Europe, both for greatness of body and sweetness of flesh: or
else would not the Roman writers have preferred them before those of Liguria.
In most places our grasiers are now grown to be so cunning, that if they do
but see an ox or bullock, and come to the feeling of him, they will give a
guess at his weight, and how many score or Paeones, which quantity albeit
that it be given to our breed generally by nature, yet Athenaeus lib. 10. cap.
8.
For when they be very young, many grasiers will oftentimes anoint their
budding horns, or tender tips with honey, which mollifieth the natural
hardness of that substance, and thereby makes them to grow unto a notable
greatness. Certes, it is not strange in England, to see oxen whose horns have
the length of a yard or three foot between the tips, and they themselves
thereto so tall, as the height of a man of mean and indifferent stature is
scarce equal unto them.

Our horses moreover are high, Horses.
and although not

Such as serve for the saddle are commonly gelded, Geldings.
and now grown to be very dear among us, especially if they be well
colored, justly limmed, and have thereto an easy ambling pase. For our
countriemen, seeking their ease in every corner where it is to be had, delight
very much in these qualities, but chiefly in their excellent pases, which
besides that it is in manner peculiar unto horses of our soil, and not
hurtful to the rider or owner sitting on their backs: it is moreover very
pleasant and delectable in his ears, in that the noise of their well
proportioned pase does yield comfortable sound as he trauelleth by the way.
Yet is there no greater deceit used any where than among our horssekeepers,
horssecorsers, and hostelers: for such is the subtle knauerie of a great sort
of them (without exception of any of them be it spoken which deal for private
gain) that an honest meaning man shall have very good luck among them, if he
be not deceived by some false trick or other. There are certain notable
markets, wherein great plenty of horses and colts is bought and sold, and
whereunto such as have need resort yearly to buie and make their necessary
provision of them, as Rippon, Newport pond, Wolfpit, Harborow, and diverse
other. But as most drouers are very diligent to bring great store of these
unto those places; so many of them are too too lewd in abusing such as buie
them. For they have a custom to make them look fair to the eye, when they
come within two days iourneie of the market, to drive them till they sweat,
and for the space of eight or twelve hours, which being done they turn them
all over the backs into some water, where they stand for a season, and then go
forward with them to the place appointed, where they make sale of their
infected ware, and such as by this means do fall into many diseases and
maladies. Of such outlandish horses as are daily brought over unto us I
speak not, as the genet of Spain, the courser of Naples, the hobbie of
Ireland, the Flemish roile, and Scottish nag, because that further speech of
them comes not within the compass of this treatise, and for whose breed and
maintenance (especially of the greatest sort) king Henry the eight erected a
noble studderie and for a time had very good success with them, till the
officers waxing weary, procured a mixed brood of bastard races, whereby his
good purpose came to little effect. Sir Nicholas Arnold of late has bred the
best horses in England, and written of the manner of their production: would to
God his compass of ground were like to that of Pella in Syria, wherein the king
of that nation had usually a studderie of 30000 mares and 300 stallions, as
Strabo does remember Lib. 16. But to leave this, let us see what may be said
of sheep.

Our sheep are very excellent, Sheep.
since for sweetness of flesh they pass all other. And so much are our woolles
to be preferred before those of Milesia and other places, that if Jason had
known the value of them that are bred, and to be had in Britain, he would
never have gone to Colchis, to look for any there. For as Dionysius
Alexandrinus says in his De situ orbis, it may by spinning be made comparable
to the spiders web. What fools then are our countrymen, in that they seek to
bereue themselves of this commodity, by practicing daily how to transfer the
Sheep without horns.
yet after they have remained there a while, they cast there their heads, and
from thencefoorth they remain polled without any horns at all. Certes this
kind of cattle is more cherished in England, than stands well with the
commodity of the commons, or prosperity of diverse towns, whereof some are
wholly converted to their feeding: yet such a profitable sweetness is their
fleece, such necessity Virgil (following Varro) well espied Georg. 3. where he
says: Si tibi lanicium curae, primum aspera sylua,
Lappaequae tribulique absint, fuge pabula laeta.


Nevertheless the sheep of our country are often troubled with the rot (as
are our swine with the measels though never so generally) and many men are
now and then great losers by the same: but after the calamity is over, if they
can recover and keep their new stocks sound for seven years together, the
former loss will easily be recompensed with double commodity. Cardan writes
that our waters are hurtful to our sheep, howbeit this is but his conjecture:
for we know that our sheep are infected by going to the water, and take the
same as a sure and certain token that a rot has gotten hold of them, their
livers and lights being alredie distempered through excessive heat, which
inforceth them the rather to seek unto the water. Certes there is no parcel
of the maine, wherein a man shall generally find more fine and wholesome water
than in England; and therefore it is impossible that our sheep should decaie by
tasting of the same. Wherefore the hinderance by rot is rather to be ascribed to
the vnseasonablenes and moisture of the weather in summer, also their licking
in of mildewes, gossamire, rowtie fogs, and rank grass, full of superfluous
juice: but specially (I say) to over moist wether, whereby the continual
rain pearsing into their hollow felles, soketh forthwith into their flesh,
which brings them to their baines. Being also infected their first show of
sickness is their desire to drink, so that our waters are not unto them
Causa aegritudinis, but Signum morbi, what so ever Cardan do maintain to the
contrary. There are (and peradventure no small babes) which are grown to be
so good husbands, that they can make account of every ten kine to be cleerelie
worth twenty pounds in common and indifferent years, if the milk of five
sheep be daily added to the same. But as I wot not how true this surmise is,
because it is no part of my trade, so I am sure hereof, that some housewiues
can and do ad daily a less proportion of ewes milk unto the cheese of so
many kine, whereby their cheese does the longer abide moist, and eats more
brickle and mellow than otherwise it would.

Goats we have p^ntie, Goats.
and of sundry colors in the west parts of England; especially in and
toward Wales, and amongst the rockie hills, by whom the owners do reap no
small advantage: some also are cherished elsewhere in diverse steeds for the
benefit of such as are diseased with sundry maladies, unto whom (as I hear)
their milk, cheese, and bodies of their young kids are judged very
profitable, and therefore inquired for of many far and near. Certes I find
among the writers, that the milk of a goat is next in estimation to that of
the woman; for that it helps the stomach, remooueth oppilations and stoppings
of the liver, and loses the belly. Some place also next unto it the milk of
the ew: and thirdly that of the cow. But hereof I can show no reason; only
this I know, that ewes milk is fulsome, sweet, and such in taste, as except
such as are used unto it no man will gladly yield to live and feed withal.

As for swine, there is no place that has greater store, Swine.
nor more wholesome in eating, than are these here in England, which
nevertheless do never any good till they come to the table. Of these some we
eat green for porke, and other dried up into bakon to have it of more
continuance. Lard we make some though very little, because it is chargeable:
neither have we such use thereof as is to be seen in France and other
countries, since we do either bake our meat with sweet suet of beef or mutton,
and bast all our meat with sweet or salt butter, or suffer the fattest to bast
it self by leisure. In champaine countries they are kept by herds, and an
hogherd appointed to attend and wait upon them, who commonly gathers them
together by his noise and cry, and leads them forth to feed abroad in the
fields. In some places also women do scowre and wet their cloths with their
doong, as other do with hemlocks and netles: but such is the savor of the
cloths touched withal, that I cannot abide to wear them on my body, more
than such as are scowred with the reffuse soap, than the which (in mine
opinion) there is none more unkindly favor.

Of our tame bores we make brawne, Bores.
which is a kind of meat not usually known to strangers (as I take it)
otherwise would not the swart Rutters and French cooks, at the loss of Calis
(where they found great store of this provision almost in every house) have
attempted with ridiculous success to roast, bake, broile, and fry the same for
their masters, till they were better informed. I have heard moreover, how a
noble man of England, not long since, did send over an hogshead of brawne
ready sowsed to a catholic gentleman of France, who supposing it to be fish,
reserved it till Lent, at which time he did eat thereof with very great
frugalitie. Thereto he so well liked of the provision it self, that he wrote
over Brawne of the bore.
especially in gentlemen's houses (for the husbandmen and farmers never frank
them for their own Baked hog.
the rest is nothing so fat, and therefore it bears the name of sowse only,
and is commonly reserved for the serving man and hind, except it please the
owner to have any part thereof baked, which are then

Of wild and tame fowls. Chap. 2.
ORder requires that I speak somewhat of the fowls also of England, which I
may easily divide into the wild and tame: but alas such is my small skill in
fowls, that to say the truth, I can neither recite their numbers, nor well
distinguish one kind of them from another. Yet this I have by general
knowledge, that there is no nation under the sun, which has already in the
time of the year more plenty of wild foul than we, for so many kinds as our
Island does bring forth, and much more would have, if those of the higher
soil might be spared but one year or two, from the greedy engines of covetous
foulers, which set only for the pot and purse. Certes this enormitie bred
great trouble in K. John's days, insomuch that going in progress about the
tenth of his reign, he found little or no game wherewith to solace himself, or
exercise his falcons. Wherefore being at Bristow in the Christmas ensuing, be
restreined all manner of hawking or taking of wildfoule throughout England for a
season, whereby the land within few years was thoroughly replenished again.
But what stand I upon this impertinent discourse? Of such therefore as are bred
in our land, we have the crane, the bitter, the wild and tame swan, the
bustard, the herron, curlew, snite, wildgoose, wind or doterell, brant, lark,
plouer of both sorts, lapwing, teele, wigeon, mallard, sheldrake, shoueler,
pewet, seamew, barnacle, quail (who only with man are subject to the falling
sickness) the notte, the oliet or olife, the dunbird, woodcocke, partrich and
feasant, besides diverse other, whose names to me are utterly unknown, and
much more the taste of their flesh, wherewith I was never acquainted. But as
these serve not at all seasons, so in their several turns there is no plenty
of them wanting, whereby the tables of the nobility and gentry should seem
at any time furnished. But of all these the production of none is more
marvelous in my mind, than that of the barnacle, whose place of generation we
have sought often times so far as the Orchades, whereas peradventure we might
have found the same nearer home, and not only upon the coasts of Ireland, but
even in our own rivers. If I should say how either these or some such other
foul not much unlike unto them have bred of late times (for their place of
generation is not perpetual, but as opportunity serves, and the
circumstances do minister occasion) in the Thames mouth, I do not think that
many will believe me: yet such a thing has there been seen, where a kind of
foul had his beginning upon a short tender shrub standing near unto the
shore, from whence when their time came, they fell down, either into the salt
water and lived, or upon the dry land and perished, as Pena the French
herbarian has also noted in the very end of his herball. What I for mine own
part have seen here by experience, I have already so touched in the chapter
of Islands, that it should be but time spent in vain to repeat it here again.
Look therefore in the description of Man or Manaw for more of these barnacles,
as also in the eleventh chapter of the description of Scotland, and I do not
doubt

Our tame foul are such (for the most part) as are common both to us and to
other countries, as cocks, hens, geese, duckes, peacocks of Jude, pigeons, now
an hurtful foul by reason of their multitudes, and number of houses daily
erected for their increase

The golding of cocks, whereby capons are made, is an ancient practice brought
in of old time by the Romans when they dwelt here in this land: but the Cardan
speaking of the second sort, does affirm it to be a foul of excellent
beauty. I would likewise entreat of other fowls which we repute unclean, as
ravens, crows, pies, choughes, rookes, kites, iaies, ringtailes, starlings,
woodspikes, woodnawes, ravens, etc: but since they abound in all countries,
though peradventure most of all in England (by reason of our negligence) I
shall not need to spend any time in the rehearsal of them. Neither are our
crows and thoughs cherished of purpose to catch up the woormes that breed in
our soiles (as Polydor supposes) since there are no vplandish towns but have
(or should have) nets of their own in store to catch them withal. Sundry
acts of parliament are likewise made for their utter destruction, as also the
spoil of other ravenous fouls hurtful to pultrie, conies, lambs, and kids,
whose valuation of reward to him that kills them is after the head: a devise
brought from the Goths, who had the like ordinance for the destruction of their
white crows, and tale made by the beck, which killed both lambs and pigs. The
like order is taken with us for our vermines, as with them also for the rootage
out of their wild beasts, saving that they spared their greatest bears,
especially the white, whose skins are by custom and privilege reserved to
cover those planchers whereupon their priests do stand at Mass, least he
should take some unkind cold in such a long piece of work: and happy is the
man that may provide them for him, for he shall have pardon enough for that so
religious an act, to last if he will till doomes day do approach; and many
thousands after. Nothing therefore can be more unlikely to be true, than that
these noisome creatures are nourished amongst us to devour our worms, which
do not abound much more in England than elsewhere in other countries of the
maine. It may be that some look for a discourse also of our other fowls in
this place at my hand, as nightingales, thrushes, blackebirds, mauises,
ruddocks, redstarts or dunocks, larkes, tiuits, kingsfishers, buntings, turtles
white or graie, linets, bulfinshes, goldfinshes, washtailes, cheriecrackers,
yellowhamers, felfares, etc: but I should then spend more time upon them than
is convenient. Neither will I speak of our costly and curious auiaries daily
made for the better hearing of their melody, and observation of their natures:
but I cease also to go any further in these things, having (as I think) said
enough already of these that I have named.

Of fish usually taken upon our coasts. Cap. 3.
I Have in my description of waters, as occasion has served, entreated of the
names of some of the several fishes which are commonly to be found in our
rivers. Nevertheless as every water has a sundry mixture, and therefore is
not stored with every kind: so there is almost no house, even of the meanest
bowres, which have not one or mo ponds or holes made for reservation of water
vnstored with some of them, as with tench, carpe, breame, roch, dace, eeles, or
such like as will live and breed together. Certes it is not possible for me to
deliver the names of all such kinds of fishes as our rivers are found to bear:
yet least I should seem injurious to the reader, in not delivering so many of
them as have been brought to my knowledge, I will not let to set them down as
they do come to mind. Besides the salmons therefore, which are not to be taken
from the midst of September to the midst of November, and are very
plentiful in our greatest rivers, as their young store are not to be touched
from mid April unto Midsummer, we have the trout, barbell, graile, powt,
cheuin, pike, goodgeon,

I might finally tell you, how that in fennie rivers sides if you cut a
turffe, and lay it with the grass downwards, upon the earth, in such sort as
the water may touch it as it passes by, you shall have a brood of eeles, it
would seem a wonder; and yet

For mine own part I am greatly acquainted neither with the seasons, nor yet
with the fish it self: and therefore if I should take upon me to describe or
speak of either of them absolutely, I should enterprise more than I am able
to perform, and go in hand with a greater matter than I can well bring about.
It shall suffice therefore to declare what sorts of fishes I have most often
seen, to the end I may not altogether pass over this chapter without the
rehersall of something, although the whole sum of that which I have to say
be nothing indeed, if the performance of a full discourse hereof be any thing
hardly required.

Of fishes therefore as I find five sorts, the flat, the round, the long, the
legged and shelled: so the flat are divided into the smooth, scaled and tailed.
Of the first are the plaice, the but, the turbut, birt, floke or sea flounder,
dorreie, dab, etc. Of the second the soles, etc. Of the third, Flat fish.
our chaits, maidens, kingsons, flath and thornbacke, whereof the greater be
for the most part either dried and carried into other countries, or sodden,
sowsed, and eaten here at home, whilst the lesser be fried or buttered; soon
after they be taken as provision not to be kept long for fear of putrefaction.
Under the round kinds are commonly comprehended lumps, Round fish.
an ugly fish to sight, and yet very delicat in eating, if it be kindly
dressed: the whiting (an old waiter or seruitor in the court) the rochet, sea
breame, pirle, hake, sea trowt, gurnard, haddocke, cod, herring, pilchard,
sprat, and such like. And these are they whereof I have best knowledge, and be
commonly to be had in their times upon our coasts. Under this kind also are
all the great fish contained, as the seal, the dolphin, the porpoise, the
thirlepole, whale, and whatsoever is round of body be it never so great and
huge. Of the long sort are congers, eeles, garefish, and such other of that
form. Long fish.
Finally, of the legged kind we have not many, neither hane I seen any more
of this sort than the Polypus called in English the lobstar, Legged fish.
crafish or creuis, and the crab. As for the little crafishes they are not
taken in the sea, but plentifully in our fresh rivers in banks, and under
stones, where they keep themselves in most secret manner; and often by likeness
of color with the stones among which they lie, deceive even the skillful
takers of them, except they use great diligence. Carolus Stephanus in his
maison rustique, doubted whether these lobstars be fish or not; and in the end
concludes them to grow of the purgation of the water as does the frog, and
these also not to be eaten, for that they be strong and very hard of
digestion. But hereof let other determine further.

I might here speak of sundry other fishes now and then taken also upon our
coasts: but since my mind is only to touch either all such as are usually
gotten, or so many of them only as I can well rehearse Mutianus as Pliny
notes lib. 32, cap. 6. prefer the Cyzicene before them) and these we have in
like manner of diverse quantities, and no less variety also of our muskles and
cockles. We have in like sort no small store of great whelkes, scalops and
perewinkles, and each

Of savage beasts and vermines. Chap. 4.
IT is none of the least blessings

This is chiefly spoken of the south and southwest Woolfes.
who to the intent the whole country might once be cleansed and clearelie rid
of them, charged the conquered Welshmen (who were then pestered with these
ravenous creatures above measure) to pay him a yearly tribute of woolfes
skins, Tribute of woolfes skins.
to be gathered within the land. He appointed them thereto a certain number of
three hundred, with free liberty for their prince to hunt and pursue them over
all quarters of the realm; as our chronicles do report. Some there be which
write how Ludwall prince of Wales paid yearly to king Edgar this tribute of
three hundred woolfes, whose carcases being brought into Lhoegres, were buried
at Wolfpit in Cambridgeshire, and that by means thereof within the compass
and term of four years, none of those noisome creatures were left to be
heard of within Wales and England. Since this time also we read not that any
woolfe has been seen here that has been bred within the bounds and limits
of our country: howbeit there have been diverse brought over from beyond the
seas for greediness of gain, and to make money only by the gasing and gaping
of our people upon them, who covet often to see them being strange beasts in
their eyes, and sildome known (as I have said) in England.

Lions we have had very many in the north parts of Scotland, and those with
maines of no less force than they of Mauritania were sometimes reported to be;
but how and when they were destroyed as yet I do not read. They had in like
sort no less plenty of wild and cruel bulls, which the princes and their
nobility in the frugall time of the land did hunt, and follow for the trial
of their manhood, and by pursuit either on horssebacke or foot in armor;
notwithstanding that many times they were dangerously assailed by them. But
both these savage cretures are now not heard of, or at the least wise the later
scarcely known in the south parts. Howbeit it this I gather by their being
here, that our Island was not cut from the maine by the great deluge or flood of
Noah: but long after, otherwise the generation of those and other like
creatures could not have extended into our Islands. For, that any man would of
set purpose replenish the country with them for his pleasure and pastime in
hunting, I can in no wise believe.

Of foxes we have some but no great store, Foxes.
and also badgers in our sandy and light grounds, Badgers.
where woods, firzes, broom, and plenty of shrubs are to shroud them in, when
they be from their borrowes, and thereto warrens of conies at hand to feed upon
at will. Otherwise in claie, which we call the cledgie mould, we sildom hear
of any, because the moisture and toughness of the soil is such, as will not
suffer them to draw and make their borrowes deep. Certes if I may freely say
what I think, I suppose that these two kinds (I mean foxes and badgers) are
rather preserved by gentlemen to hunt and have pastime withal at their own
pleasures, than otherwise suffered to live, as not able to be destroyed because
of their great numbers. For such is the scantitie of them here in England, in
comparison of the plenty that is to be seen in other countries, and so
earnestly are the inhabitants bent to root them out, that except it had been
to bear thus with the recreations of their superiors in this behalf, it could
not otherwise have been chosen, but that they should have been utterly
destroyed by many years agone.

I might here entreat largely of other vermin, as the polcat, Beuers.
the miniuer, the weasell, stote, fulmart, squirrill, fitchew, and such like,
which Cardan includes under the word Mustela: also of the otter, and likewise
of the beuer, whose hinder feet and tail only are supposed to be fish. Certes
the tail of this beast is like unto a thin whetstone, as the body unto a
monsterous rat: the beast also it self is of such force in the teeth, that it
will gnaw an hole through a thick planke, or shere thorough a dubble billet in
a night; it loves also the stillest rivers: and it is given to them by nature,
to go by flocks unto the woods at hand, where they gather sticks wherewith to
build their nests, wherein their bodies lie dry above the water, although they
so provide most commonly, that they tails may hang within the same. It is
also reported that their said tails are a delicate dish, and their stones of
such medicinable force, that (as Vertomannus says) four men smelling unto
them each after other did bleed at the nose through their attractiue force,
proceeding from a vehement savor wherewith they are endued: there is greatest
plenty of them in Persia, chiefly about Balascham, from whence they and
their dried cods are brought into all quarters of the world, though not without
some forgerie by such as provide them. And of all these here remembered, as the
first sorts are plentiful in every wood and hedgerow: so these latter,
especially the Marterns.
a beast of the chase, although for number I worthily doubt whether that of
our beuers or marterns may be thought to be the less.

Other pernicious beasts we have not, except you repute the great plenty of
red and fallow dear, whose Stags.
Of these also the stag is accounted for the most noble game, the fallow dear
is the next, then the roe, whereof we have indifferent store; and last of all
the hare, not the least in estimation, because the hunting of that seely beast
is mother to all the terms, blasts, and artificial devises that hunters do
use. All which (notwithstanding our custom) are Franciscus Patritius says to
the contrary in his institution of a prince) than for men of courage to
follow, whose hunting should practice their arms in tasting of their manhood,
and dealing with such beasts as eftsoons will turn again, and offer them the
hardest rather than their horses feet, which many times may carry them with
dishonor from the field. Surely this noble kind of hunting only did great
princes frequent in times past, as it may yet appear by the histories of their
times, especially of Alexander, who at vacant times hunted the tiger, the
pard, the bore, and the bear, but most willingly lions, because of the
honorable estimation of that beast; insomuch that at one time he caused an od
or chosen lion (for force and beauty) to be let forth unto him hand to hand,
with whom he had much business, albeit that in the end he overthrew and
killed the beast. Hereunto beside that which we read of the usual hunting of
the princes and kings of Scotland, of the wild bull, woolfe, etc: the example
of king Henry the first of England, who disdaining (as he termed them) to
follow or pursue cowards, cherished of set purpose sundry kinds of wild
beasts, as bears, libards, ounces, lions at Woodstocke, and one or two other
places in England, which he walled about with hard stone, An. 1120, and where
he would often fight with some one of them hand to hand, when they did turn
again and make any raise upon him: but cheeflie he loved to hunt the lion and
the bore, which are both very dangerous exercises, especially that with the
lion, except some policy be found wherewith to trouble his eiesight in any
manner of wise. For though the bore be fierce, and has learned by nature to
harden his flesh and skin against the trees, to sharpen his teeth, and defile
himself with earth, thereby to prohibit the entrance of the weapons: yet is
the sport somewhat more easy, especially where two stand so near together,
that the one (if need be) may help and be a succor to the other. Neither
would he cease for all this to follow his pastime, either on horssebacke or on
foot, as occasion served, much like the yoonger Cyrus. I have read of wild
bores and bulls to have been about Blackleie near Manchester, whither the
said prince would now and then resort also for his solace in that behalf, as
also to come by those excellent falcons then bred thereabouts; but now they are
gone, especially the bulls, as I have said already.

King Henry the fifth in his beginning thought it a mere scofferie to pursue
any fallow dear with hounds or greihounds, but supposed himself always to
have done a sufficient act when he had tired them by his own travel on foot,
and so killed them with his hands in the vpshot of that exercise and end of his
recreation. Certes herein he resembled Polymnestor Milesius, of whom it is
written, how he ran so swiftly, that he would and did very often overtake
hares for his pleasure, which I can hardly believe: and therefore much less
that one Lidas did run so lightly and swiftly after like game, that as he
passed over the sand, he left not so much as the prints of his feet behind him.
And thus did very many in like sort with the heart (as I do read) but this I
think was very long agone, when men were far higher and swifter than they
are now: and yet I deny not, but rather grant willingly that the hunting of
the red dear is a right princely pastime. In diverse foreign countries they
cause their red and fallow dear to draw the plough, as we do our oxen and
horses. Hinds have been milked
In some places also they milk their hinds as we do here our kine and goats.
And the experience of this latter is noted by Giraldus Cambrensis to have been
seen and used in Wales, where he did eat cheese made of hinds milk, at such
time as Baldwine archbishop of Canturburie preached the croisad there, when
they were both lodged in a gentleman's house, whose wife of purpose kept a
deirie of the same. As for the plowing with vres (which I suppose to be
unlikely) because they are (in mine opinion) untameable and alkes a thing
commonly used in the east countries; here is no place to speak of it, since
we want these kind of beasts, neither is it my purpose to entreat at large of
other things than are to be seen in England. Wherefore I will omit to say
any more of wild and sanage beasts at this time, thinking my self to have
spoken already sufficiently of this matter, if not too much in the judgment
of the curious.

Of hawks and ravenous fowls. Chap. 5.
I Can not make (as yet) any just report how many sorts Brennus, as our
writers do remember. Certes this castle is no great thing, but yet a pile
sometime very strong and inaccessible for enemies, though now all ruinous as
many other are. It stands upon an hard rock, in the side whereof an eagle
breeds every year. This also is notable in the overthrow of her nest (a
thing often attempted) that he which goes thither must be sure of two large
baskets, and so provide

Of venomous beasts. Chap. 6.
IF I should go about to make any long discourse of venomous beasts or worms
bred in England, I should attempt more than occasion it self would readily
offer, since we have very few worms, but no beasts at all, that are thought by
their natural qualities to be either venomous or hurtful. First of all
therefore we have the adder (in our old Saxon tongue called an atter) which some
men do not rashly take to be the viper. Certes if it be so, then is it not
the viper author of the death of her Galenus de Theriaca ad Pisonem,
parents, as some histories affirm; and thereto Encelius a late writer in his
De re metallica, lib. 3. cap. 38. Plin. lib. 10. cap. 62.
where he makes mention of a she adder which he saw in Sala, whose womb (as
he says) was eaten out after a like fashion, her young ones lieng by her in
the sun shine, as if they had been earth worms. Nevertheless as he names
them Viperas, so he calls the male Echis, and the female Echidna, Echis is
the same serpent which his countrymen to this day call Ein atter, as I have
also noted before out of a Saxon dictionarie. For my part I am persuaded that
the slaughter of their parents is either not true at all, or not always
(although I doubt not but that nature has right well provided to inhibit their
superfluous increase by some means or other) and so much the rather am I led
hereunto, for that I gather by Nicander, that of all venomous worms the viper
only brings Vipera quasi viuipara: but of her own death he does not (to
my remembrance) say any thing. It is testified also by other in other words,
and to the like sense, that Echis id est vipera sola exserpentibus non ouased
animalia parit. And it may well be, for I remember that I have read in
Philostratus De vita Appollonij, Adder or viper.
how he saw a viper licking her young. I did see an adder once my self that
lay (as I thought) sleeping on a moulehill, out of whose mouth came eleven
young adders See Aristotle, Animalium lib. 5. cap. vltimo, and Theophrast. lib.
7. cap. 13.
So soon therefore as they saw my face, they ran again into the mouth of
their dam, whom I killed, and then found each of them shrouded in a distinct
cell or pannicle in her belly, much like unto a soft white iellie, which
makes me to be of the opinion that our adder is the viper indeed. The color
of their skin is for the most part like rustie iron or iron graie: but such as
be very old resemble Dracunculus minor) he speedily ministered and drunk in
strong ale, or else Snakes.
whereas our snakes are much longer; and seen sometimes to surmount a yard, or
three foot, although their poison be nothing so grievous and deadly as the
others. Our adders lie in winter under Aristotle also says of the viper Lib.
8. cap. 15. and in holes of the earth, rotten stubs of trees, and amongst the
dead leaves: but in the heat of the summer they come abroad, and lie either
round on beapes, or at length von some hillocke, or elsewhere in the grass.
They are found only in our woodland countries and highest grounds, where
sometimes (though seldom) a speckled stone called Echites, in dutch Ein atter
stein, is gotten out of their dried carcases, which diverse report to be good
against their poison. As for our snakes, which in Latin are properly named
Angues, Sol. cap. 40.
they commonly are seen in moors, Plin. lib. 37. cap. 11.
fens, lomie walls, and low bottoms.

And as we have greats store of todes where adders commonly are found, Todes.
so do frogs abound where snakes do keep their residence. Frogs.
We have also the sloworme, Sloworme.
which is black and graieth of color, and somewhat shorter than an adder. I
was at the killing once of one of them, and there by perceived that she was not
so called of any want of nimble motion, but rather of the contrary.
Nevertheless we have a blind worm to be found under logs in woods, and timber
that has lien long in a place, which some also do call (and upon better
ground) by the name of flow worms, and they are known easily by their more or
less variety of striped colors, drawn long ways from their heads, their
whole bodies little exceeding a foot in length, and yet is there venem deadly.
This also is not to be omitted, that now an then in our fennie countries, other
kinds of serpents are found of greater quantity than either our adder or our
snake: but as these are not ordinary and often to be seen, so I mean not to
entreat of them among our common annoiances. Neither have we the scorpion, a
plague of God sent not long since into Italy, and whose poison (as Apollodorus
says) is white, neither the tarantula or Neopolitane spider, whose poison
brings death, except music be at hand. Wherefore I suppose our country to be
the more happy (I mean in part) for that it is void of these two grievous
annoiances, wherewith other nations are plagued.

We have also efts, both of the land and water, Efts.
and likewise the noisome swifts, Swifts.
whereof to say any more it should be but loss of time, since they are well
known; and no region to my knowledge found to be void of many of them. Flies.
As for flies (since it shall not be amiss a little to touch them also) we have
none that can do hurt or hinderance naturally unto any: for whether they be
cut wasted, Cutwasted* whole bodied.
or whole bodied, Hornets.
they are void of poison and all venomous inclination. Waspes.
The cut or girt wasted (for so I English the word Insecta) are the hornets,
waspes, bees, and such like, whereof we have great store, and of which an
opinion is conceived, that the first do breed of the corruption of dead
horses, the second of pears and apples corrupted, and the last of kine and
oxen: which may be true, especially the first and latter in some parts of the
beast, and not their whole substances, as also in the second, since we have
never waspes, but when our fruit begins to wax ripe. In deed Virgil and
others speak of a generation of bees, by killing or smoothering of a bruised
bullock or calfe, and laieng his bowls or his flesh wrapped up in his hide in
a close house for a certain season; but how true it is hitherto I have not
tried. Yet sure I am of this, that no one living creature corrupts without
the production of another; as we may see by our selves, whose flesh does alter
into lice; and also in sheep for excessive numbers of flesh flies, if they be
suffered to lie vnburi^^ or uneaten by the dogs and swine, who often and
happily prevent such needless generations.

As concerning bees, I think it good to remember, that whereas some ancient
writers affirm it to be a commodity wanting in our Island, it is now found to
be nothing so. In old time peradventure we had none in deed, but in my days
there is such plenty of them in manner every where, that in some vplandish
towns* there are one hundred, or two hundred hiues of them, although the said
hiues are not so huge as those of the east country, but far less, as not able
to contain above one bushel of corn, or five pecks at the most. Pliny (a
man that of set purpose deliteth to write of woonders) speaking of honey notes
that in the north regions the hiues in his time were of such quantity, that
some one comb contained eight foot in length, and yet (as it should seem) he
speaks not of the greatest. For in Podolia, which is now subject to the king
of Poland, their hiues are so great and combs so abundant, that huge bores
ouerturning and falling into them, are drowned in the honey, before they can
recover and find the means to come out.

Our honey also is taken and reputed to be the best, Honey.
because it is harder, better wrought, and clenlier vesselled up, than that
which comes from beyond the sea, where they stamp and streine their combs,
bees, and young blowings altogether into the stuff, as I have been informed.
In use also of medicine our

As for the whole bodied, as the cantharides, and such venomous creatures of
the same kind, to be abundantly found in other countries, we hear not of
them: yet have we beetles, horseflies, turdbugs or Scarabei) the locust or the
grasshoppers (which to me do seem to be one thing, as I will anon declare) and
such like, whereof let other entreat that make an exercise in catching of
flies, but a far greater sport in offering them to spiders. As did Domitian
sometime, and an other prince yet living, who delited so much to see the iollie
combats betwixt a stout fly and an old spider, that diverse men have had great
rewards given them for their painful provision of flies made only for this
purpose. Some Ne musca quidem, uttered first by Vibius Priscus, who being asked
Nemusca quidem, whereby he noted his folly. There are some cockescombs here and
there in England, learning it abroad as men transregionate, which make account
also of this pastime, as of a notable matter, telling what a fight is seen
between them, if either of them be lusty and courageous in his kind. One also
has made a book of the spider and the fly, wherein he deals so
profoundly, and beyond all measure of skill, that neither he himself that
made it, neither any one that reads it, can reach unto the meaning thereof.
But if those iollie fellows in steed of the straw that they thrust into the
flies tale (a great injury no doubt to such a noble champion) would bestow the
cost to set a fools cap upon their own heads: then might they with more
security and less reprehension behold these notable battles.

Now as concerning the locust, I am led by diverse of my country, who (as they
say) were either in Germany, Italy, or Pannonia, 1542, when those nations
were greatly annoied with that kind of fly, and affirm very constantly,
that they saw none other creature than the grasshopper, during the time of that
annoiance, which was said to come to them from the Meotides. In most of our
translations also of the bible, the word Locusta is Englished a grasshopper, and
thereunto Leuit. 11. it is reputed among the clean food, otherwise John the
Baptist would never have lived with them in the wilderness. In Barbary,
Numidia, See Diodorus Siculus.
and sundry other places of Africa, as they have been, so are they eaten to
this day powdered in barels, and therefore the people of those parts are called
Acedophagi: nevertheless they shorten the life of the eaters by the production
at the last of an irksome and filthy disease. In India they are three foot
long, in Ethiopia much shorter, but in England seldom above an inch. As for
the cricket called in Latin Cicada, he has some likelihood, but not very
great, with the grasshopper, and therefore he is not to be brought in as an
vmpier in this case. Finally Matthiolus, and so many as describe the locust,
do set down none other form than that of our grasshopper, which makes me so
much the more to rest upon my former imagination, which is, that the locust and
grasshopper are one.

Of our English dogs and their qualities. Chap. 7.
THere is no country that may (as I take it) compare with ours, in number,
excellency, and diversity of dogs. And therefore if Polycrates of Samia were
now alive, he would not send to Epyro for such merchandise: but to his further
cost provide them out of Britain, as an ornament to his country, and piece of
husbandry for his common wealth, which he furnished of set purpose with
Molossian and Lacaonian dogs, as he did the same also with sheep out of Attica
and Miletum, gotes from Scyro and Naxus, swine out of Sicilia, and artificers
out of other places. Howbeit the learned doctor Caius in his Latin treatise
unto Gesner De canibus Anglicis, brings them all into three sorts: that is,
the gentle kind serving for game: the homely kind apt for sundry uses: and
the currish kind meet for many toies. For my part I can say no more of them
than he has done alredie. Wherefore I will here set down only a sum of
that which he has written of their names and natures, with the addition of an
example or two now lately had in experience, whereby the courages of our
mastiffes shall yet more largely appear. As for those of other countries I
have not to deal with them: neither care I to report out of Pliny, that dogs
were sometime killed in sacrifice, and sometime their whelps eaten as a
delicate dish, Lib. 29. cap. 4. Wherefore if any man be disposed to read of
them, let him resort to Pliny lib. 8. cap. 40. who (among other woonders)
tells of an army of two hundred dogs, which fetched a king of the Garamantes
out of captivity, mawgre the resistance of his adversaries: also to Cardan,
lib. 10. De animalibus, Aristotle, etc: who write maruels of them, but none
further from credit than Cardan, who is not afraid to compare some of them for
greatness with oxen, and some also for smalnesse unto the little field mouse.
Neither do I find any far writer of great antiquity, that makes mention of
our dogs, Starbo excepted, who says that the Galls did sometime buy up all our
mastiffes, to serve in the forewards of their battles, wherein they resembled
the Colophonians, Castabalenses of Calicute and Phenicia, of whom Pliny also
speaks, but they had them not from us.

The first sort therefore he divides either into such Strabo) are most apt for
game, and called Sagaces Bratius in his De venatione, and not unremembered by
Hercules Stroza in a like treatise, but above all other those of Britain,
where he says: -- and magna spectandi mole Britanni, also by Nemesianus, libro
Cynegeticon, where he Diuisa Britannia mittit
Veloces nostrique orbis venatibus aptos,
of which sort also some be smooth, of sundry colors, and some shake haired:
the sixth a liemer, that excels in smelling and swift running: the seventh a
tumbler: and the eight a thief, whose offices (I mean of the latter two)
incline only to deceit, wherein they are often to skillful, that few men would
think so mischiefous Melitei, of the Island Malta, from whence they were
brought hither. These are little and pretty, proper and fine, and sought out
far and near to satisfy the nice delicacie of dainty dames, and wanton
women's wills; instruments of folly to play and dally withal, in trifling
away the treasure of time, to withdraw their minds from more commendable
exercises, and to content their corrupt concupiscences with vain disport, a
silly poor shift to shun their irksome idleness. These Sybariticall puppies,
the smaller they be (and thereto if they have an hole in the foreparts of their
heads) the better they are accepted, the more pleasure also they provoke, as
meet plaiefellowes for minsing mistresses to bear in their bosoms, to keep
company withal in their chambers, to succor with sleep in bed, and nourish
with meat at board, to lie in their laps, and lick their lips as they lie
(like young Dianaes) in their wagons and coches. And good reason it should be
so, for coursenesse with finenesse has no fellowship, but featnesse with
neatness has neighbourhead enough. That plausible proverb therefore verefied
sometime upon a tyrant, namely that he loved his sow better than his son,
may well be applied to some of this kind of people, who delight more in their
dogs, that are deprived of all possibility of reason, than they do in
children that are capable of wisdom and judgment. Yea, they often feed them of
the best, where the poor man's child at their doors can hardly come by the
woorst. But the former abuse peradventure reigns where there has been long
want of issue, else where barrenness is the best blossom of beauty: or
finally, where poor men's children for want of their own issue are not ready
to be had. It is thought of some that it is very wholesome for a weak stomach
to bear such a dog in the bosom, as it is for him that has the palsy to
feel the daily smell and favor of a for. But how truly this is affirmed
let the learned judge: only it shall suffice for Doctor Caius to have said
thus much of spaniels and dogs of the gentle kind.

Dogs of the homely kind, Homely kind of dogs.
are either shepherds curs, or mastiffes. The first are so common, that it
needs me not to speak of them. Their use also is so well known in keeping
the heard together (either when they grase or go before the shepherd) that it
should be but in vain to spend any* time about them. Wherefore I will leave
this curre unto his own kind, Tie dogs.
and go in hand with the mastiffe, tie dog, or banddog, so called because many
of them are tied up in chains and strong bonds, in the day time, for doing
hurt abroad, which is an huge dog, stubborn, ouglie, eager, burthenous of
body (and therefore but of little swiftness) terrible and fearful to behold,
and oftentimes more fierce and fell than any Archadian or Corsican cur. Our
Englishmen to the intent that these dogs may be more cruel and fierce, assist
nature with some art, use and custom. For although this kind of dog be capable
of courage, violent, valiant, stout and bold: yet will they increase these
their stomachs by teaching them to bait the bear, the bull, the lion, and
other such like cruel and bloody beasts, (either brought over or kept up at
home, for the same purpose) without any collar to defend their throats, and
oftentimes thereto they train them up in fighting and wrestling with a man
(having for the safeguard of his life either a pike staff, club, sword, privy
coat) whereby they become the more fierce and cruel unto strangers. The
Caspians made so much account sometime of such great dogs, that every able man
would nourish sundry of them in his house of set purpose, to the end they
should devour their carcases after their deaths, thinking the dogs bellies to
be the most honorable sepulchers. The common people also followed the same
rate, and therefore there were tie dogs kept up by public ordinance, to devour
them after their deaths: by means whereof these beasts became the more eger,
and with great difficulty after a while restreined from falling upon the
living. But whither am I digressed? In returning therefore to our own, I say
that of mastiffes, some bark only with fierce and open mouth but will not
bite, Some (...)
some do both bark and bite, but the cruellest do either not bark at all,
or bite before they bark, and therefore are more to be feared than any of the
other. Some bite and bark not.
They take also their name of the word mase and thief (or master thief if you
will) because they often stound and put such persons to Nichomedes king
sometime of Bithinia, Masinissa reposed in them, in so much that mistrusting
his household servants he made him a guard of dogs, which many a time delivered
him from their treasons and conspiracies, even by their barking and biting, nor
of less force than the Molossian race, brought from Epiro into some countries,
which the poets feign to have original from the brazen dog that Uulcan made,
and gave to Jupiter, who also delivered the same to Europa, she to Procris, and
Procris to Cephalus, as Julius Pollux notes, lib. 5. cap. 5: neither unequal
in carfulness to the mastiffe of Alexander Phereus, who by his only courage
and attendance kept his master long time from slaughter, till at the last he
was removed by policy, and the tyrant killed sleeping: the story goes thus.
The^e the wife of the said Phereus and her three brethren conspired the death
of her husband, who fearing the dog only, she found the means to allure him
from his chamber door by fair means, unto another house hard by, whilst they
should execute their purpose. Nevertheless, when they came to the bed where he
lay sleeping, they waxed faint hearted, till she did put them in choice, either
that they should dispatch him at once, or else that she her self would wake
her husband, and give him warning of his enemies, or at the least wise bring in
the dog upon them, which they feared most of all: and therefore quickly
dispatched him.

The last sort of dogs consists of the currish kind meet for many toies: of
which the whappet or prickeard curre is one. Some men call them warners,
because they are good for nothing else but to bark and give warning when any
body does stir or lie in wait about the house in the night season. Certes
it is impossible to describe these curs in any order, because they have no
any one kind proper unto themselves, but are a confused company mixed of all
the rest. The second sort of them are called turn spits, whose office is not
unknown to any. And as these are only reserved for this purpose, so in
many places our mastiffes (beside the use which tinkers have of them in
carieng their heavy budgets) are made to draw water in great wheels out of
deep wels, going much like unto those which are framed for our turn spits, as
is to be seen at Roiston, where this feat is often practiced. Besides these
also we have sholts or curs daily brought out of Iseland, and much made of
among us, because of their sauciness and quarrelling. Moreover they bite very
sore, and love candles exceedingly, as do the men and women of their
country: but I may say no more of them, because they are not bred with us.
Yet this will I make report of by the way, for pastimes sake, that when a
great man of those parts came of late into one of our ships which went thither
for fish, to see the form and fashion of the same, his wife apparrelled in
fine fables, abiding on the deck whilst her husband was under the hatches
with the mariners, espied a pound or two of candles hanging at the mast, and
being loath to stand there idle alone, she fell to and eat them up every one,
supposing her self to have been at a iollie banquet, and showing very pleasant
gesture when her husband came up again unto her.

The last kind of toiesh curs are named bansers, and those being of a mongrell
sort also, are taught and exercised to danse in measure at the musical sound
of an instrument, as at the just stroke of a drum, sweet accent of the
citharne, and pleasant harmony of the harp, showing many tricks by the
gesture of their bodies: as to stand bolt upright, to lie flat upon the ground,
to turn round as a ring, holding their tails in their teeth, to saw and beg
for meat, to take a man's cap from his head, and sundry such properties, which
they learn of their idle rogish masters whose instruments they are to gather
gain, as old apes clothed in motleie, and colored short wasted iackets are
for the like vagabunds, who seek no better living, than that which they may
get by fond pastime and idleness. I might here entreat of other dogs, as of
those which are bred between a bitch and a woolfe, and called Lycisca: a thing
very often seen in France says Franciscus Patricius in his common wealth, as
procured of set purpose, and learned as I think of the Indians, who tie their
fault bitches often in woods, that they might be loined by tigers: also
between a bitch and a fox, or a bear and a mastiffe. But as we utterly want
the first sort, except Cardans talk, De subt. lib. 10. who says, that after
many generations, dogs do become woolfes, and contrariwise; which if it were
true, than could not England be without many woolfes: but nature has set a
difference between them, not only in outward form, but also in inward
disposition of their bones, wherefore it is impossible that his assertion can
be sound.

Of our saffron, and the dressing
AS the saffron of England, which Platina reckneth among spices, is the most
excellent of all other: for it gives place neither to that of Cilicia, whereof
Solinus speaks, neither to any that comes Cilicia, where it grows upon
the mount Taurus, Tmolus, Italy, Aetolia, Sicilia, or Licia, in sweetness,
tincture, and continuance; so of that which is to be had amongst us, the same
that grows about Saffron Walden, sometime called Waldenburg, in the edge of
Essex, first of all planted there in the time of Edward the third, and that of
Gloucester shire and those westerlie parts, which some think to be better than
that of Walden, surmounteth all the rest, and therefore bears worthily Inter
bulbosa, as Orchis, hyacinthus orientalis, and Statyrion. The color of the
rind is not much differing from the innermost shell of a chestnut, although it
be not altogether so brickle as is the pill of an onion. So long as the leaf
florisheth the root is little and small; but when the grass is withered, the
head increases and multiplieth, the fillets also or small roots die, so that
when the time does come to take them up, they have not roots at all, but so
continue until September that they do grow again: and before the chiue be
grounded the smallest heads are also most esteemed; but whether they be great
or small, if sheep or neat may come to them on the heap, as they lie in the
field, they will devour them as if they were haie or stuble, some also will
wroot for them in very eger manner. The leaf or rather the blade thereof is
long and narrow as grass, which come up always in October after the flowers
be gathered and gone, pointed on a little tuft much like unto our siues.
Sometimes our cattle will feed upon the same; nevertheless, if it be bitten
whilst it is green, the head dies, and therefore our crokers are careful to
keep it from such annoiance until it begin to wither, and then also will the
cattle soonest taste thereof: for until that time the juice thereof is bitter.
In every flower we find commonly three chiues, and three yellowes, and double
the number of leaves. Of twisted flowers I speak not; yet is it found, that
two flowers grow together, which bring forth five chiues, so that always
there is an od chiue and od yellow, though three or four flowers should come
out of one root. The whole herb is named in Greek Crocos, but of some (as
Dioscorides says) Castor, Cynomorphos, or Hercules blood: yet in the Arabian
speech, (from whence we borow the name which we give thereunto) I find that it
is called Zahafaran, Occasion of the name.
as Rembert does bear witness. The cause wherefore it was called Crocus was
this (as the poets feign) specially those from whom Galen has borrowed the
history, which he notes in his ninth book De medicamentis secundum loca,
where he writes after this manner (although I take Crocus to be the first that
used this commodity.) A certain young gentleman called Crocus went to play at
coits in the field with Mercury, and being heedlesse of himself, Mercuries
coit happened by mishap to hit him on the head, whereby he received a wound
that yer long killed him altogether, to the great discomfort of his friends.
Finally, in the place where he bled, saffron was after found to grow,
whereupon the people seeing the color of the chiue as it stood (although I
doubt not but it grew there long before) adjudged it to come of the blood of
Crocus, and therefore they gave it his name. And thus far Rembert, who with
Galen, etc: differ very much from Ouids Metamorphos. 4. who writes also
thereof. Indeed the chiue, while it remains whole and vnbrused, resembles a
dark red, but being broken and converted into use, it yields a yellow
tincture. But what have we to do with fables?

The heads of saffron are raised in Iulie, either with plough, raising, or
tined hook; and being scowred from their rosse or filth, and severed from such
heads as are engendered of them since the last setting, they are interred again
in Iulie and August by ranks or rows, and being covered with moulds, they rest
in the earth, where they cast forth little fillets and small roots like unto a
scallion, until September, in the beginning of which month the ground is
pared, and all weeds and grass that grows upon the same removed, Paung.
to the intent that nothing may annoie the flower when as his time does come
to rise.

These things being thus ordered in the latter end of the aforesaid month of
September, Gathering
the flower begins to appear of a whitish blew, fesse or sky color, and
in the end showing it self in the own kind, See (...).
it resembles almost the Leucotion of Theophrast, saving that it is longer,
and has in the midst thereof three chiues very red and pleasant to behold.
These flowers are gathered in the morning before the rising of the sun, which
otherwise would cause them to welke or flitter. And the chiues being picked
from the flowers, these are thrown into the doonghill; the other dried upon
little kelles covered with streined canuasses upon a soft fire: whereby, and by
the weight that is laid upon them, they are dried and pressed into cakes, and
then bagged up for the benefit of their owners. In good years we gather four
score or an hundred pounds of wet saffron of an acre, which being dried does
yield twenty pounds of dry and more. Whereby, and since the price of saffron
is commonly about twenty shillings in money, or not so little, it is easy to
see what benefit is

The heads are raised every third year about us, to wit, Raising.
after Midsummer, when the rosse comes dry from the heads; and commonly in
the first year after they be set they yield very little increase: yet that
which then comes is counted the finest and greatest chiue, and best for
medicine, and called saffron Du hort. The next crop is much greater; but the
third exceeds, and then they raise again about Walden and in Cambridge
shire. In this period of time also the heads are said to child, that is, to
yield

In Norffolke and Suffolk they raise but once in seven years: but as their
saffron is not so fine as that of Cambridge shire and about Walden, so it will
not cake, ting, nor hold color withal, wherein lies a great part of the
value of this stuff. Some crafty iackes use to mix it with scraped brazell or
with the flower of Sonchus, which comes somewhat near indeed to the hue of
our good saffron (if it be late gathered) but it is soon bewraied both by the
depth of the color and hardness. Such also was the plenty of saffron about
twenty years passed, that some of the townsmen of Walden gave the one half
of the flowers for picking of the other, and sent them ten or twelve miles
abroad into the country, whilst the rest, not thankful for the abundance of
Gods blessing bestowed upon them (as wishing rather more scarsitie thereof
because of the keeping up of the price) in most contemptuous manner murmured
against him, saying that he did shite saffron therewith to choke the market.
But as they showed themselves no less than ingrat infidels in this behalf, so
the Lord considered their unthankfulness, and gave them ever since such
scarsitie, as the greatest murmurers have now the least store; and most of them
are either worn out of occupieng, or remain scarce able to maintain their
grounds without the help of other men. Certes it has generally decayed about
Safton Walden since the said time, until now of late within these two years,
that men began again to plant and renew the same, because of the great
commodity. But to proceed. When the heads be raised and taken up, they will
remain sixteen or twenty days out of the earth or more: yea peradventure a
full month. Howbeit they are commonly in the earth again by saint James
tide, or very shortly after. For as if they be taken up before Midsummer, or
beginning of Iulie, the heads will shirnke like a roasted warden: so after
August they will wax dry, become unfruitful, and decaie. And I know it by
experience, in that I have carried some of them to London with me; and
notwithstanding that they have remained there unset by the space of forty dais
and more: yet some of them have brought forth two or three flowers a piece,
and some flowers three or five chiues, to the greeat admiration of such as have
gathered the same, and not been acquainted with their nature and country
where they grew. The crokers or saffron men do use an observation a little
before the coming up of the flower, and sometime in the taking up at Midsummer
tide, by opening of the heads to judge of plenty and scarsitie of this
commodity to come. For if they see as it were many small hairie veins of
saffron to be in the midst of the bulbe, they pronounce a fruitful year.
And to say truth, at the cleaving of each head, a man shall discern the
saffron by the color, and see where abouts the chiue will issue out of the
root. Warm dark nights, sweet dews, fat grounds (cheeflie the chalkie) and
mistie mornings are very good for saffron; but frost and cold do kill and
keep back the flower, or else shrink up the chiue. And thus much have I
thought good to speak of English saffron, which is hot in the second and dry
in the first degree, and most plentiful as our crokers hold, in that year
wherein ewes twin most. But as I can make no warrantize hereof, so I am
otherwise sure, that there is no more deceit used in any trade than in
saffron. For in the making they will grease the papers on the kell with a
little candle grease, to make the woorst saffron have so good a color as the
best: afterward also they will sprinkle butter thereon to make the weight
better. But both these are bewraied, either by a quantity thereof holden over
the fire in a silver spoone, or by the softness thereof between the fore
finger and the thumb; or thirdly, by the color thereof in age: for if you
lay it by far worse saffron of other countries, the color will bewraie the
forgerie by the swartnesse of the chiue, which otherwise would excel it, and
thereunto being sound, remain crispe, brickle, and dry: and finally, if it
be holden near the face, will strike a certain biting heat upon the skin and
eyes, whereby it is adjudged good and merchant ware indeed among the skillful
crokers.

Now if it please you to hear of any of the virtues Dioscorides does
affirm: and droonke in wine (says Platina) lib. 3. cap. 13. De honesta
voluptate, does have on droonkennesse, which is very true. And I have known
some, that by eating only of bread more than of custom streined with
saffron, have become like droonken men, and yet otherwise well known to be but
competent drinkers. For further confirmation of Carthamus, called amongst us
bastard saffron, but neither is this of any value, nor the other in any wise
comparable unto ours. Whereof let this suffice as of a commodity brought into
this Island in the time of Edward 3. and not commonly planted till Richard 2.
did reign. It would grow very well (as I take it) about the Chiltern hills,
and in all the vale of the White horse so well as in Walden and
Cambridgeshire, if they were careful of it. I hear of some also to be
cherished already in Glocestershire, and certain other places westward. But
of the finenesse and tincture of the chiue, I hear not as yet of any trial.
Would to God that my countriemen had been heretofore (or were now) more
careful of this commodity! then would it no doubt have proved more
beneficial to our Island than our cloth or wool. But alas! so idle are we, and
heretofore so much given to ease, by reason of the smalnesse of our rents, that
few men regard to search out which are their best commodities. But if landlords
hold on to raise the rents of their farms as they begin, they will enforce
their tenants to look better unto their gains, and scratch out their rent from
under every clod that may be turned aside. The greatest mart for saffron is at
Aquila in Abruzo, where they have an especial weight for the same of ten
pounds less in the hundred than that of Florens and Luke: but how it agrees
with ours it shall appear hereafter.

Of quarries of stone for building. Chap. 9.
QUarries with us are pits or mines, out of which we dig our stone to build
withal, and of these as we have great plenty in England, so are they of
diverse sorts, and those very profitable for sundry necessary uses. In times
past the use of stone was in manner dedicated to the building of churches,
religious houses, princely palaces, bishops manours, and holds only: but now
that scrupulous observation is altogether infringed, and building with stone so
commonly taken up, that amongst noble men and gentlemen, the timber frames are
supposed to be not much better than paper work, of little continuance, and
least continuance of all. It far passes my cunning to set down how many
sorts of stone for building are to be found in England, but much further to
call each of them by their proper names. Howbeit, such is the curiosity of our
countrymen, that notwithstanding almighty God has so blessed our realm in
most plentiful manner, with such and so many quarries apt and meet for piles
of longest continuance, yet we as loathsome of this abundance, or not liking of
the plenty, do commonly leave these natural gifts to mould and cinder in
the ground, and take up an artificial brick, in burning whereof a great part
of the wood of this land is daily consumed and spent, to the no small decaie
of that commodity, and hinderance of the poor that perish often for cold.

Our elders have from time to time, following our natural vice in misliking of
our own commodities at home, and desiring those of other countries abroad,
most esteemed the cane stone that is brought hither out of Normandy: and many
even in these our days following the same vein, do covet in their works
almost to use none other. Howbeit experience on the one side, and our skillful
masons on the other (whose judgment is nothing inferior to those of other
countries) do affirm, that in the north and south parts of England, and
certain other places, there are some quarries, which for hardness and beauty
are equal to the outlandish greet. This may also be confirmed by the kings
chapel at Cambridge, the greatest part of the square stone whereof was brought
thither out of the north. Some commend the vein of white free stone, slate,
and mere stone, which is between Pentowen, and the black head in Cornwall,
for very fine stuff. Other do speak much of the quarries at Hamden, nine
miles from Milberie, and pauing stone of Burbecke. For toph stone, not a few
allow of the quarrie that is at Dresleie, diverse mislike not of the veins of
hard stone that are at Oxford, and Burford. One praises the free stone at
Manchester, and Prestburie in Glocestershire; another the quarries of the like
in Richmont. The third likes well of the hard stone in Clee hill in
Shropshire; the

If neither alabaster nor marble does suffice, we have the touchstone, called
in Latin Lydius lapis, shining as glass, either to match in sockets with our
pillars of alabaster, or contrariwise: or if it please the workman to join
pillars of alabaster or touch with sockets of brass, pewter, or copper, we
want not also these metals. So that I think no nation can have more excellent
and greater diversity of stuff for building, than we may have in England, if
our selves could so like of it. But such alas is our nature, that not our own
but other men's do most of all delight us; and for desire of novelty, we often
exchange our finest cloth, corn, tin, and woolles, for half penie cockhorsses
for children, dogs of wax or of cheese, two penny tabers, leaden swords,
painted feathers, gewgaws for fools, dogtricks for disards, hawkeswhoods, and
such like trumperie, whereby we reap just mockage and reproach in other
countries. I might remember here our pits for milstones, that are to be had in
diverse places of our country, as in Angleseie, Kent, also at Queen hope of
blew greet, of no less value than the Colaine, yea than the French stones: our
grindstones for hardware men. Our whetstones are no less laudable than those
of Creta and Lacedemonia, albeit we use no oil with them, as they did in those
parties, but only water, (...) the Italians and Naxi^^^ (...) th^irs: whereas
they that grow in Cilicia must have both oil and water laid upon them, or else
they make no edge. These also are divided either into the hard greet, as the
common that shoomakers use, or the soft greet called hones, to be had among the
barbars, and those either black or white, and the rub or brickle stone which
husbandmen do occupy in the whetting of their sithes.

In like manner slate of sundry colors is every where in manner to be had, as
is the flint and chalk, the shalder and the peble. Howbeit for all this we
must fetch them still from far, as did the Hull men their stones out of
Iseland, wherewith they paued their town for want of the like in England: or
as sir Thomas Gresham did, when he bought the stones in Flanders, wherewith he
paued the Burse. But as he will answer peradventure, that he bargained for the
whole mould and substance of his workmanship in Flanders: so the Hullanders or
Hull men will say, how that stockefish is light loding, and therefore they did
balasse their vessels with these Iseland stones, to keep them from turning
over in their so tedious a voyage. And thus much briefly of our quarries of
stone for building, wherein oftentimes the workmen have found strange things
enclosed, I mean lively creatures shut up in the hard stones, and living
there without respiration or breathing, as frogs, todes, etc: whereof you shall
read more in the chronology following: also in Caius Langius, William of
Newburie, Agricola, Cornelius of Amsterdam, Bellogius de a quatilibus, Albert
the great, lib.19. cap. 9. De rebus metallicis, and Goropius in Niloscopio,
page 237, etc. Sometime also they find precious stones (though seldom) and
some of them perfectly squared by nature, and much like unto the diamond,
found of late in a quarrie of marble at Naples, which was so perfectly
pointed, as if all the workmen in the world had co^sulted about the
performance of that workmanship. I know that these reports unto some will
seem incredible, and therefore I stand the longer upon them; nevertheless
omitting to speak particularly of such things as happen amongst us, and
rather seeking to confirm the same by the like in other countries, I will
deliver a few more examples, whereby the truth hereof shall so much the better
appear. For in the midst of a stone not long since found at Chius, upon the
breaking up thereof, there was seen Caput panisci enclosed therein, very
perfectly formed as the beholders do remember. How come the grains of gold to
be so fast enclosed in the stones that are and have been found in the Spanish
Baetis? But this is most marvelous, that a most delectable and sweet oil,
comparable to the finest balm, or oil of spike in smell, was found naturally
included in a stone, which could not otherwise be broken but with a smiths
hammer. Goropius does tell of a perch perfectly formed to be found in
Britain: but as then committed into hard stone, upon the top of a crag.
Aristotle and Theophrast speak of fishes dug out of the earth, far from
the sea in Greece, which Seneca

Of sundry minerals. Chap. 10.
WIth how great benefits this Island of ours has been endued from the
beginning, I hope there is no godly man but will readily confess, and

We have in England great plenty of quick silver, antimonie, sulphur, black
lead, and orpiment red and yellow. We have also the finest alume (wherein the
diligence of one of the greatest favorers of the commonwealth of England of a
subject has been of late egregiously abused, The lord Mountioy.
and even almost with barbarous inciuilitie) and of no less force against
fire, if it were used in our parietings than that of Lipara, which only was in
use sometime amongst the Asians and Romans, and whereof Sylla had such trial
that when he meant to have burned a tower of wood erected by Archelaus the
lieutenant of Mithridates, he could by no means set it on fire in a long time,
because it was washed over with alume, as were also so the gates of the temple
of Jerusalem with like effect, and perceived when Titus commanded fire to be
put unto the same. Beside this we have also the natural cinnabarum or
vermilion, the sulphurous glebe called bitumen in old time for mortar, and yet
(...): the chrysocolla, coperis, and mineral stone, whereof petriolum is made,
and that which is most strange the mineral pearl, which as they are for
greatness and color most excellent of all other, so are they dug out of
the maine land, and in sundry places far distant from the shore. Certes the
western part of the land has in times past greatly abounded with these and
many other rare and excellent commodities, but now they are washed away by
the violence of the sea, which has devoured the greatest part of Cornwall and
Devonshire on either side: and it does appear yet by good record, that
whereas now there is a great distance between the Syllan Isles and point of the
lands end, there was of late years to speak of scarcely a brook or draine of
one fadam water between them, if so much, as by those evidences appears, and
are yet to be seen in the hands of the lord and chief owner of those Isles.
But to proceed.

Of colemines we have such plenty in the north and western parts of our
Island, as may suffice for all the realm of England: and so must they do
hereafter in deed, if wood be not better cherished than it is at this present.
And to say the truth, notwithstanding that very many of them are carried into
other countries of the maine, yet their greatest trade begins now to grow
from the forge into the kitchen and hall, as may appear already in most
cities and towns that lie about the coast, where they have but little other
fuel, except it be turffe and hassocke. I marvel not a little that there is
no trade of these into Sussex and Southhampton shire, for want whereof the
smiths do work their iron with charcoale. I think that far carriage be the
only cause, which is but a slender excuse to enforce us to carry them unto
the maine from hence.

Beside our colemines we have pits in like sort of white plaster, and of fat
and white and other colored marle, wherewith in many places the inhabitors
do compest their soil, and which does benefit their land in ample manner for
many years to come. We have saltpeter for our ordinance, and salt soda for
our glass, and thereto in one place a kind of earth (in Southerie as I ween
hard by Codington, and sometime in the tenure of one Croxton of London) which
is so fine to make moulds for goldsmiths and casters of metal, that a load of
it was worth five shillings thirty years agone: none such again they say
in England. But whether there be or not, let us not be unthankful to God for
these and other his benefits bestowed upon us, whereby he shows himself a
loving and merciful father unto us, which contrariewise return unto him in
lieu of humility and obedience, nothing but wickedness, avarice, mere
contempt of his will, pride, excess, atheism, and no less than Jewish
ingratitude.

Of metals to be had in our land.
ALl metals receive their beginning of quicksiluer and sulphur, which are as
mother and father to them. And such is the purpose of nature in their
generations: that she tends always to the procreation of gold, nevertheless
she sildome reaches unto that her end, because Encelius does call the sun
and right heir of nature but if it swerve but a little (says he) in ^he
commixtion Gold Silver.
that all countries have need of Britain, and Britain it self of none. For
truly if a man regard such necessities as nature only requires, there is
no nation under the sun, that can say so much as ours: since we do want none
that are convenient for us. Wherefore if it be a benefit to have any gold at
all, we are not void of some, neither likewise of silver: whatsoever Cicero
affirms to the contrary, Lib. 4. ad Atticum epi. 16. in whose time they were
not found, Britannici belli exitus (says he) expectatur, And albeit that we
have no such abundance of these (as some other countries do yield) yet have my
rich countrymen store enough of both in their pursses, where in time past they
were wont to have least, because the garnishing of our churches, tabernacles,
images, shrines and apparel of the preests consumed the greatest part, as
experience has confirmed.

Of late my countriemen have found out I wot not what voyage into the west
Indies, from whence they have brought some gold, whereby our country is
enriched: but of all that ever adventured into those parts, none have sped
better than sir Francis Drake whose success 1582 has far passed even his own
expectation. One John Frobisher in like manner attempting to seek out a shorter
cut by the northerlie regions into the peaceable sea and kingdom of Cathaie,
happened 1577 upon certain Islands by the way, wherein great plenty of much
gold appeared, and so much that some let not to give out for certeintie,
that Solomon had his gold from thence, wherewith he builded the temple. This
golden show made him so desirous also of like success, that he left off his
former voyage, and returned home to bring news of such things as he had seen.
But when after another voyage it was found to be but dross, he gave over both
the enterprises, and now keeps home without any desire at all to seek into
far countries. In truth, such was the plenty of ore there seen and to be
had, that if it had holden perfect, might have furnished all the world with
abundance of that metal; the iorneie also was short and performed in four or
five months, which was a notable encouragement. But to proceed.

Tin and lead, metals which Strabo notes in his time to be carried unto
Marsilis from hence, Tin. Lead.
as Diodorus also confirms, are very plentiful with us, the one in
Cornwall, Devonshire (and elsewhere in in the north) the other in Darbishire,
Weredale, and sundry places of this Island; whereby my countriemen do reap no
small commodity, but especially our pewterers, who in time past employed the
use of pewter only upon dishes, pots, and a few other trifles for service
here at home, whereas now they are grown unto such exquisit cunning, that they
can in manner imitate by infusion any form or fashion of cup, dish, salt,
bowl, or goblet, which is made by goldsmiths craft, though they he never so
curious, exquisite, and artificially forged. Such furniture of household of
this metal, as we commonly call by the name of vessel, is sold usually by
the garnish, which does co^eine twelve plaiters, twelve dishes, twelve
saucers, and those are either of silver fashion, or else with broad or narrow
brims, and bought by the pound, which is now valued at six or seven pence, or
peradventure at eight pence. Of poringers, pots, and other like I speak not
albeit that in the making of all these things there is such exquisite diligence
used, I mean for the mixture of the metal and true making of this commodity
(by reason of sharp laws provided in that behalf) as the like is not to be
found in any other trade. I have been also informed that it consists of a
composition, which has thirty pounds of kettle brass to a thousand pounds of
tin, whereunto they ad three or four pounds of tinglasse: but as too much of
this does make the stuff brickle, so the more the brass be, the better is
the pewter, and more profitable unto him that does buie and purchase the same.
But to proceed.

In some places beyond the sea a garnish of good flat English pewter of an
ordinary making (I say flat, because dishes and platters in my time begin to
be made deep like basins, and are indeed more convenient both for sauce,
broth, and keeping the meat warm) is esteemed almost so precious, as the like
number of vessels that are made of fine silver, and in manner no less desired
amongst the great estates, whose workmen are nothing so skillful in that trade
as ours, neither their metal so good, nor plenty so great, as we have here
in England. The Romans made excellent looking glasses of our English tin,
howbeit our workmen were not then so equisite in that feat as the Brundusiens:
wherefore the wrought metal was carried over unto them by way of
merchandise, and very highly were those glasses esteemed of till silver came
generally in place, which in the end brought the tin into such contempt, that
in manner every dishwasher refused to look in other than silver glasses for
the attiring of her head. Howbeit the making of silver glasses had been in use
before Britain was known unto the Romans, for I read that one Praxiteles
devised them in the young time of Pompeie, which was before the coming of
Caesar into this Island.

There were mines of lead sometimes also in Plinies time the abundance of lead
(whereof he speaks) was to be found in those parts, in the seventeenth of
his thirty fourth book: also he affirms that it lay in the very swart of
the earth, and daily gotten in such plenty, that the Romans made a restraint
of the carriage thereof to Rome, limiting how much should yearly be Leland
says) had made so tame, that it would daily fly and follow him to his work
and other places where soever he happened to travel. This labourer working on
a time in the bottom or vallie, where the first mine was known to be, did
lay his pursse and girdle by him, as men commonly do that address
themselves to apply their business earnestly, and he Cogitaui dies antiquos
But whither am I digressed, from lead unto crows, and from crows unto devils?
Certes it is now high time to return unto our metals, and resume the
tractation of such things as I had erst in hand.

Iron is found in many places, Iron.
as in Sussex, Kent, Weredale, Mendip, Walshall, as also in Shropshire, but
cheeflie in the woods betwixt Beluos and Willocke or Wicberie near Manchester,
and elsewhere in Wales. Of which mines diverse do bring forth so fine and
good stuff, as any that comes from beyond the sea, beside the infinite
gains to the owners, if we would so accept it, or bestow a little more cost in
the refining of it. It is also of such toughness, that it yields to the
making of claricord wire in some places of the realm. Nevertheless, it was
better cheap with us when strangers only brought it hither: for it is our
quality when we get any commodity, to use it with extremity toward our
own nation, after we have once found the means to shut out forreners from the
bringing in of the like. It breeds in like manner great expense and waste of
wood, as does the making of our pots and table vessel of glass, wherein is
much loss since it is so quickly broken; and yet (as I think) easy to be
made tougher, if our alchumists could once find the true birth or production of
the red man, whose mixture would induce a metallicall toughness unto it,
whereby it should abide the hammer.

Copper is lately not found, Copper.
but rather restored again to light. For I have read of copper to have been
heretofore gotten in our Island; howbeit as strangers have most commonly the
governance of our mines, so they hither to make small gains of this in hand in
the north parts: for (as I am informed) the profit does very hardly
counteruaile the charges, whereat wise men do not a little marvel, considering
the abundance which that mine does seem to offer, and as it were at hand
Leland our countrieman notes sundry great likelihoods of natural copper
mines to be eastwards, as between Dudman and Trewa^^thher places, wherea^ in
sundry pla^es of this book already, and therefore it shall b^ but in vain
to repeat them here again: as for that which is gotten out of the marchasite,
I speak not of it, since it is not incident to my purpose. In Dorsetshire also
a copper mine lately found is brought to good perfection.

As for our steel, Steel.
it is not so good for edge-tooles as that of Colaine, and yet the one is often
sold for the other, and like tale used in both, that is to say, thirty gads
to the sheffe, and twelve sheffes to the burden. Our alchumie is artificial,
and thereof our spoones and some salts are commonly made, and preferred before
our pewter with some, albeit in truth it be much subject to corruption,
putrefaction, more heavy and foul to handle than our pewter; yet some
ignorant persons affirm it to be a metal more natural, and the very same
which Encelius calls Plumbum cinereum, the Germans, wisemute, mithan, and
counterfeie, adding, that where it grows, silver can not be far off.
Nevertheless it is known to be a mixture of brass, lead, and tin (of which
this latter occupies the one half) but after another proportion than is used
in pewter. But alas I am persuaded that neither the old Arabians, nor new
alchumists of our time did ever hear of it, albeit that the name thereof do
seem to come out of their forge. For the common sort indeed do call it
alchumie, an unwholesome metal (God wot) and worthy to be banished and
driven out of the land. And thus I conclude with this discourse, as having no
more to say of the metals of my country, except I should talk of brass,
bell metal, and such as are brought over for merchandise from other
countries: and yet I can not but say that there is some brass found also in
England, but so small is the quantity, that it is not greatly to be esteemed
or accounted of.

Of precious stones. Chap. 12.
THe old writers remember few other stones of estimation to be found in this
Island than that which we call great, and they in Latin Gagates: Geat.
Laon. Chalchonvtle.
whereof none of our writers do make any mention at all. Howbeit whatsoever
it has pleased a number of strangers (upon false surmise) to write of the
vsages of this our country, about the trial of the virginity of our maidens
by drinking the powder hereof against the time of their bestowing in marriage:
certain it is that even to this day Marbodeus Gallus also writing of the same
among other of estimation, says thus: Nascitur in Lycialapis and prope gemma
Gagates,
Sed genus eximium faecunda Britannia mittit,
Lucidus and niger est, leuis and leuissimus idem,
Vicinas paleas trahit attritu calefactus,
Ardet aqua lotus, restinguitur vnctus oliuo.


The Germane writers confound it with amber Dioscorides says. Nicander in
Theriaca calls it Engangin and Gangitin, of the plenty thereof that is found
in the place aforesaid, which he calls Ganges, and where they have great use
of it in driving away of serpents by the only perfume thereof. Charles the
fourth emperor of that name glased the church withal that

Moreover, as geat was one of the first stones of Caesar to adventure hither,
after he had seen the quantities and heard of our plenty of them, while he
abode in France, and whereof he made a taberd which he offered up in Rome to
Uenus, where it hoong long after as a rich and notable oblation and testimony
of the riches of our country. Certes they are to be found in these our days,
and thereto of diverse colors, in no less numbers than ever they were in old
time. Yet are they not now so much desired because of their smalnesse, and also
for other causes, but especially since church work, as copes, vestments,
albes, tunicles, altarclothes, canopies, and such trash, are worthily
abolished; upon which our countrymen superstitiously bestowed no small
quantities of them. For I think there were sew churches or religious houses,
besides bishops miters, books and other pontifical vestures, but were either
thoroughly fretted, or notably garnished with huge numbers of them. Marbodeus
likewise speaking of pearls, commends them after this manner: Gignit and
insignes antiqua Britannia baccas, etc.

Marcellinus also Lib. 23, in ipso, fine, speaks of our pearls and their
generation, but he prefers greatly those of Persia before them, which to me
does seem unequally done. But as the British geat or orient pearl were in
old time esteemed above those of other countries; so time has since the
conquest of the Romans revealed many other: insomuch that at this season there
are found in England the Aetites (in English called the ernestone, but for erne
some pronounce eagle) and the hematite or bloodstone, and these very pure and
excellent: also the calcedonie, the porphyrite, the crystal, and those other
which we call calaminares and speculares, besides a kind of diamond or adamant,
which although it be very fair to sight, is yet much softer (as most are that
are found and bred toward the north) than those that are brought hither out of
other countries. We have also upon our coast the white coral, nothing
inferior to that which is found beyond the sea in the albe, near to the fall
of Tangra, or to the red and black, whereof Dioscorides entreats, Lib. 5.
cap. 8. We have in like sort sundry other stones daily found in cliffes and
rocks (beside the load stone which is oftentimes taken up out of our mines of
iron) whereof such as find them have either no knowledge at all, or else do
make but small account, being seduced by outlandith lapidaries, whereof the
most part discourage us from the searching and seeking out of our own
commodities, to the end that they may have the more free utterance of their
natural and artificial wares, whereby they get great gains amongst such as
have no skill.

I have heard that the best trial of a stone is to lay it on the nail of the
thombe, Trial of a stone.
and so to go abroad into the clear light, where if the color hold in all
places a like, the stone is thought to be natural and good: but if it alter,
especially toward the nail, then is it not sound, but rather to be taken for
an artificial piece of practice. If this be true it is an experiment worthy
the noting. Cardan also has it in his De subtilitate; if not, Lib. 7.
I have read more lies than this, as one for example out of Cato, who says,
that a cup of iuie will hold no wine at all. I have made some vessels of the
same wood, which refuse no kind of liquor, and therefore I suppose that there
is no such Antipathia between wine and our iuie, as some of our reading
philosophers (without all manner of practice) will seem to infer amongst us:
and yet I deny not but the iuie of Greece or Italy may have such a property;
but why should not the iuie then of France somewhat participat withal in the
like effect, which grows in an hotter soil than ours is? For as Baptista
porta says, it holds not also in the French iuie, wherefore I can not
believe that it has any such quality at all as Cato ascribes unto it. What
should I say more of stones? Truly I can not tell, since I have said what I may
already, and peradventure more than I think necessary: and that causes me
to pass over those that are now and then taken out of our oisters, todes,
muskels, snailes and adders, and likewise such as are found upon sundry hills
in Glocestershire, which have naturally such sundry proportions, forms and
colors in them, as pass all humane possibility to imitate, be the workman
never so skillful and cunning, also those that are found in the heads of our
perches and carps much desired of such as have the stone, and yet of themselves
are no stones but rather shells or gristles, which in time consume to nothing.
This yet will I ad, that if those which are found in muskels (for I am utterly
ignorant of the generation of pearls) be good pearl in deed, I have at sundry
times gathered more than an ounce of them, of which diverse have holes already
entered by nature, some of them not much inferior to great Boethius in that
behalf. They are called orient, because of the cleerenesse, which resembles
the

Of salt made in England.
THere are in England certain wells where salt is made, whereof Leland has
written abundantly in his commentaries of Britain, and whose words only I
will set down A common plague in all things of any great commodity, for one
beats the bush but another catches the birds, as we may see in batfowling.
There are at this present time three hundred salters, and three salt springs
in the town of Which, whereof the principal is within a butshoot of the right
ripe (or bank) of the river that there comes down: and this spring is
double so profitable in yielding of salt liquor, as both the other. Some say
(or rather fable) that this salt spring did fail in the time of Richard de la
Which bishop of Chichester, and that afterward by his intercession it was
restored to the profit of the old course (such is the superstition of the
people) in remembrance whereof, or peradventure for the zeal which the Which
men and salters did bear unto Richard de la Which their countriman, they used
of late times on his day (which comes once in the year) to hang this salt
spring or well about with tapistrie, and to have sundry games, drinkings, and
foolish revels at it. But to proceed. There be a great number of salt cotes
about this well, wherein the salt water is sodden in leads, and brought to the
perfection of pure white salt. The other two salt springs be on the left side
of the river a pretty way lower than the first, and (as I found) at the very
end of the town. At these also be diverse fornaces to make salt, but the
profit and plenty of these two are nothing comparable to the gain that rises
by the greatest. I asked of a salter how many fornaces they had at all the
three springs, and he numbered them to eighteen score, that is, three hundred
and sixty, saying how every one of them paid yearly six shillings and
eight pence to the king. The truth is that of old they had liberties given unto
them for three hundred fornaces or more, and thereupon they give a fee farm
(or Vectigal) of one hundred pounds yearly. Certes the pension is as it was,
but the number of fornaces is now increased to four hundred. There was of late
search made for another salt spring there abouts, by the means of one Newport
a gentleman dwelling at the Which, and the place where it was appears, as
does also the wood and timber which was set about it, to keep up the earth
from falling into the same. But this pit was not since occupied, whether it
were for lack of plenty of the salt spring, or for letting or hindering of
the profit of the other three. Me think that if wood and sale of salt would
serve, they might dig and find more salt springs about the Which than three, but
there is somewhat else in the wind. For I heard that of late years a salt
spring was found in an other quarter of Worcestershire, Privileges do sometimes
harm.
but it grew to be without any use, since the Which men have such a privilege,
that they alone in those quarters shall have the making of salt. The pits be so
set about with gutters, that the salt water is easily turned to every man's
house, and at Mantwich very many troughs go over the river for the commodity
of such as dwell on the other side of the same. They sees also their salt
water in fornaces of lead, and lade out the salt some in cases of wicker,
through which the water draineth, and the salt remains. There be also two or
three but very little salt springs at Dertwitch, in a low bottom, where salt
is sometime made.

Of late also a mile from Cumbremere abbaie a piece of an hill did sink, and
in the same pit rose a spring of salt water, where the abbat began to make
salt; but the men of the city compounded with the abbat and covent that there
should be none made there, whereby the pit was suffered to go to loss. And
although it yielded salt water still of it self, yet it was spoiled at the
last and filled up with filth. The Which men use the commodity of their salt
springs in drawing and decocting the water of them only by six months in the
year, that is, from Midsummer to Christmas, as (I guess) to maintain the
price of salt, or for saving of wood, which I think to be their principal
reason. For making of salt is a great and notable destruction of wood, and
shall be greater hereafter, except some provision be made for the better
increase of firing. The lack of wood also is already perceived in places
near the Which, for whereas they used to buie and take their wood near unto
their occupiengs, those woonted springs are now decayed, and they be enforced
to seek their wood so far as Worcester town, and all the parts about
Brenisgraue, Alchirch, and Alcester. I asked a salter how much wood he supposed
yearly to be spent at these fornaces? and he answered that by estimation
there was consumed about six thousand load, and it was round pole wood for the
most, which is easy to be cleft, and handsomelie riuen in pieces. The people
that are about the furnace are very ill colored, and the just Leland left in
memory of our white salt, who in an other book, not now in my hands, has
touched the making also of baie salt in some part of our country. But since
that book is delivered again to the owner, the tractation of baie salt can
not be

Of our account of time and her parts. Chap. 14.
AS Libra is As or Assis to the Romans for their weight, and the foot in
standard measure: Censorinus cap. 19. shows a reason wherefore they were
Hipparchus and the latter Egyptians, or to speak more properly, imitating
the Roman manner used in the church there of long time, choose the very point
of midnight; from whence we account twelve equal hours unto middaie ensuing,
and other twelve again unto the aforesaid point, according to these verses;
Mane diem Graeca gens incipit astrasequentes
In medio lucis Iudaeis vespere sancta,
Inchoat ecclesia media sua tempora nocte.


And this is our general order for the natural day. Of the artificial we
make so far account, as that we reckon it day when the sun is up, and night
when the sun leaves our horizon. Otherwise also we divide it into two parts,
that is to say, fore noone and after noone, not regarding the ruddie, shining,
burning and warming seasons (of three unequal hours a piece, which others
seem to divide into spring time, summer, autumn, and winter, in like curious
manner) and whereof I read these verses: Solis equi lucis dicuntur quatuor
horae,
Haec rubet, haec splendet, haec calet, illa tepet.


Indeed our physicians have another partition of the day, as men of no less
learning no doubt than the best of foreign countries, if we could so conceive of
them. And herein they concur also with those of other nations, who for
distinction in regiment of our humors, divide the artificial day and night in
such wise as these verses do import, and are indeed a general rule which each
of them does follow: Tres lucis primas, noctis tres sanguinis imas,
Vis cholerae medias lucis sex vendicat horas.
Datque melam primas noctis, tres lucis and imas,
Centrales ponas sex noctis phlegmatis horas.


Or thus, as Tansteter has given them forth in his prelections: A nona noctis
donec sit terita lucis,
Est dominus sanguis, sex inde sequentibus horis
Est dominans cholera, dum lucis nona sit hora
Post niger humid inest donec sit tertia noctis,
Posthaec phlegma venit, donec sit nona quietis.


In English thus in effect: Three hours yer sun do rise, and so many after,
blud,
From nine to three at after noone, hot choler bears the swaie,
Even so to nine at night, swart choler has to rule,
As phlegm from thence to three at morn: six hours each one I say.


In like sort for the night we have none other parts than the twilight, Night.
darkenight, midnight, and cocks crowing: whereas the Latins divide the same
into 7 parts, as Vesper Vesper.
or Vesperugo, as Plautus calls it, as Virgil uses the word Hesper the
evening, which is immediately after the setting of the sun. Crepusculum
Crepusculum.
the twilight (which some call Prima fax, because men begin then to light
candles) when it is between day and night, light and darkness, or properly
neither day nor night. Concubium Concubium.
the still of Intempestum, Intempestum.
the dull or dead of the night, which is midnight, when men be in their first
or dead sleep. Gallicinium, Gallicinium.
the cocks crowing. Conticinium, Conticinium.
when the cocks have left crowing. Matutinum, Matutinum.
the breach of the day, and Diluculum Diluculum.
sieve aurora, the ruddie, orange, golden or shining color, seen immediately
before the rising of the sun, and is opposite to the evening, as Matutinum is
to the twilight.

Other there are which do reckon by watches, dividing Watches.
Of which the first begins at evening called the first watch, and continues
by three unequal hours, and so forth until the end of the ninth hour,
whereat the fourth watch enters, which is called the morning watch, because it
concurreth partly with the dark night, and partly with the morning and
breach of the day before the rising of the sun.

As for the original of the word hour, it is very ancient; Hour.
but yet not so old as that of the watch, whereof Hora among the Grecians
signified so well the four quarters of the year, as the four and twentieth
part of the day, and limits of any form. But what stand I upon these things

Of natural days is the week compacted, week.
which consists of seven of them, the fridaie being commonly called among
the vulgar sort either king or worling, because it is either the fairest or
foulest of the seven: albeit that I cannot guess of any reason why they
should so imagine. The first of these enters with mondaie, whereby it comes
to pass, that we rest upon the sundaie, which is the seventh in number, as
almighty God has commanded in Hebdoma: because Mahomet their prophet (as they
say) was borne and dead upon the fridaie, and so he was indeed, except their
Alcharon deceive them. The Jews do reckon their days by their distance from
their sabbath, so that the Saxo calls her) Uenus, and finally by Theut,
Mars: which if it be so, then it is an easy matter to find out the german
Mars, Uenus, Mercury, and Jupiter, whereof you may read more hereafter in my
chronology. The truth is, that Frea albeit that Saxo gives her scant a good
report, for that she loved one of her husbands men better than himself, had
seven sons by Woden; the first, father to Wecca, of whom descended those
that were afterward kings of Kent. Fethelgeta was the second, and of him came
the kings of Mercia. Baldaie the third, father to the kings of the west Saxons.
Beldagius the fourth, parent to the kings of Brenicia or Northumberland.
Weogodach the fifth, author of the kings of Deira. Caser the sixth race of the
east Angle race, and Nascad original burgeant of the kings of Essex. As for
the kings of Sussex, although they were of the same people, yet were they not
of the same streine, as our old monuments do express. But to proceed.

As certain of our days suffered this alteration by the Saxons, so in our
churches we retained for a long time the number of days or of Ferias.
sabbath, after the manner of the Jews, I mean vnstill the service after the
Roman use was abolished, which custom was first received (as some think) by
pope Syluester, though other say by Constantine; albeit another sort do
affirm, that Syluester caused the sundaie only to be called the Lords day,
and dealt not with the rest.

In like manner of weeks our months are made, which are so called of the
moon, Month.
each one containing eight and twenty days, or four weeks, without any
further curiosity. For we reckon not our time by the year of the moon, as
the Jews, Grecians, or Romans did at the first; or as the Turks, Arabians and
Persians do now: neither any parcel thereof by the said planet, as in some
part of the west Indies, where they have neither week, month, nor year, but
only a general account of hundreds and thousands of moons. Wherefore if we
say or write a month, it is to be expounded of eight and twenty days, or
four weeks only, and not of her usual period of nine and twenty days and
one and thirty minutes. Or (if you take it at large) for a month of the common
calender, Triuethus in Antartico.
which nevertheless in plees and suits is nothing at all allowed of, since the
moon makes her full revolution in eight and twenty days or four weeks,
that is, unto the place where she left the sun: notwithstanding that he be now
gone, and at her return not to be found very often in that sign wherein she
before had left him. Plutarch writes of diverse barbarous nations which
reckoned a more or less number of these months for whole years: and that of
these some accounted but three, as the Archadians did four, the Acarnans six,
and the Egyptians but one for a whole year, which causes them to make such a
large account of their antiquity and original. But for so much as we are not
troubled with any such disorder, it shall suffice that I have generally said
of months and their quantities at this time. Now a word or two of the ancient
Roman calender.

In old time each month of the Roman calender was reckoned after the course
of the moon, and their enterances were uncertain, as were also the changes of
that planet: whereby it came to pass, that the day of the change was the
first of the month, howsoever it fell out. But after Julius Caesar had once
corrected the same, the several beginnings of every one of them did not
only remain fixed, but also the old order in the division of their parts
continued still unaltered: so that the month is yet divided as before, into
calends, ides and nones, albeit that in my days, the use of the same be but
small, and their order retained only in our calenders, for the better
understanding of such times, as the historiographers and old authors do
remember. The reckoning also of each of these goes (as you see) after a
preposterous order, whereby the Romans did rather note how many days were to
the next change

The days also of the change of the month of the moon, are called Calendae,
which in time of paganism were consecrated to Juno, and sacrifice made to that
goddess on the same. On these days also, and on the ides and nones they would
not marie. Likewise the morrow after each of them were called Dies atri, black
days, as were also diverse other, and those either by reason of some notable
overthrow or mishap Dies Aegyptiaci. Whereby it appears that this peevish
estimation of these days came from that nation. And as we do note our holy
and festival days with red letters in our calenders, so did the Romans their
principal feasts and circle of the moon, either in red or golden letters, and
their victories in white, in their public or consularie tables.

The word Calendae (in Greek Neomenia) is derived of Calo, to call: for upon
the first day of every month, the priest used to call the people of the city
and country together in Calabria, for so the place was called where they met,
and show them by a custom Calendae, dedicated to Juno, who thereof was also
Calendaris. At the first also the fasts or feast days were known by none
other means unto the people but by the denunciation of the priests (as I said)
upon this day, till Flauius Scriba caused them to be written: published in
their common calenders, contrary to the will and meaning of the senate, for the
ease and benefit of the people, as he pretended.

The nones commonly are not above four or six in every month: and so long
as the nones lasted, so long did the markets continue, and therefore they Nonae
quasi Nundinae. In them also were neither holiedaies more than is at this
present (except the day of the purification of our lady) no sacrifice offered
to the gods, but each one applied his business, and kept his market, reckoning
the first day after the calends or change, to be the fourth or sixth day before
the fair ended. Some think that they were called Nonae, of the word Non, quia
in ijsdem dij non coluntur. For as Ovid says, Nonarum tutelae deo caret, or
for that the nones were always on the ninth day before the ides: other
because Nundina dea was honored the ninth day before the ides, albeit I suppose
rather that Nundina dea (a goddess far yoonger than the name of Nonae) took
her name of the nones, whereon it was a custom among the Romans, Lustrare
infantes ac nomina maribus imponere, as they did with their maid children upon
the eight: but howsoever this be, sure it is that they were the mart days of
every month, wherein the people bought, sold, exchanged or battered, and did
nothing else.

The ides are so named of the Hethruscan word, Iduare, to divide: and before
that Caesar altered the calender, they divided the month commonly by the
midst. But afterward when he had added certain days the reto, thereby to
make it agree to the year of the sun (which he intruded about the end of
every month, because he would not alter the celebration of their usual
feasts, whereof the chief were holden always upon the day of the ides) then
came they short of the midst, sometime by two or three days. In these
therefore (which always are eight) the merchants had leisure to pack up and
conueie their merchandise, to pay their creditors, and make merry with their
friends.

After the ides do the calends follow, but in a decreasing order (as I noted)
as the moon does in light when she is past the full. But herein lies all the
mystery, if you can say so many days before the next change or new moon, as
the number there expressed does betoken, as for 16 calends so many days
before the next conjunction, etc: (as is above remembered.) Of these calends, I
mean touching their number in every month, I find these verses ensuing:
Ianus and Augustus denas nouemque December,
Iunius Aprilis September and ipse November
Ter senas retinent, Februs bis octo calendas,
Julius October Mars Maius epta decemque.


In English thus. December June and August month full nineteen calends have,
September April Nouemb and June twice nine they do desire,
Sixteen foul February has, no more can he well crave,
October May and Iulie hot but seventeen door require.


In like manner do the nones and ides. Sex Maius nonas, October, Julius, and
Mars,
Quatuor at reliqui, dabit idus quilibet octo.
To Iulie, Mars, October, May, six nones I hight,
The rest but four, and as for ides they keep still eight.
Again touching the number of days in every month: Iunius, Aprilis,
Septemque Nouemque, tricenos,
Vnumplus reliqui, Februs tenet octo vicenos,
At si bissextus fuerit superadditur vnus.
Thirty days has November,
April, June, and September,
Twenty and eight has February alone, and all the rest thirty and one, but
in the leap you must ad one.


Our year is counted after the course of the sun, and although the church
has some use of that of the moon for observation of certain mooueable
feasts, yet it is reducible to that of the sun, which in our civil dealings
is chiefly had in use. Herein only I find a scruple, that the beginning
thereof is not uniform and certain, for most of our records bear date the 25
of March, and our calenders she first of January; so that with us Christ is
borne before he be conceived. Our sundry officers also have sundry entrances
into their charges of custom, which breeds great confusion, whereas if all
these might be referred to one original (and that to be the first of Inuarie)
I do not think but that there would be more certeintie, and less trouble for
our historiographers, notaries, and other officers in their account of the
year. In old time the Atheniens began their year with the change of the moon
that fell nearest to the entrance of the sun into the crab, the Latins at
the winter solstice, or his going into the goat, the Jews in civil case at
the latter equinoctial, and in ecclesiastical with the first. They of
Calecute begin their year somewhere in September, but upon no day certain,
since they first consult with their wisards, Osorius does remember, who adds
that upon the eleventh calends of September, they have solemn plays, much
like to the idol games, and that they write in leaves of tree with a pencill,
in stead of paper, which is not found among them. Some of the old Grecians
began their year also in September: but since we seek herein but for the
custom of our country only, it shall be enought to Limes between that and
the last of December, whereof this may suffice. I might speak of the Cynike
year also in this place (for the ease of our English readers) sometime in use
amongst the Egyptians, which contains 1460 common years, whose beginning is
always reckoned from the rising of the lesser dog. The first use thereof
entered the self year wherein the Olimpiads were restored. And Annus magnus
Elizabethae, in perpetual remembrance of our noble and sovereign princess
now reigning amongst us.

I might here say somewhat also of the prime and her alteration, which is
risen higher by five days in our common calender than it was placed by Julius
Caesar: and in seven thousand years some writer

Certes the next omission is to be performed if all princes would agree thereto
in the leap year that shall be about the year of Grace 1668: if it shall
please God that the world may last so long, and then may our calender also
stand without any alteration as it does already. By this also it appears
how the defect of our calender may be supplied from the creation, wherein the
first equinoctial is seen higher toward the beginning of March than Caesar's
calender now extant does yield unto by seven days. For as in Caesar's time
the true equinoctial was pointed out to happen (as Stadius also notes) either
upon or about the sixteenth or seventeenth of March, albeit the manifest
apperance thereof was not found until the five and twentieth of that month in
their dials or by eie-sight: so at the beginning of the world the said entrance
of the sun into the ram, must needs fall out to be about the twentieth or one
and twentieth of April, as the calender now stands, if I fail not in my
numbers. Above the year we have no more parts of time, that carry any
several names with them, e^^cept you will affirm the word age to be one,
which is taken for a hundred years, and signifies in English so much as
Seculum or Aeuum does in Latin; neither is it needful to remember that some
of my countrymen do reckon their times not by years but by summers and
winters, which is very common among us. Wherefore to shut up this chapter
withal, you shall have a table of the names of the days of the week, after
the old Saxon and Scottish manner, which I have borrowed from amongst our ancient
writers, as I have perused their volumes.

The present names.
Monday. Tuesday. Wednesday. Thursday. Fridaie. Saturdaie. Sunday, or the Lords
day.
The old Saxon names.
Monendeg. Tuesdeg. Wodnesdeg. Thunresdeg. Frigesdeg. Saterdeg. Sunnandeg.
The Scottish usage.
Diu Luna. Diu Mart. Diu Yath. Diu Ethamon. Diu Friach. Diu Satur. Diu Seroll.
Of our principal faires and markets. Chap. 15.
I Have heretofore said sufficiently of our faires, in the chapter of fairs
and markets; and now to perform my promise there made, I set down here so
many of our faires as I have found out by mine own observation, and help of
others in this behalf. Certes it is impossible for me to come by all, since
there is almost no town in England, but has one or more such marts holden
yearly in the same, although some of them (I must needs confess) be scarce
comparable to Lowse fair, and little else bought or sold in them more than
good drink, pies, and some pedlerie trash: wherefore it were no loss if
diverse of them were abolished. Neither do I see whereunto this number of
paltrie fairs tends, so much as to the corruption of youth, who (all other
business set apart) must needs repair unto them, whereby they often spend not
only the week days, but also the Lords sabbath in great vanity and riot.
But such has been the iniquity of ancient times. God grant therefore that
ignorance being now abolished, and a further insight into things grown into
the minds of magistrates, these old errors may be considered of, and so far
reformed, as that thereby neither God may be dishonored, nor the common wealth
of our country any thing diminished. In the mean time, take this table here
ensuing in stead of a calender of the greatest, since that I cannot, or at the
least wise care not to come by the names of the less, whose knowledge cannot
be so profitable to them that be far off, as they are often prejudicial to
such as dwell near hand to the places where they be holden and kept, by
pilferers that resort

Faires in January.
THe sixth day being Twelfe day at Salisburie, the five and twentieth being saint
Paul's day, at Bristow, at Grauesend, at Churchingford, at Northalerton in
Yorkshire, where is kept a fair every wednesday from Christmasse until June.

Faires in February.
THe first day at Bromleie. The second at Lin, at Bath, at Maidstone, at
Bickleswoorth, at Budwoorth. The fourteenth at Feuersham. On Ashwednesday at
Lichfield, at Tamwoorth, at Roiston, at Excester, at Abington, at Cicester. The
four and twentieth at Henlie upon Thames, at Tewkesburie.

Faires in March.
ON the twelth day, at Stamford, Sappesford, and at Sudburie. The thirteenth
day at Wie, at the Mount, and at Bodmin in Cornwall. The fifth sunday in Lent,
at Grantham, at Salisburie. On monday before our lady day in Lent, at Wisbich,
at Kendall, Denbigh in Wales. On palm sunday eeuen, at Pumfret. On
palmesunday, at Worcester. The twentieth day at Durham. On our lady day in Lent
at Northamton, at Malden, at great Chart, at Newcastell.

Faires in April.
THe fifth day at Wallingford. The seventh at Darbie. The ninth at
Bickleswoorth, at Belinswoorth. On monday after, at Euesham in Worcestershire.
On tuesday in Easter week at Northfleet, at Rochford, at Hitchin. The third
sunday after

Faires in May.
ON May day at Rippon, at Perin in Cornwall,

Faires in June.
THe ninth day at Maidstone. The xi, at Okingham, at Newbourgh, at Bardfield,
at Maxfield, and Holt. The seventeenth at Hadstocke. The twenty three at
Shrewsburie, at saint Albans. The twenty fourth day, at Horsham, at Bedell, at
Strackstocke, at saint Annes, at Wakefield, at Colchester, at Reading, at
Bedford, at Barnewell beside Cambridge, at Woollerhampton, at Crambrooke, at
Gloucester, at Lincoln, at Peterborow, at Windsor, at Harstone, at Lancaster,
at Westchester, at Halifax, at Ashborne. The twenty seventh, at Folkestone.
The twenty eight, at Hetcorne, at saint Pombes. The twenty ninth, at
Woodhurst, at Marleborough, at Hollesworth, at Woollerhampton, at Peterfield,
at Lempster, at Sudburie, at Gargrainge, at Bromleie.

Faires in Iulie.
THe second at Congreton, at Ashton under line. The sunday after the third of
Iulie, at Raiston. The eleventh at Partneie, and at Lid. The fifteenth, at
Pichbacke. The seventeenth, at Winchcombe. The twentieth, at Uxbridge, at
Catesbie, at Bolton. The twenty two, at Marleborow, at Winchester, at
Colchester, at Tetburie, at Cooling, at Yealdon, at Bridgenorth, at Clitherall,
at Norwich in Cheshire, at Cheswike, at Battelfield, at Bicklewoorth. The
twenty fifth, at Bristow, at Dover, at Chilham, at Darbie, at Ipswich, at
Northampton, at Dudleie in Staffordshire, at saint James beside London, at
Reading, at Ereth in the I Will, at Walden, at Thremhall, at Baldocke, at Louth,
at Malmesburie, at Bromeleie, at Chichester, at Liuerpoole, at Altergam, at
Rauenglasse in the north. The twenty sixth, at Tiptrie. The twenty seventh at
Canturburie, at Horsham, at Richmund in the north, at Warington, at Chapel
frith.

Faires in August.
THe first day at Excester, at Feuersham, at Dunstable, at saint Edes, at
Bedford, at Northam church, at Wisbich, at York, at Rumneie, at Newton, at
Yeland. The fourth at Linton. The tenth at Waltham, at Thaxsted, at
Blackemoore, at Hungerford, at Berdford, at Stroides, at Fernam, at S. Laurence
by Bodmin, at Walton, at Croileie, at Seddell, at new Brainford. The xv, at
Cambridge, at Dunmow, at Caerleill, at Preston in Andall, at Wakefield on the
two lady days, and upon the sunday after the fifteenth day of August, at
Hauerhull, On Bartholomew day, at London, at Beggars bush beside Rye, at
Teukesburie, at Sudburie, at Rye, at Nantwich, at Pagets, at Bromleie, at
Norwich, at Northalerton, at Dover. On the sunday after Bartholomew day, at
Sandwich. The twenty seventh, and at Ashford.

Faires in September.
THe first day at S. Giles at the Bush. The eight day at Woolfpit, at
Wakefield, at Sturbridge, in Southwarke at London, at Snide, at Recoluer, at
Gisbourgh both the lady days, at Partneie. The three lady days at
Blackeburne, at Gisborne in

Faires in October.
THe fourth day at Michell. The sixth day at saint

Faires in November.
THe second at Blechinglie, at Kingston, at Maxfield, at Epping. The sixth day,
at Newport pond,

Faires in December.
ON the fifth day, at Pluckeleie. On the sixth, at Cased, at Hedningham, at
Spalding, at Excester, at Sinocke, at Arnedale, and at Northwich in Chesshire.
The seventh day at Sandhurst. The eight day being the conception of our lady,
at Clitherall in Lancashire, at Malpas in Cheshire. The twenty ninth, at
Canturburie, and at Salisburie.

Of our innes and thorowfaires. Chap. 16.
THose towns that we call thorowfaires have great and sumpthous innes builded
in them, for the receiving of such travelers and strangers as pass to and
fro. The manner of harboring wherein, is not like to that of some other
countries, in which the host or goodman of the house does challenge, a lordly
authority over his ghests, but clean otherwise, since every man may use his
inn as his own house in England, and have for his money how great or little
variety of vittels, and what other service himself shall think expedient to
call for. Our innes are also very well furnished with naperie, bedding, and
tapisterie, especially with naperie: for beside the linen used at the tables,
which is commonly washed daily, is such and so much as belongs unto the
estate and calling of the ghest. Each commer is sure to lie in clean sheets,
wherein no man has been lodged since they came from the landresse, or out of
the water wherein they were last washed. If the traveler have an horse, his
bed does cost him nothing, but if he go on foot he is sure to pay a penie for
the same: but whether he be horsseman or footman if his chamber be once
appointed he may carry the kaie with him, as of his own house so long as he
lodges there. If he loose oughts whilst he abides in the inn, the host is
bound by a general custom to restore the damage, so that there is no greater
security any where for travelers than in the gretest ins of England. Their
horses in like sort are walked, dressed and looked unto by certain hostelers
or hired servants, appointed at the charges of the goodman of the house, who in
hope of extraordinary reward will deal very diligently after outward
appeerance in this their function and calling. Herein nevertheless are many
of them blame worthy, in that they do not only deceive the beast oftentimes
of his allowance by sundry means, except their owners look well to them; but
also make such packs with slipper merchants which hunt after preie (for what
place is sure from evil and wicked persons) that many an honest man is
spoiled of his goods as he trauelleth to and fro, in which feat also the
counsel of the tapsters or drawers of drink, and chamberleins is not seldom
behind or wanting. Certes I believe not that chapman or traveler in England is
robbed by the way without the knowledge of some of them, for when he comes
into the nine, and alighteth from his horse, the hostler forthwith is very
busy to take down his budget or capcase in the yard from his sadle bow, which
he peiseth slilie in his hand to feel the weight thereof: or if he miss of
this pitch, when the ghest has taken up his chamber, the chamberleine that
looks to the making of the beds, will be sure to remove it from the place
where the owner has set it as if it were to set it more conveniently some
where else, whereby he gets an inkling whether it be money or other short
wares, and thereof gives warning to such od ghests as hant the house and are of
his confederacy, to the utter undoing of many an honest yeoman as he
iournieth by the way. The tapster in like sort for his part does mark his
behavior, and what plenty of money he draws when he paieth the shot, to the
like end: so that it shall be an hard matter to escape all their subtle
practices. Some think it a gay matter to commit their budgets at their coming
to the goodman of the house: but thereby they often bewraie themselves. For
albeit their money be safe for the time that it is in his hands (for you shall
not hear that a man is robbed in his inn) yet after their departure the host
can make no warrantise of the same, since his protection extends no further
than the gate of his own house: and there cannot be a surer taken unto such as
pry and watch for those booties, than to see any ghest deliver his capcase in
such manner. In all our innes we have plenty of ale, beer, and sundry kinds
of wine, and such is the capacity

The way from Walsingham to London.
FRom Walsingham to Picknam 12. miles From Picknam to Brandonferie 10. miles
From Brandonfarie to Newmarket 10. miles From Newmarket to Brabram 10. miles
From Brabram to Barkewaie 20. miles From Barkewaie to Puchrich 7. miles From
Puchrich to Ware 5. miles From Ware to Waltham 8. miles From Waltham to London
12. miles.
The way from Barwike to York, and so to London.
FRom Barwike to Belford 12. miles From Belford to Anwike 12. miles From Anwike
to Morpit 12. miles From Morpit to Newcastell 12. miles From Newcastell to
Durham 12. miles From Durham to Darington From Darington to Northalerton 14.
miles From Northalerton to Toplife 7. miles From Toplife to York 16. miles
From York to Tadcaster 8. miles From Tadcaster to Wantbridge 12. miles From
Wantbridge to Dancaster 8. miles From Dancaster to Tutford 18. miles From
Tutford to Newarke 10. miles From Newarke to Grantham 10. miles From Grantham
to Stanford 16. miles From Stanford to Stilton 12. miles From Stilton to
Huntington 9. miles From Huntington to Roiston 15. miles From Roiston to Ware
12. miles From Ware to Waltham 8. miles From Waltham to London 12. miles
The way from Carnaruan to Chester, and so to London.
FRom Carnaruan to Conwaie 24. miles From Conwaie to Denbigh 12. miles From
Denbigh to Flint 12. miles From Flint to Chester 10. miles From Chester to Which
14. miles From Which to Stone 15. miles From Stone to Lichfield 16. miles From
Lichfield to Colsill 12. miles From Colsill to Couentrie 8. miles
And so from Couentrie to London, as hereafter follows.

The way from Cockermouth to Lancaster, and so to London.
FRom Cockermouth to Kiswike 6. miles From Kiswike to Grocener 8. miles From
Grocener to Kendale 14. miles From Kendale to Burton 7. miles From Burton to
Lancaster 8. miles From Lancaster to Preston 20. miles From Preston to Wigam
14. miles From Wigam to Warington 20. miles From Warington to Newcastell 20.
miles From Newcastell to Lichfield 20. miles From Lichfield to Couentrie 20.
miles From Couentrie to Daintrie 14. miles From Daintrie to Tocester 10. miles
From Tocester to Stonistratford 6. miles From Stonistratford to Brichill 7.
miles From Brichill to Dunstable 7. miles From Dunstable to saint Albons 10.
miles From saint Albons to Barnet 10. miles From Barnet to London. 10. miles
The way from Yarmouth to Colchester, and so to London.
FRom Yarmouth to Becclis 8. miles From Becclis to Blibour 7. miles From
Blibour to Snaphridge 8. miles From Snaphridge to Woodbridge. 8. miles From
Woodbridge to Ipswich 5. miles From Ipswich to Colchester 12. miles From
Colchester to Eastford 8. miles From Eastford to Chelmesford 10. miles From
Chelmestford to Brentwood 10. miles From Brentwood to London 15. miles
The way from Dover to London.
FRom Dover to Canturburie 12. miles From Canturburie to Sittingborne 12. miles
From Sittingborne to Rochester 8. miles From Rochester to Grauesend 5. miles
From Grauesend to Datford 6. miles From Datford to London 12. miles
The way from saint Burien in Cornwall to London.
FRom S. Burien to the Mount 20. miles From the Mount to Thurie 12. miles From
saint Thurie to Bodman 20. miles From Bodman to Launstone 20. miles From
Launstone to Ocomton 15. miles From Ocomton to Crokehornewell 10. miles From
Crokehornewell to Excester 10. miles From Excester to Honiton 12. miles From
Honiton to Chard 10. miles From Chard to Crokehorne 7. miles From Crokehorne to
Shirborne 10. miles From Shirborne to Shaftsburie 10. miles From Shaftsburie to
Salisburie 18. miles From Salisburie to Andeuor 15. miles From Andeuor to
Basingstocke 18. miles From Basingstocke to Hartford 8. miles From Hartford to
Bagshot 8. miles From Bagshot to Stanes 8. miles From Stanes to London 15.
miles
The way from Bristowe to London.
FRom Bristow to Maxfield 10. miles From Maxfield to Chipnam 10. miles From
Chipnam to Marleborough 15. miles From Marleborough to Hungerford 8. miles From
Hungerford to Newburie 7. miles From Newburie to Reading 15. miles From Reading
to Maidenhead. 10. miles From Maidenhead to Colbrooke 7. miles From Colbrooke
to London 15. miles
The way from saint David's to London.
FRom saint David's to Axford 20. miles From Axford to Carmarden 10. miles From
Carmarden to Newton 10. miles From Newton to Lanburie 10. miles From Lanburie
to Brechnocke 16. miles From Brechnocke to Haie 10. miles From Haie to Harford
14. miles From Harford to Roso 9. miles From Roso to Gloucester 12. miles From
Gloucester to Cicester 15. miles From Cicester to Farington 16. miles From
Farington to Habington 7. miles From Habington to Dorchester 7. miles From
Dorchester to Henleie 12. miles From Henleie to Maidenhead 7. miles From
Maidenhead to Colbrooke 7. miles From Colbrooke to London 15. miles
Of thorowfares, from Dover to Cambridge.
FRom Dover to Canturburie 12. miles From Canturburie to Roschester 20. miles
From Rofchester to Grauesend 5. miles From Grauesend over the Thames, to
Hornedon 4. miles From Hornedon to Chelmesford 12. miles From Chelmesford to
Dunmow 10. miles From Dunmow to Thaxsted 5. miles From Thaxsted to Radwinter 3.
miles From Radwinter to Linton 5. miles From Linton to Babrenham 3. miles From
Babrenham to Cambridge 4. miles
From Canturburie to Oxford.
FRom Canturburie to London 43. miles From London to Uxbridge or Colbrooke 15.
mile From Uxbridge to Baccansfield 7. miles From Baccansfield to east Wickham
5. miles From Wickham to Stocking church 5. miles From Stocking church to
Thetisford 5. miles From Thetisford to Whatleie 6. miles From What leie to
Oxford 4. miles
From London to Cambridge.
FRom London to Edmondton 6. miles From Edmondton to Waltham 6. miles From
Waltham to Hoddesdon 5. miles From Hoddesdon to Ware 3. miles From Ware to
Polcherchurch 5. miles From Pulcherchurch to Barkewaie 7. miles From Barkewaie
to Fulmere 6. miles From Fulmere to Cambridge 6. miles
Or thus better way.
From London to Hoddesdon 17. miles From Hoddesdon to Hadham 7. miles From
Hadham to Saffron Walden 12. miles From Saffron Walden to Cambridge 10. miles
Of certain ways in Scotland, out of Reginald Wolfes his annotations. From
Barwijc to Edenborow.
FRom Barwijc to Chirneside 10. miles From Chirneside to Coldingham 3. miles
From Coldingham to Pinketon 6. miles From Pinketon to Dunbarre 6. miles From
Dunbarre to Linton 6. miles From Linton to Haddington 6. miles From Haddington
to Seaton 4. miles From Seaton to Aberladie or Muskelborow 8. mi. From thence
to Edenborow 8. miles
From Edenborow to Barwijc another way.
FRom Edenborow to Dalketh 5. miles From Dalketh to new Battle and Lander 5.
miles From Lander to Ursildon 6. miles From Ursildon to Driburg 5. miles From
Driburg to Cariton 6. miles From Cariton to Barwtjc 14. miles
From Edenborow to Dunbrittaine westward.
FRom Edenborow to Kirkeliston 6. miles From Kirkeliston to Lithco 6. miles
From Lithco to Farekirke over Forth 6. miles From thence to Striuelin upon
Forth 6. miles From Striuelin to Dunbrittaine 24. miles
From Striuelin to Kinghorne eastward.
FRom Striuelin to Down in Menketh 3. miles From Down to Campskenell 3. miles
From Campskenell to Alwie upon Forth 4. miles From Alwie to Culrose on Fiffe
10. miles From Culrose to Dunfermelin 2. miles From Dunfermelin to Euerkennin
2. miles From Euerkennin to Aberdore on Forth 3. miles From Aberdore to
Kinghorne upon Forth 3. miles
From Kinghorne to Taimouth.
FRom Kinghorne to Dissard in Fiffe 3. miles From Dissard to Cowper 8. miles
From Cowper to S. Andrews 14. miles From S. Andrews to the Taimouth 6. miles
From Taimouth to Stockeford.
FRom Taimouth to Balmerimoth abbeie 4. mil. From thence to Londores abbeie 4.
miles From Londores to S. John's town 12. miles From S. John's to Schone 5.
miles From thence to Abernithie, where the Erne runs From Abernithie to
Dundee 15. miles From Dundee to Arbroth and Muros 24. miles From Muros to
Aberden 20. miles From Aberden to the water of Doneie 20. miles From thense to
the river of Spaie 30. miles From thence to Stockeford in Rosse, and so to the
Nesse of Haben, a famous point on the west side 30. miles
From Carleill to Whiteherne westward.
FRom Carleill over the Ferie against Redkirke 4. miles From thence to Dunfrees
20. miles From Dunfrees to the Ferie of Cre 40. miles From thence to Wigton 3.
miles From thence to Whitherne 12. miles
Hitherto of the common ways of England and Antoninus, to the end that by
their conference the diligent reader may have further consideration of the same
than my leisure will permit me. In setting forth also thereof, I have noted
such diversity of reading, as has happened in the sight of such written and
printed copies, as I have seen in my time. Notwithstanding. I must confess
the same to be much corrupted in the rehearsal of

Iter Britanniarum.
A GESSORIACO.
De Gallis Ritupis in portu Britanniarum stadia numero. CCCCL.
A LIMITE, ID EST, A VALLO
A Bramenio Corstopitum, Britannia.
m. p. XX Vindomora, m. p. IX Viconia * m. p. XIX Vinouia Vinouium Cataractoni
m. p. XXII Darington. Isurium m. p. XXIIII Aidbor^ (...) Eburacum legio VI
Victrix m. p. XVII york. Deruentione m. p. VII Tadcaster. Delgouitia m. p.
XIII Wentbridge. Praetorio m. p. XXV Tudford.
ITEM A VALLO AD portum Ritupis m. p. 481 491 sic,
Ablato Bulgio * castra exploratorum m. p. X, 15 alias a Blato Lugu-vallo * m.
p. XII alias a Lugu-valio. Cairteill. Voreda m. p. XIIII Brouonacis * m. p.
XIII Brauoniacis Verteris m. p. XX, 13 Lauatris m. p. XIIII Cataractone * m. p.
XXI Caturractonium. Darington. Isuriam * m. p. XXIIII Isoriam. Ald borow alias
Topcliffe. Eburacum * m. p. XVIII Eboracum. york. Calcaria * m. p. IX Cacaria
Camboduno m. p. XX Mammuncio * m. p. XVIII Manucio Condate m. p. XVIII Deua
legio XXIII.CI. m. p. XX Bouio * m. p. X Bonio Mediolano m. p. XX Rutunio m. p.
XII Vrio Conio * m. p. XI Viroconium, Shrewesbuie prope. Vxacona m. p. XI
Penno-Crucio m. p. XII Etoceto m. p. XII Mandues Sedo m. p. XVI Venonis m. p.
XII Bennauenta * m. p. XVII Banna venta Lactorodo * m. p. XII Lactodoro Maginto
* m. p. XVII. 12 Magiouintum Duro-Cobriuis m. p. XII Dunstable. Vero-Lamio m.
p. XII S^^lbanes. Sullomacis * m. p. IX Barnet. Longidinio m. p. XII Londinio.
London. Nouiomago m. p. XII Vagniacis m. p. VI Durobrouis m. p. V. Duroprouis.
Rochester. Duroleuo m. p. XVI. 8 Duror-Verno * m. p. XII Drouerno Durouerno Ad
portum Ritupis m. p. XII Duraruenno Daruerno
ITEM A LONDINIO ad portum Dubris m. p. 56 66, sic:
Dubobrus * m. p. XXVII Durobrouis Durobrius. Rochester. Duraruenno m. p. XV,
25 Canturburie. Ad portum Dubris m. p. XIIII Dover haven.
ITEM A LONDINIO AD portum Lemanis m. p. 68 sic:
Durobrius m. p. XXVII Rochester. Duraruenno m. p. XV, 25 Canturburie. Ad
portum * Lemanis m. p. XVI Lumming haven.
ITEM A LONDINIO Lugu-Valio ad Vallum m. p. 443, sic:
Caesaromago m. p. XXVIII Colonia m. p. XXIIII Villa Faustini m. p. XXXV, 25
Icianos m. p. XVIII Camborico m. p. XXXV Duroliponte m. p. XXV Durobriuas m. p.
XXXV Gausennis m. p. XXX Lindo m. p. XXVI Segeloci m. p. XIIII Dano m. p. XXI
Lege-Olio * m. p. XVI Logetium Eburaco m. p. XXI Isubriganium * m. p. XVI
Isurium Briganium Cataractoni m. p. XXIIII Leuatris * m. p. XVIII Leuatrix
Verteris m. p. XIIII Brocouo * m. p. XX Brocouicum Lugu-Vallo m. p. XXV, 22
ITEM A LONDINIO Lindo m. p. 156 sic:
Verolami m. p. XXI Duro Cobrius m. p. XII Magiouinio * m. p. XII Maginto
Lactodoro m. p. XVI Magis Isanna Vantia * m. p. XII Isanna vatia Tripontio m.
p. XII Isanna varia Venonis m. p. IX Ratas m. p. XII Verometo m. p. XIII
Margi-duno m. p. XII Ad Pontem * m. p. VII Pons Aelij Croco Calana * m. p. VII
Crorolana Lindo m. p. XII
ITEM A REGNO Londinio m. p. 116, 96 sic:
Clausentum m. p. XX Venta Belgarum m. p. X Galleua * Attebatum m. p. XXII
Galleua, Walingford. Pontibus m. p. XXII Reding. Calliua, Walingford. Londinio
m. p. XXII
ITEM AB EBVRACO Londinium m. p. 227 sic:
Lagecio m. p. XXI Dano m. p. XVI Dancaster. Ageloco * m. p. XXI Segoloco Lindo
m. p. XIIII Crococalano m. p. XIIII Margi-duno m. p. XIIII Vernemero * m. p.
XII Verometo Ratis m. p. XII Vennonis m. p. XII Bannauanto m. p. XIX Magio
Vinio m. p. XXVIII Durocobrius m. p. XII Dunstable. Verolamo m. p. XII S
Albanes. Sullomaca m. p. IX Barnet. Londinio m. p. XII London.
ITEM A VENTA ICINORVM Londinio m. p. 128 sic:
Sitomago m. p. XXXI Combretouio * m. p. XXII Cumbretnio Ad Ansam m. p. XV
Camoloduno m. p. VI Canonio m. p. IX Caesaromago m. p. XII Durolito m. p. XVI
Londinio m. p. XV
ITEM A GLAMOVENTA Mediolano m. p. 150 sic:
Galaua m. p. XVIII Alone * m. p. XII Ala^^a * Aliona Alione Galacum * m. p.
XIX Galacum Brigantum Bremetonaci m. p. XXVII Coccio m. p. XX Mancunio * m. p.
XVIII Mammucio vel Manucio Condate m. p. XVIII Mediolano m. p. XIX
ITEM A SEGONCIO DEuam m. p. 74 sic:
Canouio m. p. XXIIII Varis m. p. XIX Deua. m. p. XXXII
ITEM A CALLEVA alias MVRIDONO alias Viroconiorum. Per Viroconi^^^
Vindonu * m. p. XV Vindomi Venta Belgarum m. p. XXI Brige * m. p. XI Brag^
Soruioduni m. p. IX Vindogladia m. p. XIII, 15 Durnouaria m. p. VIII Muriduno
m. p. XXXVI Scadum Nunniorum * m. p. XV, 12 Iscadum Leucaro m. p. XV Bomio m.
p. XV Nido m. p. XV Iscelegua Augusti * m. p. XIIII Iscelegla Burrio m. p. IX
Gobannio m. p. XII Magnis m. p. XXII. Brauinio * m. p. XXIIII Bron^ni^
Viriconio m. p. XXVII
ITEM AB ISCA CALIeu^ m. p. 109 sic:
Burrio m. p. IX Blestio m. p. XI Ariconio m. p. XI. Cleuo m. p. XV
Durocornouio m. p. XIIII Spinis m. p. XV Calleua m. p. XV
ITEM ALIO ITINERE AB Isca Calleua m. p. 103 sic:
Venta Silurum m. p. IX Abone m. p. IX Traiectus m. p. IX Aquis Solis m. p. VI
Verlucione m. p. XV Cunetione m. p. XX Spinis m. p. XV Calleua m. p. XV
ITEM A CALLEVA IS CADVM Nunniorum m. p. 136 sic:
Vindomi m. p. XV Venta Belgarum m. p. XXI Brige m. p. XI Sorbiodoni m. p. VIII
Vindocladia m. p. XII Durnonouaria * m. p. VIII (...) Moriduno m p. XXXVI
Iscadum Nunniorum m. p. XV
FINIS.
THE History of England, from the time that it was first inhabited, until the
time that it was last conquered:

Wherein the sundry alterations of the state under foreign people is declared;
and other manifold observations remembered:

BY RAPHAEL HOLINSHED.

Now newly read over, and diligently digested into books and chapters, with
their several arguments prefixed, containing an abridgement of the whole
history, for the help of the readers judgment and memory:

With two tables of particulars, the one serving the description, the other the
history: by Abr. Fleming.

Laus historiae ex I. Lelando. Quod sol aethereo praestat pulcherrimus orbi,
Historia humanis vsibus hoc tribuit.



To the Readers studious in histories.
THe order observed in the description of Britain, by reason of the necessary
diuison thereof into books and chapters growing our of the variety of matters
therein contained, seemed (in my judgment) so convenient a course devised by
the writer, as I was easily induced thereby to digest the history of England
immediately following into the like method: so that as in the one, so likewise
in the other, by summarie contents foregoing every chapter, as also by
certain material titles added at the head of every page of the said
history, it is a thing of no difficulty to comprehend what is discoursed and
discussed in the same.

Wherein (since histories are said to be the registers of memory and the
monuments of verity) all lovers of knowledge, specially historical, are
advisedly to mark (among other points) the several and successiue
alterations of regiments in this land: whereof it was my meaning to have made
an abstract, but that the same is sufficiently handled in the first book and
fourth chapter of the description of Britain; whereto if the seventh chapter
of the same book be also annexed, Page 5, 6, 7, 8, 15. 16, 28, 29, of the
description: and page 202 of the history of England.
there is little or no defect at all in that case whereof justly to make
complaint.

Wherefore by remitting the readers to those, I reap this advantage, namely a
dischage of a forethought and purposed labor, which as to reduce into some
plausible form was a work both of time, pain and study: so seeming
unlikely to be comprised in few words (being a matter of necessary and
important observation) occasion of tediousnes is to and fro avoided; specially
to the reader, who is further to be advertised, that the computations of years
here and there expressed, according to the indirect direction of the copies
whense they were derived and drawn, is not so absolute (in some men's opinion)
as it might have been: howbeit justifiable by their originals.

Wherein hereafter (God prolonging peace in the church and common-welth that the
use of books may not be abridged) such diligent care shall be had, that in
whatsoever the help of books will do good, or conference with antiquaries
avail, there shall want no will to use the one and the other. And yet it is
not a work for every common capacity, naie it is a toil without head or
tail even for extraordinary wits, to correct the accounts of former ages so
many hundred years received, out of vncerteinties to raise certeinties, and to
reconcile writers dissenting in opinion and report. But as this is impossible,
so is no more to be looked for than may be performed: and further to inquire as
it is against reason, so to undertake more than may commendablie be atchiued,
were foul folly.

Abraham Fleming.

THE FIRST BOOK of the history of England.
^HONI^ SOIT^ QVI^ MAL^ Y^ PENSE^

Who inhabited this Island before the coming of Brute: of Noah and his three
sons, among whom the whole earth was divided: and to which of their portions
this I Will of Britain befell.
WHat manner of people did first inhabit this our country, which has most
generally and of longest continuance been known among all nations by The
original of nations for the most part uncertain.
But since the original in manner of all nations is doubtful, and even the same
for the more part fabulous (that always excepted which we find in the holy
scriptures) I wish not any

To fetch therefore the matter from the farthest, whither Britain were an
Island at the first.
and so to stretch it forward, Geog. com. lib.
it seems by the report of Dominicus Marius Niger that in the beginning, when
God framed the world, No Islands at the first, as some conjecture.
and divided the waters

First therefore John Bale our countrieman, who in his time greatly traveled
in the search of such antiquities, In the first part of the acts of the English
votaries.
does probably conjecture, that this land was inhabited and replenished with
people long before the flood, and that time in the which the generation of
mankind (as Moses writes) began to multiply Britain inhabited before the
flood.
upon the universal face of the earth: Genesis. 6
and therefore it follows, that as well this land was inhabited with people
long before the days of Noah, Berosus ant. lib. ^
as any the other countries and parts of the world beside. But when they had
once forsaken the ordinances appointed them by God, and betaken them to new
ways invented of themselves, such looseness of life ensued every where, as
brought upon them the great deluge and universal flood, in the which perished
as well the inhabitants of these quarters, as the residue of the race of
mankind, generally dispersed in every other part of the whole world, only
Noah and his family excepted, who by the providence and pleasure of almighty
God was preserved from the rage of those waters, to recontinue and repair the
new generation of man upon earth.

AFter the flood (as Annius de Viterbo records) Noah.
and reason also enforces, In comment. super 4. lib. Berosus de antiquit. lib.
1. Annisus vt supr.
Noah was the only monarch of all the wrold, and as the same Annius gathers
by the account of Moses in the 100. year after the flood, Noah divided the
earth among his three sons; assigning to the possession of his eldest son
all that portion of land which now is known by the name of Asia; to his second
son Cham, he appointed all that part of the world which now is called
Africa: and to his third son Iaphet was allotted all Europa, with all the
Isles thereto belonging, wherein among other was contained this our I Will of
Britain, with the other Isles thereto perteining.

IAphet the third son of Noah, of some called Iapetus, Iaphet and his sons.
and of others, Atlas Maurus (because he departed this life in Mauritania) was
the first (as Bodinus affirms by the authority and consent of Johannes
Bodinus ad fac. hist. cogn.
the Hebrew, Greek and Latin writers) that peopled the countries of Europe,
which afterward he divided among his sons: Franciscus Tarapha.
of whom Iuball (as Tarapha affirms) obtained the kingdom of Spain. Gomer
had dominion over the Italians, and (as Berosus and diverse other authors agree)
Samothes was the founder of Celtica, which contained in it (as Bale witnesses)
a great part of Europe, but specially those countries which now are called by
the names of Gallia and Britannia.

Thus was the Island inhabited and peopled within Britain inhabited shortly
after the flood.
200 years after the flood by the children of Iaphet the son of Noah: and
this is not only proved by Annius, writing upon Berosus, but also confirmed
by Moses in the scripture, where he writes, that of the offspring of Iaphet,
the Isles of the Gentiles (whereof Britain is one) were sorted into regions in
the time of Phaleg the son of Hiber, who was borne at the time of the
division of languages. Hereupon Theophilus Theophilus episcop. Antioch. ad
An^ol. lib. 2.
has these words: Cum priscis temporibus pauei forant homines in Arabia and
Chaldaea, post linguarum diuisonem aucti and multiplicati paulatim sunt: The
words of Theophilus a doctor of the church, who lived an. Dom. 160.
hinc quidam abierunt versus orientem, quidam concessere ad parts maioris,
continentis, alij porro profecti sunt ad septentrionem seeds quaesiu^^i, nec
prius desierunt terram vbique occupare, quam etiam (...) annos in Arctois
climatibus accesserint, etc. That is; When at the first there were not many
men in Arabia and Chaldaea, it came to pass, that after the division of
toongs, they began somewhat better to increase and multiply, by which occasion
some of them went toward the east, and some toward the parts of the great many
land: diverse went also northwards to seek them dwelling places, neither staid
they to replenish the earth as they went, till they came unto the Isles of
Britain, lieng under the north pole. Thus far Theophilus.

These things considered, Gildas the Britain had great reason to think, that
this country had been inhabited from the beginning. And Polydor Virgil was
with no less consideration hereby induced to confess, that the I Will of
Britain had received inhabitants forthwith after the flood.

Of Samothes, Magus, Sarron, Druis, and Bardus, five kings succeeding
SAmothes the first begotten Genesis 2.
Dis, De migr. genesis
by others received for his portion (according to the report of Wolfgangus
Lazius) all the country lieng between the river of Rhene and the Pyrenian
mountains, where he founded the kingdom of Celtica over his people called
Celtae. Which name Bale affirms to have been indifferent to the inhabitants
both of the country of Gallia, Cent. 1.
and the I Will of Britain, and that he planted colonies of men (brought forth
of the east parts) in either of them, first in the maine land, and after in the
Island. Anti. lib. 1.
He is reported by Berosus to have excelled all men of that age in learning and
knowledge: Bale script. Brit. cent. 1.
and also is thought by Bale to have imparted the same among his people;
namely, the understanding of the sundry courses of the stars, Caesar
commen^. lib. 8.
the order of inferior things, with many other Achilochus) devised and
derived the Greek characters, In epithes. temp. De aequiuocis contra Appionem.
insomuch that Xenophon and Josephus do constantly report (although Diogenes
Laertius be against it) that both the Greeks and other nations received their
letters and learning first from these countries. Lib. de Magic. success. lib.
22.
Of this king and his learning arose a sect of philosophers (says Annius)
Samothei. They (as Aristotle and Secion write) were passing skillful both in
the law of God and man: and for that cause exceedingly given to religion,
Script. Brit. cent. 1. De ant. Cant. cent. lib. 1.
especially the inhabitants of this I Will of Britain, insomuch that the whole
nation did not only take the name of them, but the Island it self (as Bale
and doctor Caius agree) came to be called Samothea, This I Will called Samothes.
which was the first peculiar name that ever it had, and by the which it was
especially known before the arrival of Albion.

MAgus the son of Samothes, Magus the son of Samothes Lib. 9.
after the death of his father, was the second king of Celtica; by whom (as
Berosus writes) there were many towns builded among the Celts, which by the
witness of Annius did bear the addition of their founder Magus: Annius in co^
men. super ^^dem. Geogr.
of which towns diverse are to be found in Ptolomie: And Antoninus a painful
surueior of the world and searcher of cities, makes mention of four of them
here in Britain, Sitomagus, Neomagus, Niomagus, and Nouiomagus. Neomagus sir
Thomas Eliot writes to have stood where the city of Chester now stands;
Niomagus, George Lilly places where the town of Buckingham is now remaining.
Beside this, Bale does so highly commend the foresaid Magus for his learning
renowned over all the world, that he would have the Persians, and other nations
of the south and west parts, to derive the name of their divines called Magi
from him. In deed Rauisius Textor, and sir John Prise affirm, that in the
days of Pliny, the Britons were so expert in art magike, that they might be
thought to have first delivered the same to the Persians. What the name of
Magus imports, and of what profession the Magi were, Tullie declares at
large, De diui. lib. 1. DE fastis li. 5.
and Mantuan in brief, after this manner: Ille penes Persas Magus est, qui
sidera norit,
Qui sciat herbarum vires cultumu deorum,
Persepoli facit ista magos prudentia triplex.
The Persians term him Magus, that
the course of stars does know,
The power of herbs, and worship due
to God that man does owe, H. F.

By threefold knowledge thus the name
of Magus then does grow.


SArron the third king of the Celts succeeded his father Magus in government
of the contrie of Gallia, Sarron the son of Magus. De ant. Cant. lib. 1. Bale
script. Brit. cent. 1.
and the I Will Samothea, wherein as (D. Caius writes) he founded certain
public places for them that professed learning, with Berosus affirms to be
done, to the internt to restrain the wilful outrage of men, being as then but
raw and void of all civility. Also it is thought by Annius, that he was the
first author of those kind of philosophers, which were called Sarronides, of
whom Diodorus Siculus writes in this sort: Lib. 6.
There are (says he) among the Celts certain divines and philosophers called
Sarronides, whom above all other they have in great estimation. For it is the
manner among them, not without a philosopher to make any sacrifice: since they
are of belief, that sacrifices ought only to be made by such as are skillful
in the divine mysteries, as of those who are nearest unto God, by whose
intercession they think all good things are to be required of God, and whose
advise they use and follow, as well in war as in peace.

DRuis, whom Seneca calls Dryus, Druis the son of Sarron.
being the son of Sarron, De morte Claud
was after his father established the fourth king of Celtica, indifferently
reigning as well over the Celts as Britons, or rather (as the inhabitants of
this I Will were then called) Samotheans. This prince is commended by Berosus to
be so plentifully endued with wisdom and learning, that Annius takes him to
be the undoubted author of the beginning and name of the philosophers called
Druides, whom Caesar and all other ancient Greek and Latin writers do
affirm to have had their beginning in Britain, and to have bin brought from
thence into Gallia, insomuch that when there arose any doubt in that country
touching any point of their discipline, they did repair to be resolved therein
into Britain, where, specially in the I Will of Anglesey (as Humfrey L^^oyd
witnesses) they made their principal abode. Anti. lib. 5. Annius super
eu^ndem. De bello Gallico. lib. 9. De belio Gallico. 6;
Touching their vsages many things are written by Aristotle, Socion, Pliny,
Laertius, Bodinus, and others: which I will gather in brief, and set down as
follows. They had (as Caesar says) the charge of common and private
sacrifices, the discussing of points of religion, the bringing up of youth, the
determining of matters in variance, with full power to interdict so many from
the sacrifice of their gods and the company of men, as disobeied their award.
Hist. an. lib. 1.
Polydore affirms, how they taught, that men's souls could not die, but
departed from one body to another, and that to the intent to make men valiant
and dreadlesse of death. Tullie writes, De diui. lib. 1.
that partly by tokens, and partly by surmises, they would foretell things to
come. And by the Hector Boethius, Hi^t. S^oti, li. 2.
some of them were not ignorant of the immortality of the one and everlasting
God. Demigr. genesis (...) 2.
All these things they had written in the Greek tongue, insomuch that Wolf
Lazius (upon the report of Marcellinus Marcellinus.
) declares how the Greek letters were first brought to Athens by Timagenes
from the Druides. And hereupon it comes also to pass, that the British tongue
has in it remaining at this day some smacke of the Greek. Among other abuses
of the Druides, they had (according to Diodorus) Auentinus witnesses) by
Tiberius and Cladius the emperors; Anna. B oiorum. lib. 22.
and lastly abolished here in Britain (by the report of Caius) when the
gospel of Christ by the preaching of Fugatius and Damianus was received among
the Britains, De ant. Caut.
under Lucius

BArdus the son of Druis succeeded his father in the kingdom of Celtica,
Bardus the son of Druis. Berosus any. lib. 2. Annius in com^en super eur^dem.
and was the fifth king over the Celtes and Samotheans, amongst whom he was
highly renoumed (as appears by Berosus) for invention of dities and music,
wherein Annius of Viterbo writes, that he trained his people: and of such as
excelled in this knowledge, he made an order of philosophical poets or
heralds, Bardi. And it should seem by doctor Caius and master Bale, Ant.
Cant. li. 1. script. Britain. cent. 1,
that Caesar found some of them here at his arrival in this I Will, and reported
that they had also their first beginning in the same. The profession and vsages
of these Bardi, Nonnius, Strabo, Diodorus, Stephanus, Bale, Nonnius Marcel.
Strabo. Diodor. Sicul. lib. 6. ^arol. Stepha. ^n dict. hist. Bale. John Prise.
and sir John Prise, are in effect reported after this sort. They did use to
record the noble exploits of the ancient capteins, and to draw the pedegrees
and genealogies of such as were living. They would frame pleasant Lucane says,
Vos quoque qui fortes animas belloque peremptas, Lucan. lib. 1.

Laudius in longum vates dimittitis aeuum,
Plurima securi fudistis carmina Bardi:
And you o poet Bards from danger void that dities sound,
Of souls of dreadlesse men, H. F.
whom rage of battle would confound,
And make their lasting praise to time of later age rebound.


Because the names of these poets were neither discrepant from the civility of
the Romans, nor repugnant to the religion of the Christians, they (of all the
other sects before specified) were suffered only to continue vnabolished in
all ages, insomuch that there flourished of them among the Britains (according
to Bale) before the birth of Christ, John Bale script Britan. cent. 2. John
Prise defen hist. Brit. Caius de ant. Cant lib. 1. John Leland syllab. ant.
dict. Hum. Lloyd de Mona insula.
Plenidus and Oronius: after Christ (as Prise recounteth) Thalestine, and the
two Merlins, Melkin, Elaskirion, and others: and of late days among the
Welshmen, David Day, Iollo Gough, David ap William, with an infinite number
more. And in Wales there are sundry of them (as Caius reports) remaining
unto this day, where they are in their language called (as Leland writes)
Barthes. Also by the witness of Humfrey Llhoyd, there is an Island near unto
Wales, called Insula Bardorum, and Bardsey, whereof the one name in Latin, and
the other in Saxon or old English, signifies the Island of the Bardes or
Barthes. Thus far the government of the Celts in this I Will.

An appendix to the former chapter.
AFter Bardus, Bale.
the Celts (as Bale says) loathing the streict ordinances of their ancient
kings, and b^^aking themselves to pleasure and idleness, were in short time,
and with small labor brought under the subjection of the giant Albion, the
son of Neptune, who altering the state of things in this Island, streicted the
name of Celtica and the Celts within the bounds of Gallia, from whence they
came first to inhabit this land under the conduct of Samothes, as before ye
have heard, accordingly as Annius has gathered out of Berosus the Chaldean,
Annius.
who therein agrees also with the scripture, the saying of Theophilus the
doctor, Theophilus.
and the general consent of all writers, which fully consent, that the first
inhabitants of this I Will came out of the parties of Gallia, although some of
them dissent about the time and manner of their coming. Sir Brian Tuke thinks
it to be meant of the arrival of Brute, Sir Brian Tuke
when he came out of those countries into this I Will. Caesar and Tacitus seem to
be of opinion, Caesar. Tacitus. Bodinus.
that those Celts which first inhabited here, came over to view the country
for trade of merchandise. Bodinus would have them to come in (a Gods name) from
Languedoc, and so to name this land Albion, of a city in Languadoc named
Albie. Beda, Beda. Polydor.
and likewise Polydore (who follows him) affirm that they came from the
coasts of Armorica, which is now called little Britain.

But that the authorities before recited are sufficient to prove the time that
this Island was first inhabited by the Celts, the old possessors of Gallia; not
only the neernesse of the regions, but the congruence of languages, two great
arguments of originals do fully confirm the same. Bodinus writes upon
report, Bodinus.
that the British and Celtike language was all one. But whether that be true or
not, I am not able to affirm, because the Celtike tongue is long since grown
wholly out of use. Howbeit some such Celtike words as remain in the writings
of old authors may be perceived to agree with the Welsh tongue, being the
voncorrupted speech of the ancient Britains. In deed Pausanias the Grecian
makes mention how the Celts in their language called a horse Marc: Pausanias.
and by that name do the Welshmen call a horse to this day: and the word
Trimarc in Pausanias, signifies in the Celtike tongue, three horses.

Thus it appears by the authority of writers, by situation of place, and by
affinity of language, that this Island was first found and inhabited by the
Celts, that there name from Samothes to Albion continued here the space of 310
years or there abouts. And finally it is likely, John Bale.
that as well the progeny as the speech of them is partly remaining in this
I Will among the inhabitants, and specially the British, even unto this day.

Of the giant Albion, of his coming into this Island, diverse opinions why it
was called Albion: why Albion and Bergion were slain by Hercules: of Danaus
and of his 50. daughters. The third Chapter.
NEptunus called by Moses Bale.
the sixth son of Osiris, after the account of Annius, and the brother of
Hercules, Annius de Viterbo. Diodorus Siculus.
had appointed him of his father (as Diodorus writes) the government of the
ocean sea: wherefore he furnished himself of sundry light ships for the more
ready passage Pinnesses or galleys.
which in the end grew to the number of a full navy: and so by continual
exercise he became so skillful, and therewith so mighty upon the waters (as
Higinus and Pictonius do write) that he was not only called the king,
Higinus. Pictonius.
but also esteemed the god of the seas. He had to wife a lady called
Amphitrita, who was also honored as goddess of the seas, of whose body he
begat sundry children: and (as Bale reports) he made every one of them king
of an Island. Scrip. Bri. cens. 1.
In the I Will of Britain he landed his John Textor, and Polydor Virgil made
mention, that light ships were first invented in the British seas, Ioh.
Textor. Polydor.
and that the same were covered round with the hides of beasts, for defending
them from the surges and waves of the water.

This Albion being put by his father in possession of this I Will of Britain,
within short time subdued the Samotheans, the first inhabitants thereof,
Nicholaus Perottus, Rigmanus Philesius, Aristotle, Nichol. Perot. Rigmanus
Philesius. Aristotle. Hum. Lhoyd.
and Humfrey Llhoyd, with diverse other, both foreign and home-writers) this
Island was first called by the name of Albion, having

This Albion (that thus changed the name of this I Will) and his company, are
called giants, which signifies none other than a tall kind of men, of that
vncorrupt stature and highness naturally incident to the first age (which
Berosus also seems to allow, Berosus.
where he writes, that Noah was one of the giants) and were not so called only
of their monstrous What Gigantes signify.
for Gigantes signifies the sons of the earth: the Aborigines, or (as Caesar
calls them) Indigenae) that is, borne and bred out of the earth were they
inhabited.

Thus some think, but verelie although that their opinion is not to be allowed
in any condition, which maintain that there should be any Aborigines, Against
the opinion of the Aborigines.
or other kind of men than those of Adams line; yet that there have been men
of far greater stature than are now to be found, is sufficiently proved by
the huge bones of those that have been found in our time, or lately before:
whereof here to make further relation it shall not need, since in the
description of Britain ye shall find it sufficiently declared.

But now to our purpose. As Albion held Britain in subjection, Bale. Bergion
(...) there to (...) Hercules ^^^bicus.
so his brother Bergion kept Ireland and the Orkenies under his rule and
dominion, and hearing that their coosine Hercules Lybicus having finished his
conquests in Spain, meant to pass through Gallia into Italy, against their
brother Lestrigo that oppressed Italy, under subjection of him and other of
his brethren the sons also of Neptune; as well Albion as Bergion assembling
their powers together, passed over into Gallia, to stop the passage of
Hercules, whose intention was to vanquish and destroy those tyrants the sons
of Neptune, and their accomplices that kept diverse countries and regions under
the painful yoke of their heavy thraldom.

The cause that moned Hercules thus to pursue upon those tyrants now reigning
thus in the world, The cause why Hercules purs^^ his coosins.
was, for that not long before, the greatest part of them had conspired
together and slain his father. Osiris, not withstanding that they were nephues
to the same Osiris, as sons to his brother Neptune, and not contented with
his slaughter, they divided his carcass also amongst them, so that each of them
got a piece in token of reioising at their murtherous atchiued enterprise.

For this cause Hercules (whom Moses calls Laabin) proclaimed wars against
them all in revenge of his fathers death: and first he killed Triphon and
Bustris in Egypt, then Anteus in Mauritania, and the Garions in Spain, which
enterprise atchiued, he led his army toward Italy, and by the way passed,
through a part of Gallia, where Albion and Bergion having united their powers
together, Pomp Me^^
were ready to receive him with battle: and so near to the mouth of the
river called Rhosne, in Latin Rhodanus, they met and fought. At the first
there was a right terrible and cruel conflict betwixt them. And albeit that
Hercules had the greatest number of men, yet was it very doubtful a great
while, to whether part the glory of that days work would bend. whereupon
when the victory began outright to turn unto Albion, and to his brother
Bergion, Hercules perceiving the danger and likelihood of utter loose of that
battle, specially for that his men had wasted their weapons, he caused those
that stood still and were not otherwise occupied, to stoop down, and to
gather up stones, Hercules (...) conifite^h ^ enemies.
whereof in that place there was great plenty, which by his commandment they
bestowed so freely upon their enemies, that in the end he obtained the
victory, and did not only put his adversaries to flight, Albion is slain.
but also slew Albion there in the field, together with his brother Bergion,
and the most part of all their whole army. This was the end of Albion, and his
brother Bergion, by the valiant prowess of Hercules, who as one appointed by
Gods providence to subdue the cruel and unmerciful tyrants, spent his time to
the benefit of mankind, delivering the oppressed from the heavy yoke of
miserable thraldom, in every place where he came.

And by the order of this battle we may learn whereof the poets had their
invention, The occ^^^ of the fables Jupiters ^^^ping his s^^ Hercules. How this
(...) was called Albion, (...) giant Ilbe^^ John Bale.
when they feign in their writings, that Jupiter help his son Hercules, by
throwing down stones from heaven in this battle against Albion and Bergion.
Moreover, from henceforth was this I Will of Britain called Albion (as before we
have said) after the name of the said Albion: because he was established chief
ruler and king thereof both by his grandfather Osiris, and his father Neptune
that cunning sailour reigning therein (as Bale says) by the space of 44.
years, till finally he was slain in manner before remembered by his uncle
Hercules Libicus.

After that Hercules had thus vanquished and destroyed his enemies, he passed
to and fro thorough Gallia, suppressing the tyrants in every part where he
came, and restoring the people unto a reasonable kind of liberty, under
lawful governors. This Hercules (as we find) builded the city Alexia in
Burgongne, now called Alize. Moreover, by Lilius Giraldus in the life of
Hercules it is avouched, Giraldus writer by warrant of such Britons as (says
he) have so written themselves, which thing peradventure he has read in Gildas
the ancient Briton poet: a book that (as he confesses in the 5. dialog of his
histories of poets) he has seen. The same thing also is confirmed by the name
of an head of land in Britain called Promontorium Herculis, as in Ptolomie ye
may read, which is thought to take name of his arrival at that

But now, Diverse opinions why this I Will was called Albion. See more hereof in
the description.
whereas it is not denied of any, that this I Will was called ancientlie by the
name of Albion: yet there be diverse opinions how it came by that name: for
many do not allow of this history of Albion the giant. But for so much as it
apperteineth rather to the description than to the history of this I Will, to rip
up and lay forth the secret mysteries of such matters: and because I think
that this opinion which is here avouched, how it took that name

When Albion chief captain of the giants was slain, the residue that
remained at home in the I Will, continued without any rule or restraint of law, in
so much that they fell to such a dissolute order of life, that they seemed
little or nothing to differ from brute beasts: and those are they which our
ancient chronicles call the giants, who were so named, as well Gigines, or
Gegines, from whence our word giant (as some take it) is derived, is a Greek
word, and signifies, Borne or bred of or in the earth, for our fore-elders,
specially the Gentiles, being ignorant o the true beginning of mankind, were
persuaded, Terrae filius what it signifies.
they would name him Terrae filius, The son of the earth: and so the giants
whom the poets feign to have sought to make battle against heaven are called
the sons of the earth: and the first inhabitants generally of every country
were of the Greeks called Gigines, or Gegines, and of the Latins Aborigines,
Aborigines. Indigenae.
and Indigenae, that is, People borne

These giants and first inhabitants of this I Will continued in their beastly
kind of life unto the arrival of the ladies, The mistaking of the name of
Dioclesianus for Danaus.
which some of our chronicles ignorantly write to be the daughters of
Dioclesian the king of Assyria, whereas in deed they have been deceived, in
taking the word Danaus to be short written for Dioclesianus: and by the same
means have diverse words and names been mistaken, both in our chronicles, and
in diverse other ancient written woorks. But this is a fault that learned men
should not so much trouble themselves about, considering the same has bin
already found by sundry authors ling since, as Hugh the Italian,
Iohn-Harding, John Rouse of Warwike, Hugh the Italian. Harding. John Rous out
of David Pencair.
and others, specially by the help of David Pencair. a British history, who
recite the history under the name of Danaus and his daugthers. And because we
would not any man to think, that the history of these daughters of Danaus is
only of purpose devised, and brought in place of Dioclesianus, to excuse the
imperfection of our writers, whereas there as either no such history (or at
the least no such women that arrived in this I Will) Nennius.
the authority of Nennius a Briton writer may be avouched who wrote above 900.
years past, and makes mention of the arrival of such ladies.

To be short, Belus priscus. Dictionarium poeticum.
the history is thus. Belus the son of Epaphus, or (as some writers have) of
Neptune and L^bies (whom Isis after the death of Apis married) had issue two
sons: the first Danaus, called also Armeus; and Aegyptus called also Rameses:
these two were kings among the Egyptians. Danaus the elder of the two, Danaus.
Aegyprus. Higinus.
having in his rule the upper region of Egypt, had by sundry wives 50.
daughters, with whom his brother Aegyptus, gaping for the dominion of the
whole, did instantly labor, that his sons being also 50. in number, might
match. But Danaus having knowledge by some prophecy or oracle, that a son in
law of his should be his death, refused so to bestow his daughters. Hereupon
grew war betwixt the brethren, in the end whereof, Danaus being the weaker,
was enforced to flee his country, and so prepared a navy, embarked himself
and his daughters, and with them passed over into Greece, where he found means
to dispossess Gelenor (son to Stenelas king of Argos) of his rightful
inheritance, driving him out of his country, and reigned in his place by the
assistance of the Argiues that had conceived an hatred toward Gelenor, and a
great liking toward Danaus, who in very deed did so far excel the kings
that had reigned there before him, that the Greeks in remembrance of him were
after called Danai.

But his brother Aegyptus, taking great disdain for that he and his sons
were in such sort despised of Danaus, sent his sons with a great army to
make war against their uncle, giving them in charge not to return, till they
had either slain Danaus, or obtained his daugthers in marriage. he young
gentlemen according to their fathers commandment, being arrived in Greece,
made such war against Danaus, that in the end he was constrained to give unto
those his 50. nephues his 50. daughters, to join with them in marriage, and so
they were. But as the proverb says, In trust appeared treachery. For on the
first night of the marriage, Danaus delivered to each of his daughters a sword,
charging them that when their husbands after their bankets and pastimes were
once brought into a sound sleep, each of them should slay her husband, menacing
them with death unless they fulfilled his commandment. They all therefore
obeyed the will of their father, Hypermnestra only excepted, with whom
prevailed more the love of kindred and wedlock, than the fear of her fathers
displeasure: for she alone spared the life of her husband Lynceus, waking him
out of his sleep, and warning him to depart and flee into Egypt to his
father. He therefore having all the wicked practices revealed to him by his
wife, followed her advice, and so escaped.

Now when Danaus perceived how all his daughters had accomplished his
commandment, Pausanias.
saving only Hypermnestra, he caused her to be brought forth into judgment,
for disobeing him in a matter wherein both the safety and loss of his life
rested: but she was acquitted by the Argiues, and discharged. Howbeit her
father kept her in prison, and seeking to find out other husbands for his other
daughters that had obeyed his pleasure in sleaing their first husbands, long it
was yer he could find any to match with them: for the heinous offense committed
in the slaughter of their late husbands, was yet too fresh in memory, and
their blood not wiped out of mind. Nevertheless, to bring his purpose the
better to pass, he made proclamation, that his daughhters should demand no
ioinctures, and every

How much this practice auailed, I know not: but certain it is, diverse of them
were bestowed, either by this or some other means, for we find that Autonomes
was married to Architeles, Chrysanta or (as Pausanias says) Scea was matched
with Archandrus, Amaome with Neptunus Equestris, on whom he begat Nauplius.

But now to return unto Lynceus, Higinus,
whom his wife Hypermnestra preserved, as before ye have Pausanias.
in raising a fire on height beaconwise, accordingly as she had requested him
to do at his departure from her: and this was at a place which afterward
took name of him, and was called Lyncea. Upon his return into Egypt, he gave
his father to understand the whole circumstance of the treacherous cruelty
used by his uncle and his daughters in the murder of his brethren, and

This done, he caused the daughters of Danaus (so Harding and John Rous out of
David Pencair.
where they took land, and in seeking to provide themselves of victuals by
pursuit of wild beasts, met with no other inhabitants, than the rude and
savage giants mentioined before, whom our historiens for their beastly kind
of life do call devils. With these monsters did these ladies (finding none
other to satisfy the motions the motions of their sensual lust) join in the
act of venerie, and engendered a race of people in proportion nothing differing
from their fathers that begat them, nor in conditions from their mothers that
bare them.

But now peradventure ye will think that I have forgotten my self, in
rehearsing this history of the ladies arrival here, because I make no mention
of Albina, which should be the eldest of the sisters, of whom this land should
also take the name of Albion. To this we answer, that as the name of their
father has been mistaken, so likewise has the whole course of the history in
this behalf. For though we shall admit that to be true which is rehearsed (in
manner as before ye have heard) of the arrival here of those ladies; yet
certain it is that none of them bare the name of Albina, from whom this land
might be called Albion. For further assurance whereof, if any man be desirous
to know all their names, Higinus.
we have thought good bear to rehearse them as they be found in Higinus,
Pausanias, The names of the daughters of Danaus.
and others, 1 Idea, 2 Philomela, 3 Scillo, 4 Phicomene, 5 Euippe, 6 Demoditas,
7 Hyale, 8 Trite, 9 Damone, 10 Hippothoe, 11 Mirmidone, 12 Euridice, 13 Chleo,
14 Urania, 15 Cleopatra, 16 Phylea, 17 Hypareta, 18 Chrysothemis, 19 Heranta,
20 Armoaste, 21 Danaes, 22 Scea, 23 Glaucippe, 24 Demophile, 25 Autodice, 26
Polyxena, 27 Hecate, 28 Achamantis, 29 Arsalte, 30 Monuste, 31 Amimone, 32
Helice, 33 Amaome, 34 Polybe, 35 Helicte, 36 Electra, 37 Eubule, 38 Daphildice,
39 Hero, 40 Europomene, 41 Critomedia, 42 Pyrene, 43 Eupheno, 44 Themistagora,
45 Paleno, 46 Erato, 47 Autonomes, 48 Itea, 49 Chrysanta, 50 Hypermnestra.
These were the names of those ladies the daughters of Danaus: howbeit, which
they were that should arrive in this I Will, we cannot say: but it suffices to
understand, that none of them hight Albina. So that, whether the history of
their landing here should be true or not, it is all one for the matter
concerning the name of this I Will, which undoubtedly was called Albion, either
of Albion the giant (as before I have said) or by some other occasion. See more
in the description.


And thus much for the ladies, whose strange adventure of their arrival here,
as it may seem to many and (with good cause) incredible, so without further
auouching it for truth, I leave it to the consideration of the reader, to
think thereof as reason shall move him; since I see niot how either in this, or
in other things of such antiquity, we cannot have sufficient warrant otherwise
than by likely conjectures. Which as in this history of the ladies they are
not most probable, yet have we showed the likeliest, that (as we think) may be
deemed to agree with those authors that have written of their coming into this
I Will. But as for an assured proof that this I Will was inhabited with people
before the coming of Brute, I trust it may suffice which before is recited out
of Annius de Viterbo, Theophilus, Gildas, and other, although much more might
be said: as of the coming hither of Osiris, as well as in the other parties of
the world: and likewise of Ulysses his being here, Ulysses in Britain.
who in performing some vow which he either then did make, or before had made,
erected an altar in that part of Scotland which was ancientlie called
Calidonia, as Julius Solinus Polyhistor in plain words does record. Julius
Solinus.


Upon these considerations I have no doubt to deliver unto the reader, the
opinion of those that think this land to have been inhabited before the
arrival here of Brute, trusting it may be taken in good part, since we have but
showed the conjectures of others, till time that some sufficient learned man
shall take upon him to decipher the doubts of all these matters. Nevertheless,
I think good to advertise the reader that these stories of Samothes, Magus,
Sarron, Druis, and Bardus, do rely only upon the authority of Berosus,
whom most diligent antiquaries do reject as a fabulous and counterfeit author,
and Vacerius has labored to prove the same by a special treatise lately
published at Rome.

THE SECOND BOOK of the History of England.
Of Brute and his descent, how he slew his father in hunting, his banishment,
his letter to king Pandrasus, against whom he wageth battle, takes him
prisoner, and concludes peace upon conditions.
HItherto have we spoken of the inhabitants of this I Will before the coming of
Brute, although some will needs have it, that he was the first Humfr. Lhoyd.
and so reigned as well over them as over those which he brought with him.

This Brutus, or Brytus [for this letter ( Y) has of ancient time had the
sounds both of V and I) (as the author of the book which Geffrey of Monmouth
translated does affirm) was the son of Siluius, the son of Ascanius, the
son of Aeneas the Trioan, begotten of his wife Creusa, and borne in Troie,
before the city was destroyed. But as other do take Harding Alex. Neuil. W.
Har.
the author of that book (whatsoever he was) and such other as follow him, are
deceived only in this point, mistaking the matter, in that Posthumus the
son of Aeneas (begotten of his wife Lauinia, and borne after his fathers
deceasse in Italy) was called Ascanius, who had issue a son named Julius,
who (as these others do conjecture) was the father of Brute, that noble
chieftaine and aduenturous leader of those people, which being descended (for
the more part in the fourth generation) from those Trojans

To this opinion Giouan Villani a Florentine in his universal history,
speaking of Aeneas and his offspring kings of Italy, seems to agree, where he
says: Siluius (the son of Aeneas by his wife Lauinia) fell in love with a
niece of his mother Lauinia, and by her had a son, of whom she died in
travel, and therefore was called Brutus, who after as he grew in some stature,
and hunting in a forest slew his father unawares, and thereupon for fear of
his grandfather Siluius Posthumus he fled the country, and with a retinue of
such as followed him, passing through diverse seas, at length he arrived in the
I Will of Britain.

Concerning therefore our Brute, whether his father Julius was son to
Ascanius the son of Aeneas by his wife Creusa, or son to Posthumus called
also Aseanius, and son to Aeaneas by his wife Lauinia, we will not further
stand. But this, we find, that when he came to the age of 15. years, so that
he was now able to ride abroad with his father into the forests and chases, he
fortuned (either by mishap, or by Gods providence) to strike his father with an
arrow, Brute kills his father.
in shooting at a dear, of which wound he also died. His grandfather (whether
the same was Posthumus, or his elder brother) hearing of this great misfortune
that had chanced to his son Siluius, lived not long after, but died for very
grief and sorrow (as is supposed) which he conceived thereof. And the young
gentleman, immediately after he had slain his father (in manner before
alleged) was banished his country, and thereupon got him into Grecia, where
traveling the country, he lighted by chance among some of the Trojan
offspring, and associating himself with them, grew by means of the lineage
(whereof he was descended) in process of time into great reputation among them:
chiefly by reason there were yet diverse of the Trojan race, and that of great
authority in that country. For Pyrrhus the son of Achilles, Pausanias.
having no issue by his wife Hermione, married Andromache, late wife unto
Hector: and by her had three sons, Molossus, Pileus, and Pergamus, who in
their time grew to be of great power in those places and countries, and their
offspring likewise: whereby Brutus or Brytus wanted no friendship. For even at
his first coming thither, diverse of the Trojans that remained in servitude,
being desirous of liberty, by flock resorted unto him. And amongst other,
Assaracus was one, whom Brute entertained, receiving at his hands the
possession of sundry forts and places of defense, before that the king of
those parties could have understanding or knowledge of any such thing. Herewith
also such as were ready to make the adventure with him, repaired to him on each
side, whereupon he first placed garrisons in those towns which had been thus
delivered unto him, and afterward with Assaracus and the residue of the
multitude he withdrew into the mountains near adioining. And thus being made
strong with such assistance, by consultation had with them that were of most
authority about him, wrote unto the king of that country called Pandrasus, in
form as follows.

A letter of Brute to Pandrasus, as I find it set down in Galfride
Monumetensis.
BRute leader of the remnant of the Trojan people, to Pandrasus king of the
Greeks, sends greeting. Because

The sight of these letters, and request in them contemed, made Pandrasus at
the first somewhat amazed, howbeit deliberating further of the matter, and
considering their small number, he made no great account of them, but
determined out of hand to suppress them by force, Pandrasus prepares an army
to suppress the Trojan offspring.
before they should grow to a greater multitude. Sparatinum.
And to bring his intention the Peradventure Achelous
so that many of them were drowned. Howbeit Antigonus the brother of
Prandrasus did what he could to stay the Grecians from fleeing, Antigonus, the
brother of Pandrasus.
and calling them back again did get some of them together, placed them in
order, and began a new field: but it nothing auailed, He is taken prisoner.
for the Trojans preasing upon him, took him prisoner, slew and scattred his
company, and ceased not till they had rid the fields of all their adversaries.

This done, Brute entering the town, Brute enters into Sparatinum.
furnished

To conclude, so long he continued the siege, till victuals began to wax scant
within, so that there was no way but to yield, if present succor came not to
remove the siege: whereupon they signified their necessity unto Brute, who for
that he had not power sufficient to fight with the enemies in open field, he
meant to give them a camifado in the night season, and so ordered his business,
that inforsing a prisoner (named Anacletus whom he had taken in the last
battle) to serve his turn, by constreining him to take an oath (which he durst
not for conscience sake break) he found means to encounter with his enemies
upon the advantage, Pandrasus taken prisoner
that he did not only overthrow their whole power, but also took Pandrasus
prisoner, whereby all the trouble was ended: and shortly after a perfect peace
concluded, upon these conditinos following.

First that Pandrasus should give his daugther Innogen unto Brute in marriage,
The condinons of the agreement betwixt Brute and Pandrasus.
with a competent sum of gold and silver for her dowry.

Secondly, to furnish him and his people with a navy of ships, and to store
the same with victuals and all other necessaries.

Thirdly, that Brute with his people* should have license to depart the
country, to seek adventures whither so ever it should please them to direct
their course, without let, impeachment, or trouble to be offered any ways by
the Greeks.

To all these conditions (because they touched not the prerogative of his
kingdom) Pandrasus did willingly agree, and likewise performed.

Brute and his wife Innogen arrive in Leogitia, they ask counsel of an oracle
where they shall inhabit, he meets with a remnant of Trojans on the coasts
near the shooting down of the Pyrenine hills into the sea.
The second Chapter.
AL things being thus brought to pass according to Brutes desire, wind also
and wether serving the purpose, he with his wife Innogen and his people
embarked, and hoising up sails departed from the coasts of Grecia. Now after
two days and a nights sailing, they arrived at Leogitia (in some old written
books of the British history noted down Lergetia) an Island, where they
consulted with an oracle. Brute himself kneeling before the idol, and holding
in his right hand a boll prepared for sacrifice full of wine, and the blood of
a white hind, spoke in this manner as here follows: Diua potens nemorum,
terror sylustribus apris,
Cui licet anfractus ire per aethereos,
Infernasque domos, terrestria iura resolve,
Et dic quas terras nos habitare velis:
Dic certam sedem qua te venerabor in aeuum,
Qua tibi virgineis templa dicabo choris.


These verses (as Ponticus Virumnius and others also do guess) were written by
Gildas Cambrius in his book entitled Cambreidos, and may thus be Englished:
Thou goddess that do rule
the woods and forests green,
And chasest foming boares
that flee thine awful sight,
Thou that may pass aloft
in airie skies so sheene,
And walk eke under earth in places void of light,
Discover earthly states, direct our course aright,
And show where we shall dwell, according to thy will,
In seats of sure abode, where temples we may dight
For virgins that shall sound thy land with voices shrill.


After this prayer and coremonie done, according to the pagane rite and
custom, Brute abiding his answer, fell asleep: in which sleep appeared to
him the said goddess uttering this answer in the verses following expressed.

Brute, sub occasum solis trans Gallica regna,
Insula in oceano est, vndique clausa mari,
Insula in oceano est, habitata gigantibus olim,
Nunc deserta quidem, gentibus apta tuis:
Hanc pete, namque tibi seeds erit illa perennis,
Hic fiet natis altera Troia tuis:
Hic de prole tua reges nascentur, and ipsis
Totius terrae subditus orbis erit.
Brute, far by-west beyond the Gallike land is found,
An I Will which with the ocean seas enclosed is about,
Where giants dwelt sometime, but now is desert ground,
Most meet where thou may plant
Make thitherwards with speed, for there thou shall find out
An euerduring seat, and Troie shall rise anew,
Unto thy race, of whom shall kings be borne no dout,
That with their mighty power the world shall whole subdew.
After he awaked out of sleep, and had called his Brute with his company
landed in Affrike.
and making westward, first arrived in Africa, and after keeping on their
course, they passed the straits of Gibralterra, and coasting along the shore
on the right hand, The mistaking of those that have copied the British history
putting Mare Tyrrhenum, for Pyrenaenum.
whereof the same sea by good reason (as some suppose) was named in those days
Mare Pyrenaeum, although hitherto by fault of writers and copiers of the
British history received, in this place Mare Tyrrhenum, was slightlie put
down in stead of Pyrenaeum.

The offspring of those Trojans, with whom Brute and his company thus did meet,
were a remnant of them that came away with Antenor. Their captain hight
Corineus, a man of great modesty and approved wisdom, and thereto of
incomparable strength and boldness.

Brute and the said Trojans with their captain Corineus do associat, they
take landing within the dominion of king Goffarus, he raises an army against
Brute and his power, but is discomfited: of the city of Tours: Brutes arrival
in this Island with his company. The third Chapter.
AFter that Brute and the said Trojans, Brute and Corineus ioin their companies
together.
by conference interchangeablie had, understood one another estates, and how
they were descended from one country and progeny, they united themselves
together, greatly reioising that they were so fortunatlie met: and hoising up
their sails, They arrive on the coasts of Gallia, now called France. Goffarius
surnamed Pictus. Les annals d Aquitaine. Agathyrsi, otherwise called Picts, of
painting their bodies.
directed their course forward still, till they arrived within the mouth of the
river of Loire, which divides Aquitaine from Gall Celtike, where they took
land within the dominion of a king called Goffarius, surnamed Pictus, by reason
he was descended of the people Agathyrsi, otherwise named Picts, because they
used to paint their faces and bodies, insomuch that the richer a man was
amongst them, the more cost he bestowed in painting himself; and commonly the
hair of their head was red, or (as probable writers say) of sky color.
Herodotus calls them (...), Marcellus. Pliny. Herodotus li. 4.
because they did wear much gold about them. They used their wives in common,
and because they are all supposed to be brethren, there is no strife nor
discord among them. Of these Agathyrsi, it is recorded by the said Herodotus,
that they refused to succor the Scythians against Darius, giving this reason
of their refusal; because they would not make war against him who had done
them no wrong. Virg. Aeneid. 4:
And of this people does the poet make mention, saying, Cretesque Dryopesque
fremunt pictique Agathyrsi.

To paint their faces not for amiablenesse, Caesar com. li. 5
but for terriblenesse, the Britons in old time used, and that with a kind of
herb like unto plantine. In which respect I see no reason why they also should
not be called Picts, as well as the Agathyrsi; seeing the denomination sprang
of a vain custom in them both. And here by the way, P. Mart. com. part. 2.
sect. 60.
since we have touched this folly in two several people, let it not seem
tedious to read this one trick of the Indians, among whom there is great
plenty of precious stones, wherewith they adorn themselves in this manner;
namely, in certain hollow places which they make in their flesh, they enclose
and riuet in precious stones, and that as well in their forheads as their
cheeks, to none other purpose, than the Agathyrsi in the use of their painting.

The country of Poictou (as some hold) where the said Goffarius reigned, took
name of this people: and likewise a part of this our I Will of Britain now
contained within Scotland, Pightland or Pictland.
which in ancient time was called Pightland or Pictland, as elsewhere both in
this history of England, and also of Scotland may further appear. But to our
purpose.

When Goffarius the king of Poictou was advertised of the landing of these
strangers within his country, Goffarius sends unto Brute.
he sent first certain of his people to understand what they meant by their
coming a land within his dominion, without license or leave of him obtained.
They that were thus sent, came by chance to a place where Corineus with two
hundred of the company were come from the ships into a forest near the sea
side, to kill some veneson for their sustenance: and being rebuked with some
disdainful speech of those Poictouins, Corineus answers the messengers.
Imbert.
he shaped them a round answer: insomuch that one of them whose name was
Imbert, let drive an arrow at Corineus: but he avoiding the danger thereof,
shot again at Imbert, in revenge of that injury offered, Imbert is slain by
Corincus.
and claue his head in sunder. The rest of the Poictouins fled thereupon, and
brought word to Goffarius what had happened: Goffarius raises an army.
who immediately with a mighty army made forward to encounter with the
Trojans, and coming Goffarius is discomfited.
specially through the noble prowess of Corineus.

Goffarius escaping from the field, Goffarius seeks aid against Brute.
fled into the inner parts of Gallia, making suit for assistance unto such
kings as in those days reigned in diverse provinces of that land, who promised
to aid him with all their forces, and to expel out of the coasts of Aquitaine,
such strangers as without his license were Brute spoileth the country.
But Brute in the mean time passed forward, and with fire and sword made
havoc in places where he came: and gathering great spoils, Turonium or Tours
built by Brute.
fraught his ships with plenty of riches. At length he came to the place,
where afterward he built a city named Turonium, that is, Tours.

Here Goffarius, with such Galls as were assembled to his aid, Goffarius
having renewed his forces, fights eftsoons with Brute.
gave battle again unto the Trojans that were encamped to abide his coming.

This policy was put in practice, and took such effect as the deuisers
themselves wished: for the Galls being sharply assailed on the front by Brute
and his company, were now with the sudden coming Turonium, because the said
Turinus was

Andrew Theuet affirms the contrary, Theuet.
and mainteineth that one Taurus the nephue of Haniball was the first that
enclosed it about with a pale of wood (as the manner of those days was of
fensing their towns) in the year of the world 3374. 3374
and before the birth of our savior 197.

But to our matter concerning Brute, who after he had obtained so famous a
victory, albeit there was good cause for him to reioise, yet it sore troubled
him to consider that his numbers daily decayed, and his enemies still
increased, and grew stronger: whereupon resting doubtful what to do, Brute in
dout what to do.
whether to proceed against the Galls, or return to his ships to seek the
I Will that was appointed him by oracle, at length he chose the surest and best
way, as he took it, and as it proved. For whilst greater part of his army
was yet left alive, and that the victory remained on his side, he drew to his
navy, and lading his ships with exceeding great store of riches which his
people had got abroad in the country, he took the seas again. After a few
days sailing they landed at the haven now called Totnesse, Brute with his
remnant of Trojans arrive in this I Will.
the year of the world 2850, after the destruction of Troy 66, after the
deliverance of the Israelites from the captivity of Babylon 397, Anno mundi
2850.
almost ended; in the 18 year of the reign of Tineas king of Babylon, 13 of
Melanthus king of Athens, before the building of Rome 368, which was before the
nativity of our Savior Christ 1116, 1116
almost ended, and before the reign of Alexander the great 783.

Brute discovers the commodities of this Island, mighty giants withstand him,
Gogmagog and Corineus wrestle together at a place beside Dover: he builds the
city of Trinouant now termed London, calls this Island by the name of
Britain, and divides it into three parts among his three sons. The fourth
Chapter.
WHEN Brute had entered this land, immediately after his arrival (as writers
do record) he searched the country from side to side, and from end to end,
finding it in most places very fertile and plentious of wood and grass, and
full of pleasant springs and fair rivers. As he thus traveled to discover the
state and commodities of the Island, Brute encountered by the giants.
he was encountered by diverse strong and mighty giants, whom he destroyed and
slew, or rather subdued, with all such other people as he found in the Island,
which were more in number than by report of some authors it should appear
there were. Among these giants (as Geffrey of Monmouth writes) there was one
of passing strength and great estimation, named Gogmagog, Corineus wrestleth
with Gogmagog.
with whom Brute caused Corineus to wrestle at a place beside Dover, where it
chanced that the giant brake a rib in the side of Corineus while they strove to
claspe, and the one to overthrow the other: wherewith Corineus being sore
chafed and stirred to wrath, did so double his force that he got the upper hand
of the giant, Gogmagog is slain.
and cast him down headlong from one of the rocks there, not far from Dover,
and so dispatched him: by reason whereof the place was named long after, The
fall or leap of Gogmagog, but afterward it was called The fall of Dover. For
this valiant deed, and other the like services first and last atchiued,
Cornwall given to Corineus.
Brute gave unto Corineus the whole country of Cornwall. To be brief, after
that Brute had destroyed such as stood against him, and brought such people
under his subjection as he found in the I Will, and searched the land from the one
end to the other: he was desirous to build a city, that the same might be the
seat royal of his empire or kingdom. Whereupon he chose a plot of ground
lieng on the north side of the river of Thames, which by good consideration
seemed to be most pleasant and convenient for any great multitude of
inhabitants, as well for holsomnesse of air, goodness of soil, plenty of
woods, and commodity of the river, serving as well to bring in as to carry
out all kinds of merchandise and things necessary for the gain, store, and
use of them that there should inhabit.

Here therefore he began to build and lay the foundation of a city, in the
tenth or (as other think) in the second year after his arrival, which he
named (says Gal. Mon.) Troinouant, or (as Hum. Llhoyd says) Troinewith, that
is, new Troy, in remembrance of that noble city of Troy from whence he and his
people were for the greater part descended.

When Brutus had builded this city, and brought the Island fully under his
subjection, he by the advice Harison notes) and was buried at Troinouant or
London: In the days of this our Brute Saul and Samuel governed Israel.
although the place of his said burial there be now grown out of memory.

Of Locrine the eldest son of Brute, of Albanact his yoongest son, and his
death: of Madan, Mempricius, Ebranke, Brute Greenesheeld, Leill,
LOcrinus or Locrine the first begotten son of Brute began to reign over the
Locrine the second ruler of Britain
in the year of the world 1874, and held to his part the country that reached
from the souht sea unto the river of Humber. While this Locrinus governed
Logiers, his brother Albanact ruled in Albania, Gal. Mon. Mat. West. Fa. out of
G. de Co.
where in fine he was slain in a battle by a king of the Hunnes or Scythians,
called Humber, who invaded that part of Britain, and got possession thereof,
till Locrinus Gal. Mon. Mar. West.
in revenge of their other brothers death, and for the recovery of the
kingdom, gathered their powers together, and coming against the said king of
the Hunnes, by the valiancie of their people they discomfited him in battle,
It should seem that he was come over the Humber.
and chased him so egerlie, that he himself and a great number of his men were
drowned in the gulf that then parted Loegria and Albania, which after took
name of the said king, and was called Humber, and so continues unto this day.

Moreover in this battle against the Hunnes were three young damsels taken of
excellent beauty, Gal. Mon.
specially one of them, whose name was Estrild, daughter to a certain king of
Scythia. With this Estrild king Locrine fell so far in love, notwithstanding
a former contract made betwixt him and the lady Guendoloena, daughter to
Corineus duke of Cornwall, that he meant yet with all speed to marie the same
Estrild. But being earnestly called upon, and in manner forced thereto by
Corineus, he changed his purpose, and married Guendoloena, keeping nevertheless
the aforesaid Estrild as paramour still after a secret sort, during the life of
Corineus his father in law.

Now after that Corineus was departed this world, Locrine forsook Guendoloena,
and married Estrild. Guendoloena therefore being cast off by her husband, got
her into Cornwall to her friends and kindred, and there procured them to make
war against the said Locrine her husband, in the which wars he was slain,
and a battle fought near to the river of Sture, after he had reigned (as
writers affirm) twenty years, and was buried by his father in the City of
Troinouant, Mat. West.
leaving behind him a young son (begotten of his wife Guendoloena) named
Madan, as yet unmeet to govern.

Guendoloena or Guendoline the wife of Locrinus, She is not numbered amongst
those that reigned as rulers in this land by Mat. West.
and daughter of Corineus duke of Cornwall, for so much as her son Madan was
not of years sufficient to govern, was by common consent of the Britons made
ruler of the I Will, in the year of the world 2894, and so having the
administration in her hands, she did right discreetlie use her self therein,
to the comfort of all her subjects, till her son Madan came to lawful age,
and then she gave over the rule and dominion to him, after she had governed by
the space of fifteen years. Gal. Mon.


MAdan the son of Locrine and Guendoline entered into the government of
Britain in the 2909, Madan the third ruler.
of the world. There is little left in writing of his doings, saving that he
used great tyranny amongst his Britons: and therefore after he had ruled this
land the term of 40. years, he was devoured of wild beasts, as he was
abroad in hunting. He left behind him two sons, Mempricius and Manlius. He
builded (as is reported) Madancaistre, now Dancastre, which reteineth still the
later part of his name.

MEmpricius the eldest son of Madan began his reign over the Britons in the
year of the world 2949, Mempricius the fourth ruler.
he continued not long in peace. For his brother Manlius upon an ambitious mind
provoked the Britons to rebel against him, so that sore and deadly war
continued long between them. But finally, under color of a treaty, Fabian.
Manlius is slain. Gal. Mon.
Manlius was slain by his brother Mempricius, so that then he lived in more
tranquillity and rest. Howbeit, being delivered thus from trouble of wars,
he fell into sloth, Sloth engendered lechery.
and so into unlawful lust of lechery, and thereby into the hatred of his
people, by forcing of their wines and daughters: and finally became so
beastly, that he forsook his lawful wife and all his concubines, and fell
into the abominable sin of Sodomie. And thus from one vice he fell into
another, Mempricius is devoured of beasts.
till he became odious to God and man, and at length, going on hunting, was
lost of his people, and destroyed of wild beasts, when he had reigned twenty
years, leaving behind him a noble young son named Ebranke, begotten of his
lawful wife.

EBranke the son of Mempricius began to rule over the Britons in the year of
the world 2969 Ebranke the fifth ruler.
He had as writers do of him record, Ebranke had 21. wives: his thirty
daughters sent into Italy.
one and twenty wives, on whom he begot 20. sons and 30. daughters, of the
which the eldest hight Guales, or Gualea. These daughters he sent to Alba
Syluius, which was the eleventh king of Italy, or the sixth king of the
Latins, to the end they might be married to his noble men of the blood of
Trojans, because the Sabines refused to join their daughters with them in
marriage. Bergomas lib. 6.
Furthermore, he was the first prince of his land that ever invaded France
after Bute, and is commended as author and original builder of many cities,
both in his own kingdom, and else where. His sons also under the conduct of
Assaracus, one of their eldest brethren, returning out of Italy, after they
had conducted their sisters thither, invaded Germany, The city of Caerbranke
builded. Matthew. West.
now called York, about the 14, year of his reign. He builded also in
Albania now called Scotland, the castle of Maidens, afterward called Edinburgh
of Adian one of their kings. The city Forty years has Math. West. and Gal.
Monuine.
now called France, with a great army, and subduing the Galls as is
aforesaid, he returned home with great riches and triumph. Now when he had
guided the land of Britain in noble wise by the term of forty years, he
died, and was buried at York.

BRute Greeneshield, Brute Greeneshield the sixth ruler.
the son of Ebranke, was made governor of this land in the year of the
Iacobus Lef.
and of him some foreign authors affirm, that he made an attempt to bring the
whole realm of France under his subjection, which he performed, because his
father sustained some dishonor and loss in his last voyage into that country.
Howbeit they say, that when he came into Henaud, Brinchild a prince of that
quarter gave him also a great overthrow, and William Harison, who in his
chronology touches the same at large, concluding in the end, that the said
passage of this prince into France is very likely to be true, and that he
named a parcel of Armorica lieng on the south, and in manner upon the very
loine after his own name, and also a city which he builded there Britain.
Strabo lib. 4.
For (says he) it should seem by Strabo. lib. 4. that there was a noble city
of that name long before Pliny also speaks lib. 4. cap. 7. albeit that he
ascribe it unto France after a disordered manner. More I find not of this
foresaid Brute, saving that he ruled the land a certain time, his father yet
living, and after his decease the term of twelve years, and then died, and
was buried at Caerbranke now called York.

LEill the son of Brute Greeneshield, Leill the seventh ruler.
began to reign in the year of the world 3021, the same time that Asa was
reigning in Judah, and Ambri in Carleil builded.
which then after his own name was called Caerleil, that is, Leill his city,
or the city of Leill. He repaired also (as Henry Bradshaw says) the city of
Caerleon now called Chester, Chester repaired.
which (as in the same Bradshaw appears) was built before Brutus entry into
this land by a giant named Leon Gauer. But what authority he had to avouch
this it may be doubted, for Ranulfe Higden in his work entitled
Polychronicon, says in plain words; that it is unknown who was the first
founder of Chester, but that it took the name of the soiourning there of some
Roman legions, by whom also it is not unlike that it might be first built by
P. Ostorius Scapula, who as we find, after he had subdued Caratacus king of the
Ordouices that inhabited the countries now called Lancashire, Cheshire, and
Salopshire, built in those parts, and among the Silures, certain places of
defense, for the better harbrough of his men of war, and keeping down of
such Britains as were still ready to move rebellion.

But now to the purpose concerning K. Leill. We find it recorded that he was in
the beginning of his reign very upright, and desirous to see justice
executed, and above all things loved peace and quietness; but as years
increased with him, so his virtues began to diminish, in so much that
abandoning the care for the body of the commonwealth, he suffered his own
body to welter in all vice and voluptuousness, and so procuring the hatred of
his subjects, caused malice and discord to rise amongst them, which during his
life he was never able to appease. But leaving them so at variance, he departed
this life, and was buried at Carleil, which as ye have heard he had builded
while he lived.

LUd or Ludhurdibras the son of Leill began to govern in the year of the
world 3046. Lud or Ludhurdibras the eight ruler.
In the beginning of his reign, he sought to appease the debate that was
raised in his fathers days, and bring the realm to her former quietness, and
after that he had brought it to good end, he builded the town of Kaerkin now
called Canterbury: Kaerking or Canterbury is builded.
also the town of Caerguent now cleped Winchester, Caerguent is builded.
and mount Paladour now called Shaftsburie. Paladour is builded.
About the building of which town of Shaftsburie, Aquila a prophet of the
British nation wrote his prophesies, of which some fragments remain yet to be
seen, translated into the Latin by some ancient writers. When this Lud had
reigned 29. years, he died, and left a son behind him named Baldud. Baldud
or Bladud the ninth ruler.
BAldud the son of Ludhurdibras began to rule over the Britains in the year
of the world 3085. This man was well seen in the sciences of astronomy and
nigromancie, by which (as the common report says) he made the hot bathes in
the city of Caerbran now called Bath. But William of Malmesburie is of a
contrary opinion, Gal. Mon. The king was learned. Hot bathes.
affirming that Julius Caesar made those bathes, or rather repaired them when he
was here in England: which is not like to be true: for Julius Caesar, as by good
conjecture we have to think, never came so far within the land that way
forward. But of these bathes more shall be said in the description. Now to
proceed. This Baldud took such pleasure in artificial practices and magike,
that he taught this art throughout all his realm. And to show his cunning in
other points, upon a presumptuous pleasure which he had therein, Mat. West. The
prince did fly.
he took upon him to fly in the air, but he fell upon the temple of Apollo,
which stood in the city of Troinouant, and there was torn in pieces after he
had ruled the Britains by the space of 20. years.

LEir the son of Baldud was admitted ruler over the Britains, Leir the 10.
ruler.
in the year of the world 3105, at what time Ioas reigned in Judah. This Leir
was a prince of right noble demeanor, governing his land and subjects in great
wealth. He made the town of Caerleir now called Leicester, Mat. West.
Leicester is builded.
which stands upon the river of Sore. It is written that he had by his wife
three daughters without other issue, whose names were Gonorilla, Regan, and
Cordeilla which daughters he greatly loved, but specially Cordeilla the
yoongest far above the two elder. When this Leir therefore was come to great
years, and began to wax unwieldy through age, Gal. Mon.
he thought to understand the affections of his daughters toward him, and
prefer her whom he best loved to the succession over the kingdom. Whereupon
he first asked Gonorilla the eldest, A trial of love.
how well she loved him: who calling her gods to record, protested that she
loved him more than her own life, which by right and reason should be most
dear unto her. With which answer the father being well pleased, turned to the
second, and demanded of her how well she loved him: who answered (confirming
her saiengs with great oaths) that she loved him more than tongue could
express, and far above all other creatures of the world.

Then called he his yoongest daughter Cordeilla before him, The answer of the
yoongest daughter.
and asked of her what account she made of him, unto whom she made this answer
as follows: knowing the great love and fatherly zeal that you have always
borne toward me (for the which I may not answer, you otherwise than I
think, and as my conscience leads me) I protest unto you, that I have loved
you ever, and will continually (while I live) love you as my natural father.
And if you would more understand of the love The two eldest daughters are
married.
so much you are worth, and so much I love you, The realm is promised to his
two daughters.
and no more. The father being nothing content with this answer, married his
two eldest daughters, the one unto Henninus the duke of Cornwall, and the
other unto Maglanus the duke of Albania, betwixt whom he willed and ordained
that his land should be divided after his death, and the one half thereof
immediately should be assigned to them in hand: but for the third daughter
Cordeilla

Nevertheless it fortuned that one of the princes of Gallia (which now is called
France) whose name was Aganippus, hearing of the beauty, womanhood, and good
conditions of the said Cordeilla, desired to have her in marriage, and sent over
to her father, requiring that he might have her to wife: to whom answer was
made, that he might have his daughter, but as for any dower he could have
none, for all was promised and assured to her other sisters already. He
governed the third part of Gallia as Gal. Mon. says.
as in the British history it is recorded. But to proceed.

After that Leir was fallen into age, the two dukes that had married his two
eldest daughters, thinking it long yer the government of the land did come to

In the end, such was the unkindness, or (as I may say) the unnaturalness
which he found in his two daughters, notwithstanding their fair and pleasant
words uttered in time past, that being constreined of necessity, he fled the
land, and sailed into Gallia, there to seek some comfort of his youngest
daughter Cordeilla, whom before time he hated. The lady Cordeilla hearing that
he was arrived in poor estate, she first sent to him privily a certain sum
of money to apparel himself withal, and to retain a certain number of
servants that might attend upon him in honorable wise, as apperteined to the
estate which he had borne: and then so accompanied, she appointed him to come
to the court, which he did, and was so ioifullie, honorably, and lovingly
received, both by his son in law Aganippus, and also by his daughter
Cordeilla, that his heart was greatly comforted: for he was no less honored,
than if he had been king of the whole country himself.

Now when he had informed his son in law and his daughter in what sort he had
been used by his other daughters, Aganippus caused a mighty army to be put
in a readiness, and likewise a great navy of ships to be rigged, to pass
over into Britain with Leir his father in law, to see him again restored to
his kingdom. It was accorded, that Cordeilla should also go with him to take
possession of the land, the which he promised to leave unto her, as the
rightful inheritour after his decesse, notwithstanding any former grant made
to her sisters or to their husbands in any manner of wise.

Hereupon, when this army and navy of ships were ready, Leir and his
daughter Cordeilla with her husband took the sea, and arriving in Britain,
fought with their enemies, and discomfited them in battle, in the which
Maglanus and Henninus were slain: and then was Leir restored to his kingdom,
which he ruled after this by the space of two years, and then died, forty
years after he first began to reign. His body was buried at Leicester in a
vaut under the channel of the river of Sore beneath the Matthew. West.
town.

The gunarchie of queen Cordeilla, how she was vanquished, of her imprisonment
and selfe-murther: the contention between Cunedag and Margan nephews for
government, and the evil end thereof. The sixth Chapter.
COrdeilla the yoongest daughter of Leir was admitted Q. Queen Cordeilla.
and supreme gouernesse of Britain, in the year of the world 3155, before the
bylding of Rome 54, Uzia then reigning in Judah, and Jeroboam over Israel. This
Cordeilla after her fathers deceasse ruled the land of Britain right worthily
during the space of five years, in which mean time her husband died, and then
about the end of those five years, her two nephews Margan and Cunedag, sons
to her aforesaid sisters, disdaining to be under the government of a woman,
levied war against her, and destroyed a great part of the land, and finally
took her prisoner, and laid her fast in ward, wherewith she took such grief,
being a woman of a manly courage, and despairing to recover liberty, there
she slew hirselfe, when she had reigned (as before is mentioned) the term of
five years.

CUnedagius and Marganus nephews to Cordeilla, having recovered the land out
of her hands, Cunedag and Margan.
divided the same betwixt them, that is to say, the country over and beyond
Humber fell to Margan, as it stretches even to Catnesse, and the other part
lieng south and by-west, was assigned to Cunedagius. This partition chanced in
the year of the world 3170, before the building of Rome 47, Uzia as then
reigning in Judah, and Jeroboam in Israel. Afterward, these two cousins,
Cunedag and Margan, had not reigned thus past a two years, but thorough some
seditious persons, Margan was persuaded to raise war against Cunedag, telling
him in his ear, how it was a shame for him being come of the elder sister, not
to have the rule of the whole I Will in his hand. Hereupon overcome with pride,
ambition, and covetousness, he raised an army, and entering into the land of
Cunedag, Margan inuadeth his cousine Cunedag.
he burned and destroyed the country before him in miserable manner.

Cunedag in all have to resist his adversary, assembled also all the power he
could make, and coming with the same against Margan, gave him battle, in the
which he slew a great number of Margans people, and put the residue to flight,
and furthermore pursued him from country to country, till he came into
Cambria, now called Wales, where the said Margan gave him eftsoons a new
battle: but being too weak in number of men, he was there overcome and slain
in the field, Margan is slain. Matt. West.
by reason whereof that

AFter the death of Margan, Cunedagus alone.
Cunedag the son of Hennius and Ragaie (middlemost daughter of Leir before
mentioned) became ruler of all the whole land of Britain, in the year of the
world 3172, before the building of Rome 45, Uzia still

Of Riuallus, Gurgustius, Sysillius, Iago,
RIuallus, Riuallus the 13. ruler.
the son of Cunedag, began to reign over the Britains in the year of It
rained blood. Matthew. West.
after which rain ensued such an exceeding number and multitude of flies, so
noisome and contagious, that much people died by reason thereof. When he Rome
builded
after concordance of most part of writers. Perdix also a wizard, and a learned
astrologian flourished and writ his prophesies, and Herene also.

GUrgustius, Gurgustius the 14. ruler.
the son of the before named Rival, began to govern the Britains in the
year after the creation of the world 3249, and after the first foundation of
Rome 33, Ezechias reigning in Judah. This Gurgustius in the chronicle of
England, is called Gorbodian the son of Reignold, he reigned 37 years, then
departing this life, was buried at Caerbranke (now called York) by his father.

SYsillius, Sysillius the 15. ruler.
or after some writers Syluius, the brother of Gurgustius, was chosen to have
the governance of Britain, in the year of the world 3287, and after the
building of Rome 71, Manasses still reigning in Judah. This Sysillius in the
English chronicle is named Secill. He reigned 49 years, and then died, and was
buried at Carbadon, now called Bath.

IAgo or Lago, the cousin of Gurgustius, Iago the 16. ruler.
as next inheritor to Sysillius, took upon him the government of Britain, in
the year of the world 3336, and after the building of Rome 120, in whose time
the city of Jerusalem was taken by Nabuchodonozar and the king of Judah,
Mathania, otherwise called Zedechias, being slain. This Iago or Lago died
without issue, when he had reigned 28 years, and was buried at York.

KInimacus or Kinmarus the son of Sysillius as some write, Kinimacus the 17
ruler.
or rather the brother of Iago, began to govern the land of Britain, in the
year of the world 3364, and after the building of Rome 148, the Jews as then
being in the third year of their captivity of Babylon. This Kinimacus
departed this life, after he had reigned 54 years, and was buried at York.

Of Gorbodug and his two sons Ferrex and Porrex, one brother kills another,
the mother slaieth her son, and how Britain by civil wars (for lack of
issue legitimate to the government) of a monarchy became a pentarchie: the end
of Brutes line. The eight Chapter.
GOrbodug the son of Kinimacus began his reign over the Britains, Gorbodug
the 18. ruler.
in the year after the creation of the world 3418, from the building of the
city of Rome 202, the 58 of the Jews captivity at Babylon. This Gorbodug by
most likelihood to bring histories to accord, should reign about the term of
62 years, and then departing this world, was buried at London, leaving after
him two sons Ferrex and Porrex, or after some writers, Ferreus and Porreus.

FErrex with Porrex his brother began jointly to rule over the Britains,
Ferrex the 19. ruler.
in the year of the world 3476, after the building of Rome 260, at which time,
the people of Rome forsook their city in their rebellious mood. These two
brethren continued for a time in good friendship and amity, till at length
through covetousness, and desire of greater dominion, provoked by flatterers,
they fell at variance and discord, whereby Ferrex was constreined to flee into
Gallia, Ferrex fled into Gallia.
and there purchased aid of a great duke called Gunhardus or Suardus, and so
returned into Britain, thinking to prevail and obtain the dominion of the
whole Island. But his brother Porrex was ready to receive him with battle
after he was landed, in the which battle Ferrex was slain, with the more part
of his people. The English chronicle says, that Porrex was he that fled into
France, and at his return, was slain, and that Ferrex suruiued. But Geffrey
of Monmouth and Polychronicon are of a contrary opinion. Matthew
Westmonasteriensis writes, that Porrex devising ways to kill Ferrex, Matthew.
West.
atchiued his purpose and slew him. But whether of them so ever suruiued, the
mother of them was so highly offended for the death of him that was slain,
whom the most intierlie loved, that setting apart all motherlie affection, she
found the means to enter the chamber (...) him that suruiued in the night
season, and as he slept, the with the help of his maidens slew him, and cut
him into small pieces, as the writers do affirm. Such was the end of these
two brethren, The mother kills her son.
after they had reigned by the space of four to five years.

After this followed a troublous season, full of cruel war, and seditious
discord, whereby and in the end, (...) for the space of fifty years, the
monarchy or sole Robert Record
no rightful inheritor was left alive to succeed them in the kingdom. The
names of these five kings are found in certain old pedegrees: and although the
same be much corrupted in diverse copies, yet these under named are the most
agreeable.

But of these five kings or dukes, the English chronicle allows Cloton king
of Cornwall for most rightful heirs. There appears no^ any (...) certain
by report of ancient author* how long this variance continue (...) amongst the
Britains (...) but (as some say) it lasted for the space of 51 years
coniectyring so much by (...) recorded in Polychron who says, Fabian. Civil
warras 51. years.
(...) till the beginning of the reign of Dunwallon, Mulmucius who began to
govern (...) the time that Brute first entered. Britain, about the space of
703 three years.

Here ye must note, that there is difference amongst writers about the
supp^tation and account of these years, Insomuch that some making their
reckoning after certain writers, and finding the same to vary above three C.
years, are brought into further doubt of the truth at the whole history: but
whereas other have by ^aligent search tried out the continuance of every
governors reign, and reduced the same to a likelihood of some conformity, I
have thought best to follow the same, leaving the credit thereof with the first
authors.

The pentarchie.
1 Rudacus 2 Clotenus 3 Pinnor 4 Staterus 5 Yewan king of Wales. Cornwall.
Loegria. Albania. Northumberland.
The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK of the History of England.
Of Mulmucius the first king of Britain, who was crowned with a golden crown,
his laws, his foundations, with other his acts and deeds. The first Chapter.
NOw to proceed Mulmucius. Matthew. West. Polyd.
with the aforesaid authors, Mulmucius Dunwallo^, or as other say Dunuallo
Mulmucius, the son of Cloton (as testifies the english chronicle and also
Geffrey of Monmouth) got the upper hand of the other dukes or rulers: and after
his fathers deceasse began his reign over the whole monarchy of Britain, in
the year of the world 3529, after the building of Rome 314, and after the
deliverance of the Israelites out of captivity 97, and about the 26 year of
Darius Artaxerxes Longimanus, the fifth king of the Persians. This Mulmucius
Dunuallo is named in the english chronicle Donebant, and proved a right
worthy prince. He builded within the city of London then called Troinouant, a
temple, and named it the temple of peace: the which (as some hold opinion,
Fabian. See more in the description.
I wot not upon what ground) was the same which now is called Blackwell hall,
where the market for buieng and selling of cloths is kept. The chronicle of
England affirms, Malmesburie and the Uies built. Matthew. West. Laws made.
that Mulmucius (whom the old book names Molle) builded the two towns
Malmesburie and the Uies. He also made many good laws, which were long after
used, called Mulmucius laws, turned out of the British speech into the Latin
by Gildas Priscus, and long time after translated out of latin into english by
Alfred king of England, and mingled in his statutes. He moreover gave
privileges to temples, to plowes, to cities, and to high ways leading to the
same, so that whosoever fled to them, should be in safeguard from bodily harm,
and from thence he might depart into what country he would, with indemnitie of
his person. Some authors write, Caxton and Polychron.
that he began to make the four great high ways of Britain, the which were
finished by his son Blinus, as after shall be declared.

After he had established his land* and set his Britains in good and convenient
order, The first king that was crowned with a golden crown.
he ordained him by the advice of his lords a crown of gold, and caused
himself with great solemnity to be crowned, according to the custom of (...)
laws then in use: and because he was the first that bare a crown here in
Britain, after the opinion of some writers, he is named the first king of
Britain, and all the other before rehearsed are named rulers, dukes, or
governors.

Amongst other of his ordinances, Polyd. Weights and measures.
he appointed weights and measures, with the which men should buy and sell. And
further he devised sore and straight orders for the punishing of theft. Theft
punished. Fabian.
Finally, after he had guided the land by the space of forty years, he died,
and was buried in the foresaid temple of peace which he had erected within the
city of Troinouant now called London, as before ye have heard, appointing in
his life time, that his kingdom should be divided

The ioint-gouernment of Belinus and Brennus the two sons of Mulmucius, their
coffeehouse, the stratagems of the one against the other, the expulsion of
Brennus out of Britain. The second Chapter.
BRennus and Belinus began to reign jointly as kings in Britain, Belinus and
Brennus.
in the year of the world 3574, after the building of the city of Rome 355,
and after the deliverance of the Israelites out of captivity 142, 3574
which Matthew. West.
Wales, and Cornwall: and Brennus all those countries over and beyond Humber.
And with this partition were they contented by the term of six or seven
years, Polyd. says 5. Brennus not content with his portion.
after which time expired, Brennus coveting to have more than his portion came
to, first thought to purchase himself aid in foreign parties, and therefore
by the provocation and counsel of young unquiet Elsingius.
as then duke or ruler of that country. Beline offended with his brother, that
he should thus without his advice marry with a stranger, now in his absence
seized all his lands, towns, and fortresses into his own hands, placing
garrisons of men of war where he thought convenient.

In the mean time, Brenne advertised hereof, assembled a great navy of ships,
well furnished with Guilthdacus king of Denmark.
the which had laid long in wait for him, because of the young lady which
Brenne had married, for whom he had been a suitor to her father Elsing of long
time. When these two fleetes of the Danes and Norwegians met, there was a sore
battle betwixt them, but finally the Danes overcame them of Norway, and took
the ship wherein the new bride was conveyed, and then was she brought aboard
the ship of Guilthdacus. Brenne escaped by flight as well as he might. But when
Guilthdacus had thus obtained the victory and prey, suddenly thereupon arose
a sore tempest of wind and weather, A tempest.
which scattered the Danish fleet, and put the king in dangers to have been
lost^ but finally within five days after, being driven by force of wind, he
landed in Northumberland, with a few such ships as kept together with him.
Guilthdacus landed in the north.


Beline being then in that country, providing for defense against his brother,
upon knowledge of the king of Denmarks arrival, caused him to be stayed.
Shortly after, Brenne having recovered and gotten together the most part of
his ships that were dispersed by the discomfiture, and then newly rigged and
furnished of all things necessary, sent word to his brother Beline, both to
restore unto him his wife wrongfullie ravished by Guilthdacus, and also his
lands injuriously by him seized and his possession. These requests being
plainly and shortly denied, Brenne made no long delaie, but speedily made
toward Albania, and landing with his army in a part thereof, incountred with
his brother Beline near unto a wood named as then Calater, where (after cruel
fight, Calater wood is in Scotland.
and mortal battle betwixt them) at length the victory abode with the
Britains, and the discomfiture did light so on the Norwegians, that the most of
them were wounded, slain, and left dead upon the ground.

Hereby Brenne being forced to flee, made shift, and got over into Gallia,
where after he had sued to this prince, at length he abode, and was well
received of one Seguinus or Seginus duke of the people called then Allobrogs
(as Galfrid of Monmouth says) or rather Armorica, Seguinus or Seginus duke of
the Allobrogs, now the D^^phinat or Sauoy.
which now is called Britain, as Polychronicon, and the english history
printed by Caxton, more truly may seem to affirm. But Beline having got the
upper hand of his enemies, assembling his council at Caerbranke, now called
York, took advise what he should do with the king of Denmark: where it was
ordained, that he should be set at liberty, with condition and under covenant,
to acknowledge himself by doing homage, to hold his land of the king of
Britain, and to pay him a yeerelie tribute. These covenants being agreed
upon, The Danes tributarie to the Britains.
and hostages taken for assurance, he was set at liberty, and so returned into
his country. The tribute that he couenanted to pay, was a thousand pounds, as
the English chronicle says.

When Beline had thus expelled his brother, and was alone possessed of all the
land of Britain, he first confirmed the laws made by his father: and for so
much as the four ways begun by his father were not brought to perfection, The
four high ways finished.
he therefore caused workmen to be called forth and assembled, whom he set in
hand to paue the said ways with stone, for the better passage and ease of all
that should travel through the countries from place to place, as occasion
should require.

The first of these four ways is named Fosse, The fosse.
and stretches from the south into the north, beginning at the corner of
Totnesse in Cornwall, and so passing forth by Devonshire, and Somersetshire,
by Tutherie, on Cotteswold, and then forward beside Couentrie unto Leicester,
and from thence by wild plains toward Newarke, and ends at the city of
Lincoln. The second way was named Watling street, the which stretches
overthwart the Fosse, Watling street
out of the southeast into the northeast, beginning at Dover, and passing by
the middle of Kent over Thames beside London, by-west of Westminster, as some
have thought, and so forth by S. Albons, and by the west side of Dunstable,
Stratford, Toucester, and Wedon by-south of Lilleborne, by Atherston, Gilberts
hill, that now is called the Wreken, and so forth by Seuerne, passing beside
Worcester, unto Stratton to the middle of Wales, and so unto a place called
Cardigan, at the Irish sea. The third way was named Ermingstreet, Ermingstreet
which stretched out of the west northwest, unto the east southeast, and
begins at Meneuia, the which is in Saint David's land in west Wales, and so
unto Southampton. The fourth and last way hight Hiknelstreete, Hiknelstreete.
which leads by Worcester, Winchcombe, Birmingham, Lichfield, Darbie,
Chesterfield, and by York, and so forth unto Tinmouth. After he had caused
these ways to be well and sufficiently raised and made, Privileges granted to
the ways.
he

Brennus marries with the duke of Alobrogs daughter, grows into great
honor, comes into Britain with an army against his brother Beline, their
mother reconcileth them, they join might and munition and have great
conquests, conflicts
IN the mean time that Beline was thus occupied about the necessary affairs
of his realm and kingdom, his Brenne marieth the duke of Alobrogs daughter.
that he gave to him his daughter in marriage, with condition, that if he died
without issue male, then should he inherit his estate and duke dome: and if it
happened him to leave any heir male behind him, then should he yet help him
to recover his land and dominion in Britain, beerest from him by his brother.

These conditions well and surely upon the dukes part by the assent of the
nobles of his land concluded, ratified, and assured, the said duke within the
space of

Shortly after also, Brenne with an army returns into Britain.
with their assent he gathered an army, and with the same eftsoons came over
into Britain, to make new war upon his brother Beline. Brenne and Beline
made friends by intercession of their mother.
by the intercession of their mother that came betwixt them, and demeaned
hirselfe in all motherlie order, and most loving manner toward them both, they
fell to an agreement, and were made friends or ever they parted asunder.

After this they repaired to London, and there taking advice together with
their peers and counselors, for the good order and quieting of the land, at
length they accorded to pass with both their armies into Gallia, to subdue
that whole country, and so following this determination, they took shipping
and sailed over into Gallia, where beginning the war with fire and sword,
they wrought such maisteries, that within a short time (as says Geffrey of
Monmouth) they conquered a great part of Gallia, They i^ made Gallia and Italy.
Italy, and Germany, and brought it to their subjection. In the end they
took Rome by this occasion (as writers report) if these be the same that had
the leading of those Galls, which in this season did so much hurt in Italy
and other parts of the world.

After they had passed the mountains, and were entered into Tuscan, Now Clusi.
they besieged the city of Clusium, the citizens whereof being in great
danger, sent to Rome for aid against their enemies. Whereupon the Romans,
considering with themselves that although they were not in any league of
society with the Clusians, yet if they were overcome the danger of the next
brunt were like to be theirs: Ambassadors sent from Rome.
with all speed they sent ambassadors to entreat betwixt the parties for some
peace to be had.

They that were sent, Brennus answer.
required the capteines of the Galls, in the name of the senate and citizens of
Rome, not to molest the friends of the Romans. Whereunto answer was made by
Brennus, that for his part he could be content to have peace, if it were so
that the Clusians would be agreeable that the Galls might have part of the
country which they held, being more than they did already well occupy, for
otherwise (said he) there could be no peace granted.

The Roman ambassadors being offended with these words, The treaty of peace
breaks off.
demanded what the Galls had to do in Tuscan, by reason of which and other
the like overthwart words, the parties began to kindle in displeasure so
far, that their communication brake off, and so they from treating fell
again to try the matter by dint of sword.

The Roman ambassadors also to show of what prowess the Romans were,
contrary to the law of nations (forbidding such as came in embassage about
any treaty of peace to take either one part or other) took weapon in hand,
and joined themselves with the Clusians, wherewith the Galls were so much
displeased, that incontinently with one voice, they required to have the siege
raised from Clusium, that they might go to Rome. But Brennus thought good first
to send messengers thither, to require the delivery of such as had broken the
law, that punishment might be done on them accordingly as they had deserved.
This was done, and knowledge brought again, that the ambassadors were not
only not punished, but also chosen to be tribunes for the next year.

The Galls then became in such a rage (because they saw there was nothing to
be looked for at the hands of the Romans, but war, injurious wrongs, and
deceitful trains) that they turned all their force against them, The Galls
make toward Rome.
marching straight toward Rome, and by the way destroyed all that stood
before them. The Romans advertised thereof, assembled themselves together to
the number of 40. thousand, The Romans incountring with the Galls are
overthrown.
and encountering with Beline and Brenne, near to the river Allia, about 11.
miles on this side Rome, were slain and quite discomfited.

The Galls could scarce believe that they had got the victory with so small
resistance: but when they perceived that the Romans were quite overthrown and
that the field was clearelie rid of them, they got together the spoil, and
made toward Rome it self, where such fear and terror was stricken into the
hearts of the people, The Romans in despair with draw into the capitol.
and all men were in despair to defend the city: and therefore the senate
with all the warlike youth of the citizens got them into the capitol, which
they furnished with victuals and all things necessary for the maintenance of
the same against a long siege. The honorable fathers and all the multitude of
other people not apt for wars, remained still in the city, as it were to
perish with their country if hap so befell.

In the mean time came the Galls to the city, The Galls enter into Rome.
and entering by the gate Collina, they passed forth the right way unto the
market place, maruelling to see the houses of the poorer sort to be shut
against them, and those of the richer to remain wide open; wherefore being
doubtful of some deceitful trains, they The reverend aspect of the senators.
they reverenced them as gods, so honorable was their port, grauenesse in
countenance, and show of apparel.

In the mean time it chanced, Marcus Papirius.
that Marcus Papirius stroke one of the Galls on the head with his staff,
because he presumed to stroke his heard: with which injury the Gall being
provoked, slew Papirius Rome sacked.
were put to the sword, and their houses sacked. And thus was Rome taken by the
two brethren, Beline and Brenne, 365 years after the first building thereof.
Besides this, the Galls attempted in the night season to have entered the
capitol: 365
The capitol defended.
that they had atchiued their purpose, if a sort of ganders had not with their
cry and noise disclosed them, in wakening the Romans that were asleep: and so
by that means were the Galls beaten back and repelled.

Camillus revoked from exile, made dictator, and receives peremptory
authority, he overthrows the Galls in a
THe Romans being thus put to their extreme shift, devised among themselves
how to revoke Furius Camillus from exile, whom not long before they had
unjustly banished out of the city. In the end they did not only send for
him home, but also created him dictator, committing into his hands (so long as
his office

In the mean time those that kept the capitol (being almost famished for
lack of vittels) compounded with Brenne and Beline, that for a thousand pounds
weight in gold, A composition
the Romans should redeem their liberties, and the said Brenne and Beline
depart with their army out of the city and all the territories of Rome. But
at the delivery of the money, and by a certain kind of hap, the Romans name
was preserved at that time from such dishonor and ignominy as was likely to
have insued. For some of the covetous sort of the Galls, not contented with
the just weight of the gold, did cast their swords also into the balance where
the weights lay, thereby to have over weight: whereupon the Romans refused to
make payment after that weight.

And thus whilst they were in altercation about this matter, the one
importunnate to have, the other not willing to grant, the time passed, till in
the mean season Camillus came in amongst them with his power, Camillius
^^appointeth the Galls of their poimet
commanding that the gold should be had away, and affirming that without
consent of the dictator, no composition or agreement might be concluded by the
meaner magistrate. He gave a sign to the Galls to prepare themselves to
battle, whereunto they lightly agreed, and together they went. The battle
being once begun, the Galls that looked erst for gold, and not for battle,
The Galls overthrown.
were easily overcome, such as stood to the brunt were slain, and the rest by
flight constreined to depart the city.

Polybius writes, that the Galls were turned from the siege of the city,
through wars which chanced amongst their own people at home, and therefore
they concluded a peace with the Romans, and leaving them in liberty returned
home again.

But howsoever the matter passed, thus much have we stepped from our purpose, to
show somewhat of that noble and most famous captain Brennus, who (as not only
our histories, but also Giouan Villani the Florentine does report) was a
Britain, and brother to Beline (as before is mentioned) although I know that
many other writers are not of that mind, affirming him to be a Gall, and
likewise that after this present time of the taking of Rome by this Brennus 110
years, or there abouts, there was another Brennus a Gall by nation (say they)
under whose conduct an other army of the Gals invaded Grecia, which Brennus
had a brother that hight Belgius, although Humfrey Llhoyd and sir John Prise
do flatly deny the same, by reason of some discordance in writers, and
namely in the computation of the years set down by them that have recorded
the doings of those times, whereof the error is grown. Howbeit I doubt not
but that the truth of this matter shall be more fully sifted out in time by
the learned and studious of such antiquities. But now to our purpose.

This is also to be noted, that where our histories make mention, that Beline
was abroad with Brennus in the most part of his victories, both in Gallia,
Germany, Titus Li^. Polydor.
and Italy; Titus Liuius speaks but only of Brennus: whereupon some write,
that after the two brethren were by their mothers intreatance made friends,
Brennus only went over to Gallia, and there through proof of his worthy
prowess, atteined to such estimation amongst the people called Galli Senones,
that he was chosen to be their general captain at their going over the
mountains into Italy. But whether Beline went over with his brother, and
finally returned back again, Matthew. West.
leaving Brennus behind him, as some write, or that he went not at all, but
remained still at home whilst his brother was abroad, we can affirm no
certeintie.

Most part of all our writers make report of many worthy deeds accomplished
by Beline, in repairing of cities decayed, and erecting of other new buildings,
to the adorning and beautifieng of his realm and kingdom. Polyehr. Gal. M.
Caerleon. wiske built by Beline.
And amongst other works which were by him erected, he builded a city in the
south part of Wales, near to the place where the river of Uske falls into
Seuerne, fast by Glamorgan, which city hight Caerleon, or Caerlegion Ar Wiske.
This Caerleon was the principal city in time past of all Demetia, now called
Southwales. Many notable monuments are remaining there till this day,
testifieng the great magnificence and royal building of that city in old
time. In which city also since the time of Christ were three churches, one of
saint Julius the martyr, an other of saint Aron, and the third was the mother
church of all Demetia, and the chief see: but after, the same see was
translated unto Meneuia, (that is to say) saint David in Westwales. In this
Caerleon was Amphibulus borne, who taught and instructed saint Albon.

This Beliue also builded an haven, with a gate over the same, Fabian.
within the city of Troinouant now called London, in the summitie or highest
part whereof afterward was set a vessel of brass, in the which were put the
ashes of his body, which body after his deceasse was burnt, as the manner of
burieng in those days did require. This gate was long after called Belina
gate, John Leland.
and at length by corruption of language Billings gate. He builded also a
castle eastward from this gate (as some have written) which The tower of
London built by Beline.
at length departed this life, after he had reigned with his brother jointly
and alone the space of 26 years.

Of Gurguintus, Guintolinus, and Sicilius, three kings of Britain succeeding
GUrguintus the son of Beline began to reign over Gurguintus.
in the year of the world 1596, after the building of Rome 380, after the
deliverance of the Israelites out of captivity 164 complet, which was about
the 33 year of Artaxerxes Mnenon, surnamed Magnus, the seventh king of the
Persians. This Gurguint in the English chronicle is named Corinbratus, Matthew.
West. Gal. M.
and by Matthew Westmin. he is surnamed Barbiruc, the Gurguint constrained the
Danes by force to pay their tribute.
that the king of Denmark with the assent of his barons was constreined to
grant eftsoons to continue the payment of the aforesaid tribute.

After he had thus atchiued his desire in Denmark, as he returned back
toward Britain, he Matthew. West. Gal. Mon.
who being brought to the presence of king Gurguint, declared that he with his
people were banished out of Spain, and were named Balenses or Baselenses,
Basques.
and had sailed long on the sea, to the end to find some prince that would
assign them a place to inhabit, to whom they would become subjects, and hold
of him as of their sovereign governor. See more hereof in Ireland.
Therefore he besought the king to consider their estate, and of his great
benignity to appoint some void quarter where they might settle. The king with
the advice of his barons granted to them the I Will of Ireland, which as then (by
report of some authors) lay waste and without habitation. But Polychron.
it should appear by other writers, that it was inhabited long before those
days, by the people called Hibemeneses, of Hiberus their captain that brought
them also out of Spain.

After that Gurguintus was returned into his country, he ordained that the
laws made by his ancestors should be duly kept and observed. And thus
administering justice to his subjects for the term of 19 years, he finally
departed this life, and was buried at London, or as some have at Caerleon. In
his days was the town of Cambridge with the university first founded by
Cantaber, brother to the Caius.
aforesaid Bartholin (according to some writers) as after shall appear.

GUintollius or Guintellius the son of Gurguintus was admitted king of
Britain in the year of the world of 614, after the building of the city of
Rome 399, Guintolinus.
and second year of the 206 Olimpiad. This Guintoline was a wise prince, grave
in counsel, and sober in behauior. He had also a wife named Martia, a woman of
perfect beauty, and wisdom incomparable, as by her prudent government and
equal administration of justice after her husbands deceasse, during her sons
minority, it most manifestly appeared.

It is thought that in an happy time this Guintoline came to the government
of this kingdom, being shaken and brought out of order with civil
dissentions, to the end he might reduce it to the former estate, which he
carnestlie accomplished: for having once got the place, he studied with great
diligence to reform anew, and to adorn with justice, laws and good orders,
the British common wealth, by other kings not so framed as stood with the
quietness thereof. But before all things he utterly removed and appeased such
civil discord, as seemed yet to remain after the manner of a remnant of those
seditious factions and partakings, which had so long time reigned in this land.
But as he was busy in hand herewith, death took him out of this life, after
he had reigned 27 years, and then was he buried at London.

SIcilius the son of Guintoline, Sicilius.
being not past seven years of age when his father died, was admitted king, in
the year 3659, after the building of Rome 430, and after the deliverance of
the Israelites out of captivity 218, and in the sixth after the death of
Alexander. By reason that Sicilius was not of age sufficient of himself to
guide the kingdom of the Britains, Queen Martia governs in her sons room.
his mother that worthy lady called Martia, had the governance both of his
realm and person committed to her charge.

She was a woman expert and skillful in diverse sciences, but chiefelie being
admitted to the governance of the realm, she studied to preserve the common
wealth in good quiet and wholesome order, and therefore devised and established
profitable and convenient laws, the which after were called Martian laws, She
makes laws.
of her name that first made them. These laws, as those that were thought good
and necessary for the preservation of the common wealth, Alfred, or Alured,
that was long after king of England, translated also out of the British tongue,
into the English Saxon speech, and then were they called after that translation
Marchenelagh, that is to mean, the laws of Martia. Matthew. West.
To conclude, this worthy woman guided the land during the minority of her
son right politikelie; and highly to her perpetual renown and
commendation. And when her son came to lawful age, she delivered up the
governance into his hands. How long he reigned writers vary, some avouch but
seven years, Matt. Westminster.
though other affirm 15. which agrees not so well with the accord of other
histories and times. He was buried at London.

Of Kimarus and his sudden end, of Elanius and his short regiment, of Morindus
and his beastly cruelty, all three immediately succeeding each other in the
monarchy of Britain, with the explorts of the last.
KImarus the son of Sicilius began to reign over the Britains, Kimarus.
in the year of the world 3657, and after the building of Rome 442, and in the
first year of the 117, Fabian.


ELanius the son of Kimarus, Elanius.
or (as other have) his brother, began to rule the Britains in the year after
the creation of the world 3361, after the building of Rome 445, after the
deliverance of the Israelities 229, Matthew. West.
and in the fourth year of the Seleuciens, Mat. Westin. Danius; and by an old
chronicle which Fabian much followed, Elanius and Kimarus should seem to be
one person: but other hold the contrary, and say that he reigned fully 8.
years.

MOrindus the bastard son of Elanius was admitted king of Britain, Morindus.
in the year of the

In his days, G. Mon.
a certain king of the people called Moriani, with a great army landed in
Northumberland, and began to make cruel war upon the inhabitants. But
Morindus advertised heerof, assembled

These people (whom Gal. Mon. The like may be thought of those Murreis or
Morauians of whom H. B. speaks.
names Moriani) I take to be either those that inhabited about Terrouane and
Calice, Fabian.
called Morini, or some other people of the Galls or Germans, and not as
some esteem them, Morauians, or Merhenners, which were not known to the world
(as Humfrey Llhoyd has very well noted) till about the days of the emperor
Mauricius, which misconstruction of names has brought the British history
further out of credit than reason requires, if the circumstances be duly
considered.

But now to end with Morindus. At length this bloody prince heard of a monster
that was come a land out of the Irish sea, with the which when he would needs
fight, he was devoured of the same, after he had reigned the term of 8 years,
leaving behind him five sons, Gorbomanus, Archigallus, Elidurus, Uigenius or
Nigenius, and Peredurus.

Of Gorbonianus, Archigallus, Elidurus, Vigenius, and Peredurus, the five sons
of Morindus, the building of Cambridge, the restitution of Archigallus to the
regiment after his deprivation, Elidurus three times admitted King, his death
and place of interrament. The seventh Chapter.
GOrbonianus the first son of Morindus succeeded his father in the kingdom of
Britain, Gorbomen or Gorbonianus.
in the year of the world 3676, after the building of Rome 461, and fourth
year of the 121, Olimpiad. This Gorbonianus in the English chronicle is named
Granbodian, A righteous and religious prince.
and was a righteous prince in his government, and very devout (according to
such devotion as he had) toward the advancing of the religion of his gods: and
thereupon he repaired all the old temples through his kingdom, and erected some
new.

He also builded the towns of Cambridge and Grantham (as Caxton writes) and
was beloved both of the rich and poor, for he honored the rich, and relieved
the poor in time of their necessities. In his time was more plenty of all
things necessary for the wealthfull state of man, than had been before in
any of his predecessors days. He died without issue, after he had reigned (by
the accord of most writers) about the term of ten years.

Some write that this Gorbonian built the towns of Cairgrant, Cambridge by
whom it was built.
now called Cambridge, and also Grantham, but some think that those which have
so written are deceived, in mistaking the name; for that Cambridge was at the
first called Granta: and by that means it might be that Gorbonian built only
Grantham, and not Cambridge, namely because other write how that Cambridge (as
before is said) was built in the days of Gurguntius the son of Beline, by
one Cantaber a Spaniard, brother to Partholoin, which Partholoin by the advice
of the same Gurguntius, got seats for himself and his company in Ireland (as
before ye have heard.)

The said Cantaber also obteining license of Gurguntius, builded a town upon
the side of the river called Canta, which he closed with walls, and fortified
with a strong tower or castle, and after procuring philosophers to come hither
from Athens (where in his youth he had been a student) he placed them there,
and so even then was that place furnished (as they say) with learned men, and
such as were ready to instruct others in knowledge of letters and
philosophical doctrine. But by whom or in what time soever it was built,
certain it is that there was a city or town walled in that place before the
coming of the Saxons, called by the Britains, Caergrant, and by the Saxons
Granchester.

This town fell so to ruin by the invasion of the Saxons, that at length it
was in manner left desolate, and at this day remains as a village. But near
thereunto under the Saxon kings, an other town was built, now called
Cambridge, where by the favor of king Sigebert and (...) Burgundian, that was
bishop of Dunwich, (...) school was erected, as in place convenient shall
appear.

ARchigallus, Archigallus.
the second son of Morindus, and He is given to nourish dissension.
This Archigalius (in the English chronicle called Artogaill) followed not the
steps of his brother, but giving himself to dissension and strise, imagined
causos against his nobles, that he might displace

ELidurus the third son of Morindus, Elidurus.
and brother

Now as it chanced one dahy (being abroad on hunting in the wood called
Calater) near unto York, By this it should seem that Acliud should not be in
Scotland, contrary to the Scottish authors.
he found his brother Archigall wandering there in the thickest of that
wilderness, whom in most loving manner he secretly conneied home to his house,
being as then in the city of Aldud, otherwise called Acliud. Shortly after he
feined himself sick, and in all have

After this he assembled a council at York, where he so used the matter with
the commons, that in conclusion, An example of brotherly love.
if a man shall reuolue in his mind what an inordinate desire remains amongst
mortal men to atteine to the supreme souereintie of ruling, and to keep the
same when they have it once in possession. He had well learned this lesson (as
may appear by his contentation and resignation) namely, that Nec abnuendum si
dat imperium Deus, Sen. in Thiest.

Nec appetendum,
otherwise he would not have been led with such an equabilitie of mind. For
this great good will and brotherly love by him showed thus toward his brother,
he was surnamed the godly and virtuous.

WHen Archigallus was thus restored to the kingedome, Archigallus again.
and having learned by due correction that he must turn the leaf, and take
out a new lesson, by changing his former trade of living into better, if he
would reign in suertie: he became a new man, using himself vprightlie in the
administration of justice, and behauing himself so woorihilie in all his
doings, both toward the nobles and commons of his realm, that he was both
beloved and dread of all his subjects. And so continuing the whole term of
his life, finally departed out of this world, after he had reigned this second
time the space of ten years, and was buried at York.

ELidurus brother to this Archigallus was then again admitted king by consent
of all the Britains, Elidurus again.
3700 of the world. Matt. West.
But his two younger brethren, Uigenius and Peredurus, Brother against brother.
enuieng the happy state of this worthy prince, so highly for his virtue
and good governance esteemed of the Britains, of a grounded malice conspired
against him, and assembling an army, levied war against him, and in a pitched
field took him prisoner, and put him in the tower of London, there to be kept
close prisoner, Elidure committed to prison.
after he had reigned now this last time the space of one year.

VIgenius and Peredurus, Vigenius and Peredurus.
the yoongest sons of Morindus, and brethren to Elidurus, began to reign
jointly as kings of Britain, in the year of the world 3701, after the
building of Rome 485, after the deliverance of the Israelites 266 complet, and
in the 12 year of Antigonus Gonaias, the son of Demetrius king of the
Macedonians. These two brethren in the English chronicles are named Higanius
and Petitur, who (as Gal. Mon. testifies) divided the realm betwixt them,
Britain divided into two realms.
so that all the land from Humber westward fell to Uigenius, or Higanius, the
other part beyond Humber northward Peredure held. But other affirm, that
Peredurus only reigned, and held his brother Elidurus in prison by his own
consent, for so much as he was not willing to govern.

But Gal. Mon. says, that Uigenius died after he had reigned 7 years, and
then Peredurus seized all the land into his own rule, and governed it with
such sobriety and wisdom, that he was praised above all his brethren, so
that Elidurus was quite forgotten of the Britains. But others write that he was
a very tyrant, Uarietie in writers.
and used himself very cruelly toward the lords of his land, whereupon they
rebelled and slew him. But whether by violent hand, or by natural sickness,
he finally departed this life, after the consent of most writers, when he had
reigned eight years, Caxton. Eth. Bur.
leaving no issue behind him to succeed in the governance of the kingdom. He
builded the town of Pikering, where his body was buried.

ELidurus then, Elidurus the third time.
as soon as his brother Peredurus was dead, for as much as he was next heir
to the crown, was delivered out of prison, and now the third time admitted
king of Britain, who used himself (as before) very orderly in ministering to
all persons right and justice all the days of his life, and lastly being
grown to great age died, when he had reigned now this third time (after most
concordance of writers) the term of four years: He is buried at Caerleill.
and was buried at Caerleill.

A Chapter of digression, showing the diversity of writers in opinion,
touching the computation of years from the beginning of the British kings of
this Island downwards; since Gurguintus time, till the death of Elidurus; and
likewise till king Lud reigned in his roialtie, with the names of such kings as
ruled between the last year of Elidurus, and the first of Lud.
HEre is to be noted, that even from the beginning of the British kings, which
reigned here in this land, there is great diversity amongst writers, both
touching the Polydor.
Insomuch that Polydor Virgil in his history of England, finding a manifest
error (as he takes it) in those writers whom he follows touching the
account, from the coming of Brute, unto the sacking of Rome by Brennus, whom
our histories affirm to be the brother of Beline, that to fill up the number
which is wanting in the reckoning of the

After him succeeded these whose names follow in order, Chimarius, Danius,
Morindus, Gorbonianus, Archigallo, who being deposed, Elidurus was made king,
and so continued till he restored the government (as ye have heard) to
Archigallo again, and after his death Elidurus was eftsoons admitted, and
within a while again deposed by Uigenius and Polydor gathers by the account
of years attributed to those kings that reigned before

But since other have in better order brought out a perfect agreement in the
account of years, and succession of those kings, which reigned and governed in
this land before the sacking of Rome; and also another such as it is after the
same, and before the Romans had any perfect knowledge thereof; we have thought
good to follow them therein, leaving to every man his liberty to judge as his
knowledge shall serve him in a thing so doubtful and uncertain, by reason of
variance amongst the ancient writers in that behalf.

And even as there is great difference in writers since Gurguintus, till the
death of Elidurus, so is there as great or rather greater after his deceasse,
specially till king Lud atteined the kingdom. But as may be gathered by that
which Fabian and other whom he follows do write, Fabian
there passed above 185 years betwixt the last year of Elidurus, and the
beginning of king Lud his reign, in the which time there reigned 32, or 33,
kings, as some writers have mentioned, whose names (as Gal. Mon. has recorded)
are th^se immediately here named; Reg^^ the son of Gorbolian or Gorbonian, a
worthy prince, who justly and mercifully governed his people; Margan the
son of Archigallo a noble prince likewise, and guiding his subjects in good
quiet; Emerian brother to the same Margan, but far unlike to him in manners, so
that he was deposed in the sixth year of his reign; Ydwallo son to Uigenius;
Rimo the son of Peredurus; Geruntius the son of Elidurus; Catell that was
buried at Winchester; Coill that was buried at Nottingham; Porrex a virtuous
and most gentle prince; Cherinus a drunkard; Fulginius, Eldad, and Androgeus;
these three were sons to Chercinus, and reigned successively one after
another; after them a son of Androgeus; then Eliud, Vrianus.
Dedaicus, Clotinius, Gurguntius, Merianns, Bledius, Cop, Owen, Sicilius,
Bledgabredus an excellent musician: after him his brother Archemall; then
Eldol, Red, Rodiecke, Samuill, Penisell, Pir, Capoir; after him his son
Gligweil an upright dealing prince, and a good iusticiarie; whom succeeded his
son Helie, which reigned 60 years, as the forsaid Gal. Mon. writes, where
other affirm that he reigned 40 years, and some again say that he reigned
but 7 months.

There is great diversity in writers touching the reigns of these kings, and
not only for the number of years which they should continue in their reigns
but also in their names: so that to show the diversity of all the writers,
were but to small purpose, since the doings of the same kings were not great by
report made thereof by any approved author. But this may suffice to advertise
you, that by conferring the years attributed to the other kings which reigned
before them, since the coming of Brute, who should enter this land (as by the
best writers is gathered) about the year before the building of Rome 367,
which was in the year after the creation of the world 2850 (as is said) with
their time, there remains 182 years to be dealt amongst these 33 kings,
which reigned betwixt the said Elidure and Lud, which Lud also began his reign
after the building of the city of Rome (as writers affirm) about 679 years,
and in the year of the world 3895, as some that will seem the precisest
calculators do gather.

Polydor Virgil changing (as I have showed) the order of succession in the
British kings, in bringing diverse of those kings, which after other writers
followed Beline and Brenne, to preceed them so successively after Beline and
Brenne, reherseth those that by his conjecture did by likelihood succeed, as
thus. After the decesse of Beline, his son Gurguntius, being the second of
that name, succeeded in government of the land, and then these in order as they
follow: Merianus, Bladanus, Capeus, Ouinus, Sicilius, Bledgabredus,
Archemallus, Eldorus, Rodianus, Redargius, Samulius, Penisellus, Pyrrhus,
Caporus, Dinellus, and Helie, who had issue, Lud, Cassibellane, and Neurius.

Of king Helie who gave the name to the I Will of Elie, of king Lud, and what
memorable edifices he made, London sometimes called Luds town, his
bountifuln^s, and burial. The ninth Chapter.
Here note by the way a thing not to be be forgotten, that of the foresaid
Helie the last of the said 3^ kings, the I Will of Elie took the name, whereof
the I Will of Elie took name.
because that he most commonly did there inhabit, building in the same a
goodly palace, and making great reparations of the sluices, ditches and causies
about that I Will, for conueiance away of the water, Humfrey Llhoyd holds, that
it took name of this British word Helig, which signifies willowes, wherewith
those fennes abound.

After the decesse of the same Helie, Lud.
his eldest son Lud began his reign, in the year after the creation A worthy
prince.
amending the laws of the realm that were defective, abolishing evil customs
and manners used amongst his people, and repairing old cities and towns which
were decayed: but specially he delited most to beautify and enlarge with
buildings the city of Troinouant, London enclosed with a wall
which he compassed with a strong wall made of John Hard.
in the best manner fortified with diverse fair towers: and in the west part of
the same wall he erected a strong gate, which he commanded to be called after
his name, Ludsgate, and so unto this day it is called Ludgate, (S) only
drowned in pronuntiation of the word.

In the same city also he soiorned for the more part, Fabian.
by reason whereof the inhabitants increased, Gal. Mon.
and many habitations were builded to receive them, Matt. West.
and he himself caused buildings to be made betwixt The bisshops palace.
as some think; yet Harison supposes it to have bin Bainards castle, where
the black friars now stands. He also builded a fair temple near to his
said palace, which temple (as some take it) was after turned to a church, and
at this day called Paul's. By reason that king Lud so much esteemed that city
before all other of his realm, enlarging it so The name of Troinouant changed
and called London
that is to say, Luds town: and after by corruption of speech it was named
London.

Beside the princely doings of this Lud touching the advancement of the
common wealth by studies apperteining to the time of peace, he was also strong
and valiant in arms, in subduing his enemies, bountious and liberal both in
gifts and keeping a plentiful house, so that he was greatly beloved of all
the Britains. Finally, when he had reigned with great honor for the space of
11 years, he died, and was buried near Ludgate, leaving after him two sons,
Androgeus and Theomancius or Tenancius.

Of Cassibellane and his noble mind, Julius Caesar sends Caius Volusenus to
^^^uey the coasts of this Island, he lies with his fleet at Calice, purposing
to invade the country, his attempt is bewraied and withstood by the Britains.
The tenth Chapter.
GAssibellane the brother of Lud was admitted king of Britain, in the year of
the world 3908, Cassibellane.
after the building of Rome 692, and before the coming of Christ 58 complet.
Gal. Mon.
For since the two sons of Lud were not of age able to govern, Matt. West.
the rule of the land was committed to Cassibellane: Fabian.
but yet (as some have written) he was not created king, but rather appointed
ruler and protector of the land, during the nonage of his nephews. Gal. Mon.
Now after he was admitted (by whatsoever order) to the administration of the
common wealth, he became so noble a prince and so bountious, that his name
spread far and near, and by his upright dealing in seeing justice executed he
grew in such estimation, that the Britains made small account of his nephews,
in comparison of the favor which they bare toward him. But Cassibellane
having respect to his honor, least it might be thought that his nephews were
expelled by him out of their rightful possessions, brought them up very
honorably; assigning to Androgeus, Matt. West.
London and Kent; and to Theomantius the country of Cornwall. Thus far out
of the British histories, whereby it may be gathered, that the years assigned
to these kings that reigned before Cassibellane, amount to the sum of 1058.

But whether these governors (whose names we have recited) were kings, Polydor.
or rather rulers of the common wealth, or tyrants and usurpers of the
government by force, it is uncertain: for not one ancient writer of any
approved authority makes any remembrance of them: and by that which Julius
Caesar writes, it may and does appear, that diverse cities in his days were
governed of themselves, as hereafter it shall more plainly appear. Neither
does he make mention of those towns which the British histoie affirms to be
built by the same kings. In deed both he and other Latin writers speak of
diverse people that inhabited diverse portions of this land, as of the
Brigantes, Trinobantes, Iceni, Silures, and such other like, but in what parts
most of the said people did certeinlie inhabit, it is hard to avouch for
certain truth.

But what John Leland thinks hereof, being one in our time that curiously
searched out old antiquities, you shall after hear as occasion serves: and
likewise the opinions of other, Hector Boethius his fault.
as of Hector Boethius, who coveting to have all such valiant acts as were
atchiued by the Britains to be ascribed to his countriemen the Scots, draws
both the Silures and Brigantes, with other of the Britains so far northward,
that he makes them inhabitants of the Scottish countries. And what particular
names soever they had, yet were they all Scots with him, and known by that
general name (as he would persuade us to believe) saying that they entered into
Britain out of Ireland 330 years before the incarnation of our Savior.

Nevertheless, how general soever the name of Scots then was, sure it is,
that no special mention of them is made by any writer, till about 300 years
after the birth of our savior. And yet the Romans, which ruled this land, and
had so much adoo with the people thereof, make mention of ^iuerse other people,
nothing so famous as Boethius would make his Scottish men even then to be. But to
leave to the Scots the antiquity of their original beginning, as they and
other must do unto us our descent from Brute and the other Trojans, since the
contrary does not plainly appear, unless we More certeintie from hence
forth appears in the history.


In this season that Cassibellane had royal government here in Britain,
Caius Julius Caesar Julius Caesar
being appointed by the senate of Rome to conquer Gallia, was for that purpose
created consul, and sent with a mighty army into the country, where after he
had brought the Galls unto some frame, Caesar de bello Gall. lib. 4.
he determined Britains unknown to the Romans.
which as yet the Romans knew not otherwise than by report. The chiefest cause
that moved him to take in hand that enterprise, Caesar de bello Gal. lib. 4.
was for that he did understand, that there daily came great succors out of
that I Will to those Galls that were enemies unto the Romans. Causes of the war.
And though the season of that year to make war was far spent (for summer
was almost at an end) yet he thought it would be to good purpose, if he might
but pass over thither, Cesars purpose.
and learn what manner of people did inhabit there, and discover the places,
havens,

Heerevpon calling together such merchants as he knew to have had traffike
thither with some trade of wares, he diligently inquired of them the state of
the I Will: but he could not be thoroughly satisfied in any of those things that
he coueted to know. Therefore thinking it good to understand all things by view
that might apperteine to the use of that war which he purposed to follow:
before he attempted the same, he sent one Caius Uolusenus with a gallie or
light Caius Uolusenus sent over into Britain.
commanding him (after diligent search made) to return with speed to him
again. He him self also drew downwards toward Bullenois, from whence the
shortest cut lies to pass over into Britain.

In that part of Gallia there was in those days an haven called Itius Portus
(which some take to be Calice) John Leland.
and so the word imports, Polydor.
an harbourgh as then able to receive a great number of ships. Unto Uannes in
Britane.
In the mean time (his endeavor being known, and by merchants reported in
Britain) all such as were able to bear armor, were commanded and appointed
to repair to the sea side,

Caesar in his commentaries agrees not with our historiographers: for he
writes that immediately upon knowledge had that he would invade Britain,
there came to him ambassadors from diverse cities of the I Will to offer
themselves to be subjects to the Romans, and to deliver hostages. Whom after
he had exhorted to continue in their good mind, he sent home again, and with
them also one Comius governor of Artois, Comius.
commanding him to repair unto as many cities in Britain as he might, and to
exhort them to submit themselves to the Romans. He makes no mention of
Cassibellane, till the second journey that he made into the I Will, at what time
the said Cassibelane was chosen (as ye shall hear) to be the general captain
of the Britains, and to have the whole administration of the war for defense
of the country: but he names him not to be a king. Howbeit in the British
history it is contained, that Caesar required tribute of Cassibelane, Which is
more likely i^ this behalf, as appeared by the sequel.
and that he answered how he had not learned as yet to live in seruage, but to
defend the liberty of his country, and that with weapon in hand (if need
were) as he should well perceive, if (blinded through covetousness) he should
adventure to seek to disquiet the Britains.

Caius Volusenus discovers to Caesar his observations in the I Will of Britain,
he makes haste to conquer it, the Britains defend their country against him,
Caesar after consultation had changes his landing place, the Romans are put to
hard shifts, the Britains begin to give back, the courage of a Roman
ensigne-bearer, a sharp encounter between both armies. The eleventh Chapter.
Caius Uolusenus within five days after his departure from Caesar, Uolusenus
returns.
returned unto him with his gallie, and decalred what he had seen touching the
view which he had taken of the coasts of Britan. Caesar having got together so
many sail as he thought sufficient for the transporting of two legions of
soldiers, Caesar with two legions of soldiers passes over into Britan.
after he had ordered his business as he thought expedient, and gotten a
convenient wind for his purpose, did embarke himself and his people, and
departed from Calice in the night about the third watch (which is about three
or four of the clock after midnight) giving order that the horssemen should
take ship at an other place 8 miles above Calice, and follow him. The Britans
ready to defend their country.
Howbeit when they somewhat slacked the time, about ten of the clock in the
next day, having the wind at will, he touched on the coast of Britain, where
he might behold all the shore set and covered with men of war. For the
Britains hearing that Caesar meant very shortly to come against them, were
assembled in armor to resist him: and now being advertised of his approach to
the land, they prepared themselves to withstand him.

Caesar perceiving this, determined to stay till the other ships were come, and
so he lay at anchor till about 11 of the clock, Caesar calls a council.
and then called a council of the marshals and chief capteines, unto whom he
declared both what he had learned of Uolusenus, and also further what he would
have done, willing them that all things might be ordered as the reason of
war required. And because he perceived that this place where he first cast
anchor was not meet for the landing of his people, since (from the height of
the cliffes that closed on each side the narrow creek into the which he had
thrust) the Britains might annoy his people with their bows and darts, before
they could set foot on land, having now the wind and tide with him, he
disanchored from thence, and drew along the coast under the downs, This was
a^bout day.
the space of 7 or 8 miles, and there finding the shore more flat and plain,
he approached near to the land, determining to come to the shore.

The Britains perceiving Cesars intent, with all speed caused their horssemen
and charets or wagons, which Caesar calls Esseda, out of the which in those
days they used to fight, to march forth toward the place whither they saw
Caesar drew, and after followed with their maine army. Wherefore Caesar being
thus prevented, enforced yet to land with his people, though he saw that he
should have much a do. For as the Britains were in readiness to resist him, so
his great and huge ships could not come near the shore, but were forced to
keep the deep, so that the Roman soldiers were put to very hard The Romans
put to their (...)
to wit, both to leap forth of their ships, and being pestered with their
heavy armor and weapons, to fight in the water with their enemies, who
knowing the flats and shelues, stood either upon the dry ground, or else but a
little way in the shallow places of the water; and being not otherwise
encumbred either with armor or weapon, but so as they might bestir themseues
at will, they laid load upon the Romans with their arrows and darts, and
forced their horses (being thereto inured) to

This thing being put in execution (according to his commandment) The Britans
astonished.
the Britains were not a little astonished at the strange sight of those galleys,
for that they were driven with ores, which erst they had not seen, and
shrewdly were they galled also with the artillery which the Romans discharged
upon them, so that they began to shrink and retire somewhat back. She valiant
courage of an ensign bearer.
Herewith one that bare the ensign of Leap forth now even you worthy
soldiers (says he) if you will not betraie your ensign to the enemies: for
surely I will acquit my self according to my and therewith leaping forth into
the water, he marched with his ensign straight upon the enemies. The Romans
douting to lose their ensign, which should have turned them to great reproach,
leapt out of their ships so fast as they might, and followed their standard, so
that there ensued a sore reencounter: and that which troubled the Romans most,
was because they could not keep their order, neither find any sure footing,
nor yet follow every

The Britains that were inured with the shelues and shallow places of the
water, when they saw the Romans thus disorderly come out of their ships, ran
upon them with their horses, and fiercely assailed them, The fierceness of
the Britains.
and now and then a great multitude of the Britains would compass in and
enclose some one company of them: and other also from the most open places of
the shore bestowed great plenty of darts upon the whole number of the Romans,
and so troubled them very sore.

The Romans get to land on the English coast, the Britains send to Caesar for a
treaty of peace, they stay the Roman ambassador as prisoner, Caesar
demands hostages of the Britains, the Roman navy is driven diverse ways in
a great tempest, the British princes steal out of Caesar's camp and gather a
fresh power against the Romans, their two armies have a sharp encounter. The
twelfe Chapter.
CAesar perceiving the manner of this fight, caused his men of war to enter
into boats and other small vessels, which he commanded to go to such places
where most need appeared. And relieuing them that fought with new supplies, The
Romans get to land.
at length the Romans got to land, and assembling together, they assailed the
Britains a fresh, and so at last did put them all to flight. The want of
horssemen.
But the Romans could not follow the Britains far, because they wanted their
horssemen which were yet behind, and through slacking of time could not come to
land. And this one thing seemed only to disappoint the luckie fortune that
was accustomed to follow Caesar in all his other enterprises.

The Britains after this flight were no sooner got together, The Britans send
to Caesar.
but that with all speed they sent ambassadors unto Caesar to treat with him of
peace, offering to deliver hostages, and further to stand unto that order that
Caesar should take with them in any reasonable sort. With these ambassadors
came also Comius, Comius of Arras.
whom Caesar (as you have heard) had sent before into Britain, whom
notwithstanding that he was an ambassador, and sent from Caesar with commission
and instructions sufficiently furnished, yet had they stayed him as a
prisoner. But now after the battle was ended, they set him at liberty, and
sent him back with their ambassadors, who excused the matter, laieng the
blame on the people of the country, which had imprisoned him through lack of
understanding what apperteined to the law of arms and nations in that behalf.

Caesar found great fault with their misdemenor, not only for imprisoning his
ambassador, but also for that contrary to their promise made by such as they
had sent to him into Gallia to deliver hostages, in lieu thereof they had
received him with war: yet in the end he said he would pardon them, and not
seek any further revenge of their follies. And herewith required of them
hostages, Caesar demands hostages.
of which, part were delivered out of hand, and made promise that the residue
should likewise be sent after, craving some respit for performance of the same,
because they were to be fetched far off within the country.

Peace being thus established after the fourth day of the Romans arrival in
Britain, the 18 ships which (as ye have heard) were appointed to convey the
horssemen over, loosed from the further haven with a soft wind. Which when they
approached so near the shore of Britain, that the Romans which were in Cesars
camp might see them, suddenly there arose so great a tempest, that none of
them was able to keep his course, so that they were not only driven in
sunder (some being carried again into Gallia, and some westward) but also the
other ships that lay at anchor, and had brought over the army, were so
pitifully beaten, tossed and shaken, that a great number of them did not
only lose their tackle, but also were carried by force of wind into the high
sea; the rest being likewise so filled with water, that they were in danger by
sinking to perish and to be quite lost. For the moon in the same night was at
the full, and therefore caused a spring tide, which furthered the force of the
tempest, to the greater periall of those ships and galleys that lay at anchor.
There was no way for the Romans to help the matter: wherefore a great number
of those ships were so bruised, rent and weather-beaten, that without new
reparation they would serve to no use of sailing. This was a

In the mean time the British princes that were in the Roman army,
perceiving how greatly this mishap had discouraged the Romans, and again by
the small circuit of their camp, gessing that they could be no great number,
and that lack of vittels sore oppressed them, they stale privily away one

The manner of the Britains fighting in charets, the Romans give a fresh sallie
to the Britains and put them to flight, they sue to
Whilst these things were a

He was not gone any great way from the camp, when he might see where his
people were ouermatched by the enemies, and had much a do to bear out the
brunt: for the legion being thronged together, the Britains pelted them fore
with arrows and darts on each side: for since there was no forage left in
any part of the country about, but only in this place, the Britains judged
that the Romans would come thither for it: therefore having lodged themselves
within the woods in ambushes the night before; on the morrow after when they
saw the Romans dispersed here and there, and busy to cut down the corn, they
set upon them on a sudden, and sleaing some few of them, brought the residue
out of order, compassing them about with their horssemen and charets, so that
they were in great distress.

The manner of fight with these charets was such, that in the beginning of a
battle they would ride about the sides and skirts of the enemies host, and
bestow their darts as they sat in those charets, so that oftentimes with the
braieng of the horses, and craking noise of the charet wheels they disordered
their enemies, and after that they had woond themselves in amongst the troops
of horssemen, they would leap out of the charets and fight on foot. In the
mean time those that guided the charets would withdraw them selves out of the
battle, placing themselves so, that if their people were ouermatched with the
multitude of enemies, they might easily withdraw to their charets, and mount
upon the same again, by means whereof they were as ready to remove as the
horssemen, and as steadfast to stand in the battle as the footmen, and so to
supply both duties in one. And those charetmen by exercise and custom were so
cunning in their feat, that although their horses were put to run and gallop,
yet could they stay them and hold them back at their pleasures, and turn and
wind them to and fro in a moment, notwithstanding that the place were very
steep and dangerous: and again they would run up and down very nimbly upon
the cops, and stand upon the beam, and convey themselves quickly again into
the charet.

Caesar thus finding his people in great distress and ready to be destroyed,
came in good time, and delivered them out of that danger: for the Britains upon
his approach with new succors, gave over to assail their enemies any further,
and the Romans were delivered out of the fear wherein they stood before his
coming. Furthermore, Caesar considering the time served not to assail his
enemies, kept his ground, and shortly after brought back his legions into the
camp.

While these things were thus a doing, and all the Romans occupied, the rest
that were abroad in the fields got them away. After this there followed a sore
season of rain and foul weather, which kept the Romans with in their camp,
and staid the Britains from offering battle. But in the mean time they sent
messengers abroad into all parts of the country, to give knowledge of the
small number of the Romans, and what hope there was both of great spoil to be
gotten, and occasion to deliver themselves from further danger for ever, if
they might once expel the Romans out of their camp. Hereupon a great
multitude both of horssemen and footmen of the Britains were speedily got
together, and approached the Roman camp.

Caesar although he saw that the same would come to pass which had chanced
before, that if the enemies were put to the repulse, they would easily escape
the danger with swiftness of foot; yet having now with him thirty horssemen
(which Comius of Arras had brought over with him, when he was sent from Caesar
as an ambassador unto the Britains) he placed his legions in order of battle
before his camp, and so coming to join with the Britains, they were not able
to sustain the violent impression of the armed men, and so fled. The Romans
pursued them so far as they were able to overtake any of them, and so
slaieng many of them, and burning up all their houses all about, came back
again to their camp. Immediately whereupon, even the same day, they sent
ambassadors to Caesar to sue for peace, who gladly accepting their offer,
commanded them to send over into Gallia, after he should be returned thither,
hostages in number duble to those that were agreed upon at the first. After
that these things were thus ordered, Caesar because the month of September was
well-neare half spent, and that winter hasted on (as season not meet for his
weak and bruised ships

Thus writes Caesar touching his first journey made into Britain. Caesar de
bello Gallieo lib. 4.
But the British history (which Polydor calls the new history) declares
that Caesar in a pitched field was vanquished at the firt encounter, and so
withdrew back into France. Beda also writes, that Caesar coming into the
country Bid. The British history moreover makes mention of three
vnder-kings that aided Cassibellane in this first battle fought with Caesar, as
Cridiorus alias Ederus, king of Albania, now called Scotland: Guitethus king of
Uenedocia, that is Northwales: and Britaell king of Demetia, at this day called
Southwales.

The same history also makes mention of one Belinus

Again, Hector Boet.
the Scottish historiographers write, that when it was first known to the
Britains, that Caesar would invade them, there came from Cassibellane king of
Britain an ambassador unto Ederus king of Scots, who in the name of king
Cassibellane required aid against the common enemies the Romans,

At their first approach together, Cassibellane sent forth his horssemen and
charets called Esseda, by the which he thought to disorder the araie of the
enemies. Twice they incountred together with doubtful victory. At length they
joined puissance against puissance, and fought a very sore and cruel battle,
till finally at the sudden coming of the Welshmen and Cornishmen, so huge a
noise was raised by the sound of bells hanging at their trappers and charets,
that the Romans astonished therewith, were more easily put to flight. The
Britains, Scots, and Picts following the chase without order or araie, so that
by reason the Romans kept themselves close together, the Britains, Scots, and
Picts did scarce so much harm to the enemies as they themselves received. But
yet they followed on still upon the Romans till it was dark night.

Caesar after he had perceived them once withdrawn, did what he could to
assemble his companies together, minding the next morning to seek his revenge
of the former days disadvantage. But for so much as knowledge was given him that
his ships (by reason of a sore tempest) were so beaten and rent, that many of
them were past service, he doubted least such news would encourage his
enemies, and bring his people into despair. Wherefore he determined not to
fight till time more convenient, sending all his wounded folks unto the ships,
which he commanded to be newly rigged and trimmed. After this, keeping his
army for a time within the place where he was encamped without issuing forth,
he shortly drew to the sea side, where his ships lay at anchor, and there
within a strong place fortified for the purpose he lodged his host, and
finally without hope to atchieue any other exploit available for that time,
he took the sea with such ships as were apt for sailing, and so repassed into
Gallia, leaving behind him all the spoil and baggage for want of vessels and
leisure to conueie it over. Thus have the Scots in their chronicles framed the
matter, more to the conformity of the Roman histories, than according to the
report of our British and English writers: and therefore we have thought good
to show it here, that the diversity of writers and their affections may the
better appear.

Of this sudden departing also, or rather fleeing of Julius Caesar out of
Britain, Lucanus the poet makes mention, reciting the saying of Pompeius in
an oration made by him unto this soldiers, wherein he reprochfullie and
disdainfully reproved the doings of Caesar in Britain, saying:

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis. Caesar takes a new occasion to
make war against the Britains, he arriueth on the coast without resistance,
the number of his ships, both armies encounter, why Caesar forbad the Romans to
pursue the discomfited Britains, he repaireth his navy, the Britains choose
Cassibellane their chief governor, and skirmish afresh with their enemies,
but have the repulse in the end. The xiiij. Chapter.
NOw will we return to the sequel of the matter, as Caesar himself reports.
After his coming into Gallia, there were but two cities of all Britain that
sent over their hostages according to their covenant, which gave occasion to
Caesar to pick a new quarrel against Dion Cassius.
them, which if it had wanted, he would yet (I doubt not) have found some
other: for his full meaning was to make a more full conquest of that I Will.
Therefore purposing to pass again thither, as he that had a great desire to
bring the Britains under the obedience of the Roman estate, he caused a great
number of ships to be provided in the winter season and put in a readiness, so
that against the next spring there were found to be ready rigged six hundred
ships, beside 28 galleys. Heerevpon having taken order for the governance of
Gallia in his absence, Caesar de bell. Gal. lib. 5.
about

After he had stayed at Calice (as well for a convenient wind, as for other
incidents) certain days, at length when the weather so changed that it served
his purpose, he took the sea, and having with him five legions of soldiers,
and about two thousand horssemen,

But to proceed: Caesar being got to land, encamped his army in a place
convenient: and after learning by the prisoners, into what part the enemies

The next day, as he had sent forth such as should have pursued the Britains,
word came to him from Quintus Atrius, that his navy by rigor of a sore and
hideous tempest was greeuouslie molested, and thrown upon the shore, so that
the cabels and tackle being broken and destroyed with force of the unmerciful
rage of wind, the masters and mariners were not able to help the matter.
Caesar calling back those which he had sent forth, returned to his ships, and
finding them in such state as he had heard, took order for the repairing of
those that were not utterly destroyed, and caused them so to be drawn up to
the land, that with a trench he might so compass in a plot of ground, that
might serve both for defense of his ships, and also for the incamping of those
men of war, which he should leave to attend upon the safeguard of the same.
And because there were at the least a forty ships lost by violence of this
tempest, so as there was no hope of recovery in them, he saw yet how the rest
with great labor and cost might be repaired: wherefore he chose out wrights
among the legions, sent for other into Gallia, and wrote over to such as he had
left there in charge with the government of the country, to provide so many
ships as they could, and to send them over unto him. He spent a ten days about
the repairing of his navy, and in fortifieng the camp for defense thereof,
which done, he left those within it that were appointed there before, and then
returned toward his enemies.

At his coming back to the place where he had before encamped, he found them
there ready to resist him, having their numbers hugelie increased: for the
Britains hearing that he was returned with such a mighty number of ships
assembled out of all parts of the land, and had by general consent appointed
the whole rule and order of all things touching the war unto Cassiuellane or
Cassibelane, whose dominion was divided from the cities situat near to the sea
coast, Cassibellane as should seem, ruled in the parties of Oxfordshire,
Barkshire, Buckinghamshire, and Bedfordshire.
by the river of Thames, 80 miles distant from the sea coast. This Cassibellane
before time had bin at continual war with other rulers, and cities of the
land: but now the Britains moved with the coming of the Romans, chose him to
be chief governor of all their army, permitting the order and rule of all
things touching the defense of their country against the Romans only to him.
Their horssemen and charets skirmished by the way with the Romans, but so as
they were put back oftentimes into the woods and hills adioining: yet the
Britains slew diverse of the Romans as they followed any thing egerlie in the
pursuit.

Also within a while after, as the Romans were busy in fortifieng their camp,
the Britains suddenly issued out of the woods, and fierselie assailed those
that warded before the camp, unto whose aid Caesar sent two of the chiefest
cohorts of two legions, the which being placed but a little distance one from
another, when the Romans began to be discouraged with this kind of fight, the
Britains therewith burst through their enemies, and came back from thence in
safety. That day Quintus Laberius Durus a tribune was slain. At length Caesar
sending sundry other cohorts to the succor of his people that were in fight,
and shrewdly handled as it appeered, the Britains in the end were put back.
Nevertheless, that repulse was but at the pleasure of fortune; for they quited
themselves afterward like men, defending their territories with such munition
as they had, until such time as either by policy or inequality of power they
were vanquished; as you shall see after in the course of the history. Howbeit
in fine they were ouer-run and utterly subdued, but not without much bloodshed
and slaughter.

The Romans heavy armor their great hinderance, the manner of the Britains
fighting in war, their encounter with their enemies, their discomfiture, the
worthy stratagems or martial exploits of Cassibellane, the Troinouants
submission to Caesar, and their suit touching Mandubratius, many of the
Britains are taken and slain of the Romans. The xv. Chapter.
IN all this manner of skirmishing and fight which chanced before the camp,
even in the sight and view of all men, it was perceived that the Romans, The
Romans heavy armor
by reason of their heavy armor (being not able either to follow the Britains
as

This also was the manner of the Britains: The manner of the Britains in the
wars.
they fought not close together, but in sunder, and divided into companies one
separated from another by a good distance, and had their troops standing in
places convenient, to the which they might retire, and so relieve one another
with sending new fresh men to supply the rooms of them that were hurt or
weary. The next day after they had thus fought before the camp of the Romans,
they showed themselves aloft Caius Trebonius.
they suddenly brake out on every side, and set upon the forragers. The
Romans so far forth as they might, not breaking their arraie, nor going from
their ensigns or guidons, gave the charge on them, and fiercely repelled
them, so that Dion Cassius says, that the Britains vanquished the Roman
footmen at this time, but were put to the worst by the horssemen.
followed the Britains so long as they might have the said legions in sight
ready to succor them if need were: by reason whereof, they slew a great
number of the Britains, not giving them leisure to recover themselves, nor to
stay that they might have time to get out of their charrets. After this chase
and discomfiture, all such as were come from other parties to the aid of their
fellows departed home, and after that day the Britains adventured (Which is to
be supposed was at Kingston) or not far from thence.
Thames, determined to stop the enemies from passing the same, if by any
means they might: and whereas there was but one foord by the which they might
come over, Cassibellane caused the same to be set full of sharp stakes, not
only in the midst of the water, but also at the coming forth on that side
where he was lodged with his army in good order, ready to defend the passage.
Caesar learning by relation of prisoners which he took, what the Britains
intended to do, marched forth to the river side, where the foord was, by the
which his army might pass the same on foot though very hardly. At his
coming thither, he might perceive how the Britains were ready on the further
side to impeach his passage, and how that the bank at the coming forth of
the water was pight full of sharp stakes, and so likewise was the channel of
the river set with piles which were covered with the water.

These things yet stayed not Caesar, who appointing his horssemen to pass on
before, commanded the footmen to follow. The soldiers entering the water,
waded through with such speed and violence (nothing appeering of them above
water but their heads) that the Britains were constreined to give place, being
not able to sustain the brunt of the Roman horssemen, and the legions of
their footmen, and so abandoning the place betook them to flight.
Cassibellane not minding to try the matter any more by battle, sent away
the most part of his people, but yet kept with him about a four thousand
charretmen or wagoners, and still watched what way the Romans took, coasting
them ever as they marched, and kept somewhat aside within the covert of woods,
and other combersome places. And out of those quarters through which he
understood the Romans word pass, he gathered both men and cattle into the
woods and thick forests, leaving nothing of value abroad in the champion
country. And when the Roman horssemen did come abroad into the country to
seek booties, he sent out his charrets unto the known ways and passages to
skirmish with the same horssemen, so much to the disadvantage of the Romans,
that they durst not straie far from their maine army. Neither would Caesar
permit them (least they might have been utterly distressed by the Britains)
to depart further than the maine battles of the footmen kept pace with them,
by reason whereof the country was not indamaged by fire and spoil, but only
(...) the army marched.

In the mean time, Troinouants where they inhabited.
the Troinouants which some take to be Middlesex and Essex men, whose city was
the best fensed of all those parties, and thought to be the same that now is
called London, sent ambassadors unto Caesar, offering to submit themselves unto
him, and to obeie his ordinances, and further besought him to defend
Mandubratius from the injuries of K. Cassibellane, which Mandubratius had fled
unto Caesar into France, after that Cassibellane had slain his father named
Imanuentius, Imanuentius.
that was chief lord and king of the Troinouants, and so now by their
ambassadors the same Troinouants requested Caesar, not only to receive
Mandubratius into his protection, but also to send him unto them, that he might
take the government and rule of their city into his hands. Caesar commanded
them to deliver unto him 40 hostages, and grain for his army, and therewith
sent Mandubratius unto them. Some take the Troinouants to be Londoners.
The Troinouants accomplished his commandments with all speed, sending both
the appointed number of hostages, and also grain for the army. And being thus
defended and preserved from injury of the soldiers, the people called
Cenimagni, Segontiaci, Ancalites, Bibroci, and Cassi, submitted themselves unto
Caesar, by whom he understood that the town of Cassibellane was not far from
the place where he was then encamped fensed with wooddes and marshes, into the
which a great number of people with their cattle and other substance was
withdrawn. The Britains in those days (as Caesar writes) called that a town
or hold, which they had fortified with any thick combersome wood, with trench
and rampire, into the which they used to get themselves for the avoiding of
invasion.

Caesar with his legions of soldiers therefore marched thither, and finding the
place very strong both by nature and help of hand, assaulted it on two
parts. The Britains defending their strength a while, at length not able
longer to endure the impression of the Romans, fled out on the contrary side
of the town where the enemies were not. Within this place a great number of
cattle was found, and many of the Britains taken by the Romans that followed
them in chase, and many also slain.

Cassibellane does send unto the four
NOw whilst these things passed on this sort in those parts, Four kings in
Kent.
Cassibellane sent messengers into Kent unto four kings (which ruled that side
of the land in those days) Cingetorix,

Caesar meaning to winter in Gallia, and therefore because summer drew toward
an end, willing Dion Cassius.
knowing that if he should so do, they were in danger to be cast away. And so
because he could not well remain there all the winter season for doubt of
rebellion in Gallia, he was contented to take up, and return thither, since he
had done sufficiently for the time, least in coveting the more, he might have
come in peril to lose that which he had already obtained.

Thus according to that which Caesar himself and other autentike authors have
written, was Britain made tributarie to the Romans by the conduct of the same
Caesar. But our histores far differ from this, Gal. Mon. Matt. West.
affirming that Caesar coming the second time, was by the Britains with
valiancie and martial prowess beaten and repelled, as he was at the first,
and specially by means that Cassibellane had pight in the Thames great piles
of trees piked with iron, through which his ships being entered the river, were
perished and lost. And after his coming a land, he was vanquished in battle,
and constrained to flee into Gallia with those ships that remained. For joy of
this second victory (says Galfrid) Cassibellane made a great feast at London,
and there did sacrifice to the gods.

At this feast there fell variance betwixt two young gentlemen, the one named
Hirilda, nephew to Cassibellane, and the other Euelie or Eweline, being of
aliance to Androgeus earl of London. They fell at discord about wrestling, and
after multiplieng of words, they came to dealing of blows, by means whereof
parts were taken, so that there ensued a sore fraie, in the which diverse were
wounded and hurt, and amongst other Hirilda the kings nephew was slain by the
hands of Eweline. The king sore displeased herewith, meant to punish Eweline
according to the order of his laws, so that he was summoned to appear in due
form to make answer to the murder: but Eweline by the comfort of Androgeus
disobeied the summons, and departed the court with Androgeus, in contempt of
the king and his laws. The king to be revenged upon Androgeus, gathered a
power, and began to make war upon him.

Androgeus perceiving himself not able to withstand the kings puissance, sent
letters to Julius Caesar, exhorting him to return into Britain, and declaring
the whole matter concerning the variance betwixt him and the king, promising to
aid the Romans in all that he might. Julius Caesar ioifull of this message,
prepared his navy, and with all speed with a mighty host embarked in the
same, came toward Britain: but yet he would land, doubting some treason in
Androgeus, he received from him in hostage his son named Scena, and thirty
other of the best and most noble personages of all his dominion. After this he
landed, and ioining with Androgeus, came into a vallie near to Canturburie,
and there encamped. Shortly after came Cassibellane with all his power of
Britains, and gave battle to the Romans. But after the Britains had long
fought and knightly borne themselves in that battle, Androgeus came with his
people on a wing, and so sharply assailed them, that the Britains were
constrained to forsake the field, and took themselves to flight. The which
flight so discomforted them, that finally they all fled, and gave place to the
Romans, the which pursued and slew them without mercy, so that Cassibellane
with the residue of his people withdrew to a place of suertie, but being
environed about with the puissance of the Romans, and of Androgeus, who had
with him seven thousand men there in the aid of the Romans, Cassibellane in the
end was forced to fall to a composition, in couenanting to pay a yearly
tribute of three thousand pounds. So says Campton, but Galfrid Monu. says
five thousand.
When Caesar had ordered his business as he thought convenient, he returned,
and with him went Androgeus, fearing the displeasure of Cassibellane.

The reverend father Bid writing of this matter, says thus: After that Caesar
being returned into Gallia, had placed his soldiers abroad in the country to
soiorne for the winter season, he caused ships to be made ready, to the number
of 600, with the which repassing into Britain, whilst he marched The stakes
remained to be seen in Bedes days.
the tokens of which unto this day are to be seen, and it seems to the
beholders that every of these stakes are as big as a man's thigh, sticking fast
in the bottom of the river closed with lead. This being

The Scottish writers report, that the Britains, after the Romans were the first
time repelled (as before ye have heard) refused to receive the aid of the
Scottish men the second time, and so were vanquished,

Now here is to be noted, that Caesar did not vanquish all the Britains: for he
came not amongst the northern men, only discovering and subduing that part
which lies toward the French seas: so that Cornelius Tacitus. In vit. Agr.
than to have delivered the possession of the same. This subjection, to the
which he brought this I Will (what manner of one soever it was) chanced about the
year of the world 3913, Dion Gassius.
after the building of Rome 698, before the birth of our savior 53, the first
and second year of the 181 Olympiad, after the coming of Brute 1060, before
the conquest made by William duke of Normandy 1120, and 1638 years before this
present year of our Lord 1585, after Harisons account.

The state of Britain when Caesar offered to conquer it, and the manner of
their government, as diverse authors report the same in their books: where
the contrariety of their opinions is to be observed. The xvij. Chapter.
AFter that Julius Caesar had thus made the Britains tributaries to the Romans,
and was returned into Gallia, Cassibellane reigned 7 years, and was vanquished
in the ninth or tenth year after he began first to reign so that he reigned
in the whole about 15 or as some have 17 years, and then died, Fabian.
leaving no issue behind him. There has bin an old chronicle (as Fabian
records) which he saw and follows much in his book, wherein is contained,
that this Cassibellane was not brother to Lud, but eldest son to him: for
otherwise as may be thought (says he) Caesar having the upper hand, would have
displaced him from the government, and set up Androgeus the right heir to the
crown, as son to the said Lud. But whatsoever our chronicles or the British
histories report of this matter, it should appear by that which Caesar writes
(as partly ye have heard) that Britain in those days was not governed by one
sole prince, Caesar.
but by diverse, and that diverse cities were estates of themselves, so that the
land was divided into sundry gouernements, much after the form and manner as
Germany and Italy are in our time, where some cities are governed by one
only prince, some by the nobility, and some by the people. And whereas
diverse of the rulers in those days here in this land were called kings, those
had more large seigniories than the other, Cassibellane a king.
as Cassibellane, who was therefore called a king.

And though we do admit this to be true, yet may it be, that in the beginning,
after Brute entered the land, there was ordained by him a monarchy, as before
is mentioned, which might continue in his posterity many years after, and
yet at length before the coming of Caesar, through civil dissension, might
happily be broken, and divided into parts, and so remained not only in the
time of this Cassibellane, but also long after, whilst they lived as
tributaries to the Romans, till finally they were subdued by the Saxons. In
which mean time, through the discord, negligence, or rather unadvised rashness
of writers, hard it is to judge what may be affirmed and received in their
writings for a truth; namely, concerning the succession of the kings that are
said to have reigned betwixt the days of Cassibellane, and the coming of the
Saxons. The Roman writers (and namely Tacitus) report, that the Britains in
times past were under the rule of kings, Cor. Tacit. in vit. Iu. Agr.
and after being made tributaries, were drawn so by princes into sundry
factions, that to defend and keep off a common ieopardie, scarcely would two
or three cities agree togther, and take weapon in hand with one accord, so that
while they fought by parts, the whole was overcome. And after this sort they
say that Britain was brought into the form of a province by the Romans, from
whom governors under the name of legates and procurators were sent that had the
rule of it.

But yet the same authors make mention of certain kings (as hereafter shall
appear) who while the Roman emperors had the most part of the earth in
subjection, reigned in Britain. The same witnesses Gildas, Gildas in epist.
saying: Britain has kings, but they are tyrants: judges it has, but the
same are wicked, oftentimes spoiling and tormenting the innocent people. And
Caesar (as ye have heard) speaks of four kings that ruled in Kent, and
thereabouts. Cornelius Tacitus makes mention of Prasutagus, and Cogidunus,
Some take Prasutagus and Aruiragus to be one man.
that were kings in Britain: and Iuuenal speaks of Aruiragus: and all the
late writers,

On the other part, the common opinion of our chronicle-writers is, Gal. Mon.
that the chief government remained ever with the Britains, and that the
Roman senate receiving a yearly tribute, sent at certain times ( Ex officio)
their emperors and lieutenants into this I Will, to repress the rebellious
tumults therein begun, or to beat back the invasion of the enemies

This may suffice here to advertise you of the contrariety in writers. Now we
will go forth in following our history, as we have done heretofore, saving
that where the Roman histories write of things done here by emperors, or their
lieutenants, it shall be showed as reason requires, since there is a

Of Theomantius, the term of years that he reigned, and where he was
interred; of Kymbeline, within the time of whose government Christ Jesus our
savior was borne, all nations content to obeie the Roman emperors and
consequently Britain, the customs that
AFter the death of Cassibellane, Theoma^tius.
Theomantius or Tenantius the yoongest son of Lud was made king of Britain
Fabian.
in the same chronicle it is contained, that not he, but his brother Androgeus
was king, where Geffrey of Monmouth and others testify, Gal. Mon.
that Androgeus abandoned the land clerelie, and continued still at Rome,
because he knew the Britains hated him for treason he had committed in aiding
Julius Caesar against Cassibellane. Theomantius ruled the land in good quiet,
and paid the tribute to the Romans which Cassibellane had granted, and finally
departed this life after he had reigned 22 years, and was buried at London.

KYmbeline or Cimbeline the son of Theomantius was of the Britains made king
after the deceasse of his father, Kymbeline.
in the year of the world 3944, after the building of Rome 728, Fabian ^ut ^
Guido de Columna.
and before the birth of out Savior 33. This man (as some write) was brought
up at Rome, and there made knight by Augustus Caesar, under whom he served in
the wars, and was in such favor with him, that he was at liberty to pay his
tribute or not. Little other mention is made of his doings, except that during
his reign, Christ our savior borne.
the Savior of the world our Lord Jesus Christ the only son of God was
borne of a virgin, about the 23 year of the reign of this Kymbeline, and in
the 42 year of the emperor Octauius Augustus, that is to wit, in the year of
the world 3966, 3966
in the second year of the 194 Olympiad, after the building of the city of
Rome 750 nigh at an end, after the universal flood 2311, from the birth of
Abraham 2019, after the departure of the Israelits out of Egypt 1513, after the
captivity of Babylon 535, from the building of the temple by Solomon 1034, and
from the arrival of Brute 1116, complet. Touching the continuance of the
years of Kymbelines reign, some writers do vary, but the best approved
affirm, that he reigned 35 years and then died, and was buried at London,
leaving behind him two sons, Guiderius and Aruiragus.

But here is to be noted, that although our histories do affirm, that as well
this Kymbeline, as also his father Theomantius lived in quiet with the Romans,
and continually to them paid the tributes which the Britains had couenanted
with Julius Caesar to pay, yet we find in the Roman writers, that after Julius
Cesars death, when Augustus had taken upon him the rule of the empire, the
Britains refused to pay that tribute: whereat as Cornelius Tacitus reports,
Cor Tacitus. in vita Iu. Agr.
Augustus (being otherwise occupied) was contented to wink; howbeit, through
earnest calling upon to recover his right by such as were desirous to see the
uttermost of the British kingdom; at length, to wit, in the tenth year after
the death of Julius Caesar, which was about the thirteenth year of the said
Theomantius, Augustus made provision to pass with an army over into Britain,
and was come forward upon his journey into Gallia Celtica: or as we may say,
Dion Cassius.
into these hither parts of France.

But here receiving aduertisements that the Pannonians, which inhabited the
country now called Hungary, and the Dalmatians whom now we call Slauons had
rebelled, he thought it best first to subdue those rebels near home, rather
than to seek new countries, and leave such in hazard whereof he had present
possession, and so turning his power against the Pannonians and Dalmatians, he
left off for a time the wars of Britain, whereby the land remained without
fear of any invasion to be made by the Romans, till the year after the
building of the city of Rome 725, and about the 19 year of king Theomantius
reign, that Augustus with an army departed once again from Rome to pass
over into Britain, there to make war. But after his coming into Gallia,
when the Britains sent to him certain ambassadors to treat with him of peace,
he stayed there to settle the state of things among the Galls, for that they
were not in very good order. And having finished there, he went into Spain,
and so his journey into Britain was put off till the next year, that is, the
726 after the building of Rome, which fell before the birth of our savior 25,
about which time Augustus eftsoons meant the third time to have made a voyage
into Britain, because they could not agree upon covenants. But as the
Pannonians and Dalmatians had aforetime stayed him, He kept not promise with
the Romans.
when (as before is said) he meant to have gone against the Britans: so even
now the Salassians (a people inhabiting about Italy and Switserland) the
Cantabrians and Asturians by such rebellious sturrs as they raised, Those of
Calice and Biskate.
withdrew him from his purposed journey. But whether this controversy which
appears to fall forth betwixt the Britans and Augustus, was occasioned by
Kymbeline, or

But whether for this respect, or for that it pleased the almighty God so to
dispose the minds of men at that present, not only the Britains, but in manner
all other nations were contented to be obedient to the Roman empire. That this
was true in the Britains, it is evident enough by Strabos words, Strab. Geog.
which are in effect as follows. At this present (says he) certain princes
of Britain, procuring by ambassadors and dutiful demeanors the amity of the
emperor Thus far Strabo.

Of Guiderius, who denied to pay tribute
GUiderius the first son of Kymbeline (of whom Harison says nothing) began
his reign in the seuententh year after th'incarnation of Christ. This
Guiderius being a man of stout courage, Guiderius.
gave occasion of breach of peace betwixt the Britains and Romans, denieng to
pay them tribute, and procuring the people to new insurrections, which by one
mean or other made open rebellion, as Gyldas says. Caligula.
Whereupon the emperor Caligula (as some think) took occasion to leauie a
power, and as one utterly misliking the negligence (as he called it) of
Augustus and Tiberius his predecessors, he meant not only to reduce the Island
unto the former subjection, but also to search out the uttermost bounds
thereof, to the behoof of himself, and of the Roman monarchy.

Great provision therefore was made by the said Caligula to perform that noble
enterprise, and this was in the fourth year of his reign. The like
preparation was made on the other side by Guiderius, to resist the foreign
enemies, so that having all things in a readiness, he ceased not daily to
look for the coming of the emperor, whom he meant to receive with hard
enterteinment if he durst adventure to set toward Britain. Dion Cassius lib.
59.
But see the sequel: the maine army being thus in a readiness, departed from
Rome in the 79 year after the building of the city, and marching forth, at
length came unto the Belgike shore, from whence they might look over, and
behold the cliffes and coast of Britain, which Caligula and his men stood
gazing upon with great admiration and wonder.

Furthermore he caused them to stand in battle arraie upon the coast, where be
heard how the Britains were in a readiness to withstand his entrance. But
entering into his gallie, as nothing discouraged with these news, he rowed a
flight shot or two from the shore, and forthwith returned, and then going up
into an high place like a pulpit, framed and set up there for the nonce, he
gave the token to fight unto his soldiers by sound of trumpet, and therewith
was each man charged to gather cockle shells upon the shore, which he called the
spoil of the Ocean, and caused them to be laid up until a time convenient.
The spoil of the Ocean.
With the atchiuing of this exploit (as having none other wherewith to
beautify his triumph) he seemed greatly exalted, thinking that now he had
subdued the whole Ocean, and therefore highly rewarded his soldiers for their
pains sustained in that collection of cockle shells, as if they had done him
some notable piece of service. He also carried of the same shells with him to
Rome, to the end he might there boast of his voyage, and brag how well he had
sped: and required therefore very earnestly of have a triumph decreed unto
him for the accomplishment of this enterprise.

But when he saw the senate grudge at the free and liberal granting of a grace
in that behalf, and perceived how they refused to attribute divine honors unto
him, in recompense of so foolish an enterprise, it wanted little that he had
not slain them every one. From thence therefore he went up into a throne or
royal seat, and calling therewith the common people about him, he told them a
long tale what adventures had chanced to him in his conquest of the Ocean. And
when he had perceived them to shout and cry, as if they had consented that he
should have been a god for this his great travel and valiant prowess, he to
increase their clamor, caused great quantities of gold and silver to be
scattered amongst them, in the gathering whereof, many were pressed to death,
and diverse also slain with the inuenomed caltrops of iron, which he did cast
out with the same money, of purpose to do mischief, the same caltrops being
in form small and sharp, so that by reason of the prease of people, much hurt
was done by them yer they were perceived. And this was the end of the
ridiculous voyage of Caligula attempted against the Britains.

But after the death of this Caligula, Suetonius.
the emperor Claudius (as Suetonius says) moved war against the Britains,
because of a stir and rebellion raised in that land, for that such fugitives
as were fled from thence, were not again restored when request was made for
the same.

Dion Cassius writes, Dion Cassius.
that one Bericus, being expelled out of Britain, persuaded the emperor
Claudius to take the war in hand at this time against the Britains, so that
one Aulus Plautius a senator, and as then praetor, was appointed to take the
army that soiourned in France then called Gallia, and to pass over with the
same into Britain. The soldiers hearing of this voyage, were loath to O
Saturnalia, as if they should have celebrated their feast day so called.

When the servants apparelled in their masters

The end of the third book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK of the History of England.
The Britains discomfited, sore wounded, slain, and disabled by Plautius and
his power, Claudius the Roman takes the chief city of Cymbebeline the king
of Britain, he bereaueth the Britains of their armor, and by virtue of his
conquest over part of the land is surnamed
NOw Plautius had much adoo to find out the Britains in their lurking holes and
couerts; Bodumni.
Plautus received part of the people called Bodumni (which were subjects unto
them that were called Catuellani) into the obeisance of the Romans: and so
leaving there a garrison of soldiers, Catuellani.
passed further till he came to a river which could not well be passed without
a bridge: whereupon the Britains took small regard to defend the passage, as
though they had been sure enough. But Plautius appointed a certain number of
Germans which he had there with him (being used to swim over rivers, although
never so swift) to get over, which they did, sleaing and wounding the Britains
horses, which were fastened to their wagons or chariots, so that the Britains
were not able to do any piece of their accustomed service with the same.

Herewithall was Flauius Uespasianus (that afterward was emperor) with his
brother Sabinus sent over that river, which being got to the further side, slew
a great number of the enemies. The residue of the Britains fled, but the next
day proffered a new battle, in the which they fought so stoutly, that the
victory depended long in doubtful balance, till Caius Sidius Geta being
almost at point to be taken, did so handle the matter, that the Britains
finally were put to flight: for the which his valiant doings, triumphant
honors were bestowed upon him, although he was no consul.

The Britains after this battle, withdrew to the river of Thames, near to the
place where it falls into the sea, and knowing the shallowes and firm places
thereof, easily passed over to the further side, whom the Romans following,
through lack of knowledge in the nature of the places, they fell into the
marish grounds, and so came to lose many of their men, namely of the Germans,
which were the first that passed over the river to follow the Britains, partly
by a bridge which lay within the country over the said river, and partly by
swimming, and other such shift as they presently made.

The Britains having lost one of their rulers, Togodumnus.
namely Togodumnus (of whom ye have heard before) were nothing discouraged,
but rather more egerlie set on revenge. Plautius perceiving their fierceness,
went no further, but staid and placed garrisons

Thus having brought under a part of Britain, Dion Cassius.
and having made his abode therein not past a sixtene Suetonius.
giving after his return, to his son, the surname of Britannicus. This war
he finished in manner as before is said, in the fourth year of his reign,
which fell in the year of the world 4011, after the birth of our Savior 44,
and after the building of Rome 79.

The diverse opinions and variable reports
THere be that write, how Claudius subdued and added to the Roman empire, the
Isles of Orknie situate in the north Ocean beyond Britain: which might well be
accomplished either by Plautius, or some other his lieutenant: for Plautius
indeed for his noble prowess and valiant acts atchiued in Britain, afterward
triumphed. Titus the son of Uespasian also wan no small praise for delivering
his father out of danger in his time, being beset with a company of Britains,
which the said Titus bare down, and put to flight with great slaughter. Beda
following the authority of Suetonius, writes breeflie of this matter, and
says, that Claudius passing over into this I Will, to the which neither before
Julius Caesar, neither after him any stranger durst come, within few days
received the most part of the country into his subjection without battle or
bloodshed.

Gyldas also writing of this reuolting of the Britains, says thus: When
information thereof was given to the senate, and that have was made with a
speedy army to revenge the same, there was no warlike navy prepared in the
sea to fight valiantly for the defense of the country, no square battle, no
right wing nor any other provision appointed on the shore to be seen, but the
backs of the Britains in stead of a shield are showed to the persecutors, and
their necks ready to be cut off with the sword through cold fear running
through their bones, which stretched forth their hands to be bound like
womanly creatures; so that a common proverb followed thereof, to wit, That
the Britains were neither valiant in war, nor faithful in peace: and so the
Romans ^leaing many of the rebels, reserving some, and bringing them to
bondage, that the land should not lie altogether untilled and desert, returned
into Italy out of that land which was void of wine and oil, leaving some of
their men there for governors to chastise the people, not so much with an army
of men, as with scourge and whip, and if the matter so required, to apply the
naked sword unto their sides: so that it might be accounted Rome and not
Britain. And what coin either of brass, silver or gold there was, the same
to be stamped with the image of the emperor. Thus far Gildas.

In the British history we find other report as thus, that Claudius at his
coming aland at Porchester, Gal. Mon. Matthew. West.
besieged that town, to the rescue whereof came Guiderius, and giving battle
to the Romans, put them to the worse, till at length one Hamo, being on the
Romans side, changed his shield and armor, apparelling himself like a
Britain, and so entering into the thickest prease of the British host, came at
length where the king was, and there slew him. But Aruiragus perceiving this
mischief, to the end the Britains should not be discouraged therewith, caused
himself to be adorned with the kings cote-armor, and other abiliments, and so
as king continued the fight with such manhood, that the Romans were put to
flight. Claudius retired back to his ships, and Hamo to the next woods, whom
Aruiragus pursued, and at length drove him unto the sea side, and there slew
him yer he could take the haven which was there at hand; so that the same took
name of him, and was called a long time after, Hamons haven, and at length by
corruption of speech it was called Hampton, and so continues unto this day,
commonly called by the name of Southhampton. Hampton, why so called.
Thus have you heard how Guiderius or Guinderius (whether you will) came to his
end, which chanced (as some write) in the 28 year of his reign.

Aruiragus the Britain and Claudius the Roman with their armies do
encounter, a composition concerning marriage concluded between them, Claudius
returns to Rome. The third Chapter.
ARuiragus the yoongest son of Kymbeline, Aruiragus. Hector Boet.
and brother to Guinderius (because the same Guinderius left no issue to
succeed him) was admitted king of Britain in the year of our Lord 45, or
rather 46.

This Aruiragus, otherwise called by the Britains Meuricus or Mauus, of Tacitus
Prasutagus, is also named Armiger in the English chronicle, Caxton.
by which chronicle (as appears) he bare himself right manfully against
Claudius and his Romans in the war which they made against him: in so much that
when Claudius had renewed his force and woone Porchester, Gal. Mon.
and after came to besiege Winchester (in the which Aruiragus as then was
enclosed) Aruiragus assembling his power, was ready to come forth and

Some write that Claudius in favor of the valiant prowess which he saw and
found in Aruiragus, Ranulfus Cestrensis.
honored not only him with the marriage of his daughter

Other there be that write, how Claudius being vanquished in battle by
Aruiragus, was compelled by the said Aruiragus to give unto him his said Sueton.
But Suetonius may seem to reprove this part of the British history, which
in the life of Claudius witnesses, that he had by three wives only three
daughters, that is to say, Claudia, Antonia, and Octauia: and further, that
reputing Claudia not to be his, caused her to be cast down at the door of his
wife Herculanilla, whom he had forsaken by way of diuorcement: and that he
bestowed his daughter

And here to speak my fancy also what I think of this Aruiragus, and other
the kings (whom Galfrid and such as have followed him do register in order,
to succeed one after another) I will not deny but Gyldas as the old approved
Roman writers have written, that diverse of these kings lived about one time,
or in times greatly differing from those times which in our writers we find
noted. As for example, Iuuenal makes this Aruiragus of whom we now entreat, to
reign about Domitians time. For my part therefore, since this order of the
British kingly succession in this place is more easy to be flatly denied and
utterly reproved, than either wisely defended or truly amended, I will
refer the reforming thereof unto those that have perhaps seen more than I
have, or more deeply considered the thing, to try out an undoubted truth: in
the mean time, I have thought good, both to show what I find in our histories,
and likewise in foreign writers, to the which we think (namely in this
behalf, whilst the Romans governed there) we may safely give most credit,
do we otherwise never so much content our selves with other vain and fond
conceits.

To proceed yet with the history as we find it by our writers set forth: it
is reported, that after the solemnization of this marriage, Legions of
soldiers sent into Ireland.
which was done with all honor that might be devised, Claudius sent certain
legions of soldiers forth to go into Ireland to subdue that country, and
returned himself to Rome.

Aruiragus denies subjection to the Romans, Vespasian is sent to repress him
and his power, the Roman host is kept back from landing, queen Genissa
pacifieth them after a sharp conflict: and what the Roman writers say of
Vespasians being in Britain, the end of Aruiragus. The fourth Chapter.
THen did king Aruiragus ride about to view the state of his realm, repairing
cities and towns decayed by the war of the Romans, and saw his people
governed with such justice and good order, that he was both feared and greatly
beloved: so that in tract of time he grew very welthie, and by reason thereof
fell into pride, so that he denied his subjection to the Romans. Whereupon
Claudius appointed Uespasian with an army to go as lientenant into Britain.
Uespasian in Britain. Cornel. Tacit. in vit. Agr. lib. 5. and li. 6. Gal. Mon.
Rutupium.
This journey was to him the beginning of his advancement to that honor, which
after to him most luckily befell. But if we shall credit our Britain writers,
he gained not much at Aruiragus hands, for where he would have landed at
Sandwich or Richborough, Aruiragus was ready to resist him, so as he durst not
once enter the haven: for Aruiragus had there such a puissant number of armed
men, that the Romans were afraid to approach the land.

Uespasian therefore withdrew from thence, and coasting westward, landed at
Totnesse, and coming to Excester, besieged that city: but about the seventh
day after he had planted his siege, came Aruiragus, and gave him battle, in
the which both the armies sustained great loss of men, and neither part got
any advantage of the other. On the morrow after queen Genissa made them
friends, and so the wars ceased for that time, by her good mediation.

But seeing (as before I have said) the truth of this history may be greatly
mistrusted, ye shall hear what the Roman writers say of Uespasianus being
here in Britain, beside that which we have already recited out of Dion in
the life of Guiderius.

In the days of the emperor Claudius, through favor of Narcissus (one that
might do all with Claudius) the said Uespasian was sent as coronell or
lieutenant of a legion of soldiers into Germany, Vespasian.
and being removed from thence into Britain, Suetonius. Sabellicus.
he fought thirty several times with the enemies, and brought unto the Roman
obeisance two most mighty nations, and above twenty towns, together with the
I Will of Wight; and these exploits he atchiued, partly under the conduct of
Aulus Plautius ruler of Britain for the emperor Claudius, and partly under
the same emperor himself. For as it is evident by writers of good credit, he
came first over into Britain with the said Aulus Plautius, and served very
valiantly under him, as before in place we have partly touched. By Tacitus it
appears, that he was called to be partener in the government of things in
Britain with Claudius, and had such success, as it appeered to what estate of
honor he was predestinate, having conquered nations, and taken kings
prisoners. But now to make an end with Aruiragus: Gal. Mon.
when he perceived that his force was too weak to prevail against the Roman
empire, and that he should strive but in vain to shake the yoke of subjection
from the necks of the Britains, he made a final peace with them in his old
age, and so continued in quiet the residue of his reign, which he lastly
ended

Joseph of Arimathia came into Britane and Simon Zelotes, the antiquity of
christian religion, Britain governed by Lieutenants and treasurers of the
Roman emperors, the
IN the days of the said Aruiragus, about the year John Bale following the
authority of Gildas and other British writers recites) after that the
Christians were dispersed out of Gallia, came into Britain with diverse other
godly christian men, Polydorus.
and preaching the gospel there amongst the Britains, and instructing them

Nicephorus writes in his second book and fourth Theodoretus in his 9. book
De curandis Graecorum affectibus, shows that Paul being released of his
second imprisonment, and suffered to depart from Rome, preached the gospel to
the Britains and to other nations in the west. The same thing in manner does
Sophronius the patriarch of Jerusalem witness. Tertullian also may be a
witness of the ancientnes of the faith received here in Britain, where he
writing of these times says:

Cornelius Tacitus writes, that the Roman emperors in this season governed
this land by lieutenants and treasurers, Treasurers or receivers.
the which were called by the name of legates and procurators, thereby to keep
the unruly inhabitants the better in order.

And Aulus Plautius a noble man of Rome of the order of consuls, Aulus Plautius.
was sent hither as the first legate or lieutenant (in manner as before ye have
heard) and after him Ostorius Scapula, who at his coming found the I Will in
trouble, Ostorius Scapula.
the enemies having made invasion into the country of those that were friends
to the Romans, the more presumptuouslie, for that they thought a new
lieutenant, Cor. Tacitus lib. 12.
with an army to him unacquainted and come over now in the beginning of
winter, would not be hasty to march forth against them. But Ostorius
understanding that by the first success and chance of war, fear or hope is
bred and augmented, hasted forward to encounter with them, and such as he found
abroad in the country he slew out right on every side, and pursued such as
fled, to the end they should not come together again. Now for that a
displeasing and a doubtful peace was not like to bring quietness either to
him or to his army, he took from such as he suspected, their armor. And
after this, he went about to defend the rivers of Auon and Seuerne, with
placing his soldiers in camps fortified near to the same. But the Oxfordshire
men and other of those parties would not suffer him to accomplish his purpose
in any quiet sort, being a puissant kind of people, and not hitherto weakened
by wars: for they willingly at the first had joined in amity with the
Romans. The countries adioining also being induced by their procurement,
Cornelius Tacit. lib. 12.
came to them, and so they chose forth a plot of ground, fensed with a mighty
ditch, unto the which there was no way to enter but one, and the same very
narrow, so as the horssemen could not have any easy passage to break in upon
them. Ostorius, although he had no legionarie soldiers, but certain bands of
aids, marched forth toward the place within the which the Britains were
lodged, and assaulting them in the same, brake through into their camp, where
the Britains being impeached with their own enclosures which they had raised
for defense of the place, knowing how that for their rebellion they were like
to find small mercy at the Romans hands, when they saw now no way to escape,
laid about them manfully, and showed great proof of their valiant stomachs.

In this battle, Which was a certain crown, to be set on his head called
ciuica cornona.
the son of Ostorius the lieutenant deserved the price and commendation of
preserving a citizen out of the cruel enemies hands. But now with this
slaughter of the Oxfordshire men, diverse of the Britains that stood doubtful
what way to take, either to rest in quiet, or to move wars, were contented
to be conformable unto a reasonable order of peace, in so much that Ostorius
lead his army against the people called Cangi, Cangi.
who inhabited that part of Wales now called Denbighshire, which country he
spoiled on every side, no enemy once daring to encounter him: and if any of
them adventured privily to set upon those which they found behind, or on the
outsids of his army, they were cut short yer they could escape out of danger.
Whereupon he marched straight to their camp and giving them battle,
vanquished them: and using the victory as reason moved him, he lead his army
against those that inhabited the inner parts of Wales, spoiling the country on
every side. And thus sharply pursuing the rebels, he approached near unto the
sea side, which lies over against Ireland. While this Roman captain was thus
occupied, he was called back by the rebellion of the Yorkshire men, whom
forthwith upon his coming unto them, he appeased, punishing the first authors
of that tumult with death.

In the mean time, the people called Silures, Cor. Tacitus. lib. 12.
being a very fierce kind of men, and valiant, prepared to make war against
the Romans, for they might not be bowed neither with roughness, nor yet with
any courteous handling, so that they were to be tamed by an army of
legionarie soldiers to be brought among them.

Therefore to restrain the furious rage of those people and their neighbors,
Ostorious peopled a town near to their borders, called Camelodunum with
certain bands of old soldiers, there to inhabit with their wives and
children, according to such manner as was used in like cases of placing natural

The conjectures of writers touching
BUt now there rests a great doubt among writers, where this city or town
called Camelodunum did stand, of some (and not without good ground of probable
conjectures gathered upon the advised consideration of the circumstances of
that which in old authors is found Camelodunum, Colchester.
But verelie by this place of Tacitus it may rather seem to be some other
town, situat more westward than Colchester, since a colonie of Roman soldiers
were planted there to be at hand, for the repressing of the unquiet Silures,
Silures where they inhabited.
which by consent of most writers inhabited in Southwales, or near the Welsh
marshes.

There was a castle of great fame in times past that hight Camaletum, or in
British Caermalet, Cornelius Tacitus; and yet so it might be done by such as
found it short or vnperfectlie written, namely, by such strangers or others,
to whom only the name of Camelodunum was only known, and Camaletum
peradventure never seen nor Ptolomie Camedolon to be a city belonging to the
Trinobants, and he makes mention also of Camelodunum, but Humfrey Lhoyd
thinks that he means all one city.

Notwithstanding Polydor Virgil is of a contrary opinion, supposing the one to
be Colchester in deed, and the other that is Camelodunum to be Doncaster or
Pontfret. Leland esteeming it to be certeinelie Colchester takes the Iceni men
also to be the Northfolke men. But howsoever we shall take this place of
Tacitus, it is evident enough that Camelodunum stood not far from the Thames.
And therefore to seek it with Hector Boethius in Scotland, or with Polydor
Virgil so far as Doncaster or Pontfret, it may be thought a plain error.

But to leave each man to his own judgment in a matter so doubtful, we will
proceed with the history as touching the wars betwixt the Romans and the
Silurians, against whom (trusting not only upon their own manhood, but also
upon the high prowess and valiancie of Caratacus) Ostorius set forward.
Cornelius Tacitus lib. Anna. 12.
Caratacus excelled in fame above all other the princes of Britain, advanced
thereto by many doubtful adventures and many prosperous exploits, which in
his time he had atchiued: but as he was in policy and advantage of place
better provided than the Romans: so in power of soldiers he was ouermatched.
And therefore he removed the battle into the parts of that country where the
Ordouices inhabited, Hu. Lhoyd.
which are thought to have dwelled in the borders of Shropshire, Cheshire, and
Lancashire, which people together with other that misliked of the Roman
government, he joined in one, and chose a plot of ground for his advantage,
determining there to try the uttermost hazard of battle.

The place which he thus chose was such, as the entries, the backwaies, and the
whole situation thereof made for the Britains advantage, and clean contrary
to the Romans, as enclosed among high hills. And if there were any easy
passage to enter it upon any side, the same was shut up with mighty huge
stones in manner of a rampire, and before it there ran a river without any
certain foord to pass over it. This place is supposed to lie in the confines
of Shropshire aloft upon the top of an high hill there, environed with a triple
rampire and ditch of great depth, having three entries into it, not directly
one against an other, but aslope. It is also (they say) compassed about with
two rivers, to wit, on the left hand with the river called Clun, and on the
right hand with an other called Teuid. On three sides thereof the clime is
very steep and headlong, and no way easy to come or reach unto it, but
only one.

Caratac having thus fortified himself within this place, and brought his
army into it: to encourage his people, he exhorted them to show their manhood,
affirming that to be the day, and that army to be the same wherein should
appear the beginning either of liberty then to be recovered, or else of
perpetual bondage for ever to be sustained. He rehearsed also specially by
name those their elders, which had resisted Julius Caesar, by whose high
valiancie they lived free from the bloody thraldom and tributes of the
Romans, and enioied their wives and children safe and undefiled. Thus
discoursing of many things with them, in such hope of assured victory, that
they began to raise their cries, each one for him self, declaring that he was
bound by the duty he owght to the gods of his country, not to shrink for
fear of any wounds or hurts that might chance unto them by the enemies weapon.

This cheerfulness of the Britains greatly astonished the Roman lieutenant.
The hideous course also of the river before his face, the fortifications and
craggie higth of the hills, all set full of enemies ready to beat him back,
put him in great fear: for nothing he saw before him, but that which seemed
dreadful to those that should assail. But the soldiers yet seemed to be
very desirous of battle, requesting him to bring them to it, protesting that
nothing was able to resist the force of noble prowes. Herewith the capteins and
tribunes discoursing the like, pricked forward the earnest wills which their
souliders had to fight.

Ostorius perceiving such courage and ready wills in the men of war, as well
soldiers as capteins, began to bestirre himself, and left nothing undone that
might serve to set forward their earnest desire to battle. And having
advisedly considered which ways were hard and impossible to be entered upon,
and which were most easy for his people to find passage by, he led them
forth, being most earnestly bent to cope with the enemy.

Now having passed the water without any great difficulty, Cornelius Tacitus
Annal. lib. 12.
but coming to the rampire, he lost many of his people, so long as the fight
was continued with shot and casting of darts: but after that the Romans
covering themselves with their targets, came once close together, and approached
under the rampire, they removed away the stones which the Britains had
roughly couched together, and so came to join with them at handblowes. The
Britains being unarmed, and not able to abide the force of the

The wife and daughter of Caratake were taken

The name of Caratacus famous in Italy, the manner how he and his alies were
led
THe name of Caratacus being brought out of the Isles was already spread over
the provinces adioining, Cornelius Tacit. lib. 12. Carataks name renowned.
and began now to grow famous through Italy. Men therefore were desirous to
see what manner of man he was that had so many years set at naught the
puissant

After these followed his brethren, wife, and daughters: and last of all came
Caratacus himself, whose countenance was nothing like to theirs that went
before him. For whereas they fearing punishment for their rebellion with
wailefull* countenance craved mercy, he neither by countenance nor words showed
any token of a discouraged mind, but being pre^sented before the emperor
Claudius sitting in his tribunal seat, he uttered this speech as follows.

If there had been in me so much moderation in time of prosperity, as there
was nobility of birth and puissance, I had come to this city rather as a
friend than as a captain: neither should I have thought scorn, being borne of
most noble parents, and ruling over many people, to have accepted peace by way
of ioining with you in league. My present estate as it is to me reproachful, so
to you it is honorable. I had at commandment, horses, men, armor, and great
riches; what marvel is it if I were loath to forgo the same? For if you shall
look to govern all men, it must needs follow that all men must be your
slaves. If I had at the first yielded my self, neither my power nor your
glory had been set forth to the world, and upon mine execution I should
straight have been forgotten. But if you now grant me life, I shall be a
witness for ever of your merciful clemency.

The emperor with these words being pacified, granted life both to Caratake,
and also to his wife and brethen, who being loosed from their bands, went also
to the place where the empress Agrippina sat (not far off) in a chair of
estate, whom they reverenced with the like praise and thanks as they had done
before to the emperor. After this the senate was called together, who
discoursed of many things touching this honorable victory atchiued by the
taking of Caratake, Siphax. L. Paulus.
esteeming the same no less glorious, than when P. Scipio showed in triumph
Siphar king of the Numidians, or L. Paulus the Macedonian king Perses, or other
Roman capteins any such king whom they had vanquished.

Heerevpon it was determined, that Ostorius should enter the city of Rome with
triumph like a conqueror, for such prosperous success as hither to had
followed him: but afterward his proceedings were not to luckie, either for
that after Caratake was removed out of the way, or because the Romans (as
though the war had been finished) looked negligentlie to themselves, either
else for that the Britians taking compassion of the miserable state of
Caratake, being so worthy a prince, through fortunes froward aspect cast into
misery, were more earnestly set to revenge his quarrel. Heerevpon they
encompassed the master of the camp, and those legionarie bands of soldiers
which were left amongst the Silures to fortify a place there for the army to
lodge in: and if succor had not come out of the next towns and castles, the
Romans had been destroyed by siege. The head captain yet, and eight
centurions, and every one else of the companies being most forward, were
slain. Shortly after they set upon the Roman forragers, and put them to
flight, and also such companies of horssemen as were appointed to guard them.
Heerevpon Ostorius set forth certain bands of light horssemen, but neither
could he stay the flight by that means, till finally the legions entered the
battle, by whose force they were staid, and at length the Romans obtained the
better: but the Britains escaped by flight without great loss, by reason the
day was spent.

After this, many bickerings chanced betwixt the Britains and Romans, and
oftentimes they wrought their feats more like the trade of them that use to rob
by the high ways, than of those that make open war, taking their enemies at
some advantage in woods and bogs, as hap or force ministered occasion upon
malice conceived, or in hope of prey, sometimes by commandment, and sometimes
without either commandment or knowledge of captain or officer.

At one time the Britains surprised two bands of footmen that were with the
Romans in aid, and sent forth to forreie abroad unadvisedly, through
covetousness of the capteins. This feat was atchiued by the Silures also, the
which in bestowing prisoners

In the mean time Ostorius Scapula departed this life, a right noble warrior,
and one who by little and little ensuing the steps of Aulus Plautius his
predecessor, did what he could to bring the I Will into the form of a province,
which in part he accomplished.

There be some led by conjecture grounded upon W. H. in his chronology.
that suppose this Ostorius Scapula began to build the city of Chester after
the overthrow of Caratacus: for in those parties he fortified sundry holds,
and placed a number of old soldiers either there in that self place, or in
some other near thereunto by way of a colonie. And for so much (say they) as
we read of none other of any name thereabouts, it is to be thought that he
planted the same in Chester, where his successors did afterward use to harbor
their legions for the winter

In deed it is a common opinion among the people there unto this day, that the
Romans built those vaults or tauerns (which in that city are under the ground)
with some part of the castle. And verelie as Ranulfe Higden says, Ran. Hig.
alias Cestrensis.
a man that shall view and well consider those buildings, may think the same
to be the work of Romans rather than of any other people. That the Roman
legions did make Caer leon ardour deuy, that is, The city of legions upon the
water of Dee, proves it sufficiently enough.

But to return unto Ostroius Scapula, Corn. Tacit.
we find in Corn. Tacitus, Cogidune a king in Britain.
that during his time of being lieutenant in this I Will, there were certain
cities given unto one Cogidune a king of the Britains, who continued faithful
to the Romans unto the days of the remembrance of men living in the time of
the said Cornelius Tacitus, who lived and wrote in the emperor Domitianus time.
This was done after an old received custom of the people of Rome, to have both
subjects and kings under their rule and dominion, as who so shall note the acts
and deeds of the Roman emperors from C. Julius Caesar (who chased Pompeie out
of Italy, and was the first that obtained the Roman empire to himself; of
whom also the princes and emperors succeeding him were called Cesars) to
Octauian, Tiberius, Caligula, etc: may easily mark and observe. For they
were a people of singular magnanimity, of an ambitious spirit, greedy of
honor and renown, and not vnaptlie termed Romani rerurn domini, etc.

A. Didius is sent to supply Ostorius his room in Britain, the treachery and
lechery of queen Cartimanda, Venutius keeps the kingdom in spite of the
Romans, by what means their confines in this I Will were enlarged; the error of
Hector Boethius and others touching the Siluers, Brigants, and Nouants notified,
the Britains give the Romans a shameful overthrow. The eight Chapter.
AFter the deceasse of Ostorius Scapula, A. Didius liuetenant.
one A. Didius was sent to supply his room, but yer he could come, things
were brought out of order, and the Britains had vanquished the legion the
whereof Manlius Ualens had the conduct: this victory was set forth by the
Britains to the uttermost, that with the bruit thereof they might strike a
fear into the lieutenants heart, now upon his first coming over. And he
himself reported it by letters to the emperor after the largest manner, to
the end that if he appeased the matter, he might win the more praise; or if he
were put to the woorst, and should not prevail, that then his excuse might
seem the more reasonable and worthy of pardon. The Siluers were they that
had atchiued this victory, and kept a foul stur over all the countries about
them, till by the coming of Didius against them, they were driven back and
repelled.

But heerewith began trouble to be raised in another part: for after that
Caratac was taken, the chiefest and most skillfull captain which the Britains
had, Uenutius ruler of the Iugants.
was one Uenutius, a ruler of the people named Iugants, a man that remained a
long time faithful to the Romans, and by their power was defended from his
enemies, Cartimanda.
who had married with Cartimanda queen of the Brigants or Yorkshire men. This
Cartimanda (as ye have heard) had delivered Caratac into the Romans hands,
thereby ministering matter for the emperor Claudius to triumph, by which
pleasure showed to the Romans, she increased thorough their friendship in power
and wealth, whereof followed riotous lust to satisfy her wanton appetite, so
as she falling at square with her husband, married Uellocatus, one of his
esquires, Uellocatus.
to whom she gave her kingdom, and so dishonored her self. Here upon insued
cruel war, in so much that in the end Uenutius became enemy also to the
Romans. But first they tugged together betwixt themselves, and the queen by a
crafty policy found means to catch the brother and coosens of Uenutius, but
her enemies nothing therewith discouraged, but kindled the more in wrath
against her, ceased not to go forward with their purpose.

Many of the Brigants disdaining to be subject unto a woman's rule that had so
rejected her husband, revolted unto Uenutius: but yet the queens sensual lust
mixed which cruelty, maintained the adulterer. Uenutius therefore calling to
him such aid as he could get, and strengthened now by the reuolting of the
Brigants, brought Cartimanda to such a narrow point, that she was in great
danger to fall into the hands of her enemies: which the Romans forseeing, upon
suit made, sent certain bands of horssemen and footmen to help her. They had
diverse incounters with the enemies at the first, Uenutius keeps the kingdom
in despite of the Romans.
with doubtful success: but at length they prevailed, and so delivered the
queen out of peril, but the kingdom remained to Uenutius: against whom the
Romans were constreined still to maintain war.

About the same time, the legion also which Cesius Nasicaled, got the upper
hand of those Britains against whom he was sent. For Didius being aged, and by
victories past enough renowned, thought it sufficient for him to make war by
his capteins, so to stay and keep off the enemy. Certain castles and holds
in deed he caused to be built and fortified, further within the country than
had been before attempted by any of his predecessors, and so thereby

But here you must note, The error of Hector Boethius.
that Hector Boethius, following the authority of one Veremond a Spaniard, of
Cornelius Hibernicus, and also of Campbell, remooueth the Silures, Brigants,
and Nouants, so

But for so much as he has diligently gathered in what manner the wars were
maintained by those people against the Romans, and what valiant exploits were
taken in hand and finished thorough their stoutnesse and valiancie, ye may
there read the same, A note to be considered in the reading of Hect. Boethius
and judge at your pleasure what people they Boethius; marvel might it seem,
that the Roman writers would so pass them over with silence.

After the death of Claudius the emperor of Rome, Cor. Tac. lib. annal. 15.
Claudius Domitianus Nero succeeded him in government of the empire. In the
seventh year of whose reign, which was after the incarnation 53, the Romans
received a great overthrow in Britain, where neither the lieutenant A. Didius
Gallus (whom in this place Cornelius Tacitus calls Auitus) could during the
time of his rule do no more but hold that which was already gotten, beside
the

The government of P. Suetonius in this Island, he inuadeth Angle sey, and
wins it, a strange kind of women, of the Druides, the Britains lament their
misery and servitude, and take advise by weapon to redress it against the
Romans their enemies. The ninth Chapter.
BUt now when this great P. Suetonius lieutenant.
loss chanced to the Romans Paulinus Suetonius did govern here as lieutenant,
a man most plentifully furnished with all gifts of fortune and virtue, and
therewith a right skillful warrior. This Suetonius therefore wishing to tame
such of the Britains as kept out, Anglesey invaded.
prepared to assail the I Will of Anglesey, a country full of inhabitants, and a
place of refuge for all outlawes and rebels. He builded certain brigantins
with flat keeles to serve for the ebbes and shallow shelues here and there,
lieng vncerteinlie in the straits which he had to pass. The footmen ferried
over in those vessels, the horssemen following by the foords, and swimming when
they came into the deep, got likewise to the shore, where stood in order of
battle an huge number of armed men close together, ready to beat back the
Romans, and to stay them from coming to land. Amongst the men, A strange
manner of women.
a number of women were also running up and down as they had been out of
their wits, in garments like to wild roges, with their hair hanging down
about their shoulders, and bearing firebrands in their hands. There was also a
company of their priests or philosophers called Druides, The Druids.
who with stretched forth hands toward heaven, thundered out curssings against
the Romans in most bitter wise.

The soldiers were so amazed with the strangeness of this sight, that (as men
benumbed of their lims and senses) they suffered themselves to be wounded and
slain like senseless creatures, till by the calling upon of their general,
and each one encouraging other in no wise to fear a sort of mad and distract
women, they preassed forward under their ensigns, bearing down such as stood
in their way, and with their own fire smooldered and burnt them to ashes.

To conclude, Anglesey soon by the Romans.
the Roman lieutenant got possession of the whole I Will, wherein he placed
garrisons of men of war to keep the people there in subjection. He also
caused their woods to be cut down, Woods cut down.
that were consecrated to their gods, within the which they were accustomed to
sacrifice such as they took prisoners, and by the view of their intrailes, in
dismembring them, to learn of their gods some oracles and such other things as
should come to pass.

But now in the mean time, whilst Paulinus was abroad about this enterprise,
the Britains began to confer together of their great and importable miseries,
of their grievous state of servitude, of their injuries and wrongs, which they
daily sustained: how that by sufferance they profited nothing, but still were
oppressed with more heavy burdens. Each country in times past had only one
king to rule them: now had they two, Lieutenant and procurator.
the lieutenent by his capteins and soldiers spilling their blood, and the
procurator or receiver (as we may call him) be reauing them of their goods and
substance. The concord or discord betwixt those that were appointed to rule
over them, was all alike hurtful unto the subjects, the lieutenant oppressing
them by his capteins and men of war, and the procurator or receiver by force
and reproachful demeanours, polling them by insufferable exactions.

There was nothing free from the covetous extortion and filthy concupiscence
of these insatiable persons, for in these days (say they) the greatest spoiler
is the valiantest man, and most commonly our houses are robbed and ransacked
by a sort of cowardly raskals that have no knowledge of any warlike feats at
all. Our children are taken from us, we are forced to go to the musters, and
are set forth to serve in

They might easily be compelled to depart the country, as Julius Caesar was,
if the Britains would show some proof of the noble prowess that was evidently
found in their worthy ancestors, and not shrink or quail in courage for the
misaduenture that should happily chance by fighting one battle or two.
Greatest force and constancy always Occasion not to be neglected.
for less danger it is manfully to adventure, and to go forward with our
purpose, than to bewraied and taken in these our

A catalog of causes or greeuances inciting the Britains to rebel against the
Romans, wherein is showed what injuries they sustained: of diverse strange
wonders and apparitions;
THe Britains indeed were occasioned to do as they purposed, Cor. Tac. lib. 14.
For whereas Prasutagus (who is supposed by Hector Boethius to be Aruiragus,
Prasutagus.
king of the people called Iceni) had made the emperor and two of his own
daughters his heirs, The Oxfordshire and Glocestershire men.
supposing by that mean to have his kingdom and family preserved from all
injury: it happened quite contrary to that his expectation. For his kingdom
was spoiled by the Roman capteins, his wife named Uoadicia beaten by the
soldiers, his daughters ravished, Uoadicia alias Bunduica.
the peers of the realm berest of their goods, and the kings friends made and
reputed as bondslaues.

There was also an other great cause that stirred the Britains to this
rebellion, Dion Cassius
which was the confiscating of their goods: for whereas Claudius himself had
pardoned the chiefest persons of the forfeitures, Decianus Catus the procurator
of that I Will maintained that the same ought to be renewed again. To this an
other grief was added, Usurie.
that where Seneca had lent to the nobility of the I Will, four hundred
sestercies, each hundred being 500000 pounds starling, or thereabout, upon great
interest, he required the whole sum together by great rigor and violence,
although he forced them at the first to take this money to usury.

Also such old soldiers as were placed by way of a colonie, to inhabit the
town of Camelodunum, expelled many of the Britains out of their houses, drove
them out of their possessions and lands, and accounted the Britains as slaves,
and as though they had been captive prisoners or bondmen. Besides this, the
temple there that was built in honor of Claudius, as an altar of eternal rule
and government, was served with preests, the which under color of religion did
spoil, consume and devour the goods of all men.

Moreover, such strange sights and woonders as chanced about the same time,
pricked the Britians the rather forward. For the image of the goddess Victoria
in the temple at Camelodunum, slipping down, Dion Cassius.
turned her back (as who should say she gave place as vanquished) to the
enemies. Also in the hall where the courts of justice were kept, there was a
marvelous great noise heard, with much laughing, and a stir in the theater,
Strange woonders.
with great weeping and lamentable howling, at such time as it was certeinlie
known that there was no creature there to make any noise. The sea at a spring
tide appeared of a bloody color, Dion Cassius
and when the tide was gone back, there were seen on the sands the shapes and
figures of men's bodies. Women also as ravished of their wits, and being as it
were in a fury, prophe^^ed that destruction was at hand, so that the Britains
were put greatly in hope, and the Romans in fear.

But those things, Poly dot.
whether they chanced by the craft of man, or illusion of the devil; or
whether they proceeded of some natural cause, which the common people
oftentimes takes superstitiouslie, in place of strange woonders signifieng
things to follow, we would let pass, least we might be thought to offend
religion; the which teaching all things to be done by the providence of God,
despises the vain predictions of haps to come, if the order of an history
(says Polydor Virgil) would so permit, the which requires all things to be
written in manner as they fall out and come to pass.

But the Britains were chiefelie moved to rebellion by the just complaint of
Uoadicia, Cor. Tac. li. 15. Uoadicia by Dion Cassius is called Bunuica.
declaring how unseemly she had been used and entreated at the hands of the
Romans: and because she was most earnestly bent to seek revenge of their
injuries, and hated the name of the Romans most of all other, they chose her to
be captain (for they in rule and government made no difference then of sex,
whether they committed the same to man or woman) and so by a general
conspiracy, The ancient Britains admitted as well women as men to public
government.
the more part of the people having also allured the Essex men unto rebellion,
rose and assembled themselves together to make war against the Romans. There
were of them a hundred and twenty thousand got together in one army under the
leading of the said Uoadicia, or Bunduica (as some name her.)

She therefore to encourage her people against the enemies, mounted up into an
high place raised up of turfes and sods made for the nonce, out of the which
she made a long and very pithie oration. Her mighty tall personage, comely
shape, severe countenance, and sharp voice, with her long and yellow tresses
of hear reaching down to her thighs, her brave and gorgeous apparel also
caused the people to have her in great reverence. She ware a chain of gold,
great and very massy, and was clad in a lose kirtle of sundry colors, and
aloft thereupon she had

The oration of queen Voadicia full of prudence and spirit to the Britains,
for their encouragement against the Romans, wherein she rippeth up the vile
servitude and shameful wrongs which their enemies inflicted
NOw Uoadicia being prepared (as you hear) set forth with such majesty, that
she greatly encouraged the Britains;

I do suppose (my lovers and friends) that there is no man here but does well
understand how much The oration of Uoadicia.
liberty and freedom is to be preferred before thraldom and bondage. But if
there have been any of you so deceived with the Roman persuasions, that

Are we not all in manner bereaved of our riches and possessions? Do not we
(beside other things that

If any of us be without money (as I know not well how and which way we should
come by any) then are we left naked, and spoiled of that which remains in
our houses, and we our selves as men left desolate and dead. How shall we look
for better dealing at their hands hereafter, that in the beginning deal so
vncourteousie with us: since there is no man that takes so much as a wild
beast, but at the first he will cherish it, and with some gentleness win it to
familiarity? But we our selves (to say the truth) are authors of our own
mischief, which suffered them at the first to set foot within our Island, and
did not by and by drive them back as we did Caesar, or slew them with our
swords when they were yet far off, and that the aduenturing hither was
dangerous: as we did sometime to Augustus and Caligula.

We therefore that inhabit this Island, which for the quantity thereof may
well be called a maine, although it be environed about with the Ocean sea,
dividing us from other nations, so that we seem to live upon an other earth,
and under a several heaven: we, even we (I say) whose name has been long
kept hid from the wisest of them all, are now contemned and trodden under foot,
of them who study nothings else but how to become lords and have rule of other
men. Wherefore my well-beloved citizens, friends, and kinsfolks (for I think
we are all of kin, since we were borne and dwell in this I Will, and have one name
common to us all) let us now, even now (I say, because we have not done it
heretofore, and whilst the remembrance of our ancient liberty remains)
stick together, and perform that thing which does perteine to valiant and
hardy courages, to the end we may inioie, not only the name of liberty,
but also freedom it self, and thereby leave our force and valiant acts for an
example to our posterity: for if we which have been liberally and in honest
manner brought up, should utterly forget our pristinate felicity: what may we
hope for in those that shall suceed us, and are like to be brought up in
misery and thraldom?

I do not make rehearsal of these things unto you, to the end I would provoke
you to mislike of this present estate of things (for well I know you abhor it
sufficiently already) neither to put you in fear of those things that are
likely to fall hereafter (because you do fear and see them very well before
hand) but to the end I may give you hearty thanks and worthy
commendations, for that of your own accord and means you determine so well to
provide for things necessary (thereby to help both me and your selves with
willing minds) as men that are nothing in doubt of all the Roman puissance.

If you consider the number of your enemies, it is not greater than yours: if
you regard their strength, they are no stronger than you: and all this does
easily appear by the bassinets, habergeons, and greiues wherewith you be
armed; and also by the walls, ditches and trenches that you have made for your
own defense, to keep off their excursions, who had rather fight with us a
far off, than cope and deal with us at hand strokes, as our custom of the
wars and martial discipline does require. Wherefore we do so far exceed
them in force, that in mine opinion, our army is more strong than stone walls,
and one of our targets worth all the armor that they do bear upon them: by
means whereof, if the victory be ours, we shall soon make them captives: or
if we lose the field, we shall easily escape the danger.

Furthermore, if after the flight we shall endeavor to meet any where, we have
the marshes here beneath to hide us in, and the hills round about to keep
them off, so that by no means they shall have their purpose of us, whereas
they being ouercharged with heavy armor, shall neither be able to follow, if
we flee; nor escape out of our danger, if they be put to flight: if they happen
to break out at any time as desirous to make a rode, they return by and by
to their appointed places, where we may take them as

In their houses also and tents, they make much account of their baked meats,
wine, oil, and abroad of the shadow, that if any of these do fail them,
they either die forthwith, or else in time they languish and consume: whereas
to us every herb and root is meat, every juice an oil, all water pleasant
With which words the queen let an hare go out of her lap, as it were thereby
to give prognostication of her success, which coming well to pass, all the
company showted, and cried out upon such as not long before had done such
violence to so noble a personage. Presently upon this action, Uoadicia calling
them together again, proceeded forward with her prayer, which she made before
them

I give thee thanks O Adraste, and call upon she thou woman of women, which
reignest not over the burthen-bearing Egyptians, as Nitocris; neither over
their merchants, as does Semiramis, for these trifles we have learned lately
of the Romans: neither over the people of Rome, as a little heretofore
Messalina, then Agrippina, and now Nero, who is called by the name of a man,
but is in deed a very woman, as does appear by his voice, his harp, and

Therefore since I have obtained a kingdom among

Queen Voadicia marches against the Romans, to whom she gives a shameful
and bloody overthrow without any motion of mercy, dreadful examples of the
Britains cruelty indifferently executed without exception of age or sex. The
twelfe Chapter.
WHen Uoadicia had made an end of her prayer, she set forward against her
enemies, who at that time were destitute in deed of their lieutenant Paulinus
Suetonius, being as then in Anglesey (as before ye have heard.) Wherefore the
Romans that were in Camelodunum sent for aid unto Catus Decianus the
procurator, Corn. Tacit. Catus Decianus procurator.
that is, the emperors agent, treasurer, or receiver, for in that city
(although it were inhabited by Romans) there was no great garrison of able men.
Whereupon the procurator sent them such aid as he thought he might well spare,
which was not past two hundred men, and those not sufficiently furnished
either with weapon or armor.

The city was not compassed with any rampire or ditch for defense, such as
happily were privy to the conspiracy, having put into the heads of the
Romans that no fortification needed: neither were the aged men nor women sent
away, whereby the young able personages might without trouble of them the
better attend to the defense of the city: but even as they had been in all
suertie of peace, and free from suspicion of any war, they were suddenly
beset with the huge army of the Britains, and so all went to spoil and fire
that could be found without the enclosure of the temple, into the which the
Roman soldiers (stricken with sudden fear by this sudden coming of the
enemies) had thronged themselves. Where being assieged by the Britains, within
the space of two days the place was woonne, and they that were found within
it, slain every mothers son.

After this, the Britains encouraged with this victory, went to meet with
Petus Cerealis lieutenant of the legion, surnamed the ninth, and boldly
incountering with the same legion, gave the Romans the overthrow and slew all
the footmen, so that Cerealis with much adoo escaped with his horssemen, and
got him back to the camp, and saved himself within the trenches. Catus the
procurator being put in fear with this overthrow, and perceiving what hatred
the Britains bare toward him, having with his covetousness thus brought the
war upon the head of the Romans, got him over into Gallia.

But Suetonius advertised of these doings, came back out of Anglesey, and
with marvelous constancy marched through the midst of his enemies to
London, being as then not greatly peopled with Romans, though there was a
colonie of them, but full of merchants, and well provided of vittels: he was in
great doubt at his coming thither, whether he might best stay there as in a
place most convenient, or rather seek some other more easy to be defended. At
length considering the small number of his men of war, and remembering how
Cerealis had sped by his too much rashness, he thought better with the losing
of one town of save the whole, than to put all in danger of irrecouerable
loss. And therewith nothing moved at the prayer and tears of them which
besought him of aid and succor, he departed, and those that would go with him
he received into his army, those that tarried behind were oppressed by the
enemies: and the like destruction happened to them of Uerolanium, a town in
those days of great fame, situat near to the place where the town of Saint
Albons now stands.

The Britains leaving the castles and fortresses unassaulted, followed their
gain in spoiling of those places which were easy to get, and where great
plenty of riches was to be found, using their victory 80000. says Dion.
and such as took their part in the said places by the Britains thus won and
conquered. For there was nothing with the Britains but slaughter, fire,
gallows, and such like, so earnestly were they set on revenge. They spared
neither age nor sex: women of great nobility and worthy fame they took and
hanged up naked, and cutting off their paps, sowed them to their mouths, that
they might seem as if they sucked

P. Suetonius the Roman with a fresh
IN this mean time there came over to the aid of Suetonius, the legion
surnamed the 14, and other bands of soldiers and men of war, to the number
of ten thousand The Britains were at that time 230000. men, (as Dion writes.)
having their women there to be witnesses of the victory, whom they placed in
charrets at the uttermost side of their field.

Uoadicia, or Boudicia (for so we find her written by some copies, Corn. Tacit.
li. 15.
and Bonuica also by Dion) having her daughters before her, Dion Cassius.
being mounted into a charret, as she passed by the soldiers of each sundry
country, told them it was a thing accustomed among the Britains to go to the
wars under the leading of women; but she was not now come forth as one borne
of such noble ancestors as she was descended from, to fight for her kingdom
and riches; but as one of the meaner sort, rather to defend her lost liberty,
and to revenge her self of the enemy, for their cruelty showed in scourging
her like a vagabond, and shameful deflouring of her daughters: for the
licentious lust of the Romans was so far spread and increased, that they
spared neither the bodies of old nor young, but were ready most shame fully
to abuse them, having whipped her naked being an aged woman, and forced her
daughters to satisfy their filthy concupiscence: but (says she) the gods are
at hand ready to take just revenge.

The legion that presumed to encounter with us is slain and beaten down. The
residue keep them close within their holds, or else seek ways how to flee
out of the country: they shall not be once able so much as to abide the noise
and clamor of so many thousands as we are here assembled, much less the
force of our great puissance and dreadful hands. If ye therefore (said she)
would wey and consider with your selves your huge numbers of men of war, and
the causes why ye have moved this war, ye would surely determine either in
this battle to die with honor, or else to vanquish the enemy by plain
force, for so (quoth she) I being a woman am fully resolved, as for you men ye
may (if ye list) live and be brought into bondage.

Neither did Suetonius cease to exhort his people: for though he trusted in
their manhood, yet as he had divided his army into three battles, so did he
make unto each of them a several oration, willing them not to fear the shrill
and vain menacing threats of the Britains, since there was among them more
women that men, they having no skill in warrelike discipline, and heereto being
naked without furniture of armor, would forthwith give place when they should
feel the sharp points of the Romans weapons, and the force of them by whom
they had so often been put to flight. In many legions (says he) the number
is small of them that win the battle. Their glory therefore should be the
more, for that they being a small number should win the fame due to the whole
army, if they would (thronging together) bestow their weapons freely, and
with their swoords and targets preasse forward upon their enemies, continuing
the slaughter without regard to the spoil, they might assure themselves when
the victory was once atchiued to have all at their pleasures.

Such forwardness in the soldiers followed upon this exhortation of the
courageous general, that every one prepared himself so readily to do his
duty, and that with such a show of skill and experience, that Suetonius having
conceived an assured hope of good luck to follow, caused the trumpets to sound
to the battle. The onset was given in the straits, greatly to the advantage
of the Romans, being but a handful in comparison to their enemies. The fight
in the beginning was very sharp and cruel, but in the end the Britains being
a let one to another (by reason of the narrowness of the place) were not able
to sustain the violent force of the Romans their enemies, so that they were
constreind to give back, and so being disordered were put to flight, and
utterly discomfited.

There were slain of the Britains that day few less than 80000 thousand,
80000. Britains slain.
as Tacitus writes. For the straits being stopped with the charrets, stayed
the flight of the Britains, so as they could not easily escape: and the Romans
were so set on revenge, that they spared neither man nor woman, so that many
were slain in the battle, many amongst the charrets, and a great number at
the woods side, which way they made their flight, and many were taken
prisoners. Those that escaped, would have fought a new battle, but in the
mean time Uoadicia, or Bonuica deceassed of a natural infirmity, as Dion
Cassius writes, but other say that she poisoned her self, and so died,
because she would not come into the hands of her bloodthirstie enemies. There
died of the Romans part in this most notable battle 400, and about the like
number were grieuouslie hurt and most pitifully wounded.

Penius Posthumus master of the camp of the second legion, Penius Posthumus
sleteth himself.
understanding the prosperous success of the other Roman capteins, because he
had defrauded his legion of the like glory, and had refused to obeie the
commandments of the general, contrary to the use of war, slew himself.

After this all the Roman army was brought into the field to make an end of
the residue of the war. And the emperor caused a supply to be sent out of
Germany being 2000 legionarie souldi ers, and 8 bands of aids, with 1000
horssemen, by whose coming the bands of the ninth legion were supplied with
legionarie soldiers, and those bands and wings of horssemen were appointed to
places where they might winter, and such people of the Britains as were either
enemies, or else stood in

But nothing more afflicted them than famine, for whilst every man gave
himself to the war, and purposed to have lived upon the provision of the
Romans and other their enemies, they applied not themselves to tillage, nor to
any husbanding of the ground, Julius Cassictanus procurator.
and long it was yer they (being a fierce kind of people) fell to embrace
peace, by reason that Julius Cassicianus, who was sent into Britain

The port which Polycletus bare was great, for he was furnished with no small
train that attended upon him, so that his presence seemed very dreadful to
the Romans. But the Britains that were not yet pacified, thought great scorn
to see such honorable capteins and men of war as the Romans were to, submit
themselves to the order of such a one as had been a bondslaue.

In what state the Island stood whiles Aruiragus reigned; the dissolute and
loose
IN place of Suetonius, Petronius Turpilianus lieutenant.
was Petronius Turpilianus (who

AFter Turpilianus, Trebellius Maximus lieutenant.
Trebellius Maximus was made lieutenant of Britain, who likewise with
courteous demeanous sought to keep the Britains in rest rather than by force
to compel them. And now began the people of the I Will to bear with pleasant
faults and flattering vices, so that the civil wars that chanced in those
days after the death of the emperor Nero at home, might easily excuse the
slothfulness of the Roman lieutenants.

Moreover, there rose dissension amongst their men of war, which being used
to lie abroad in the field, could not agree with the idle life; so that
Trebellius Maximus was glad to hide himself from the sight of the soldiers
being in an uproar against him, till at length humbling himself unto them
further than became his estate, he governed by way of entreaty, or rather at
their courtesy. And so was the commotion stayed without bloodshed, the army
as it were having by covenant obtained to live licentiously, and the captain
suertie to live without danger to be murdered.

NEither Uictius Uolanus that succeeded Maximus whilst the time of the civil
wars as yet endured, Victius Volanus lieutena^t.
did trouble the Britains, using the same slacknesse and sloth that the other
lieutenants had used before him, and permitted the like license to the
presumptuous soldiers: but yet was Uolanus innocent as touching himself, and
not hated for any notable crime or vice: so that he purchased favor, although
authority wanted.

But after that the emperor Uespasianus had subdued his adversaries, and
atteined the imperial government, as well over Britain as over other parts of
the world, Cor. Tacitus.
there were sent hither right noble capteins, with diverse notable bands of
soldiers, and Petilius Cerialis being appointed lieutenant, put the Britains
in great fear, by inuading the Brigants the mightiest nation of all the whole
Island: and fighting many battles, and some right bloody with those people, he
subdued a great part of the country at the last.

AFter him succeeded as lieutenant of Britain, one Julius Frontinus, Julius
Frontinus lieutena^t.
who vanquished and brought to the Roman subjection by force of arms the
people called Silures, striving not only against the stout resistance of the
men, but also with the hardness and combersome troubles of the places.

Thus may you perceive in what state this I Will stood in the time that Aruiragus
reigned in the same, as is supposed by the best histories of the old Britains:
so that it may be thought that he governed rather a part of this land, than the
whole, and bare the name of a king, the Romans not having so reduced the
country into the form of a province, but that the Britains bare rule in
diverse parts thereof, and that by the permission of the Romans, which
nevertheless had their lieutenants and procuratours here, that bare the
greatest rule under the aforesaid emperors.

The state of this Island under Marius the son of Aruiragus, the coming in of
the Picts with Roderike their king, his death in the field, the Picts and Scots
enter into mutual aliance, the monument of Marius, his victory over the
Picts, his death and interrement. The xv. Chapter.
AFter the decease of Aruiragus, Marius.
his son Marius succeeded him in the estate, Hector Bo^tius says that this
Marius was a Roman. 73.
and began his reign in the year of our Lord 73. In the old English chronicle
he is fondly called Westmer, and was a very wise man, governing the Britains
in great prosperity, honor and wealth.

In the time of this man's reign, the people called Picts invaded this land, Of
these you may read more in page 9.
who are judged to be descended of the nation of the Scithians, near knismen
to the Goths, both by country and manners, a cruel kind of men and much given
to the wars. This people with their ringleader Roderike, Matthew. West.
or (as some name him) Londorike, entering the Ocean sea after the manner of
rouers, arrived on the coasts of Ireland, where they required of the Scots new

The Picts more desirous of spoil than of rule or government, without delaie
returned to the sea, and sailed toward Britain, where being arrived, they
first invaded the north parts thereof, and finding there but few inhabiters,
they began to wast and forrey the country: whereof when king Marius was
advertised, with all speed he assembled his people, and made toward his
enemies, and giving them battle, obtained the victory, Roderike king of Picts
slain.
so that Roderike was there

Unto those that escaped with life, Marius granted license that they might
inhabit in the north part of Scotland called Catnesse, being as then a country
in manner desolate without habitation: whereupon they withdrew thither, and
settled themselves in those parties. And because the Britains disdained to grant
unto them their daughters in marriage, they sent unto the Scots into Ireland,
requiring to have wives of their nation. The Scots agreed to their request,

Thus the Picts next after the Romans were the first of any strangers that
came into this land to inhabit as most writers affirm, although the Scottish
chronicles avouch the Picts to be inhabiters here before Polydor. Matthew. West.
But the victory which Marius obtained against their king Roderike, chanced in
the year after the incarnation 87. In remembrance of which victory, Marius
caused a stone to be erected in the same place where the battle was fought, in
which stone was graven these words, Marij victoria. The English chronicle says
that this stone was set up on Stanesmoore, and that the whole country
thereabout taking name of this Marius, was Westmaria, now called Westmerland.

King Marius having thus subdued his enemies, and escaped the danger of their
dreadful invasion, gave his mind to the good government of his people, and
the advancement of the common wealth of the realm, continuing the residue of
his life in great tranquillity, and finally departed this life, after he had
reigned (as most writers say) 52, or 53 years. Howbeit there be that write,
Matt. West. Thus find we in the British and English histories touching this
Marius.
that he died in the year of our Lord 78, and so reigned not past five or six
years at the most. He was buried at Caerleill, leaving a son behind him
called Coill.

Humfrey Lhoyd seems to take this man and his father Aruiragus to be all one
person, whether moved thereto by some catalog of kings which he saw, or
otherwise, I cannot affirm: but speaking of the time when the Picts and Scots
should first come to settle themselves in this land, he has these words;
Neither was there any writers of name, that made mention either of Scots or
Picts before Uespasianus time, about the year of the incarnation 72: at what
time Meurig or Maw, or Aruiragus reigned in Britain, in which time our annals
do report, that a certain kind of people living by pirasie and rouing on the
sea, came forth of Sueden, or Norwaie, under the guiding of one Rhithercus,
who landed in Albania, wasting all the country with robbing and spoiling so
far as Caerleill, where he was vanquished in battle, and slain by Muragus,
with a great part of his people; the residue that escaped by flight, fled to
their ships, and so conveyed themselves into the Isles of Orkney and Scotland,
where they abode quietly a great while after.

Thus far have I thought good to show of the foresaid Lhoyds book, for that
it seems to carry a great likelihood of truth with it, for the history of
the Picts, which undoubtedly I think were not as yet inhabiting in Britain,
but rather first placing themselves in the Isles of Orkney, made invasion into
the maine I Will of Britain afterward, as occasion was offered. In the British
tongue they are called Pightiaid, that is Pightians, and so likewise were they
called in the Scottish, and in their own tongue. Now will we show what chanced
in this I Will, during the time of the foresaid Marius his supposed reign, as is
found in the Roman histories.

Julius Agricola is deputed by Vespasian to govern Britain, he inuadeth the
I Will of Anglesey, the inhabitants yield up them selves, the commendable
government of Agricola, his worthy practices to train the Britains to
civility, his exploits fortunately atchiued against diverse people, as the
Irish, etc. The 16. Chapter.
AFter Julius Frontinus, Julius Agricola lieutenant
the emperor Uespasian sent Julius Agricola to succeed in the government of
Britain, who coming over about the midst of summer, Cor. Tacit in vit. Agr.
The first year of Agricola his government.
found the men of war thorough want of a lieutenant negligent enough, as
those that looking for no trouble, thought themselves out of all danger, where
the enemies nevertheless watched upon the next occasion to work some
displeasure, and were ready on each hand to move rebellion. For the people
called Ordonices, that inhabited in the country of Chesshire. Lancashire and
part of Shropshire, had lately before overthrown, and in manner utterly
destroyed a wing of such horssemen as soiourned in their parties, by reason
whereof all the province was brought almost into an assured hope to recover
liberty.

Agricola upon his coming over, though summer was now half past, and that the
soldiers lodging here and there abroad in the country, were more disposed to
take rest, than to set forward into the field against the enemies, determined
yet to resist the present danger: and therewith assembling the men of war of
the Romans, and such other aids as he might make, he invaded their country
that had done this foresaid displeasure, and slew the most part of all the
inhabitants thereof. Not thus contented (for that he thought good to follow the
steps of favorable fortune, and knowing that as the beginning proved, so would
the whole sequel of his affairs by likelihood come to pass) he purposed to
make a full conquest of the I Will of Anglesey, The I Will of Anglesey.
from the conquest whereof the Roman lieutenant Paulinus was called back by
the rebellion of other of the Britains, as before ye have heard.

But whereas he wanted ships for the furnishing of his enterprise, his wit and
policy found a shift to supply that defect: for choosing out a piked number
of

And therefore making suit for peace, Anglesey yielded to Agricola.
they delivered the I Will into the hands of Agricola, whose fame by these
victories daily much increased, as of one that took pleasure in travel, and
attempting to atchiue dangerous enterprises, in stead whereof his predecessors
had delighted, to show the majesty's of their office by vain brags, stately
ports, and ambitious

Moreover, perceiving the nature of the people in this I Will of Britain, and
sufficiently taught by other men's example, that armor should little avail
where injuries followed to the disquieting of the people, Agricola his good
government.
he

But when summer was come, he assembled his army, His diligence.
and leading forth the same, trained his soldiers

In the winter following, The second year of Agricola his government.
Agricola took pains to reduce the Britains from their rude manners and
customs, unto a more civil sort and trade of living, that changing their
natural fierceness and apt disposition to war, they might through tasting
pleasures be so inured therewith, that they should desire to live in rest and
quietness: The worthy practices of Agricola to train the Britains to
ciuilttie.
and therefore he exhorted them privily, and help them publikelie to build
temples, common halls where plees of law might be kept, and other houses,
commending them that were diligent in such doings, and blaming them that were
negligent, so that of necessity they were driven to strive who should prevent
each other in civility. He also procured that noble men's sons should learn
the liberal sciences, and praised the nature of the Britains more than the
people of Gallia, because they studied to atteine to the knowledge of the
Roman eloquence. By which means the Britains in short time were brought to
the use of good and commendable manners, and sorted themselves to go in comely
apparel after the Roman fashion, and by little and little fell to accustom
themselves to fine fare and delicate pleasures, the ready provoke us of vices,
as to walk in galleries, to wash themselves in bathes, to use banketting, and
such like, which amongst the unskillful was called humanity or courtesy, but
in very deed it might be accounted a part of thraldom and servitude, namely
being too excessiuelie used.

In the third year of Agricola his government in Britain, The third year.
he invaded the north parts thereof (unknown till those days of the Romans)
being the same where the Scots now inhabit: for he wasted the country unto the
water of Tay, The water of Tay.
in such wise putting the inhabitants in fear, that they durst not once set
upon his army, though it were so that the same was very sore disquieted and
vexed by tempest and rage of weather. Whereupon finding no great let or
hinderance by the enemies, he builded certain castles and fortresses, which he
placed in such convenient steeds, that they greatly annoied his adversaries,
and were so able to be defended, that there was none of those castles which he
builded, either won by force out of the Romans hands, or given over by
composition, for fear to be taken: so that the same being furnished with
competent numbers of men of war, were safely kept from the enemies, the
which were daily vexed by the often issues made forth by the soldiers that
lay thus in garrison within them: so that where in times past the said enemies
would recover their losses sustained in summer by the winters advantage, now
they were put to the worse, and kept back as well in the winter as in the
summer.

In the fourth summer, The fourth year of Agricola his government.
after that Agricola was appointed unto the rule of this land, Clota. Bodotria.
he went about to bring under subjection those people, the which before time he
had by incursions and forreies sore vexed and disquieted: and thereupon coming
to the waters of Clide and Loughleuen, he built certain fortresses to defend
the passages and entries there, driving the enemies beyond the same waters, as
it had been into a new Island.

In the fifth summer, The fifth year.
Agricola causing his ships to be brought about, and appointing them to arrive
on the north coasts of Scotland, he passed with his army over the river of
Clide; and subdued such people as inhabited those further parts of Scotland,
which till those days had not been discovered by the Romans. And because he
thought it should serve well to purpose, for some conquest to be made of
Ireland, if that part of Scotland which bordereth on the Irish seas might be
kept in due obedience, he placed garrisons of soldiers in those parties, in
hope verelie upon occasion to pass over into Ireland, and for the more easy
advancement of his purpose therein, he interteined with honorable provision
one of the kings of Ireland, An Irish king expelled out of his country.
which by civil discord was expelled and driven out of his country. In deed
Agricola perceived, that with one legion of soldiers, and a small aid of other
men of war, it should be an easy matter to conquer Ireland, and to bring it
under

In the sixth summer of Agricola his government, The sixth year of Agricola his
government.
he proceeded in subduing the furthermost parts of Scotland northwards, causing
his navy to keep course against him by the coast as he marched forth by
land, so that the Britains perceiving how the secret

The danger also of them that were in the ships by sea was not small, by reason
of winds and tempests,

The Britains of Calenderwood assalt the Romans upon advantage, bloody battles
fought betwixt them, great numbers slain on both sides, the villainous dealing
of certain Dutch soldiers against their capteins and fellows in arms, the
misery that they were driven unto by famine to eat one another, a sharp
conflict between the Romans and Britains, with the loss of many a
THe Britains that inhabited in those days about the parts of Calenderwood,
Calenderwood.
perceiving in what danger they were to be utterly subdued,

Agricola had knowledge of their purposed intent, and therefore with all speed
hasted forth to come to the succors of his people, sending first his light
horssemen, and certain light armed footmen to assail the enemies on their
backs, and shortly after approached with his whole puissance, so that the
Roman standards beginning to appear in sight by the light of the day that
then began to spring, the Britains were sore discouraged, and the Romans
renewing their force, fiercely preassed upon them, so that even in the entry
of the camp, there was a sore conflict, till at length the Britains were put
to flight and chased, so that if the mareshes and woods had not saved them from
the pursuit of the Romans, there had been an end made of the whole war even
by that one days work. But the Britains escaping as well as they might, and
reputing the victory to have chanced not by the valiancie of the Roman
soldiers, but by occasion, and the prudent policy of their captain, were
nothing abashed with that their present loss, but prepared to put their youth
again into armor: and thereupon they removed their wives and children into
safe places, and then assembling the chiefest governors together, concluded a
league amongst themselves, each to aid other, confirming their articles with
doing of sacrifice (as the manner in those days was.)

The same summer, The seventh year.
a band of such Dutch or German soldiers as had been levied in Germany and
sent over into Britain to the aid of the Romans, attempted a great and
wonderful act, in sleaing their captain, and such other of the Roman
soldiers which were appointed to have the training and leading of them, as
officers and instructors to them in the feats of war: and when they had
committed that murder, they got into three pinesses, and became rouers on the
coasts of Britain, and incountring with diverse of the Britains that were
ready to defend their country from spoil, oftentimes they got the upper hand
of them, and now and then they were chased away, insomuch that in the end they
were brought to such extremity for want of vittels, that they did eat such
amongst them as were the weakest, and after, such as the lot touched, being
indifferently cast amongst them: and so being carried about the coasts of
Britain, and losing their vessels through want of skill to govern them, they
were reputed for robbers, and thereupon were apprehended, first by the
Suabeners, and shortly after by the Frizers, the which sold diverse of them to
the Romans and other, whereby the true understanding of their adventures came
certeinlie to light.

In summer next following, The eight year of Agricola his government.
Agricola with his army came to the mounteine of Granziben, where he
understood that his enemies were encamped, to the number of 30 thousand and
above, and daily there came to them more company of the British youth, and
such aged persons also as were lusty and in strength, able to weld weapon and
bear armor. Amongst the capteins the chiefest was one Galgagus whom the
Scottish chronicles name Gald. Galgagus whom the Scots name Gald and will needs
have him a Scottish man.
This man as chiefteine and head captain of all the Britains there assembled,
made to them a pithie oration, to encourage them to fight manfully, and
likewise did Agricola to his people: which being ended, the armies on both
sides were put in order of battle. Agricola placed 8 thousand footmen of
strangers which he had there in aid with him in the most, appointing three
thousand horssemen to stand on the sides of them as wings. The Roman legions
stood at their (...) in steed of a bulworke. The Britains were imbattelled in
such order, that their fore ward stood in the plain ground, and the other on
the side of an hill, as though they had risen on height one rank above
another. The midst of the field was covered with their charrets and horssemen.
Agricola doubting by the huge multitude of enemies, Corn. Tacit.
least his people should be assailed not only afront, but also upon every
side the battles, he caused the ranks so to place themselves, as their battles
might stretch far further in breadth than otherwise the order of war
required: but he took this to be a good remedy against such inconvenience as
might have followed, if the enemy by the narrowness of the fronts of his
battles should have bemmed them in on each side.

This done, and having conceived good hope of victory, he alighted on foot,
and putting his horse from him, he stood before the standards as one not
caring for any danger that might happen. At the first they bestowed their shot
and darts freely on both sides. The Britains as well with constant manhood, as
skillful practice, with broad swords and little round bucklers avoided and beat
from them the arrows and darts that came from their enemies, and therewithal
paid them home again with their shot and (...).
and join with them at hand-strokes, Congri.
so as the matter might come to be tried with the edge of the sword, which
thing as to them (being inured with that kind of fight) it stood greatly with
their advantage, so to the Britains it was very dangerous, that were to defend
themselves with their mighty huge swoords

The horssemen also that made resistance they pulled from their horses, and
began to clime the hill upon the Britains. The other bands desirous to match
their fellows in helping to atchiue the victory, Hollanders.
and beat down the Britains where they might approach to them: many were
ouerrun and left half dead, and some not once touched with any weapon, were
likewise ouerpressed, such have the Romans made to follow upon the Britains.
Whilst the British horssemen fled, their charets joined themselves with their
footmen, and restoring the battle, put the Romans in such fear, that they
were at a sudden stay: but the charets being troubled with prease of enemies,
and vneeuennesse

Now the Britains that kept the top of the hills,

The Britains now and then as they saw their advantage, namely when they
approached near to the woods, gathered themselves together, and set upon the
Romans as they followed unadvisedly, and further (through ignorance of the
places) than stood with their suertie, insomuch that if Agricola had not
provided remedy, and sent forth mighty bands of light armed men both on foot
and horssebacke to close in the enemies, and also to beat the wood, some
greater loss would have followed through too much boldness of them that too
rashly pursued upon the Britains: who when they beheld the Romans thus to
follow them in whole troops and good order of battle, they slipped away and
took them to flight, each one seeking to save himself, and kept not together
in plumps as before they had done. The night made an end of the chase which
the Romans had followed till they were thoroughly wearied. Ten thousand
Britains slain.
There were slain of the Britains that day 10000, and of the Romans 340, among
whom Aulus Atticus a captain of one of the cohorts or bands of footmen was
one, Aulus Atticus slain.
who being mounted on horssebacke (through his own too much youthful courage,
and fierce unruliness of his horse) was carried into the middle throng of his
enemies, and there slain.

The lamentable distress and pitiful perplexity of the Britains after their
overthrow, Domitian enuieth Agricola the glory of his victories, he is
subtilie deprived of his deputiship, and Cneus Trebellius surrogated in his
room. The xviij. Chapter.
THe night ensuing the foresaid overthrow of the Britains was spent of the
Romans in great joy and gladness for the victory atchiued. But among the
Britains there Britains (...) Scots, neither yet Picts.
was nothing else heard but mourning and lamentation, both of men and women
that were mingled together, some busy to bear away the wounded, to bind and
dress their hurts; other calling for their sons, kinsfolks and friends that
were wanting. Many of them forsook their houses, and in their desperate mood
set them on fire, and choosing forth places for their better refuge and
safeguard, forthwith misliking of the same, left them and sought others:
herewith diverse of them took counsel together what they were best to do,
one while they were in hope, an other while they fainted, as people cast into
utter despair: the beholding of their wives and children oftentimes moved
them to attempt some new enterprise for the preservation of their country and
liberties. And certain it is that some of them slew their wives and children,
as moved thereto with a certain fond regard of pity to rid them out of
further misery and danger of thraldom.

The next day the certeintie of the victory more plainly was disclosed, for
all was quiet about, and no noise heard any where: the houses appeared burning
on each side, and such as were sent forth to discover the country into every
part thereof, saw not a creature stirring, for all the people were avoided and
withdrawn a far off.

When Agricola had thus overthrown his enemies Hector Bo^t.
which inhabited the countries now called Angus and Merne, and there intended
to winter, Cot. Tacitus.
and took hostages of the people for assurance of their loialtie and
subjection. This done, he appointed the admiral of the navy to sail about
the I Will, which accordingly to his An haven called Trutulens^s, peradventure
Rutupensis.
luckily accomplished his enterprise, and brought the navy about again into
an haven called Trutulensts.

In this mean time, whiles Julius Agricola was thus occupied in Britain, both
the emperor Uespasianus, and also his brother Titus that succeeded him,
departed this life, and Domitianus was elected emperor, who hearing of such
prosperous success as Agricola had against the Britains, did not so much
reioise for the thing well done, as he envied to consider

To find remedy therefore herein, he thought not good to utter his malice as
yet, whilst Agricola remained in Britain with an army, which so much
favored him, and that with so good cause, since by his policy and noble
conduct the same had obtained so Cneus Trebellius alias Salustius Lucullus as
some think.
delivered his province unto his successor Cneus Trebellius, appointed thereto
by the emperor Domitianus, in good quiet and safeguard.

Thus may you see in what state Britain stood in the days of king Marius, of
whom Tacitus makes no mention at all. Some have written, that the city of
Chester was builded by this Marius, though other (as before I have said) think
rather that it was the work of Ostorius Scapula their Fabian.
legate. Touching other the doings of Agricola, in the Scottish chronicle you
may find more at large set forth: for that which I have written here, is but
to show what in effect Cornelius Tacitus writes of

Of Coillus the son of Marius, his education in Rome, how long he reigned: of
Lucius his son and successor, what time he assumed the government of this
land, he was an open professor of christian religion, he and his family are
baptized, Britain receives the faith, 3 archbishops and 28 bishops at that
time in this Island, westminster church and S. Peter's in Cornehill builded,
diverse opinions touching the time of Lucius his reign, of his death, and when
the christian faith was received in this Island. The 19. Chapter.
COillus the son of Marius Coillus.
was after his fathers deceasse made king of Britain, in the year of our Lord
125. 125
This Coillus or Coill was brought up in his youth amongst the Romans at Rome,
where he spent his time not unprofitably, but applied himself to learning and
service in the wars, by reason whereof he was much honored of the Romans, and
he likewise honored and loved them, so that he paid his tribute truly all
the time of his reign, and therefore lived in peace and good quiet. He was
also a prince of much bounty, and very liberal, whereby he obtained great
love both of his nobles and commons. Some say, that he made the town of
Colchester in Essex, Colchester built.
but others write, that Coill which reigned next after Asclepiodotus was the
first founder of that town, but by other it should seem to be built long
before, being called Camelodunum. Finally when this Coill had reigned the
space of 54 years, he departed this life at York, leaving after him a son
named Lucius, which succeeded in the kingdom.

Lucius the son of Coillus, Lucius.
whose surname (as says William Harison) is not extant, began his reign over
the Britains about the year of our Lord 180, as Fabian following the
authority of Peter Pictauiensis says, although other writers seem to
disagree in that account, as by the same Fabian in the table before his book
partly appears, whereunto Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis affirms, that this
Lucius was borne in the year of our Lord 115, and was crowned king in the
year 124, as successor to his father Coillus, which died the same year, being
of great age yer the said Lucius was borne. It is noted by antiquaries, that
his entrance was in the 4132 of the world, 916 after the building of Rome, 220
after the coming of Caesar into Britain, and 165 after Christ, 165
whose accounts I follow in this treatise.

This Lucius is highly renowned of the writers, for that he was the first king
of the Britains that received the faith of Jesus Christ: for being inspired by
the spirit of grace and truth, even from the beginning of his reign, he
somewhat leaned to the favoring of Christian religion, being moved with the
manifest miracles which the Christians daily wrought in witness and proof of
their sound and perfect doctrine. For even from the days of Joseph of
Arimathia and his fellows, or what other godly men first taught the Britains
the gospel of our Savior, there remained amongst the same Britains some
christians which ceased not to teach and preach the word of God most sincerely
unto them: but yet no king amongst them openly professed that religion, till
at length this Lucius perceiving not only some of the Roman lieutenants in
Britain as Trebellius and Pertinax, with others, to have submitted themselves
to that profession, but also the emperor himself to begin to be favorable to
them that professed it, he took occasion by their good example to give ear
more attentively unto the gospel, and at length sent unto Eleutherius bishop
of Rome two learned men of the British nation, Eluane and Meduine, requiring
him to send some such ministers as might instruct him and his people in the
true faith more plentifully, and to baptize them according to the rules of
christian religion.

The reverend father John Jewel, sometime bishop of Salisburie, writes in his
Fol. 119.
reply unto Hardings answer, that the said Eleutherius, for general order to
be taken in the realm and churches here, wrote his advice to Lucius in manner
and form following. You have received in the kingdom of Britain, by Gods
mercy, both the law and faith of Christ; ye have both the new and the old
testament, out of the same through Gods grace, by the advice of your realm
make a law, and by the

Hereupon were sent from the said Eleutherius two godly learned men, the one
named Fugatius, and the other Damianus, the which baptized the king with all
his family and people, Britain receives the faith.
and therewith removed the worshipping of idols and false gods, and taught the
right mean and way how to worship the true and immortal God. There were in
Matthew. West.
and all the middle part of England, Josephus of Arimathia.
Thus Britain partly by the means of Joseph of Arimathia (of whom ye have
heard before) and partly by the wholesome

There be that affirm, how this Lucius should build the church of saint Peter
at Westminster, Polydor. Westminster Church built.
Harison anno mundi 4174) does lie a scruple. Sure Cornell might soon be
mistaken for Thorney, specially in such old records, as time, age, and evil
handling have oftentimes defaced.

But howsoever the case stands, truth it is, that Lucius reioising much, in
that he had brought his people to the perfect light and understanding of the
true God, that they needed not to be deceived any longer with the crafty
temptations and feigned miracles of wicked spirits, he abolished all profane
worshippings of false gods, and converted all such temples as had been
dedicated to their service, unto the use of christian religion: and thus
studieng only how to advance the glory of the immortal God, and the
knowledge of his word, without seeking the vain glory of worldly triumph,
which is got with slaughter and bloodshed of many a giltlesse person, he left
his kingdom; though not enlarged with brother dominion than he received it, yet
greatly augmented and enriched with quiet rest, good ordinances, and (that
which is more to be esteemed than all the rest) adorned with Christ's religion,
and perfectly instructed with his most holy word and doctrine. He reigned (as
some write) 21 years, though other affirm but twelve years. Polydor. Fabian.
John Hard.
Again, some testify that he reigned 77, others 54, and 43.

Moreover here is to be noted, that if he procured the faith of Christ to be
planted within this realm in the time of Eleutherius the Roman bishop, the
same chanced in the days of the emperor Marcus Aurelius Antonius; and about
the time that Lucius Aurelius Commodus was joined and made partaker of the
empire with his father, which was seven year after the death of Lucius Aelius,
Aurelius Uerus, and in the 177 after the birth of our Savior Jesus Christ, as
by some chronologies is easy to be collected. For Eleutherius began to govern
the sea of Rome in the year 169, according to the opinion of the most diligent
chronographers of our time, and governed fifteen years and thirteen days.
And yet there are that affirm, how Lucius died at Gloucester in the year of
our Lord 156. Gal. Mon. Matthew. West.
Other say that he died in the year 201, and other 208. So that the truth of
this history is brought into doubt by the discord of writers, concerning the
time and other circumstances, although they all agree that in this kings days
the christian faith was first by public consent openly received and professed
in this land, which as some affirm, Polydor.
should chance in the twelfe year of his reign, and in the year of our Lord
177. Other judge that it came to pass in the eight year of his regiment, and
in the year of our Lord 188, where other (as before is said) allege that it
was in the year of the Lord 179. Nauclerus says, that this happened about the
year of our Lord 156. Nauclerus. Hen. Herf.
And Henricus de Herfordea supposes, that it was in the year of our Lord 169,
and in the ninteenth year of the emperor Marcus Anfonius Uerus: and after
other, about the sixth year of the emperor Commodus.

But to conclude, king Lucius died without issue, by reason whereof after his
deceasse the Britains fell at variance, which continued about the space of
fifteen years (as Fabian thinks) Fabian.
howbeit the old English chronicle affirms, that the contention betwixt them
remained fifty years, Caxton. John Hard.
though Harding affirms but four years. And thus much of the Britains, and
their kings Coilus and Lucius. Now it rests to speak somewhat of the Romans
which governed here in the mean while. After that Agricola was called back to
Rome, the Britains (and namely those that inhabited beyond Tweed) partly
being weakened of their former strength, and partly in consideration of their
pledges, which they had delivered to the Romans, remained in peace certain
years.

The Britains after the deceasse of Lucius (who died without issue) rebel
against the Romans, the emperor Adrian coming in his own person into Britain
appeaseth the broile, they go about to recover their liberty against the
Romans, but are suppressed by Lollius the Roman lieutenant; the vigilantnesse
or wakefulnesie of Marcellus, and his policy to keep the soldiers waking,
the Britains being ruled by certain mean gentlemen of Perhennis
IN the mean time the Roman lieutenant Cneus Trebellius that succeeded Cneus
Trebellius lieutenant.
could no, foresee all things so preciselie but that the soldiers waxing
unruly by reason of long rest, fell at variance among themselves, and would
not in the end obey the lieutenant, but disquieted the Britains beyond measure.
Wherefore the Britains perceiving themselves sore oppressed with intolerable
bondage, and that daily the same incresed, they conspired together, upon hope
The wall of Adrian built. Spartianus.
and so caused a wall to be made from the mouth of Tine unto the water of Eske,
which wall contained in length 30 miles.

After this, the Britains bearing a malicious hatred toward the Roman
soldiers, and repining to be kept under the bond of servitude, eftsoons went
about to recover liberty again. Whereof advertisement being given, Lollius
Urbicus lieutenant.
the emperor Pius Antoninus sent over Lollius Urbicus as lieutenant into
Britain, who by sundry battles stricken, constreined the Britains to remain
in quiet, and causing those that inhabited in the north parts to remove
further off from the confines of the Roman province, Julius Capitol. Another
wall built.
caised Calphurnius Agricola.
either to reduce their state into liberty, or to bring the same into further
danger.

Whereupon Marcus Antonius that succeeded Pius, Of the doings of this
Calphurnius in Britain ye may read more in the Scottish chronicle.
sent Calphurnius Agricola to succeed Lollius in the government of Britain,
the which easily overcame and subdued all his enemies. After this there
chanced some trouble in the days of the emperor Commodus the son of Marcus
Antonius and his successor in the empire: for the Britans that dwelled
northwards, beyond Adrians wall, brake through the same, and spoiled a great
part of the country, against whom the Roman lieutenant for that time being
come forth, Dion Cassius.
gave them battle: but both he and the Roman soldiers that were with him,
were beaten down and slain.

With which news Commodus being sore amazed, sent against the Britains one
Ulpius Marcellus, Ulpius Marcellus lieutenant.
a man of great diligence and temperance, but therewith rough and nothing
gentle. He used the same kind of diet that the common soldiers did use. He was
a captain much watchful, as one contented with very little sleep, and
desirous to have his soldiers also vigilant and careful to keep sure watch
in the night season. Every evening he would write twelve tables, such as they
used to make on the lind tree, and delivering them to one of his servants,
appointed him to bear them at several hours of the night to sundry
soldiers, whereby supposing that their general was still watching and not
gone to bed, they might be in doubt to sleep.

And although of nature he could well abstain from sleep, yet to be the
better able to forbear it, he used a marvelous spare kind of diet: for to the
end that he would not fill himself too much with bread, he would eat none but
such as was brought to him from Rome, so that more than necessity compelled
him he could not eat, by reason that the stalenesse took away the pleasant
taste thereof, and less provoked his appetite. He was a marvelous contemner of
money, so that bribes might not move him to do otherwise than duty required.
This Marcellus being of such disposition, sore afflicted the Britains, and put
them oftentimes to great losses: through fame whereof, Co^modus enuieng his
renown was after in mind to make him away, but yet spared him for a further
purpose, and suffered him to depart.

After he was removed from the government of Britain, Perhennis captain of
the emperors guard.
one Perhennis captain of the emperors guard (or pretorian soldiers as they
were then called) bearing all the rule under the emperor Commodus, appointed
certain gentlemen of mean calling to govern the army in Britain. Which
fond substituting of such petie officers to ouersee and ouerrule the people,
was to them an occasion of hartgrudge, and to him a means of final mischief:
both which it is likely he might have avoided, had he been provident in his
deputation. For the soldiers in the same army grudging and repining to be
governed by men of base degree, Aelius L^^^pridius.
in respect of those that had borne rule over them before, being honorable
personages, as senators, and of the consular dignity, they fell at square
among themselves, and about fifteen hundred of them departed toward Rome to
exhibit their complaint against Perhennis: for what soever was amiss, the
blame was still laid to him. They passed forth without impeachment at all, and
coming in to Rome, the emperor himself came forth to understand what they
meant by this their coming in such sort from the place where they were
appointed to serve. Their answer was, that they were come to inform him of the
treason which Perhennis had devised to his destruction, that he might make his
son emperor. To the which accusation when Commodus too lightly gave ear, and
believed it to be true, namely, through the setting on of one Cleander, who
hated Perhennis, for that he brideled him from doing diverse unlawful acts,
which he went about upon a wilful mind (without all reason and modesty) to
practice; the matter was so handled in the end, that Perhennis was delivered to
the soldiers, who cruelly mangled him, and presently put him to a pitiful
death.

Pertinax is sent as lieutenant into Britain, he is in danger to be slain of
the soldiers, he riddeth himself of that perilous office: Albinus with an
army of Britains fights against Seuerus and his power near to Lions,
Seuerus is slain in a conflict against the Picts, Geta and Bassianus two
brethren make mutual war for the regiment of the land, the one is slain,
the other rules. The xxj. Chapter.
NOw will we say somewhat of the tumults in Britain. Pertinax lieutenant of
Britain.
It was thought needful to send some sufficient captain of authority thither;
and therefore was one Pertinax that had been consul The lieutenant in danger.
and left for dead among the stain carcasses. But he woorthilie revenged
himself of this injury. At length, having chastised the rebels, and brought
the I Will into meetelie good quiet, he sued and obtained to be discharged of that
room, because as he alleged, the soldiers could not brook him, for that he
kept them in dutiful obedience, by correcting such as offended the laws of
arms.

THen was Clodius Albinus appointed to have Clodius Albinus lieutena^t.
whose destruction when Seuerus the emperor sought, Albinus perceived it
quickly: and therefore choosing forth a great power of Britains, passed with
the same over into France to encounter with Seuerus, who was come thither
toward him, so that near to the city of Lions they joined in battle and
fought right sore, in so much that Seuerus was at point to have received the
overthrow by the high prowess and manhood of the Britains: Spartianus) being
sent thither by Seuerus for that purpose before. And such was the state of this
I Will about the year of our Lord 195. In which season, because that king Lucius
was dead, and had left no issue to succeed him, the Britains (as before ye have
heard) were at variance amongst themselves, and so continued till the coming
of Seuerus, whom the

THis Seuerus as then emperor of Rome, Seuerus.
began to rule this I Will (as authors affirm) in the year of our Lord 207, and
governed the same 4 years and od months. At length hearing that one
Fulgentius as then a leader of the Picts was entered into the borders of his
country on this side Durham, he raised an host of Britains and Romans, with
the which he marched toward his enemies: and meeting with the said Fulgentius
in a place near unto York, in the end after sore fight Seuerus was slain,
when he had ruled this land for the space almost of five years, as before is
said, and was after buried at York, leaving behind him two sons, the one
named Geta, and the other Bassianus. This Bassianus being borne of a British
woman, succeeded his father in the government of Britain, in the year of the
incarnation of our Lord 211. The Romans would have had Geta created king of
Britain, bearing more favor to him because he had a Roman lady to his
mother: but the Britains moved with the like respect, held with Bassianus. And
thereupon war was raised betwixt the two brethren, who coming to try their
quarrel by battle, Geta was slain, and Bassianus with aid of the Britains
remained victor, and so continued king, till at length he was slain by one
Carausius a Britain, borne but of low birth, howbeit right valiant in arms,
and therefore well esteemed. In so much that obteining of the senate of Rome the
keeping of the coasts of Britain, that he might defend the same from the
malice of strangers, as Picts and others, he drew to him a great number of
soldiers and specially of Britains, to whom he promised that if they would
make him king, he would cleerelie deliver them from the oppression of the
Roman servitude. Whereupon the Britains rebelling against Bassianus, joined
themselves to Carausius, who by their support vanquished and slew the said
Bassianus, after he had reigned 6 or (as some affirm) 30 years.

Thus far out of the English and British writers, the which how far they
vary from likelihood of truth, you shall hear in the next chapter what the
approved historiographers, Herodianus.
Greeks and Latins, writing of these matters, have recorded.

The ambitious mind of the old emperor Seuerus, he arriueth in Britain with a
mighty power to suppress the rebellious Britains, the emperors politic
provision for his soldiers in the fens and bogs: the agilitie of the Britains,
their nimblenesse, the painting of their bodies with diverse colors, their
furniture, their great sufferance of hunger, cold, etc: diverse conflicts
between the Romans and the Britains, their subtle trains to deceive their
enemies, the Romans pitifully distressed, Seuerus constreineth the Caledonians
to conclude a league with him; he falls sick, his own son practices to
make him away: the Britains begin a new rebellion, the cruel commandment of
Seuerus to kill and slay all that came to hand without exception, his age, his
death, and sepulchte: Bassianus ambitiouslie usurps the whole regiment, he
kills his brother Geta, and is slain himself by one of his own soldiers.
The xxij. Chapter.
THe emperor Seuerus receiving aduertisment from the lieutenant of Britain,
that the people there moved rebellion, and wasted the country with roads and
forraies, so that it was needful to have the prince himself to come thither
within great power to resist the enemies, he of an ambitions mind re^oised not
a little for those news, because he saw occasion offered to advance his
renow^e and fame with increase of new victories now in the west, after so many
triumphs purchased and got by him in the east and north parts of the world:
Heerevpon though he was of great age, yet the desire that he had still to win
honor, caused him to take in hand to make a journey into this land, and so
being furnished of all things necessary, he set forwards, being carried for
the more part in a litter for his more ease: for that beside his feebleness of
age, he was also troubled with the gout. He took with him his two sons,
Antoninus and Geta.
Antoninus Bassianus and Geta, upon purpose as was thought, to avoid occasions
of such inconvenience as he perceived might grow by discord moved betwixt them
through flatterers

Seuerus being thus on his journey toward Britain, stayed not by the way,
The emperor Seuerus arriueth in Britain.
but with all diligence Herodianus Herodianus.
writes) was full of fens and maresh ground, He means of the north Britains
or savage Britains as we may call them.
and wade up to the middle at their pleasure, going for the more part naked, so
that they passed not on the mud and mires, for they knew not the use of wearing
cloths, but ware hoopes of iron about their middles and necks, esteeming the
same as an ornament and token of riches, as other barbarous people did gold.

Moreover they marked, or (as it were) painted their bodies in diverse sorts
and with sundry shapes and figures of beasts and fowls, and therefore they
used not to wear any garments, that such painting of their bodies might the
more apparantlie be seen, which they esteemed a great bravery.

They were as the same Herodianus writes, a people given much to war, and
delighted in slaughter and bloodshed, using none other weapons or armor but a
slender buckler, The furniture of the savage Britains.
a iaueline, and a sword

Moreover, to suffer hunger, cold, and travel, they were so used and inured
therewith, that they would not pass to lie in the bogs and mires covered up to
the chin, without caring for meat for the space of diverse days together: and
in the woods they would live upon roots and barks of trees. Also they used to
prepare for themselves a certain kind of meat, of the which if they received
but so much as amounted to the quantity of a bea^e, they would think
themselves satisfied, and feel neither hunger nor thirst. The one half of the
I Will or little less was subject unto the Romans, the other was governed of
themselves, the people for the most part having the rule in their hands.

Seuerus therefore meaning to subdue the whole, and understanding their nature,
and the manner of their making war, provided him self of all things
expedient for the annoiance of them and help of his own soldiers, and
appointing his son Geta to remain in that part of the I Will which was subject
to the Romans, he took with him his other son Antoninus, and with his army
marched forth, and entered into the confines of the enemies, and there began to
waste and forrey the country, whereby there insued diverse conflicts and
skirmishes betwixt the Romans and the inhabitants, the victory still remaining
on the Romans side: but the enemies easily escaped without any great loss
unto the woods, mountains, bogs, and such other places of refuge as they knew
to be at hand, whither the Romans durst not follow, nor once approach, for fear
to be intrapped and enclosed by the Britains that were ready to return and
assail their enemies upon every occasion of advantage that might be offered.

This manner of dealing sore troubled the Romans, and so hindered them in their
proceedings, that no speedy end could be made of that war. Dion Cassius.
The Britains would oftentimes of purpose lay their cattle, as oxen, kine,
sheep, and such like, in places convenient, to be as a stale to the Romans;
and when the Romans should make to them to fetch the same away, being distant
from the residue of the army a good space, they would fall upon them and
distress them. Beside this, the Romans were much annoied with the
vnwholesomnesse of the waters which they were forced to drink, and if they
chanced to straie abroad, they were snapped up by ambushes which the
Caledonians laid for them, and when they were so feeble that they could not
through want of strength keep pace with their fellows as they marched in
order of battle, they were slain by their own fellows, least they should be
left behind for a prey to the enemies. Hereby there died in this journey of
the Roman army, at the point of fifty thousand men: but yet would not
Seuerus return, till he had gone through the whole I Will, and so came to the
uttermost parts of all the country now called Scotland, and at last back
again to the other part of the I Will subject to the Romans, the inhabitants
whereof are named (by Dion Cassius) Meatae. But first he forced the other, whom
the same Dion names Caledontj, to conclude a league with him, upon such
conditions, as they were compelled to depart with no small portion of the
country, and to deliver unto him their armor and weapons.

In the mean time, the emperor Seuerus being worn with age fell sick, so
that he was constreined to abide at home within that part of the I Will which
obeyed the Romans, and to appoint his son Antoninus to take charge of the
army abroad. But Antoninus not regarding the enemies, attempted little or
nothing against them, but sought ways how to win the favor of the soldiers
and men of war, that after his fathers death (for which he daily looked) he
might have their aid and assistance to be admitted emperor in his place. Now
when he saw that his father bare out his sickness longer time than he would
have wished, he practiced with physicians and other of his fathers servants to
dispatch him by one mean or other.

Whilst Antoninus thus negligentlie looked to his charge, the Britains began a
new rebellion, not only those that were lately joined in league with the
emperor, but the other also which were subjects to the Roman empire. Seuerus
took such displeasure, that he called together the soldiers, and commanded
them to invade the country, and to kill all such as they might meet within
any place without respect, and that his cruel commandment he expressed in
these verses taken out of Homer: Nemo manus fugiat vestras, Iliados. 3.
caedemque cruentam,
Non foetus grauida matter quem gessit in aluo
Horrendam effugiat caedem.


But while he was thus disquieted with the rebellion of the Britains, and the
disloiall practices of his son Antoninus, which to him were not unknown,
(for the wicked son had by diverse attempts discovered his traitorous and
unnatural, meanings) at length, rather through sorrow and grief, than by
force of sickness, Herodianus. Dion Cassius. Eutropius. Dion Cassius.
he wasted away, and departed this life at York, the third day before the
nones of February, after he had governed the empire by the space of 17 years,
8 months, and 33 days. He lived Herodian and Dion Cassius, of the manners and
vsages of those people, against whom Seuerus held war here in Britain, it
may be coniectured, that they were the Picts, the which possessed in those
days a great part of Scotland, and with continual incursions and rodes wasted
and destroyed to the borders of those countries which were subject to the
Romans. To keep them back therefore and to repress Eurropius. Orosius.
Seuerus (as some write) either restored the former wall made by Adrian, or
else newly built an other overthwart the I Will, Dion Cassius.
from the east sea to the west, containing in length 232 miles. This wall was
not made of stone, but of turfe and earth supported with stakes and piles of
wood, Beda.
and defended on the back with a deep trench or ditch, and also fortified
with diverse towers and turrets built and erected upon the same wall or rampire
so near together, Hector Boe^ius.
that the sound of trumpets

Seuerus being departed out of this life in the year of our Lord 211,
Polydorus. Herodianus. 211
his son Antoninus otherwise called also Bassianus, would feign have usurped
the whole government into his own hands, attempting with bribes and large
promises to corrupt the minds of the soldiers: but when he perceived that his
purpose would not forward as he wished in Sextus Aurelius.
after he had reigned the space of 6 years, as is aforesaid. Where we are to
note Gods judgment, providing that he which had shed man's blood, should also
die by the sword.

Of Carausius an obscure Britain, what countries he gave the Picts, and
whereupon, his death by Alectus his successor, the Romans foiled by
Asclepiodotus duke of Cornwall, whereof Walbrooke and the name, the covetous
practice of Carausius the usurper. The xxxiij. Chapter.
CArausius a Britan of unknown birth, Carausius.
as witnesses the British histories, after he had vanquished and slain
Bassianus (as the same histories make mention) was of the Britains made king
and ruler over them, in the year of our Lord 218, 218 Galfrid.
as Galfridus says: but W. H. notes it to be in the year 286. This Carausius
either to have the aid and support of the Picts, as in the British history is
contained, either else to be at quietness with them, being not otherwise able
to resist them, Polychron. Fabian.
gave to them the countries in the south parts of Scotland, which join to
England on the east marshes, as Mers, Louthian, and others.

But here is to be noted, Galfridus.
that the British writers affirm, that these Picts which were thus placed in
the south parts of Scotland at this time, were brought over out of Scithia by
Fulgentius, to aid him against Seuerus, and that after the death of Seuerus and
Fulgentius, which bother died of hurts received in the batell fought betwixt
them at York: the Picts took part with Bassianus, and at length betrayed him
in the battle which he fought against Carausius: for he corrupting them by
such subtle practices as he used, they turned to his side, to the overthrow
and utter destruction of Bassianus: for the which traitorous part they had
those south countries of Scotland given unto them for their habitation. But by
the Scottish writers it should appear, that those Picts which aided Fulgentius
and also Carausius, were the same that long before had inhabited the north
parts of Britain, now called Scotland. But whatsoever they were, truth it is
(as the British histories record) that at length one Alectus was sent from Rome
by the senate with 3 legions of soldiers to subdue Carausius, which he did, and
slew him in the field, as the same histories make mention, after he had reigned
the space of 7, or 8, years: and in the year of our salvation two hundred,
ninety, three.

A Lectus in haung vanquished and slain Carausius took upon him the rule and
government of Britain, Alectus. Of whom our British histories do write after
their manner. 293.
in the year of our Lord 293. This Alectus, when he had restored the land to
the subjection of the Romans, did use great cruelty against such Britains as
had maintained the part of Carausius, by reason whereof he purchased much evil
will of the Britains, the which at length conspired against him, and purposing
to chase the Romans altogether out of their country, they procured one
Asclepiodotus (whom the British chronicles name duke of Cornwall) to take
upon him as chief captain that enterprise. Whereupon the same Asclepiodotus
assembling a great army, made such sharp wars on the Romans, that they
being chased from place to place, at length withdrew to the of London, and
there held them till Asclepiodotus came thither, and provoked Alectus and his
Romans so much, that in the end they issued forth of the city, and gave
battle to the Britans, in the which much people on both parts were slain, but
the greatest number died on the Romans side: and amongst others, Alectus
himself was slain. the residue of the Romans that were left alive, retired
back into the city with a captain of theirs named. Liuius Gallus, and
defended themselves within the walls for a time right valiantly. Thus was
Alectus slain of the Britains, after he had reigned (as some suppose) about
the term of six years, Fabian. Matthew. West.
or (as some other write) three years.

ASclepiodotus, Asclepiodotus.
duke of Cornwall, began his Gal. Mon. Matt. West.
after he had vanquished the Romans in battle, as before is recited, he laid
his siege about the city of London, and finally by knightly force entered the
same, and flue the forenamed Liuius Gallus near unto a brook which in those
days ran through the city, and threw him into the same brook: by reason
whereof long after it was called Gallus or Wallus brook. And at this present
the street where the same brook did run, Walbrooke.
is called Walbrooke.

Then after Asclepiodotus had overcome all his enemies, he held this land a
certain space in good rest and quiet, and ministered justice vprightlie, in
rewarding the good, and punishing the evil. Till at length, through slanderous
toongs of malicious persons, discord was raised betwixt the king and one Coill
or Coilus, that was governor of Colchester: the occasion whereof appears not
by writers. But whatsoever the matter was, there insued such hatred betwixt
them, Asclepiodotus slain. Matt. West. has x. years.
that on both parts great armies Eutropius.
Thus have Geffrey of Monmouth and our common chroniclers written of Carausius,
Alectus, and Asclepiodotus, which governed here in Britain.

But Eutropius the famous writers of the Roman histories, in the acts of
Dioclesian has in effect these words. About the same time Carausius, the
which being borne of most base offspring, atteined to high The covetous
practicing of Carausius.
nor yet sent any part thereof Maximianus purposes to slay Carausius.
commanded Polydor.
at length a peace was concluded with him, and so he enioied the possession of
Britain by the space of seven years, Eutropius.
and then was slain by his companion Alectus, the which after him ruled
Britain for the space of three years, and was in the end oppressed by the
guile of Asclepiodotus governor of the pretorie, or (as I may call him) lord
lieutenant of some precinct and jurisdiction perteining to the Roman empire.
Also so was Britain recovered by the foresaid Asclepiodotus about ten years
after that Carausius had first usurped the government there, and about the
year of our Lord 300, 300.
as Polydor judges, wherein he varieth much from Fabian and others.

But to show what we find further written of the subduing of Alectus, I think
it not amiss to set down what Mamertinus in his oration written in praise of
Maximianus does report of this matter, Mamertinus.
which shall be performed in the chapter following.

The substance of that which is written touching Britain in a panegyrike
oration ascribed to Mamertinus, which he set forth in praise of the emperors
Dioclesian and Maximian: it is entitled only to Maximian, whereas
nevertheless both the emperors are praised; and likewise (as ye may perceive)
Constantius who was father to Constantine the great is here spoken of, being
chosen by the two foresaid emperors, to assist them by the name of Caesar in
rule of the empire: of whom hereafter more shall be said. The xxiiij. Chapter.
ALl the compass of the earth (most victorious emperor) being now recovered
through your noble prowess, not only so far as the limits of the Roman
empire had before extended, but also the enemies borders being subdued, when
Almaine had been so often vanquished, and Sarmatia so often restreined and
brought under, the people called Vitungi, Quadi, Carpi so often put to flight,
Vitungi, Quadi, Carpi, and people of Germany and Polome.
the Goth submitting himself, the king of Persia by offering gifts suing for
peace: one despitefull reproach of so mighty an empire and government over the
whole grieved us to the heart, as now at length we will not stick to confess,
and to us it seemed the more intolerable, because it only remained to the
accomplishing of your perfect renown and glory. And verily as there is but
one name of Britain, so was the loss to be esteemed small to the common wealth
of a land so plentiful of corn, so abundant with store of pastures, so
flowing with veins of metal, so gainful with revenues rising of customs and
tributes, so environed with havens, so huge in circuit, the which when Caesar,
the founder of this your honorable title, being the first that entered into
it, writ that he had found an other world, supposing it to be so big, that it
was not compassed with the sea, but that rather by resemblance the great Ocean
was compassed with it. Now at that time Britain was nothing furnished with
ships of war; so that the Romans, soon after the wars of Carthage and
Asia, had lately been exercised by sea against pirates, and afterward by
reason of the wars against Mithridates, were practiced as well to fight by
sea as land: besides this, Picts and Irishmen.
the British nation then alone was accustomed but only to the Picts and
Irishmen, enemies half naked as yet and not used to wear armor, so that the
Britains for lack of skill, easily gave place to the Roman puissance,
insomuch that Caesar might by that voyage only glory in this, that he had
sailed and passed over the Ocean sea.

But in this wicked rebellious robbery, first the navy that in times pat
defended the coasts of Gallia, was led away by the

And although our armies were invincible in force and manhood, yet were they
raw and not accustomed to the seas, so that Long sufferance of evil increases
boldness in the authors.
which had puffed up the presumptuous boldness of desperate people, that they
Caransius slain
one of the mates slew the archpirat or captain rouer as I may call him,
hoping in reward of so great an exploit, to obtain the whole government into
his hands.

This war then being both so necessary, so hard to enter upon, so grown in
time to be stubborn stiffenesse, and so well provided for of the enemies part,
you noble

Here comes to mind how pleasant and easefull the good luck of those princes
in governing the commong wealth with praise was, which sitting still in Rome
had triumphs and surnames appointed them of such nations as their capteins did
vanquish. Fronto therefore, not the second, but match with the first honor of
the Roman eloquence, Fronto counted Ciceros match.
when he yielded unto the emperor Antoninus the renown of the war brought to
end in Britain, although he sitting at home in his palace within the city,
had committed the conduct and success of that war over unto the same Fronto,
it was confessed by him, that the emperor sittings as it were at the helm of
the ship, deserved the praise, by giving of perfect order to the full
accomplishing of the enterprise. But you (most invincible emperor) have been
not only the appointer forth how all this voyage by sea, and prosecuting the
war by land should be demeaned, as apperteined to you by virtue of your
imperial rule and dignity, but also you have been an exhorter and setter
forward in the things themselves, and through example of your assured
constancy, the victory was atchiued. For you taking the sea at Sluice, did
put an irreuocable desire into their hearts that were ready to take ship at
the same time in the mouth of the river of Saine, insomuch that when the
capteins of that army did linger out the time, by reason the seas and air was
troubled, they cried to have the sails hoised up, and sign given to lanch
forth, that they might pass forward on their journey, despising certain
tokens which threatened their wrecke, and so set forward on a rainie and
tempestuous day, sailing with a cross wind, for no forewind might serve their
turn.

But what was he that durst not commit himself unto the sea, were the same
never so unquiet, when you were once under sail, and set forward? One voice
and exhortation was among them all (as report has gone thereof) when they
heard that you were once got forth upon the water, What do we dout? what mean
we to stay? He is now loosed from land, he is forward on his way, and
peradventure is already got over: Let us put all things in proof, let us
venture through any dangers of sea whatsoever. What is there that we may stand
in fear of? we follow the emperor. Neither did the opinion of your good hap
deceive them: for as by report of them selves we do understand, at that self
time there fell such a mist and thick fog upon the seas, that the enemies
navy laid at the I Will of wight watching for their adversaries, and lurking as
it were in await, these

But now as concerning that the same unvanquishable army fighting under your
ensigns and name, streightwaies after it came to land, set fire on their
ships; what moved them so to do, except the admonitions of yoru divine
motion? Or what other The good luck in a captain.
as in the good luck and felicity of the captain general.

That same ringleader of the ungracious

To be short, he was brought into such Aiectus found dead.
the chief ringleader of the thieves was found, who had put off those robes
which in his life time he had usurped and dishonored, so as scarce was he
covered with one piece of apparel whereby he might be known, He had despoiled
himself of the imperial robes, because he would not be known if he chanced
to be slain.
so near were his words true, uttered at the hour of his death, which he saw
at hand, that he would not have it understood how he was slain.

Thus verelie (most invincible emperor) so great a victory was appointed to
you by consent of the immortal gods over all the enemies whom you assailed,
but namely the slaughter of the Frankeners and those your soldiers also,
Francones sieve Franci.
which (as before I have said) through missing their course by reason of the
mist that lay on the seas, were now come to the city of London, London in
danger to be spoiled.
where they slew down right in each part of the same city, what multitude
soever remained of those hired barbarous people, which escaping from the
battle, meant (after they had spoiled the city) to have got away by flight.
But now being thus slain by your soldiers, the subjects of your province were
both preserved from further danger, and took pleasure to behold the slaughter
of such cruel enemies. O what a manifold victory was this, worthy
undoubtedly of innumerable triumphs! by which victory Britain is restored
to the empire, by which victory the nation of the Frankeners is utterly
destroyed, and by which many other nations found accessaries in the
conspiracy of that wicked practice, are compelled to obedience. To conclude,
the seas are purged and brought to perpetual quietness.

Glory you therefore, invincible emperor, for that you have as it were got an
other world, and in restoring to the Roman puissance the glory of conquest by
sea, have added to the Roman empire an element greater than all the compass
of the earth, that is, the mighty maine ocean. You have made an end of the
war (invincible emperor) that seemed as present to threaten all provinces,
and might have spread abroad and burst out in a flame, even so largely as the
ocean seas stretch, and the mediterrane gulfs do reach. Neither are we
ignorant, although through fear of you that infection did fester within the
bowels of Britain only, and proceeded no further, with what fury it would
have advanced it self else where, if it might have been assured of means to
have ranged abroad so far as it wished. For it was bounded in with no border of
mounteine, nor river, which garrisons appointed were guarded and defended but
even so as the ships, although we had your martial prowes and prosperous
fortune ready to relieve us, and was still

For that incredible boldness and unworthy good hap of a few silly captives
of the Frankeners in time of the emperor Probus came to our remembrance, The
piracie of the Frankeners called Franci or Francones.
which Frankeners in that season, conueieng away certain vessels from the
coasts of Pontus, wasted both Grecia and Asia,

Now Spain (to let pass the coasts of Gallia) with her shores almost in sight
is in suertie: now Italy, now Afrike, now all nations even unto the fens of
Meotis are void of perpetual cares. Neither are they less ioifull, the fear
of danger being taken away, which to feel as yet the necessity had not
brought them: but they reioise to so much the more for this, that Britains
restored to quietness.
Not without good cause therefore immediately, when The Britains receive
Maximian with great joy and humbleness.
came forth and offered themselves to your presence, with their wives and
children, reuerencing not only your self (on whom they set their eyes, as on
one descended down to them from heaven) but also even the sails and tackling
of that ship which had brought your divine presence unto their coasts: and when
you should set foot on land, they were ready to lie down at your feet, that
you might (as it were) march over them, so desirous were they of you.

Neither was it any marvel if they showed them selves so ioifull, since after
their miserable captivity so many years contiuued, after so long abusing of
their wives, and filthy bondage of their children, at length yet were they now
restored to liberty, at length made Romans, at length refreshed with the true
light of the imperial rule and government: for beside the fame of your
clemency and pity, which was set forth by the report of all nations, in your
countenance (Caesar) they perceived the tokens of all virtues, in your face
gravity, in your eyes mildness, in your ruddie cheeks bashfulnesse, in your
words justice: all which things as by regard they acknowledged, so with voices
of gladness they signified on high. To you they bound themselves by vow, to
you they bound their children: yea and to your children they vowed all the
posterity of their race and offspring.

We truly (O perpetual parents and Dioclesian and Maximian.
lords of mankind) require this of the immortal gods with most earnest
supplication and hearty prayer, that our children and their children, and such
other as shall come of them for ever hereafter, may be dedicated unto you, and
to those whom you now bring up, or shall bring up hereafter. For what better
hap can we wish to them that shall succeed us, than to be enioiers of that
felicity which now we our selves enjoy? The Roman common wealth does now
comprehend in one conjunction of peace, all whatsoever at sundry times have
belonged to the Romans, and that huge power which with too great a burden was
shroonke down, and riuen in sunder, is now brought to join again in the
assured ioints of the imperial government. For there is no part of the earth
nor region under heaven, but that either it remains quiet through fear, or
subdued by force of armies, or at the lestwise bound by clemency. And is there
any other thing else on other parts, which if will and reason should move men
thereto, that might be obtained? Beyond the Ocean, what is there more than
Britain, which is so recovered by you, that those nations which are nere
adioinign to the bounds of that I Will, Nations near to Britain obeie the
emperors.
are obedient to your commandments? There is no occasion that may move you to
pass further, except the ends of the Ocean sea, which nature forbids should
be sought for. All is yours (most invincible princes) which are accounted
worthy of you, and thereof comes it, that you may equally provide for
every one, since you have the whole in our majesty's hands. And therefore as
heretofore (most excellent emperor Dioclesian) by your commandment Asia did
supply the desert places of Thracia with inhabitants transported thither, as
afterward (most excellent emperor Maximian) by your appointment, the
Frankeners at length brought to a pleasant subjection, and admitted to live
under laws, has peopled and manured the vacant fields of the Neruians, The
printed book has (...), but I take the H, to be thrust in for N.
and those about the city of Trier. And so now by your victories (invincible
Constantius Caesar) whatsoever did lie vacant about Amiens, Beauois. Trois, and
Langres, begins to flourish Artificers forth of Britain.
and restoring

What is to be observed and noted out of the panegyrike oration of Mamertinus
before remembered, with necessary collections out of other Antiquaries. The xxv.
Chapter.
NOw let us consider what is to be noted out of this part of the foresaid
oration. It should seem that when the emperor Maximian was sent into Gallia
by appointment taken betwixt him and Dioclesian, after he had quieted things
there, he set his Franci, or Frankeners, people of Germany.
a nation of Germany, as then highly renowned for their puissance by sea,
near to the which they inhabited, so that there were no rouers

But because none durst stir on these our seas for fear of the British fleet
that passed to and fro at pleasure, to the great annoiance of the Roman
subjects inhabiting along the coasts of Gallia, Maximian both to recover
again so wealthy and profitable a land unto the obeisance of the empire, as
Britain then was, and also to deliver the people of Gallia subject to the
Romans, from danger of being daily spoiled by those rouers that were
maintained here in Britain, he provided with all diligence such numbers of
ships as were thought requisite for so great an enterprise, and rigging them in
sundry places, took order for their setting forward to his most advantage for
the easy atchiuing of his enterprise. He appointed to pass himself from the
coasts of Flanders, at what time other of capteines with their fleets from
other parts should likewise make sail toward Britain. By this means Alectus
that had usurped the title and dignity of king or rather emperor over the
Britains, knew not where to take heed, but yet understanding of the navy that
was made ready in the mouth of Saine, he meant by that which may be
coniectured, to intercept that fleet, as it should come forth and make sail
forwards: and so for that purpose he lay with a great number of ships about
the I Will of Wight.

But whether Asclepiodotus came over with that navy which was rigged on the
coasts of Flanders, or with some other, I will not presume to affirm either to
or for, because in deed Mamertinus makes no express mention either of Alectus
or Asclepiodotus: but notwithstanding it is evident by that which is contained
in his oration, that not Maximian, but some other of his capteins governed the
army, which slew Alectus, so that we may suppose that Asclepiodotus was
chiefteine over some number of ships directed by Maximians appointment to pass
over into this I Will against the same Alectus: and so may this, which Mamertinus
writes, agree with the truth of that which we do find in Eutropius. Eutropius.


Here is to be remembered, that after Maximians had thus recovered Britain out
of their hands that usurped the rule thereof from the Romans, it should seem
that not only great numbers of artificers and other people were conveyed over
into Gallia, there to inhabit and furnish such cities as were run into decaie,
but also a power of warlike youths was transported thither to defend the
country from the invasion of barbarous nations. For we find that in the days
of this Maximian, the Britains expelling the Neruians out of the city of Mons
in Henaud, held a castle there, which was called Bretaimons after them,
whereupon the city was afterward called Mons, reteining the last syllable
only, as in such cases it has often happened.

Moreover this is not to be forgotten, that as Humfrey Lhoyd has very well
noted in his book entitled Fragmenta historiae Britannicae, Mamertinus in
this parcel of his panegyrike oration does make first mention of the nation
of Picts, of all other the ancient Roman writers: so that not one before his
time once names Picts or Scots. But now to return where we left.

The state of this Island under bloody Dioclesian the persecuting tyrant, of
Alban the first that suffered martyrdom in Britain, what miracles were
wrought at his death, whereof Lichfield took the name; of Coilus earl of
Colchester, whose daughter Helen was married to Constantius the emperor, as
some authors suppose. The xxvj. Chapter.
AFter that Britain was thus recovered by the Romans, Dioclesian and Maximian
ruling the empire, the Island tasted of the cruelty that Dioclesian exercised
against the christians, in presecuting them with all extremities, continually
for the space of ten years. Amongst other, one Alban a citizen of
Werlamchester, a town now bearing his name, was the first that suffered here
in Britain in this persecution, being converted to the faith by the zealous
christian Amphibalus, Beda and Gyldas.
whom he received into his house: insomuch that when there came sergeants to
seek for the same Amphibalus, the foresaid Alban to preserve Amphibalus out of
danger, presented himself in the apparel of the said Amphibalus, and so being
apprehended in his stead, was brought before the judge and

It is reported by writers, that diverse miracles were wrought at the time of
his death, insomuch Beda. See the book of acts and monuments set forth by
master Fox.
reioised nothing thereat, for his eyes fell out of his head down to the
ground, together with the head of that holy man which he had then cut off.
There were also martyred about the same time two constant witnesses of Christ
his religion, Aaron and Julius, citizens of Caerleon Arwiske. John Rossus.
Warwicens. in lib. de Wigorniens. epis. Lichfield whereof it took name.
Moreover, a great number of Christians which were assembled together

To be brief, this persecution was so great and grievous, and thereto so
universal, that in manner the Christian religion was thereby destroyed. Gyldas.
The faithful people were slain, their books burnt, and churches
overthrown. Ran. Cestren. Matthew. West. Constantius.
It is recorded that in one months space in diverse places of the world there
were

COelus earl of Colchester began his dominion over the Britains in the year
of our Lord 262. This Coelus or Coell ruled the land for a certain time,
Coelus.
so as the Britains were well content with his government, 262 Fabian.
and lived the longer in rest from invasion of the Romans, because they were
occupied in other places: but finally they finding time for Gal. Mon. Fabian.
Caxtoa.
when he had reigned (as some write) 27 years, or (as other have) but 13
years.

But by the way touching this Coelus, I will not deny, but assuredly such a
prince there was: howbeit that he had a daughter named Helen, whom he married
unto Constantius the Roman lieutenant that was after emperor, I leave that to
be decided of the learned. For if the whole course of the lives, as well of the
father and the son Constantius and Constantine, as likewise of the mother
Helen, be consideratelie marked from time to time, and year to year, as out
of authors both Greek and Latin the same may be gathered, I fear least such
doubt may rise in this matter, that it will be harder to prove Helen a
Britain, than Constantine to be borne in Bithynia (as Nicephorus avouches.)
Lib. 7. cap. 18.
But for so much as I mean not to step from the course of our country writers
in such points, where the received opinion may seem to warrant the credit of
the history, I will with other admit both the mother and son to be Britains
in the whole discourse of the history following, as though I had forgot what
in this place I have said.

A further discourse of the forenamed Constantius and Helen, hs regiment over
this Island, his behavior and talk to his son and counselors as he lay on
his deathbed, a devise that he put in practice to understand what true
Christians he had in his court, his commendable virtues, that the Britains in
his time embraced the christian faith is proved. The xxvij. Chapter.
COnstantius a senator of Rome began to reign over the Britains, Constantius.
in the year of our Lord 289, as our histories report. Matthew. West. says 302.
289
This Constantius (as before ye have heard) had to wife Helen the daughter of
the foresaid king Coel, of whom he begat a son named Constantinus, which
after was emperor, and for his worthy doings surnamed Constantine the
great. S. Ambrose following the common report, Orofius. Beda.
writes that this Helen was a maid in an inn: and some again write, that she
was concubine to Constantius, and not his wife. But whatsoever she was, it
appears by the writers of the Roman histories, that Constantius being the
daughters son of one Crispus, that was brother to the emperor Claudius,
Cuspin^an.
came into Britain, and quieted the troubles that were raised by the Britains,
Fabian.
and there (as some write) married the foresaid Helen, being a woman of an
excellent beauty, whom yet [after] he was constreined to forsake, and to
marry The odora the daughter in law of Herculeus Maximianus, by whom he had
six sons, and finally was created emperor, together with the said Galerius
Maximianus, at what time Dioclesianus and his fellow Herculeus Maximianus
renounced the rule of the empire, and committed the same unto them. The empire
was then divided betwixt them, so that to Constantius the regions of Italy,
Affrike, France, Spain and Britain were assigned; and to Galerius, Illyricum,
Grecia, and all the east parts. But Constantine being a man void of ambition,
was contented to leave Italy and Affrike, supposing his charge to be great
enough to have the government in his hands of France, Spain, and Britain (as
Eutropius says.)

But as touching his reign over the Britains, we have not to say further than
as we find in our own writers recorded: as for his government in the empire,
it is to be considered, that first he was admitted to rule as an assistant to
Maximian under the title of Caesar: and so from that time if you shall account
his reign, it may comprehend 11, 12, or 13 years, yea more or less,
according to the diversity found in writers. Howbeit, if we shall reckon his
reign from the time only that Dioclesian and Maximian resigned their title
unto the empire, we shall find that he reigned not fully three years. For
whereas between the slaughter of Alectus, and the coming of Constantius, are
accounted 8 years and od months, not only those eight years, but also some
space of time before may be ascribed unto Constantius: for although before his
coming over into Britain now this last time (for he had been here before, as
it well appears) Asclepiodotus governing as legate, albeit under Constantius,
who had a great portion of the west parts of the empire under his regiment, by
the title, as I have said, of Caesar, yet he was not said to reign absolutely,
till Dioclesian and Maximian resigned. But now to conclude with the doings of
Constantius, at length he fell sick at York, and there died, about the year
306.


This is not to be forgotten, that whilst he lay on his deathbed, somewhat
before he departed this life, hearing that his son Constantine was come, and
escaped from the emperors Dioclesian and Maximian, with whom he remained as a
pledge (as after shall be partly touched) he received him with all joy, and
raising himself up in his bed, in presence of his other sons and
counselors, with a great number of other people and strangers that were come
to Niceph.
executing as it were him self the office of an herald, and withal spoke
these words unto his said son, and to his counselors there about him: Now
is my death to me more welcome, and my departure hence more pleasant;
Tripartit. histo.
I have here a large epitaph and monument of burial, to wit, mine own son,
and one whom in earth I leave to be emperor in my place, which by Gods good
help shall

After this, turning himself to the multitude, he commanded them all to be of
good comfort, meaning those that had not forsaken true virtue and godliness in
Christ, which Christ he undertook should continue with his son Constantine
in all enterprises, which in wars or otherwise he should take in hand. That
devise also is worthy to be had in memory,

He called together all his officers and servants, feining himself to choose
out such as would do sacrifice to devils, and that those only should remain

To conclude, he was a grave prince, sober, upright, courteous and liberal, as
he which kept his mind ever free from covetous desire of great riches: insomuch
that when he should make any great feast to his friends, he was not ashamed to
borow plate and silver vessel to serve his turn, Pomponius Laetus.
and to furnish his cupbord for the time, being contented for himself to be
served in cruses and earthen vessels. He was wont to have this saying in his
mouth, that better it was that the subjects should have store of money and
riches, than the prince to keep if close in his treasury, where it served to
no use. By such courteous dealing the provinces which were in his charge
flourished in great wealth and quietness. He was a very wise and politic
prince in the ordering of all weighty matters, and very skillfull in the
practice of wars, He died in the year 306. as Matt. West. has noted, and
reigned over the Britains but 11. years as Galf. says.
so that he stood the Roman empire in great steed, and was therefore highly
beloved of the soldiers, insomuch that immediately after his deceasse, they
proclaimed his some Constantine emperor.

That The christian faith was embraced of the Britains in this season, it may
appear, in that Hilarious bishop of Poictiers writes to his brethren in
Britain, and Constantine in an epistle (as Theodoretus says in his first
book and tenth chapter) makes mtention of the churches in Britain: which
also Sozomenus does affirm. For the Britains after they had received the
faith, defended the same even with the shedding of their blood, as Amphibalus,
who in this Constantius days being apprehended, suffered at Redburne near to
Werlamchester, 291. John Bale.
about 15 years after the martyrdom of his host S. Albane.

Constantine created emperor in Britain, he is solicited to take upon him
the regiment of those countries that his father governed, he is requested to
subdue Maxentius the usurping tyrant, Maximianus his father seeks to depose
him, Constantines death is purposed by the said Maximianus the father and his
son Maxentius, Fausta the daughter of Maximianus and wife to Constantine
detecteth her fathers treachery to her husand, Maximianus is strangled at
Constantines commandment, league and alliance between him and Licinius, he is
sl^ine, the empress Helen commended, the cross of Christ found with the
inscription of the same, what miracles were wrought thereby, of the nails
wherewith Christ was crucified, Constantine commended, the state of Britain in
his time. The xxviij Chapter.
COnstantine being the son of the forenamed Constantius, Constantine. 306
begot of his first wife Helen, the daughter (as some affirm) of Coell late
king of the Britains, began to reign in the year of our Lord 306. This
worthy prince begotten of a British woman, and borne of her in Britain (as
our writers do affirm) and created certeinlie emperor in Britain, did
doubtless make his native country partaker of his high glory and renown,
which by his great prowes, politic wisdom, worthy government, and other
his princely qualities most abundantly planted in his noble person, he
purchased and got thorough the circuit of the whole earth, insomuch that for
the high enterprises and noble acts by him happily brought to pass and
atchiued, he was surnamed (as before is said) the great Constantine. Whilst
this Constantine remained at Rome in manner as he had been a pledge with
Galerius in his fathers life time, he being then but yoond, fled from thence,
and with all post have returned to his father into Britain, killing or
howghing by the way all such horses as were appointed to stand at innes
ready for such as should ride in post, least being pursued, Eutropius. Sextus
Aurelius Victor.
he should have been overtaken, and brought back again by such as might be
sent to pursue him.

At his coming into Britain, he found his father sore vexed with sickness,
whereof shortly after he died, and then was he by help of such as were about
him, encouraged, to take upon him as emperor: Erocus king of the Almains.
and namclie one Erocus king of the Almains, which had accompanied his father
thither, assisted him thereto, so that being prclaimed emperor, he took upon
him the rule of those countries which his father had in government, Maxentius
the tyrant.
that is to say, France, Spain, the Alps, and Britain, with other provinces
here in the west: and ruling the same

This Maxentius was son to Herculeus Maximianus, and Constantine had married
Fausta the daughter of the said Maximianus. Now so it was, that Maximianus,
immediately after that his son Maxentius had taken the rule upon him, sought
means to have deposed him, and to have resumed and taken eftsoons into his
own hands the government of the empire. But soliciting Dioclesian to do the
like, he was much reproved of him for his unreasonable and ambitious purpose:
so that when he perceived Dissimulation.
that Herculeus Maximianus did but for a color seem to mislike that which his
said son

Heerevpon (as it were) fleeing out of Italy, he came to Constantine,
Ranulphus Cestrensis.
who as then having appointed lieutenants under him in Britain, remained in
France, and with all joy and honor that might be, received his father in law:
the which being earnestly bent to compass his purpose, made his daughter
Fausta privy thereto: Fausta the daughter of Maximianus and wife to
Constantine.
which lady (either for fear Marsiles.
purposing there to take the sea, and so to retire to his son Maxentius into
Italy. But yer he could get away from thence, he was strangled by
commandment of his son in law Constantine, Maximianus slain. Ann. Chri. 322.
and so ended his life, which he had spotted

In this mean time had Maximianus adopted one Licinius to assist him in
governance of the empire, Licinius chosen fellow with Maximianus in the empire.
proclaiming him Caesar. So that now at one self time Constantine governed
France and the west parts of the empire, Maxentius held Italy, Affrike, and
Egypt: and Maximianus which likewise had been elected Caesar, ruled the east
parts, and Licinius Illyrium and Grecia. But shortly after, the emperor
Constantine joined in league with Licinius, and gave to him his sister in
marriage, named Constantia, for more suertie of faithful friendship to endure
betwixt them. He sent him also against Maximianus, who governing in the cast
part of the empire, purposed the destruction of Constantine and all his
partakers: but being vanquished by Licinius at Tarsus, he shortly after died,
being eaten with lice. Constantine after this was called into Italy, to
deliver the Romans and Italians from the tyranny of Maxentius, which occasion
so offered, Constantine gladly accepting, passed into Italy, and after
certain victories got against Maxentius, at length slew him.

After this, when Maximianus was dead, who prepared to make war against
Licinius, that had married Constantia the sister of Constantine, he finally
made war against his brother in law the said Licinius, by reason of such
quarrels as fell out betwixt them. In the which war Licinius was put to the
worse, and at length coming into the hands of Constantine, was put to death,
so that Constantine by this means got the whole empire under his rule and
subjection. He was a great favorer of the Christian religion, insomuch that to
advance the same, he took order for the converting of the temples dedicated to
the honor of idols, unto the service of the true and almighty God. He
commanded also, that none should be admitted to serve as a soldier in the
wars, Christians honored and cherished.
except he were a christian, nor yet to have rule of any country or army. He
also ordained, the week before Easter, and that which followed to be keptas
holy, and no person to do any bodily woorks during the same.

He was much counseled by that noble and most virtuous lady his mother,
Polydor.
the empress Helen, The praise of the empress Helen.
who being a godly and devout woman, did what in her lay, to move him to the
setting forth of Gods honor and increase of the christian faith, wherein as
yet he was not fully instructed. Some writers allege, 328
that she being at Jerusalem, made diligent search to find out the place of the
sepulcher of our Lord, and at length found it, though with much adoo: for the
infidels had stopped it up, and covered it with a heap of filthy earth, and
builded aloft upon the place, a chapel dedicated to Uenus, where young women
used to sing songs in honor of that unchaste goddess. Helen caused the same to
be overthrown, the earth to be removed, and the place cleansed, so that at
length the sepulcher appeered, and fast by were found there buried in the earth
three crosses and the nails. But the cross whereupon our Savior was
crucified, was known by the title written upon it, though almost worn out, in
letters of Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: the inscription was this, Jesus
Nazarenus rex Iudaeorum. It was also perceived which was that cross by a
miracle (as it is reported, but how truly I can not tell) that should be
wrought thereby: for being laid to a sick woman, only with the touching
thereof she was healed. It was also said, that a dead man was raised from death
to life, his body only being touched therewith. Whereupon Constantine moved
with these things, forbad that from thencefoorth any should be put to death on
the cross, to the end that the thing which before time was accounted infamous
and reproachful, might now be had in honor and reverence.

The empress Helen having thus found the cross, builded a temple there, and
taking with her the nails, returned with the same to her son Constantine,
who set one of them in the crest of his helmet, an other in the bridle of his
horse, Polydor.
and the third he cast into the sea, to assuage and pacify the furious
tempests and rage thereof. She also brought with her a parcel of that holy
cross, Polydor.
and gave it to her son the said Constantine, the which he caused to be
closed within an image that represented his person, standing upon a pillar in
the market place of Constantine, or (as some late writers have) he caused it to
be enclosed in a coffer of gold, adorned with rich stones and pearls, placing
it in a church called Sessortana, the which church he endued with many great
gifts and precious ornaments. Many woorks of great ^eale and virtue are
remembered by writers to have been done by this Constantine and his mother
Helen, to the setting forth of Gods glory, and the advancing of the faith of
Christ. The commendation of Constantine.
But to be brief, he was a man in whom many excellent virtues and good

But now to speak somewhat of the state of Britain in his time, ye shall
understand, that as before is recorded, at his going over into France, after
that he was proclaimed emperor, he left behind him in Britain certain
governors to rule the

Some write that Constantine thus conueieng Gulielmus Malmes. Britains serving
in the wars under Constantine.
and by their industry obteining victory as he wished, he placed a great
number of such as were discharged out of wages, and licenced to give over the
war, in a part of Gallia toward the west sea coast, where their posterity
remain unto this day, maruellouslie increased afterward, and somewhat
differing from our Britains, the Welshmen, in manners and language. Amongst
those noble men which he took with him when he departed out of this land (as
our Galfridus. Matt. West.
that is to say, Hoelmus, Traherinus, and Marius, whom he made senators of
Rome.

Of Octauius a British lord, his reign over the Britains, he incountereth with
Traherne first near Winchester, and afterward in Westmerland: Octauius being
discomfited flees into Norway, Traherne is slain, Octauius sends for
Maximianus, on whom he bestows his daughter
NOw in the mean time that Constantine had obeteined and ruled the whole
empire, Britain as it were having recovered liberty, in that one of her
children being her king, had got the government of the whole earth, remained in
better quiet tan before time she had done. But yet in the mean season,
Octauius. Caxton. Gewisses inhabited the country which the west Saxons after
held. The name of Gewisses came in with the Saxons of Guuy. etc.
if we shall credit the British chronicle and Geffrey of Monmouth the
interpretor thereof; there was a British lord, named Octauius or Octauian, as
the old English chronicle names him, that was duke of the Gewisses, and
appointed by Constantine to be ruler of the land in his absence the which
Octauius (after that Constantine had recovered Rome and Italy, and was so
busied in the affairs of the empire iu those parts, that as was thought, he
could not return back into Britain) seized into his hands the whole dominion
of Britain, and held himself for king.

THis Octauius then beginning his reign over the Britains in the year of our
Lord 329, Octauius.
provoked Constantine to send against him one of his mothers uncles, the
foresaid Traherne. Galfridus. 329 Fabian.
This Trahernus, or as some name him Traherne, entered this land with three
legions of soldiers, and in a field near unto Winchester, was incountered by
Octauius and his Britains, Galfridus. This agrees not altogether with that
which Hector Boethius writes, as in the Scottish chronicle appears.
by whom after a sore battle there stricken betwixt them, in the end Traherne
was put to flight an^^chased, insomuch that he was constreined to forsake that
part of the land, and to draw toward Scotland. Octauius having knowledge of
his passage, followed him, and in the country of Westmerland eftsoons gave
him battle, but in that battle Octauius was put to the woorsse, and
constreined to forsake the land, fled into Norway, there to purchase aid: and
being ready with such power as he there gathered, what of Britains and
Norwegians, to return into Britain. Before his landing, he was advertised
that an earl of Britain which bare him hearty good will, had by treason
slain Traherne. Traherne slain. See in the Scottish chronicles more of these
matters. Matthew. West. says 316.
Octauius then coming to land, eftsoons got possession of Britain, which
should be (as Fabian gathers) about the year of our Lord 329, in the 20
year of the reign of the emperor Constantine, and about two years after
that the said Octauius first took upon him to rule as king.

After this (as the British chronicle affirms) Octauius governed the land
right nobly, and greatly to the contentation of the Britains. At length when
he was fallen in age, and had no issue but one daughter, he was counseled to
send unto Rome for one Maximianus, Maximianus is sent for.
a noble young man, coosine to the emperor Constantine, on the part of his
mother Helena, to come into Britain, and to take to his wife the said daughter
of Octauius, and so with her to have the kingdom. Conan Meridoc duke of
Cornwall.
Octauius at the first meant to have given her in marriage unto one Conan
Meridoc duke of Cornwall, which was his nephue: but wen the lords would not
thereto agree, This agrees not with that which is found in the Scottish
chronicles.
at the length he appointed one Maurice son to the said C^^an to go to Rome
to fetch the forenamed Maximianus.

Maurice according to his commission and instruction in that behalf received,
came to rome, and declared his message in such effectual sort, that Maximianus
consented to go with him into Britain, and so taking with him a convenient
number, set forward, Maximianus comes into Britains.
and did so much by his iournies, that finally he landed here in Britain. And
notwithstanding that Conan Meridoc past not so much to have been doing with
him, for malice that he conceived toward him, because he saw that by his
means he should be put beside the crown, yet at length was Maximianus safely
brought to the kings presence, and of him honorably received, and finally the
marriage was knit up, and solemnized in all princely manner. Shortly after,
Octauius departs this life.
Octauius departed out of this life, after he had reigned the term of fifty
and four years, as Fabian gathers by that which diverse authors do write,
how he reigned till the days that Gratian and Ualentinian ruled the Roman
empire which began to govern in the year of our Lord (as he says) 382, which
is to be understood of Gratian his reign after the deceasse his uncle Ualens,
for otherwise a doubt may rise, 382.
because Ualentine the father of Gratian admitted the said Gratian to the title
of Augustus in the year of our Lord 351.

But to leave the credit of the long reign of Octauius, with all his and
others government and rule over the Britains since the time of Constantius,
unto our British and Scottish writers, let us make an end with the government
of that noble emperor Constantine, an assured branch of the Britains race, as
borne of that worthy lady the empress Helen, daughter to Coell earl of
Colchester, and after king of Britain (as our histories do witness.) Unto
the which empress Constantine Nicephorus. The empress Helen departs this
life.
First she was buried at Rome without the walls of the city with all funeral
pomp, as to her estate apperteined: but after his corpse was removed and
brought to Constantinople, where it was eftsoons interred. Her son the
emperor Constantine 340 The deceasse of the emperor Constantine.
and then deceassed at Nicomedia in Asia, after he had ruled the empire 32
years and od months.

We find not in the Roman writers of any great stur here in Britain during
his reign more than the British and Scottish writers have recorded: so that
after Traherne had reduced this land to quietness, it may be supposed, that
the Britains lived in rest under his government, and likewise after under his
sons that succeeded him in the empire, 360. (...)
at what time the Picts and Scots invaded the south parts of the land.

But now to end with Octauius, that the christian faith remained still in
Britain, during the supposed time of this pretended kings reign, it may
appear, in that amongst the 36 provinces, out of the which there were
assembled above 300 bishops in the city of Sardica in Dacia, at a synod held
there against the Eusebians, Synodus anno. 351.
Britain is numbered by Athanasius in his second apology to be one. And
again,

But now to speak somewhat of things chancing in Britain about this season
(as we find recorded by the Roman writers) some trouble was likely to have
grown unto the Britains by receiving certain men of war that fled out of
Italy into Britain, whom the emperor Constantius would have punished,
Marcellinus. lib. 14. Paulus a notarie.
because they had taken part with Maxentius his adversary. Paulus a Spaniard
and notarie was sent over by him, with commission to make inquiry of them, and
to see them brought to light to answer their transgressions: which Paulus
began to deal roughly in the matter, whereof he was called Catera, and to
rage against the Britains and partakers with the fugitives, in that they had
received and maintained them, Martinus lieutenant.
as he alleged: but in the and being certified by Martinus the lieutenant of
their innocence, and fearing least his extreme rigor might alienate the
hearts of the inhabitants altogether, and cause them to withdraw their
obedience from the Roman empire, he turned the execution of his fury from
them unto the Romans, and made havoc of those that he suspected, till the
said Martinus fell at square with him, and thinking on a time to kill him, he
drew his sword and smote at him. But such was his age and weakness, that he
was not able to kill him or give him any deadly wound: wherefore he turned
the point of his sword against himself, and so ended his life, being contented
rather to die than see his countriemen and subjects of the empire so to be
abused. After this the said Paulus returned back again into Italy from
whence he came, after whose departure, it was not long yer he also was slain,
and then all the Scots and Picts sore disquieted the Roman subjects, for the
suppressing of whose attempts Lupicinus was sent over out of Gallia by
Iulianus, as shall be declared out of Amianus Marcellinus, after we have first
showed what we find written in our own writers concerning the Scots and Picts,
who now began to rob and spoil the British inhabitants within the Roman
provinces here in this I Will, and that even in most outrageous manner.

Maximianus or Maximus governs this I Will, why writers speak ill of him,
strife betwixt him and Conan duke of Cornwall, Maximus is proclaimed emperor
in Britain, he transporteth the British youth serviceable for wars into
France, little Britain in France why so called, eleven thousand maids sent
thither to match with Conans people, whereof some were drowned, and other some
murdered in the way by Guanius king of Hunnes and Melga king of Picts, they
fly into Ireland, murder requited with murder, the words of Gyldas
concerning Maximus. The xxx. Chapter.
AFter the deceasse of Octauius or Octauian (as the old English chronicle
names Maximianus or Maximus
him) Maximianus or Maximus (as the Roman writers call him) began to rule the
Britains in the year of our Lord 383, 383
he was the son of one Leonine, and coosen germane to Constantine the great,
a valiant personage, and hardy of stomach: but yet because he was cruel of
nature, and (as Fabian says) somewhat persecuted the christians, he was
infamed by writers: but the chief cause why he was evil reported, was for
that he slew his sovereign lord the emperor Gratianus, as after shall
appear, for otherwise he is supposed worthy to have had the rule of the
empire committed to his hands in each respect. Betwixt him and the abouenamed
Conan Meridoc duke of Cornwall, chanced strife and debate, so that Conan got
him into Scotland, and there purchasing aid, returned, and coming over Humber,
wasted the country on each side. Maximianus thereof having advertisement,
raised his power and went against him, and so fighting with him diverse battles,
sometime departed away with victory, and sometime with loss. At length
through mediation of friends, a peace was made betwixt them. Finally this
Maximianus, or (as the Roman histories say) Maximus, was by the soldiers
chosen and proclaimed emperor here in Britain: although some write that this
was done in Spain.

After he had taken upon him the imperial dignity, upon desire to have
enlarged his dominion, Gal. Mon. Fabian. Caxton. Matthew. West The British youth
led forth of the realm by Maximianus.
he assembled together all the chosen youth of this land meet to do service in
the wars, with the which he passed over into France, Britain in France.
and there (as our writers record) he first subdued the country ancientlie
called

Conan then placing himself and his Britains in that quarter of Gallia,
avoided all the old inhabitants, peopling that country only with Britains,
which abhorring to join themselves with women borne in Gallia, Conan was
counseled to send into Britain for maids to be coupled with his people in
marriage. Hereupon a messenger was dispatched unto Dionethus at that time duke
of Cornwall, Dionethus duke of Cornwall.
and Maids sent forth.
requiring him to send over into little Britain 11000 maids, that is to say,
8000 to be bestowed upon the meaner fort of Conans people, and 3000 to be
joined in marriage with the nobles and gentlemen. Dionethus at Conans request,
assembled the appointed number of maids, and amongst them he also appointed his
daugther Ursula, a lady of excellent beauty, to go over and to be given in
marriage to the foresaid Conan Meridoc, as he had earnestly requested.

These number of maids were shipped in Thames, and passing forward toward
Britain, Ursula the daughter of Dionethus.
were by force of weather and rage of wind scattered abroad, and part or them
drowned, and the residue (among whom was the foresaid Ursula) were slain by
Guanius king of the Hunnes, and Melga king of the Picts, into whose hands they
fell, the which Guanius and Melga were sent by the emperor Gracian to the sea
coasts of Germany, to oppress and subdue all such as were friends and
mainteiners of the part of

After that Guanius and Melga had murdered the foresaid virgins, Guanius and
Melga.
they entered into the north parts of Britain, where the Scots now inhabit, and
began to make sore war on the Britains, whereof when Maximus was advertised,
he sent into Britain one Gratianus with three legions of soldiers,

But here yet before we make an end with this maximus or Maximianus, I have
thought good to set down the words which we find in Gyldas, where the writes
of the same Maximus, undoubtedly a Britain borne, nephue to the empress
Helen, Consobrinus Helene imperatricis.
and begotten by a Roman. At length (says Gyldas) the spring of tyrants
budding up, and now increasing into an huge wood, the I Will being called after
the name of Rome, but holding neither manners nor laws according to that name,
but rather casting the same from it, sends forth a branch of her most bitter
planting, to wit Maximus, accompanied with a great number of warriors to guard
him, and apparelled in the imperial robes which he never ware as became him,
nor put them on in lawful wise, but (after the custom of tyrants) was put
into them by the mutining soldiers: which Maximus at the first by crafty
policy rather than by true manhood winding in (as nets of his perjury and
false suggestion) unto his wicked government the countries and provinces next
adioining, against the imperial state of Rome, stretching one of his wings
into Spain, and the other into Italy, placed the throne of his most unjust
empire at Trier, and showed such rage in his wood dealing against his
sovereign lords, that the one of the lawful emperors he expelled out of
Rome, and the other he bereft of his most religious and godly life. Now
without long tariance, compassed about with such a furious and bold guard as he
had got together, at the city of Aquilia he loses his wicked head, which had
cast down the most honorable heads of all the world from their kingdom and
empire.

From thencefoorth Britain being deprived of all her warlike soldiers and
armies, of her governors also (though cruel) and of an huge number of her
youth (the which following the steps of the foresaid tyrant, never returned
home again) such as remained being utterly unskillful in feats of war, were
trodden down by two nations of beyond the seas, the Scots from the west, and
the Picts from the north, and as men thus quite dismayed, Scotorum a circio,
Pictorum ab aquilone.
lament their miserable case, not knowing what else to do for the space of
many years together. By reason of whose grievous invasion and cruel
oppression wherewith she was miserably disquieted, she sends her ambassadors
unto Rome, making lamentable suit even with tears to have some power of men of
war sent to defend her against the enemies, promising to be true subjects
with all faithfulness of mind, if the enemy might be kept off and removed.
Thus far Gyldas, and more, as in place hereafter you shall find recited.

What Gratianus it was that was sent over from Rome into Britain by Maximus,
in what estimation the British soldiers have been, the privy treason of
Andragatius whereby Gratian came to his end: Maximus and his son Victor do
succeed him in the empire, they are both slain, Marcus the Roman lieutenant
suceeding them is murdered, Gratianus also his successor has the same end,
the election of Constantine a Britain borne, his praise and dispraise reported
by writers, he goes into France, makes his son Constance partaker with him
of the empire, a sharp encounter betwixt his power and two brethrens that had
the keeping of the Pyrennie hills, the issue of the battle. The xxxj. Chapter.
BUt now where the British histories, and such of our English writers as follow
them, make mention of one Gratianus a Roman, sent over with three legions of
soldiers by Maximus, as before ye have heard: we may suppose that it was
Gratianus the Britain, that afterward usurped the imperial dignity here in
Britain, in the days of the emperor Honorius. For it stands neither with
the concurrence of time nor yet with reason of the history, Sextus Aurelius.
that it should be Gratianus, surnamed Funarius, father to Ualentinian, and
grandfather to the emperor Gratianus, against whom Maximus rebelled. And yet
I remember not that any of the Roman writers makes mention of any other
Gratianus, being a Lib. 30.
who (as appears by Amian. Marcellinus) was general of the Roman army
here in this I Will, and at length being discharged, returned home into Hungary
(where he was borne) with honor, and there remaining in rest, was at length
spoiled of his goods by the emperor Constantius as confiscate, for that in
time of the civil wars he had received Maxentius, as he past thorough

But let us grant, that either Gratianus the Britain, or some other of that
name, was sent over into Britain (as before is said) by Maximus, least
otherwise some error may be doubted in the writers of the British histories,
as having happily mistaken the time and matter, bringing Gratianus Funarius to
serve under Maximus, where peradventure that which they have read or heard of
him, chanced long before that time by them supposed: and so thorough Am.
Marcellinus, if his first thirteen books might once come to light and be
extant.

But now to end with Maximus. William of Malmesburie (as ye have heard)
writes, that not Maximus,

Here is yet to be considered, in what price the soldiers of the British
nation were had in those days, with whose only puissance Maximus durst W. H.
out of Paulus Diaco. lib. 12. and alijs.
He had a faithful friend called Andragatius, who was admiral of the seas
perteining to the empire. It was therefore agreed betwixt them, that this
Andragatius (with a chosen company of the army) should be carried in secret
wise in a coch toward Lions, as if it had been Constantia Posthumia the
empress, Tripart. hist. lib. 9. cap. 21.
wife to the emperor Gratian, bruting abroad therewithal, that the said
empress was coming forwards on her way to Lions, there to meet with her
husband, for that upon occasion she was very desirous to commune with him
about certain earnest business.

When Gratian heard hereof, as one mistrusting no such dissimulation, he made
have to meet his wife, and coming at length without any great guard about
him, as one not in doubt of any treason, approached the coch, where supposing
to find his wife, he found those that streightwaies murdered him: and so was
he there dispatched quite of life by the said Andragatius, who leapt forth of
the coch to work that feate when he had him once within his danger.

Thus did the emperor Gratian finish his life in the 29 year of his age, on
the 25 of August, in the year of Christ 383, and then died. Maximus succeeded
him (making his son Flauius Uictor Nobilissimus his assistant in the empire)
383 This Flauius Uictor he begat of his wife Helen the daughter of Eudes. H.
Lhoyd.
reigning five years and two days. In the beginning of his reign Ualentinian
the yoonger made great suit to him to have his fathers body, but it would not
be granted. Afterward also Maximus was earnestly requested to come to an
enteruiew with the same Ualentinian, who promised him not only a safe
conduct, but also many other beneficial good turns beside. Howbeit Maximus
durst not put himself in any such hazard, but rather meant to pursue
Ualentinian as an usurper, and so at length chased him into Slauonie, where he
was driven to such a straight, that if Theodosius had not come to relieve him,
Maximus had driven him thence also, Ualentinian put in danger by Maximus.
or else by slaughter rid him out of the way.

But when Maximus thought himself most assured, and so established in the
empire, as he doubted no perils, he lived careless of his own safeguard, and
therefore dismissed his British soldiers, who retiring into the northwest parts
of Gallia, placed themselves there among their countriemen, which were brought
over by the emperor Constantius, whilst Maximus passing the residue of his
time in delights and pleasures, was surprised in the end and slain by
Theodosius near unto Aquilia, the 27 of August, in the year of Grace 388,
Eutropius. 388
and in the beginning of the sixth year of his reign, or rather usurpation, as
more rightly it may be termed. His son Flauius Uictor surnamed
Nobilissimus was also dispatched and brought to his end, not far from the
place where his father was slain, by the practice of one Arbogastes a Goth,
Arbogastes.
which Flauius Uictor was by the said Maximus made regent of the Frankeners,
and partaker (as before is said) with him in the empire.

After this, the I Will of Britain remained in meetlie good quiet by the space of
twenty years, till one Marcus (that was then legate, or as we may call him
lord lieutenant or deputy of Britain for the Romans) was by the soldiers
here proclaimed emperor against Honorius, which Marcus was soon after killed
in a tumult raised among the people within few days after his usurpation
began. Then one Gratianus a Britain borne succeeded in his place, Gratianus a
Britain. He reigned four years of we shall believe the British history.
who was also slain in the fourth month, after he had taken upon him the
imperial ornaments. The soldiers not yet heerewith pacified, proceeded to the
election of an other emperor, or rather usurper, and so pronounced a noble
gentleman called Constantine, borne also in Britain, to be emperor, who took
that honor upon him in the 409 year after the birth of our Savior, 409
continuing his reign by the space of two years and od months, as the Roman
histories make mention. Some report this Constantine to be of no great
towardlie disposition worthy to govern an empire, and that the soldiers
chose him rather for the name sake, because they would have another
Constantine, more than for any virtues or sufficient qualities found in his
person. But other commend him both for manhood and wisdom, wherein to speak
a truth, he deserved singular commendation, if this one note of usurpation of
the imperial dignity had not stained his other noble qualities. But herein
he did no more than many other would have done, neither yet after his
inuesture did so much as was looked for at his hands.

Constantine being placed in the imperial throne,

This Constans therefore coming under the passages that lead over the Pyrenine
mountains, Dindimus and Uerianianus two brethren, unto whom the keeping of
those passages was committed to defend the same against the Uandals, and all
other enemies His soldiers were Picts, and placed among other men of war
that served under the ensigns of the empire, and named after Honorius,
Honoriciani. Blondus.
were ready to resist him with their servants and countriemen that inhabited
therabouts, giving him a very sharp encounter, and at the first putting him
in great danger of an overthrow, but yet at length by the valiant prowes of his
British soldiers, Constans put his adversaries to flight, and killed the two
capteins, with diverse other men of name that were partakers with him in the
necessary defense of that country against the enemies. When Constans had thus
repelled those that

Honorius sends earl Constantius to expel Constantine out of Gallia, the
end of Constantinus the father and Constans the son, the valor and prowess
of the British soldiers, the British writers reproved of necligences for that
thiy have inserted fables into their works, whereas they might have deposed
matters of truth.
THe emperor Honorius, perceiving the reeling state of the empire, determined
forthwith to recover it, before it fell altogether into ruin: and therefore
sent one Constantius an earl to drive Constantine out of Gallia, which he
accordingly performed: for after certain bickerings, he slew the said
Constantine at Arles, although not without great bloodshed. He pursued also the
residue of the Britains, driving them to the very sea coasts, where they
shrouded themselves among the other Britains, that before were settled in the
country there, ancientlie called (as before we said) Armorica, that is, a
region lieng on the sea coast: for Ar in the British tongue signifies upon; and
Moure, perteining to the sea. And as this Constantine the father was slain by
Constantius, so was Constans the son killed at Uienna by one of his own
capteines named Ger^ntius. Whereby it came to pass, that Honorius shortly
after, having thus obtained the victory of both these usurpers, recovered the
I Will, but yet not till the year next following, and that by the high industry
and great diligence of that valiant gentleman earl Constantius. The slaughter
of Constantine and his son happened in the 1 year of the 297 Olympiad, 465
after the coming of Caesar, 1162 after the building of Rome, the dominicall
letter being A, and the golden number 13, so that the recovering of the Island
fell in the year of our Lord 411. 411
Here also is eftsoons to be considered the valor of the British soldiers,
who following this last remembered Constantine the usurper, did put the Roman
state in great danger, and by force brake through into Spain, vanquishing
those that kept the streicts of the mounteins betwixt Spain and Gallia, now
called France, an exploit of no small consequence, since thereby the number of
barbarous nations got free passage to enter into Spain, whereof insued many
battles, sacking of cities and towns, and wasting of the countries,
accordingly as the furious rage of those fierce people was moved to put their
cruelty in practice.

If therefore the Britain writers had considered and marked the valiant
exploits and noble enterprises which the British aids, armies and legions
atchiued in service of the Roman emperors (by whom whilst they had the
government over this I Will, there were at sundry times notable numbers conveyed
forth into the parties of beyond the seas, as by Albinus and Constantius, also
by his son Constantine the great, by Maximus, and by this Constantine, both
of them usurpers) if (I say) the British writers had taken good note of the
numbers of the British youth thus conveyed over from hence, and what notable
exploits they boldly attempted, and no less manfully atchiued, they needed
not to have given ear unto the fabulous reports forged by their Bards, of
Arthur and other their princes, worthy in deed of very high commendation.

And pity it is, that their fame should be brought by such means out of
credit, by the incredible and fond fables which have been devised of their
acts so unlike to be true, as the tales of Robin Hood, or the gests written by
Ariost the Italian in his book entitled Orlando furioso, since the same
writers had otherwise true matter enough to write of concerning the worthy
feats by their countriemen in those days in foreign parts boldly enterprised,
and no less valiantly accomplished, as also the wars which now and then
they maintained against the Romans here at home, in times when they felt
themselves oppressed by their tyrannical government, as by that which is
written before of Caratacus, Uoadicia, Cartimandua, Uenusius, Galgagus, or
Galdus (as some name him) and diverse other, who for their noble valiancies
deserve as much praise, as by tongue or pen is able to be expressed. But now to
return unto the British history: we will proceed in order with their kings as
we find them in the same mentioned, and therefore we have thought good to
speak somewhat further of Gratian, from whom we have digressed.

Gratians rough regiment procures his own destruction, the coming of his two
brethren Guanius and Melga with their armies, the Scots and Picts plague the
Britains, they send for aid to Rome, Valentinian sends Gallio Rauenna to
relieve them, the Romans refuse any longer to succor the Britains, whom they
taught how to make armor and weapons, the Scots and Picts enter afresh into
Britain and prevail, the Britains are brought to extreme misery, civil
wars among them, and what mischief does
GRatianus then, Gratianus.
whom Maximus or Maximinus had Polydor writes, coniecturing so, 390.
by that he is named of authors to be Municeps, that is to say, a free man of
the country or city where he inhabited. For his sternehesse and Of the Roman
soldiers as Blondus says.
slain and dispatched out of the way, after he had reigned the space of four
years, or rather four months, as should seem by that which is found in
autentike writers. Then the forenamed kings Guanius and Melga, which (as some
write) were brethren, Galfrid. Caxton.
returned into this land with their armies increased with new supplies of men
of war, as Scots, Danes, the Norwegians, and destroyed the country from side
to side. Galfrid. Matthew. West. Caxton.
as before ye have heard.

Gyldas makes no mention of these two kings Guanius and Melga of the Hunnes,
Gyldas.
but rehearsing this great destruction of the land, declares (as before ye
have heard) that the Scots and Picts were the same that did all the mischief,
whom he 414.
which easily repelled the enemies, and chased them back with great
slaughter, to the great comfort of the Britains, the which by this means were
delivered from danger of utter destruction, as they thought.

But the Romans being occasioned to depart again out of the land, appointed
the Britains to make a wall (as had been aforetime by the emperors Adrian,
Antoninus and Seuerus overthwart the country from sea to sea, Beda and
Polychron.
stretching from Penuelton unto the city of Aclud, whereby the enemies might
be staid from entering the land: but this wall being made of turfs and sods,
rather than with stones, after the departure of the Romans was easily
overthrown by the Scots and Picts, which eutsoones returned to invade the
confines of the Britains, and so entering the country, wasted and destroyed the
places before them, according to their former custom. Hereupon were messengers
with most lamentable letters again dispatched toward Gyldas. Polychron. Beda.
Matthew West.
Rome for new aid against those cruel enemies, with promise, that if the
Romans would now in this great necessity help to deliver the land, they
should be assured to find the Britains evermore obedient subjects, and ready at
their commandment. Ualentinianus (pitieng the case of the poor Britains)
Blondus.
appointed another legion of soldiers (of the which one Gallio of Rauenna had
the leading) Gallio Rauenna sent into Britain.
to go to their succors, the which arriving in Britain set on the enemies,
and giving them the overthrow, slew a great number of them, and chased the
residue out of the country.

The Romans thus having obtained the victory, declared to the Britains, that
from thencefoorth they would not take upon them for every light occasion so
painful a journey, alleging how there was no reason why the Roman ensigns,
with such a number of men of war, should be put to travel so far by sea and
land, for the repelling and beating back of a sort of scattering rouers and
pilfring thieves. Wherefore they advised the Britains to look to their duties,
and like men to endeavor themselves to defend their country by their own
force from the enemies invasions. And because they judged it might be an help
to the Britains, they set in hand to build a wall yet once again ouerthward
the I Will, in the same place where the emperor Seuerus A wall built overthwart
the Island Beda.
caused his trench and rampire to be cast. This wall which the Romans now built
with help of the Britains, was 8 foot in breadth and 12 in length, traversing
the land from east to west, and was made of stone.

After that this wall was finished, Gyldas and Beda.
the Romans exhorted the Britains to play the men, and showed them the way how
to make armor and weapons. Besides this, on the coast of the east sea where
their ships lay at rode, and where it was douted that the enemies would land,
they caused towers to be erected, with spaces betwixt, out of the which the
seas might be discovered. These things ordered, the Romans bad the Britains
farewell, not minding to return thither again. Gyldas.
The Romans then being gone out of the land, the Scots and Picts knowing
thereof, by and by came again by sea, and being more emboldened than before,
because of the denial made by the Romans to come any more to the succor of the
Britains, they took into possession all the north and uttermost bounds of the
I Will, even unto the foresaid wall, therein to remain as inhabitans. This
chanced in the year 43. as M. W. says
And whereas the Britains got them to their wall to defend the same, that the
enemies should not pass further into the country, they were in the end beaten
from it, and diverse of them slain, so that the Scots and Picts entered upon
them and pursued them in more cruel manner than before, so that the Britains
being chased out of their cities, towns, and dwelling houses, were constreined
to fly into desert places, and there to remain and live after the manner of
savage people, and in the end began to rob and spoil one another, so to avoid
the danger of staruing for lack of food: and thus at the last the country was
so destroyed and wasted, that there was no other shift for them that was left
alive to live by, except only by hunting and taking of wild beasts and
fowls. And to augment their misery, the commons imputing the fault to rest in
the lords and Hector Boet. Rebellion.
governors, arose against them in arms, but were vanquished and easily put to
fight at two several times, being beaten down and slain (through lack of
skill) in such numbers, especially the latter time, that the residue which
escaped, withdrew into the craggie mounteins, where within the bushes and caves
they kept themselves close, sometimes coming down and fetching away from the
herds of beasts and flocks of sheep which belonged to the nobles and
gentlemen of the country, great booties to relieve them withal. But at length
oppressed with extreme famine, when neither part could long remain in this
state, as needing one another help, necessity made peace betwixt the lords
and commons of Civil war decayed the force of the Britains. What mischief
follow of civil wars.
little less than the tyrannical practices of Maximus, for by the avoiding of
the commons thus out of their houses, the ground lay untilled, whereof insued
such famine for the space of three years together, that a wonderful number
of people died for want of sustenance.

Thus the Britains being brought generally into such extreme misery, they
thought good to try if Actius.
which at that time remained in France as yet called Gallia, governing the same
as lieutenant under the emperor Honorius: and hereupon taking counsel
together, they wrote a letter to him, the tenor whereof insueth.

To Actius thrice consul.
THe lamentable request of us the Britains, beseeching you of aid to be

Notwithstanding the Britains thus sought for aid at Actius hands as then the
emperors lieutenant, The Britains could get no aid from the Romans.
yet could they get none; either for that Actius would not, as he that passed
little how things went, because he bare displeasure in his mind against
Ualentinian as then emperor; or else for that he could not, being otherwise
constreined to imploie all his forces in other

The Britains being thus put to their shifts, many of them as hunger-starued
were constrained to yield themselves into the griping hands of their enemies,
whereas other yet keeping within the mounteins, Gyldas) did the Britains not
putting their trust in man but in God (according to the saying of Philo, Where
man's help fails, it is needful that Gods help be present) make slaughter
of their enemies that had been accustomed many years to rob and spoil them
in manner as before is recited, and so the bold attempts of the enemies ceased
for a time, Punishment cease, but sin increases.
but the wickedness of the British people ceased not at all. The enemies
departed out of the land, but the inhabitants departed not from their naughty
doings, being not so ready to put back the common enemies, as to exercise
civil war and discord among themselves. The wicked Irish people departed
home, to make return again within a while after. But the Picts settled
themselves first at that season in the uttermost bounds of the I Will, and there
continued, making insurrections oftentimes upon their neighbors, and spoiling
them of their goods.

This with more also has Gyldas, and likewise Beda written of this great
desolation of the British Galfridus. Gyldas his words are to be considered.
people: wherein if the words of Gyldas be well weighed and considered, it may
lead us to think, that the Scots had no habitations here in Britain, but
only in Ireland, till after this season, and that at this present time the
Picts, which before inhabited within the Isles of Orkenie, now placed themselves
in the north parts of Scotland, and after by process of time came and nestled
themselves in Louthian, in the Mers, and other countries more near to our
borders. But to proceed.

The British histories affirm, that whilst the Britains were thus persecuted
by these two most cruel and fierce nations the Scots and Picts, the noble and
chiefest men amongst them consulted together, and concluded to send an
honorable embassage unto Aldroenus as then king of little Britain in Gallia,
An embassage sent from the Britains unto Aldroenus king of Britain in France.
which Aldroenus was the fourth from Cnoan Meridoc the first king there of the
British nation. Of this embassage the archbishop of London named Guetheline or
Gosseline was appointed the chief and principal, who passing over into little
Britain, and coming before the presence of Aldroenus, so declared the effect
of his message, that his suit was granted. For Aldroenus agreed to send his
brother Constantine over into great Britain with a convenient power,
Constantine the brother of Aldroenus.
upon condition, that the victory being obtained against the enemies, the
Britains should make him king of great Britain.

Thus it is apparent, that this land of Britain was without any certain
governor (after that Gratian the usurper was dispatched) a number of years
together, but how many, writers in their account do vary. Fabian.
Fabian deposes by diverse coniecturs that the space betwixt the death of
Gratian, and the beginning of the reign of the said Constantine, brother; to
Aldroenus, continued nine and thirty years, during which time the Britains
were sore and miserably afflicted by the invasions of the Scots and Picts, as
before ye have heard by testimonies taken out of Beda, Gyldas, Geffrey of
Monmouth, and other writers both British and English.

What the Roman historiographer Marcellinus reports of the Scots, Picts, and
Britains under the emperor Iulianus, Valentinianus and Valens, they send their
vicegerents into Britain, the disquietnesse of that time, London called
Augusta, the worthy exploits of Theodosius in this Island against the enemy,
Valentinus a banished malefactor deuiseth his destruction, he is taken and
executed, he reformeth many disorders and inconveniences, the first entering of
the Saxons into Britain, they are dawn^ed at the very sight of the Roman
ensigns, the Saxons lieng in wait for their enemies are slain every mothers
son. The xxxiiij. Chapter.
BUt now since no mention is made of the Scots in our Maximus.
histories, till the days of Maximus the usurper or tyrant, as some call him,
who began his reign here in Britain about the year of our Lord 383, 383
and that till after he had bereft the land of the chiefest forces thereof, in
taking the most part of the youth over with him: we find not in the same
histories of any troubles wrought to the Britains by that nation. Therefore we
have thought good here to come back to the former times, that we may show
what is found mentioned in the Roman histories, both before that time and
after, as well concerning the Scots and Picts, as also the Saxons, Ammianus
Marcellinus lib. 20.
and especially in Ammianus Marcellinus, where in the beginning of his
twentieth The emperor Iulianus.
he says as follows.

In this state stood things in Illyricum or Slauonia, in and the east parts, at
what time Constantius bare the office of consul the tenth time, and Iulianus
the third time, that is to say, in the year of our Lord 360, 360.
when in Britain quietness being disturbed by roads made by the Scots and
Picts, which are wild and savage people, Scots and Picts trouble the state of
this I Will.
the frontiers of the country were wasted, and fear oppressed the provinces

He thought good therefore to send Lupicinus unto these places to bring things
into frame and order, Lupicinus sent into Britain.
Heruli and Bataui, (...)
with diverse companies also of the people of Mesia now called Bulgarie; when
winter was well entered and come on, he came himself to Bulleine, and there
providing ships, and imbarking Rutupis.
and so marched forth unto London, from thence purposing to set forward, as
upon advise taken according to the quality of his business he should think
meet and expedient.

In the mean time, whilst Lupicinus was busy here in Britain to repress
the enemies, Of the displacing of ^hese men the learned may see more in Am. Mar.
the emperor Constantius displaced certain officers, and among other he
deprived the same Lupicinus of the office of the master of the armorie,
appointing one

The same Marcellinus speaking of the doings about the time that Ualentinianus,
Lib. 26.
being elected emperor, had admitted his brother Ualens as fellow with him in
government, Ammianus Marcellinus lib. 26.
has these words. In this season as though trumpets had blown the sound to
battle through out the whole Roman empire, most cruel nations being stirred
up, invaded the borders next adioining, The Almans. The Sarmatians.
the Almans wasted and destroyed the parts of Gallia and Rhetia, as the
Sarmatians and Quadi did Pannonia, The Quadi. Picts and Saxons.
the Picts, the Saxons, the Scots, and the Attacots vexed the Britains with
continual troubles, and grievous damages; the Austorians and the people of the
Moors ouerran the country of Affrike more sharply than in time past
Austorians. The Goths.
they had done; the pilfring troops of the Goths spoiled Thracia; the king of
Persia set in hand to subdue the Armenians, and sought to bring them under his
obeisance, hasting with all speed toward Numonia, pretending (though unjustly)
that now after the deceasse of Iouinius, with whom he had contracted a league
and bond of peace, there was no cause of let what he ought not to recover those
things, which (as he alleged) did belong to his ancestors: and so forth.

Moreover, the same Marcellinus in another place writes in this wise, Lib. 27.
where he speaks of the said Ualentinianus. Departing therefore from Amiens,
and hasting to Trier, he was troubled with grievous news that were brought
him, giving him to understand, that Britain by a conspiracy of the barbarous
nations was brought to utter poverty, that Nectaridus one of the emperors
house earl of the sea coast, Comes maritimi tractus.
having charge of the parties toward the sea, was slain, and that the
general Bulchobaudes was circumuented by trains of the enemies. These things
with great horror being known, he sent Seuerus as then earl, or (as I may
call him lord steward of his household) to reform things that were amiss,
Comes domesticorum.
if hap would so permit, who being shortly called back, Iouinius going
thither, and with speed hasting forward, sent for more aid and a great power of
men, as the instant necessity then required. At length, for many causes, and
the same greatly to be feared, the which were reported and advertised out of
that I Will, Theodosius was elected and appointed to go thither, Theodosius sent
into Britain.
a man of approved skill in warlike affairs, and calling together an hardy
youthful number of the legions and cohorts of men of war, he went forth, no
small hope being conceived of his good speed; the fame whereof spread and went
before him.

A little after, Marcellinus adding what people they were that troubled the
Britains in this wise, says thus. This shall suffice to be said, Picts divided
into two nations. Attacotti.
that in this season the Picts divided into two nations Dicalidones, and
Victuriones, and in like manner the Attacotti a right warlike nation, and the
Scots wandering here and there, made foul work in places where they came.
The confines of France were disquieted by the Frankeners and Saxons borderers
unto them, every one as they could breaking forth, and doing great harm by
cruel spoil, fire, and taking of prisoners. To withstand those doings if
good fortune would give him leave, Theodosius passes over into Britain.
that most able captain going unto the uttermost bounds of the earth, when he
came to the coast of Bullen which is severed from the contrary coast on the
other side by the sea, with a narrow straight, where sometime the water goes
very high and rough, and shortly after becomes calm and pleasant, without
hurt to those that pass the same, transporting over at leisure, he arrived at
Sandwich (or rather Richburrow) where there is a quiet road for vessels to lie
at anchor. Bataui Hollanders.
Whereupon the Bataui and Heruli, with the soldiers of the legions called
Iouij, and Victores, being companies that trusted well to their own strength,
marched forth and drew toward London, an ancient city, which now of late
has bin called Augusta. London called Augusta.
Herewith dividing his army into sundry parts, he set upon the troops of his
enemies as they were abroad to forrey the country, pestered with burdens of
their spoils and pillage, and speedily putting them to flight, as they were
leading away those prisoners which they had taken, with their booties of
cattle, he bereft them of their preie, the which the poor Britains that were
tributaries had lost. To be brief, restoring the whole, except a small portion
bestowed amongst the weary soldiers, he entered the city which before was
oppressed with troubles, but now suddenly refreshed, because there was hope of
relief and assured preservation.

After this, when Theodosius was comforted with prosperous success to attempt
things of greater importance, and searching ways how with good advise
Theodosius requires to have Ciuilis sent to him.
a man of sharp wit, and an earnest mainteiner of justice. He likewise
required that one Dulcitius a captain renowned Dulcitius.
These things were done in Britain.

Again, in his eight and twentieth book, the same Marcellinus reciting further
what the same Theodosius atchiued in Britain, has in effect these words:
Thedosius verelie a captain of worthy fame, taking a valiant courage to him,
and departing from Augusta, London called Augusta.
which men of old time called London, with soldiers assembled by great
diligence, did succor

But as these things were a doing, one wicked practice was in hand and like to
have burst forth, to the grievous danger of setting things in broile, if it
had not been stayed even in the beginning of the first attempt. Ualentinus.
Ualeria now Stiermarke.
now called Stiermarke, a man of a proud and lofty stomach, brother to the
wife of Maximinus, which Ualentinus for some notable offense had been banished
into Britain, where the naughty man that could not rest in quiet, devised how
by some commotion he might destroy Theodosius, who as he saw was only able to
resist his wicked purposes. And going about many things both privily and
apertlie, the force of his unmeasurable desire to mischief still increasing,
he sought to procure as well other that were in semblable wise banished men, and
inclined to mischief like him self, as also diverse of the soldiers, alluring
them (as the time served) with large promises of great wealth, if they would
join with him in that enterprise. But even now in the very nicke, when they
should have gone in hand with their ungracious exploit, Theodosius warned of
their intent, boldly advanced himself to see due punishment executed on the
offenders that were forthwith taken and known to be guilty in that
conspiracy.

Theodosius committed Ualentine with a few other of his trusty accomplices unto
the captain Dulcitius, Dulcitius is appointed to put Ualentinus to death.
commanding him to see them put to death: but coniecturing by his warlike skill
(wherein he passed all other in those days) what might follow, he would not in
any wise have any further inquiry made of the other conspirators, least
through fear that might be spread abroad in many, the troubles of the
provinces now well quieted, should be again revived. After this, Theodosius
disposing himself to redress many things as need required, all danger was
quite removed: so that it was most apparent, that fortune favored him in such
wise, that she left him not destitute of her furtherance in any one of all his
attempts. He therefore restored the cities and castles that were appointed to
be kept with garrisons, and the borders he caused to be defended and guarded
with sufficient numbers to keep watch and ward in places necessary. And
having recovered the province which the enemies had gotten into their
possession, he so restored it to the former state, that upon his motion to have
it so, A part of Britain called Ualentia.
a lawful governor was assigned to rule it, and the name was changed, so as
from thencefoorth it should be called Ualentia for the princes pleasure.

The Areani, a kind of men ordained in times past by our elders (of whom
somewhat we have spoken in the acts of the emperor Constance) being now by
little and little fallen into vices, he removed from their places of abiding,
being openly convicted, that allured with bribes and fair promises, they had
oftentimes bewraied unto the barbarous nations what was done among the Romans*
for this was their charge, to run up and down by long iournies, and to give
warning to our captains, what stir the people of the next confines were about
to make.

Theodosius therefore having ordered these and other like things, The praise of
Theodosius.
most woorthilie and to his high fame, was called home to the emperors court,
who leaving the provinces in most triumphant state, was highly renowned for
his often and most profitable victories, as if he had been an other Camillus
or Cursor Papirius, and with the favor and love of all men was conveyed unto
the sea side; and passing over with a gentle wind, came to the court, where he
was received with great gladness and commendation, being immediately appointed
to succeed in the room of Ualence Iouinus that was master of the horses.
Finally, he was called by the emperor Gratianus, to be associated with him in
the imperial estate, after the death of Ualence, in the year after the
incarnation of our Savior 379, 379 Will. Har.
and reigned emperor, surnamed Thodosius the great, about 16 years and 2
days.

Hereto also may that be applied which the foresaid Marcellinus writes in the
same book, touching the invasion of the Saxons, Wolf. Lazi.
the which (as Wolf. Lazius takes it) entered then first into great Britain,
but were repelled of the emperor Ualentinianus the first, Seuerus.
by the conduct and guiding of Seuerus. The same year (says he) that the
emperors were the third time consuls, there brake forth a multitude of Saxons,
and passing the seas, entered strongly into the Roman confines: a nation fed
oftentimes with the slaughter of our people, the brunt of whose first invasion
earl Nonneus sustained, Nonneus Co^^es.
one which was appointed to defend those parties, an approved captain, and
with continual travel in wars very expert. But then incountring with
desperate and forlorn people, when he perceived some of his soldiers to be
overthrown and beaten down, and himself wounded, not able to abide the often
assaults of his enemies, he obtained this by informing the emperor what was
necessary and ought to be done, Seuerus coronell of the footmen.
insomuch that Seuerus, master or (as I

After this the Saxons were permitted to depart without impeachment, and so to
return from whence they came, who being now out of all fear, and preparing to
go their ways, diverse bands of footmen

Then ran they together more cruelly than before, 399


Thus were the Romans, as commonly in all their martial affairs, so in this
encounter very fortunate, the happy issue of the conflict faling out on their
side. And strange it is to consider and mark, how these people by a celestial
kind of influence were begotten and borne as it were to prowess and renown;
the course of their dealings in the field most aptly answering to their name.
For (as some suppose) the Romans were called of the Greek word (...), Solinus.
Adr. Iun.
signifieng power and mightiness: and in old time they were called Ualentians,
A valendo, of prevailing: so that it was no marvel though they were victorious
subduers of foreign people, since they were by nature created and appointed to
be conquerors, and thereof had their denomination.

What the poet Claudianus says of the state of Britain in the decaie of the
Roman empire, of the Scots and Picts cruelly vexing the Britains, they are
afflicted by invasion of barbarous nations, the practice of the Saxons, of the
Scots first coming into this Island, and from whence, the Scottish
chronographers noted for curiosity and vanity. The xxxv. Chapter.
AFter this, Honorius (...) emperor.
in the time of the emperor Honorius, the Scots, Picts, and Saxons, did
eftsoons invade the frontiers of the Roman province in Britain, as appears
by that which the poet Claudianus writes, in attributing the honor of
preserving the same frontiers unto the said emperor, in his book entitled
Panegerycus tertij consulatus (which fell in the year 396) as thus: Ille leaves
Mauros nec falso nomine Pictos
Edomuit, Scotumque vago mucrone secutus, 396. Claudia^^^.

Fregit Hyperboreas remis audacibus vndas,
Et geminis fulgens vtroque sub axe tropheis,
Tethyos alternae refluas calcauit arenas.
The nimble Mores and Picts by right so called, he has subdude,
And with his wandering sword likewise the Scots he has pursude:
He brake with bold courageous oar the Hyperborean wave,
And shining under both the poles with double trophies brave,
He marched upon the bubling sands of either swelling seas.
The same Caladianus upon the fourth consulship of Honorius, says in a
tetrastichon as follows: Quid rigor aeternus caeli? quid frigora prosunt?
Ignotumque fretum? maduerunt Saxons fuso
Orcades, incaluit Pictonum sanguine Thule,
Sootorum cumulos fleuit glacialis Hyberne.
What lasting cold? what did to them the frostlie climats gain?
And sea unknown? be moisted all with blood of Saxons slain
The Orknies were: with blood of Picts has Thule waxed warm, Thule some take
take to be Iseland, some Scotland.

And ysie Ireland has bewaild the heaps of Scottish harm.


The same praise gives he to Stilico the son in law of Honorius, and makes
mention of a legion of soldiers sent for out of Britain in the periphrasis or
circumlocution of the Gotish bloody wars: Venit and extremis legio praetenta
Britannis,
Quae Scoto dat fraena truci, ferroque notatas
Perleget exanimes Picto moriente figuras.
A legion eke there came from out the farthest Britains bent,
Which brideled has the Scots so stern: and marks with iron brent
Upon their liuelesse lims does read, whiles Picts their lives relent.


He rehearses the like in his second Panegerycus of Stilico, in most ample and
pithie manner ensuing: Inde Calidonio velata Britannia monstro,
Ferro Picta genas, cuius vestigia verrit
Caerulus, Oceanique aestum mentitur amictus,
Me quoque vicinis pereuntem gentibus inquit,
Muniuit Stilico, totam quum Scotus Hybernam
Mouit, and infesto spumauit remige Thetis,
Illius effectum curis, ne bella timerem
Scotica, ne Pictum tremerem, ne littore toto
Prospicerem dubijs venturum Saxona ventis.
Then Britain whom the monsters did of Calidone surround,
Whose cheeks were pearst with scorching steel, whose garments swept the
ground,
Resembling much the marble hew of ocean seas that boil,
Said, She whom neighbor nations did
Has Stilico munited strong, when raisd by Scots entice
All Ireland was, and enemies ores the salt sea foam did slice,
His care has causd, that I all fear of Scottish broiles have bard,
Ne do I dread the Picts, ne look my country coasts to guard
Against Saxon troops, whom changing winds


Thus may it appear, that in the time when the Roman empire began to decaie,
Britain af^luted bp invasion of barbarous nations.
in like manner as other parts of the same empire were invaded by barbarous
nations, so was that part of Britain which was subject to the Roman emperors
grieuouslie assailed by the Scots and Picts, and also by the Saxons, the which
in those days inhabiting all along the sea coasts of low Germany, even from
the Elbe unto the Rhine, did not only trouble the sea by continual

To the which Sidonius Apollinaris thus alludeth, Sidon. Apol. li. 8. Epist.
writing to Namatius. The messenger did assuredly affirm, that lately ye
blew the trumpet to war in your nation, and betwixt the office one while of a
mariner, and another while of a soldier, wasted about the crooked shores of
the ocean sea against the fleet The pirasie of the Saxons.
of whom as many rouers as ye behold, so many archpirats ye suppose to see:
so do they altogether with one accord command, obeie, teach, and learn to
play the parts of rouers, that even now there is good occasion to warn you to
beware. This enemy is more cruel than all other enemies. He assaileth at
unawares, he escapes by forseeing the danger before hand, he despises those
that stand against him, he throws down the unwary: if he be followed he
snappeth them up that pursue him, if he flee he escapes.

Of like effect for proof h^ereof be those verses which he wrote unto
Maiorianus his panegyrike oration, following in Latin and in English verse.
Tot maria intra^^^ duce te, longeque remotas
Sole sub occiduo gentes, victricia Caesar
Signa Calidonios transuexit ad vsque Britannos.
Fuderi^ and quanquam Scotum, and cum Saxone Pictum,
Hostesquaesiuit quem iam natura vetabat,
Qu^erere plus homines, etc.
So many seas Lontred have, and nations far by west,
By thy conduct, and Caesar has his banners borne full pressed
Unto the furthest British coast, where Calidonians dwell,
The Scot and Pict with Saxons eke, (...) though he subdued fell,
Yet would he enemies seek unknown whom nature had forbid, etc.


Thus much have we thought good to gather out of the Roman and other writers,
that ye might perceive the state of Britain the better in that time of the
decaie of the Roman empire, and that ye might have occasion to mark by the
way, how not only the Scots, but also the Saxons had attempted to invade the
Britains, before any mention is made of the same their attempts by the British
and English writers. But whether the Scots had any habitation within the
bounds of Britain, till the time supposed by the Britain writers, we leave
that point to the judgment of others that be traveled in the search of such
antiquities, only admonishing you, that in the Scottish chronicle you shall
find the opinion which their writers have conceived of this matter, and also
many things touching the acts of the Romans done against diverse of the
Britains, which they presume to be done against their nation, though shadowed
under the general name of Britains, or of other particular names, at this day
to most men unknown. But whenever the Scots came into this I Will, they made
the third nation that inhabited the same, coming first out of Scithia, or
rather out of Spain (as some suppose) into Ireland, Polydot.
and from thence into Britain; next after the Picts, though their writers
fetch a far more ancient beginning (as in their chronicles at large
appears) referring them to the reading thereof, that desire to understand
that matter as they set it forth.

Thus far the dominion and tribute of the Romans over this land of Britain,
which had continued (by the collection of some chronographers) the space of
483. years. And here we think it convenient to end this fourth book.
THE FIFTH BOOK of the History of England.
Constantinus at the general suit of the Britains undertakes to govern this
Island, he is crowned king, his three sons, he is traitorouslie slain of a
Pict, Constantius the eldest son of Constantine having been a monk is
created king, the ambitious and sly practices of duke Vortigerne to aspire to
the government, he procures certain Picts and
Having ended our former book with the end of the Roman power over this
Island, wherein the state of the Island under them is at full described; it
remains now that we proceed to

Constantinus the brother of Aldroenus king of little Britain, Constantinus.
at the suit and earnest request of the archbishop of London, Gal. Mon. Matt.
Westminster.
made in name of all the Britains Caxton says 12000. but Gal. and others say
but 2000.
Immediately after his coming on land, he gathered to him a great power of
Britains, which before his landing were hid in diverse places of the I Will. Then
went he forth with them, and gave battle to the enemies, whom he vanquished:
and slew that tyrannical king Guanius The British history disagreeth from the
Scottish.
which affirm that they got the field, but yet lost their king named Dongard
(as in their history ye may read.)

But to proceed as our writers report the matter. When the Britains had thus
overcome their enemies, they conveyed their captain the said Constantine unto
Cicester, and there in fullfilling their promise and covenant made to his
brother, crowned him king of great Britain, in the year of our Lord 433,
Matthew. West. says 435.
which was about the fifth year of the emperor Ualentinianus the second, and
third year of Clodius king of the Frankners after called Frenchmen, which then
began to settle themselves in Gallia, whereby the name of that country was
afterward changed and called France. Constantine being thus established king,
ruled the land well and nobly, and defended it from all invasion of enemy
during his life. He begat of his wife three sons (as the British history
affirms) Constantius, Aurelius Ambrosius, and Uter surnamed Pendragon. The
eldest, because he perceived him to be but dull of wit, and not very toward,
he made a moonke, placing him within the abbie of Amphibalus in Winchester.

Finally this Constantine, In a grove of bushes as Gal. says. Matthew. West.
Beda. Orosius, Blondus.
after he had reigned ten years, was traitoroustie stain one day in his own
chamber (as some write) by a Pict, who was in such favor with him, that he
might at all times have free access to him at his pleasure. Neither the Roman
writers, nor Beda, make any mention of this Constantine: but of the other
Constantine they write, which immediately after the usurper Gratian was
dispatched out of the way (as before ye have heard) was advanced to the rule of
this land, and title of emperor, only in hope of his name, and for no other
respect of towardness in him, before time being but a mean soldier, without
any degree of honor. The same Constantine (as writers record) going over into
Gallia, adorned his son Constantius with the title and dignity of Caesar, the
which before was a moonke, and finally as well the one as the other were
slain, the father ar Arles by earls Constantius, that was sent against him by
the emperor Honorius; and the son at Uienna (as before ye have heard) by one
of his own court called Gerontius (as in the Italian history ye may see more
at large.) This chanced about the year of our Lord 415. 415


This have we thought good to repeat in this place, for that some may suppose
that this Constantine is the same that our wr^ters take to be the brother of
Aldroenus king of little Britain, as the circumstance of the time and other
things to be considered may give them occasion to think, for that there is not
so much credit to be yielded to them that have written the British histories,
but that in some part men may with just cause doubt of sundry matters
contained in the same: and therefore have we in this book been the more
diligent to show what the Romans and other foreign writers have registered in
their books of histories touching the affairs of Britain, that the reader
may be the better satisfied in the truth. But now to return to the sequel of
the history as we find the same written by the British chroniclers.

After that Constantine was murdered (as before ye have heard) one Uortigerus,
This Uortigerne was duke of the Geuisses and Cornwall, as Rad. Cestr.
reports. Gal. Mon.
or Uortigernus, a man of great authority amongst the Britains, wrought so
with the residue of the British nobility, that Constantius the eldest son of
their king the fore-remembred Constantine, was taken out of the abbie of
Winchester where he remained, and was streightwaies created king, as lawful
inheritour to his father.

Ye have heard how Constantius was made a moonke in his fathers life time,
because he was thought to be too soft and childish in wit, to have any public
rule committed to his hands: but for that cause specially did Uortigerne seek
t'aduance him, to the end that the king being not able to govern of himself,
he might have the chiefest swaie, and so rule all things as it were under him,
preparing thereby

THis Constantius then the son of Constantine, Constantius.
by the help (as before ye have heard) of Uortigerne, was made king of
Britain, in the year of our Lord 443. Matt. West. says 445.
But Constantius bare but the name of king: for Uortigerne abusing his
innocence and simple discretion to order things as was requisite, had all the
rule of the land, and did what pleased Hector Boet.
and as many Scots to be attendant as a guard upon the kings person, diverse of
the which (corrupting them with fair promises) he procured by subtle means
in the end to murder the king, Constantius murdered.
and immediately upon the deed done, he caused the murderers to be strangled,
that they should not The subtle (...) of Uortigerne.
Then caused he all the residue of the Scots and Picts to be apprehended, and
as it had been upon a zeal to see the death of Constantius severely
punished, be framed such inditements and accusations against them, that
chiefly by his means (as appeared) the giltlesse persons were condemned and
hanged, the multitude of the British people being woonderfullie pleased
therewith, and giving great commendations to Uortigerne for that deed. Thus

After his death was known, those that had the bringing up and custody of his
two yoonger brethren, Aurelius Ambrosius. Uter Pendragon.
Aurelius Ambrose, and Uter Pendragon, mistrusting the wicked intent of
Uortigerne, whose dissimulation and mischievous meaning by some great
likelihoods they suspected, with all speed got them to the sea, and fled into
little Britain, there keeping Uortigerne chosen king of Britain.
Uortigerne himself was chosen, diverse of the nobles (whom he had procured
thereto) giving their voices to this his preferment, as to one best deserving
the same in their opinion and judgment. This Uortigerne, as by indirect means
and sinister proceedings he aspired to the regiment, having no title thereunto,
otherwise than as blind fortune vouchsafed him the preferment: so when he was
possessed, but not interessed in the same, he uncased the crooked conditions
which he had covertly concealed, and in the end (as by the sequel you shall
see) did pull shame and infamy upon himself.

Vortigerne furnishes the tower with a garrison, he bewraieth his cruelty,
Aurelius and Pendragon brethren to the late king Constantius fly into Britain
Armorike, what common abuses and sins did universally concur with a
plentiful year, the Scots and Picts revenge the death of their countrymen,
Vortigerne is in doubt of his estate, the Britains send for succor to the
Saxons, they come under the conduct of Hengist and Horsus two brethren, where
they are assigned to be seated, they vanquish the Scots, disagreement in
writers touching the Saxons first coming into this Island. The second Chapter.
VOrtigerne, Vortigerne.
by such devilish means and unconscionable practices (as you hear) stealing
away the hearts of the people, was chosen and made king of Britain, in the
year of our Lord 446, 446
in the 3 consulship of Aetius, 1197 of Rome, 4 of the 305 Olympiad, 4112 of
the world, the dominicall letter going by F, the prime by 10, which fell about
the 21 year of the emperor Ualentinianus, the same year that Meroneus began
to reign over the Frenchmen. Before he was made king, he was earl or duke of
the Geuisses, a people which held that part of Britain where afterward the
west Saxons inhabited. Now when he had with treason, fraud, Hector Bo^t.
and great deceit at length obtained that for the which he had long looked, he
first of all furnished the tower of London with a strong garrison of men of
war.

Then studieng to advance such only as he knew to be his special friends and
favorers, he fought by all means how to oppress other, of whose good will he
had never so little mistrust, 415
and namely those that were affectionate toward the lineage of Constantine he
hated deadly, and devised by secret means which way he might best destroy
them. But these his practices being at the first perceived, caused such as had
the governance of the two poong gentlemen with all speed to get them over (as
ye have heard) Fabian.
into Britain Armorike, there to remain out of danger with their uncle the
king of that land. Diverse of the Britains also, that knew themselves to be in
Uortigerne his displeasure, sailed over daily unto them, which thing brought
Uortigerne into great doubt and fear of his estate.

It chanced also the same time, that there was great plenty of corn, Gyldas.
and store of fruit, the like whereof had not been seen in many years
before, and thereupon insued riot, strife, lechery, and other vices very
heinous, and yet accounted as then for small or rather none offenses at all.
Plenty of wealth accompanied with store of sins.
These abuses and great enormities reigned not only in the temporaltie, but
also in the spirituality and chief rulers in the same: so that every man
turned the point of his spear (even as he had consented of purpose) against
the true and innocent person. The commons also gave themselves to voluptuous
lust, drunkenness, and idle loitering, whereof followed fighting, contention,
envy, and much debate. Of this plenty therefore insued great pride, and of
this abundance no less hautinesse of mind, whereupon followed great
wickedness, lack of good government and sober temperancie, and in the neck
of these as a just punishment, death and mortality, so that in some countries
scarce the quick sufficed to bury the dead.

And for an augmentation of more mischief, Scots and
the Scots and Picts hearing how their countrymen through the false suggestion
of Uortigerne, Picts invade the Britains.
had been wrongfullie and most cruelly put to death at London, began with fire
and sword to make sharp and cruel war against the Britains, wasting their
country, spoiling and burning their towns, and giving them the overthrow in a
pitched field, as in the Scottish history more plainly appears. To be brief,
the Britains were brought into such danger and misery, that they knew not what
way to take for remedy in such present peril, likely to be ouerrun and
utterly

At length after they had thoroughly pondered all things, the more part of the
nobles with the king also were of this mind, that there could be no better way
devised, than to send into Germany for the Saxons to come to their aid: the
which Saxons in that season were highly renowned for their valiancie Gyldas.
Will. Malm. Beda. The Saxons sent for.
And so forthwith messengers were dispatched into Germany, the which with
money, gifts, and promises, might procure the Saxons to come to the aid of the
Britains against the Scots and Picts. The Saxons glad of this message, as
people desirous of intertainment to serve in wars, choosing forth a picked
company of Iustie young men under the leading of two brethren Hingist and
Horsus, 10000 has Hector Boet. Gyldas and Beda mention only but of 3 plates
or galleys, but Hector Boet. has 30.
got them aboard into certain vessels appointed

This was in the year of our Lord 449, 449 Will. Malm.
and in the second year of Uortigerns reign, as the most autentike writers
both British and English seem to gather, although the Scottish writers, and
name- Hector Boethius do vary herein, touching the just account of years, as
to the perusers of the writings as well of the one as the other may appear. But
others take it to be in the 4 year of his reign: Beda seems to agree, who
notes it in the same year that Martianus the emperor began to rule the
empire, which was (as appears by the consularie table) in the consulship of
Protogenes and Austerius, and third year of Meroneus king of France.

These Saxons thus arriving in Britain, were courteously received, and
heartily welcomed of king Uortigerne, who assigned to them places in Kent to
inhabit, and forthwith led them against the Scots Scots vanquished by the
Saxons.
began to renew the fight with such violence, that the enemies not able to
abide their fierce charge, were scattered and beaten down on each side with
great slaughter.

The king having gotten this victory, highly rewarded the strangers according
to their well deseruings, as by whose prowess he had thus vanquished his
enemies, which (as some write) were come as far as Stamford, Henry Hur^
and used at that time to fight with long darts and spears, whereas the Saxons
fought only with long swords and axes.

Some have written that the Saxons were not sent for, but came by chance into
the I Will, and the occasion to be this. Gal. Mon.
There was an ancient custom among the English Saxons a people in Germany, as
was also at the first among other nations, that when the multitude of them was
so increased, that the country was not able to sustain and find them, by
commandment of their princes, they should choose out by lots a number of young
and able personages fit for the wars, which should go forth to seek them new
habitations: and so it chanced to those, that they came into great Britain,
and promised to serve the king for wages in his wars.

Hengistus the Saxon shoots at the crown and scepter of the kingdom by
crafty and subtle practices, a great number of foreign people arrive in
Britain for the augmentation of his power, of the fair lady Rowne his
daughter, whereof Wednesdaie and Fridaie took their name, of the Iutes,
Saxons, and Angles, Vortigerne being inflamed with the love of Hengists
daughter forsakes his own wife and marries her, Vortigerne gives Hengist
all Kent, the Saxons come over by heaps to inhabit the land, the British
nobility move the king to avoid them, he is deprived of his kingdom, the
miserable destruction made by the Saxons in this land, skirmishes betwixt them
and the Britains. The third Chapter.
NOw Hengistus, Hengist purposes at the first to conquer the Britains.
being a man of great wit, rare policy, and high wisdom, understanding the
kings mind, who wholly trusted to the valiancie of the Saxons, and herewithall
perceiving the fruitfulness of the country, presently began to consider with
himself, by what wiles and craft he might by little settle here, and obtain
a kingdom in the I Will, and so establish the same to him and his fore ever.

Therefore first he endeavored with all speed possible Polydor.
to fense that part of the country, which was given him and his people, and to
enlarge and furnish it with garrisons appointed in places most convenient. After
this he did what he could to persuade the king, that a great power of men might
be brought over our of Germany, that the land being fortified with such
strength, the enemies might be put in fear, and his subjects holden in rest.
The king not foreseeing the hap that was to come, did not despise this counsel
tending to the destruction of his kingdom, and so was more aid sent for into
Germany: whereupon now at this second time shere arrived here 16 vessels
fraught with people, will. Malm. 18 Foists or plates say the Scottish writers,
and 5000 men in the same.
and at the same time came the lady Rowen or Ronix (daughter to Hengist) a
maid of excellent beauty and comeliness, able to delight the eyes of them
that should behold her, and specially to win the heart of Uortigerne with the
dart of concupiscence, The Saxons call these vessels C^ol^s, or Keeles, and our
old histories Cogiones.
whereunto he was of nature much inclined, and that did Hengist well perceive.

There came over into this land at that time, and soon after, three manner of
people of the Germane nation, as Saxons, Vitae or Iutes, and Angles, over the
which the said Hengist and Horse being brethren, The Vitae or Iutae are called
Ibitti. Alex. Now.
were capteines and rulers, men of right noble parentage in their country, as
descended of that ancient prince Woden, of whom the English Saxon kings do for
the more part fetch their pedigree, as lineallie descended from him, unto whom
also the English people (falselie reputing him for a god) consecrated the
fourth day of the week, as they did the sixth to his wife Frea: so that the
same days took name of them, the one being called Wodensdaie, and the other
Freadaie, which words after in continuance of time by corruption of speech
were somewhat altered, Wednesdaie, and Fridaie, whereof they came.
though not much, as from Wodensdaie, to Wednesdaie, and from Freadaie to Beda


But now to rehearse further touching those three people which at this time
came over into Britain out of Germany. Of the Uites or Iutes (as Beda
records) are the Kentishmen descended, and the people of the I Will of Wight,
with those also that inhabit over against the same I Will. Of the Saxons came the
east, the south, and the west Saxons. Moreover, Cot. Tacitus.
and the Northern men. That these Angles were a people of Germany, it
appears also by Cornelius Tacitus, who called them Anglij, which word is of
three syllables (as Polydor says:) but some write it Angli, with two
syllables. And that these Angli, or Anglij were of no small force and
authority in Germany before their coming into this land, may appear, in
that they are numbered amongst the twelve nations there, Lex Angliorum and
Werinorum, hoc est Thuringorum, The law of the Angles and Werinians that is to
say the Thuringers, which Thuringers are a people in Saxony, as in the
description of that country it may appear.

But now to the matter. Polydor.
Hengist perceiving that his people were highly in Uortigernes favor, Rowen,
or Ronowen Hengists daughter.
began to handle him craftily, devising by what means he might bring him in
love with his daughter Ronix, or Rowen, or Ronowen (as some write) which he
believed well would easily be brought to pass, because he understood that the
king was much given to sensual lust, Will Malm.
which is the thing that often blinds wise men's understanding, and makes
them to dote, and to lose their perfect wits: yea, and oftentimes

A great supper therefore was prepared by Hengist, at the which it pleased the
king to be present, and appointed his daughter, Gal. Mon.
when every man began to be somewhat merry with drink, to bring in a cup of
gold full of good and pleasant wine, and to present it to the king^^ saying;
Wassail. Which she did in such comely and decent manner, as she that knew how
to Wassail, what it signifies.
that she wished him well, and the meaning of it was, that he should drink
after her, ioining thereto this answer, Drink hail. Whereupon the king (as he
was informed) took the cup at the damsels hand, and drank.

Finally, this young lady behaved her self with such pleasant words,
comely countenance, and amiable grace, that the king beheld her so long, till
he felt himself so far in love with her person, that he burned in continual
desire to enjoy the same: insomuch that shortly after he forsook his own
wife, by the which he had three sons, Polydor Fabian.
named Uortimerus, Catagrinus, and Pascentius, and required of Hengist to have
his daughter, the said Rowen, or Ronowen in marriage. Hengist at the first
seemed strange to grant to his request, and excused the matter, Will. Malm.
for that his daughter was not of estate and dignity meet to be matched with
his majesty. But at length as it had been half against his will he
consented, and so the marriage was concluded and solemnized, all Kent being
assigned unto Hengist in reward, the which country was before that time
governed by one Guorongus (though not with most equal justice) which Guorongus
was subject unto Uortigerne, as all other the potentats of the I Will were.

This marriage and liberality of the king toward the strangers much offended
the minds of his subjects, and hastened the final destruction of the land. For
the Saxons now understanding the affinity had betwixt the king and Hengist,
came so fast over to inhabit here, that it was wonder to consider in how
short a time such a multitude could come together: so that because of their
great number and approved puissance in wars, they began to be a terror to
the former inhabitants the Britains. Will. Malm.
But Hengist being no less politic in counsel than valiant in arms, abusing
the kings lack of discretion, to serve his own turn, persuaded him to call
out of Germany his brother Occa and his son named Ebusa, Gal. says he was
Hengists son* and Ebusa his uncles son. Occa and Ebusalcaders of Saxons.
being men of great valor, to the end that as Hengist defended the land in the
south part: so might they keep back the Scots in the north.

Heerevpon by the kings consent, they came with a power out of Germany, and
coasting about the land, they sailed to the Isles of Orknie, and sore vexed the
people there, and likewise the Scots and Picts also, and finally arrived in
the north parts of the realm, now called Northumberland, where they settled
themselves at that present, and so continued there ever after: but none of them
taking upon him the title of king, Will. Malm. de Regib.
till about 99 years after their first coming into that country, but in the
mean time remaining as subjects unto the Saxon kings of Kent. After their
arrival in that province, they oftentimes fought with the old inhabitants
there, and overcame them, chasing away such as made resistance, and appeased
the residue by receiving them under allegiance.

When the nobles of Britain saw and perceived in what danger the land stood,
Fabian. The great numbers of strangers suspected to the Britains.
by the daily repair of the huge number of Saxons into the same, they first
consulted together, and after resorting to the king, moved him that some order
might be taken for the avoiding of them, or the more part of them, least they
should with their power and great multitude utterly oppress the British
nation. But all was in vain, for Uortigerne so esteemed and highly favored
the Saxons, and namely by reason of the great love which he bare to his wife,
that he little regarded his own nation, no nor yet any thing esteemed his
own natural kinsmen and chief friends, by reason whereof the Britains in
fine deprived him of all kingly honor, Uortigerne deprived.
after that he had reigned 16 years, and in his steed crowned his son
Uortimer.

Gyldas and Beda make no mention of Uortimer, Gyldas. Beda. H. Hunt.
but declare that after the Saxons were received into this land, there was a
covenant made betwixt them and the Britains, that the Saxons should defend the
country from the invasion of enemies by their knightly force: and that in
consideration thereof, the Britains should find them provision of a vittels:
wherewith they held them contented for (...). But afterward they began to pike
quarrels, as though they were not sufficiently furnished of their due
proportion of vittels, threatening that if they were not provided more largely
thereof, they would surely spoil the country. So that without deferring of
time, they performed their words with effect of deeds, The miserable
destruction made by the Saxons in this land.
beginning in the east part of the I Will, and with fire and sword passed forth,
wasting and destroieng the country, till they came to the uttermost part of
the west: so that from sea to sea, the land was wasted and destroyed in such
cruel and outrageous manner, that neither city, town, nor church was
regarded, but all committed to the fire: the priests slain and

Many of the Britains seeing the demeanor of the Saxons, fled to the
mounteins, of the which diverse being apprehended, were cruelly slain, and
other were glad to come forth and yield themselves to eternal bondage, for to
have relief of meat and drink to assuage their extremity of hunger. Some

But after that the Saxons were departed and withdrawn to their houses, the
Britains began to take courage to them again, issuing forth of those places
where they had lien hid, and with one consent So Gyldas was borne in the year
of our Lord 493.
which chanced the same year in the which Gyldas was borne (as he himself
witnesses) being about the 44 year after the coming of the Saxons into
Britain.

Thus have Gyldas and Beda (following by likelihood the authority of the same
Gyldas) written of these first wars begun between the Saxons and Britains.
But now to go forth with the history, according

Vortimer is created king in the room of his father Vortigerne, he gives the
Saxons sore and sharp battles, a combat fought between Catigerne the brother
of Vortimer and Horsus the brother of Hengist, wherein
THis Uortimer being eldest son to Uortigerne, Vortimer. Fabian. Galf. Mon.
Matthew. West. says 454.
by the common assent of the Britains was made king of Britain, in the year
of our Lord 464, 464
which was in the fourth year of the emperor Lea the fist, and about the sixth
year of Childericus king of France, as our common account runs, which is
far disagreeing from that whereof W. Harison does speak in his chronology,
who notes Uortigerne to be deposed in the 8 after his exaltation to the
crown, 454 of Christ, and 5 current after the coming of the Saxons, which
concurreth with the 4420 of the world, and 8 of Meroneus, as by his chronology
does more at large appear.

But to proceed, Uortimer being thus advanced to the government of the realm,
in all have made sore war against the Saxons, and gave unto them a great
battle upon the river of Derwent, The river of Derwent.
where he had of them the upper hand. And the second time he fought with them
at a place called Epiford, or Aglisthrop, Epiford.
in the which encounter Catagrine or Catigernus the brother of Uortimer, and
Horsus the brother of Hengist, after a long combat betwixt them two, either of
them slew other: but the Britains obtained the field (as says the British
history.) The third battle Uortimer fought with them near to the sea side,
The I Will of Tenet.
where also the Britains chased the Saxons, and drove them into the I Will of
Tenet. The fourth battle was stricken near to a moore called Colemoore, the
which was sore fought by the Saxons, and long continued with great danger to
the Britains, because the foresaid moore enclosed a part of their host so
strongly, that the Britains could not approach to them, being beaten off with
the enemies shot, albeit in the end the Saxons were put to flight, and many of
them drowned and swallowed up in the same moore. Beside these four principal
battles, Fabian.
Uortimer had diverse other conflicts with the Saxons, Tetford in Norfolk.
Colchester.
as in Kent and at Tetford in Norfolk, also near to Colchester in Essex: for
he left not till he had berest them of the more part of all such possessions as
before time they had got, so that they were constrained to keep them within
the I Will of Tenet, where he oftentimes assailed them with such ships as he then
had. When Ronowen the daughter of Hengist perceived the great loss that the
Saxons sustained by the martial prowess of Uortimer, she found means that
within a while the said Uortimer was poisoned, after he had ruled the Britains
by the space of 6 or 7 years and od months.

By the British history it should seem, that Uortimer before his death
handled the Saxons so hardly, keeping them besieged within the I Will of Tenet,
till at length they were constrained to sue for license to depart home into
Germany in safety: and the better to bring this to pas, they sent Uortigerne,
(whom they had kept still with them in all these battles) unto his son
Uortimer, to he a mean for the obteining of their suit. But whilst this
treaty was in hand, they got them into their ships, and leaving their wives
and children behind them, returned into Germany. Thus far Gal Mon. But how
unlikely this is to be true, I will not quake any further discourse, but
only refer every man to that which in old autentike historiographers of the
English nation is found recorded, Will. Malmel.
as in Will. Malmes. Henr. Hunt. Marianus, and others: unto whom in these
matters concerning the doings betwixt the Saxons and Britains, we may
undoubtedly and safely give most credit.

William Malmes. writing of this Uortuner, or Guortigerne, and of the wars
which he had against the Saxons, varieth in a manner altogether from Geffrey of
Monmouth, as by his words here following ye may perceive. Guortimer, the son
of Uortimer (says he) thinking not good long to dissemble the matter, for that
he saw himself and his countriemen the Britains prevented by the craft of the
English Saxons, set his full purpose to drive them out of the realm, and
kindled his father to the like attempt. He therefore being the author and
procurer, seven years after their first coming into this land, the league was
broken, and by the space of 20 years they fought oftentimes together in many
light incounters, but four times they fought puissance against puissance in
open field: (...) had the victory in this vatell says Ra. Hig. Horse and
Catigerne (...).
in the first battle they departed with like fortune, whilst the one part,
that is to mean, the Saxons lost their captain Horse that was brother to
Hengist,

In the other battles, 458
when the Englishmen went ever away with the upper hand, at length a peace was
concluded, Guortimer being taken out of this world by course of fatal death,
the which much differing from the soft and mild nature of his father, right
nobly would have governed the realm, if God had suffered him to have lived.
But these battles which Uortimer gave to the Saxons (as before W. Harison
gives his consent, referring the mutual slaughter of Horsus and Catigerne to
the 6 years of Martianus, and 455 of Christ. Polydor.
Howbeit Polydor Virgil says, that Uortimer succeeded his father, and that
after his fathers The Britains discomfited by the Scots.
they were easily discomfited and put to flight, so that all hope of defense
by force of arms being utterly taken away, as men in despair to prevail
against their enemies, they fled as sheep scattered abroad, some following one
captain and some another, getting them into desert places, woods and maresh
grounds, and moreover left such towns and fortresses as were of no notable
strength, as a preie unto their enemies.

Thus says Polydor Virgil of the first breaking of the wars betwixt the
Saxons and the Britains, which chanced not (as should appear by that which he
writes thereof) till after the death of Uortigerne. Howbeit he denies not
that Hengist at his first coming got seats for him and his people within the
county of Kent, and there began to inhabit. This ought not to be forgotten,
that king Uortimer (as Sigebertus has written) Sigebertus.
restored the christian religion after he had vanquished the Saxons, in such
places where the same was decayed by the enemies invasion, whose drift was not
only to ouerrun the land with violence, but also to erect their own laws and
liberties with out regard of clemency.

Vortigerne is restored to his regiment, in what place he abode during the time
of his sons reign, Hengist with his Saxons reenter the land, the Saxons and
Britains are appointed to meet on Salisburie plain, the privy treason of
Hengist and his power whereby the Britains were slain like sheep, the manhood
of Edol earl of Gloucester, Vortigerne i^ taken prisoner, Hengist is in
possession of three provinces of this land, a description of Kent. The fifth
Chapter.
AFter all these bloody broiles and tempestuous tumults ended, Matthew. West.
says 461.
Uortigerne was restored and set again into the kingdom of Britain, in the
year of our Lord 471. 471
All the time of his sons reign, he had remained in the parties now called
Wales, where (as some write) in that mean time he builded a strong castle
called Generon, or Guaneren, in the west side of Wales nere to the river of
Guana, upon a mounteine called Cloaricus, which some refer to be builded in
his second return into Wales, as shall be showed hereafter. And it is so much
the more likely, for that an old chronicle, which Fabian had sight of,
affirms, that Uortigerne was kept under the rule of certain governors to him
appointed in the town of Caerlegion, and behaved himself in such commendable
sort toward his son, Caerleon Arwiske.
in aiding him with his counsel, and otherwise in the mean season whilst his
son reigned, that the Britains by reason thereof began so to favor him, that
after the death of Uortimer they made him king again.

Shortly after that Uortigerne was restored to the rule of the kingdom, Matthew.
West. says 4000. He might easi^ie return, for except I be deceived he was
never driven out after he had once set foot within this I Will.
Hengist advertised thereof, returned into the land with a mighty army of
Saxons, whereof Uortigerne being admonished, assembled his Britains, and with
all speed made toward him. When Hengist had knowledge of the huge host of the
Britains that was coming against him, he required to come to a communication
with Uortigerne, which request was granted, so that it was concluded, that on
May day a certain number of Britains, and as many of the Saxons should meet
together upon the plain of Salisburie. Hengist having devised a new kind of
treason, when the day of their appointed meeting was come, caused every one of
his allowed number secretly to put into his hose a long knife (where it was
ordained that no man should bring any weapon with him at all) and that at the
very instant when this watchword should be uttered by him, Nempt your* sexes,
what if it were messes
Nempt your sexes, then should every of them pluck out his knife, and slay
the Britain that chanced to be next to him, except the same should be
Uortigerne, whom he willed to be apprehended, but not slain.

At the day assigned, the king with his appointed number or train of the
Britains, mistrusting nothing less than any such manner of vnhaithfull
dealing, came unto the place in order before prescribed, without armor or
weapon, where he found Hengist ready with his Saxons, the which received the
king with amiable countenance and in most loving sort: but after they were a
little entered into communication, Hengist meaning to accomplish his devised
purpose, gave the watchword, immediately whereupon the Saxons drew out their
knives, There died of the nobles of Britain 450. as Gal. sattl^
and suddenly fell on the Britains, and slew them as sheep being fallen
within the danger of woolues. For the Britains had no weapons to defend
themselves, except any of them by his strength and manhood got the knife of
his enemy.

Amongst other of the Britains, Ran. Cestren. Fabian.
there was one Edol earl of Gloucester, or (as other say) Chester, which got a
slake out of an hedge, or else where, and with the same so defended himself
and laid about him, Gal. says 70. Matthew. West. Ran. Cestren.
that he slew 17 of the town of Ambrie, now called Salisburie, and so saved
his own life. Uortiger was taken and kept as

William Malmesburie writes somewhat otherwise Will. Malm.
during whose reign, after the deceasse of his son Uortimer, nothing was
attempted against the Saxons, but in the mean time Hengist by colorable craft
procured his son in law Uortigerne to come to a banquet at his house, with
three hundred other Britains, and when he had made them well and warm with
often quaffing and emptieng of cups, and of purpose touched every of them with
one bitter tawnt or other, they first fell to multiplieng of malicious words,
and after

Thus by what mean soever it came to pass, truth it is (as all writers agree)
that Hengist got possession of Kent, and of other countries in this realm, and
began to reign there as absolute lord and governor, in the year of our Lord
(as some write) 476.
the same kingdom began in the year 455, and contained the country that
stretches from the east Ocean unto the river of Thames, having on the
southeast Southerie, and upon the west London, upon the northeast the river of
Thames aforesaid, Kingdom of Kent.
and the country of Essex.

The heptarchie or seven kingdoms of this land, Hengist causes Britain to be
peopled with Saxons, the decaie of Christian religion, the Pelagians with their
heretical and fall doctrine infect the Britains, a synod summoned in Gallia
for the redress thereof, the Scots assist the Britains against the Saxons, who
renew their league with the Picts, Germane and Lupus two bishops of Germany
procure the British army to be newly christened, the terror that the Britains
under bishop Germans fortunate conduct drove into the
HEngist and all other the Saxon kings which ruled (as after shall appear) in
seven parts of this realm, are called by writers Reguli, that is, little kings
or rulers of some small dominion: so that Hengist is counted a little king, who
when he had got into his hands the foresaid three provinces, he caused more
Saxons to come into Britain, and bestowed them in places abroad in the
country, by reason whereof the christian religion greatly decayed within the
land, for the Saxons being pagans, did that they could to extinguish the faith
of Christ, The decay of christian religion.
and to plant again in all places their heathenish religion, and woorshipping
of false gods: and not only hereby was the true faith of the Christians
brought in danger daily to decaie, but also the erroneous opinions of the
Pelagians greatly prevailed here amongst the Britains, by means of such
unsound preachers as in that troublesome season did set forth false doctrine
amongst the people, without all manner of reprehension.

Certain years before the coming of the Saxons, R^da.
that heresy began to spread within this land vrrie much, by the lewd
industry of one Leporius Agricola, the son of Seuerus Sulpitius (as Bale
says) a bishop of that lore. But Pelagius the author of this heresy was borne
in Wales, and held opinion that a man might obtain salvation by his own free
will and merit, and without assistance of grace, as he that was borne without
original sin, etc.

This erroneous doctrine being taught therefore, and maintained in this
troublesome time of wars with the Saxons, sore disquieted the godly minded
men amongst the Britains, Beda.
who not meaning to receive it, nor yet able well to confute the crafty and
wicked persuasions used by the professors thereof, thought good to send over
into Gallia, requiring of the bishops there, that some godly and profound
learned men might be sent over from thence into this land, to defend the cause
of the true doctrine against the naughty teachers of so blasphemous an error.
Whereupon the bishops of Gallia sore lamenting the miserable state of the
Britains, and desirous to relieve their present need, specially in that case
of religion, A synod called in Gallia.
called a synod, and therein taking counsel to consider who were most meet to
be sent, it was decreed by all their consents in the end, Germanus and Lupus.
that one Germane the bishop of Aurerre, and Lupus bishop of Trois should pass
over into Britain to confirm the Christians there in the faith of the
celestial grace. And so those two virtuous learned men taking their journey,
finally arrived in Britain, though not without some danger by sea, through
storms and rage of winds, stirred (as has been thought of the superstitious)
by the malice of wicked spirits, who purposed to have hindered their
proceedings in this their good and well purposed journey. After they were come
over, they did so much good with conuincing the wicked arguments of the
adversaries of the truth, by the invincible power of the word of God, and
holiness of life, that those which were in the wrong way, were soon brought
into the right path again.

About the same time also, Beda.
one Palladius Palladius.
was sent from Celestinus bishop of Rome, unto the Scots, to instruct them in
the faith of Christ, and to purge them from the heresy of the said Pelagius.
Constantine king of Scots.
This Palladius exhorted Constantinus the king of Scots, that in no wise he
should aid the Saxons being infidels against the Britains: whose exhortation
took so good effect, that the said Constantinus did not only forbear to
assist the Saxons, but contrarily help the Britains in their wars against
them, which thing did maintain the state of the Britains for a time from
falling into utter ruin and decaie. In the mean time, the Saxons renewed
their league with the Picts, H. Hunt. Beda.
so that their powers being joined together, they began afresh to make sore
wars upon the Britains, who of necessity were constreined to assemble an
army, and mistrusting their own strength, required aid of the two bishops,
Germane and Lupus, who hasting forward with all speed came into the army,
bringing with them no small hope of good luck to all the Britains there being
assembled. This was done in Kent.

Now such was the diligence of the bishops, that (the people being instructed
with continual preaching) in renouncing the error of the Pelagians, The army
of the Britains newly christened.
and over against the passage thorough the which the enemies were appointed to
come, he chose forth a fair vallie enclosed with high Alleluia, Alleluia.
thrice: and Polydor takes that river to be Trent. The Britains having thus
vanquished their enemies, gathered the spoil at good leisure, and gave God
thanks for the victory thus got without blood, for the which the holy bishops
also triumphed as best became them. Now after they had settled all things in
good quiet within the I Will, as was thought expedient, they returned into Gallia
or France, from whence they

By one author it should appear that this battle was woone against the Scots
and Picts, Matthew. West.
about the year of our Lord 448, 448.
a little before the coming of the Saxons into this land under Hengist, in
which year Germane first came hither to weed out the heresy of Pelagius, as
by the same author more at large is affirmed. Howbeit, some chronographers
allege out of Prosper and other, and note the first coming of Germane to have
been in the 429 year of Vincentius notes, which was the very year of the
coming of the Saxons: notwithstanding, when or wheresoever he died, it was not
long after his return into Gallia, upon his first journey made hither into
this land, who no sooner obtained the victory before mentioned, but word was
brought again unto him, that eftsoons the heresy of the Pelagians was spread
abroad in Britain, and therefore all the priests or clergy made request to
him that it might stand with his pleasure to come over again, and defend the
cause of true religion which he had before confirmed.

Heerevpon bishop Germane granted (...) to do, Germane returns again into
Britain.
and therefore taking with him one Seuerns (that was disciple unto Lupus, and
ordained at that tune bishop of Triers) took the sea, and came again into
Britain, where he found the multitude of the people steadfast in the same
belief wherein he had left them, and perceived the fault to rest in a few:
whereupon inquiring out the authors, he condemned them to exile (as it is
written) and with a manifest miracle by restoring a young man that was lame (as
they say) unto the right use of his lims, he confirmed his doctrine. Then
followed preaching to persuade amendment of errors, and by the general consent
of all men, the authors of the wicked doctrine being banished the land, were
delivered unto bishop Germane and to his fellow Seuerus, to conueie them away
in their company unto the parties beyond the seas, that the region might so be
delivered of further danger, and they receive the benefit of due amendment.

By this means it came to pass, that the true faith continued in Britain
sound and perfect a long time after. Things being thus set in good order, those
holy men returned into their countries, the forenamed bishop Germane went to
Rauenna to sue for peace to be granted unto the people of Britain Armorike,
where being received of the emperor Ualentinian and his mother Placida in most
reverend manner, he departed in that city out of this transitory life, Anno
450, as Vincentius notes, lib. 20. ca. 15.
to the eternal ioies of heaven. His body was afterward conveyed to the
city of Anxerre, where he had been bishop with great opinion of holiness for
his sincere doctrine and pure and innocent life. Shortly after was the
emperor Ualentinian slain by the friends of that noble man named Aetius, The
emperor Ualentin^an slain.
whom he had before caused to be put to death.

By this it may appear, that bishop Germane came into this realm both the
first and second time, whilst as well Hengist, as also Uortigerne were living:
for the said Ualentinian was murdered about the year of our Lord 454, 454
where the said kings lived and reigned long after that time, as may appear
both before and after in this present book.

What part of the realm the Saxons possessed, Vortigerne builds a castle in
Wales for his safety, Aurelius and Vter both brethren return into Britain,
they assalt the usurper Vortigerne, and with wild fire burn both him, his
people, his fort, and all the furniture in the same, Vortigerne commits
incest with his own daughter, feined and ridiculous woonders of S. Germane, a
sheepherd made a king. The seventh Chapter.
NOw will we return to Uortigerne, of whom we read in the British history,
that after the Saxons had constreined him to deliver into their hands a great
part of the south and east parts of the realm, so that they had in possession
London, York, Lincoln, and Winchester, Galfrid.
with other cities and towns, he not only fearing their puissance, but also
the return of Aurelius Ambrosius, and his brother Uter pendragon, withdrew him
into Wales, where he began to build a strong castle upon a mounteine called
Breigh, Caxton.
or after other Cloaric, Fabian.
near to the river of Guana, Polychron.
which is in the west side of Wales in a place within the compass of the same
hill called Generon or Guemeren. Mount Erir he calls it in one place of his
book.
Of the building of this castle, and of the hinderance in erecting the same,
with the monstrous birth of Merlin and his knowledge in prophesieng, the
British histories tell a long process, the which in Caxton, and in Galf^ides
books is also set forth, as there ye may see: but for that the same seems
not of such credit as deserves to be registered in any sound history, we have
with silence passed it over.

Whilst Uortigerne was busied in building of Aurelius and Uter brethren
return into Britain.
the two foresaid brethren Aurelius and Uter prepared a navy of ships, and an
army of men, by help of such their kinsmen and friends as they found in
Britain Armorike, and so passed the sea, and landed at Totnesse: whereof when
the Britains were advertised, the which were scattered abroad and severed in
diverse parties and countries, they drew unto the said two brethren with all
speed that might be. When Aurelius and his brother Uter perceived that they
were sufficiently furnished of Uortigerne burnt to death.
who having knowledge of their approach, had fortified his castle very
strongly with men, munition and vittels, but yet all auailed him nothing, for
in the end after his enemies had given diverse assaults to the said castle,
Wild fire not yet invented as some think.
they found means with wild fire to burn it down to the earth, and so
consumed it by fire together with the king, and all other that were within it.

Thus did Uortigerne end his life (as in the British Polychron.. A feined tale
of S. Germane.
that when the same S. Germane came into Britain (as before ye have heard)
this Uortigerne on a time should deny the same S. Germane harbor: but one
that kept the kings herds of cattle A caluish narration.
and lodged him, and slew a calfe for his supper, which calfe after supper was
ended, S. Germane restored again to life: and on the morrow by the ordinance
of God, he caused Uortigerne to be deposed from his kingly estate, and took
the heardman and made him king. But Ranulfe Hig. in his Polychronicon,
alleging Gyldas for his author, says that this chand to a ceking that ruled
in Powsey, whose name was Bulie, and not to Uortigerne: so that the successors
of that Bulie

Moreover it has been said (as one writer records) H. Hunt.
that when Uortigerne refused to hear the preaching of saint Germane, and fled
from him as he would have instructed him, one night there fell fire from heaven
upon the castle wherein the king was lodged, and so the king being destroyed
with the fall of the house and the fire together, was never after seen. But
these are fables, and therefore I pass Rei vere gestae memoria) will not bear
the burden or lode of a lie, since the same is too heavy: otherwise they would
have deposed matters conspiring with the truth.

Aurelius Ambrosius the brother to Constantius created king of Britain, he
incountereth with the Saxons, Hengist their general is beheaded, Occa his
son submits himself to Aurelius, he puts all the Saxons out of the
land, repaireth places decayed, and restores religion, the memorable monument
of the stones that are so much spoken of on Salisburie plain, the exploits of
Pascentius Vortigerns youngest son, Aurelius lies sick, Vter goes against
Pascentius and gives him the overthrow, Aurelius is poisoned of a counterfeit
moonke, the place of his burial, Polydor Virgils report of the acts and deeds
of Aurelius against the Saxons, Hengist is slain, Osca and Occa his two sons
make a foul spoil of the west part of the land, Vortimer dies, the
disagreement of writers touching matters interchangeablie passed between the
Britains and Saxons. The eight Chapter.
Aurelius Ambrose, Aurelius Ambrosius.
the second son of king Constantine, brother to Constantius, and murdered by
the treason of Uortigerne (as before ye have heard) was made king of Britain
in the year of our Lord 481, which was about the third year of the reign of
the emperor Zen^, Matt. West. says 466.
and the 23 of Childericus king of France, Odocer king of the Herulians then
usurping the government of Italy. When this Aurelius Ambrosius had dispatched
Uortigerne, and was now established king of the Britains, Gal. Mon.
he made toward York, and passing the river of Humber, incountred with the
Saxons at a place called Maesbell, and overthrew them in a strong battle, from
the which as Hengist was fleeing to have saved himself, Hengist taken and
beheaded.
he was taken by Edoll earl of Gloucester, or (as some say) Chester, and by him
led to Conningsborrow, where he was beheaded by the counsel of Eldad then
bishop of Colchester.

Howbeit there be some that write, Matthew. We^^.
how that Hengist was taken at another battle fought upon the river of Dune,
in the year of our Lord 489, and not in the chase of the battle which was
fought at Maesbell in the year 487, as the same authors do allege. Occa the
son of Hengist by flight escaped to York, and being there besieged, Occa.
at length was constreined to yield himself to Aurelius: who dealing
favorably with him, assigned unto him and other of the Saxons a country
bordering near to the Scots, which (as some affirm) was Galloway, where the
said Occa and the Saxons began to inhabit. Then did Aurelius Ambrosius put the
Saxons out of all other parts of the land, and repaired such cities, towns and
also churches, as by them had been destroyed or defaced, and placed again
priests, and such other as should attend on the ministry and service of God
in the same churches.

Also for a perpetual memory of those Britains that were slain on the plain
of Salisburie by the treason of Hengist, he caused stones to be fetched out of
Ireland, and to be set up in the same place where that slaughter was committed,
and called the place Stoneheng, Stoneheng.
which name continues unto this day. Fifteen thousand men (as Galfrid ^
says) were sent for those stones, Gal. Mon.
under the leading of Uter Pendragon the kings brother, who giving battle unto
Gillomanus king of Ireland that went about to resist the Britains, and would
not permit them to fetch away the same stones out of his country, discomfited
him and his people, and so (maugre his heart) brought the stones away with him.

Shortly after, Pascentius that was Uortigerns yoongest son, and had escaped
into Ireland (when Aurelius Ambrosius came into Britain) returned with a great
power of strange nations, and took the city of Meneuia in Wales, afterward
called saint David's, and did much hurt in the country with fire and sword. At
which time the same Aurelius Ambrosius lay sick at Winchester, and being not
able to go forth himself, desired his brother Uter Pendragon to assemble an
army of Britains, and to go against

In the mean while, (...)
a Saxon or some other stranger, whose name was Eopa or Copa, not long before
procured thereto by Pascentius, fained himself to be a Britain, and for a
color counterfeiting himself (...)
when he had reigned after most accord of writers ninteene years: his body
was conveyed to Stoneheng and there buried. Thus find we in the British and
common English histories of the doings of Aurelius Ambrosius, who (as ye have
hard) makes him a Britain Gyldas and Beda report him to be a Roman by
descent, as before is mentioned.

Polydor Virgil writes in this sort of the victorious acts atchiued by the
foresaid Aurelius Ambrosius. Polydor.
Then (says he) the Saxons having already gotten the whole rule of the I Will,
practiced their outrageous cruelties specially against the princes of the
Britains, to the end that the said princes being overcome and destroyed, they
might with more ease obtain

Thus an army being assembled, Aurelius Ambrosius went against them, and
valiantly assailed them, so that within the space of a few days they fought
three battles with great fierceness on both sides, in trial of their high
displeasures and uttermost forces, in which at length the Britains put the
Saxons to flight, Horsus the brother of Hengist being slain with a great
number of his people. But yet notwithstanding the enemies rage was little
abated hereby, for within a few days after receiving Hengist is slain.
Hengist at the first meeting of the battle being slain, with a (...) number
of the Germans. The fame of this (...) (says Polydor) is had in memory with
the inhabitants of those parties even unto this day, which victory did sore
diminish the power of the Saxons, insomuch that they began now to think it
should be more for their profit to sit in rest with that dishonor, than to
make any new wars to their great disadvantage and likelihood of present
loss.

Hengist left behind him two sons, Osca and and Occa, which as men most
sorrowful for the overthrow of fate received, assembled such power as they
could together, and removed therewith toward the west part of the I Will,
supposing it to be better for them to draw that way forth, than to return
into Kent, where they thought was already a sufficient number of their people
to resist the Britains on that side. Now therefore when they came into the west
parts of the land, they wasted the country, burnt villages, and absteined from
no manner of cruelty that might be showed. These things being reported unto
Aurelius Ambrosius, he straightwaies hasted thither to resist those enemies,
and so giving them battle, eftsoons discomfited them: Aurelius dies of a
wound
but he himself receiving a wound, died thereof within a few days after. The
English Saxons having thus sustained so many losses within a few months
together, were contented to be quiet now that the Britains stirred nothing
against them, by reason they were brought into some trouble by the death of
such a noble captain as they had now lost. Uortimer departs this life.
In the mean time Uortimer died, whom Uier surnamed Pendragon succeeded.

Thus has Polydor written of the forsaid Aurelius Ambrosius, not naming him to
be king of Britain, and differing in deed in sundry points in this behalf
from diverse ancient writers of the English histories: for where he attributes
the victory to the Britains in the battle fought, wherein Horsus the brother
of Hengist was slain, by the report of Polychronicon, and others, the Saxons
had the victory in that reincounter: and William of Malmesburie says, Will.
Malm.
that they departed from that batell with equal fortune, the Saxons losing
their captain Horsus, and the Britains their captain Katigerne (as before ye
have heard.) Katigerne.
But there is such contrariety in writers touching the doings betwixt the
Britains and Saxons in those days, as well in account of years, as in report
of things done, that setting affection aside, hard it is to judge to which
part a man should give credit.

For Fabian and other authors write, that Aurelius. Ambrosius began his reign
over the Britains about the year of our Lord 481, and Horsus was slain about
the year 458, 458
during the reign of Uortimer, as above is mentioned, so that it cannot stand
with the truth of the British histories (the which Fabian follows) that
Horsus was slain by Aurelius Ambrosius, if according to the same histories he
returned not into Britain, till the time there supposed. But diverse such
manner oh contrarieties shall ye find, in perusing of those writers that have
written the chronicles of the Britains and Saxons, the which in every point to
recite* would be too tedious and combersome a matter, and therefore we are
forced to pass the same over, not knowing how to bring them to any lust
accord for the satisfieng of all men's minds, specially the curious, which may
with diligent search satisfy themselves happily much better, than any other
shall be able to do in uttering his opinion never so much at large, and
agreeable to a truth. This therefore have we thought good as it were by the
way to touch what diverse authors do write, leaving it so to every man's
judgment to construe thereof, as his affection leads him. We find in the
writings of those that have registered the doings of these times, Sigebertus.
that Aurelius having vanquished the Saxons, restored churches to the
furtherance of the christian religion, Matthew. West. says 488.
which by the invasion of the Saxons was greatly decayed in diverse parts of
Britain, and this chanced in the days of the emperor Theodosius the yoonger.

The beginning of the kingdom of the Southsaxons commonly called Sussex, the
Britains with their rulers give battle to Ella the
IN the time of the foresaid Ella entered this land as Matt. West. says ann. 477
one Ella a Saxon with his 3 sons Cymen, Plettinger and Cissa, came out of
Germany with three ships, and landed in the south parts of Britain, and being
incountred with a power of Britains at a place called Cuneueshore, discomfited
them, and chased them unto a wood then called Andredescester, and so took that
country, and The kingdom of the Southsaxons does begin.
which had for limits on the east side Kent, on the south the sea and I Will of
Wight, on the west Hamshire, and on the north part Southerie. This kingdom
(after some) began under the foresaid Ella, about the 32 year after the first
coming of the Saxons into this land, which by following that account, should
be about 482
and about the year of our Lord 482. But other write, that it did begin about
the 30 year after the first coming of Hengist, which should be two years
sooner.

William Harison differing from all other, notes it to begin in the fourth
year after the death of Hengist, 4458 of the world, 2 of the 317 Olympiad,
1243 of Rome, 492 of Christ, and 43 after the coming of the Saxons: his words
are these. Ella erected

About the ninth year after the coming of Ella, the Britains perceiving that
he with his Saxons still enlarged the bounds of his lordship by entering further
into the land, assembled themselves together under their kings and rulers, and
gave battle to Ella and his sons at Mecredesbourne, where they departed with
doubtful victory, the armies on both sides being sore diminished, and so
returned to their homes. Ella after this battle sent into his country for
more aid.

But now touching Hengist, who as ye have heard, reigned as king in the
province of Kent, the writers of the Wnglish kings vary somewhat from the
British histories, both in report of the battles by him fought against the
Britains, and also for the manner of his death: as thus. After that Uortimer was
dead, who departed this life (as some write) in the first year of the emperor
Leo, Polych^^^
surnamed the great, and first of that name that governed the empire, who began
to rule in the year of our Lord 457, we find that Hengist and his son Occa
or Osca gathered their people together that were before sparkled, 457 Henry
(...) Will. Ma^t.
and having also received new aid out of Germany, fought with the Britans at a
place called Crekenford, where were slain of the Britains four dukes or
capteins, and four thousand of other men, the residue were chased by Hengist
out of Kent unto London, Britains^ (...)
so that they never returned afterward again into Kent: thus the kingdom of
Kent began under Hengist the twelfe year after the coming of the Saxons into
Britain, and Hengist reigned in Kent after this (as the same writers agree)
four and twenty years.

It is remembered that those Germans which lately were come over to the aid of
Hengist, Polychro^
being chosen men, mighty and strong of body, with their axes and swoords
made great slaughter of the Britains in that battle at Crekenford or Creiford,
which Britains were ranged in four battles under their aforesaid four dukes
or capteins, Hen. Hu^.
and were (as before is mentioned) slain in the same battle. About the sixth
year of the said emperor Leo, which was in the 17 year after the coming of
the Saxons, Hengist and his son Occa or Osca fought at Wipets field in Kent,
Wipets field. Matthew. West. This battle was fought anno 473. as the same Mat
West. notes. Wipet. H Hunt.
near to a place called Tongue with the Britains, and slew of them twelve dukes
or capteins, and on the part of the Saxons was slain beside common soldiers
but only one captain called Wipet, of whom the place after that day took
name.

This victory was nothing pleasant to the Saxons, by reason of the great loss
which they sustained, as well by the death of the said Wipet, as of a great
number of others: and so of a long time neither did the Saxons enter into the
confines of the Britains, nor the Britains presumed to come into Kent. But
whilst outward wars ceased among the Britains, they exercised civil battle,
falling together by the ears among themselves, one striving against another.
Finally, Hengist departed this life by course of nature, in the 39 year after
his first coming into Britain, Forty years says H. Hun^.
having proceeded in his business no less with craft and guile than with
force and strength, following therewith his native cruelty, so that he rather
did all things with rigor than with gentleness. After him succeeded a son
whom he left behind him, By this it is evident that he was not driven out of
the land after he had once set foot (...) it. Matt. West. H. Hunt. The city of
Andredescester.
who being attentive rather to defend than to enlarge his kingdom, never set
foot out of his fathers bounds, during the space of 24 years, in the which he
reigned.

About three years after the deceasse of Hengist, a new supply of men of
war came out of Germany unto the aid of Ella king of Sussex, who having his
power increased, besieged the city of Andredescester, which was very strong
and well furnished with men and all things necessary. The Britains also
assembling together in companies, greatly annoied the Saxons as they lay there
at ^^ege, laieng ambushes to destroy such as went abroad, and ceassing not to
give alarums to the camp in the night season: and the Saxons could no sooner
prepare them selves to give the assalt, but the Britains were ready to assail
them on the backs, till at length the Saxons dividing themselves into two
companies, appointed the one to give the assalt, and the other to encounter
with the army of the Britains without, and so finally by that means
prevailed, took the city, and destroyed man, woman and child. Neither so
contented, they did also utterly race the said city, so as it was never after
that day builded or readified again.

The east Angles kingdom begins, the arrival of Cerdic and Kenric with
five ships of war in this land, he puts the Britains to flight, the west
Saxons kingdom begineth, Vter Pendragon made king of Britain, the etymon
Moreover, The kingdom of the east Angles began not till Aurclius Co^^naus
reigned. 561
in the days of the aforementioned Aurelius Ambrosius, about the year of our
Lord 561, the kingdom of the east Angles began under a Saxon named Uffa. This
same kingdom contained Northfolke and Suffolk, having on the east and north
parts the sea,

FUrthermore, Cerdic. Will. Malm. 495 Fabian. Polychron.
about the year of our Lord 495, and in the eight year after that Hengist was
dead, one Cerdicus and his son Kenricus came (...) Malm.
He was at the first received with battle by the Britains, but being an old
skillful warrior, he easily beat back and repelled the inconstant multitude
of his enemies, and caused them to flee: by which good success he procured
both undoubted assurance to himself for the time to come, and to the
inhabitants good and perfect quietness. For they thinking good never after to

Thus ye may see, 529
that Aurelius Ambrosius did

After that Aurelius Ambrosius was dead, his brother Uter Pendragon (whom some
call Aurelius Uterius Ambrosianus) Matthew. West. notes. 500
was made king in the year of our Lord 500, in the seventh year of the
emperor Anastasius, and in the sixteenth year of Clodoueus king of the
Frenchmen. The cause why he was surnamed Pendragon, was, for that Merline the
great prophet likened him to a dragons head, that at the time of his nativity
marvelously appeared in the firmament at the corner of a blasing star, as is
reported. But others supposed he was so called of his wisdom and serpentine
subiltie, or for that he gave the dragons head in his banner. This Uter,
hearing that the Saxons with their capteins Occa or Otta the son of Hengist,
and his brother Osca had besieged the city of York, hasted thither, and
giving them battle, discomfited their power, and took the said Occa and Osca
prisoners.

From this varieth Hector Boethius in his chronicle of Scotland, Hector Boe^.
writing of these doing in Britain: for he affirms, that the counterfeit
moonke, which poisoned Aurelius Ambrosius, was suborned and sent to work that
feat by Occa, and not by his brother Pascentius: and further, that about the
selfsame time of Aurelius his death, his brother Uter Pendragon lay in Wales,
not as yet fully recovered of a sore sickness, wherewith of late he had been
much vexed. Yet the lords of Britain after the burial of Aurelius Ambrosius,
came unto him and crowned him king: and though he was not able to go against
the Saxons (which as then by reason of Aurelius Ambrosius his death were very
busy, and more earnest in pursuing the war than before) yet an army was
prepared and sent forth with all convenient speed under the leading of one
Nathaliod, a man neither of any great ancient house, nor yet of skill in
warlike affairs.

The noble men were nothing pleased herewith, as misliking altogether the lack
of discretion in their new king, and doubted sore, least in time to come he
would have more delight to advance the men of base degree, than such as were
descended of noble parentage. Yet because they would not put the state of the
common wealth in danger through any mutiny, they agreed to go forth with him
in that journey. Occa had advertisement given him by certain letters sent to
him from some close friends amongst the Britains of the whole matter: and
therefore in hope of the better speed, he hasted forth to encounter the
Britains, and so the whole army coming within sight of the other, they
prepared to the battle, and shortly after buckling together, the Britains
were soon discomfited, by reason that one of their chiefest capteins called
Gothlois disdaining to be at the appointment of Nathaliod, got him up to the
next hill with the next battle which he led, leaving the other Britains in all
the danger: which they seeing began by and by to flee. There died no great
number of the Britains, except those that were killed in the fight: for Occa
mistrusting what Gothlois meant by his withdrawing aside, would not suffer the
Saxons to follow the chase, but in the night following Gothlois got him away,
and rested not till he was out of danger. Occa then perceiving himslefe to have
the upper hand, sent an herald unto king Uter with a certain message,
threatening destruction to him and to his people, if he refused to do that
which he should appoint.

Uter perceiving what disloialtie rested in the hearts of his own subjects,
agreed that the matter might be committed to eight grave and wise courrestors,
four Britains and four Saxons, which might have full power to make an end of
all controversies and variances depending betwixt the two nations. Occa was
likewise contented therewith, whereupon were named on either part four
persons, of such wisdom, knowledge and experience, as were thought meetest
for the ordering of such a weighty matter. So that by the arbitrament, award
and doom of those eight persons authorized thereto, a league was concluded
upon certain articles of agreement, amongst the which the chiefest was, that
the Saxons from thencefoorth should quietly Hector Boethius.

But now to return unto Uter according to that we find in the British
histories, and to proceed after our own historians; we find, that when he had
vanquished the Saxons and taken their two chiefeteins prisoners, in process of
time he fell in love Gorolus duke of Cornwall.
wife to one Gorolus or Gorlois duke of Cornwall, the which duke he slew at
length near to his own castle called Diuulioc in Cornewell, to the end that
he might enjoy the said lady, whom he afterward married, and begot on her
that noble knight Arthur, and a daughter named Amie or Anna. Occa and Osca
escaping also out of prison assembled eftsoons a poer of Saxons, and made
war against the Britains, whereof Uter having advertisement Harding.
and slew them both in the field.

By that which Polydor Virgil writes, it should seem that Germane the bishop
of Auxerre came into Britain in the days of this Uter, by whose presence the
Britains had victory against the Saxons (as before ye have heard) after which
victory both rested from troubling either other for a time. The Polydor
supposes to be Blackamore Badon hill.
which divides the bishoprike of Durham from Yorkshire, having at the mouth
thereof an haven meet to receive such ships as come out of Germany, from
whence the Saxons looked for aid, having already sent thither for the same.

The Britains being thereof advertised, made have toward the place, and
besieged it on every side. They also lay the sea coasts full of soldiers, to
keep such of the enemies from landing as should come Gyldas makes mention,
and chanced the same year that he was borne, Gyldas.
which was in the 44 year after the first coming of the Saxons into this
land, the year of Grace 492, 492 The decease of Uter Pendragon.
and 15 indiction.

About the same time Uter departed out of this life (says Polydor) so that
this account agrees nothing with the common account of those authors, whom
Fabian and other have followed. For either we must presuppose, that Uter
reigned before the time appointed to him by the said authors, either else that
the siege of Badon hill was before he began to reign, as it should seem in
deed by that which Will. Malmesburie writes thereof, as hereafter shall be also
showed. Finally (according to the agreement of the English writers) Uter
Pendragon died by poison, when he had governed this land by the full term of
16 years, and was after buried by his brother Aurelius at Stoneheng, otherwise
called Chorea Gigantum, Stoneheng, Chorea Gigantum.
leaving his son Arthur to succeed him. Here ye must note that the Scottish
chronicles declare, that in all the wars for the more part wherein the
Britains obtained victory against the Saxons, the Scots aided them in the same
wars, and so likewise did the Picts, but the same chronicles do not only
vary from the British writers in account of years, but also in the order of
things done, as in the same chronicles more plainly may appear, and namely
in the discourse of the accidents which chanced during the reign of this Uter.
For whereas the British histories, as ye have heard, attribute great praise
unto the same Uter for his victories atchiued against the Saxons and their king
Occa, whom he slew in battle, and obtained a great victory, the Scottish
writers make other report, affirming in deed that by the presence of bishop
Germane he obtained victory in one battle against them: but shortly after
the Britains fought again with the Saxons, and were discomfited, although Occa
in following the chase over rashly chanced to be slain: after whose deceasse
the Saxons ordained his son named also Occa to succeed in his place, who to
make himself strong against all his enemies, sent into Germany for one
Colgerne, the which with a great power of Dutchmen came over into this our
Britain, and conquered by Occas appointment the country of Northumberland,
situate between Tine and Tweed, as in the Scottish chronicles may further
appear.

Also this is to be remembered, that the victory which was got against the
Saxons by the Britains, at what time Germane bishop of Auxerre was present:
Hector Boethius affirms (by authority of V^remond that wrote the Scottish
chronicles) to have chanced the second time of his coming over into this land,
where Beda avouches it to be at his first being here. Again the same Boethius
writes, that the same victory chanced in the days of Uter Pendragon. Which
can not be, if it be true that Beda writes, touching the time of the death of
the said Germane: for where he departed this life before the year of our Lord
459, as above is said, Uter Pendragon began not his reign till the year of
our Lord 500 or as the same Hector Boethius says 503, so that bishop Germane
was dead long before that Uter began to reign.

In deed some writers have noted, that the third battle which Uortimer fought
against the Saxons, was the same wherein S Germane was present, and procured
the victory with the cry of Alleluia, as before ye have heard. Which seems
to be more agreeable to truth, and to stand also with that which holy Beda
has written, touching the time of the being here of the said Germane, that
the opinion of other, which affirm that it was in the time of the reign of
Uter. The like is to be found in the residue of Hector Boethius his book,
touching the time specially of the reigns of the British kings that governed
Britain about that season. For as he affirms, Aurelius Ambrosius began his
reign in the year of our Lord 498, and ruled but seven years, and then
succeeded Uter, which reigned 18 years, and departed this life in the year of
our Lord 521.

Notwithstanding the premises, here is to be remembered, that whatsoever the
British writers have Osca. 34 says. Hen Hunt. in corrupted copres.
defending his kingdom only, and not seeking to enlarge it (as before is
touched.) After whose death his son Oath, and Irmenrike son to

Porth the Saxon arriueth at Portesmouth, war between Nazaleod king of the
Britains and the Saxons, the Britains are
NOw will we breefelie discourse Porth entered this land about the year of our
Lord 501 as Matthew. West. notes.
about the beginning of the said Uters reign, and slew a noble young man of
the Britains, and many other of the meaner sort with him. Of this Porth
Harison supposes the river to be called Pores, as for the word mouth, is the
fall of any fresh river into the sea.
as some have thought. Moreover, about 40 years after the coming of the
Saxons into this land with their leader Hengist, one Nazaleod, a mighty king
amongst the Britains, assembled all the power he could make to fight with
Certicus king of the West saxons, who understanding of the great power of his
enemies, required aid of Osca king of Kent, also of Elle king of Sussex, and of
Porth and his sons which were lately before arrived as ye have The Britains
overthrown.
he brake their army in pieces, and slew their king Nazaleod, and withal put
his people to flight. There died of the Britains that day 5000 men, Matthew.
West. Henr. Hunt. Stuff and Wightgar. Matthew. West. notes the year of their
arrival to be 514.
and the residue escaped by fleeing as well as they might. In the sixth year
after this battle, Stuff and Wightgar that were nephues to Certicus, came with
three ships, and landed at Certicesford, and overthrew a number of Britains
that came against them in order of battle, and so by the coming of those his
nephues being valiant and hardy capteins, the part of Certicus became much
stronger. About the same time Elle king of the Southsaxons departed this life,
after whom succeeded his son Cissa, of whom we find little left in writing
to be made account of.

About the year of our Lord 519, Henr. Hunt. Britains overthrown by the
Saxons.
and in the year after the coming of the Saxons 71, which was in the 26 year
of the emperor Anastasius, the Britains fought with Certicus and his son
Kenrike at Certicesford, where the capteins of the Britains stood to it
manfully: but in the end they were discomfited, and great slaughter was made
there of them by the Saxons, and greater had been, if the night coming on had
not parted them, and so many were saved.

From that day forward Certicus was reputed and taken for king of Westsaxons,
The kingdom of Westsaxons
and so began the same kingdom at that time, which was (as W. Harison notes)
in the year of Christ 519, after the building of Rome 1270, of the world 4485,
of the coming of the Saxons 70, of Justinius Anicius emperor of the east, the
first and third of the renowned prince Patricius Arthurus then reigning over
the Britains. The said kingdom also contained the countries of Wiltshire,
Summersetshire, Barkeshire, Dorsetshire, and Cornwall, having on the east
Hamshire, on the north the river of Thames, and on the south and west the Ocean
sea. Howbeit, at the first the kings of the Westsaxons had not so large
dominions, but they daily wan ground upon the Britains, and so in the end by
enlarging their confines, they came to enjoy all the foresaid countries, and
the whole at the last.

In the ninth year of the reign of Certicus, he eftsoons sought with the
Saxons at Certicesford aforesaid, Certicesford.
where great slaughter was made on both parts. This Certicesford was in times
past called Nazaleoy of the late remembered Nazaleod king of the Britains. About
this season at sundry times diverse great companies of the Saxons came over
into Britain out of Germany, and got possession of the countries of Mercia
and Eastangle: but as yet those of Mercia had no one king that governed them,
but were under certain noble men that got possession of diverse parts in that
country, by means whereof great wars and many incounters insued, with a
common waste of land both arable and habitable, whiles each one being
ambitiouslie minded, and heaping to themselves such powers as they were able to
make, by sword and bloodshed chose rather to have their fortune decided, than
by reason to suppress the rage of their unruly affections. For such is the
nature of men in government, whether they be interessed to it by succession,
or possessed of it by usurpation, or placed in it by lawful constitution,
(unless they be guided by some supernatural influence of divine conceit) if
they be more than one, they cannot away with equality, for regiment admits
no companion: but every one seeks to advance himself to a singularity of
honor, wherein he will not (to die for it) participate with another, which
may easily be observed in this our historical discourse.

The beginning of the kingdom of the Eastsaxons, what it contained, of Arthur
king of Britain, his twelve victories over the Saxons against whom he
maintained continual war, why the Scots and Picts envied him his roialtie
and empire, a league betwixt Arthur and Loath king of the Picts, Howell king of
little Britain aideth Arthur against Cheldrike king of Germany, who taking
the overthrow, is slain by the duke of Cornwall, the Picts are discomfited,
IN those days also the kingdom of the Eastsaxons Erchenwin.
the chief city whereof was London. It contained in effect so much as at this
present belongs to the diocese of London. The kingdom of the Eastsaxons.
One Erchenwin a Saxon was the first king thereof, the which was son to one
Offa, the sixth in lineall descent from one Saxnot, from whom the kings of that
country fetched their original. Harison notes the exact year of the
erection

AFter the deceasse of Uter Pendragon (as we do find in the British histories)
his son Arthur, Arthur.
a young towardlie gentleman, of the age of 15 years or thereabouts, began his
reign over the Britains in the year of our Lord 516, or as Matt. Westmin. 516
Matthew. West. has noted 518
says 517, in the 28 year of the emperor Anastasius, and in the third year
of the reigns of Childebert, Clothare, Clodamire, and Theodorike, brethren
that were kings of the Frenchmen. Of this

But truth it is (as diverse authors agree) that he held continual war
against them, and also against the Picts, the which were allied with the
Saxons: for as in the Scottish histories is contained, even at the first
beginning of his reign, the two kings of the Scots and Picts seemed to envy
his advancement to the crown of Britain, because they had married the two
sisters of the two brethren, Aurelius Ambrosius, and Uter Pendragon, that is to
say, Loath king of Picts had married Anne their eldest sister, and Conran king
of Scots had in marriage Alda their yoonger sister, so that because Arthur was
be gotten out of wedlock, they thought it stood with more reason, that the
kingdom of the Britains should have descended unto the sisters sons, rather
than to a bastard, namely Loath the Pictish king, which had issue by his wife
Anna, sore repined at the matter.

Wherefore at the first, when he saw that by suit he could not prevail, he
joined in league with the Saxons, and aiding them against Arthur, lost many of
his men of war being overthrown in battle, which he had sent unto the
succors of Colgerne the Saxon prince that ruled as then in the north parts.
But finally a league was concluded betwixt Arthur and the foresaid Loath king
of Picts, upon certain conditions, as in the Scottish history is expressed,
where ye may read the same, with many other things touching the acts of Arthur,
somewhat in other order than our writers have recorded.

The British authors declare, that Arthur (immediately after he had received
the crown of Dubright bishop of Caerleon) went with his power of Britains
against the Saxons of Northumberland, which had to their captain (as before is
said) one Colgrime or Colgerne, whom Arthur discomfited and chased into the
city of York, within which place Arthur besieged him, till at length the same
Colgrime escaped out of the city, York besieged.
and leaving it in charge with his brother called Bladulfe, passed over into
Germany unto Cheldrike king of that country, Cheldrike comes in aid of
Colgrime. Matt. Westminster. says but 700.
of whom he obtained succor, so that the said Cheldrike made provision of men
and ships, and came himself over into Scotland, having in his company
fifteen hundred sails one with an other.

When Arthur was advertised thereof, he raised his siege, and withdrew to
London, sending letters with all speed unto Howell king of little Britain in
France, that was his sisters son, requiring of him in most earnest wise his
aid. Howell incontinently assembled his people, Howell king of Britain
comes (...) in aid of Arthur.
to the number of fifteen thousand men, and taking the sea, landed with them
at Southampton, where Arthur was ready to receive him with great joy and
gladness. From thence they drew northwards, where both the hosts of Arthur and
Howell being assembled together, marched forward to Lincoln, which city
Cheldrike did as then besiege. Here Arthur and Howell assailed the Saxons with
great force and no less manhood, and at length after great slaughter made of
the enemies, Cheldrike overthrown in battle.
they obtained the victory, and chased Cheldrike (with the residue of the
Saxons that were left alive) unto a wood, where they compassed them about
within the same, in such wise, that in the end they were constreined to yield
themselves, with condition that they might be suffered to depart on foot to
their ships, and so avoid the land, leaving their horse, armor, and other
furniture unto the Britains.

Heerevpon the Britains taking good hostages for assurance, permitted the
Saxons to go their ways, and so Cheldrike and his people got them to their
ships, in purpose to return into their country: but being on the sea, they
were forced by wind to change their course, and coming on the coasts of the
west parts of Britain, they arrived at Totnesse, and contrary to the
couenanted articles of their last composition with Arthur, invaded the country
anew, and taking such armor as they could find, marched forth in robbing and
spoiling the people, till they came to Bath, which town the Britains kept and
defended against them, not suffering them by any means to enter there,
whereupon the Saxons environed it with a strong siege. Bath besieged.
Arthur informed hereof, with all speed hasted thither, and giving the enemies
battle, slew the most part of Cheldrikes men.

There were slain both Colgrime and Bladulfe, The Saxons overthrow Colgrime
and Bladulfe.
howbeit Cheldrike himself fled out of the field toward his ships, but being
pursued by Cador earl of Cornwall (that had with him ten thousand men) by
Arthurs appointment, Cheldrike slain by Cador duke of Cornwall.
he was overtaken and in fight slain with all his people. Arthur himself
returned from this battle foughten at Bath with all speed toward the marshes
of Scotland, for that he had received advertisement, how the Scots had besieged
K. Howell besieged by the Scots.
of Britain there, as he lay sick. Also when Cador had accomplished his
enterprise and slain Cheldrike, he returned with as much speed as was possible
toward Arthur, and found him in Scotland, where he rescued Howell, and
afterward pursued the Scots which fled before him by heaps.

About the same time, Guillomer.
one Guillomer king of Ireland arrived in Scotland with a mighty power of
Irishmen (near the place where Arthur lodged) to Guenhera.
that was near kinswoman to Cador earl of Cornwall.

In the year following, which some note to be 525, W Harison. 525.
he went into Ireland, and discomfiting king Guillomer in battle, he
constreined him to yield, and to acknowledge by doing his fealty to hold the
realm of Ireland of him. It is further remembered in those British histories,
Gothland.
that he subdued Gothland and Ileland, with all the Isles in and about those
seas. Also that he overcame the Romans in the country about Paris, with their
captain Lucius, and wasted the most part of all France, and slew in singular
combats

Arthur is resisted by Mordred the usurper from arriving in his own land, they
join battle, Gawaine is slain and his death lamented by Arthur, Mordred
takes flight, he is
KIng Arthur at his return into Britain, found that Mordred had caused
himself to be made king, and having alied himself with Cheldrike a Saxon (not
him whom Galfride, as ye have heard, Rather Cerdicke as Leland thinks.
supposes to have been wounded and slain before) was ready to resist his
landing, so that before he could come on land, he lost many of his men: but
yet at length he repelled the enemies, and so took land at Sandwich, where he
first arrived, and ioining in battle with his enemies, he discomfited them,
but not without great loss of his people: specially he sore lamented the
death of Gawaine the brother of Mordred, which like a faithful gentleman,
regarding more his honor and loiall truth than neerenesse of blood and
coosenage, chose rather to fight in the quarrel of his liege king and loving
master, than to take part with his natural brother in an unjust cause, and so
there in the battle wa slain, together also with Angussell, to whom Arthur
before time had committed the government of Scotland. Mordred fled from this
battle, and getting ships sailed westward, and finally landed in Cornwall
King Arthur caused the corpse of Gawaine to be buried at Dover Gawaine buried at
Dover
(as some hold opinion:) but William Malmesburie supposes, he was buried in
Wales, as after shall be showed. The dead body of Angussell was conveyed into
Scotland, and was there buried. When that Arthur had put his enemies to flight,
and had knowledge into what parts Mordred was withdrawn, with all speed he
reinforced his army with new supplies of soldiers called out of diverse
parties, and with his whole puissance hasted forward, not resting till he came
near to the place where Mordred was encamped, with such an army as he could
assemble together out of all parties where he had any friends. Here (as it
appears by John Leland, in his book entitled, The assertion of Arthur) it
may be douted in what place Mordred was encamped: but Geffrey of Monmouth
shows, that after Arthur had discomfited Mordred in Kent at the first
landing, it chanced so that Mordred escaped and fled to Winchester, whither
Arthur followed him, and there giving him battle the second time, did also put
him to flight. And following him from thence, fought eftsoons with him act a
place called Camblane, or Kemelene in Cornwall, or (as some authors have) near
unto Glastenburie.

This battle was fought to such proof, that finally Mordred was slain,
Richard Turner.
with the more part of his whole army, and Arthur receiving diverse mortal
wounds died of the same shortly after, when he had reigned over the Britains
by the term of 26 years. His corpse was buried at Glastenburie aforesaid, in
the churchyard, betwixt two pillars: where it was found in the days of king
Henry the second, about the year of our Lord 1191, which was in the last
year of the reign of the same Henry, more than six hundred years after the
burial thereof. He was laid 16 foot deep under ground, for doubt that his
enemies the Saxons should have found him. But those that dug the ground
there to find his body, after they had entered about seven foot deep into the
earth, they found a mighty broad stone with a leaden cross fastened to that
part which laid downwards toward the corpse, containing this inscription: Hic
iacet sepultus inclytus rex Arthurius in insula Aualoniae.

This inscription was graven on that side of the cross which was next to the
stone: so that till the cross was taken from the stone, it was unseen. His
body was found, not enclosed within a toome of marble or other stone
curiously wrought, but within a great tree made hollow for the nonce like a
trunk, the which being found and dug up, was opened, and therein were found
the kings bones, of such marvelous bigness, that the shinbone of his leg
being set on the ground, reached up to the middle thigh of a very tall man: as
a moonke of that abbeie has written, which did live in those days, and saw
it. But Gyraldus Cambrensis (who also lived in those days, and spoke with the
abbat of the place, by whom the bones of this Arthur were then found)
affirms, that by report of the same abbat, he learned, that the shinbone of
the said Arthur being set up by the leg of a very tall man (the which the
abbat showed to the same Gyraldus) came about the knee of the same man the
length of three fingers breadth, which is a great deal more likely than the
other. Furthermore the skull of his head was of a wonderful largeness,
Henricus Blecensis seu Soliacenfis. Io. Leland.
nephue to king Henry the second (by whose commandment he had serched for the
grave of Arthur) translated the bones as well of him as of queen Gueneuer,
being so found, into the great church, and there buried them in a fair double
toome of marble, laieng the body of the king at the head of the toome, and the
body of David Pow. page 238, 239.
that the bones of the said Arthur, and Gueneuer his wife were found in the I Will
of Aualon (that is, the I Will of Alps) without the abbeie of Glastenbury,
fifteen feet within the ground, and that his grave was found by the means of
a Bardh, whom the king heard at Penbroke singing the acts of prince Arthur,
and the place of his burial.

John Leland in his book entitled
SAxonicas toties qui fudit Mart cruento
Who vanquished Saxon troops so often, with battles bloody broiles,
Turmas, and peperit spolijs sibi nomen opimis,
And purchased to himself a name with warlike wealthy spoils,
Fulmineo toties Pictos qui contudit ense,
Who has with shiuering shining sword, the Picts so often dismayed,
Imposuitque iugum Scoti ceruicibus ingens:
And eke unwieldy servile yoke on neck of Scots has laid:
Qui tumidos Gallos, Germanos quique feroces
Who Frenchmen puffed with pride, and who the Germans fierce in fight
Perculit, and Dacos bello confregit aperto:
Discomfited, and danted Danes with maine and martial might:
Denique Mordredum e medio qui sustulit illud
Who of that murdring Mordred did the vital breath expel,
Monstrum, horrendum, ingens, dirum, saeuum que tyrannum,
That monster grisly, loathsome, huge, that diresome tyrant fell,
Hoc iacet extinctus monumento Arthurius alto,
Here liuelesse Arthur lies intoomd, within this stately hearse,
Militiae clarum decus, and virtutis alumnus:
Of chiuairie the bright renown, and virtues nursling fearse,
Gloria nunc cuius terram circumuolat omnem,
Whose glory great now over all the world does compass fly,
Aetherijque petit sublimia tecta Tonantis.
And of the airie thunder skales the lofty building hie.
Vos igitur gentis proles generosa Britannae,
Therefore you noble progeny of Britain line and race,
Induperatoriter magno assurgite vestro,
Arise unto your emperor great, of thrice renowned grace,
Et tumulo sacro roseas inferte corollas,
And cast upon his sacred toome the roseall garlands gaie,
Officij testes redolentia munera vestri.
That fragrant smell may witness well, your duties you displaie.
These verses I have the more willingly inserted, for that I had the same
delivered to me turned into English by master Nicholas Roscarocke, both right
aptly yielding the sense, and also properly answering the Latin, verse for
verse.

Upon what occasion the grave of king Arthur was sought for, the folly of such
discovered as believed that he should return and reign again as king in
Britain, whether it be a fiction or a verity that there was such an Arthur or
no; discordance among writers about the place of Gawains burial and Arthurs
death; of queen Gueneuer the wife of king Arthur, her beauty and dishonest
life, great disagreement among writers touching Arthur and his wives to the
impeachment of the history, of his life and death. The xiiij. Chapter.
THe occasion that moved king Henry the second to cause his nephue the
foresaid abbat to search for the grave of king Arthur, was, for that he
understood by a Welsh minstrell or Bardh (as they call him) that could sing
many histories in the Welsh language of the acts of the ancient Britains, that
in the forsaid churchyard at Glastenburie, betwixt the said two pillars the
body of Arthur was to be found sixteen foot deep under the ground. Gyraldus
Cambrensis affirms, that the tree in the which Arthurs body was found so
enclosed, was an oak, but other suppose that it was an alder tree, because that
in the same place a great number of that kind of trees do grow, and also for
that it is not unknown, that an alder lieng under ground where moisture is,
will long continue without rotting.

By the finding thus of the body of Arthur buried (as before ye have heard)
such as hitherto believed that he was not dead, but conveyed away by the
fairies into some pleasant place, As for example in a cave near a water called
pond perilous at Salisburie, where he and his knights should sleep armed,
till an other knight should be borne that should come and awake them.
where he should remain for a time, and then to return again, and reign in
as great authority as ever he did before, might well perceive themselves
deceived in crediting so vain a fable. But yet (where it might otherwise be
doubted, whether any such Arthur was at all, as the British histories mention,
because neither Gyldas nor Beda in their woorks speak any thing of him) it
may appear, the circumstances considered, that suerly such one there was of
that name, hardy and valiant in arms, though not in diverse points so famous
as some writers paint him out. William Malmesburie a writer of good credit and
authority amongst the learned, has these words in his first book entitled
De regibus Anglorum, Will. Malme. lib. 1. de regibus Ang.
saying: But he being dead [meaning Uortimer] the force of the Britains waxed
feeble, their decayed hope went backward apace: and even then suerlie had they
gone to destruction, if Ambrosius (who alone of the Romans remained yet alive,
and was king after Uortigerne) had not kept under and stayed the lofty
barbarous people, that is to say the Saxons, by the notable aid and assistance
of the valiant Arthur.

This is the same Arthur, of whom the trifling tales of the Britains even to
this day fantasticallie do descant and report woonders: but worthy was he
doubtless, of whom feined fables should not have so dreamed, but rather that
true histories might have set forth his worthy praises, as he that did for a
long season sustain and hold up his country that was ready to go to utter
ruin and decaie, encouraging the bold hearts of the Britains unto the war,
and finally in the siege of Badon hill, he set upon nine hundred of the
enemies, and with incredible slaughter did put them all to flight. On the
contrary part, the English Saxons, although they were tossed with sundry hops
of fortune, yet still they renewed their bands with new supplies of their
countriemen that came out of Germany, and so with bolder courage assailed
their enemies, and by little and little causing them to give place, spread
themselves over the whole I Will. For although there were many battles, in the
which sometime the Saxons and sometime the Britains got the better, yet the
greater number of Saxons

Here is also to be noted, that where the British history declares, that
Gawaine or Gallowine being slain in the battle fought betwixt Arthur and
Mordred in Kent, Gawaine where he is buried.
was buried at Dover, so that his bones remained there to be showed a long time
after: yet by that which the foresaid William Malmesburie writes De regibus
Anglorum, Will. Malm. lib. 3. de regib.
the contrary may seem true: his words are these. Then (says he) in the
province of Wales, which is called Rosse, the sepulture of Gallowine was found,
who was nephue to Arthur by his sister, not going out of kind from so worthy
an uncle. He reigned in that part of Britain which unto this day is called
Walwichia, a knight for his high prowess most highly renowned, but expelled
out of his kingdom by the brother and nephue of Hengist, Thus says William
Malmesburie.

But here you must consider, that the said Malmesburie departed this life
about the beginning of the reign of king Henry the second, certain years
before the bones of Arthur were found (as ye have heard.) But omitting this
point as needles to be controuerssed,

Some judge that she took her name of her excellent beauty, because Guinne or
Guenne in the

Arthur had two wives (as Gyraldus Cambrensis affirms) of which the latter
(says he) was buried with him, and her bones found with his in one sepulcher,
but yet so divided, that two parts of the toome toward the head were appointed
to receive the bones of the man, and the third part toward the feet contained
the woman's bones, apart by themselves. Here is to be remembered, that Hector
Boethius writes otherwise of the death of Arthur than before in this book is
mentioned, and also that Gueneuer being taking prisoner by the Picts, was
conveyed into Scotland, where finally she died, and was there buried in Angus,
as in the Scottish chronicles further appears. And this may be true, if he had
three sundry wives, each of them bearing the name of Gueneuer, as sir John
Price does avouch that he had. Now because of contrariety in writers touching
the great acts atchiued by this Arthur, and also for that some difference there
is amongst them, about the time in which he should reign, many have doubted
of the whole history which of him is written (as before ye have heard.) But
others there be of a constant belief, who hold it for a grounded truth, that
such a prince there was; and among all other a late writer, David Pow. page
238, 239.
who falling into necessary mention of prince Arthur, frames a speech
apologeticall in his and their behalf that were princes of the British blood,
discharging a short but yet a sharp inuectiue against William Paruus, Polydor
Virgil, and their accomplices, whom he accuses of lieng toongs, envious
detraction, malicious slander, reproachful and venomous language, wilful
ignorance, dogged envy, and cankerd minds; for that they speak irreverently
and contrary to the known truth concerning those thrisenoble princes. Which
defensitiue he would not have deposed, but that he takes the monuments of their
memories for undoubted verities.

The British histories and also the Scottish chronicles do agree, that he lived
in the days of the emperor Justinian, about the fifteenth year of whose
reign he died, which was in the year of our Lord 542, 542
as diverse do affirm. Howbeit some write farther from all likelihood, that
he was about the time of the emperor Zeno, who began his reign about the year
of our Lord 474. The writer of the book entitled Aurea historia affirms,
Aurea historia. I. Leland.
that in the tenth year of Cerdicus king of Westsaxons, Arthur the warrior
rose against the Britains. Also Diouionensis writes, that Cerdicus fighting
oftentimes with Arthur, if he were overcome in one month, he arose in an other
month more fierce and strong to give battle than before. At length Arthur
wearied with irkesomnes, after the twelfth year of the coming of Cerdicus,
gave unto him upon his homage done and fealty received, the shires of
Southampton and Somerset, the which countries Cerdicius named Westsaxon.
Westsaxon.
This Cerdicius or Cerdicus came into Britain about the year of your Lord
495. In the 24 year after his coming hither, that is to say, about the year
of our Lord 519, he began his reign over the Westsaxons, and governed them as
king by the space of 15 years, as before ye have heard. But to follow the
course of our chronicles accordingly as we have began, we must allow of their
accounts herein as in other places, and so proceed.

The decaie of christian religion and receiving of the Pelagian heresy in
Britain by what means they were procured and by whom redressed: Constantine
succeeds Arthur in the kingdom, civil war about succession to the crown,
the chalengers are pursued and slain, Constantine is unkindly killed of his
kinsman, a bitter and reproachful inuectiue of Gyldas against the British
rulers of his time, and namely against Constantine, Conan that slew
Constantine reigns in Britain, his virtues and vices, his
IN this mean while that the realm was disquieted with sore and continual
wars The heresy of the Pelagians revived, Hist. Mag. Dubritius and David
learned bishops.
which began again to be broched by diverse naughty persons. But Dubritius
that was first bishop of Landaffe, and after archbishop

AFter the death of Arthur, Constantine.
his coosine Constantine the son of Cador, duke or earl of Cornwall began
his reign over the Britains, in the year of our Lord 542, 542
which was about the 15 year of the emperor Iustinianus almost ended, the 29
of Galfrid. Matthew. West.
Arthur when he perceived that he should die, ordained this Constantine to
succeed him, and so by the consent of the more part of the Britains he was
crowned king: but the sons of Mordred sore repined thereat, as they that
claimed the rule of the land by just title and claim of inheritance to them
from their father descended. Hereupon followed civil war, Civil war.
so that diverse battles Aurelius Conanus. Constantine slain.
who ioining with him in battle slew him in the field, after he had reigned
four years. His body was conveyed to Stonheng, and there buried beside his
ancestour Uter Pendragon.

Of this Constantine that seems to be meant, which Gyldas writes in his book
entitled De excidio Britanniae, Gyldas.
where inueieng against the rulers of the Britains in his time, he writes
thus: Britain has kings, but the same be tyrants; judges it has, but they be
wicked, oftentines peeling and harming the innocent people, revenging and
defending, but whom? such as be gu^ltie persons and robbers; having many
wives, but yet breaking wedlock; oftentimes swearing, and yet for swearing
themselves; vowing, and for the more part lieng; warring, but mainteining
civil and unjust wars; pursuing indeed thieves that are abroad in the
country, and yet not only cherishing those that sit even at table with them,
but also highly rewarding them: giving alms largely, but on the other part
heaping up a mighty mount of sins; sitting in the seat of sentence, but
seldom seeking the rule of righteous judgment; despising the innocent and
humble persons, and exalting so far as in them lies, even up to the heavens,
most bloody and proud murderers, thieves and adulterers, yea the very
professed enemies of God; if he would so permit: keeping many in prison, whom
they oppress, in loding them with irons, through craft rather to serve their
own purpose, than for any gilt of the persons so imprisoned: taking solemn
oths before the altars, and shortly after, despising the same altars as vile
and filthy stones.

Of this heinous and wicked offense Constantine the tyrannical whelpe of the
lioness of Devonshire is not ignorant, who this year, after the receiving of
his dreadful oath, whereby he bound himself that in no wise he should hurt his
subjects (God first, and then his oath, with the company of saints, and his
mother being there present) did notwithstanding in the reverent laps of the two
mothers, as the church, and their carnal mother, under the coule of the holy
abbat, devour with sword and spear in stead of teeth, the tender sides, yea
and the entrails of two children of noble and kingly race, and likewise of
their two governors, yea and that (as I said) amongst the sacred altars: the
arms of which persons so slain, not stretched forth to defend themselves
with weapons (the which few in those days handled more valiantly than they)
but stretched forth (I say) to God and to his altar in the day of judgment,
shall set up the reverent ensigns of their patience and faith at the gates of
the city of Christ, which so have covered the seat of the celestial
sacrifice, as it were with the red mantle of their cluttered blood.

These things he did not after any good deeds done by him deserving praise:
for many years before, overcome with the often and changeable filths of
adultery, and forsaking his lawful wife contrary to the laws of God, etc:
he now brought forth this crime of quelling his own kinsmen, and violating
the church, but neither being loosed from the snares of his former evils, he
increases the new with the old. Thus in effect has Gyldas written of this
Constantine, with more: for turning his tale to him, he reproves him of his
faults, and counsels him to repent.

AFter that Aurelius Conanus had slain the foresad Constantine, Conanus.
as in the British histories is mentioned, the same Conan was made king of
Britain in the year of our Lord 546, 546.
in the 20 year of Iustinianus, and in the 33 of the reign of Childebert king
of the Frenchmen. This Aurelius Conanus (as is recorded by some writers) was of
a noble heart, free and liberal, but given much to the maintenance of strife
and discord amongst his people, light of credit, and namely had an open ear
to receive and hear the reports of such as accused other. Moreover he was
noted of cruelty, as he that took his uncle, Matthew. West. writes that he
reigned 30. years.
who of right should have been king, and kept him in prison, and not so
satisfied slew in tyrannous manner the two sons of his said uncle. But God would
not suffer him long to enjoy the rule of the land in such unjust dealing, for
he died after he had reigned the space of two years, and left a son behind
him called Uortiporus, which succeeded him in the kingdom, as authors do
record. Of this Aurelius Conanus Gyldas writes, calling unto him after he had
made an end with his predecessor Constantine, saying in this wise: And thou
lions whelpe, as says the prophet, Aurelius Conanus what do thou? Art thou
not swallowed up in the filthy mire of murdering thy kinsmen, of committing
fornications and adulteries like to the And after these reprehensions, with
further threatenings of Gods vengeance, he exhorted him to amendment of life,
and so proceeds to talk with Uortiporus, whom he names the king, or rather
the tyrant of Southwales, as after shall be rehearsed.

The beginning of the kingdom of Brenitia, of whom the king of Kent, Mertia,
and west Saxons descended, Ida the Saxon commended, the original of the
kingdom of Deira, the circuit and bounds thereof, of Ella the governor of the
same, when the partition of the kingdom of Northumberland chanced; Vortiporus
reigns over the Britains, he vanquisheth the Saxons; Gyldas sharply
reprooueth Vortiporus for many grievous
IN the year of the Lord 547, Ida.
which was about the first year of the reign of Aurelius Conanus, 547
the kingdom of Brenitia bagan under a H. Hunt. The kingdom of Brenitia. began.
and descended of Woden, For where the said Woden had three sons, Weldecius,
Withlegris, and Beldecius; of the first, the kings of Kent were lineallie
extracted: of the second, the kings of Mertia: and of the third son came the
kings of Westsaxon, and also of him was this Ida descended, being the ninth in
lineall succession from the said Beldecius and the tenth from Woden. The same
Ida was undoubtedly

About the same time, Ella.
or rather about 14 years after, one Ella a Saron also reigned as king in
Diera, 561. The beginning of the kingdom of Deira.
which kingdom began at the said river of Tine in the north, and ended at the
river of Humber toward the south. These two kingdoms were sometime governed by
two several kings, and afterward at other times they were joined in one, and
governed by one only king, and named the kingdom of Northumberland, which in
process of time was much enlarged, so that it included the shires of York,
Notingham, Darbie, Lancaster, the bishoprike of Durham, Copland, and other
countries betwixt the east and the west seas, even unto the river of Mersie.
The river of Mersie.
The foresaid Ella was son to Iffus, being descended from Woden, as the 12 in
succession from him, though not by right line as William Malmesburie has
noted. Ida (as the same Malmesburie does testify) reigned 14 years.

Now Ella who was successor to Ida (as he says) reigned thirty years, and
very valiantly enlarged his kingdom. Matthew. West.
But one author writes how Ida reigned but 12 years, and that he builded the
castle of Bamburge, first fensing it with pales, and after with a wall of
stone. The same Ida had by his wife six sons, begotten in lawful bed, Hen.
Hunt.
Ada, Ebric, Theodoric, Athelric, Osmer, and Theofred. Matt. West.
Moreover he begat of certain concubines (which he kept) six bastard sons,
Oga, Aleric, Ettha, Osbale, Segor, and Segother. These came altogether into
this land, and arrived at Flemesburke with forty ships, as Matthaeus
Westmonasteriensis has recorded. The partition of the kingdom of
Northumberland chanced after the deceasse of Ida, as the same author
signifies: for Ada the son of the foresaid Ida succeeded his father in the
kingdom of Brenitia, reigning therein seven years: and Ella the son of
Histria, a most valiant duke, began to govern Deira, as both the said Matthew.
Westminster. and other do affirm.

VOtiporus the son of Aurelius Conanus succeeded his father, Vortiporus.
and began to reign over the Britains, in the year of our Lord 576, in the
11, year of the emperor Flauius Anicius Justinius, in the fourth year of the
reign of Childeric king of France, Matthew. West. notes 578.
and in the fourth year of Clephis the Gothish king in Italy. This Uortiporus
vanquished the Saxons in battle, as the British histories make mention, and
valiantly defended his land and subjects the Britains, from the danger of them
and other their allies. In the time of this kings reign, the foresaid Ella
began to rule in the south part of the kingdom of Northumberland called Deira,
as before is mentioned, according to the account of some authors, who also take
this Uortiporus to begin his reign in the year 548. After that Uortiporus had
ruled the Britans the space of 4 years, Matthew. West. notes 3 years
he departed this life, and left no issue behind him to succeed him in the
kingdom.

Against this Uortiporus Gyldas also whetting his tongue, begins with him
thus: And why stand thou as one stark amazed? Thou (I say) Uortiporus the
tyrant of Southwales, like to the panther in manner and wickedness diversely
spotted as it were with many colors, with thy hoarie head in thy throne, full
of deceits, crafts and wiles, and defiled even from the lowest part of thy
body to the crown of thy head, with diverse and sundry murders committed on
thine own kin, and filthy adulteries, thus proouing a naughty son of a
good king, as Manasses was to Ezechias. How chances it that the violent
streams of sins which thou swallowest up like pleasant wine, or rather art
devoured of them, (the end of thy life by little and little now drawing near)
can not yet satisfy the? What meanest thou that with fornication of all evils,
as it were the full heap, thine own wife being put away, thou by her honest
death dooest oppress thy soul with a certain burden that can not be
avoided, of thine unshamefast daughter? Consume not (I pray thee) the residue
of thy days to the offense of God, etc. These and the like words uttered he,
exhorting him to repentance, with admonitions taken out of the scriptures both
for his comfort and warning.

If the circumstance of this that Gyldas writes of Uortiporus be marked, it
may be perceived, that Geffrey of Monmouth, and also Matthew of Westminster,
the author of the flowers of histories, are deceived, in that they take him to
be the son of Aurelius Conanus: and rather it may be gathered, that not only
the same Aurelius Conanus and Uortiporus, but also Constantinus, yea and
Cuneglasus, and Maglocunus, of the which he also entreats (as partly shall
be hereafter touched) lived and reigned

Malgo reigns over the Britains, the noble qualities wherewith he was
beautified by his filthy sins are blemished, Gyldas
AFter the deceasse of Uortiporus, Malgo.
Malgo the nephue of Aurelius Conanus (as some write) Matthew. West. has noted
581
was made king of Britain, and began his reign over the Britains, in the 580
in the fifteenth year of the emperor Justinian, and in the 37 year of the
reign of Childerike king of the Frenchmen. This Malgo is reported to have
been the comeliest gentleman in beauty and shape of personage that was to be
found in those days amongst all the Britains, and therewith of a bold and
hardy courage. Gal. Mon.
He manfully defended the country which he had in governance from the malice
of the Saxons, and subdued the out Isles,

It seems that this Malgo is named by Gyldas, Maglocunus, Matt. Westminster.
counts not cast five years to his reign though other affirm that he reigned
35 years.
the which Gyldas (before he speaks of him) inueieth against one Cimeglasus,
whom he reprooueth, for that he warred both against God and man: against God,
with grievous sins, as namely adultery, in forsaking the company of his
lawful wife, and keeping to concubine a sister of hirs, that had professed
chastilie: and against man with material armor and weapons, which he used to
the destruction of his own countrymen, with whom he kept wars, and not
against the enemies of the common wealth.

From Cuneglasus he comes to the foresaid Magl^cunus, whom he names the
dragon of the Isles, and the expeller of many tyrants, not only out of their
kingdoms, but also out of life, the last of whom he treats (as he himself
says) but the first in all mischief and evil, greater than many in power,
and likewise in malice: very liberal in giving, but more plentiful in sin,
strong and valiant in arms, but stronger in destruction of his own soul. And
so proceeding, charge him with the sin of the Sodomits, and sore blames
him, for that where it had pleased God to make him higher than all other dukes
of Britain in kingdom and degree, he did not show himself better, but
contrarily far worse than they both in manners and conditions. He declares
also a little after, that this Maglocune in his young years slew in battle
his uncle being king, with the most valiant soldiers in manner that he had.
Also that where the said Maglocune took upon him the profession of a moonke,
he after renounced the same, and became a woorsse liver than ever he was
before, abandoning his wife, and keeping his brothers sons wife, while her
husband yet lived.

Thus by that which Gyldas writes of the kings and rulers of the Britains,
which lived in his days, ye may perceive that they were given to all manner of
wickedness, and namely to civil dissension, rapine, adultery, and
fornication: so that it may be thought, that GOD stirred up the Saxons to be a
scourge to them, and to work his just vengeance upon them for their
wickednesses and abominable offenses daily committed against his divine
majesty, so that we find recorded by writers, how that the Saxons in diverse
conflicts against the Britains had the better, and also took from them diverse
towns, as already partly has been and also hereafter shall be showed.

It is furthermore to be remembered, that about the 14 year of the Britain
king Conanus his reign, which was about the end of the year of Christ 559, 559
Kenrike king of the Westsaxons departed this life, after he had reigned xxv.
years complet. This Kenrike was a victorious prince, Hen. Hunt.
and fought diverse battles against the Britains. In the 18 year of his reign,
which was the 551 of Christ, we find that he fought against them, being come at
that time unto Salisburie, and after great slaughter made on both parts, at
length the victory remained with the Saxons, and the Britains were chased.
Again in the two and twentieth year of his reign, and 555 year of Christ,
the fame Kenrike and his son Cheuling fought with a great power of Britains
at Branburie.

The Britains were divided into nine companies, three in the fore ward, three
in the battle, and three in the rere ward, with their horssemen and archers,
after the manner of the Romans. The Saxons being ranged in one entire battle,
valiantly assailed them, and notwithstanding the shot of the Britains, yet
they brought the matter to the trial of handblowes, till at length by the
coming on of the night, the victory remained doubtful: and no marvel is to
be made thereof (says Henry archdeacon of Huntington) since the Saxons were men
of huge stature, great force, and valiant courage. The same year that Kenrike
deceassed, Ida the king of Northumberland also died: he was (as ye have heard)
a right valiant prince, and enlarged the dominion of the Saxons greatly, he
overcame Loath king of the Picts in battle, and Gorran king of Scots.

Also about the year of Christ 560, 560
Conanus (as yet governing the Britains) Irmen^ike king of Kent departed this
life, of whom ye have heard before, and Ethelbert his son succeeded him 52
years. Then after that the foresaid three princes were dead (as before ye have
heard) Hen. Hunt.
they had that succeeded them in their estates as here follows. After
Kenrike,

This Ethelbert in process of time grew to be a mighty prince, but yet in the
beginning of his reign he had but sorry success against some of his enemies:
for having to do with the foresaid Cheuling king of Westsaxons, Hen. Hunt.
A^^d. Wiphandune.
he was of him overcome in battle at

ABout the year 570, 570. Cutha.
Cutha the brother of king Cheuling fought with the Britains at Bedford,
vanquished them, ^ilsburie. 581
and took from them 4 towns, Gyldas it may evidently appear. For they had
declined from the laws of the Lord, and were become abominable in his sight,
even from the prince to the poor man, from the priest to the Leuit, so that
not one estate among them walked vprightlie, but contrary to duty was gone
astray, by reason whereof the righteous God had given them over as a prey to
their enemies.

Also in the latter end of Malgos days or about the first beginning of the
reign of his successor Careticus, His brother as Matt. West. says.
Cheuling and his son Cutwine fought with the Britains at a place called
Fechanley or Fedanley, or (as some books have) Frithenlie, where Cutwine was
slain, H. Hunt.
and the Englishmen chased: but yet Cheuling repairing his army, wan the
victory, and chasing the Britains, took from them many countries, and wan
great riches by the spoil. But Matthew. West. says, Matt. West.
that the victory abode with the

The beginning of the kingdom of Mercia, the bounds of the same, the heptarchie
or seven regiments of the Saxons, how they grew to that perfection, and by whom
they were reduced and drawn into a monar^^ie; Careticus is created king of
Britain, the Saxons take occasion by the civil dissentions of the Britains to
make a full conquest of the land* they procure foreign power to further them in
their enterprise, Gurmundus king of the Africans arriueth in Britain, the
British king is driven to his hard shifts, the politic practice of Gurmundus
in taking Chichester and setting the town on fire, he delivers the whole
land in possession to the Saxons, the English and Saxon kings put Careticus to
flight, the Britains have only three provinces left of all their country
which before they inhabited, their religion, church, and commonwealth is in
decaie, they are governed by three kings, Cheulings death is conspired of his
own subjects. The xviij. Chapter.
ABout the same time also, Crida. H. Hunt. This kingdom began in the year
585, as Matt. Westminster. says. Ran Cest.
and 585 of Christ, the kingdom of Mercia began under one Crida, who was
descended from Woden, and the tenth from him by lineall extraction. The bounds
of this kingdom were of great distance, having on the east the sea unto
Humber, and so on the north the said river of Humber, and after the river of
Mercia, which falls into the west sea at the corner of Wirhall, and so
coming about to the river of Dee that passes by Chester, the same river
bounded it on the west from Wales, and likewise Seuerne up to Bristow: on the
south it had the river of Thames, till it came almost to London. And in this
sort it contained Lincolneshire, Notingamshire, Derbishire, Chesshire,
Shropshire, Worcestershire, Glocestershire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire,
Hertefordshire, Bedfordshire, Huntingtonshire, Northamptonshire,
Leicestershire, and Warwikeshire.

Thus have ye heard how the Saxons in process of time remoouing the Britains
out of their ^eats, daily wan ground of them, till at length they got
possession of the best part of this I Will, and erected within the same seven
kingdoms, which were governed by seven several kings, who continued until the
kings of Westsaxon brought them all at length into one monarchy, as after
shall appear. Matthew. Westmin. reckons eight kingdoms as thus; The kingdom of
Kent, the kingdom of Sussex, the kingdom of Essex, the kingdom of Eastangle,
the kingdom of Mercia, the kingdom of Westsex, and the kingdom of
Northumberland, which was divided into two kingdoms, that is to say, into Deira
and into Bernicia: whereunto W. Harison adds the ninth in the first part of
his chronology, and calls it Wales.

AFter that Malgo or Maglocune was departed this life, Careticus 586
one Careticus, or (as some write him) Caretius, was made king of the Britains,
and began his reign in the year of our Lord, 586, which was in the third
year of the emperor Mauricius, and thirteenth of Chilperike king of France.
This Careticus was a nourisher of civil war and dissension amongst his own
people the Britains, so that he was hated both of God and man, as writers
testify. The Saxons understanding that the Britains were not of one mind, but
divided in partakings, so as one was ready to devour an other, thought it
good time for them to advance their conquests, and ceased not to pursue the
Britains by force and continual war, till they had constreined them for
refuge to withdraw into Wales. Gal. Mon. See more of this Gurmundus in Ireland.
Ranulf. Cest.
And as some have written, the Saxons meaning to make a full conquest of the
land, sent over into Ireland, requiring one Gurmundus a king of the Affricans
to come over into Britain to help them against the Britains.

This Gurmundus appointing his brother Turgesius to pursue the conquest of
Ireland, came and arrived here in Britain, making such cruel war in aid of
the Saxons against the Britains, that Careticus

But whilst the battle continued, Careticus stale away, and got him into
Wales. After this, the foresaid Gurmundus destroyed this land throughout in
Matt. West.
and so both the land and people took name of them, being called Angli, a long
time before they entered into this I Will (as before is showed out of Cornelius
Tacitus and others.) But now to return where we left.

Of this Gurmundus the old English writers It should seem that this history
of Gurmundus is but some fained tale except it may be that he was some Dane,
Norwegian or Germane.
There be, that omitting to make mention of Gurmundus, write thus of the
expelling of the Britains out of this land at that time, when with their king
Careticus they got them into Wales.

In the year of Grace 586, 586 Matt. West.
Careticus a lover of civil war succeeded Malgo an enemy to God and to the
Britains, whose inconstancy when the English and Saxon kings perceived, with
one consent they rose against him, and after many battles chased him from
city to city, till at length incountering with him in a pight field, they
drove him beyond Seuerne into Wales. Heerevpon clerks and priests were driven
out of their places with bright swoords brandishing in all parts, and fire
crackling in churches, wherewith the same were consumed. The remnant of the
Britains therefore withdrew into the west parts of the land, that is to say,
into Cornwall, and into Wales, out of which countries they oftentimes brake
out, and made insurrections upon the Saxons, the which in manner aforsaid got
possession of the chiefest parts of the land, leaving to the Britains only
three provinces, that is to say, Cornwall, Southwales, and Northwales, which
countries were not easy to be woone, by reason of the thick woods environed
with deep mareshes and waters, and full of high craggie rocks and mounteins.

The English and Saxon kings having thus removed the Britains, enlarged the
bounds of their dominions. There reigned in that season within this land,
beside the Britain kings, eight kings of the English and Saxon nations, as
Ethelbert in Kent, Cissa in Sussex, Ceauline in Westsex, Creda or Crida in
Mercia, Erkenwine in Essex, Titila in Estangle, Elle in Deira, and Alfrid in
Bernicia. In this sort the Britains lost the possession of the more part of
their ancient seats, and the faith of Christ thereby was greatly decayed: for
the churches were destroyed; and the archbishops of Caerleon Arwiske, London
and York withdrew together with their clergy into the mounteins and woods
within Wales, taking with them the reliks of saints, doubting the same should
be destroyed by the enemies, and themselves put to death if they should abide
in their old habitations. Many also fled into Britain Armorike with a great
fleet of ships, so that the whole church or congregation (as ye may call it)
of the two provinces, Loegria and Northumberland, was left desolate in that
season, to the great hinderance and decaie of the christian religion. Careticus
was driven into Wales (as before is rehearsed) about the second or third year
of his reign, and there continued with his Britains, the which ceased not to
indamage the Saxons from time to time as occasion still served.

But here is to be noted, that the Britains being thus removed into Wales and
Cornwall, were governed afterward by three kings, or rather tyrants, the which
ceased not with civil war to seek others destruction, Will. Mol^^.
till finally (as says the British book) they became all subject unto
Cadwallo, whom Beda names Cedwallo. In the mean time, Ceaulinus or Cheuling
king of the Westsaxons, through his own misgouernance and tyranny, which
toward his latter days he practiced, did procure not only the Britains, but
also his own subjects to conspire his death, so that ioining in battle with
his adversaries at Wodensdic, in the 33 year of his reign, his army was
discomfited, and he himself constreined to depart into exile, and shortly
after ended his life before he could find means to be restored.

So that we have here a mirror or lively view of a tyrant and a king, wherein
there is no less ods in the manner of their government, than there is
repugnance in their names, or difference in their states. For he sees but
little into the knowledge of toongs, that understands not what the office of
a king should be, by the composition of his name, the same sounding in Greek
(...), which being resolved is in effect (...), that is, the foundation or stay
of the people; from which quality when he resulteth, he makes shipwreck of
that goodly title, and degenerateth into a tyrant, than the which violent and
enforced government as there is none more perilous, so is it of all other the
least in continuance: this is proved by historical observation through the
course of this history.

Ceolric reigns over the Westsaxons, the Saxons and Britains encounter,
Ethelbert king of kent subdueth the Englishsaxons, he is married to the French
kings daughter upon cautions of religion, the king imbraceth the gospel,
Augustine the moonke and others were sent into this I Will to preach the christian
faith, the occasion that moved Gregory the great to send him, buieng and
selling of boys, the Englishmen called Angli commended, Ethelbert causes
Augustine and his fellows to come before him, they
NOw after Cheuling, Celric.
his nephue Celricus or Ceolric 594
after whom his son Wibbas or Wipha succeeded. And after the deceasse of
Ethelric, one Edelbertor Edelfride surnamed the wild, succeeded in government
of the Northumbers. But to return to our purpose.

Ethelbert king of Kent, not discouraged with the evil chance which happened
in the beginning, but rather occasioned thereby to learn more experience in
feats of war, Beda. Will. Malmes.
proved so perfect a master therein, that in process of time he subdued by
force of

In the year of our Lord 596, which was about the 14 year of the reign of
the emperor Mauricius, and after the coming of the English Saxons into this
land, Beda. Matthew. West. says 596.
about an 47 years almost complet, the bishop of Rome, Gregory the first of
that name, and surnamed Magnus, 47 says the same author.
sent Augustinus a moonke, with certain other learned men into this I Will to
preach the christian faith unto the English Saxons, which nation as yet had not
received the gospel. And here we hold it necessary to show how it is recorded
by diverse writers, that the first occasion whereby Gregory was moved thus to
send Augustine into this land, rose by this means.

It chanced (whilst the same Gregory was as yet but archdeacon of the sea of
Rome) Beda. Will. Malmes.
certain young boys were brought thither to be sold out of Northumberland,
according to the accustomable use of that country, in so much that as we have
in our time seen (says W. Mal.) the people of that province have not yet
doubted to sell away their near kinsfolk for a small price. When those
children which at that time were brought from thence to Rome, had by reason of
their excellent beauties and comely shape of lims and body, turned the eyes
in manner of all the citizens to the beholding of them, it fortuned that
Gregory also came amongst other to behold them, and when he considered and
well viewed their fair skins, Vita Gregorii. magni.
their sweet visages, and beautiful bushes of their bright and yeallow hears,
he demanded out of what region or land they came, unto whom answer was made,
that they were brought out of Britain, the inhabitants of which country were
of the like beautiful aspect. Then he asked whether the men of that country
were christians, or as yet entangled with blind heathenish errors? Whereunto it
was answered, that they were not christened, but followed the religion of the
Gentiles. Whereat Gregory fetching a deep sigh, said: Ah, alas that the
author of darkness does as yet possess men of so brightsome countenances,
and that with the grace of such fair shining visages, they bear about minds
void of inward grace.

Moreover he demanded by what name the people were called, whereto answer was
made, that they were called Angli, that is to say Englishmen. Right woorthilie
(says he) for they have angels faces, and such as ought to be made fellow
heirs with angels in heaven. Then asked he the name of the province from
whence they were brought, and it was told him they were of Deira. It is well
(said he) they are to be delivered De ira dei, that is to say, from the ire and
wrath of God, and called to the mercy of Christ our Lord? What name (said he)
has the king of that province, Whereunto answer was made that he was called
Alla, whereupon alluding to that name, he said, Alleluia ought to be soong in
those parts to the praise and honor of God the creator.

Hereupon coming to Benedict the first of that name (as then bishop of Rome)
Pelagius the second Will. Malmes.
he required him that some learned men might be sent into England to preach the
gospel unto the Englishmen, offering himself to be one of the number. But
though Benedict was contented to grant his request, yet the Romans had him in
such estimation, Pelagius.
that they would not consent that he should depart (...) far from the city,
so that by them he was at that time stayed of that his godly purpose. Howbeit
when he came to be bishop, he thought to person (...) if though not by
himself, yet by other: and so Augustine and his fellows were sent by him
about it (as before is said.) By the way, as they were passing in their
iour^^^, such a sudden fear entered into their hearts, M. Fox.
that (as some write) they returned all. Others write, that Augustine was sent
back to Gregory, to sue that they might be released of that voyage so
dangerous and uncertain amongst such a barbarous people, whose language they
neither knew, nor whose rudeness they were able to resist. Then Gregory with
pithie persuasions confirming and comforting him, sent him again with letters
unto the bishop of Arles, willing him to help and aid the said Austine and his
company in all what so ever his need required. Also other letters he directed
by the foresaid Austine unto his fellows, exhorting them to go forward boldly
in the

Gregory the servant of Gods servants, to the servants of our Lord.
FOr as much as it is better not to take good things in

Thus emboldned and comforted through the good words and wholesome exhortation
of Gregory, they set forward again, and speeding forth their journey, first
arrived at the I Will of Thanet in Kent in the month of Iulie, being in number
about forty persons, of the which diverse were interpretors, whom they
brought with them out of France. These they sent unto king Ethelbert,
signifieng the occasion of their The seuenfold letanies of S. Gregory were not
yet devised.
and thereto singing the letanies, made intercession unto the Lord for the
everlasting preservation of themselves, and of all them for whom and to whom
they came.

Now when they being set down by commandment of the king, had preached the
word of life to him, and to all those that came thither with him, he made them
this answer, that their words and promises were good: but for as much as the
same were new and uncertain to him that had been brought up in the contrary
doctrine, he could not rashly assent to their admonitions, and leave that
belief which he and the English nation had so long a time observed and kept:
but (said he) because ye have traveled far, to the intent to make us
partakers of those things which ye believe to be most true and perfect, we will
thus much grant unto you, that ye shall be received into this country, and
have harbrough, with all things sufficient found unto you for your maintenance
and sustentation: neither will we hinder you, but that ye may by preaching
associat and join as many of our subjects as you can unto your law and
belief. They had therefore assigned unto them a place to lodge in within the
city of Canturburie, which was the head city of all his dominion. It is said
that as they approached the city according to their manner, they had a cross
borne before them, with an image of our Lord Jesus Christ, and they followed,
singing this letanie, Deprecamur te Domine in omni misericordia tua, vt
auferatur furor tuus and ira tua a ciuitate ista and de domo sancta tua,
quoniam peccauimus: Alleluia. That is to say, We beseech thee o Lord in all thy
mercy that thy fury and wrath may be taken from this city, and from thy
holy house, for we have sinned. Praise be to thee o Lord. After they were
received into Canturburie, Beda. Matthew. West.
they began to follow the trade of life which the apostles used in the
primitive church, that is to say, exercising themselves in continual prayer,
watching, and preaching to as many as they could, despising all worldly
things, as not belonging to them, receiving only of them (whom they taught)
things necessary for the sustenance of their life, and living in all points
according to the doctrine which they set forth, having their minds ready to
suffer in patience all adversities what so ever, yea and death it self, for
the confirming of that which they now preached. The christian faith received of
the English men.
Hereupon, many of the English people believed and were baptized, having in
great reverence the simplicity of those men, and the sweetness of their
heavenly doctrine. There was a church neeree to the city on the east part
thereof dedicated to the honor of saint Martine, and builded of old time
whilst the Romans as yet inhabited Britain, in the which the queen, being
(as we have said) a christian, used to make her prayers. To this church Austine
and his fellows at their first coming accustomed to resort, and there to
sing, to pray, to say mass, to preach and to baptize, till at length the
king being converted, granted them license to preach in every place, and to
build and restore churches where they thought good. After that the king being
persuaded by their doctrine, good examples giving, and diverse miracles showed,
was once baptized, the people in great numbers began to give ear unto the
preaching of the gospel, and renouncing their heathenish belief, became
christians, Lib. 7. cap. 26.
in so much that as Gregory remembers, there were baptized ten thousand
persons in one day, being the feast of the nativity of our Savior 597, and
the first indiction.

Some write how this should chance toward the latter end of Augustines days,
Polychron.
after he was admitted to preach the gospel amongst them that inhabited about
York (as some write) which affirm, that the said number of ten thousand was
baptized in the river of Suale, which (as W. Harison says) cannot be verified,
because of the indiction and death of Gregory. But to proceed.

Religion is not to be enforced but persuaded and preached, Augustine is made
archbishop of England, Gregory informs Augustine of certain ordinances to
be made and observed in the new English church, as the revenues of the church
to be divided into four parts, of liturgy, of marriage, of ecclesiastical
discipline and ordeining of bishops: trifling questions objected by Augustine
to Gregory, fellow helpers are sent over to assist Augustine in his
KIng Ethelbert reioised at the conversion of his people, Beda. lib. 1. cap.
26. and 27.
howbeit he would not Augustine ordained archbishop of the English nation.
After that the faith of Christ was thus received of the English men, Augustine
went into France, and there of the archbishop of Arles named Etherius was
ordained archbishop of the English nation, according to the order prescribed by
Gregory before the departure of the said Augustine from Rome.

After his return into Britain, he sent Laurence Laurence a priest.
and Peeter a moonke unto Rome, to give knowledge unto Gregory the bishop, how
the Englishmen had received the faith, and that he was ordained archbishop of
the land, according to that he had commanded, if the work prospered under his
hand as it had done. He also required to have Gregory's advice touching
certain ordinances to be made and observed in the new church of England.
Whereupon Gregory, sending back the messengers, wrote an answer unto all his
demands. And The revenues of the church to be divided into 4. parts.
he declared that the ancient custom of the apostolic see was to give
commandment unto bishops ordained, that the profits and revenues of their
benefices ought to be divided into four parts, whereof the first should be
appointed to the bishop and his family for the maintenance of hospitality:
the second should be assigned to the clergy: the third given to the poor: and
the fourth

And whereas in the church of Rome one custom in saying mass or the liturgy
was observed, Liturgy.
and another custom in France; concerning such church service, Church service.
Gregory advised Austine that if he found any thing either in the church of
Rome, either in the church of France, or in any other church which might most
please the almighty God, he should diligently choose it out, and instruct the
church of England (now being new) according to that form which he should
gather forth of the said churches: for the things are not loved for the places
sake, but the places for the things sake. Such as did steal.
Also for punishing of such as had stolen things out of churches, so near as
might be, the offender should be chastised in charity, so as he might know his
fault, and (if it were possible) restore the thing taken away.

And touching degrees in marriage, Englishmen might take to their wives,
Marriages.
women that touched them in the third and fourth degree without reprehension,
and if any unlawful marriages were found amongst the Englishmen, as if the
son had married the fathers wife, or the brother the brothers wife, they ought
to be warned in any wise to abstain, and understand it to be a grievous
sin: yet should they not for that thing be deprived of the communion of the
body and blood of our Lord, least those things might seem to be punished in
them wherein they had offended (before their conversion to the christian faith)
by ignorance: Discipline of the church.
for at this season the church (says he) corrects some things of a fervent
earnestness, suffers some things of a gentle mildnes, and dissembleth some
things of a prudent consideration, and so bears and winketh at the same, that
oftentimes the evil which she abhors by such bearing and dissembling, is
restreined and reformed.

Moreover touching the ordeining of bishops, Ordeining of bishops.
he would they should be so placed, that the distance of place might not be a
let, but that when a bishop should be consecrated, there might be three or
four present. Also touching the bishops of France, he willed Augustine in no
wise to intermeddle with them, otherwise than by exhortation and good
admonition to be given, but not to presume any thing by authority, since the
archbishop of Arles had received the pall in times past, whose authority he
might not diminish, least he should seem to put his sickle into another man's
harvest. But as for the bishops of Britain, he committed them unto him, that
the unlearned might be taught, the weak with wholesome persuasions
strengthened, and the froward by authority reformed. Moreover, that a woman
with child might be baptized, Women with child.
and she that was delivered after 33 days of a manchild, and after 46 days of
a womanchild, should be purified, but yet might she enter the church before, if
she would.

The residue of Augustines demands consisted in these points, Matters in
question about trifles.
to wit:

1 Within what space a child should be christened after it was borne, for doubt
to be prevented by death?

2 Within what time a man might company with his wife after she was brought to
bed?

3 Whether a woman, having her flowers, might enter the church, or receive the
communion?

4 Whether a man having had company with his wife, might enter the church, or
receive the communion before he was washed with water?

5 Whether after pollusion by night in dreams, a man might receive the
communion: or if he were a priest, whether he might say mass?

To these questions Gregory makes answer at full in the book and place
before cited, which for breefenesse we pass over. He sent also at that time
with the messengers aforesaid, at their return into England, diverse learned
men to help Augustine in the harvest of the Lord. The names of the chiefest
were these, Assistance to Augustine. The pall.
Melitus, Iustus, Paulinus, and Ruffinianus. He sent also the pall, which is
the ornament of an archbishop, with vessels and apparel which should be used
in churches by the archbishop and other ministers. He sent also with the pall
other letters to Augustine, to let him understand what number of bishops he
would have him to ordeine within this land. Also after that Melitus, and the
other before mentioned persons were departed from Rome, he sent a letter unto
the same Melitus, being yet on his way toward Britain, touching further matter
concerning the churches of England, wherein he confesses that many things are
permitted to be used of the people lately brought from the errors of
gentilitie, Bearing with them that had newly received the faith, whereof
superstition grew and increased.
in keeping feasts on the dedication days, which have resemblance with the old
superstitious rites of the Pagan religion. For to hard and obstinate minds
(says he) it is not possible to cut away all things at once, for he that
coueteth to the highest place, goes up by steps and not by leaps.

At the same time Gregory did send letters unto Miracles.
which by report he understood were showed by the fame Augustine, counselling
him in no wise to glory in the same, but rather in reioising to fear, and
consider that God gave him the gift to work such signs for the wealth of them
to whom he was sent to preach the gospel: he advised him therefore to beware
of vainglory and presumption, for the disciples of the truth (faith he) have
no joy, but only that which is common with all men, of which there is no end,
for not every one 602
in the year of our Lord 602, which was the 19 year of the emperor
Mauricius. Moreover he sent most courteous letters by these messengers to king
Ethelbert, in the which he greatly commended him, in that he had received the
christian faith, and exhorted him to continue in that most holy

What reparations and foundations Augustine finished for clergimen to the
supportation of the church, the building of Paul's in London and saint Peter's
in Westminster uncertain, a provincial council called by Augustine, he
restores a blind man to his sight, the Britains are hardly weaned from their
old custom of belief, an heremits
THus far we have waded Beda.
that after he was established archbishop, and had his see appointed him at One
Peter was the first Abbat.
one Peter being the first abbat thereof. The church there was not consecrated
by Augustine, but by his successor Laurence, after he was dead.

Moreover, king Ethelbert at the motion of Augustine built a church in the
city of London (which he lately had conquered) and dedicated it unto saint
Paul; but whether he builded or restored this church of saint Paul it may be
doubted, for there be diverse opinions of the building thereof. Ran. Higd.
Some have written that it was first builded by king Lud (as before is
mentioned.) Other again write, that it was builded afterward by Sigebert king
of the Eastsaxons. Also king Ethelbert builded the church of saint Andrews in
Rochester. Beda.
It is likewise remembered by writers, that the same king Ethelbert procured a
citizens of London to build a church to S. Peter without the city of London
toward the west, in a place then called Thorney, that is to say, the I Will of
thorns, and now called Westminster: Ran. Higd. Westminster church burth^^.
though others have written that it was built by Lucius king of Britain, or
rather by Sibert king of the Eastsaxons. This church was either newly built,
or greatly enlarged by king Edward surnamed the Confessor, and after that, the
third Henry king of England did make there a beautiful monastery, and very
richly endowed the same with great possessions and sumptuous jewels. The place
was ouergrowne with underwoods, as thorns and brambles, before that the church
was begun to be builded there in this king Ethelberts days. Thus the faith of
Christ being once begun to be received of the English men, took wonderful
increase within a short time.

In the mean season by the help of king Ethelbert, Ran. Cest. Beda.
Sigebertus. ann. 19 Mau^^^^ imperatoris. A synod. Austines okt. Galfrid. lib.
8. cap. 4.
Augustine caused a council to be called at a place in the confines of the
Westsaxons, which place long after was called Austines oak, where he procured
the bishops or doctors of the provinces of the Britains to come before him.
Among the Britains or the Welshmen, christianity as yet remained in force,
which from the apostles time had never failed in that nation. When Augustine
came into this land, he found in their provinces seven bishops see, and an
archbishops see, wherein sat very godly and right religious prelates, and
many abbats, in the which the Lords flock kept their right order: but because
they differed in observing the feast of Easter, and other rites from the use of
the Roman church, Beda lib. 2. ca. 2.
Augustine thought it necessary to move them to agree with him in unity of
the same, but after long disputation and reasoning of those matters, they could
not be induced to give their assent in that behalf. Augustine to prove his
opinion good, wrought a miracle in restoring sight to one of the Saxon nation
that was blind.

The Britains that were present, moved with this miracle, confessed that it
was the right way of justice and righteousness which Augustine taught; but
yet they said that they might not forsake their ancient customs without consent
and license of their nation. Whereupon they required another synod to be
holden, Another synod.
whereat a greater number of them might be present. This being granted, there
came (as it is reported) seven bishops of the Britains, and a great number of
learned men, specially of the famous monastery of Bangor, The monastery of
Bangor. Abbat Dionoth.
whereof in those days one Dionoth was abbat, who as they went toward that
council, came first to a certain wise man, which lived amongst them an
heremits life, and asked his advise, whether they ought to forsake their
traditions at the preaching of Augustine or not: who made this answer; If he be
the man of God, follow him. Then said they; The answer of a godly man touching
Austine the Englishmens apostle.
How shall we prove whether he be so or not? Then said he: The Lord says,
take up my yoke and learn of me, for I am meek and humble in heart: if
Augustine be humble and meek in heart, it is to be believed that he also
bears the yoke of Christ, and offers it to you to bear; but if he be not
meek but proud, it is certain that he is not of GOD, nor his word to be
regarded. And how shall we see and perceive that (said they?) Find means (said
he) that he may first come to the place of the synod with those of his side,
and if he arise to receive you at your coming, then know that he is the
servant of God, and obey him; but if he despise you, and arise not toward you,
whereas you be more in number, let him be despised

They did as he commanded, and it chanced, that when they came, they found
Augustine sitting in his chair: whom when they beheld, straightwaies they
conceived indignation, and noting him of pride, labored to reprove all his
saiengs. He told them that they used many things contrary to the custom of
the universal church, and yet if in three things they would obeie him, Three
things required by Augustine of the Britains to be observed.
that is to say, in keeping the feast of Easter in due time, in ministering
baptism according Augustine threateneth.
Unto whom (as it is said) Augustine in threatening wise told them before hand,
that if they would not receive peace with their brethren, they should receive
war of the enemies; and if they would not preach to the Englishmen the way
of life, they should suffer punishment by death at the hands of them: which
thing in deed after came to pass, as in place convenient shall be expressed.
After this in the year of our Lord 604, the archbishop Augustine ordained 604
Bishops ordained at London and Rochester.
that is to say, Melitus at London, that he might preach the word of God to
the Eastsaxons, which were divided from them of Kent by the river of Thames,
and Iustus in the city of Rochester within the limits of Kent.

AT that time Sabert reigned over the Eastsaxons, Sabert.
but he was subject unto Ethelbert king of Kent, whose nephue he was also by
his sister Ricula that was married unto king Sledda that succeeded after
Erchenwine the first king of the Eastsaxons,

Finally, Ran. Cestren.
Augustine after he had governed as archbishop the church of Canturburie by the
space of 12 years current, departed this life the five and twentieth of May,
and was buried first without the eitie near to the church of the apostles
Peter and Paul (whereof mention is made before) because the same church as yet
was not finished nor dedicated; but after it was dedicated, his body was
brought into the church, and reverently buried in the north I Will there. He
ordained in his life time Laurence to be his successor in the sea of
Canturburie, of whom ye shall hear hereafter. Thus have ye heard in what
manner the Englishmen were first brought from the worshipping of false gods, and
baptized in the name of the living God by the foresaid Augustine (as we find in
Beda and other writers.) Now we will return to other doings chancing in the
mean time amongst the people of this I Will.

Ceowlfe or Ceoloulph governs the Westsaxons, Ceorlus king of Mercia,
Edelfride king of the Northumbers, and Edan king of the Scots join in battle,
Edan is discomfited, Edelfride subdueth the citizens of Chester, the devout
moonks of Bangorpraie for safety from the sword of the enemy, twelve hundred
of them are slain, Edelfride enters the city of Chester, the Britains
assembling their power under three capteins encounter with Edelfride, slaie
many of his soldiers, and put him to flight, wars between Edelfride and
Redwald king of the Eastangles about Edwine the son of king Elle, Edelfride
is slain, Ceowlfe king of the Westsaxons dies. The xxij. Chapter.
AFter the deceasse of Chelricus king of the Westsaxons, Matthew. West. says 34.
we find that Ceowlfe or Ceoloulph succeeded in government of that kingdom,
and reigned twelve years. He began his reign (as should appear by some
writers) about the year of our Lord 597, Matthew. West. says 607.
and spent his time for the more part in wars, not giving place to idleness,
but seeking either to defend or enlarge the confines of his dominion. He was
the son of Cutha, which was the son of Kenrike, which was the son of
Certike. After Wibba or Wipha king of Mercia (who, nothing inferior to his
father, did not only defend his kingdom, but also enlarge it, by subduing
the Britains on each side) one Ceorlus succeeded in that kingdom, being not his
son but his kinsman. This Ceorlus began his reign about the year of our
Lord 594, Ceorlus king of Mercia. 594
as Matthew. West. records.

Ye have heard that Edelferd, which otherwise is called also by writers
Edelfride, Beda Edelferd.
surnamed the wild, governed still the Northumbers, which Edelferd did more
damage to the Britains than any one other king of the English nation. None of
them destroyed their countries more than he did: neither did any prince make
more of the Britains tributaries, or inhabited more of their countries with
English people than he. Heerevpon Edan king of those Scots which inhabited
Britain, being therewith moved to see Edelfride prosper thus in his
conquests, came against him with a mighty army: but ioining in battle with
Edelfride and his power, at a place called Degsastane, or Degsastone, or
Deglaston, he lost the most part of his people, and with the residue that were
left alive, he escaped by flight. This was a sore foughten battle, with much
bloodshed on both parties. For notwithstanding that the victory remained with
the Northumbers, Theobaldus the brother of Edelferd was slain, with all that
part of the English host which he governed: and it was fought in the year of
our Lord 603, 603 Henr. Hunt. Beda lib. 1. cap. 34.
in the 19 year of the reign of the foresaid Edelferd, and in the sixth year
of Ceowlfe king of the Westsaxons, and in the first year of the emperor
Phocas, or rather in the last year of his predecessor Mauricius. From that
day, till the days of Beda, not one of the Scottish kings burst presume to
enter into Britain again to give battle against the English nation, as Beda
himself writteth. Will. Malm. See in Scotland.
But the Scottish writers make other report of this matter, as in the history
of Scotland ye may find recorded.

The Britains that dwelt about Chester, through their stoutnesse provoked the
aforesaid Edelferd king of the Northumbers unto war: whereupon to tame their
lofty stomachs, he assembled an army and came forward to besiege the city of
Chester, Chester as yet in possession of the Britains.
then called of the Britains Carleon ardour deue. The citizens coveting rather
to suffer all things than a I. Leland. Will. Malm.
got within his danger, and easily discomfited.

It chanced that he had espied before the battle joined (as Beda says) Beda.
where a great number of the British priests were got aside into a place
somewhat out of danger, that they might there make their intercession to God
for the good speed of their people, being then ready to give battle to the
Northumbers. Many The number of moonks in the monastery of Bangor.
in the which it is said, that there was such a number of moonks, that where
they were divided into seven several parts, with their several governors
appointed to have rule over them, every of those parts contained at the least
three hundred persons, the which lived altogether by the labor of their hands.
Many therefore of those moonks having kept a solemn fast for three days
together, were come to the army with other to make prayer, having for their
Brocmale.
earl (or consul as some call him) of Chester, which should preserve them
(being given to prayer) from the edge of the enemies sword.

King Edelferd having (as is said) espied these men, asked what they were, and
what their intent was; and being informed of the whole circumstance and cause
of their being there, he said; Then if they call to their God for his
assistance against us, suerlie though they bear no armor, yet do they fight
against Whereupon he commanded the first onset to be given them, The Britains
discomfited and slain.
and after slew down the residue of the British army, not without great loss
of his own people. Of those moonks and priests which came to pray (as before
is mentioned) there died at that battle about the number of 12 hundred, so
that fifty of them only escaped by flight. Brocmale, or Broemael at the
first approach of the enemies, turning his back with his company, left them
(whom he should Beda says.)

Here is to be noted, Henr. Hunt.
if this battle was fought in the seventh year of Ceowlfe king of Westsaxon
(as some have written) and that Augustine lived 12 years after his entrance
into the government of the sea of Canturburie (as some write) it is evident
that he lived four years after this slaughter made Beda himself records. A
late chronographer running upon this matter, W. Harison.
and preciselie setting down his collection, says that Athelbright, or
Edelfride, K. of the Northumbers, and Ethelbert K. of Kent, having Augustine in
their company, in the eight year after his arrival, made war upon such
Britains as refused to observe the canons of the late council mentioned 603,
and killed 1200 moonks of the monastery of Bangor, which labored earnestly,
and in the sweat of their brows, thereby to get their livings, etc. Uerclie
Galf. Mon. writes, that Ethelbert king of Kent (after he saw the Britains to
disdain and deny their subjection unto Augustine, by whom he was converted
to the christian faith) stirred up Edelferd king of the Northumbers to war
against the Britains. Acts and (...) n^^nents. page 160.
But hereof Master Fox doubts, and therefore says, that of uncertain
things he has nothing certeinlie to say, much less to judge. But now to the
matter where we left.

After that king Edelferd had made slaughter of the Britains (as before is
rehearsed) he entered the city of Chester, and from thence marched toward
Bangor. Blederike duke of Cornwall, Margadud king of Southwales, Cadwane k. of
Northwales.
The Britains in the mean time had assembled their power under three capteins,
that is to say, Blederike duke of Cornwall, Margadud king of Southwales, and
Cadwane king of Northwales. These ioining in battle with Edelferd, flue 10066
of his soldiers, and constreined him to flee out of the field for safeguard of
his life, after he had received many wounds. Galf. Mon.
On the part of the Britains the forsaid Blederike, which was chief captain
of the field in that battle, chanced to be slain. Thus says Gal. Mon.

But the ancient writers of the English kings (as Beda, William Malmesburie,
and Henry Huntington, make no mention of this last battle and victory
obtained by the Britains in manner as above is expressed in Galfrids book. But
contrarily we find, that Edelferd having such good success in his business
abroad as he could wish, upon purpose to avoid danger at home, Edwine the son
of king Alla banish^^.
banished Edwine the son of Alla or Elle, a young gentleman of great
towardness, lately come to the kingdom of the Northumbers by the death of
his father. But this Edwine in time of his exile, being long tossed from place
to place, and finding no steadfast friendship now in time of his adversity, at
length came to Redwald, that was king at that time of the Eastangles, the third
from Uffa, and successor to Titullus, which Titullus did succeed next after the
said Uffa, 592
the first king of Eastangles (as before is mentioned.) This Redwald did very
honorably interteine Edwine, Edelferd.
insomuch that Edelferd being informed thereof, was highly displeased, and
sent ambassadors unto Redwald, to require him either to deliver Edwine into his
hands, or else if he refused so to do, to declare and denounce unto him open
wars.

Redwald encouraged by his wife (that counseled him in no wise to betraie his
friend, to whom he had given his faith, for the menaces of his enemy)
assembled forthwith an army, and at the sudden coming upon Edelferd, 542
assaulted him yer he could have time to assemble his people together. But yet
the said Edelferd, H. Hunt.
though he was beset and brought in danger at unawares, died not unrevenged: for
putting himself in defense with such power as he could then get together, he
boldly incountred the enemies, and giving battle, Ethelferd slain.
slew Remerius the son of Redwald, and after was slain himself, having
reigned over the Northumbers about 22 years. This battle was fought near to
the water of Idle.

The said Edelferd had issue by his wife Acca, the daughter of Alla, and sister
to Edwine, two sons, Oswald being about two years of age, and Oswin about
four years, the which (their father being thus slain) were by help of their
governors conveyed away into Scotland with all speed that might be made. Hen.
Hunt. Matt. West. says 34.
Ceowlfe king of the Westsaxons, after he had reigned the space of 12 years,
departed this life, who in his time had maintained great war against many of
his neighbors, the which for briefness I pass over. One great battle he
fought against them of Sussex, The Southsaxons sustain the greater loss.
in which the armies on both sides sustained great damage, but the greater
loss fell to the South saxons.

Cinegiscus and his son Richelinus reign jointly over the Westsaxons, they
fight with the Britains; the endeavor of Laurence archbishop of Canturburie in
setting religion at large, and seeking a uniformity in catholic
AFter the foresaid Ceowlfe reigned Cinegiscus, Cinegiscus.
or Kingils, which was the son of Will. Malm. says that Onichelinus was the
brother of Cinegiscus.
In the fourth year of his reign, he received into fellowship with him in
governance of the kingdom his son Richelinus, or Onichelinus, and so they
reigned jointly together in great love and concord (a thing seldom seen or
heard of.) Beandune, or Beanton.
They fought with the Britains at Beandune,

In this mean time, Beda lib. 2. cap. 4.
Laurence archbishop of Canturburie, who succeeded next after Augustine,
admitted thereto by him in his life time (as before is said) did his iudeuour
to augment and bring to perfection the church of England, the foundation
whereof was lately laid by his predecessor the foresaid Augustine: who studied
not only for the increase of this new

To our dear brethren the bishops and abbats through all Scotland, Laurence,
WHereas the apostolic see (according to her manner) had sent us to preach unto
the heathen people in these west parts, as otherwise through the world, and that
it chanced to us to enter into this I Will which is called Britain, before we
knew and understood the state of things, we had in great reverence both the
Scots and Britains, which believed, because (as we took the matter) they
walked according to the custom of the universal church: but after we had
knowledge of the Britains, we judged the Scots to be better. But we have
learned by bishop Daganus coming into this I Will, and by Columbanus the abbat
coming into France, that the Scots nothing differ in their conversation from
the Britains: for bishop Daganus coming unto us, would neither eat with us, no
nor yet come within the house where we did eat.

The said Laurence also with his fellow-bishops, did write to the Britains
other letters worthy of his degree, doing what he could to confirm them in
the unity of the Roman church: but it profited little, as appears by that
which Beda writes. About the same time Melitus the bishop of London went to
Rome, to common with pope Boniface, for necessary causes touching the church
of England, and was present at a synod holden by the same pope at that season,
for ordinances to be made touching the state of religious men, and sat in the
same synod, that with subscribing he might also by his authority confirm that
which was there orderly decreed. This synod was holden the third kalends of
March, in the last year of the emperor Phocas, which was about the year
after the birth of our Savior 610. Melitus at his return brought with him
from the pope, decrees commanded by the said pope to be observed in the English
church, with letters also directed to archbishop Laurence, and to king
Ethelbert.

Cadwan is made king of the Britains in the city of Chester, he leuieth a
power against Ethelfred king of the Northumbers, covenants of peace pass
betwixt them upon condition, the death of Ethelbert king of Kent, where he and
his wife were buried, of his laws; Eadbald succeeds Ethelbert in the Kentish
kingdom, his lewd and unholy life, he is an enemy to religion; he is plagued
with madness; Hebert king of the Eastsaxons dies, his three sons refuse to
be baptized, they fall to idolatry and hate the professors of the truth,
their irreligious talk and undutiful behavior to bishop Melitus, he and his
fellow Iustus pass over into France, the three sons of Hebert are slain of
the Westsaxons in battle, the Estsaxons by their idolatry provoke archbishop
Laurence to forsake the land, he is warned in a vision to tarry, whereof he
certifieth king Eadbald, who furthering christianity, sends for Melitus and
Iustus, the one is restored to his see, the other rejected, Melitus dies,
Iustus is made archbishop of Canturburie, the christian faith increases. The
xxiiij. Chapter.
AFter that the Britains had continued about the space Cadwan king of Britain.
almost of 24 years without any one special governor, being led by sundry
rulers, ever since that Careticus was constreined to flee over Seuerne, and
fought oftentimes not only against the Saxons, but also one of them against
another, at length in the year of our Lord 613, 613
they assembled in the city of Chester, and there elected Cadwan that before
was ruler of Northwales, to have the sovereign rule and government over all
their nation, and so the said Cadwan began to reign as king of Britain in the
said year 613. But some authors say, that this was in the year 609, in which
year Careticus the British king departed this life. And then after his
deceasse the Britains or Welshmen (whether we shall call them) chose Cadwan to
govern them in the foresaid year 609, which was in the 7 year of the
emperor Phocas, and the 21 of the second Lotharius king of France, and in the
13 year of Kilwoolfe king of the Westsaxons.

This Cadwan being established king, shortly after assembled a power of
Britains, and went against the foresaid Ethelfred king of Northumberland, who
being thereof advertised, did associate to him the most part of the Saxon
princes, and came forth with Gal. Mon.
right belonged to the Britains on the south side of the same river. This
covenant with other touching their agreement was confirmed with oths solemnly
taken,

What chanced afterward to Ethelfred, ye have before heard rehearsed, which for
that it sounds more like to a truth than that which follows in the British
book, we omit to make further rehersall, passing forward to other doings
which fell in the mean season, whilst this Cadwan had government of the
Britains, reigning as king over them the term of John Hard.
and finally was slain by the Northumbers, as before has been, and also
after shall be showed.

In the 8 year after that Cadwan began to reign, Ethelbert king of Kent
departed this life, in the 21 year after the coming of Augustine with his
fellows to preach the faith of Christ here in this realm: and after that
Ethelbert had reigned over the province of Kent the term of 56 years (as
Beda says, but there are that have noted three years Will. Malm. Beda. li. 2.
cap. 5
on the 24 day of February, and was buried in the I Will of saint Martine, within
the church of the apostles Peter and Paul, without the city of Canturburie,
where his wife queen Bartha was also buried, and the foresaid archbishop
Augustine that first converted him to the faith.

Amongst other things, this king Ethelbert with the advice of his council
ordained diverse laws and Beda, as he declares. And first it was expressed in
those laws, what amends he should make that stole any thing that belonged to
the church, to the bishop, or to any ecclesiastical person, willing by all
means to defend them whose doctrine he had received.

AFter the deceasse of Ethelbert, his son Eadbald Eadbald.
The princes example occasion of evil.
either for the prince his pleasure, or for fear to offend him, did profess
the christian faith. But Eadbald escaped not worthy punishment to him sent
from the living God for his evil deserts, insomuch that he was vexed with a
certain kind of madness, and taken with an unclean spirit.

The foresaid storm or unquiet troubling of the christian congregation, was
afterward greatly increased also by the death of Sabert or Sebert king of the
Eastsaxons, who was converted to the faith of Christ, and baptized by Melitus
bishop of London (as before is mentioned) and departing this life to go to a
better in the blissful kingdom of heaven, he left behind him three sons as
true successors in the estate of his earthly kingdom, which sons likewise
refused to be baptized. Their names were Serred, Seward, and Sigebert, Ran.
Cest. Beda li. 2. cap. 5 Serred, Seward, and Segebert, the sons of Sabert.
men of an ill mind, and such as in whom no virtue remained, no fear of God,
nor any respect of religion, but specially hating the professors of the
christian faith. For after their father was dead, they began to fall to their
old idolatry, which in his life time they seemed to have given over, insomuch
that now they openly worshipped idols, and gave liberty to their subjects to
do the like.

And when the bishop Melitus, at the solemnizing of mass in the church,
distributed the eucharisticall bread unto the people, they asked him (as it is
said) wherefore he did not deliver of that bright white bread unto them also, as
well as he had been accustomed to do to their father Saba (for so they used
to call him.) Unto whom the bishop made this answer: If you will be washed in
that wholesome fountain, wherein your father was washed, ye may be partakers
of that holy bread whereof he was partaker, but if you despise the washpoole
of life, ye may by no means taste the bread of salvation. But they offended
herewith, replied in this wise: We will not enter into that fountain, for we
know we have no need thereof: but yet nevertheless we will be refreshed with
that bread.

After this, when they had been earnestly and many times told, that unless
they would be baptized, they might not be partakers of the sacred oblation: at
length in great displeasure they told him, that if he would not consent unto
them in so small a matter, there should be no place for him within the bounds
of their dominion, and so he was constrained to depart. Whereupon he being
expelled, resorted into Kent, there to take advise with his fellow-bishops,
Laurence and Iustus, what was to be done in this so weighty a matter. Who
finally resolved upon this point, that it should be better for them to return
into their country, where with free minds they might serve almighty God,
rather than to remain amongst people that rebelled against the faith, without
hope to do good amongst them. Wherefore Melitus and Iustus did depart first,
and went over into France, minding there to abide till they might see what the
end would be. But shortly after, those brethren the kings of Essex, which had
expelled their bishop in manner above said, suffered woorthilie for their wicked
doings. For going forth to battle against the Westsaxons, they were
overthrown and slain altogether with all their army, The son of king
Sebert slain.
by the two kings Kinigils and Quichelme. But nevertheless, albeit the authors
of the mischief were thus taken away, yet the people of that country would
not be reduced again from their devilish woorshipping of false gods, being
eftsoons fallen thereto in that season by the encouragement and perilous
example of their rulers. Wherefore the archbishop Laurence was in mind also to
follow his fellows Melitus and Iustus: but when he minded to set forward, he
was warned in a dream, and cruelly scourged (as has been reported by the
apostle saint Peter, who reproved him) for that he would so uncharitably for
sake his flock, and leave it in danger without a shepherd to keep the woolfe
from the fold.

The archbishop imboldned by this vision, and also repenting him of his
determination, came to king Eadbald, and showed to him his stripes, and the
manner of his dream. The king being herewith put in great fear, renounced his
heathenish worshipping of idols, and was baptized, and as much as in him lay,
from thenceforth succored the congregation of the christians, and advanced the
church to his power. He sent also into France, and called home the bishops
Melitus and Iustus, so that Iustus was

But the Eastsaxons would not receive Melitus to his see at London, but
continued in their wicked mawmetrie, in obeieng a bishop of their pagan law,
whom they had erected for that purpose. Neither was king Eadbald of that
authority and power in those parties, as his father was before, whereby he
might constreine them to receive their lawful bishop. But suerlie the said
king Eadbald with his people, after he was once converted again, gave Beda
lib. 2.
within the monastery of saint Peter, afterward called saint Agnes. This
church was consecrated by Melitus, who after the death of Laurence succeeded in
governance of the archbishops see of Canturburie. After Melitus, who departed
this life in the year of our Lord 624, Iustus that before was bishop of
Rochester, was made archbishop of Canturburie, Beda. lib. 2. ca. 8.
and ordained

Edwin reigns over the Northumbers, his great power and reputation, a
marriage between him and Ethelburga the sister of king Eadbald upon religious
covenants, the traitorous attempts of murtherous Eumerus against him, his wife
Ethelburga is delivered of a daughter,
YE have heard how Edelfred the king of Northumberland was slain in battle
near to the water of Idel, by Redwald king of the Eastangles, in favor of
Edwin whom the said Edelfred had confined out of his dominion, 24 years
before. The foresaid Redwald therefore Edwin. Beda. lib. 2, ca. 5.
and grew to be of more power than any other king in the days of the English
nation: not only ruling over a great part of the countries inhabited with
English men, but also with Britains, who inhabited not only in Wales, but in
part of Chesshire, Lancashire, Cumberland, and along by the west seacoast in
Galloway, and so forth even unto Dumbritaine in Scotland: which I have thought
good to note, that it may appear in what countries Cadwall^ bare rule, of
whom so often mention is made in this part of the history. But as concerning
Edwin, his reputation was such, as not only the English men, W. Malm. takes
Meuania to be Anglesey.
Britains and Scots, but also the Isles of Orknie, and these of Man, and others
the west Isles of ancient time called Meuaniae, had him in reverence, and feared
his mighty power, so as they durst not attempt any exploit to offend him.

It chanced that shortly after, king Redwald had advanced him to the kingdom
of Northumberland, to wit, about 6 years, the same Redwald deceassed, which
made greatly for the more augmentation of Edwins power. For the people of the
Eastangles, which (whilst Edwin remained amongst them as a banished man) had
conceived a good opinion of him for his approved valiancie and noble courage,
offered themselves to be wholly at his commandment. Carpwaldus.
But Edwin suffering Carpwald or Erpwald the son of Redwald to inioie the
bare title and name of the king of that country, ruled all things at his own
will and pleasure. Neither was there any province within Britain that did not
obeie him, or was not ready to do him service (the kingdom of Kent only
excepted) for he suffered the Kentishmen to live in quiet, because he began to
have a liking to the sister of king Eadbald, namely the lady Ethelburga,
otherwise called Tate or Tace.

He made request therefore by sending ambassadors to her brother, Beda. lib.
2. cap. 9.
to have the said lady in marriage, and at length obtained her, with condition
that she being a christian woman, might not only use the christian religion,
but also that all those, whether men or women, priests or ministers, which came
with her, might have license to do the same, without trouble or impeachment of
any manner of person. Hereupon she being sent unto him, there was appointed to
go with her (besides many other) one Pauline, which was consecrated bishop by
the archbishop Iustus the 21 of Iulie, Matthew. West. Beda. lib. 2. cap. 9.
in the year of our Lord 625, 625
who at his coming into Northumberland thus in company with Ethelburga,
traveled earnestly in his office, both to preserve her and such christians in
the faith of Christ, as were appointed to give their attendance on her, least
they should chance to fall: and also sought to win some of the Pagans (if it
were possible) unto the same faith, though at the first he little profited in
that matter.

In the year following, there came a murderer unto the court of king Edwin,
as then soiourning in a palace which stood upon the side of the river of
Dorwent, being sent from Quichelme king of the Westsaxons, to the intent to
murder Edwin, because he had of late sore damnified the countries of the
Westsaxons. This murderer was called Eumerus, and carried under his coat a
short double edged woodknife inuenomed of purpose, Other say an axe, as Matthew.
West.
that if the king being but a little hurt therewith, should not die of the
wound, yet he should not escape the danger of the poison. This Eumerus on
Easter mondaie came to the king, Eumerus.
and making forth to him as it had been to have declared some message from
his master, when he had espied his time, drew his weapon, and offered to
strike the king. But one of the kings servants named Lilla, perceiving this,
slept betwixt the king and the blow. Howbeit the murderer set the stripe
forward with such force, that the knife running through the body of Lilla
wounded also the king a little; and before this murderer could be beaten
down, he slew another of the kings servants, a knight that attended upon him,
called Fordher.

The same night Ethelburga was delivered of a daughter named Eanfled, Eanfled
borne
for the which when king Edwin gave thanks unto his gods, in the presence of
bishop Pauline, the bishop did admonish him, rather to give thanks unto the
true and only God, by whose goodness it came to pass that the queen was
safely and without danger delivered. The king giving good ear unto the
bishops wholesome admonition, promised at that present to become a christian,
if he might revenge his injuries received at the hands of the Westsaxons. And
to assure Pauline that his promise should take place, he gave unto him his newborn daughter to be made holy to

In the mean time K. Edwin being recovered of his hurt, assembled an army,
and went against the Westsaxons, with whom incountring in battle, he either
slew or brought to his subjection all them that had conspired his death, and so
returned as a

Now whilst he thus hoong in doubt unto whether part he should incline, there
came letters to him Beda. lib. 2. cap. 10.
exhorting him by sundry kinds of gentle persuasions, to turn to the
worshipping of the true and living God, and to renounce the worshipping of
mawmets and idols. The pope wrote also to queen Ethelburga, praieng her to
continue in her good purpose, and by all means possible to do what might be
done for the converting of her husband unto the faith of Christ. But the thing
that most moved the king, Beda. lib. 2. cap. 11.
was a vision A vision.
which sometime he had while he remained as a

After that king Ethelfred was informed that the foresaid Redwald had received
Edwin, Beda. cap. 12.
he ceased not by his ambassadors to move Redwald either to deliver Edwin into
his hands, or to make him away. At length by often sending, and promises made
of large sums of money, mixed with threatenings, he obtained a grant of his
suit, so that it was determined that Edwin should either be murdered, or The
honorable consideration of Edwin.
but refused to depart the country, since he had no just cause outwardly given
to play such a slipper part, choosing rather to ieopard his life with

Hereupon his friend departing from him, left him sitting without the doors:
where after he had reuolued many things in his mind, and thought long upon
this matter, at length he perceived one to come toward him unknown, and in
strange apparel, seeming to him in every point a stranger, at which sight
(for that he could not imagine who it should be) Edwin was much afraid: but the
man coming to him saluted him, and asked of him what he made there at that
time of the night when other were at rest. Edwin on the other part asked what
he had to do therewith, and whether he used to lie abroad in the night, or
within house? Who answering said; Think not Edwin that I am ignorant of thy
heaviness, of thy watchings, and this thy solitary sitting here without
doors. For I know who thou art, wherefore thou art thus pensive, and what
evils thou fear to be toward thee at hand. But tell me, what would thou
give him, that could deliver thee out of this heaviness, and persuade Redwald
that he should neither do thee hurt, nor deliver thee to thine enemies? Here
with when Edwin said that he would gladly give all that in him might lie to
such a one in reward? The other said; What would thou give then, if he should
promise in good sooth that (all thine enemies being destroyed) thou should
be king, and that thou should pass in power all the kings which have
reigned in the English nation before thy time? Edwin being better come to
himself by such demandes, did not stick to promise that he would requite his
friendship with worthy thanks.

Then replied he to his words and said; If he that shall prophecy to thee this
good hap to come, shall also be able to inform thee in such counsel for thy
health and life, as never any of thy forefathers or kinsfolk yet have heard,
would thou obey him, and also consent to receive his wholesome
advertisement? Whereunto without further deliberation Edwin promised, that he
would in all points follow the instruction of him that should deliver him out
of so many and great calamities, and bring him to the rule of a kingdom.
Which answer being got, this person that thus talked with him, laid his hand
upon his head, saying: When this therefore shall chance to thee, be not
forgetful of this time, nor of this communication, and those things that thou
now dooest promise, see thou perform. And therewith he vanished away. So that
Edwin might well perceive it was no man but a vision that thus had appeared
unto him.

[This unaccustomed course it pleased God to use for the conversion of the king
(to whose example it was no doubt but the people and inferior sort would
generally be conformed) who otherwise had continued in paganism and blind
ignorance both of Gods truth and true christianity. And it may be that there
was in him, as in other kings his predecessors, a settled persuasion in
gentilish error, so that neither by admonition nor preaching (though the same
had proceeded from the mouth of one allotted to that ministry) he was to be
revoked from the infidelity and misbeleefe wherein he was nuzzeled and trained
up. For it is the nature of all men, to be addicted to the observation of such
rites and customs as have been established and left in force by their
progenitors, and sooner to stand unto a desire and earnest purpose of adding
somewhat to their elders corrupt constitutions, and irreligious course of
conversation, than to be inclinable to any article or point tending to
innouatition: so inflexible is the posterity to swerve from the traditions of
antiquity, stand the same upon never so gross and palpable absurdities.]

Edwin still reioising in the foresaid comfortable talk, but thoughtfull in
mind what he should be, or from whence he came that had talked in this sort
with him; behold his friend returned that first had brought him forth of his
chamber, and declared unto him good news, how the king by persuasion of the
queen had altered his determination, and minded to maintain his quarrel to
the uttermost of his power: and so he did in deed. For with all diligence he
raised an army, and went against Ethelfrid, vanquished him in battle, and
placed Edwin in the kingdom (as before ye have heard.)

King Edwin is put in mind of his vision by Pauline who saw the same in
spirit, he is licenced to preach the gospel, bishop Coifi destroieth the
idols, Edwin and his people receive the christian faith, his two sons Osfride
and Eadfride become conuerts, Redwald king of the Eastangles is baptized, he
serves God and the devil, Sibert receives the faith, Felix bishop of
Burgongne comes over to Honorius archbishop of Canturburie, he preaches to
the Eastangles, the Northumbers and Lincolnshiremen are converted, many
NOtwithstanding the former vision, king Edwin deferred time yer he would
receive the christian faith, in so much that Pauline upon a day came unto him
as he sat Behold, by the assistance of Gods favor thou have escaped the hands
of thine enemies, whom thou stoodst in fear of: behold through his bountious
liberality, thou have obtained the kingdom which thou did desire,
remember then that It is to be thought that the vision which the king had in
times

The king having heard his words, answered, that he would and ought to receive
the faith which he taught, but first he would confer with his nobles, and if
they would agree to do the like, then would they be baptized altogether at one
time. Pauline satisfied herewith, Edwin did as he had promised, calling
together the wisest men of his realm, and of Edwin consulteth with his nobles.
which was preached unto them by Pauline, unto whom his chief bishop named
Coifi, incontinently made this answer; The answer of an heathen bishop.
that Suerlie the religion which they had hicherto followed was nothing worth.
For says he, there is none of thy people that has more reverently
woorshipped our gods than I have done, and yet be there many that have
received far greater benefits at thy hands than I have done: and therefore if
our gods were of any power, then would they rather help me to high honor and
dignity than others. Therefore if it may be found that this new religion is
better and more auailable than our old, let us with speed embrace the same.

Finally, when other of the kings council and men of high authority gave
their consents, that this doctrine which Pauline taught ought to be received,
if therein appeered more certeintie of salvation than could be found in the
other: at length the king gave license to Pauline openly to preach the
gospel, Pauline licenced to preach the gospel.
and renouncing his worshipping of false gods, professed the christian faith.
And when he demanded of his bishop Coifi who should first deface the altars of
their idols, and the tabernacles wherewith they were compassed about? He
answered, that himself would do it. For what is more meet (says he) than
that I, which thorough foolishness have worshipped them, should now for
example sake destroy the same, thorough wisdom given me from the true and
living God? And streightwaies throwing away the superstition of vanity,
required armor and weapon of the king, with a stoned horse, upon the which he
being mounted, rode forth to destroy the idols.

This was a strange sight to the people: for it was not lawful for the bishop
of their law to put on armor, or to ride on any beast, except it were a mare.
He having therefore a sword gird to him, took a spear in his hand, and
riding on the kings horse, went to the place where the idols stood. The common
people that beheld him had thought he had been stark mad, and out of his
wits: but he without longer deliberation, incontinently upon his coming to
the temple, began to deface the fame, and in contempt threw his spear against
it, and reioising greatly in the knowledge of the worshipping of the true God,
commanded his company to destroy and burn down the same temple with all the
altars. This place where the idols were sometime worshipped was not far from
York, toward the east part of the river of Derwent, and is called Gotmundin
Gaham, where the foresaid bishop by the inspiration of God defaced and
destroyed those altars, which he himself had hallowed.

King Edwin therefore with all the nobility, King Edwin with his people
receive the christian faith. Beda lib. 2. cap. 14.
and a great number of his people, received the faith and were baptized, in the
year of our Lord 627, 627
in the tenth year of his reign, and about the 178 year after the first
coming of the Englishmen into this land. He was baptized at York on Easter
day (which fell that year the day before the Ides of April) in the church of
S. Peter the apostle, which he had caused to be erected and built up of timber
upon the sudden for that purpose, and afterward began the foundation of the
same church in stone-woorke of a larger compass, comprehending within it that
oratorie which he had first caused to be built: but before he could finish the
work, he was slain (as after shall be showed) leaving it to be performed of
his successor Oswald.

Pauline continued from thencefoorth during the kings life, which was six
years after, in preaching the gospel in the province, converting an
innumerable number of people to the faith of Christ, among whom were Osfride
and Eadfride the two sons of Edwin, whom he begot in time of his banishment
of his wife Quinburga, the daughter of Cearlus king of Mercia. Also afterward
he begot children on his second wife Ethelburga, that is to say, a son called
Edilhimus, and a daughter named Ediltraudis, Ediltrudis.
and another son called Bustfrea, of the which the two first died in their
cradels, and were buried in the church at York. To be brief by the kings
assistance and favor showed unto Pauline in the work of the Lord, great
multitudes of people daily received the faith, and were baptized of Pouline in
(...) places, but specially in the river of Gl^^te within the province of
Bernicia, and also in Swale in the province of Deira: for as yet in the
beginning (...) of the church in those countries, no temples or fonts could be
builded or erected in so short a time.

Of such great zeal was Edwin (as it is reported) toward the setting forth
of Gods truth, that he persuaded Carpwald the son of Redwald king of the
Eastangles to abandon the superstitious worshipping of idols, This chanced in
the year 632, as Matt. West. says. Redwald king of Eastangles baptized.
and to receive the faith of Christ with all his whole province. His father
Redwald was baptized in Kent long before this time, but in vain: for returning
home, through counsel of his Redwald would serve God and the devil.
(whom before time he had served) and in one self church had at one time both
the sacraments of Christ ministered at one altar, and sacrifice made unto devils
at another.

But Carpwald within a while after he had received Sibert or Sigibert.
the brother of Carpwald, a most christian prince, and very well learned,
obtained the rule of that kingdom* who whilst he lived a banished man in
France during his brothers life time, was baptized there, and became a
christian: and when he came to be king, he caused all his province to be
partaker

Unto his godly purpose also, a bishop of the parties of Burgoigne named Felix
was a great furtherer, who coming over unto the archbishop of Canturburie
Honorius that was successor unto Iustus, and declaring unto him his earnest
desire, was sent by the same archbishop to preach the word of life unto the
Eastangles, which he did with such good success, that he converted the whole
country to the faith A bishop ordained at Dunwich. Beda lib. 1. cap. 16.
ending the course of his life there in peace after he had continued in that
his bishoplike office the space of 17 years. Moreover Pauline, after that he
had converted the Northumbers; preached the word of God unto them of Lindsey,
which is a part of Lincolnshire: This chanced in the year 628, as Matthew. West.
says.
and first he persuaded one Blecca the governor of the city of Lincoln to
turn unto Christ, together with all his family. In that city he also builded
a church of stone work. Thus Pauline Tio vulfingacester. This Pauline had
with him a deacon named James, the which showed himself very diligent in the
ministry, map profited greatly therein.

But now to return to king Edwin, who was a prince verelie or worthy same,
and for the politic Will. Malm.
for in his time all robbers by the high way were so banished out of his
dominions, that a woman with her newborn child alone, without other company,
might have traveled from sea to sea, and not have incountred with ^^ie
creature that durst once have offered her injury. He was also very careful
for the advancement of the commodity and common wealth of his people, Matthew.
West. Beda lib. 2. cap. 16.
insomuch that where there were any sweet and clear water-springs, he caused
posts to be set up, and iron dishes to be fastened thereto with chains, that
waifaring men ^^ght have the same ready at hand to drink with: and there was
none so hardy as to touch the same but for that use. He used wheresoever he
went within the cities or elsewhere abroad, to have a banner borne before him,
in token of justice to be ministered by his royal authority.

In the mean season, pope Honorius the fifth, hearing that the Northumbers had
received the faith (as before is mentioned) at the preaching of Pauline, sent
unto the said Pauline the pall, Beda lib. (...) 17.
confirming him archbishop in the sea of York. He sent also letters of
exhortation unto king Edwin, to kindle him the more with fatherly advise to
continue and proceed in the way of understanding, into the which he was
entered. At the same time also, because Iustus the archbishop of Canturburie
was dead, and one Honorius elected to that see, pope Honorius sent to the said
elect archbishop of Canturburie his pall, with letters, A decree concerning the
archbishops of Canturburie and York.
wherein was contained a decree by him made, that when either the archbishop of
Canturburie or York chanced to depart this life, he that suruiued should have
authority to ordeine another in place of him that was deceassed, that they
should not need to weary themselves with going to Rome, being so far distant
from them. The copy of which letter is registered in the ecclesiastical
history of Beda, bearing date the third Ides of June, in the year of our Lord
633. 633
The same pope sent letters also to the Scottish people, The feast of Easter.
exhorting them to celebrate the feast of Easter in such due time as other
churches of the christian world observed. The heresy of the Pelagians.
And also because the heresy of the Pelagians began to renew again amongst
them (as he was informed) he admonished them to beware thereof, and by all
means to avoid it. For he knew that to the office of a pastor it is
necessarily incident, not only to exhort, teach, and show his sheep the
ways to a christian life, but also strongly to withstand all such unjust
means, as might hinder their proceeding in the truth of religion. For as
poison is unto the body, that is heresy unto verity. And as the body by
poison is disabled from all natural faculties, and utterly extinguished,
unless by present means the force thereof be vanquished: so truth and verity
by errors and heresies is many times choked and recouereth, but never
strangled.

But now that the kingdom of Northumberland flourished (as before is partly
touched) in happy state under the prosperous reign of Edwin, at length, after
he had governed it the space of 17 years, Cadwalline, or Cadwallo king of
Britain, Cadwallin, or Cadwallo king of Britain.
who succeeded Cadwane, as Gal. Mon. says, rebelled against him. For so it
comes to pass, that nothing can be so sure confirmed by man's power, but the
same by the like power may be again destroyed. Penda king of Mercia Penda king
of Mercia.
enuieng the prosperous proceedings of Edwin, procured Cadwallo to move this
rebellion against Edwin: and ioining his power with Cadwallo, they invaded the
country of Northumberland jointly together. Edwin hereof advertised,
gathered, his people, and came to encounter them, so that both armies met at a
place called Hatfield, King Edwin slain. Matthew. West.
where was fought a very sore and bloody battle. But in the end Edwin was
slain with one of his sons named Osfride, and his army beaten down and
dispersed. Also there was slain on Edwins part, Eodbald king of Orkenie.
Moreover there was an other of Edwins sons named Eadfride constreined of
necessity to give himself into the hands of Penda, and was after by him
cruelly put to death, contrary to his promised faith in king Oswalds days
that succeeded Edwin. Thus did king Edwin end his life in that battle, fought
at Hatfield aforesaid, on the fourth ides of October, in the year of our Lord
6^^, he being then about the age of 47 years and upwards.

The cruelty of Penda and Cadwallo after their victory, the Britains make no
account of religion, Archbishop Pauline with queen Ethelburga fly out of
Northumberland into Kent, honorable personages accompany him thither, Romanus
bishop of Rochester drowned, Pauline undertakes the charge of that see; Osrike
is king of Deira, and Eaufride king of Bernicia, both kings become apostatas,
and fall from christianity to paganism, they are both slain within less
than a years space; Oswald is created king of Northumberland,
CAdwallo and Penda having obtained the victory aforsaid, used it most
cruelly. For one of the capteins was a pagan, and the other wanting all
civility, showed himself more cruel than any pagan could have done. So
that Penda being a worshipper of false gods with his people of Mercia, The
cruelty of Penda and Cadwallo.
and Cadwallo having no respect Beda (as he affirms) the Britains made no
account of the

When the country of the Northumbers was brought into this miserable case by
the enemies invasion, The archbishop Pauline flies into Kent.
the archbishop Pauline taking with him the queen Ethelburga, whom he had
brought thither, returned now again with her by water into Kent, where he was
honorably received of the archbishop

AFter it was known that Edwin was slain in battle (as before ye have heard)
Osrike the son of his uncle Elfrike took upon him the rule of the kingdom
of Deira, Beda lib. 3. ca. 1.
which had received the sacrament of baptism by the preaching and virtuous
instruction of Pauline. But the other kingdom of Northumberland called
Bernicia, Osrike king of Deira.
Eaufride the son of Edelfred or Edelfride, Eaufrid king of Bernicia.
took upon him to govern. This Eaufride during the time of Edwins reign, had
continued in Scotland, and there being converted to the christian faith was
baptized. But does these princes, after they had obtained possession of their
earthly kingdoms, did forget the care of the heavenly kingdom, so that they
returned to their old kind of idolatry. But almighty God did not long suffer
this their unthankfulness without just punishment: for first in the next
summer, The two kings of Northumberland slain.
when Osrike had rashly besieged Cadwallo king of the Britains, within a
certain town, Cadwallo brake forth upon him, and finding him unprovided to
make resistance, slew him with all his army. Now after this, whilst Cadwallo
not like a conqueror governed the provinces of the Northumbers, but like a
tyrant wasted and destroyed them, in sleaing the people in tragical manner, he
also slew Eaufride, the which with twelve men of war came vndiscreetlie unto
him to sue for peace: and thus within less than twelve months space both
these runagate kings were dispatched.

THen Oswald the son of Edelfred, and brother to the foresaid Eaufride was
created king of the Northumbers, the sixth in number from Ida. This Oswald after
that his father was slain, Oswald began his reign in the year 635. Beda.
lib. 3. cap. 3.
lived as a banished person a long time within Scotland, where he was baptized,
and professed the christian religion, and passed the flower of his youth in
good exercises, both of mind and body. Amongst other things he practiced the
understanding of warlike knowledge, minding so to use it as it might stand him
in stead to defend himself from injury of the enemies that should provoke
him, and not otherwise. Herevpo^ Cadwallo king of the Britains made in manner no
account of him: for by reason that he had atchiued such great victories against
the Englishmen, and having slain their two kings (as before is expressed) he
ceased not to proceed in his tyrannical doings, reputing the English people
for slothful, and not apt to the war, boasting that he was borne to their
destruction. Thus being set up in pride of courage, he feared no perils, but
boldly (without considering at all the skillful knowledge which Oswald had
sufficiently learned in feats of war) took upon him to assail the foresaid
Oswald, that had brought an army against him, and was encamped in a plain
field near unto the wall which the Romans had builded in times past against
the invasion of Scots and Picts.

Cadwallo straight provoked Oswald to try the matter by battle, but Oswald
forbear the first day, and caused a cross to be erected in the same place
where he was encamped, in full hope that it should be an ensign or trophie of
his victory, causing all soldiers to make their prayers to God, that in time
of such necessity it might please him to succor them that worship him. It is
said, that the cross being made, and the hole dug wherein it should be set,
he took the cross in his own hands, and putting the foot thereof into that
hole, so held it till his soldiers had filled the hole, and rammed it up: and
then caused all the soldiers to kneel down upon their knees, and to make
intercession to the true and living God for his assistance against the proud
enemy, with whom they should fight in a just quarrel for the preservation of
their people and country.

After this, on the next morning he boldly gave battle to his enemies, so
that a sore and cruel fight insued betwixt them. At length Oswald perceived
that the Britains began somewhat to faint, and therefore caused his people to
renew their force, and more lustilie to preasse forward, so that first ^e put
that most cruel enemy to flight, and after pursuing the chase ouertooke him,
and slew him with the most part of all his huge and mighty army, Beda. Will.
Malm.
at a place called Denisborne, but the place where he caused the cross to be
erected he named Heuenfield. Thus Cadwallo the most cruel enemy of the
English name ended his life: he was terrible both in nature and countenance,
for the which cause they say the Britains did afterward set up his image, that
the same might be a terror to the enemies when they should behold it.

But here is to be remembered by the British history of Gal. Mon. it should
appear that Cadwallo was not slain at all, but reigned victoriously for the
space of 48 years, and then departed this life, as in

PEnda the son of Wilba succeeded in the government of the kingdom of
Mercia after Ciarlus, Penda. 636
and began his reign in the year of our Lord

Now upon confidence in these his great virtues and vices from that time he was
made king (as though the whole I Will had been due to him) he thought not good to
let any occasion pass that was offered to make war, as well against his
friends and confederats, as also against his own sworn enemies. Part of his
doings ye have heard, and more shall appear

Cadwallo king of Britain, diverse deeds of his as the British writers have
recorded
CAdwallo or Cadwalline, (for we find him so named) began his reign over the
Britains, Cadwallo, or Cadwalline. 635.
in the year of our Lord 635, in the year of the reign of the emperor
Heracleus 35, and in the 13 year of Dagobert K. of France, Of this man ye have
heard partly before touching his dealings and wars against the Northumbers,
and other of the English nation: but for so much as diverse other things are
reported of him by the British writers, we have thought good in his place to
rehearse the same in part, as in Gal. Mon. we find written, leaving the credit
still with the author, since the truth thereof may be the more suspected,
because other authors of good authority, as Beda, Henry Huntington, William
Malmesburie, and others seem greatly to disagree from him herein. But thus it
is written.

This Cadwallo and Edwin the son of Ethelfred, as Galfride says, Edwin was
not son to Ethelfred, (...) to Alla, or Ele, as in other places pl^^^lie
apeareth.
were brought up in France, being sent thither unto Solomon king of Britain,
by king Cadwane, when they were very young. Now after their return into this
land, when they were made kings, Cadwallo of the Britains, and Edwin of the
Northumbers, there continued for the space of two years great friendship
betwixt them, till at length Edwin required of Cadwallo that he might wear a
crown, and celebrate appointed solemnities within his dominion of
Northumberland, as well as Cadwallo did in his country. Cadwallo, taking
advice in this matter, at length by persuasion of his nephue Brian, denied to
grant unto Edwin his request, wherewith Edwin took such displeasure, that he
sent word unto Cadwallo, that he would be crowned without his leave or
license, since he would not willingly grant it. Whereto Cadwallo answered, that
if he so did, he would cut off his head under his diadem, if he presumed to
wear any within the confines of Britain. Hereof discord arising betwixt
these two princes, they began to make fierce and cruel war either of them
against the other, and at length ioining in batell with their maine forces,
Cadwallo lost the field, with many thousands of his men, Cadwallo vanquishe^ by
Edwin.
and being chased fled into Scotland, and from thence got over into Ireland,
and finally passed the seas into Britain Armorike, Cadwallo flies the (...).
where, of his coosin king Solomon he was courteously received, and at length
obtained of him 10000 men to go with him back into his country to assist him
in recovery of his lands and dominions, the which in the mean time were
cruelly spoiled, wasted and haried by king Edwin.

At the same time Brian the nephue of Cadwallo, whom he had sent into Britain
a little before to slay a certain wizard or southsaier, whom king Edwin had
gotten out of Spain named Pelitus, that by disclosing the purpose of Cadwallo
unto Edwin, greatly hindered Cadwallos enterprises, had fortified the city of
Excester, mening to defend it till the coming of Cadwallo, whereupon Penda
king of Mercia besieged that city with a mighty army, purposing to take it,
and Brian within it. Cadwallo then advertised hereof, immediately after his
arrival hasted to Excester, and dividing his people in 4 parts, set upon his
enemies, and took Penda, and overthrew his whole army. Penda having no other
shift to escape, submitted himself wholly unto Cadwallo, promising to become
his liegeman, to fight against the Saxons in his quarrel. Penda being thus
subdued, Cadwallo called his nobles together which had been dispersed abroad a
long season, and with all speed went against Edwin king of Northumberland, and
slew him in battle at Hatfield (as before is mentioned) with his son Osfride,
and Eodbold king of the Isles of Orknie, which was come thither to his aid.

By this it should appear, that Fabian has gathered amiss in the account of
the reigns of the British kings: for it appears by Beda and others, that
Edwin was slain in the year of our Lord 634. And where Fabian (as before is
said) 634.
attributes that act and diverse other unto Cadwan the father of this Cadwallo:
yet both Gal. Mon. and Beda with the most part of all other writers signify
that it was done by Cadwallo. Harding assigns but 13 years to the reign of
Cadwan, and declares that he died in the year of our Lord 616, in the which
(as he says) Cadwallo, began his reign, which opinion of his seems best to
agree with that which is written by other authors. But to return to the other
doings of Cadwallo, as we find them recorded in the British story. After he
had got this victory against the Northumbers, he cruelly pursued the Saxons,
as though he Oswald slain
Whereupon his brother Osunus succeeding in government of the Northumbers,
sought the favor of Cadwallo now ruling Oswie. Matthew. West. 654
in the which (as it happened) Penda himself was slain. Then Cadwallo after two
years granted that Ulfridus the son of Penda should succeed in Mercia.

Thus Cadwallo ruled things at his appointment within this land. 678 Matt.
West. says 676.
And finally when he had reigned Beda and other antentike writers (as before I
have said.)

The true story of the forenamed king Oswald, his desire to restore christian
religion, Cormans preaching taking small effect among the Northumbers,
persuadeth him to depart into his own country, he slandereth them before
NOw will we (after all these differing discourses of the British chronologers)
approach and draw as near as we can to the truth of the history touching
Oswald king of the Northumbers, of whom we find, Oswald means to be
thankful to God for his benefits.
that after he had tasted of Gods high favor extended to himwards, Beda. li.
3. cap. 3. 5. 6. Hector Boet.
in vanquishing his enemies, as one minding to be thankful therefore, he was
desirous to restore the christian faith through his whole kingdom, sore
lamenting the decay thereof within the same, and therefore even in the
beginning of his reign, he sent unto Donwald the Scottish king (with whom he
had been brought up in the time of his banishment the space of 18 years)
requiring him to have some learned Scotishman sent unto him, skillful in
preaching the word of life, that with godly sermons and wholesome instructions,
he might convert the people of Northumberland unto the true and living God,
promising to interteine him with such provision as apperteined.

At his instance, there was sent unto him one Corman, a clerk singularly well
learned, Corman.
and of great gravity in behavior: but for that he wanted such facility, and
plain utterance by way of gentle persuading, as is requisite in him that
shall instruct the simple, only setting forth in his sermons high mysteries,
and matters of such profound knowledge, as the very learned might scarcely
perceive the perfect sense and meaning of his talk, his travel came to small
effect, so that after a years remaining there, he returned into his country,
declaring amongst his brethren of the clergy, that the people of
Northumberland was a froward, stubborn and stiffe-harted generation, whose
minds he could not frame by any good means of persuasion to receive the
christian faith: so that he judged it lost labor to spend more time amongst
them, being so unthankful and intractable a people, as no good might be done
unto them.

Amongst other learned and virtuous prelates of the Scots, there chanced one to
be there present at the same time called Aidan, Aidan.
a man of so perfect life, that (as Beda writes) he taught no otherwise than
he lived, having no regard to the cares of this world, but whatsoever was given
him by kings or men of wealth and riches, that he freely bestowed upon the
poor, exhorting other to do the like. This Aidan hearing Cormans words,
perceived anon that the fault was not so much in the people as in the teacher,
and therefore declared, that (as he thought) although it were so that the
people of Northumberland gave no such attentive ear unto the preaching of that
reverend prelate Corman, as his godly expectation was they should have done,
yet might it be that his uttering of over many mystical articles amongst
them, far above the capacity of the understanding of simple men, was the
cause why they so lightly regarded his divine instructions, whereas if he had
(according to the counsel of Saint Paul) at the first ministered unto their
tender understandings, only milk, S. Paul's counsel.
without harder nourishments, he might happily have woone a far greater
number of them unto the receiving of the faith, and so have framed them by
little and little to have digested stronger food. And therefore he thought it
necessary in discharge of their duties toward God, and to satisfy the
earnest zeal of king Oswald, that some one amongst them might be appointed to
go again into Northumberland, to try by proceeding in this manner before
alleged, what profit would thereof ensue.

The bishops hearing the opinion of Aidan, and therewith knowing Cormans manner
of preaching, judged the matter to be as Aidan had declared, and thereupon not
only allowed his words, but also willed him to take the journey upon him,
since they knew none so able with effect to accomplish their wished desires in
that behalf. Aidan, Aidan comes into England to preach the gospel.
for that he would not seem to refuse to take that in hand which he himself
had motioned, was contented to satisfy their request, and so set forward
toward Northumberland, and coming thither, was ioifullie received of king
Oswald, who appointed him the I Will of Lindesfarne, wherein to place the sea of
his new bishoprike.

This Aidan in one point varied from the use of the new begun church of
England, Beda li. 3. ca. 3. Hector Boet.
that is to say, touching the time of observing the feast of Easter, in like
manner as all the bishops of the Scots and Picts inhabiting within Britain in
those days did, following therein (as they took it) the doctrine of the

One thing was a great hinderance to him, that he had not the perfect knowledge
of the Saxon tongue. But Oswald himself was a great help to him in that
matter, who being desirous of nothing so much, as to have the faith of Christ
rooted in the hearts of his subjects, Beda. Oswald an interpretor to the
preacher.
used as an interpretor to report unto the people in their Saxon tongue, such
whole sermons Hector Boet.
of the which no small part forsaking the world, betook themselves to a
solitary kind of life.

Thus by his earnest travel in continual preaching and setting forth the
gospel in that country, it came to pass in the end, that the faith was
generally received of all the people, and such zeal to advance the glory of
the christian religion daily increased amongst them, that no where could be
found greater. Oswalds zeal to advance religion
Heerevpon were no small number of churches Beda lib. 5. ca. 6
insomuch that (as Beda writes) Oswald atteined to such power, that all the
nations and provinces within Britain, which were divided into four toongs
(that is to say) Britains, Oswald had in estimation with his neighbors.
Scots, and Englishmen, were at his commandment. But yet he was not lifted up
in any pride or presumption, but showed himself marvelous courteous and
gentle, and very liberal to poor people and strangers.

It is said, that he being set at the table upon an Ester day, and having
bishop Aidan at diner then with him, his almoner came in as the bishop was
about to say grace, and declared to the king that there was a great multitude
of poor folks set before the gates to look for the kings alms. The king
heerewith took a silver dish, which was set on the table before him with
meat, and commanded the same meat streightwaies to be distributed amongst the
poor, and the dish broken into small pieces, and divided amongst them: for
which act he was highly commended of the bishop, as he well deserved. By the
good policy and diligent travel of this king, the provinces of Deira and
Bernicia, which hitherto had been at variance, were brought to peace and made
one.

ABout the same time, Beda lib. 3. (...) Birinus conuerteth the Westsaxons
(...) the christian faith.
the Westsaxons were converted to the christian faith, by the preaching of one
Birinus a bishop, who came into this land at the exhortation of pope Honorius,
to set forth the gospel unto those people which as yet were not baptized. By
whose diligent travel in the Lords harvest, Cinigils or Kinigils, one of the
kings of that country received the faith, Kinigils king of Westsaxon becomes
a christian.
and was baptized about the five and twentieth year of his reign. K. Oswald
that should have had his daughter in marriage, was present the same time, who
first yer he became a son in law, was made a godfather unto Kinigils (that
should be his father in law) by receiving him at the fontstone, in that his
second birth of regeneration. To this Birinus, who was an Italian, Polydor.
king Kinigils (now that he was become a convert or christian) appointed and
assigned the city of Dorcester, Dorcester ordained a bishops see.
situat by the Thames, distant from Oxford about seven miles, to be the sea of
his bishoprike, where he procured churches to be built, and by his earnest
travel and setting forth the word of life, converted much people to the
right belief. In the year following, Quichelmus the other king of the
Westsaxons, and son to Kinigils was also christened, and died the same year,
and so Cinigilsus or Kinigils reigned alone.

In this mean while Penda king of Mercia that succeeded next after Ciarlus,
Henr. Hunt.
being a man given to seek trouble in one place or other, leauied war
against the kings of Westsaxon, This chance^ in the year 620, as Math West.
says.
Kinigils and Quichelmus, the which gathering their power, gave him battle at
Cirenchester, where both the parties fought it out to the uttermost, as though
they had forsworn to give place one to another, insomuch that they continued
in fight and making of cruel slaughter till the night parted them in sunder.
And in the morning, when they saw that if they should buckle together again,
the one part should utterly destroy the other, they fell to agreement in
moderating each others demands.

After this, 640 Beda lib. 3. cap. 7. Matthew. West.
in the year of our Lord 640, Eadbald king of Kent departed this life, after
he had reigned 24 years, leaving his kingdom to his son Ercombert. This
Ercombert was the first of the English kings, which took order for the utter
destroieng of all idols throughout his whole kingdom. He also by his royal
authority commanded the fast of forty Lent first ordained to be kept in
England.
days in the Lent season to be kept and observed, appointing worthy and
competent punishment against the transgressors of that commandment. He had by
his wife Segburga, Segburga.
that was daughter unto Anna king of the Eastangles, a daughter named
Eartongatha, Aimoinus.
a professed nun within the monastery of Briege or Cala in France: for in
those days, because there were not many monasteries builded within this land,
a great number of Englishmen, that took upon them the profession of a
religious life, got them over unto abbeies in France, and there professed
themselves moonks: and many there were which sent their daughters over to be
professed nuns within the nunneries there, and specially at Briege, Cala, and
Andelie: amongst other, there were Sedrike the lawful daughter, and Edelburgh
the bastard daughter of the said king Anna, both which in process of time were
made abbesses of the said monastery of Briege.

Ye have heard already, how Oswald king of Northumberland bare himself in all
points like a most worthy prince, not ceasing to relieve the necessity of
the poor, advancing the good, and reforming the evil, whereby he wan to
himself exceeding praise and commendation of all good men, and still his fame
increased for his virtuous doings; namely, for the ardent zeal he had to the
advancing of the christian faith. Hereupon Penda king of Mercia, enuieng the
prosperous proceedings of Oswald, as he that could never abide the good report
of other men's well-dooings, began to imagine how to destroy him, and to
conquer his kingdom, Penda inuadeth the Northumbers.
At length he invaded his country by open war, met with him in the field at
a place called Maserfield, Beda. lib. 3. cap. 9.
and there in sharp and cruel fight Oswald was slain on the fifth day of
August, King Oswald slain. Matt. Westminster. says 644.
in the year of our Lord 642, and in the 38 year of his age, after he had
reigned the term of eight or nine years after some, which account that year
unto his reign, in the which his predecessors Osrike and Eaufride reigned,
whom they number not amongst kings, because of their Will. Malmes.
and had in great worship of the people, being the first of the English nation
that approved his virtue by miracles showed after his departure out of this
life.

Oswie succeeds Oswald in the kingdom of Northumberland, he is sore vexed by
Penda, Oswie and Oswin are partners in government, they fall at strife, Oswin
is betraeied into the hands of Oswie and slain, a commendation of his
personage and goodly qualities, bishop Aidan dies; Cenwalch king of the
Westsaxons, Penda makes war against him for putting away his wife, his
flight, he becomes a christian and recouereth his kingdom, bishop Agilbert
comes into Westsaxon, and afterward departing
AFter that king Oswald was slain, Oswie king of Northumberland. Beda li. 3.
ca. 14.
his brother Oswie 644
Pauline the bishop of Rochester Bernicia.
continuing in perfect friendship for a season, till at length, through the
counsel of wicked persons, that coueted nothing so much as to sow discord and
variance betwixt princes, they fell at debate, and so began to make wars one
against an other, so that finally when they were at point to have tried their
quarrel in open battle, Oswin perceiving that he had not an army of
sufficient force to encounter with Oswie, brake up his camp at Wilfaresdowne,
ten mile by west the town of Cataracton, and after withdrew himself only
with one servant named Condhere unto the house of earl Hunwald, whom he took
to have been his trusty friend: but contrary to his expectation, the said
Hunwald did betraie him unto Oswie, who by his captain Edelwine slew the said
Oswin and his servant the forsaid Condhere, in a place called Ingethling, the
13 kalends of September, in the ninth year of his reign, which was after the
birth of our Savior 651. 651


This Oswin was a goodly gentleman of person, tall, and beautiful, and very
gentle of speech, civil in manners, and very liberal both to high and low,
so that he was beloved of all. Such a one he was, to be brief, as bishop Aidan
gessed that he should not long continue in life, for that the Northumbers were
not worthy of so good and virtuous a governor. Such humbleness and
obedience he perceived to rest in him toward the law of the Lord, in taking
that which was told him for his better instruction in good part, that he said,
he never saw before that time an humble king. The same Aidan lived not past 12
days after the death of the said Oswin, whom he so much loved, departing this
world the last day of August, in the seventeenth year after he was ordained
bishop. His body was buried in the I Will of Lindesferne. After Aidan, one Finan
was made bishop in his place, a Scotishman also, and of the I Will of Hui, from
whence his predecessor the foresaid Aidan came, being first a man of religion
professed in the monastery there (as some writers do report.)

IN the mean time, Cenwalch. Hen. Hunt.
after that Kinigils or Cinigilsus king of the Westsaxons had reigned 31
years, he departed this life Anno 643, leaving his kingdom to his son
Cenwalch or Chenwald, who held the same kingdom the term of 30 years, or 31
(as some write) in manner as his father had done before him. In the third, or
(as others say) in the fifth year of his reign, Penda king of Mercia made
sharp war against him, because he had put away his wife the sister of the
said Penda, 943 Ran. Higd.
and in this war Chenwald was overcome in battle, and driven out of his
country, so that he fled unto Anna king of the Eastangles, with whom he
remained the space of a year, or (as other say) three years, to his great
good hap: for before he was grown to be an enemy to the christian religion,
but now by the wholesome admonitions and sharp rebukes of king Anna, he became
a christian, and received his wife again into his company, according to the
prescript of Gods law, and (to be brief) in all things showed himself a new
man, embracing virtue, and avoiding vice, so that shortly after (through the
help of God) he recovered again his kingdom.

Now when he was established in the same, Agilbertus a bishop.
there came a bishop named Agilbertus out of Ireland, a Frenchman borne (but
having remained in Ireland a long time) to read the scriptures. This Agilbert
coming into the province of the Westsaxons, was gladly received of king
Chenwald, at whose desire he took upon him to exercise the room of a bishop
there: but afterward, when the said king admitted another bishop named Wini,
which had been ordained in France, and knew the tongue better than Agilbert, as
he that was borne in England: Agilbert offended, for that the king had admitted
him without making him of any counsel therein, returned into France, and
there was made bishop of Paris: within a few years after, the foresaid Wini
was expelled also by king Chenwald, who got him into Mercia unto king Uulfhere,
of whom he bought the bishoprike of London, which he held during his life, and
so the country of Westsaxon remained long without a bishop, till at length the
said Agilbert at the request of king Chenwald sent to him Elutherius that was
his nephue.

YE have heard that after Carpwald, Sigibert.
his brother Sigibert succeeded in rule of the Eastangles, a man of great
virtue and worthiness, who Beda. lib. 3. cap. 4.
and after returning into his country, and obteining at length the kingdom,
those things which he had seen well ordered in France, he studied to follow
the example of the same at home, and hereupon considering with himself that
nothing could more advance the state of the commonwealth of his country than
learning and knowledge in the toongs, The university of Cambridge founded by
king Sigibert.
where children might have places where to be instructed and brought up in
learning under appointed teachers, that there might be greater numbers of
learned men trained up than before time had been within this land, to the
furtherance of true religion and virtue.

So that England has good cause to have in thankful remembrance this noble
prince king Sigibert, for all those her learned men which have bin brought Bale
says 636.
At length when this worthy king began to grow in age, he considered with
himself how hard a matter, and how painful an office it was to govern a
realm as apperteined to the duty of a good king, whereupon he determined to
leave the charge thereof to other of more convenient years, and to live from
thencefoorth a private kind of life, and Sigibert resigneth his kingdom to
Egricus.
he became a moonke, and led the rest of his life in a certain abbeie.

Shortly after it so came to pass that Penda king of Mercia (that cruel
ethnike tyrant) made sore wars upon Egricus, whereupon the people of
Eastangles compelled Sigibert to come forth of his monastery, and to go with
them into the field against Penda. Sigibert being thus constreined against his
will, would not put on armor or bear any other Sigibert and Egricus slain.
together with Sigibert and his coosen Egricus their king. This happened in the
year after the birth of our Savior (as some have noted) 652. 652


In the days whilst Sigibert as yet ruled the Baleus. Beda lib. 3. cap. 19.
Furseus.
there came out of Ireland a devout person named Furseus, who coming into the
country of the Eastangles, was gladly received of king Sigibert, by whose
help afterward he builded the abbeie of Cumbreburge, in the which Sigibert
(as some have written) when he renounced his kingdom, was professed a moonke.
Of this Furseus many things are written, the which for briefness we
ouerpasse. After that Felix the bishop of the Eastangles was dead, one Thomas
was ordained in his place, who after he had been bishop five years, died, and
then one Beretgils was ordained in his room by Honorius the archbishop of
Canturburie. The said Honorius himself when he had run the race of his
natural life, deceassed also the last of September in the year of our Lord
653. 653


Anna king of Eastangles is slain by Penda king of Mercia, his brother
succeeding him is slain also by Oswie king of Northumberland, the Mercians or
Middle angles receive the faith under virtuous Peda their prince, he requesteth
Alchfled the king of Northumberlands daughter in marriage, he is baptized by
bishop Finnan, by whose means the Eastsaxons embraced christian religion under
Sigibert their king, he is murdered of two brethren that were his kinsmen upon
a conceived hatred against him for his good and christian life, how dangerous
it is to keep company with an excommunicate person, the authority of a
bishop. The xxxj. Chapter.
AFter Egricus succeeded Anna the son of Enus in the kingdom of Eastangle,
Anna. Will. Malmes.
and was likewise slain by Penda king of Mercia, with the most part of his
army, as he gave battle unto the said Penda that invaded his country. He
left behind him many children, but his brother Edelhere succeeded him in
government of the kingdom, Edelhere K. of Eastangle.
who was slain by Oswie the king of Northumberland, together with the foresaid
Penda, and woorthilie, since he would aid that tyrant which had slain his
kinsman and his brother that were predecessors with him in his kingdom. After
this, when the sea of Canturburie had been vacant by the space of one whole
year and six months, Deus dedit.
one Deus dedit of the country of the Westsaxons, was elected and consecrated
by Ithamar the bishop of Rochester, on the 7 kalends of April. He governed the
church of Canturburie by the term of nine years, four months, and two
days. When he was departed this life, the foresaid Ithamar consecrated for him
one Damianus of the country of Sussex.

ABout this time, Beda histae^^^ lib. 3. cap. 21. 653.
the people of Mercia commonly called Middleangles, received the christian
faith under their king named Peda or Peada, the son of Penda king of Mercia,
who being a towardlie young gentleman, and worthy to have the guiding of a
kingdom, his father Penda advanced him to the rule of that kingdom of the
Middleangles during his own life. Peda or Peada king of Middleangles.
[Heere may you note, that the kingdom of the Middleangles was one, and the
kingdom of Mercia another, though most commonly the same were governed by one
king.] This young Peda came to Oswie king of Northumberland, requiring of him
to have his daughter Alchfled in marriage: but when he was informed that he
might not have her except he would become a christian, then upon hearing the
gospel preached, with the promise of the celestial ioies and immortality, by
the resurrection of the flesh in the life to come, he said that whether he had
king Oswies daughter to wife or not, he would suerlie be baptized, and chiefly
he was persuaded thereunto by his kinsman Alchfrid, who had in marriage his
sister the daughter of Penda named Cimburgh.

Wherefore he was baptized by bishop Finnan, with all those which came thither
with him, at a place called At the wall, Ad (...)
and taking with him four priests which were thought meet to teach and
baptize his people, he returned with great joy into his own country. The
names of those priests were as follows, Cedda, Adda, Betti, and Diuna, of the
which, the last was a Scot by nation, and the other were Englishmen. These
priests coming into the province of the Middleangles, preached the word, and
were well heard, so that daily a great number of the nobility and communaltie
renouncing the filthy dregs of idolatry, were christened. Neither did king
Penda forbid the preaching of the gospel within his province of Mercia, but
rather hated and despised those whom he knew to have professed themselves
christians, and yet showed not the woorks of faith, The saying of king Penda.
saying, that Those were wretches and not to be regarded,

ABout the same time, Beda. lib. 3. cap. 22.
the Eastsaxons at the instance of Oswie king of Northumberland, received
eftsoons the faith which they had renounced, when they banished their bishop
Melitus. Ye have heard that Serred, Siward, and Sigibert brethren, and the
sons of king Sabert (which brethren occasioned the reuolting of that province
from the faith of King Sigibert received the faith.
at the kings house called, At the wall, so named, because it was built near
to the wall which the Romans had made overthwart the I Will, as is often before
remembered, being twelve miles distant from the east sea.

King Sigibert having now received the christian faith, This was about the
year 649, as Matthew. West. has noted.
when he should return into his country, required king Oswie to appoint him
certain instructors and teachers which might convert his people to the faith
of Christ. King Oswie desirous to satisfy his request, sent unto the province
of the Middleangles, calling from thence that virtuous man Cedda, and assigning
unto him another priest to be his associat, Cedda.
sent them unto the province of the Eastsaxons, there to preach the christian
faith unto the people. And

Heerevpon, the same Cedda returned unto his cure, Ced or Cedda bishop of the
Eastsaxons.
went forward with more authority to perform the work of the Lord, and
building churches in diverse places, ordained priests and deacons which might
help him in preaching, and in the ministry of baptising, specially in the
city of Ithancester upon the river of Pent, Tilberie.
and likewise in Tileburge on the river of Thames. Whilst Ced was thus bufle
to the great comfort and joy of the king and all his people, in the setting
forward of the christian religion with great increase daily proceeding, it
chanced thorough the instigation of the devil, the common enemy of mankind,
that king Sigibert was murdered by two of his own kinsmen who were brethren,
the which when they were examined of the cause that should move them to that
wicked fact, they had nothing to allege, but that they did it because they had
conceived an hatred against the king, for that he was too favorable toward
his enemies, and would with great mildness of mind forgive injuries committed
against him: such was the kings fault for the which he was murdered, because
he observed the commandments of the gospel with a devout heart.

Notwithstanding, in this his innocent death, his offense was punished, wherein
he had suerlie transgressed the laws of the church. For whereas one of them
which slew him kept a wife, whom he had unlawfully married, and refused to put
her away at the bishops admonition, he was by the bishop excommunicated, and
all other of the christian congregation commanded to abstain from his
company. This notwithstanding, the king being destred of him came to his house
to a banquet, and in his coming from thence met with the bishop, whom when the
king beheld, he waxed afraid, and alighted from his horse, and fell down at
his feet, beseeching him of pardon for his offense. The bishop, which also was
on horssebacke likewise alighted, and touching the king with his rod which he
had in his hand, as one something displeased, and protesting as in the
authority of a bishop, The authority of a bishop.
spoke these words; Because (says he) thou would not abstain from entering
the house of that wicked person being accurssed, thou shall die in the same
house: and so it came to pass.

Suidhelme king of the Eastsaxons, he is baptized, the bishoplike exercises of
Ced in his native country of Northumberland; Ediswald K. of Deira reuerenceth
him, the kings devout mind to further and enlarge religion; the manner of
consecrating a place appointed for a holy use; the old order of fasting in
Lent, bishop Ced dies; war between Oswie and Penda, Oswie makes a vow to
dedicate his daughter a perpetual virgin to God if he got the victory, he
obteineth his request and performs his vow, she lives, dies, and is buried
in a monastery, the benefit ensuing Oswies conquest over his enemies, the
first second and third bishops of Mercia, the victorious proceeding of king
Oswie* prince Peada his kinsman murdered of his wife. The xxxij. Chapter.
AFter Sigbert succeeded Suidhelme in the kingdom of the Eastsaxons,
Suidhelme. Beda lib. 3. cap. 22. Matt. West.
he was the son of Sexbald, and baptized of Ced in the province of the
Eastangles, at a place of the kings there called Rendlessham. Ediswald king of
the Eastangles (the brother of king Anna) was his godfather at the fontsone.
Ced the bishop of the Eastsaxons used oftentimes to visit his country of
Northumberland where he was borne, Beda. lib. 3. cap. 23.
and by preaching exhorted the people to godly life. Whereupon it chanced that
king Ediswald the son of king Oswald which reigned in the parties of Deira,
moved with the fame of his virtuous trade of living, had him in great
reverence: and therefore upon a good zeal and great devotion, willed him to
choose forth some plot of ground where he might build a monastery, in the
which the king himself and others might pray, hear sermons the oftener, and
have place where to bury the dead. The bishop consenting to the kings mind, at
length espied a place amongst high and desert mounteins, where he began the
foundation of a monastery, afterward called Lestinghem.

Wherefore meaning first of all to purge the place with prayer and fasting, he
asked leave of the king that he might remain there all the Lent, which was at
hand, and so continuing in that place for that time, fasted every day
(sundaie excepted) from the morning until evening, The manner of the old fast.
according to the manner, nor received any thing then but only a little bread,
and a hens eg, with a little milk mixed with water: for he

And when there remained ten days of Lent yet to come, he was sent for to the
king: wherefore he appointed a brother which he had, being also a priest named
Cimbill, to supply his room, that his begun religious work should not be
hindered for the Lindesferne holy Island.
Finally this bishop Ced coming unto this monastery afterward by chance in
time of a sickness, died there, and left that monastery to the governance of
another brother which he had named Ceadda, that was after a bishop, as
afterward shall be showed. There were four brethren of them, and all priests,
Ced, Cimbill,

About the same time, Beda. lib. 3. cap. 24.
Oswie king of Northumberland was sore oppressed by the wars of Penda king of
Mercia, so that he made great offers of high gifts, and great rewards unto the
said Penda for peace, but Penda refused the same, as he that meant utterly to
have destroyed the whole nation of Oswies poeple, so that Oswie turning
himself to seek help at the hands of the almighty, said: If the pagan War
between king Oswie and king Penda
let us make offer unto him that knows how to accept them: and so binding
himself by vow, promised that if he might obtein victory, he would offer his
daughter to be dedicate to the Lord in perpetual virginity: and further would
give twelve manors, lordships or farms to the building of monasteries: and so
with a small army he put himself in hazard of battle.

It is said that Penda had thirty companies of The victory of the Northumbers.
among whom was Edilhere king of the Eastangles, that reigned after his
brother Anna, and was the procurer of this war. This battle was fought near
to the water of Inwet, the which being risen as then by reason of great rain,
drowned more of the enemies than died of the Northumbers swoords.

After that Oswie had obtained this victory, he performed promise in bestowing
his daughter to the profession of virginity, and also gave the twelve manors,
whereof six were in Deira, and six in Bernicia, containing every of them ten
households a piece. Elfled.
Elfled also king Oswies daughter was professed in the monastery of Herthew,
Herteshey says Matt. West. Hilda.
where one Hilda was abbess, which Hilda purchasing a lordship of ten
households in Streanshall, now called Whitbie, builded a monastery there, in
the which first the said Elfled was a nouice, and after a ruler, till at length
being of the age of forty years she departed this life, and was buried there,
and so likewise was her mother Eufled, and her grandfather Edwin, with many
other high estates within the church of saint Peter the apostle. The victory
above mentioned got by king Oswie in the country of Loides on the 17 kalends
of December, and in the thirtenth year of his reign, Loides.
happened to the great commodity and gain of both the people, for by the same
he delivered his country of Northumberland from the cruel destruction made in
the same by the pagan people of Mercia, and converted those pagans themselves,
and the countries near adioining to them wholly unto the faith of Jesus Christ.

The first bishop in the province of Mercia, The first bishop of Mercia.
and also of Lindesferne and the Middleangles was one Diuma, who died amongst
the Middleangles. The second was Cellach, the which leaving his bishoprike
returned into Scotland, for they were both of the nation of the Scots. The
third was an Englishman named Trumhere, but instructed and ordained of the
Scots. He was abbat of the monastery of Ingethlingum, being builded in that
place where king Oswin was slain (as before is mentioned.) For queen Eufled
that was his kinswoman got of her husband king Oswie a place there for the
foresaid Trumhere to build that abbeie upon.

King Oswie having slain king Penda, The victorious proceeding of king Oswie.
governed the people of Mercia, and also other of the south provinces, and
subdued a great part of the Pictish nation to the English dominion. About the
same time king Oswie gave unto Peada the son of king Penda (because he was his
kinsman) the country of the Southmercies, containing 5000 households, and
separated from the Northmercies by the river Trent. Southmercia.
The country of the Northmercies contained in those days 7000 households.
Northmercia.
But Peada in the next spring was wickedlie murdered though the treason of his
wicked wife (as was said) in the feast of Easter. 659 Matt. West.


The dukes of Mercia rebel against Oswie, recover their own bounds, and
create Wulfhere their king; Cenwald king of the Westsaxons fights with the
Britains and prevails, he is vanquished by Wulfhere; Adelwold king of Sussex
has the I Will of Wight given him, and why; succession of Edelher, Edelwal, and
Aldulfe in the kingdom of Eastangles; Colman a Scot first made bishop of
Northumberland, controversy about the observation of Easter, about bald
crowns or shauing the hair, superstition punished by God, Ceadda bishop of
York, his course of life and diligence in his office commended; Egbert king of
Kent, the sea of Canturburie void, the preferment thereto refused, Theodore a
moonke supplieth the room at the popes appointment, all the English clergy
obey him as their head, his visitation and reformation, singing used in
churches, Theodore and Adrian woorthilie praised, English men happy, glasiers
first brought into this Island. The xxxiij. Chapter.
AFter three years were complet, Beda. lib. 3. cap. 24.
next ensuing the death of king Penda, the dukes of the country of Mercia,
Immin, Eaba, and Eadbert rebelled against king Oswie, advancing one Wulfhere a
young gentleman man the son of Peda, and brother to Peada, whom they had kept
in secret to be their king, and expelling the lieutenants of king Oswie, they
recovered both their own confines and liberty withal, and so living in
freedom with their own natural king the foresaid Uulfhere, they also
continued with glad hearts in service of the celestial king our God and Savior.

THis Uulfhere governed the Mercies seventeen years, Vulfhere. Beda. lib. 3.
cap. 24.
the which Mercies (during the reign of the said Uulfhere) had four bishops
successively

About the beginning of king Uulfhers reign, (...). H^nt. Matt. West.
that is to say, in the seventeenth year of the reign of Chenwald king of the
Westsaxons, the same Chenwald fought with the Britains at Pennum, where the
Britains being assembled in great number, proudly incountred with the
Englishmen, and T^ Britains put to slight by Chenwald.
at length the Britains were put to flight, so that the posterity of Brute
received that day an incurable wound. But within three years after, that is,
in the nineteenth year of the reign of the said Chenwald, he had not the like
luck in battle against the foresaid Uulfhere king of Mercia, as he had before
against the Britains, Chenwald vanquished by Uulfhere.
for the said Uulfhere vanquishing him in the field, passed Edelwold of Sussex.
which he conquered, and delivered it unto Adelwold king of Sussex, as a gift
at that time, when he received him at the fontstone after he had converted him
to the faith. He gave unto Adelwold that I Will, to the end he should cause the
people there to receive the faith and religon of Christ. Now after that
Edelhere king of Eastangles was slain, as before is mentioned, his brother
Edelwald succeeded him in that kingdom, reigning as

After Finan bishop of the Northumbers that held his see at Lindesferne, Beda.
lib. 3. cap. 24. Colman ordained bishop.
as Aidan did before him, one Colman was ordained bishop, a Scot borne, and an
earnest obseruer of the customs used amongst them of his nation, so that when
the controversy began to be revived for the holding of the feast of Easter,
Beda. lib. 3. cap. 25.
There was a great disputation kept about this matter, and other things, as
shauing or cutting of hears, and such like in the monastery of Whitbie, at
the which king Oswie and his son Alcfrid were present, where Colman for his
part alleged the custom of John the evangelist, and of Anatholius; and the
contrary side brought in proof of their opinion, the custom of Controversy
about shauing of crowns.
which taking part with him, Cap. 6.
refused to observe the feast of Easter according to the custom of the church
of Rome, nor would have their crowns shaven, about which point no small
reasoning had been kept. This disputation was holden in the year of our Lord
664, 664
and in the year of the reign of king Oswie 22, and 30 year after the
Scotishmen began first to bear the office of bishops within Northumberland,
which was (as W. Harison says) 624. For Aidan governed 17 years, Finan 10
years, and Colman 3 years. After that Colman was returned into his country,
one Tuda that had been brought up amongst the Southern Scots, Tuda ordained
bishop.
and ordained bishop by them, succeeded in his room, having his crown shaven,
and observing the feast of Easter according to the custom of the province and
rite of the Roman church. The same year, Cap. 27. In eclipse. Punishment. of
God for yelding to superstition.
there chanced a great eclipse of the sun, the third of May about 10 of the
clock in the day. A great dearth and mortality insued, both in all the
parties of this our Britain, and likewise in Ireland. Amongst other, the
foresaid bishop Tuda died, and was buried in the abbeie of Pegnalech. After
this Tuda, succeeded in government of the church of Lindesferne, otherwise
called Holy Island, Wilfrid bishop.
one Wilfrid, which was sent by king Alcfrid into France, to be ordained there.

About the same time king Oswie, the father of king Alcfrid, moved with the
good example of his son, sent Ceadda, Cap. 28.
the brother of Ced sometime bishop of the Eastsaxons into Kent, to be ordained
bishop of York, but at his coming into Kent he found that Deus dedit the
archbishop of Canturburie was dead, Ceadda ordained archbishop of York.
and none other as yet ordained in his place, so that Ceadda repaired into the
province of the Westsaxons, where he was ordained by bishop Wini, who took two
other bishops of the British nation unto him to be his associats, which used to
observe the feast of Easter contrary to the custom of the Roman church. But
there was no other shift, since none other bishop was then canonicallie ordained
in the province of the Westsaxons in those days, this Wini only excepted, and
therefore was he constreined to take such as he might get and provide.

After that Ceadda was thus ordained, he began forthwith to follow the true
rules of the church, lived right chastely, showed himself humble and
continent, applied his study to reading, and traveled abroad on foot and not
on horssebacke through the coimtries, towns, and villages, to preach the word
of God. He was the disciple of Aidan, and coueted by his example, and also by
the example of Ced, to instruct his hearers with the like doings and manners as
he had known them to do. Wilfrid also being consecrated bishop, and returned
into England, endeavored to plant the orders of the Roman church in the
churches of England, whereby it came to pass, that the Scots which inhabited
amongst the Englishmen, were constreined either to follow the same, or else to
return into their own country.

IN this mean time, king Ercombert being departed this life, after he had
governed the Kentishmen by the space of twenty years, Egbert king of Kent.
his son Egbert succeeded him in the kingdom, and reigned nine years. There
is little remembrance of his doings, which in that short time were not much
notable, except ye will ascribe the coming into this land of the archbishop
Theodorus, and the abbat Adrian unto his glory, which chanced in his time. For
in the year of the great eclipse and sore mortality that insued, it chanced
that both king Ercombert, and the archbishop Deus dedit departed this life, so
that the sea of Canturburie was void a certain time, in so much that king
Egbert, who succeeded his father Ercombert, Beda. lib. 3. cap. 9. Wighart.
together with king Oswie, did send one Wighart a priest of good reputation for
his excellent knowledge in the scriptures, unto Rome, with great gifts and rich
vessels of gold and silver, to be presented unto the pope, requiring him that
he would ordeine the foresaid Wighart archbishop of Canturburie, to have rule
of the English church. But this Wighart coming unto Rome, and declaring his
message unto Uitalianus then governing the church of Rome, immediately after he
died of the pestilence (that then reigned in that city) with all those that
came with him.

The pope then taking advice whom he might ordeine unto the sea of
Canturburie, Beda. lib. 4. cap. 1.
being thus destitute of an archbishop, appointed a moonke named Adrian to take
that office upon him, but Adrian excused himself as not sufficient for such a
room, Adrian.
and required the pope to appoint one Andrew a moonke Theodore ordained
archbishop of Canturburie.
And so at length was this Theodore ordained archbishop of Canturburie by pope
Uitalianus in the year of our Lord 668, 668
the sixth kalends of June, and with Adrian sent into Britain.

These with their retinue came to France, and being come thither, shortly
after king Egbert had knowledge thereof: whereupon with all convenient

Being accompanied with the foresaid Adrian, he visited all the parts of this
land, ordained bishops and ministers in churches where he thought convenient,
Ran. Cest. Matthew. West.
according to the rite and usage of the church of Rome. Ceadda that was bishop
of York, because he was not lawfully ordained, Beda.
as he himself confessed, was removed from the sea of York, and Wilfrid was
thereunto restored, so that Ceadda (though he were not disgraded of his degree
of bishop) lived yet a private kind of life, till he was admitted bishop of
Mercia, as after shall be showed. Also whereas before time there was in manner
no singing in the English churches, Singing in churches brought in use.
except it were in Kent, now they began in every church to use singing of
divine service after the rite of the church of Rome. The archbishop Theodore
finding the church of Rochester void by the death of the last bishop named
Damian, ordained one Putta a simple man in worldly matters, but well
instructed in ecclesiastical discipline, Putta bishop of Rochester.
and namely well seen in song and music to be used in the church after the
manner as he had learned of pope Gregory's disciples.

To be brief, The worthy praise of Theodore and Adrian.
the archbishop Theodore, and the abbat Adrian deserved great commendation in
this, that whereas they were notably well learned themselves in the Greek and
the Latin toongs, and also had good knowledge as well in the liberal arts, as
in the scripture, they took great pains to train up scholars in knowledge of
the same, so that the Englishmen had not seen more happy times than in those
days, Englishmen happy and why.
having as then kings of great puissance, so as strangers stood in fear of
them; and again, those that coueted learning, had instructors at hand to teach
them, by reason whereof diverse being given to study, proved excellent both in
knowledge of the Greek and Latin. There came in company of the said
archbishop from Rome, an English man named Benedict Biscop, Beda. Benedict or
Benet surnamed Biscop.
which had taken upon him the habit of a moonke in Italy, and now returning
into his country, builded two abbeis, the one named Wiremouth, because it was
placed at the mouth of the river of Wire, and the other Girwie, distant from
Wiremouth about five miles, and from the town of Newcastle four miles,
situated near to the mouth of Tine. Wiremouth was built in the year 670, and
Girwie in the year 673. 670
There were a 600 moonks found in those two houses, and governed under one
abbat. The said Benedict was the first that brought glasiers, painters,
Glasiers first brought into England. Ran. Cest.
and other such curious craftsmen into England. He went five times to Rome, and
came again.

Sighere and Sebbie associats reign over the Eastsaxons, the one falls from,
the other cleaves to the faith, Vulfhere king of Mercia sends bishop Iaroman
to redress that apostasy of the prince and the people, Cead bishop of Mercia,
the king of that country has him in hie reputation, Egfrid king of
Northumberland, a synod of bishops holden at Herford, articles propounded out
of the canons by Theodore archbishop of Canturburie, Bisi unable to discharge
his episcopal office, a remedy therefore; Kenwalke of a very evil prince
becomes a very good ruler, his wife governs the kingdom after his death,
Escuius succeeds her in the room, of Thunnir a murderer king Egberts
principal vicegerent, bishop Winfrid deposed for disobedience, Sebbie king of
the Eastsaxons a professed moonke, his death. The xxxiiij. Chapter.
ABout the same time, after that Suidhelme king of the Eastsaxons was dead,
Sighere the son of Sigbert the little, and Sebbie the son of Suward succeeded
him in government of that kingdom, albeit they were subject unto Uulfhere the
king of Mercia. Beda. lib. 3. cap. 39.
Sighere in that time, when the great mortality reigned, renounced the faith
of Christ, with that part of the people which he had in government, for both
the same Sighere and others of his chiefest lords, and also part of his commons
loving this life, and not regarding the life to come, began to repair their
idolish churches, and fell to the worshipping of idols, as though thereby they
should have been defended from that mortality. But his associat Sebbie with
great devotion continued steadfast in the faith which he had received.

King Uulfhere being informed of Seghers apostasy, and how the people in his
part of the province of Eastsaxons were departed from the faith, sent thither
bishop Iaruman or Iaroman, that was successor unto Trumhere, Bishop Iaruman or
Iaroman.
which used such diligence and godly means, that he reduced the said king and
all his people unto the right belief, so as the

After this, when the said Iaroman was departed this life, king Uulfhere sent
unto the archbishop Theodorus, requiring him to provide the province of the
Mercies of a new bishop. Theodorus not minding to ordeine any new bishop at
that time, required Oswie king of Northumberland, that bishop Cead might come
into Mercia to exercise the office of bishop there. This Cead lived as it were
a private life at that time in his monastery of Lestingham, for Wilfrid held
the bishoprike of York, extending 671


In the year of our Lord 671, which was the second year after that Theodorus
the archbishop came into this land, Matthew. West.
Oswie king of Northumberland was attached with a grievous sickness, and died
thereof the 15 kalends of March, in the 58 year of his age, after he had
reigned 28 years complet.

AFter Oswie, Egfrid. Beda. lib. 4. cap. 5. Matthew. West.
his son Egfrid succeeded in rule of the kingdom of Northumberland, in the
third year of whose reign, that is to say, in the year of our Lord 673, 673
Theodorus the archbishop of Canturburie kept a synod at Herford, the first
session whereof began the 24 of September, A synod holden at Herlord.
all the bishops of this land being present either in person or by their
deputies, as Bisi bishop of Estangle, Wilfrid of Northumberland by his deputy
Putta bishop of Rochester, Eleutherius bishop of Westsaxon, and Wilfrid bishop
of Mercia. In the presence of these prelates, the archbishop showed a book,
wherein he had noted ten chapters or articles taken out of the book of the
canons, Articles proponed by Theodore.
requiring that the same might be received.

1 The first chapter was, that the feast of Easter should be kept on the
sundaie following the fourteenth day of the first month.

2 The second, that no bishop should intermedle in an others diocese, but he
contented with the cure of his flock committed to him.

3 The third, that no bishop should disquiet in any thing any monastery
consecrated to God, nor take by violence any goods that belonged unto the same.

4 The fourth, that bishops being moonks should not go from monastery to
monastery, except by sufferance and permission of their abbats, and should
continue in the same obedience wherein they stood before.

5 The fifth, that none of the clergy should depart from his bishop to run
into any other diocese, nor coming from any other place should be admitted,
except he brought letters of testimony with him. But if any such chanced to
be received, if he refused to return, being sent for home, both he and his
receiver should be excommunicated.

6 The sixth, that bishops and other of the clergy being strangers should hold
them content with the benefit of hospitality, and should not take in hand any
priestlie office, without license of the bishop, in whose diocese he chanced
so to be remaining.

7 The seventh, that twice in the year a synod should be kept, but because of
diverse impediments herein, it was thought good to them all, that in the kalends
of August a synod should be kept once in the year, at a certain place called
Cloofeshough.

8 The eighth chapter was, that no one bishop should by ambition seek to be
preferred above another, but that every one should know the time and order of
his consecration.

9 The ninth, that as the number of the christians increased, so should there
be more bishops ordained.

10 The tenth was touching marriages, that none should contract matrimony with
any person, but with such as it should be lawful for him by the orders of the
church: none should match with their kinsfolk, no man should forsake his wife,
except (as the gospel teaches) for cause of fornication. But if any man did
put away his wife which he had lawfully married, if he would be accounted a
true christian, he might not be coopled with an other, but so remain, or else
be reconciled to his own wife.

These articles, being entreated of and concluded, were confirmed with the
subscribing of all their hands, so as all those that did go against the same,
should be disgraded of their priesthood, and separated from the company of
them all.

THe forsaid Bisi that was bishop of the Eastangles, and present at this synod,
Bisi bishop of the Eastangles.
was successor unto Bonifacius, which Bonifacius held that see 17 years, and
then departing this life, Bisi was made bishop of that province, and ordained
by the archbishop Theodore. This Bisi at length was so visited with sickness,
that he was not able to exercise the ministration, so that two bishops were
then and there elected and consecrated for him, the one named Aecci, and the
other Baldwin.

In this mean while, that, is, about the year of our Lord 872, 872
or in the beginning of 873, as Harison notes, Kenwalch king of the Westsaxons
departed this life, after he had reigned 30 years. This Kenwalch was such a
prince, Matt. West. de reg. lib. 1.
as in the beginning he was to be compared with the woorst kind of rulers, but
in the midst and later end of his reign, to be matched with the best. His
godly zeal borne toward the advancing of the christian religion well
appeered in the building of the church at Winchester, where the bishops see of
all that province was then placed. His wife Seghurga ruled the kingdom of
Westsaxons after him, a woman of stoutnesse enough to have atchiued acts of
worthy remembrance, but being prevented by death yer she had reigned one
whole year, she could not show any full proof of her noble courage. I
remember that Matthew West. makes other report hereof, declaring that the
nobility removed her from the government. But I rather follow William
Malmesburie in this matter.

TO proceed, Escuinus. Will. Malmes.
after Segburga was departed this life, or deposed (if you will needs have it
so) Escuinus or Elcuinus, whose grandfather called Cuthgisio, the brother of K.
Kinigils, succeeding in government of the Westsaxons, reigned about the space
of two years: and after his deceasse, one Centiuinus or Centwine took upon
him the rule, and continued therein the space of nine years. But Beda says
that these two ruled at one-time, and divided the kingdom betwixt them.
Elcuinus fought against Uulfhere Hen. Hunt.
a great number of men being slain on both parties, though Uulfhere yet had
after a manner the upper hand, as some have written.

In the same year that the synod was holden at Herford, Beda lib. and ca.
supr. dict.
that is to say, in the year of our Lord 673, Egbert the king of Kent departed
this life in Iulie, and left the kingdom to his brother Lothaire, which held
the same eleven years, Io. Lothaire.
and seven months. Some have written that king Egbert by the suggestion of one
Thunnir, Will. Malm. Beda de reg. lib. 1. Thunnir. A vile murder.
who had the chief rule of the

Winfrid bishop of the Mercies, Bishop winfrid deposed. Sexbulfe ordained
bishop of the Mercies. 685, as Matthew. Westminster. says. Bishop Erkenwald.
for his disobedience in some point, was deprived by archbishop Theodore,
Ethelburga.
a woman also highly esteemed for her devout kind of life. John Cap. grave.
She was first brought up and instructed in the rules of her profession by one
Hildelitha a nun of the parties beyond the seas, whom Erkenwald procured to
come over for that purpose.

After Erkenwald, one Waldhere was made bishop of London, Waldhere. Sebbie king
of Eastsaxons Beda. lib. 4. cap. 16.
in whose days Sebbie king of the Eastsaxons, after he had reigned thirty
years, being now vexed with a grievous sickness, professed himself a moonke:
which thing he would have done long before, if his wife had not kept him
back. He died shortly after within the city of London, and was buried in the
church of saint Paul. King Sighere, which in the beginning reigned with him,
Will. Malm.
and governed a part of the Eastsaxons, was departed this life before, so that
in his latter time, the foresaid Sebbie had the government of the whole
province of the Eastsaxons, and left the same to his sons Sighard and
Sewfred. About the year of our Lord 675, 675
Uulfhere king of Mercia departed this life, after he had reigned (as some say)
19 years, Will. Malm^. But other affirm that he reigned 17 years. Beda.
Peada or rather Weada.
but (as other affirm) he reigned but 17 years. Howbeit they which reckon 19,
include the time that passed after the slaughter of Penda, wherein Oswie and
Peada held the aforesaid kingdom.

Edilred king of Mercia inuadeth the kingdom of Kent, and makes great waste
without resistance of Lothaire the king thereof, Putta of a bishop becomes a
poor curat and teaches music, Wilfred deposed from his bishoprike by king
Egfrid upon displeasure, he preaches the gospel in Sussex by the license of
king Edilwalke no rain in Sussex for the space of three years, the word and
sacraments bring blessings with them; bishop Wilfrid the first teacher to catch
fish with nets, the people have him in great reverence, a great and bloody
battle between Egfrid and king Edilred, they are reconciled by the means of
archbishop Theodore; a synod holden at Hatfield, the clergy subscribe to
certain articles, of Hilda the famous abbess of Whitbie. The xxxv. Chapter.
AFter Uulfhere, Edilred.
his brother Edilred or Ethelred succeeded in government of the kingdom of
Mercia. This Edilred invaded the kingdom of Kent with a mighty army, in the
year of our Lord 677, 677
destroieng the country before him, not sparing churches nor abbeies, but
spoiling the same without respect, as well as other common places. Hen. Hunt.
King Lothaire durst not appear in the field to give him battle, so that
Edilred went thorough the country, destroyed the city of Rochester, and with
great riches gotten by the spoil he returned home. Putta the bishop of
Rochester, after that his church was spoiled and defaced by the enemies, went
to Sexvulfe bishop of Mercia, and there obteining of him a small cure, and a
portion of ground, remained in that country, not once laboring to restore his
church of his church of Rochester to the former state, but went about in Mercia
to teach song, and instruct such as would learn music, wheresoever he was
required, or could get intertainment.

Heerevpon the archbishop Theodore consecrated one William bishop of Rochester
in place of Putta, and after, when the said William constreined by poverty,
left that church, Theodore placed one Gebmound in his steed. In the year of
our Lord 678, 678
in the month of August, a blasing star appeered, A blasing star.
with a long bright beam like to a pillar. It was seen every morning for the
space of three months together. The same Egfrid king of Northumberland, Matthew.
West. Beda lib. 4. ca. 12.
banished bishop Wilfrid upon displeasure taken with him, Bishop wilfrid
banished. Hagustald. Hexham. Eadhidus. Lindesferne Holy Island.
out of his see, and then were two bishops ordained in his place, to govern
the church of the Northumbers, the one named Bosa at York, and the other
called Eata at Hagustald or Lindesferne. Also one Eadhidus was ordained about
the same time bishop of Lindsey, the which province king Egfrid had of late
conquered and taken from Uulfhere the late king of Mercia, whom he overcame in
battle, and drove him out of that country. The said three bishops were
consecrated at York by the archbishop of Canturburie Theodorus, the which
within three years after ordained two bishops more in that province of the
Northumbers, that is to say, Tumbert at Hagustald, Eata that was appointed to
remain at Lindesferne, and Trumuine was ordained to have the cure of the
province of those Picts which as then were under the English dominion. Also
because Edilred king of Mercia recovered the country of Lindsey, and joined it
to his dominion, bishop Eadhedus The church of Rippon.


After that bishop Wilfrid was expelled out of his diocese and province of the
Northumbers, he went to Rome, and returning from thence, came into the kingdom
of the Southsaxons, the which containing seven thousand households or families,
as yet was not converted to the christian faith. Wherefore the said Wilfrid
began there to preach the gospel with license of king Edilwalke, Wilfrid by
license of king Edilwalke preaches the gospel to them of Sussex.
who (as before is mentioned)

It chanced that for the space of three years (as it is said) before the
coming thither of bishop Wilfrid, Lack of rain.
there had fallen no rain from the air within that province of the
Southsaxons, so that the people were brought into great misery by reason of
famine, which through want of necessary fruits of the earth sore afflicted the
whole country, insomuch that no small numbers threw themselves hedlong into
the sea, despairing of life in such lack of necessary vittels. But as God
would, the same day that Wilfrid

Bishop Wilfrid also taught them in that country the manner how to catch fish
with nets, Catching of fish with nets.
where before that time, they had no great skill in any kind of Bondmen made
truly free.
amounting to the number of 250 bondmen and bondwomen, whom he made free both
in body and soul: for he did not only baptize them, but also infranchised
them of all bodily servitude and bondage.

In this mean while many things happened in other parts of this land, and
first in the year after the appeering of the blasing star before mentioned,
a mighty battle was fought betwixt the said Egfrid and Edilred king of
Mercia, near to the river of Trent, where Alswine the brother of king Egfrid
was slain, with many other of the Northumbers, so that king Egfrid was
constreined to return home with loss. The archbishop of Canturburie Theodorus
perceiving that great war and effussion of blood was like to follow
thereupon, traveled so in the matter betwixt them, that they were made
friends, and Egfrid had a piece of money in recompense of his losses. The
foresaid battle was fought in the year of our Lord 679; 679
and in the year following, that is to say, in the year of our Lord 680; 680
which was also in the tenth year of the reign of Egfrid king of
Northumberland, the sixth year of Edelred king of Mercia, the 17 of Aldvulfe
king of Eastangles, and in the 7 of Lother king of Kent.

The archbishop of Canturburie Theodorus held another synod at Hatfield, A
synod at Hatfield.
about the 15 kalends of October, Articles subscribed.
in the which all the clergy there present subscribed to certain articles
touching the belief of the trinity of persons, in the unity of the Godhead
of the like substance, and also of the same unity in trinity, according to
the true faith of the church of God. Moreover, they acknowledged by the like
subscription, the five general councels, of Nice, of Constantinople the first,
of Ephesus, of Calcedon, and of Constantinople the second, with the synod also
holden at Rome in the days of Martin bishop of Rome about the year of the
emperor Constantine. At this synod holden at Haifield, was present one John
the archchanter of S. Peter's church at Rome, sent into this land of purpose to
bring from hence a certificat unto pope Agatho of the agreement of the English
church in matters of faith, with other churches of the christian world: but the
foresaid archchanter died by the way in France, as he returned homewards, and
was buried at Towers in Towraine.

The same year that famous woman Hilda abbess of Whitbie departed this life,
Bale. The abbess Hilda. Beda.
or (as other say) five years after, having first been detained long with
grievous sickness. She was the daughter of one Herrericus the nephue of king
Edwin, and converted to the faith of Christ at the preaching of bishop Pauline,
and afterward instructed by bishop Aidan, she professed hirselfe a nun,
applieng her whole study to the reading of the scriptures, to prayer, and
other godly exercises. She builded the abbeie of Whitbie, wherein were placed
both men and women, with such an equality in all things, that there was no
rich person amongst them, nor any that wanted things necessary. She departed
this life on the 15 kalends of December, Bale. Ran. Cest. Matthew. West. Beda.
being 66 years of age. As some have written she argued stoutly on bishop
Colmans part, at the disputation holden in the monastery of Whitbie, in the
year of Grace 664, whereof ye have heard before. Henry Hunt.
About the year of our Lord 682, that is to say, in the seventh year of
Centwine or Centiuinus king of Westsaxons, the same Centwine fought with the
Britains, and overcame them in battle, The Britains discomfited.
pursuing them with fire and sword unto the sea side.

Thus (at this time as also at diverse other times) they were discomfited and
put to flight, being a people allotted and shared out as it were to suffer many
an overthrow, and abide many a sharp and shameful repulse at the hands of
their enemies, who converted the distress of that people to their profit, and
took pleasure in the extreamitie of the miseries wherein they were plunged, as
may be observed by the pitiful alteration of their state under diverse
governors, and specially under the Danish dominion, who kept them in no less
vile servitude than Pharao did the Hebrews at the making of brick and chopping
of straw. So that some think this land to be corruptly named Britania, Gorop.
in Goto danica lib. 7. page 759.
but ought rather to called Bridania, that is, Liberae Dania, sieve regio in qua
Dani libere viuant, for they lived as lords in the land, and did (for the time
being) what they listed. But of this matter more shall be spoken hereafter in
place convenient.

Cadwallader king of Britain, the people are brought into great misery, and
he forced to flee the land, he dies at Rome, the British writers noted of
error, Ceadwalla king of the Westsaxons, the kingdom is divided; the valorous
mind of Ceadwalla, he is forced to forsake his country, he vanquisheth and
kills Edilwalke king of the Westsaxons, his return into his kingdom with
revenge upon Berthun duke of Sussex and other his heavy friends, his vow if he
might conquer the I Will of Wight, his bountiful offer to bishop Wilfrid, the I Will
of Wight, receives the faith; Ceadwalla inuadeth
BUt now to return unto that which is found in the British histories,
Cadwallader.
by the tenor whereof it should appear, that when their king Cadwallo was dead,
his son Cadwallader succeeded him in government of the Britains, 676 says
Matthew. West.
which was about the 10 year of the emperor Constantius Paganotus, and in the
13 year of the reign of Childericus king of France. This Cadwallader, being
the son of Cadwallo, Galfrid.
was begot by him of the half sister of Penda king of Mercia, for one father
begot them both, but of two sundry mothers, for she had to mother a lady
descended of the noble blood of the Westsaxons, and was married unto Cadwallo
when the peace was made betwixt him and her brother the Geffrey of Monmouth
says) or (as others write) but 3 years, the Britains were brought into such
misery through civil discord, and also by such great and extreme famine as
then reigned through all the land, Cadwallader constreined to forsake the land.
that Cadwallader was constreined with the cheifest part of his people to
forsake their native country, and by sea to get them over into Britain
Armorike, there to seek relief by vittels for the sustentation of their
languishing bodies.

Long process is made by the British writers of this departure of Cadwallader,
and of the Britains out of this land, and how Cadwallader was about to have
returned again, but that he was admonished by a dream to the contrary, the
which because it seems but fabulous, we pass over. At length he went to
Rome, and there was confirmed in the christian religion by pope Sergius, where
shortly after he fell sick, and died the 12 kalends of May, in the year of
our Lord 689. 689
But herein appears the error of the

THis Ceadwalla king of the Westsaxons succeeded after Centwine or Centiuinus,
Ceadwalla.
which Centwine reigned nine years, Will. Malm. Beda.
though it should appear by that which is written by authors of good credit,
that during two of those years at the least, the kingdom of Westsaxons was
divided betwixt him and Elcuinus or Escuinus, so that he should not reign past
seven years alone.

But now to Ceadwalla, Will. Malm. Ranulf. Cest.
whom some take to be all one with Cadwallader, we find that he was lineallie
descended from Cutha or Cutwine, the brother of Ceauline or Keuling king of
Westsaxons, as son to Kenbert or Kenbright that was son to Ceadda the son
of the foresaid Cutha or Cutwin. Thus being extract of the noble house of the
kings of Westsaxons, he proved in his youth a personage of great towardness,
and such a one as no small hope was of him conceived: he would let no occasion
pass wherein he might exercise his force, to show proof of his high
valiancie, so that in the end with his worthy attempts showed therein, he
purchased to himself the envy of those that ruled in his country, by reason
whereof he was banished in a conspiracy made against him. Ceadwalla driven to
depart out of the country.
Whereupon he took occasion as it were in revenge of such unthankfulness to
withdraw out of his country, leading with him all the principal youth of the
same, the which either pitieng his present estate, or moved with pleasure
taken in his valiant doings, followed him at his going into exile.

The first brunt of his furious attempts after he was out of his country,
Edilwalke the king of the Southsaxons tasted, who in defense of himself
coming to try battle with Ceadwalla, was slain with the most part of all
his army. Ceadwalla then perceiving the valiant courages of his soldiers,
filled with good hope of this happy atchiued victory, returned with good and
prosperous speed into his own country, and that yer he was looked for, and
earnestly pursuing his adversaries, drove them out of the kingdom, and taking
upon him to rule the same as king, reigned two years, during the which he
atchiued diverse notable enterprises.

And first, Beda lib. 4. cap. 15.
whereas Berthun and Authun dukes of Sussex and subjects unto the late king
Edilwalke, had both expelled him out of that country, after he had slain the
said Edilwalke, and also taken upon them the rule of that kingdom, having now
atteined to the government of the Westsaxons, he invaded the country of
Sussex again, and slew Berthun in battle, Berthun a duke of Sussex slain.
bringing that country into more bondage than before. He also set upon the I Will
of Wight, and well-neere destroyed all the inhabitants, meaning to inhabit it
with his own people. He bound himself also by vow, Ceadwalla his vow. The
I Will of Wight conquered.
although as yet he was not baptized, that if he might conquer it, he would
give a fourth part thereof unto the Lord. And in performance of that vow, he
offered unto bishop Wilfride (who then chanced to be present) when he had taken
that I Will, so much thereof as contained 300 households or families, where the
whole consisted in 1200 households. Wilfrid receiving thankefullie the gift,
delivered the same unto one of his clearks named Bernewine that was his sisters
son, appointing to him also a priest named Hildila, the which should minister
the word and the sacrament of baptism unto all those that would receive the
same. Thus was the I Will of Wight brought to the faith of Christ last of all
other the parties of this our Britain, The I Will of Wight receives the says.
after that the same faith had failed here by the coming of the Saxons.

Moreover, king Ceadwalla invaded the kingdom of Kent, where he lost his
brother Mollo, as after shall appear, but yet he revenged his death with great
slaughter made of the inhabitants in that country. Finally, this worthy
prince Ceadwalla, turning himself from the desire of war and bloodshed,
became right courteous, gentle and liberal toward all men, so that ye could
not have wished more virtuous manners to rest in one as yet not christened. And
shortly after, willing to be admitted into the fellowship of the christians
(of whose religion he had taken good taste) he went to Rome, where of pope
Sergius he was baptized, and named Peter, and shortly after surprised with
sickness, he died, and was buried there within the church of saint 689


In the mean while, Beda. li^. 4. cap. 26.
that is to say, in the year of our Lord 684, Egfride king of Northumberland
sent an army under the guiding of a captain named Bertus into Ireland, the
which wasted that country, sparing neither church nor monastery, sore
indamaging the people of that country, Ireland invaded b^ the Northumbers.
which had ever been friends unto the English nation, and deserved nothing
less than so to be invaded and spoiled at their hands. The Irish men defended
themselves King Egfride slain by Brudeus king of the Picts.
and being trained into

There were diverse of Egfrides friends, and namely Cutberd (whom he had
advanced the same year unto the bishops see of Lindesferne) that advised him
in no wise, either to have taken this war in hand against the Picts, or the
other against them of Ireland, but he would not be counseled, the punishment
These Britains were those vndouttedlie yt dwelt in the northwest parts of this
I Will, and is not meant only by them of Wales.
and likewise some part of the Britains took upon them liberty, which they
kept and maintained a long time after, as Beda confesses.

Egfride died without issue, and left no children behind Echelreda.
She was both widow and virgin when he married her, being first coupled in
wedlock Giruij inhabited, which is the same where the fennes lie in the
confines of Lincolnshire, (...).
Norffolke, Huntingtonshire, and Cambridgeshire, howbeit be lived with her but
a small while. After she had obtained license to depart from the court, she got
her first into Coldingham abbeie, and there was professed a nun. Then she went
to Elie, and there restored the monastery, and was made abbess of the place,
in the which after she had governed seven years, she departed this life, and
was there buried. This same was she which commonly is called saint Audrie of
Elie, had in great reverence for the opinion conceived of her great virtue aand
purity of life.

Alfride (the bastard) king of Northumberland, his life and death, John
archbishop of Canturburie reigns his see, Lother king of Kent dies of a
wound, Edrike gets the regiment thereof but not without bloodshed, Ceadwalla
wastes Kent being at strife in it self, his brother Mollo burned to death;
Withred made king of Kent, he vanquisheth his enemies, Inas king of Westsaxons
is made his friend, Suebhard and Nidred usurpers of the Kentish kingdom, the
age and death of Theodore archbishop of Canturburie, Brightwald the first
archbishop of the English nation; the end of the British regiment, and how long
the greatest part of this Island was under their government. The xxxvij.
Chapter.
AFter that king Egfride was slain (as before is mentioned) Alfride 685.
his brother Alfride was made king of Northumberland. This Alfride was the
bastard son of king Oswie, and in his brothers days (either willingly, or
by violent means constreined) he lived as a banished man in Ireland, where
applieng himself to study, he became an excellent philosopher. And therefore
being judged to be better able to have the rule of a kingdom, he was received
by the Northumbers, and made king, governing his subjects the space of 20
years and more, with great wisdom and policy, but not with such large
bounds as his ancestors had done: for the Picts (as before is mentioned) had
cut off one piece of the north part of the ancient limits of that kingdom.
About the 13 year of his reign, that is to say, 698 Beda in Epit. Matt. West.
in the year of our Lord 698, one of his capteins named earl Berthred, or
Bertus, was slain in battle by the Picts, whose confins he had as then
invaded. The curse of the Irish men, whose country in the days of king Egfrid
he had cruelly wasted (as before is mentioned) was thought at this time to
take place. Finally king Alfride, 705 Beda.
after he had reigned 20 years and od months, departed this life, in the year
of our Lord 705.

In the beginning of king Alfrids days, Eata the bishop of Hexham being dead,
one John a man of great holiness was admitted bishop, and after that, bishop
Wilfrid was restored, when he had remained a long time in exile. John
archbishop of York.
The said John was removed to the church of York, the same being then void by
the death of the archbishop Bosa. At length the foresaid John wearied with the
cares of public affairs resigned his see, He resigneth his see. 721
and got him to Beuerley, where he lived a solitary life for the space of
four years, and then died, about the year of our Lord 721, king Os^ike as
then reigning in Northumberland. He continued bishop for the space of 24
years, and builded a church, and founded a college of priests at Beuerley
aforsaid, in which church he lies buried.

The same year, or in the year after that king Egfrid was slain, Lother king
of Kent departed this life, 686 says Matthew. West. Lother king of Kent dies of
a wound.
the 8 Ides of February, of a wound by him received in a battle which he
fought against the Southsaxons, the which came in aid of Edrike, that was son
unto his brother Egbert, and had maintained war against his uncle the said
Lother, even from the beginning of his reign, till finally he was now in the
said battle stricken thorough the body with a dart, and so died thereof, after
he had reigned 11 years, and seven months. It was thought that he was
disquieted with continual wars and troubles, and finally brought to his end
before the natural course of his time, for a punishment of his wicked consent
given to the putting to death of his cousins Ethelbert and Ethelbrit, as
appeared, in that when they were reported to be martyrs, Will. Malm.
because it was known they died innocentlie, he mocked them and made but a
jest at it, although his brother in acknowledging his fault, Capgraue faith,
their sister.
repented him thereof, and gave in recompense to their mother a part of the

THe foresaid Edrike Edricke.
(after Lother was dead) got the dominion of Kent, and ruled as king thereof,
but not without civil war, insomuch that before he had reigned the full
term of two years, he was slain in the same war. Then Ceadwalla king of
the Westsaxons being thereof advertised, supposing of the time now to be come
that would serve his purpose, as one still coveting to work the Kentishmen all
the displeasure he could, entered with an Mollo brother to king Ceadwalla burnt
to death.
but to wreake his wrath, and to revenge the -- per te nulli vnquam iniuria
fiat,
Sed verbis alijsque modis fuge laedere quenquam,
Quod tibi nolles, alijs fecisse caueto,
Quodque tibi velles, alijs praestare studeto;
Haec est naturae lex optima, quam nisiad vnguem
Seruabis, non ipse Deo (mihi creed) placebis,
Postque obitum infoelix non aurea sydera adibis.


Which lesson taught by nature, and commanded of God, if these men had followed
(as they minded

The Kentishmen being destitute of a king, after Withdredis made king ^ Kent.
having with diligent travel overcome envy at home, and with money redeemed
peace abroad, was with great hope conceived of his worthiness made king of
Kent, the 11 of Nobuember, and 205 after the death of Hengist, he reigned 33
years, not deceiving his subjects of their good conceived opinion of him: for
ouercomming all his adversaries which were ready to levy civil war against
him, he also purchased peace of Inas king of the Westsaxons, which meant to have
made him war, till with money he was made his friend.

A little before that Withdred was confirmed in the kingdom of Kent, Hen,
Hunt. Beda. lib. 5. Suebhard and Nidred kings by usurpation and not by
succe^sion, as He^^ Hunt. writes.
there reigned two kings in that country, Suebhard and Nidred, or rather the
same Withred, if the printed copy of Bedas book entitled Ecclesiastica
historia gentis Anglorum have not that name corrupted: for where he shows
that the archbishop Theodorus being of the age of 88 years, departed this life
in the year of our Lord 690, in the next chapter he declares, that in the
year 692, the first day of Iulie on Brightwald was chosen to succeed in the
archbishops see of Canturburie, Withredus and Suebhardus as then reigning in
Kent: but whether Withredus governed as then with Suebhardus, or that some
other named Nidred, it forces not: for certain it is by the agreement of
othere writers, that till Withdred obtained the whole rule, there was great
strife and contention moved about the government, and diverse there wre that
sought and fought for it. Brightwald the first archbishop of the English nation.
But this ought to be noted, that the forenamed Brightwald was the eight
archbishop in number, and first of the English nation that sat in the sea of
Canturburie: for the other seven that were predecessors to him, were strangers
borne, and sent hither from Rome.

Here ends the line and government of the Britains, now called Welshmen,
which took that name of their duke or leader Wallo or Gallo; or else of a
queen of Wales named Gales or Wales. But howsoever that name fell first unto
them, now they are called Welshmen, which sometime were called Britains or
Brutons, and descended first of the Trojans, and after of Brute, and lastly of
Mulmucius Dunwallo: albeit they were mingled with sundry other nations, as
Romans, Picts, etc. and now they be called English that in their beginning were
named Saxons or Angles. To conclude therefore wiht this government, so many
times intercepted by foreign power, it appears by course of histories treating
of these matters, that the last year of Cadwallader was the year of our Lord
686, which makes the year of the world 4647. So that (as Fabian says) the
Britains had the greater part of this land in rule (reckoning from Brute till
this time) 1822 years. Which term being expired, the whole dominion of this
realm was Saxonish.

Thus far the interrupted regiment of the Britains, ending at the fifth book.
THE SIXTH BOOK of the History of England.
Inas king of the Westsaxons, the whole monarchy of the realm falls into
their hands, Inas for a sum of money grants peace to the Kentishmen, whom
he was purposed to have destroyed, he and his coosen Nun fight with Gerent king
of the Britains, and Cheolred king of Mercia, and Ealdbright king of
Southsaxons, the end of their kingdoms, Inas gives over his roialtie, goes in
pilgrimage to Rome, and there dies; his laws written in the Saxon tongue; of
what buildings he was the founder, queen Ethelburgas devise
AFter tht Ceadwalla, Inas. 689
late K. of the Westsaxons was gone to Rome, where he departed this life (as
before is showed) his coosen Inas or Ine was made king of the The Britains
cease to reign in this land.
ceased in this realm, as by confession of their own writers it appears,

This Inas, Fabian. H. Hunt.
whom some (mistaking N for U) do wrongfullie name Iue or Jew, proved a
Mart. Wastm. Will. Malm.
But when the Kentishmen perceived, that to resist him by force, they were
nothing able, they attempted by money to buy their peace, and so obtained their
purpose, upon payment made to him of thirty thousand marks of silver.

After this, about the 21 year of his reign, Anno 708, as is noted by Matt.
West.
king Inas and his coosen Nun fought with Gerent king of the Britains. In the
beginning of the battle, one Higelbald a noble man of the Westsaxons part was
slain, H. Hunt.
but in the end Gerent with his Britains was chased. In the 26 year of his
reign, the same Inas fought a mighty battle against Cheolred king of Mercia,
Matt. West. says 718.
at Wodenessburie, with doubtful victory, for it could not well be judged
whether part sustained greater loss. In the 36 year of his reign, king Inas
invaded the Southsaxons with a mighty army, and slew in battle Ealdbright or
Aldinius king of the Southsaxons, and joined that kingdom unto the kingdom of
the Westsaxons: Matthew. West. says 722. The end of the kingdom of the
Southsaxons.
so that from thencefoorth the kingdom of those Southsaxons ceased, after
they had reigned in that kingdom by the space of five kings successively,
that is to say, Ella, Cissa, Ethelwalke, Berutius, and this last Aldinius or
Ealdbright.

Finally, when Inas had reigned 37 years, and 10 or 11 od months, he
renounced the rule of his kingdom, together with all worldly pomp, and went
unto Rome as a poor pilgrim, Inas went to Rome and there died.
and there ended his life: but before this, during the time of his reign, he
showed himself very devout and zealous toward the advancement of the
christian religion. He made and ordained also good and wholesome laws for the
amendment of manners in the people, which are yet extant and to be read, written
in the Saxon tongue, and translated into the Latin in times past, and now
lately again by William Lambert gentleman, and printed by John Day, in the
year 1568, together with the laws and statutes of other kings before the
conquest, as to the learned may appear.

Moreover, king Ine builded the monastery of Glastenburie, Polydor.
where Joseph of Arimathea in times past builded an oratorie or chapel (as
before is recited) when he with other christians came into this land in the
days of Aruiragus, and taught the gospel here to the Britains, converting
many of them to the faith. Moreover, king Ine or Inas builded the church of
Wells, dedicating it unto saint Andrew, where afterward a bishops see was
placed, which at length was translated unto Salisburie. He had to wife one
Ethelburga, Ethelburga.
a woman of no^^^le lineage, who had been earnest with him a long time to
persuade him to forsake the world: but she could by no means bring her purpose
to pass, Will. Malmes.
till upon a time the king and she had lodged at a manor place in the country,
where all provision had been made for the receiving of them and their train
in most sumptuous manner that might be, as well in rich furniture of household,
as also in costly viands, and all other things needful, or that might serve
for pleasure, and when they were departed, the queen the foresaid Ethelburga
caused the keeper of that house to remove all the bedding, hangings, The
devise of queen Ethelburga to persuade her husband to forsake the world
and other such things as had been brought thither and ordained for the
beautiful setting forth of the hosue, and in place thereof to bring ordure,
straw, and such like filth, as well into the chambers and hall, as into all the
houses of office, and that done, to lay a fow with pigs in the place where
before the kings bed had stood. Heerevpon when she had

Now when he was returned to that house, which before seemed to the eye a
palace of most pleasure, and now finding it in such a filthy state as might
loath the stomach of any man to behold the same, she took occasion thereupon
to persuade him to the consideratino of the vain pleasures of this world,
which in a Peter pence.
which was for every household within his dominion of penie.

In this mean time Edilred or Ethelred, having governed the kingdom of Mercia
by the term of 29 years, King Ethelred becomes a moonk. Ostrida.
became a moonke in the abbeie of Bardenie, and after was made abbat of that
house. He had Beda in Epit. 697 King Kenred
about the year of our Lord 697. And as for Kenred, he was a prince of great
virtue* devout toward God, a furtherer of the commonwealth of his country,
and passed his life in great sincerity of manners. In the fifth year of his
reign, 711 Nauclerus. Egwin bishop of Worcester.
By the aid and furtherance of this Kenred, a moonke of saint Benets order
(called Egwin) builded the abbbie of Eueshame, who afterward was made bishop
of Worcester.

We find recorded by writers, A fabulous and trifling devise.
that this Egwin had warning given him by visions (as he constantly affirmed
before pope Constantine) to set up an Bale. 712
in the days of Inas king of Westsaxons, and of Ceolred king of Mercia
successor to the foresaid Kenred.

After Kenred succeeded Ceolred, the son of his uncle Edilred, and died in
the 8 year of his reign, and was buried at Lichfield. H. Hunt.
Then succeeded Ethelbaldus that was descended of Eopa the brother of king
Penda, as the fourth from him by lineall succession. This man governed a long
time without any notable trouble: some wars he had, and sped diversely. Ran.
Cestre^.
In the 18 year of his reign, he besieged Sommerton and wan it. He also
invaded Northumberland, and got there great riches by spoil and pillage, which
he brought from thence without any battle offered to him.

He overcame the Welshmen in battle, Hen. Hunt.
being then at quiet, and joined as confederats with Cuthred K. of Westsaxons.
But in the 37 year of his reign, he was overcome in battle at Bereford by
the same Cuthred, Bereford.
with whom he was fallen at variance, and within four years after, that is
to say, in the 41 year of his reign, he was slain in battle at Secandon,
755 Three miles from Tamwoorth. Will. Malm.
or Sekenton, by his own subjects, which arreared wars against him, by the
procurement and leading of one Bernred. who after he had slain his natural
prince, took upon him the kingdom: but he prospered not long, being slain by
Offa that succeeded him in rule of the kingdom of Mercia, as after shall be
showed. The body of Ethelbald was buried at Ripton. 758 Matthew. West.


Bonifacius the archbishop of Mentz or Moguntz, The history of Magd.
having assembled a council with other bishops and doctors, devised a letter,
and sent it unto this Ethelbald, commending him for his good devotion and
charity in almes-giuing to the relief of the poor, and also for his upright
dealing in administration of justice, to the punishment of robbers and such
like misdooers: but in that he absteined from marriage, and wallowed in filthy
lechery with diverse women, and namely with nuns, they sore blamed him, and
withal declared in what in famie the whole English nation in those days
remained by common report in other countries for their licentious living in
sinful fornication, and namely the most part of the noble men of Mercia by
his evil example did forsake their wives, and defloured other women which they
kept in adultery, as nuns and others. Nuns kept for concubines.
Moreover, he showed how that such evil women, as well nuns as other, used to
make away in secret wise their children which they bare out of wedlock, and
so filled the graves with dead bodies, and hell with damned souls. The same
Bonifacius in an other epistle which he wrote unto Cutbert the archbishop of
Canturburie, counseled him not to permit the English nuns to wander abroad so
often on pilgrimage, Pilgrimage of nuns.
because there were few cities either in France or Lombardie, wherein might not
be found English women, that lived wantonlie in fornication and whordome.

Offa king of the Eastsaxons with other go to Rome, he is shaven and becomes
a moonke, succession in the kingdom of the Eastsaxons and Eastangles, Osred
king of Northumberland has carnal knowledge with nuns, he is slain in
battle, Osrike renouncing his kingdom becomes a moonke, bishop Wilfrid
twice restored to his see, Westsaxonie divided into two diocesses, bishop
Aldhelme a founder of religious houses; Ethelard succeeds Inas in regiment,
two blasing stars seen at once, and what insued, the king dies: the
successiue reign of Wichtreds three sons over Kent, what provinces were
governed by bishops; of what puissance Ethelbald king of Mercia was, Egbert
archbishop of York aduanceth his see; a notable remembrance of that excellent
man Beda, his death. The second Chapter.
IN this mean time Sighard and Seufred, Kings of the Eastsaxons. Beda lib. 5.
cap. 20. Offa king of Eastsaxons.
kings of the Eastsaxons, being departed this-life, one Offa that was son to
Sigerius succeeded in (...) ^uernment of that kingdom, a man of great
towardness, and of right comely countenance: but after he had ruled a
certain time, being moved with a riligious devotion, he went to Rome in
company of Kenred king of Mercia, and of one Egwine bishop of Worcester, and
being there shaven into the order of moonks, so continued till he died. After
him one Selred the son of Sigbert the good, King Sclred.
ruled the Eastsaxons the term of 38 years. After Alduife the king of
Eastangles departed this frail life, which 688
his brother Elewold or Akwold succeeded him, and reigned about twelve years.
After whose decease one Beorne was made king of Eastangles, and reigned about
26 years. In this mean while, that is to say, in the year of our Lord 705,
705 (...) of Northumberland.
Alfride king of Northumberland being dead, his son Osred, a child of 8
years of age succeeded him in the kingdom, and reigned 11 years, spending
his time when he came to ripe years in filthy abusing his body with nuns,
and other

About the seventh year of his reign, Henr. Hunt.
that is to say, in the year of our Lord 711, one of his capteins named earl
Berthfride fought with the Picts, Picts overthrown by the Northumbers.
betwixt two places called Heue and Cere, and obteining the victory, slew an
huge number of the enemies. At length king Osred by the traitorous means of his
coosens that arreared war against him, was slain in batell, King Osred
slain in battle
and so ended his reign, leaving to those that procured his death the like
fortune in time 729
appointed Ceolwolfe the brother of his predecessor Kenred, to succeed him in
the kingdom, which he did, reigning as king of the Northumbers by the space of
8 years

In this mean while, bishop Wilfride being dead, Beda. Acca bishop of Hexham.
one Acca that was his chapline was made bishop of Hexham. The said Wilfride
had been bishop by the space of 45 years: but he lived a long time in exile.
For first being archbishop of York, and exercising his jurisdiction over all
the north parts, he was after banished by king Egbert, and again restored to
the sea of Hexham in the second year of king Alfride, 710
(as before ye have heard) departed this life, about 39 years after his
coming thither.

Also Inas the king of Westsaxons, Two bishops sees. Matthew. West.
about the 20 year of his reign, divided the province of the Westsaxons into
two bishops sees, whereas before they had but one. Bishop D^niell.
Daniell was ordained to govern the one of those sees, being placed at
Winchester, having under him Sussex, Southerie and Hamshire. And Aldhelme was
appointed to Shireburne, Bishop Aldhelme.
having under him, Barkeshire, Wiltshire, Sommersetshire, Dorsetshire,
Devonshire, and Cornwall. This Aldhelme was a learned man, and was first made
abbat of Malmesburie, in the year of our Lord 675, by Eleutherius then bishop
of the Westsaxons, by whose diligence that abbeie was greatly advanced, The
abbeie of Ma^lmesburie
being before that time founded by one Medulfe a Scottish man, but of so small
revenues before Aldhelms time, that the moonks were scarce able to live thereon.
Also the same Aldhelme was a great furtherer unto king Inas in the building of
Glastenburie.

Ethelard, Ethelard.
the coosen of king Inas, to whom the same Inas resigned his kingdom, began
to govern the Westsaxons in the year of our Lord 728, 728 Matt. West. says
727.
or rather 27, which was in the 11 year of the emperor Leo Isaurus, in the
second year of Theodorus king of France, and about the 8 or 9 year of
Mordacke king of the Scots. In the first year of Ethelards reign, he was
disquieted with civil war, which one Oswald a noble man, descended of the
royal blood of the Westsaxon kings, procured against him: but in the end, when
he perceived that the kings power was too strong for him, he fled out of the
country, leaving it thereby in rest.

In the year 729, in the month of January there appeered two comets or
blasing stars, Matthew. West.
very terrible to behold, 729 Blasing stars
the one rising in the morning before the rising of the sun, and the other
after the setting thereof: so that the one came before the break of the day,
and the other before the closing of the night, stretching forth their flerie
brands toward the north; and they appeered thus every morning and evening for
the space of a fortnight together, m^nacing as it were some great destruction
or common mishap to follow. The Saxacens shortly after entered France, and were
overthrown. Finally, when king Ethelard had reigned the term of fourteen
years current, he departed this life.

NOw when Wichtred king of Kent had governed the Kentishmen by the space of 33
years, Will. Malm.
with great commendation for the good orders which he caused to be observed
amongst them, as well concerning matters ecclesiastical as temporal, he
departed this life, leaving behind him three sons, who successively reigned
as heirs to him one after another (that is to say) Edbert 23 years, Ethelbert
11 years current, and Alrike 34 years, the which three princes following the
steps of their father in the observance of politic orders and commendable
laws, used for the more part their fathers good luck and fortune, except that
in Ethelberts time the city of Canturburie was burned by casual fire, Beda.
lib. 5. cap. ^4.
and Alrike lost a battle against them of Mercia, whereby the glory of their
times was somewhat blemished: for so it came to pass, that whatsoever chanced
evil, was kept still in memory, and the good haps that came forward, were
soon forgotten and put out of remembrance.

In the year of our Lord 731, Betrwald archbishop of Canturburie departed this
life in the fifth ides of January, 731
after he had governed that see by the space of 27 years, 6 months, and 14
days: in those place the same year one Tacwine was ordained archbishop, that
before was a priest in the monastery of Bruidon within the province of Mercia.
He was consecrated in the city of Canturburie, by the reverend fathers Daniell
bishop of Winchester, Ingwald bishop of London, Aldwin bishop of Lichfield, and
Aldwulfe bishop of Rochester, the tenth day of June being sundaie.

As touching the state of the English church for ecclesiastical governors,
Bishops what provinces they governed.
certain it is, that the same was as hereafter follows. The province of
Canturburie was governed touching the ecclesiastical state by archbishop
Tacwine, and bishop Aldwulfe. The province of the Eastsaxons by bishop Ingwald.
The province of Eastangles by bishop Eadbertus and Hadulacus, the one keeping
his see at Elsham, and the other at Dunwich. The province of the Westsaxons was
governed by the foresaid Daniell and by Forthere, who succeeded next after
Aldhelme in the sea of Shereburne. This Forthere in the year of our Lord 738,
Matthew. West.
left his bishoprike, and went to Rome in company of the queen of the
Westsaxons. Many as well kings as bishops, noble and unnoble, priests and
laiemen, together with women,

And as for temporal government, Ethelbald K. of Mercia, of what puisance he
was.
king Ceolvulfe had the sovereign dominion over all the Northumbers: but all
the provinces on the southside Beda) now in the acceptable time of peace and
quietness, many amongst them of Northumberland, laieng Beda and his history,
continued till the year of our Lord 731, which was from the coming of the
Englishmen into this land, about 285 years, according to his account.

In the year following, that is to say 732, 732
in place Will. Malm.
who as then was king of Northumberland, by whose help he greatly advanced
the sea of York, and recovered the pall: so that where all the other bishops
that held the same see before him since Paulins days, wanted the pall, and so
were counted simply but particular bishops: now was he entitled by the name
of archbishop. He also got together a great number of good books, which he
bestowed in a library at York. In the year 733, on the 18 kalends of
September, 733
the sun suffered a great eclipse about three of the clock in the after
noone, in so much that the earth seemed to be covered with a black and horrible
penthouse.

In the year 735, tht reverend and profound learned man Beda departed this
life, 735 Beda departed this (...)
being 82 years of age, upon Ascension day, which was the 7 kalends of June,
and 26 of May, as Matt. Westminster. has diligently observed. W. Harison adds
hitherto, that it is to be read in an old epistle of Cutbert moonke of the same
house unto Cuthwine, that the said Beda lieng in his deathbed, translated the
gospel of saint John into English, and commanded his brethren to be diligent
in reading and contemplation of good books, and not to exercise themselves
with fables and frivolous matters. Finally he was buried in the abbeie of
Geruie, distant five miles from Wiremouth, and abbeie also in the north parts,
not far from Newcastell (as is before remembered.) He was brought up in those
two abbeies, and was scholar to John of Beuerley. How thoroughly he was seen
in all kinds of good literature, the books which he wrote do manifestly
bear witness. His judgment also was so much esteemed over all, that Sergius
the bishop of Rome wrote unto Celfride the abbat of Wiremouth, requiring him to
send Beda unto the court of Rome for the deciding of certain questions moved
there, which without his opinion might seem to rest doubtful. But whether he
went thither or not we can not affirm: but as it is thought by men worthy of
credit, he never went out of this land, but continued for the most part of his
life in the abbeies of Geruie and Wiremouth, first under Benet the first abbat
and founder of the same abbeies, and after under the said Celfride, in whose
time he received orders of priesthood at the hands of bishop John, surnamed of
Beuerley: so that it may be marvelled that a man borne in the uttermost corner
of the world, should prove so excellent in all knowledge and learning, that his
fame should so spread over the whole earth, and went never out of his native
contrie to seek it. But who that marketh in reading old histories the state of
abbeies and monasteries in those days, Cra^^^^^
shall well perceive that they were ordered after the manner of our schools or
colleges, having in them diverse learned men, that attended only to teach and
bring up youth in knowledge of good learning, or else to go abroad and preach
the word of God in towns and villages adioining.

The same year died archbishop Tacuine, and in the year following, that is to
say 735, 735
Nothelmus was ordained archbishop of Canturburie in his place, and Egbert the
archbishop of York the same year got his pall from Rome, and so was confirmed
archbishop, and ordained two bishops, Fruidberd, and Fruidwald. But some refer
it to the year 744.

Cuthred king of the Westsaxons, he is greatly troubled by Ethelbald king of
Mercia, they are pacified; Kenric king Cuthreds son slain, earl Adelme
rebelleth against him whom the king pardons; Cuthred fights with Ethelbald
at Hereford, he has the victory, he falls sick and dies; Sigebert
succedeth him in the kingdom, he is cruel to his people, he is expelled from
his royal estate, murder revenged with murder, succession in the kingdom of
Eastangles, kings change their crowns for moonks cowles; the Britains subject
to the king of Northumberland and the king of Picts, the moon eclipsed. The
third Chapter.
AFter the decease of Ethelard king of Westsaxons, Cuthred.
his coosine Cuthred was made king and governor of those people, reigning the
term of 16 years. He began his reign in the year of our Lord 740, in the
twenty fourth year of the emperor Leo Isaurus, 740
in the 14 year of the reign of the second Theodorus Cala K. of France, and
about the 6 year of Ethfine king of Scots. This Cuthred had much to do
against Edilbald king of Mercia, Matt. West. Hen. Hunt.
who one while with stirrin^ his own subjects the Westsaxons to rebellion, an
other while with open war, and sometime by secret craft and subtle practices
sought to disquiet him. Howbeit, in the fourth year of his reign, a peace as
concluded Kenric the kings son slain.
In the 9 year of this Cuthreds reign, his son Kenric was slain in a
seditious tumult amongst his men of war, a gentleman young in years, 749
Matthew. West.
but of a stout courage, and very forward, whereby (as was thought) he came the
sooner to his woeful end.

In the 11 year of his reign, 751
Cuthred had wars 752 Matt. West.
K. Edilbald put to flight.
so that he was there put to flight, and all his army discomfited, after sore
and terrible fight continued and maintained even to the uttermost point. In the
24 year of his reign, this Cuthred

AFter him succeeded one Sigibert, Sigibert.
a cruel and unmerciful prince at home, but yet a coward abroad. This Sigbert
or Sigibert began 755
very near ended. He entreated his subjects very evil, setting law and
reason at naught. He could not abide to hear his faults told him, and
therefore he cruelly put to death an earl named Cumbra, which was of his
council, and faithfully admonished him to reform his evil doings:
whereupon the rest of his nobles assembled themselves together with a great
multitude of people, and expelled him out of his estate in the beginning of the
second, or

Lo here you may see how the righteous justice of God rewards wicked doings
in this world with worthy recompense, as well as in the world to come,
appointing evil princes sometimes to reign for the punishment of the people,
according as they deserve, permitting some of them to have government a long
time, that both the froward nations may suffer long for their sins, and that
such wicked princes may in an other world taste to more bitter torments. Again,
other he takes out of the way, that the people may be delivered from
oppression, and also that the naughty ruler for his misdemeanour may speedily
receive due punishment.

AFter Beorne king of Eastangles one Ethelred succeeded in government of that
kingdom Ethelred.
a man noted to be of good and virtuous qualities, in that he brought up his
son Ethelred 738
(which succeeded him) so in the fear of the Lord, that he proved a right
godly prince. This Ethelbert reigned (as writers say) the term of 52 years.

After that Ceolvulfe king of Northumberland was become a moonke in the abbie
of Lindesferne, Egbert king of Northumberland. 758
his uncles sons Egbert (by order taken by the said Ceolvulfe) succeeded him
in the kingdom, and governed the same right woorthilie for the term of 24
years, and then became a moonke, by the example both of his predecessor the
forsaid Ceoldulfe, and also of diverse other kings in those days, Changing of
crowns for moonkes cowles.
so that he was the eight king who in this land had changed a kings crown for
a moonks cowle (as Simon Dunel. writes.)

This Egbert (in the 18 year of his reign) and Ungust king of Picts came to
the city of Alcluid with their armies, 756
and there received the Britains into their subjection, the first day of
August: but the tenth day of the same month, the army which he led from Ouan
unto Newbourgh, was for the more part lost and destroyed. The same year on the
8 kalends of December, the moon being as then in her full, appeared to be of a
bloody color, but at length she came to her accustomed show, after a
marvelous means, for a star which followed her, passed by her, and went
before her, the like distance as it kept in following her before she lost her
usual light.

Offa king of Mercia, his manhood and victories against the Kentishmen and
Westsaxons, he kills Egilbert king, of Eastangles by a policy or subtle
devise of proffered courtesy, he inuadeth his kingdom, and possesses it, the
archbishops see of Canturburie removed to Lichfield; archbishop Lambert
laboring to defend his prerogative is deprived by king Offa, he seizes upon
churches and religious houses; mistrusting his estate, he alieth himself with
other princes; he makes amends for the wrongs that he had done to churches
and religious houses, he goes to Rome, makes his realm tributarie to the
said see, Peter pence paid, he falls sick and dies, places to this day
bearing his name in memory of him, the short reign of his son. The fourth
Chapter.
AFter that Offa had slaien Bernred the usurper of the Offa.
kingdom of Mercia (as before is mentioned) the same Offa took upon him the
government of that kingdom 758, 758 Matthew. West.
a man of such stoutnesse of stomach, that he thought he should be able to
bring to pass all things whatsoever he conceived in his mind. He reigned 39
years. His doings were great and marvelous, Will. Malm.
and such as some times his virtues surpassed his vices, The victories of king
Offa. Matthew. West. 779
and sometime again his vices seemed to ouermatch his virtues. He overcame the
Kentishmen in a great battle at Otteford, and the Northumbers also were by him
vanquished, and in battle put to flight. With Kenvulfe king of Westsaxons he
fought in open battle, and obtained a noble victory, with small loss of his
people, although the same Kenwulfe was a right valiant prince, and a good
captain.

Again, perceiving that to proceed with craft, should sooner advance his
purpose, than to use open force against Egilbert king of Eastangles, Falsehood
in fellowship.
under fair promises to give unto him his daughter in marriage, he allured him
to come into Mercia, and receiving him into his palace, caused his head to be
The archbishops see removed from Canturburie to Lichfield.
which he endowed with great possessions. He removed the archbishops see from
Canturburie unto Lichfield, 785 Matt. West.
And so Eadulfus then bishop of Lichfield was adorned with the pall, and taken
for archbishop, having all those bishops within the limits of king Offa his
dominion suffragans unto him; namely, Denebertus

This separation continued all the life time of the archbishop Lambert, The
archbishop Lambert defended his cause.
although he traveled earnestly to maintain his prerogative. Now, for that
he Offa alieth himself with other princes.
Because of these and other his hard doings, doubting the malice of his
enemies, he procured the friendship of foreign princes. Unto Brightricke king of
the Westsaxons Matt. Westminster.
that was both emperor and king of France, he purchased his friendship at
length, athough before there had depended a piece of displeasure betwixt them,
The intercourse of merchants stayed.
insomuch that the intercourse for trade of merchandise was stayed for a time.
One of the ambassadors that was sent unto the said Charles (as is reported)
Alcwine an Englishman.
was that famous clearke Albine or Alcwine, by whose persuasion the same
Charles erected

Finally king Offa (as it were for a mean to appease Gods wrath, which he
doubted to be justly conceived toward him for his sins and wickedness)
granted the tenth part of all his goods unto churchmen, and to poor people. He
also endowed the church of Hereford with great revenues, Polydor.
and (as some write) he builded the abbeie of Bath, placing moonkes in the
same, of the order of saint Benet, as before he had done at saint Albons.
Moreover he went unto Rome, about the year of our Lord 775, 775
and there following the example of Inas kign of the Westsaxons, made his
realm subject by way of tribute unto the church of Rome, appointing that
every house within the limits of his dominions, should yearly pay unto the
apostolic see one penny, which payment was after named, Peter pence or Rome
Scot.
Rome Scot, and Peter pence. After his return from Rome, percei^ing himself
to draw into years, he caused his son Egfrid to be ordained king in his life
time: Will. Malm^. 797
and shortly after departing out of this world, Offa departed this life.
left the kingdom unto him, after he had governed it by the space of 39 years.

Amongst other the doings of this Offa, which suerlie were great and
marvelous, this may not pass with silence, that he caused a mighty great
ditch t^ be cast betwixt the marshes of his country, and the Welsh confines,
to divide thereby the bounds of their dominions. Of^ditch.
This ditch was called Offditch ever after, and stretched from the south side
by Bristow, under the mountains of Wales, running northward over the rivers of
Seuerne and Dee, unto the very mouth of Dee, where that river falls into the
sea. He likewise builded a church in Warwikeshire, whereof the town there
takes name, and is called Offchurch even to this day. Egfrid taking upon him
rule, Egfrid king of Mercia.
began to follow the approved good doings of his father, and first restored
unto the churches their ancient privileges, which his father sometimes had
taken from them. Great hope was conceived of his further good proceeding, but
death cut off the same, taking him out of this life, after he had reigned the
space of four months, not for his own offenses (as was thought) but rather
for that his father had caused so much blood to be spilt for the confirming of
him in the kingdom, which so small a time he new inioied.

Osulph king of Northumberland traitorouslie murdered, Edilwald succeeds
him, the reward of rebellion, a great mortality of fowls fishes and fruits,
moonkes licenced to drink wine, great wast by fire, Edelred king of
Northumberland is driven out of his country by two dukes of the same,
Ethelbert king of the Eastangles commended for his virtues, Alfred the daughter
of king Mercia is affianced to him, tokens of missehaps toward him, his
destruction intended by queen Quendred, her platform of the pactise to kill
him, Offa inuadeth Ethelberts kingdom, Alfred his betrothed wife takes his
death greuouslie, and becomes a nun, the decaie of the kingdom of
Eastangles, succession in the regiment of the Westsaxons, the end of the
government of the Eastsaxons, prince Algar is smitten blind for seeking to
ravish virgin Friswide, and at her prayers restored to his sight. The fifth
Chapter.
WHen Eadbert or Egbert K. Eadbert
of Northumberland was become a moonke, king of Northumberland. 758
his son Osulphus succeeded him: but after he had reigned only one year,
he was traitorouslie murdered by his own servants at Mikilwongton, Simon Dun.
Hen. Hunt.
on the 9 kalends of August. Then succeeded one Moll, otherwise called Edilwold
or Edilwald, Edilw^ld king of Northumberland Simon Dun. Henr. Hunt.
but not immediately, for he began not his reign till the nones of August in
the year following, which was after the birth of our savior 759.

This man proved right valiant in government of his subjects. He slew in
battle an earl of his country named Oswin, who arrearing war against him,
fought with him in a pitched field at Eadwines Cliue, and received the worthy
reward of rebellion.

This chanced in the third year of his reign, and shortly after, Simon Dun.
764
that is to say, in the year of our Lord 764, there fell such a marvelous
great snow, and therewith so extreme a frost, as the like had not been heard
of, continuing from the beginning of the wintes, almost till the midst of the
spring, with the rigor whereof, trees and fruits withered away, and lost
their lively shape and growth: and not only feathered fowls, but also
beasts on the land, and fishes in the sea died in great numbers. The Beda did
dedicate his book of histories of the English nation. After that he was become
a moonke in the monastery of Lindesferne, Moonks licenced to drink wine.
the moonks of that house had license to drink wine, or ale, whereas before
they might not drink any other thing than milk, or water, by the ancient
rule prescribed them of the bishop of Aidan first founder of the place. The
same year sundry cities, towns, and monasteries were defaced and sore wasted
with

After that Moll had reigned 6 years, he resigned his kingdom. But other
write that he reigned 11 years, Will. Malm. Altered began his reign in the
year 765 a^ Sim. Dun. says. Hent. Hunt. Matt. West. Ethelbert.
and was in the end slain by treason of his successor Altered. This Altered
reigned ten years over the Northumbers, and was then expelled out of his
kingdom by his own subjects. Then was Ethelbert, named also Edelred, the
son of the foresaid Moll, made king of Northumberland, and

After that Ethelbert king of Eastangles was dead, H. Hunt. John Cap. grave.
Matthew. West. and others. Ethelbert king of Eastangles.
his son Ethelbert succeeded him, a prince of great towardness, and so
virtuously brought up by his fathers circumspect care and diligence, that he
utterly abhorred vice, and delighted only in virtue and commendable
exercises, for the better atteining to knowledge and understanding of good
sciences. There remain many sundry saiengs The saying of king Ethelbert.
courteous or gentle. Amongst other he had this saying oftentimes in his
mouth, that the greater that men were, the more humble they ought to bear
themselves: for the Lord puts proud and mighty men from their seats, and
exalts the humble and meek.

Moreover he did not only show himself wise in words, but desired also to
excel in staidness of manners,

Many strange things that happened to him in taking upon him this journey, put
him in great doubt of that which should follow: He was no sooner mounted on his
horse, Tokens of mishap to follow.
but that (as seemed to him) the earth shook under him: again, as he was in
his journey, about the mid-time of the day such a dark mist compassed him on
each side, that he could not see nordiscorne for a certain time any thing
about him at all: lastly, as he la^^ one night asleep, he thought he saw in a
dream the roof of his own palace fall down to the ground. But though with
these things he was brought into great fear, yet he kept on his journey, The
innocent mistrustfull of no evil.
as he that mistrusted no deceit, measuring other men's manners by his own. King
Offa right honorably received him: but his wife named ^uendred, a wise woman,
but therewith wicked, conceived a malicious devise in her heart, and
streightwaies went about to persuade her husband to put it in execution, which
was to murder king Ethelbert, and after to take into his hands his kingdom.

Offa at the first was offended with his wife for this motion, but in the end,
through the importunate request of the woman, he consented to her mind. The
order of the murder was committed unto one John Capgr. Winnebert.
Winnebert, that had served both the said Ethelbert and his father before time,
the which feining as though he had been sent from Offa to will Ethelbert to
come unto him in the night season, slew him that once mistrusted not any such
treason. Sim. Dun. says 771. Offa conquereth Eastangles.
Offa having thus dispatched Ethelbert, invaded his kingdom, and conquered it.

But when the bride Alfreda understood the death of her liked make and
bridegroom, abhorring the fact, she curssed father and mother, and as it were
inspired with the spirit of prophecy, pronounced that worthy punishment
would shortly fall on her wicked mother for her heinous crime committed in
persuading so detestable a deed: and according to her words it came to pass,
for her mother died miserably within three months after. Alfreda a nun Beda.
Matthew. West.
The maid Alfreda refusing the world, professed hirselfe a nun at Crowland, the
which place began to wax famous about the year of our Lord 695, by the means
of one Gutlake, a man esteemed of great virtue and holiness, which chose to
himself an habitation there, and departing this life about the year of our
Lord 714, was buried in that place, where afterward an abbeie of moonks was
builded of saint Benets order. The body of K. Ethelbert at length was buried
at Hereford, though first it was committed to burial in a vile place, near to
the bank of a river called Lug.

The kingdom of Eastangles from thencefoorth was brought so into decaie, that
it remained subject one while unto them of Mercia, an other while unto the
Westsaxons, and somewhile unto them of Kent, till that Edmund surnamed the
martyr got the government thereof (as after shall appear.) After that Selred
king of the Eastsaxons had governed the term of 38 years, H. Hunt.
he was slain, but in what manner, writers have not expressed. After him
succeeded one Swithed or Swithred, the 11 and last in number that particularly
governed those people. He was finally expelled by Egbert K. of Westsaxons, the
same year that the said Egbert overcame the Kentishmen (as after shall be
showed) and so the kings of that kingdom of the Eastsaxons ceased adn took
end.

About this time, Friswide a virgin.
there was a maid in Oxford named Friswide, daughter to a certain duke of
noble man called Didanus, with whom one Algar a prince in those parties fell
in love, and would have ravished her, but God the revenger of sins was at
hand (as the story says.) For when Algar followed the maid that fled before
him, she getting into the town, the gate was shut against him, and his sight
also was suddenly taken from him. But the maid by her prayers pacified Gods
wrath toward him, so that his sight was again restored to him. But ^hether
this be a fable or a true tale, hereof grew the report, that the kings of the
realm long times after were afraid to enter into the city of Oxford. So
easily is the mind of man turned to superstition (as says Polydor.)

Kinewulfe king of Westsaxons, his conquest over the Britains, his security
and negligence, he is slain by conspirators, inquisition for Kineard the
principal procurer of that mischief, he is slain in fight; legates from the
pope to the kings and archbishops of this land about reformation in the church,
a council holden at Mercia; judge Bearne burnt to death for cruelty, Alfwold
reigns over Northumberland, his own subjects murder him; a book of
articles sent by Charles king of France into Britain quite contrary to the
christian faith, Albinus writes against
AFter that theWestsaxons had deprived their unprofitable king Sigibert,
Kinewulf Hon. Hunt.
they advanced Kinewulfe or Cinevulfus, the which began 756 Simon Dun. says
755.
surnamed Copronimos, in the 6 year of the reign of Pipin king of France, and
about the 22 year of Ethfine king of Scots. This Kinewulfe proved a right
worthy and valiant prince, and was descended of the right line of Cerdicus.
The Britains vanquished.
He obtained great victories against the Britains or Welshmen, but at
Bensington or Benton

This Kineard dissembling the matter, as he that could give place to time, got
him out of the country, and after by a secret conspiracy assembled together a
knot of ungracious company, and returning privily into the country again,
watched his time, till he espied that the king with a small number of his
servants was come unto the house of a noble woman, whom he kept as paramour at
Merton, whereupon

But when he saw that by neither mean he could do good, in a great chafe he
brake forth of the house upon Kineard, and went very near to have killed
him: but being compassed about with multitude of enemies, whilst he stood at
defense, thinking it a dishonor for him to flee, Kinewulfe slain by
conspirators.
he was beaten down and slain, together with those few of his servants which
he had there with him, who chose rather to die in seeking revenge of their
masters death, than by cowardice to yield themselves into the murderers
hands. There escaped none except one Welshman or Britain, an hostage, who was
nevertheless sore wounded and hurt.

The brute of such an heinous act was streightwaies blown over all, and
brought with speed to the ears of the noble men and peers of the realm,
which were not far off the place where this slaughter had been committed*
Amongst other, one O^rike, for his age and wisdom accounted of (...)
authority, (...)ted the residue that in no wife they should suffor the death
of their sovereign lord to pass unpunished unto their perpetual shame and
reproof. Whereupon in all have they ran to the place where they knew to find
Kineard, who at the first began to plead his cause, to make large promises, to
pretend coosenage, and so forth: but when he perceived all that he could say
or do might not prevail, he encouraged his company to show themselves
valiant, and to resist their enemies to the uttermost of their powers.
Heerevpon followed a doubtful fight, the one part striving to save their
lives, and the other to atteine honor, and punish the slaughter of their
sovereign lord. At length the victory rested on the side where the right was,
so that the wicked murderer after he had fought a while, at length was slain,
together with fourscore and eight of his mates. The kings body was buried at
Winchester, Simon Dun. H. Hunt.
and the murderers at Repingdon. Such was the end of king Kinewulfe, after he
had reigned the term of 31 years.

In the year of our Lord 786, Eccle. hist Magd.
pope Adrian sent two legates into England, Gregory, or (as some copies have)
George bishop of Ostia, and Theophylactus bishop of Tuderto, 786 H. Hunt.
Legates from the pope.
with letters commendatorie unto Offa king of Mercia, Alfwold king of
Northumberland, Ieanbright or Lambert archbishop of Canturburie, and Eaubald
archbishop of York. These legates were gladly received, not only by the
foresaid kings and archbishops, but also of all other the high estates, as well
spiritual as temporal of the land, and namely of Kinewulfe king of the
Westsaxons, which repaired unto king Offa to take counsel with him for
reformation of such articles as were contained in the popes letters.

There were twenty several articles which they had to propone on the popes
behalf, Twenty articles which the legates had to propone.
as touching the receiving of the faith or articles established by the Nicene
council, and obeieng of the other general councels, with instructions
concerning baptism and keeping of synods yeerelie, for the examination of
priests and ministers, and reforming of naugthie livers. Moreover touching
discretion to be used in admitting of governors in monasteries, and curats or
priests to the ministry in churches: and further for the behauior of priests
in wearing their apparel, namely that they should not presume to come to the
altar bare legged, lest their dishonestlie might be discovered. And that in no
wise the chalice or paten were made of the horn of an ox, because the same is
bloody of nature: nor the host of a crust, but of pure bread. Also whereas
bishops used to sit in councels to judge in secular causes, they were now
forbidden so to do.

Many other things were as means of reformation articled, both for spiritual
causes, and also concerning civil ordinances, as disabling children to be
heirs to the parents, whch by them were not begot in lawful matrimony but on
concubines, Nuns concubines.
whether they were nuns or secular women. Also of payment of tithes,
performing of vows, avoiding of indecent apparel, and abolishing of all manner
of heathenish vsages and customs that sounded contrary to the order of
christianity, Curtailing of horses.
as curtailing of horses, and eating of horses flesh. These things with many
other expressed in 20 principal articles (as we have said) were first
concluded to be received by the church of the Northumbers in a council holden
there, and subscribed by Alfwold king of the Northumbers, by Delberike bishop
of Hexham, by Eubald archbishop of York, Higwald bishop of Lindisferne,
Edelbert bishop of Whiterne, Aldulfe bishop of Mieth, Ethelwine also another
bishop by his

But now to return back to speak of other doings, as in other parts of this
land they fell out. About the year of our Lord 764, 764
the sea of Canturburie being void, one Iambert or Lambert was elected
archbishop there, Sim. Dum. says 780.
and the year 766, the archbishop of York Egbert departed this life, in whose
place one Adelbert succeeded. About the 25 year of Kenwulf king of Westsaxons,
the Northumbers Simon Dun.
Osbald and Ethelherard, burned one of their judges named Bearne, because he
was more cruel in judgment (as they took the matter) than reason required.
In which vengeance executed upon the cruel judge (if he were so severe as this
attempt of the two noble men does offer the readers to suspect) all such of
his liuerie and calling are taught lenity and mildnes, wherewith they should
leven the rigor of the law. For -- capit indulgentia mentes, Ovid. lib. 2. de
artam.

Asperitas odium saeuaeque bella mouet.
Odimus accipitrem, quia viuit semper in armis,
Et pauidum solitos in pecus ire lupos.
At caret insidijs hominum, quia mitis hirundo est,
Quasque colat turres Chaonis ales habet.


At the same time, one Aswald or Alfewald reigned over the Northumbers, being
admitted K. after that Ethelbert was expelled, and when the same Alfwald had
reigned 10, or (as some say) 11 years, he was traitorouslie and without all
guilt made away; He began his reign Anno. 779, as says Simon Dun. and reigned
^at ten years.


In the year 792, 788 Matthew. West. Simon Dun. 792
Charles king of France sent a book into Britain, which was sent unto him
from Constantinople, containing certain articles agreed upon in a synod
(wherein were present above the Sim. Dunel. 800
on Christmasse eeuen chanced a marvelous tempest of wind, which overthrew
whole cities and towns in diverse places, and trees in great number, beside
other harms which it did, as by death of cattle, etc. Int the year following
a great part of London was consumed by fire.

Britricus K. of the Westsaxons, his inclination, Egbert being of the blood
royal is banished the land, and why; crosses of bloody color and drops of
blood fell from heaven, what they did prognosticate; the first Danes that
arrived on the English coasts, and the cause of their coming: fiery dragons
flieng in the air foretokens of famine and war; Britricus is poisoned of his
wife Ethelburga, her ill qualities; why the kings of the Westsaxons decreed
that their wives should not be called queens, the miserable end of Ethelburga;
Kenulfe king of Mercia, his virtues, he restores the archbishops see to
Canturburie which was translated to Lichfield, he inuadeth Kent, takes the
king prisoner in the field, and bountifully sets him at liberty, the great
joy of the people thereupon; his rare liberality to churchmen, his death and
burial. The seventh Chapter.
AFter Kenwulfe, Britricus.
Britricus or Brightrike was ordained king of Westsaxons, and began his reign
in the year of our Lord 787, Hen. Hunt. Matt. West. says 787. Simon Dun.
says 786.
which was about the 8 year of the government of the empress Eirene with her
son Constantinus, and about the second year of the reign of Achaius K. of
Scots. This Brightrike was descended of the line of Cerdicus the first king of
Westsaxons, the 16 in number from him. He was a man of nature quiet and
temperate, more desirous of peace than of war, and therefore he stood in
doubt of the noble valiancie of one Egbert, which after succeeded him in the
kingdom. The lineage of Cerdicus was in that season so confounded and mingled,
that every one as he grew in greatest power, strove to be king and supreme
governor. But specially Egbertus was known to be one that coueted that
place, as he that was of the blood royal, and a man of great power and lusty
courage. King Brightrike therefore to live in more safety, Egbert banished.
banished him the land, and appointed him to go into France. Egbert
understanding certeinlie that this his departure into a foreign country
should advance him in time, obeyed the kings pleasure.

About the third year of Brightrikes reign, A strange wonder.
there fell upon men's garments, as they walked abroad, crosses of bloody
color, and blood fell from heaven as drops of rain. Some took this wonder
for a signification of the persecution that followed by the Danes: Matt. West.
Will. Malm. Hen. Hunt. Danes.
for shortly after, in the year ensuing, there arrived three Danish ships
upon the English coasts, against whom the lieutenant of the parties adioining
made forth, to apprehend those that were come on land, howbeit aduenturing
himself over rashly amongst them, he was slain: but afterward when the
Danes perceived that the people of the countries about began to assemble, and
were coming against them, they fled to their ships, and left their prey and
spoil behind them for that time. These were the first Danes that arrived here
in this land, being only sent (as was perceived after) to view the country
and coasts of the same, to understand how with a greater power they might be
able to invade it, as shortly after they did, and warred so with the
Englishmen, that they got a great part of the land, and held it in their own
possession. In the tenth year of king Brightrikes reign, there were seen in
the air fiery dragons flieng, which betokened (as was thought) two grievous
plagues that followed. First a great dearth and famine: Famine and war signified.
and secondly a cruel war of the Danes, which shortly followed, as ye shall
hear.

Finally, after that Brightrike had reigned the space of 16 years, he
departed this life, and was buried at Warham. Some write that he was poisoned
by his wife Ethelburga daughter unto Offa king of Mercia (as before ye have
heard) and he married her in the fourth year of his reign. She is noted by
writers to have bin a very evil woman, Ran. Cest. lib. 5. cap 25. Brightrike
departed this life.
proud, and high-minded as Lucifer, and therewith disdainful. She bare her the
more stately, by reason of her fathers great fame and magnificence: Ethelburg^
her conditions and wicked nature.
whom she hated

It happened one day, as she meant to have poisoned a young gentleman, against
whom she had a quarrel, the king chanced to taste of that cup, and died thereof
(as before ye have heard.) Her purpose indeed was not to have poisoned the
king, but only the young gentleman, the which drinking after the A decree of
the kings of the Westsaxons against their wives.
For her heinous crime it is said that the kings of the Westsaxons would not
suffer their wives to be called queens, nor permit them to sit with them in
open places (where their majesty's should be showed) many years after.
Ethelburga fearing punishment, fled into France with great riches and treasure,
and was well cherished in the court of king Charles at the first, but after she
was thrust into an abbeie, and demeaned hirselfe so lewdlie there, in The end
of Ethelburga. Simon Dun.
that she was banished the house, and after died in great misery.

Egbert king of Mercia departing this life, after he had reigned four months,
ordained his coosine Kenulfe Will. Malm. Kenulfe.
to succeed in his place, which Kenulfe was come of the line of Penda king of
Mercia, as rightly descended from his brother Kenwalke. This Kenulfe for his
noble courage, wisdom, and upright dealing, was worthy to be compared with
the The archbishops see restored to Canturburie.
wherein his humblenes was to be praised, that made no account of worldly
honor in his province, so that the order of the ancient canons might be
observed. He had wars left him as it were by succession from his predecessor
Offa against them of Kent, and The king of Kent taken prisoner.
overthrew his army, and took him prisoner in the field, but afterward he
released him to his great praise and commendation. For whereas he builded a
church at Winchcombe, upon the day of the dedication thereof, he led the
Kentish king as then his prisoner, up to the high altar, and there set him at
liberty, declaring thereby a great proof of

There were present at that sight, Cuthred whom he had made king of Kent in
place of Ethelbert, or Edbert, with 13 bishops, and 10 dukes. The noise that
was made of the people in reioising at the kings bountious liberality was
marvelous. For not only he thus restored the Kentish king to liberty,
Kentilfs liberality toward church men which was not forgotten by them in
their histories.
but also bestowed great rewards upon all the prelates and noble men that were
come to the feast, every priest had a piece of gold, and every moonke a
shilling. Also he dealt and gave away great gifts amongst the people, and
founded in that place an abbeie, indowing the same with great possessions.
Finally, after he had reigned 4 years, he departed this life, and appointed
his burial to be in the same abbeie of Winchcombe, leaving behind him a son
named Kenelme, who succeeded his father in the kingdom, but was soon
murdered by his unnatural sister Quendred, the 17 of Iulie, as hereafter
shall be showed.

Osrike king of Northumberland leaves the kingdom to Edelbert revoked out of
exile, king Alfwalds sons miserably slain, Osred is put to death, Ethelbert
puts away his wife and marieth another, his people rise against him
therefore and kill him, Oswald succeeding him is driven out of the land;
Ardulfe king of Northumberland, duke Wade raises war against him and is
discomfited; duke Aldred is slain; a sore battle fought in Northumberland,
the English men aflict one another with civil wars; king Ardulfe deposed
from his estate; the regiment of the Northumbers refused as dangerous and
deadly by destiny, what befell them in lieu of their disloialtie; the Danes
invade their land and are vanquished; the royal race of the Kentish kings
deca^eth, the state of that kingdom; the primasie restored to the sea of
Canturburie, Egbert (after the death of Britricus) is sent for to undertake the
government of the Westsaxons, his lineage. The eight Chapter.
WHen Aswald king of Northumberland was made away, Osred.
his brother Osred the son of Alred took upon him the rule of that kingdom
anno 788, 788
and within one year was expelled, Will. Mal^. Matthew. West. Hen. Hunt. Simon
Dun.
and left the kingdom to Ethelbert or Edelred as then revoked out of exile, in
which he had remained for the space of 1 years, and now being restored, he
continued in government of the Northumbers 4 years, Duke Ardell taken and
wounded.
or (as some say) 7 years; in the second year whereof duke Eardulfe was taken
and led to Ripon, and there without the gate of the monastery wounded (as was
thought) to death by the said king, but the moonks taking his body, and laieng
it in a tent without the church, after midnight he was found alive in the
church.

Moreover, about the same time the sons of king Alfwald were by force drawn
out of the city of York, but first by a wile they were trained out of the
head church where they had taken sanctuary, and so at length miserably slain
by king Ethelbert in Wonwaldremere, one of them was named Alfus, and the other
Alfwin. In the year of our Lord 792, 791
Osred upon trust of the oaths and promises of diverse noble men, secretly
returned into Northumberland, but his own soldiers for sooke him, and so was
he taken, and by king Ethelberts commandment put to death at Cunburge on the
14 day of September.

The same year king Ethelbert married the lady Alfled the daughter of Offa
king of Mercia, forsaking his former wife which he had, and having no just
cause of divorce given on her part, whereby his people took such displeasure
against him, that finally after he had reigned now this second time 4 years,
or (as other say) seven years, he could not avoid the destiny of his
predecessors, but was miserably killed by his own subjects at Cobre, the 18
day of April. After whom, one Oswald a noble man was ordained king, Holy
^ant. Ardulfe.
and within 27 or 28 days after was expelled, and constreined to fly first
into the I Will of Lindisferne, and from thence unto the king of Picts.

Then Ardulfe that was a duke and son to one Arnulfe was revoked out of
exile, made king, and consecrated also at York by the archbishop Cumbald, and
three other bishops, the 25 of June, in the year 396. About two years after,
796
to wit, in the year 798, one duke Wade, and other conspirators which had
been also partakers in the murdering of king Ethelbert, raised war against
king Ardulfe, and fought a batte^l with him at Walleg, but king Ardulfe got the
upper hand, Walalege.
and chased Wade and other his enemies out of the field. In the year 799. 799
duke Aldred that had murdered Ethelbert or Athelred king of Northumberland,
was slain by another The English ^en afflicted (...)
and many other with him were slain: but to rehearse all the battles with
their successes and issues, it should be too tedious and irksome to the
readers, for the English people being naturally hard and high-minded,
continually

Thus ye may consider in what plight things stood in Northumberland, by the
often seditions, tumults and changings of governors, so that there be which
have written, how after the death of king Ethelbert, otherwise called Edelred,
diverse bishops and other of the chiefest nobles of the country disdaining such
traitorous prince-killings, civil seditions, Seians horse, whose rider came
ever to some evil end. But yet by that which is heretofore showed out of
Simon Dunelm. it is evident, that there reigned kings over the Northumbers,

Howbeit this is certain, that the sundry murtherings and banishments of
their kings and dukes give us greatly to guess, that there was but sorry
obedience used in the country, whereby for no small space of time that
kingdom remained without an head governor, being set open to the prey and
injury of them that were borderers unto it, and likewise unto strangers. For
the Danes, which in those days This chanced in the year of our ^^ord 790. as
Simon Dun. says.
had landed before in the north parts, and spoiled the abbeie of Lindisferne
otherwise called holy Island, and perceiving the fruitfulness of the country,
and easiness for their people to invade it (because that through their private
quarelling there was little public resistance to be looked for) at their
coming home, entised their countriemen to make voiages into England, and so
landing in Northumberland, The Danes invade Northumberland.
did much hurt, and obtained a great part of the country in manner without
resistance, The Danes vanquished. This was in anno 794. as Simon Dun. says.
constreined them by sharp fight to flee back to their ships, and took
certain of them in the field, whose heads they stroke off there upon the
shore. The other that got to their ships, suffered great loss of men, and
likewise of their vessels by tempest.

Here then we are taught that the safest way to maintain a monarchy, is when
all degrees live in loialtie. And that it is necessary there should be one
supereminent, unto whom all the residue should stoop: this frail body of
ours may give us sufficient instruction. For reason rules in the mind as
sovereign, and has subject unto it all the affections and inward motions, yea
the natural actions are directed by her government: whereto if the will be
obedient there cannot creep in any outrage or disorder. Such should be the
sole regiment of a king in his kingdom; otherwise he may be called Rex a
regendo, as Mons ae mouendo. For there is not a greater enemy to that estate,
than to admit participants in roialtie, which as it is a ready way to cause a
subversion of a monarchy; so it is the shortest cut over to a disordered
anarchie. But to proceed in the history.

After that Alrike (the last of king Witchtreds sons, which reigned in Kent
successiuelic after their father) was dead, the noble offspring of the kings
there so decayed, and began to vade away, that every one which either by
flattering had got riches together, or by seditious partaking was had in
estimation, sought to have the government, and to vsurp the title of king,
abusing by unworthy means the honor and dignity of so high an office.
Amongst others, one Edbert or Edelbert, Edelbert.
surnamed also Prenne, governed the Kentishmen for the space of two years, and
was in the end vanquished by them of Mercia, and taken prisoner, as before is
said: so that for a time he lived in captivity, and although afterward he was
set at liberty, yet was he not received again to the kingdom, so that it is
uncertain what end he made. Cuthred that was appointed by Kinevulfe the king
of Mercia, to reign in place of the same Edbert or Edelbert, continued in the
government eight years as king, rather by name than by act, inheriting his
predecessors evil hap and calamity, through factions and civil discord.

After that Iambrith or Lambert the archbishop of Canturburie was departed this
life, Lambert.
one Edelred was ordained in his place, unto whom the primasie was restored,
which in his predecessors time was taken away by Offa king of Mercia, as
before is recited. Also after the death of Eubald archbishop of York, another
of the same name called Eubald the second was admitted to succeed in that see.
After that Brightrike the king of Westsaxons was departed this life, messengers
were sent with all speed into France, to give knowledge thereof unto Egbert,
which as before is showed, was constreined by the said Brightrike to depart the
country. At the first, he withdrew unto Offa king of Mercia, with whom he
remained for a time, till at length (through suit made by Brightrike) he
perceived he might not longer continue there without danger to be delivered
into his enemies hands; and so Offa winking at the matter, he departed out of
his country, and got him over into France. But being now advertised of
Brightriks death, and required by earnest letters sent from his friends to come
and receive the government of the kingdom, he returned with all convenient
speed into his country, and was received immediately for king, Egbert received
as king of Westsaxons His linege.
by the general consent of the Westsaxons, as well in respect of the good hope
which they had conceived of his worthy qualities and aptness to have
government, as of hid royal lineage, being lineallie descended from Inigils
the brother of king Inas, as son to Alkemound, that was the son of one
Eaffa, which Eaffa was son to Open the son of the foresaid Inigils.

Egbert reigns over the Westsaxons, his practice or exercise in the time of
his exile, his martial exploits against the Cornishmen and Welshmen, Bernulfe
king of Mercia takes indignation at Egbert for the enlarging of his royal
authority, they fight a sore battle, Egbert overcomes, great ods between
their soldiers, bishop Alstan a warrior; Kent, Essex, Southerie, Sussex, and
Eastangles subject to Egbert; he kills Bernulfe K. of Mercia, and conquereth
the whole kingdom, Whitlafe the king thereof becomes his
THis Egbert began his reign in the year of our Lord 800, which was the 4
year almost ended, Egbert. 802 as Simon Dunel. and M. W. has noted but 801.
after that the emperor Eirine began the second time to rule the expire, and
in the 24 year of the reign of Charles the great king of. France, which also
was in the same year after he was made emperor of Simon Dun. Hen. Hunt.
as they that being vanquished, would not yet seem to be subdued, wherefore
about the 14 year of his reign, he invaded the country of Wales, and went
through the same from cast to west, not finding any

King Egbert having overcome his enemies of Wales and Cornwall, began to grow
in authority above all the other rulers within this land, Bernulf king of
Mercia.
in so much that every of them began to fear their own estate, but namely
Bernulfe king of Mercia sore stomached the matter, as he that was wise, and of
a lofty courage, and yet doubted to have to do with Egbert, who was known
also to be a man both skillful and valiant. At length yet considering A battle
fought at Ellendon.
boldly prepared to meet Bernulfe in the field. Hereupon they incountred
together at Ellendon, and fought a sore battle, in the which a huge number of
men were slain, what on the one part, and on the other, Egbert wan the
victory.
but in the end the victory remained with Egbert, although he had not the like
host for number unto Bernulfe, but he was a politic prince, and of great
experience, having chosen his soldiers of nimble, lean, and hearty men; where
Bernulfs soldiers (through long ease) were cowardly persons, and ouercharged
with flesh. Will. Malm. 826
The battle was fought in the year of our Lord 826.

King Egbert having got this victory, was advanced into such hope, that he
persuaded himself to be able without great adoo to overcome the residue of his
neighbors, whose estates he saw plainly sore weakened and fallen into great
decaie. Hereupon before all other, he determined to assail Edelvulfe king of
Kent, whom he knew to be a man in no estimation amongst his subjects. A
competent army therefore being levied, he appointed his son Ethelwulfe and
Alstan bishop of Shireborne, Alstan (...); of Shireborn a warrior.
with earl Walhard to have the conduct thereof, and sent them with the same
into Kent, where they wrought such maisteries, that they chased both the king
and all other that would not submit themselves, out of the country,
constreining them to pass over the Thames. The co^quests of the Westsaxons.
And herewith the Westsaxons following the victory, brought under subjection
of king Egbert the countries of Kent, Essex, Southerie, and Sussex. The
Eastangles also about the same time received king Egbert for their sovereign
Lord, Hent. Hunt.
and comforted by his setting on against Bernulfe king of Mercia, invaded the
confines of his kingdom, in revenge of displeasures which he had done to them
lately before, by inuading their country, and as it came to pass,
incountring with the said Bernulfe which came against them to defend his
country, Bernulfe king of Mercia slain.
they slew him in the field.

Thus their minds on both parts being kindled into further wrath, the
Eastangles estsoones in the year following fought with them of Mercia, and
overcame them again, and slew their king Ludicenus, who succeeded Bernulfe in
that kingdom, with 5 of his earls. The state of the kingdom of Mercia being
weakened, Egbert conceived an assured hope of good success, and in the 27
year of his reign, made an open invasion into the country, and chasing
Whitlafe king of Mercia (that succeeded Ludicenus) out of his estate, conquered
the whole kingdom of the Mercies. But yet in the year next following, or in
the third year after, he restored it again to Whitlafe, with condition, that
he should enjoy the same as tributarie to him, and acknowledge him for his
supreme governor. Simon Dun.
The same year that Bernulfe king of Mercia was slain by the Eastangles,
These men the Cornish men as is to be supposed.
there was a sore battle foughten at Gauelford, betwixt them of Devonshire,
and the Britains, in the which many thousand died on both parts.

King Egbert having conquered all the English people inhabiting on the south
side of Humber, led forth his army against them of Northumberland: but the
Northumbers being not only vexed with civil sedition, but also with the
often invasion of Danes, perceived not how they should be able to resist the
power of king Egbert: King Egbert inuadeth Northumberland. The Northumbers such
mit themselves to king Egbert.
and therefore upon good aduisement taken in the matter, they resolved to
submit themselves, and thereupon sent ambassadors to him to offer their
submission, committing themselves wholly unto his protection. King Egbert
gladly received them, and promised to defend them from all foreign enemies.
Thus the kingdom of Northumberland was brought under subjection to the kings
of the Westsaxons, after the state had been sore weakened with contention and
civil discord that had continued amongst the nobles of the country, for the
space of many years, beside the invasion made by outward enemies, to the
grievous damage of the people.

After that king Egbert had finished his business in Northumberland, he turned
his power toward the country of Northwales, and subdued the same, with the
city of Chester, which till those days, (...) Northwales and the city of
Chester conquered by Egbert.
the Britains or Welshmen had kept in their possession. When king Egbert had
obtained these victories, and made such conquests as before is mentioned, of
the people here in this land, he caused a council to be assembled at
Winchester, and there by advise of the high estates, he was crowned king, as
^ouereigne governor and supreme lord of the whole land. It is also recorded,
that he caused a commission to be directed forth into all parts of the realm,
to give commandment, The name of this (...) when (...) changed.
though it should appear (as before is mentioned) that it was so called
shortly after the first time that the Angles and Saxons got possession thereof.

Now was king Egbert settled in good quiet, and his dominions reduced out of the
troubles of war, when suddenly news came, The Danes.
that the Danes with a The Englishmen discomfited by Danes. Simon Dun. H. Hunt.
Matthew. West. 834
yet king Egbert by covert of the night escaped his enemies hands: but two of
his chief capteins Dudda and Osmond, with two bishops, to wit, Herferd of
Winchester, and Uigferd of Shireborne, were slain in that battle, which was
foughten at Carrum, about the 834 of Christ, and 34 year of king Egberts
reign.

In the year following, Danes and Welshmen vanquished.
the Danes with their navy came into Westwales, and there the Welshmen ioining
with them, rose against king Egbert, but he 836 Matthew. West.
as one author writes. Finally, when king Egbert had reigned the term of 36
years and seven months with great glory for the enlarging of his kingdom
with wide bounds, which when he received was but of small compass, he departed
this life, Egbert departs this life.
leaving to his issue 837
and he left behind him two sons Ethelwuffe, Matthew. West.
otherwise named Athaulfe and Adelstan. The first he appointed to succeed him
in the kingdom of Westsaxons, and Adelstan he ordained to have the government
of Kent, Sussex, and Essex.

Here we see the pattern of a fortunate prines in all his affairs, as well
foreign as domestical, Saepius incautae nocuit victoria turb^^.

The kingdom of Kent annexed to the kingdom of the Westsaxons, the end of the
kingdom of Kent and Essex; Kenelme king of Mercia murdered by the means of
his own sister Quendred, the order of her wicked practice; his death
prophesied or foreshewed by a sign, the kings of Mercia put by their roialtie
one after another, the kingdom of Britain begins to be a monarchy;
Ethelwulfe king of the Westsaxons, he marries his butlers daughter, his
disposition; the fourth destruction of this land by foreign enemies, the Danes
sought the ruin of this I Will, how long they afflicted and troubled the same;
two notable bishops and very serviceable to king Ethelwulfe in war, the
Danes discomfited, the Englishmen chased, Ethelwufs great victory over the
Danes, a great slaughter of them at Tenet, king Ethelwulfs devotion and
liberality to churches, Peter pence paid to Rome, he marieth the lady Judith,
his two sons conspire (upon occasion of breaking a law) to depose him, king
Ethelwulfe dies, his four sons by his first wife Osburga, how he bequeathed
his kingdoms. The tenth Chapter.
WHen Cuthred K. of Kent had reigned 8 years, Will. Malm.
as before is mentioned, he was constreined to give place unto one Baldred,
that took upon him the government, and reigned the space of 18 years, without
any great authority, for his subjects regarded him but sorilie, so that in
the end, when his country was invaded by the Westsaxons, he was easily
constreined to depart into exile. And thus was the kingdom of Kent annexed to
the kingdom of the Westsaxons, after the same kingdom had continued in
government of kings created of the same nation for the space of 382 years, The
end of the kingdom of Kent.
that is to say, from the year of our Lord 464, unto the year 827. 827
Suithred or Suthred king of Essex was vanquished and expelled out of his
kingdom by Egbert king of Westsaxons (as before ye may read) in the same
year that the Kentishmen were subdued by the said Egbert, The end of the
kingdom of Essex.
or else very shortly after. This kingdom continued 281 years, from the
year 614, unto the year 795, as by the table of the Heptarchie set forth by
Alexander Neuill appears. After the deceasse of Kenwulfe king of Mercia,
Matt. Westminster.
his son Kenelme a child of the age of seven years was admitted king, about
the year of our Lord 821. 821
He had two sisters, The wickedness of Quendred.
Quendred and Burgenild, of the which the one (that is to say) Quendred, of a
malicious mind, moved through ambition, envied her brothers advancement, and
sought to make him away, so that in the end she corrupted the governor of his
person one Ashbert, with great rewards and high promises persuading him to
dispatch her innocent brother out of life, that she might reign in his place.
Ashbert one day under a color to have the young king forth on hunting, led
him into a thick wood, and there cut off the head from his body, King Kenelm
murdered.
an impe by reason of his tender years and innocent age, unto the world void
of gilt, and yet thus traiterouslie murdered without cause or crime: he was
afterward reputed for a maryr.

There has gone a tale that his death should be signified at Rome, See
legendae aured. fol. (...) in the life of S. Kenelme.
and the place where the murder was committed, by a strange manner: for (as
they say) a white ^oue came and sighted upon the altar of saint Peter, bearing
a scroll in her bill, which she let fall on the same altar, in which scroll
among other things this was contained, In clenc liou bath, Kenelme kinbarsie
^eth under thorn, heaued be^eaued: that is, at Clean in a (...), Keneline the
kings child lies beheaded under a thorn. This tale I ^ehearse, not for any
credit I think it worthy of, but only for that it seems to note the
place where the young prince innocentlie lost his life.

After that Kenelme was thus made away, Ceolwulfe K. of Mercia.
his uncle Ceolwulfe the brother of king Kenulfe was created king of Mercia, 823
and in the second year of his reign was expelled by Bernwulfe. Bernwulfe in
the third year of his reign, was vanquished and put to flight in battle by
Egbert king of Westsaxons, and shortly after slain of the Eastangles, as
Matt. Westminster.
After Ludicenus, succeeded Wightlafe, 728
who first being vanquished by Egbert 828
and in the year of the reign of king Egbert 28, but yet beer it took not
end, as after shall appear.

Ethelwulfus, Ethelwulfus.
otherwise called by some writers Athaulfus, began his reign over the
Westsaxons in the year 837, which was in the 24 year of the emperor Ludouicus
Pius that was also K. of France, in the tenth year of. Theophilus the emperor
of the East, and about the third year of Kenneth, the second of that name king
of Scots. This Ethelwulfe minding in his youth to have been a priest, entered
into the orders of subdeacon, and as some write, he was bishop of Winchester:
Henry Hunt. Marth. West.
but howsoever the matter Will. Malm.
so that contenting himself with the kingdom of Westsaxons, he permitted his
brother Adelstan to enjoy the residue of the countries which his father had
subdued, as Kent

But now the fourth destruction which canced to this land by foreign enemies,
Four especial destructions of this land.
was at hand: for the people of Denmark, Norway, and other of those northeast
regions, which in that season were great rouers by sea, had tasted the wealth
of this land by such spoils and preies as they had taken in the same, Simon
Dun. Hen. Hunt.
than any of the other persecutions, either before or since that time: for
the Romans having quickly subdued the land, governed it nobly without seeking
the subversion thereof. The Scots and Picts only invaded the north parts. And
the Saxons seeking the conquest of the land, when they had once go it, they
kept it, and did what they could, to better and advance it to a flourishing
estate.

The Normans likewise having made a conquest. granted both life, and ancient
laws to the former inhabitants: but the Danes long time and often assailing
the land on every side, now inuading it in this place, and now in that, did
not at the first so much covet to conquer it, as to spoil it, nor to bear
rule in it, as to waste and destroy it: who if they were at any time
overcome, the victors were nothing the more in quiet: for a new navy, and a
greater army was ready to make some new invasion, The Danes sought the
destruction of this land.
neither did they enter all at one place, nor at once, but one company on the
east side, and an other in the west, or in the north and south coasts, in such
sort, that the Englishmen knew not whether they should first go to make
resistance against them.

This mischief began chiefly in the days of this king Ethelwulfe, but it
continued about the space of two hundred years, How long the persecution of
the Danes lasted.
as by the sequel of this book it shall appear. King Ethelwulfe was not so
much given to ease, but that upon occasion for defense of his country and
subjects, he was ready to take order for the beating back of the enemies, as
occasion served, and specially chose such to be of his counsel, Will. Malm^.
as were men of great experience and wisdom. Amongst other, Two notable
bishops in Ethelwults days.
there were two notable prelates, Suithune bishop of Winchester, and Adelstan
bishop of Shireborne, who were ready ever to give him good advise. Suithune
was not so much expert in worldly matters as Adelstan was, and therefore
chiefly counseled the king in things apperteining to his souls health: but
Adelstan took in hand to order matters apperteining to the state of the
commonwealth, as providing of money, and furnishing forth of men to withstand
the Danes, so that by him many things were both boldly begun, and happily
atchiued, as by writers has been recorded. He governed the sea of Shireborne
the space of 50 years, by the good counsel and faithful advise of those two
prelates.

King Ethelwulfe governed his subjects very politikelie, and by himself and
his capteins oftentimes put the Danes to flight, though as chance of war
falls out, he also received at their hands great losses, and sundry sore
detriments. Simon Dut. Hen. Hunt.
In the first year of his reign, the Danes arrived at Hampton, with 33 ships,
against whom he sent earl Wulhard with part of his army, the which giving
battle to the enemies, made great slaughter of them, Danes discomfited.
and obtained a noble victory. Matthew. West.
He sent also earl Adelhelme with the Dorsetshire men against an other number
of the Danes, which were landed at Portesmouth, but after long fight,
Englishmen put to flight.
the said Adelhelme was slain, and the Danes obtained the victory. In the
year following, earl Herbert fought against the Danes at Merseware, and was
there slain, They are eftsoons vanquished.
and his men chased. The same year, a great army of Danes passing by the east
parts of the land, as through Lindsey, Eastangle, and Kent, slew and murdered
an huge number of people. The next year after this, they entered further into
the land, and about Canturburie, Rochester, and London, did much mischief.

King Ethelwulfe in the fifth year of his reign, with a part of his army
incountred with the Danes at Carrum, the which were arrived in those parties
with 30 ships, Carrum.
having their full fraught of men, so that for so small a number of vessels,
there was a great power of men of war, in so much that they obtained the
victory at that time, The Danes wan the victorrie in battle. Danes are
quished. Simon. Dun. 851
and put the king to the worse. About the tenth year of king Ethelwulfs
reign one of his capteins called Ernwulfe, and bishop Adelstan, with the
Summersetshire men, and an other captain called Osred, with the Dorsetshire
men, fought against the Danes, at a place called Pedredesmuth, and vanquished
them with great triumph. In the sixteenth year of his reign, king Ethelwulfe
and his son Edelbald having assembled all their powers together, gave battle
at Ocley, to ^ huge host of Danes, (...)
the which with four hundred and fifty ships had arrived at Thames mouth, and
destroyed the famous cities of London and Canturburie, and also had chased
Brightwulfe king of Mercia in battle, and being now entered into Sontherie,
were incountered by king Ethelwulfe at Ocley aforesaid, and after sore fight
and incredible slaughter made on both sides, in the end, the victory by the
power of God was given to those that believed on

Thus king Ethelwulfe obtained a glorious victory in so mighty a battle, The
Danes (...) vanquished.
as a greater had not been lightly heard of to chance within the English
dominions. The same year also Athelstan king of Kent and duke Ealhere fought
by sea with the Danes, Danes overcome by sea.
and took 9 of their ships, and chased the residue. Moreover, one earl Ceorle
having with him the power of Devonshire, The Deuonshiremen vanquish the Danes.
fought with the Danes at

In the 18 year of king Ethelwufes reign, Simon Dun. 852
he aided Burthred king of Mercia against the Welshmen (as before is mentioned)
and gave to him his Great slaugh^^^ Danes (...).
where great slaughter was made on both sides, the Englishmen prevailing in

In the 19 year of his reign, king Ethelwulfe ordained that the tenths or
tithes of all lands due to be paid to the church, should be free from all
tribute, duties, or services regal. And afterward, with great devotion he
went to Rome, where he was received with great honor, and tarried there one
whole year: he took with him his son Alured, who had been The Saxons
school.
which Offa king of Mercia had sometime founded in that city, and lately had
been sore decayed by fire. He confirmed the grant of Peter pence, to the
intent that no Englishmen from thence-foorth should do penance in bounds as he
saw some there to do before his face. King Ethelwulfs liberality to churches.
Will. Malmes. Simon Dun. Man^usae.
It is also written, that he should acquit all the churches of his realm of
paieng tribute to his coffers (as before ye have heard) and moreover couenanted
to send unto Rome every year three

In his return thorough France, he married the lady Judith, The lady Judith.
daughter to Charles the bald, then K. of France, and bringing her with him
into his country, placed her by him in a chair of estate, with which deed he
offended so the minds of his subjects, because it was against the order taken
before him, for the offense of Ethelburga, that his son Ethelbald and
Adelstan bishop of Shireborne, with Enwulfe earl of Summerset, Will. Malm.
conspired to depose him from his kingly authority; but by mediation of
friends, the matter was taken up, and so ordered, that the kingdom was divided
betwixt the father and the son, with such parcialitie, that the son had the
better part lieng westward, and the father was constreined to content himself
with the east part being the woorst.

Of this trouble of Ethelwulfe some write otherwise, after this manner word for
word. 857
Ethelwulfe king of the Westsaxons being returned from Rome and the parties
beyond the seas, was prohibited the entrance into his realm by Adelstane
bishop of Shireborne, and Ethelbald his eldest son; pretending outwardly the
coronation of Alfride, the marriage of Judith the French kings daughter, and
open eating with her at the table, to be the only cause of this their
manifest rebellion. Whereby he seems to infer, that this reuolting of
Adelstane and his son, should proceed of the ambitous desire of Ethelbald to
reign, and likely enough, or else this unequal partition should never have
been made.

But howsoever the matter stood, king Ethelwulfe lived not long after his
return from Rome, but departed this life, after he had ruled the kingdom of
the Westsaxons the space of 20 years and od months. His body was buried at
Winchester. He left behind him four sons, Ethelbald, Ethelbert or
Ethelbright, Ethelred, and Alfred or Alured, which was begotten of his first
wife Osburga. A little before his death he made his testament and last will,
Only Westsex says Mart. Westminster. and Sim. Dunel. says that Ethelbright had
Sussex also, and so does H. Hunt.
appointing his son Ethelbald to succeed him in the whole regiment of his
kingdoms of Westsex and Sussex, which he held by inheritance: but the kingdoms
of Kent and Essex he assigned to his son Ethelbright. About the same tune also
the Danes soiourned all the winter season in the I Will of Shepie.

The old Saxons do bring the genealogy of this Ethelwulfe to Adam, Matthew.
Paris.
after this manner following. Ethelwulfe the son of Egbert,
the son of Alcmund, the son of Eaffa, the son of Eoppa, the son of Ingils, the
son of Kenred, the son of Coelwald, the son of Cudwine, the son of Ceawlin, the
son of Kenric, the son of Cerdic, the son of Eslie, the son of Gewise, the son
of Wingie, the son of Freawin, the son of Fridagare, the son of Brendie, the
son of Beldegie, the son of Woden, the son of Frethelwold, the son of
Freolaffe, the son of Frethewolfe, the son of Finnie, the son of Godulfe, the
son of De quo Sedulius in car. pasch.
Geta, the son of Teathwie, the son of Bcame, the son of Sceldie, the son of
Seafe, the son of Heremod, the son of Itermod, the son of Hordie, the son of
Wale, the son of Brdwie, the son of Sem, the son of Noah, and so forth to
Adam, as
you shall find it by retrogradation from the 32 verse unto the first of the
fifth chapter of Genesis. Which genealogicall recapitulation in their national
families and tribes, other people also have observed; as the Spaniards, who
reckon their descent from Hesperus, before the Goths and Moors ouerran their
land; the Italians from Aeneas, before they were mingled with with the Uandals
and Lumbards; the Saxons from Woden, before they were mixed with the Danes and
Normans; the Frenchmen at this day from the Thracians; the Germans from the
children of Gwiston; and other people from their far fetched ancestrie. To
conclude, John Castor. Simon Dun Matt. Parker. A kings son and heir a bishop.
of this Ethelwulfe it is written, that he was so well learned and devout, that
the clerks of the church of Winchester did choose him in his youth to be bishop,
which function he undertook, and was bishop of the said see by the space of
seven years before he was king.

Bertwolfe king of Mercia tributarie to the Westsaxons, the fame of Modwen an
Irish virgin, she was a great builder of monasteries, she had the gift of
healing diseases, Ethelbald and Ethelbright divide their fathers kingdom
betwixt them, Ethelbald marieth his mother, he dies, Winchester destroyed by
the Danes, they played the trucebreakers and did much mischief in Kent,
Ethelbright dies; Ethelred king of the Westsaxons, his commendable qualities,
his regiment was full of trouble, he fought againt the Danes nine
AFter Wightlafe king of Mercia, Bertwolfe. of Mercia.
one Bertwofe reigned as tributarie unto the Westsaxons, the space of 13
years, about the end of which term he was chased out of his country by the
Danes, and then one Burthred was made king of that kingdom, Matthew. West. says
the daughter. Ranulf. Cest. John Capgraue.
which married Ethelswida the sister of Ethelwolfe king of Westsaxons.

Ethelbald and Ethelbright dividing their fathers kingdom betwixt them,
Ethelbald and Ethelbright. 857
began to reign, Ethelbald over the Westsaxons and the Southsaxons, and
Ethelbright over them of Kent and Essex, in the The unlawful marriage of
Ethelbald. Will. Malm.
The said Ethelbald greatly to his reproach took to wise his mother in law
queen Judith, or rather (as some write) his own mother, whom his father had
kept as concubine. He lived not past five years in government of the
kingdom, but was taken out of this life to the great sorrow of his subjects
whom he ruled right worthily, and so as they had him in great love and
estimation. Then his brother Ethelbright took on him the rule of the whole
government, as well over the Westsaxons and them of Sussex, as over the
Kentishmen and them of Essex.

In his days the Danes came on land, Hen. Hunt Winchester destroyed by Danes.
Danes vanquished.
and destroid the city of Winchester: but duke Osrike with them of Hamshire,
and duke Adelwolfe with the Barkeshire men gave the enemies battle, and
vanquishing them, slew of them a great number. In the fifth year of
Ethelbrights reign, a navy of Danes arrived in the I Will of Tenet, unto whom
when the Kentishmen had promised a sum of money to have a truce granted for a
time, the Danes one night, before the term of that truce was expired, brake
forth and wasted all the east part of Kent: whereupon the Kentishmen assembled
together, made toward those trucebreakers, and caused them to depart out of
the country. The same year, after that Ethelbright had ruled well and
peaceably the Westsaxons five years, and the Kentishmen ten years, he ended
his life, and was buried at Shireborne, as his brother Ethelbald was before him.

AFter Ethelbright succeeded his brother Ethelred, Ethelred. 867
and began his reign over the Westsaxons and the more part of the English
people, in the year of our Lord 867, and in the 12 year of the emperor
Jews, in the 27 year of the reign of Charles Calnus king of France, and
about the 6 year of Constantine the second king of Scots. Touching this
Ethelred, he was in time of peace a most courteous prince, and one that by all
kind of means sought to win the hearts of the people: but abroad in the wars
he was sharp and stern, as he that understood what apperteined to good order,
so that he would suffer no offense to escape unpunished. By which means he was
famous both in peace and war: but he neither lived any long time in the
government, nor yet was suffered to pass the short space that he reigned in
rest and quietness.

For whereas he reigned not past six years, Four years six months says
Harison. Will. Malm. Ethelred fought with the Danes nine times is one year.
he was continually during that term vexed with the invasion of the Danes,
and specially toward the latter end, insomuch that (as has been reported of
writers) he fought with them nine times in one year: and although with diverse
and variable fortune, yet for the more part he went away with the victory.
Beside that, he oftentimes lay in wait for their forragers, and such as straied
abroad to rob and spoil the country, whom he met withal and overthrew. There
were slain in his time nine earls of those Danes, and one king, beside other
of the meaner sort without number.

But here is to be understood, that in this mean time, whilst Ethelred was
busied in war to resist the invasions of the Danes in the south and west
parts of this land, the kings and rulers of Mercia and Northumberland taking
occasion thereof, The kings of Mercia and Northumberland neglect their duties.
began to withdraw their couenanted subjection from the Westsaxons, and took
upon them as it were the absolute government and rule of their countries,
without respect to aid one another, but rather were contented to sustain the
enemies within their dominions, than to prevent the injury with dutiful
assistance to those, whom by allegiance they were bound to serve and obeie.

By reason hereof, The Danes grow in pursance.
the Danes without resistance grew into greater power amongst them, whilst the
inhabitants were still put in fear each day more than other, and every late
gotten victory by the enemies by the increase of prisoners, ministered occasion
of some other conquest to follow. Even about the beginning of Ethelreds reign,
there arrived upon the English coasts an huge army of the Danes, under the
conduct of two renowned capteins Hungar and Ubbs, Hung^r and Ubb^.
men of marvelous strength and valiancie, but both of them passing cruel of
nature. They lay all the winter season in (...) compounding with them of the
(...) for (...) upon certain conditions, sparing (...) a tune to show their
for as for quietness sake.

In the socond year of king E^hel^ed, the said captain came with their armies
into. Yorkshire, finding the country unprovided of necessary defense because
of the civil discord that reigned aniong the Northumbers, Hen. Hunt. King
Osbright deposed and E^la placed.
the which had lately expelled king Osbright, that had the government of
those parts, and placed one Ella in his room: howbeit now they

The English host entering the city, began to fight Osbright and Ella kings of
Northumberland slain.
but in the end the two kings Osbright and Ella were slain, and a great number
of the Northumbers, what within the city, and what without lost their lives at
that time, the residue were constreined to take truce with the Danes. This
battle was fought the 21 day of Ma^ch being in ^ent, It must be upon the 10
^alends of April, or else it well not conc^rre with Palmsunday. See. Mat. West.
on the Friday before Palmsunday, in the year 657. Some have written otherwise
of this battle, reporting that the Northumbers calling home king Osbright
(whom before they had banished) incountred with the Danes in the field,
without the walls York burnt by Danes.
but they were easily beaten back, and chased into the city, the which by
the Danes pursuing the victory, was set on fire and burnt, together with the
king and people that were fled into it for succor. How soever it came about,
certain it is, that the Danes got the victory, and now having subdued the
Northumbers, appointed one Egbert so reign over them as king, under their
protection, The commendation of Adelstan bishop of Shirborne.
having governed that see the term of 50 years. This Adelstane was a man of
high wisdom, and one that had borne no small rule in the kingdom of the
Westsaxons, as hereby it may be coniectured, that when king Ethelwulfe returned
from Rome, he would not suffer him to be admitted king, because he had done in
certain Bishop Adelstan covetous. Hen. H^nt.
which contrary e^tremities so ill matched, though in him (the time

Burthred king of Mercia with aid beseegeth the Danes in Notingham, Bas^reeg
and Halden two Danish kings with their powers (...) the Westsax^^^ they are
incountred by (...) ear^e of Ba^k^shire; King (...) gives them and their
chief guide a sore (...), what Polydor Virgil recorder touching one (...) king
of the Danes, and the wars that Ethelred had with them his death; Edmuisd
king of Eastangles gives battle to the Danes, he yields himself, and for
christian religion sake is by them most cruelly murdered, the kingdom of the
Eastangles ends, Guthran a Dane governs the whole country, K. Osbright
rauisheth the wife of one Bearne a noble man, a bloody battle insueth
thereupon, wherein Osbright and Ella are slain. The twelft Chapter.
IN the year following, Burthred king of Mercia.
that is to say, in the third year of Ethelreds reign, he with his brother
Alured went to aid Burthred king of Mercia, against the two foresaid Danish
capteines Hungar and Ubba, the which were entered into Mercia, and had won the
town for the winter season. Whereupon the foresaid Ethelred and Burthred with
their powers came to Notingham, Danes besieged in Notingham.
and besieged the Danes within it. The Danes perceiving themselves in danger,
made suite for a truce and abstinence from war, which they obtenred and then
departed back to York, where they s^^urned the most part of all that year.

In the sixth year of king Ethelreds reign, a new army of great force and
power came into the country of the Westsaxons under two leaders or kings of
the Danes, Basreeg and Halden.
Basreeg and Halden. They lodged at Reding with their maine army, and within
three days after the earl of Berrockshire Edelwulfe fought at Englefield with
two earls of those Danes, Edelwulfe. erl^ of Barkshire fought at Englefield
with the Danes.
vanquished them, and slew the one of those earls, whose name was Sidroc.
After this king Ethelred and his brother Alured came with a great host unto
Reading, and there gave battle unto the army of Danes, so that an huge number
of people died on both parts, but the Danes had the victory.

After this also king Ethelred and his brother Alured fought again with those
Danes at Aschdon, The Danes wan the victory at Reading.
where the armies on both sides were divided into two parts, so that the two
Danish kings lead the one part of their army, and certain of their earls
lead the other part. Likewise on the English side king Ethelred was placed with
one part of the host against the Danish kings, and Alured with the other part
was appointed to encounter with the earls. Hereupon they being on both parts
ready to give battle, the evening coming on caused them to defer it till
the morrow. And so early in the morning when the armies should join, king
Ethelred stated in his tent the hear divine service, whilst his brother upon
a forward courage hasted to encounter his enemies, the which received him so
sharply, and with so cruel fight, that at length, the Englishmen were at
point to have turned their backs. But herewith came king Ethelred and manfully
ended the battle, stayed his people from running away, and so encouraged them,
and discouraged the enemies, that by the power of God (whom as was thought in
the morning he had served) the Danes finally were chased and put to flight,
losing one of their kings (that is to say) Basreeg or Osreeg, The Danes
discomfited.
and 5 earls, Sidroc the elder, and Sidroc the yoonger, Osberne, Freine, and
Harold. This battle was sore foughten, and con^inued till night, with the
slaughter of many thousands of Danes. About 14 days after, king Ethelred and
his brother Alured fought eftsoons with the Danish army at Basing, where the
Danes had the victory. A battle at Merton.
Also two months after this they likewise fought with the Danes at Merton. And
there the Danes, after they had been put to the worse, He was bishop of
Shireborne as Matt. West. says.
and pursued in chase a long time, yet at length they also got the victory, in
which battle Edmund

In the summer following, a mighty host of the Danes came to Reading, and
there soiourned for a time. Polyd. Virg.
These things agree not with that which Polydor Virgil has written of these
wars which king Ethelred had with the Danes: for he makes mention of one
Iuarus a king of the Danes, Iuarus.
who landed (as he writes) at the mouth of Humber, and like a stout enemy
invaded the country adioining. Danes put to flight.
discouraged the Danes, so that they were easily put to flight, of whom
(before they could get out of danger) a great number were slain. But Agnerus
and Hubba.
two brethren, which endeavored themselves by all means possible to repair
their army: so that within 15 days after, the Danes eftsoons fought with the
Englishmen, and gave them such an overthrow, that little wanted of making an
end of all incounters to be attempted after by the Englishmen.

But yet within a few days after this, as the Polydor touching the wars
which king Ethelred had with the Danes, who yet confesses (as the truth is)
that such authors as he

But now to our purpose touching the death of king Ethelred, whether by reason
of hurt received in fight against the Danes (as Polydor says) or otherwise,
certain it is, that Ethelred anon after Easter departed this life, Winborne
abbeie.
in the sixth year of his reign, and was buried at Winborne abbey. In Agnerus.
Fabian.
Hungar, otherwise called Agnerus, and Hubba returning from the north parts
into the country of the Eastangles, 870
came unto Thetford, whereof Edmund, who reigned as king in that season over
the Eastangles, Edmund K. of the Eastangles.
being advertised, raised an army of men, and went forth to give battle unto
this army of the Danes. But he with his people was chased out of the field,
and fled to the castle of Framingham, Framingham castle.
where being environed with a siege by his enemies, King Edward shot to death.
he yielded himself unto them. And because he would not renounce the christian
faith, they bound him to a tree, and shot arrows at him till he died: and
afterward cut off his head from his body, and threw the same into a thick
grove of bushes. But afterward his friends took the body with the head,
Egleseon.
and ^uried the same at Egleseon: where afterward also a fair monastery was
builded by one bishop Aswin, and changing the name of the place, it was after
ca^^ed saint Edmundfburie. Thus was king Edmund put to death by the cruel
Danes for his constant confessing the name of Christ, in the 16 year of his
reign, and so ceased the kingdom of Eastangles. Will. Mal^.
For after that the Danes had thus slain that blessed man, they conquered all
the country, and wasted it, Eastangles without a governor.
so that through their tyranny it remained without any governor by the space
of nine years, and then they appointed a king to rule over it, Guthruns Dane
king of Eastangles.
whose name was Guthrun, one of their own nation, who governed both the
Eastangles and the Eastsaxons.

Ye have heard how the Danes slew Osrike and Ella kings of Northumberland.
After which victory by them obtained, they did much hurt in the north parts of
this land, Polychron.
and amongst other cruel deeds, they destroyed the city of A^^uid, which was
a famous city in the time of the old Saxons, as by Beda and other writers
does manifestly appear. Here is to be remembered, that some writers rehearse
the cause to be this. Caxton.
Osbright or Osrike king of Northumberland ravished the wife of one Berne that
was a noble man of the country about York, who took such great despite
thereat, that he fled out of the land, and went into Denmark, and there
complained unto the king of Denmark his coosin of the injury done to him by
king Osbright. Whereupon the king of Denmark, glad to have so just a quarrel
against them of Northumberland, furnished forth an army, and sent the same by
sea (under the leading of his two brethren Hungar and Hubba) into
Northumberland, where they slew first the said king Osbright, and after king
Ella, at a place besides York, which unto this day is called Ellas croft,
taking that name of the said Ella, being there slain in defense of his
country against the Danes. Which Ella (as we find registered by writers) was
elected king by such of the Northumbers, as in favor of Berne had refused to
be subject unto Osbright.

Alfred rules over the Westsaxons and the greatest part of England, the Danes
afflict him with sore war, and cruelly make wast of his kingdom, they lie
at London a whole winter, they invade Mercia, the king whereof (Burthred by
name) forsakes his country and goes to Rome, his death and burial; Halden
king of the Danes divides Northumberland among his people; Alfred incountreth
with the Danes upon the sea, they swear to him that they will depart out of
his kingdom, they break the truce which was made betwixt him and them, he
gives them battle, and (besides a great discomfiture) kills many of their
capteines, the Danes and English fight near Abington, the victory uncertain,
seven foughten fields betwixt them in one year, the Danes soiourne at London.
The xiij. Chapter.
AFter the decease of king Ethelred, Alured or Alfred. 871. as Mat. West. and
S^^ Dunelmen. do note it. Hent Hunt.
his brother Alured or Alfred succeeded him, and began his reign over the
Westsaxons, and other the more part of the people of England, in the year of
our Lord 872, which was in the 19 year of the emperor Jews the second, and
32 year of the reign of Charles the bald, king of France, and about the
eleventh year of Constantine the second king of Scotland. Although this Alured
was consecrated king in his fathers life time by pope Leo (as before ye have
heard) yet was he not admitted king at home, till after the decease of his
three elder brethren: for he being the yoongest, was kept back from the
government, though he were for his wisdom and policy most highly esteemed
and had in all honor.

In the beginning of his reign he was wrapped in many great troubles and
miseries, S^^ed persecuted by Danes.
specially by Matt. Westminster.
destroieng the same in most cruel wise. About a month after he was made
king, The Danes obtain the victory.
he gave battle to the Danes of Wilton, having with him no great number of
people, so that although in the beginning the Danes that day were put to the
worse, yet in the end they obtained the victory. The Danes wintered at London.
Shortly after, a truce was taken betwixt the Danes and the Westsaxons. And
the Danes that had lien at Reading, removed (...)
the Danish king Halden led the same army from London into Lindseie, and there
lodged all that winter at Torkseie. Rep^on.
In the year following, the same Halden invaded Mercia, and wintered at
Ripindon. Burthred king of Mercia.
There were come to him three other leaders of Danes which our writers name to
be kings, Godrun, Esketell, and Ammond, so that their power was greatly
increased. Burthred king of Mercia

875
In the fourth year of king Alured the army of the Danes divided it self
into two parts, The Danes went into Northumberland.
so that king Halden with one part thereof went into Northumberland, and lay in
the winter season near to The Danes at Cambridge
and remained there a whole year. In the same year king Alured fought by sea
with 7 ships of Danes, 876
took one of them, and chased the residue. In the year next ensuing, The
Danes took an oath. Hen. Hunt.
the Danes came into the country of the

Moreover the army of the Danes by land went to Excester in breach of the
truce, The Danes went to Excester.
and king Alured followed them, but could not overtake them till they Hent.
Hunt:
And so then they departed out of the country, and drew into Mercia. But
shortly after, when they had the whole government of the land, from Thames
northward, they thought it not good to suffer king Alured to continue in rest
with the residue of the countries beyond Thames. And therefore the three
foresaid rulers of Danes, Godrun, Esketell, and Ammond, inuading the country
of Westsaxons came to Chipnam, distant 17 miles from Bristow, 877
and there pitched their tents.

King Alured advertised hereof, Polydor.
hasted thither, and lodging with his army near to the enemies, provoked them
to battle. The Danes perceiving that either they must fight for their lives,
or die with shame, boldly came forth, and gave battle. The Englishmen
rashly incountered with them, and though they were ouermatched in number, yet
with such violence they gave the onset, that the enemies at the first were
abashed at their hardy assaults. But when as it was perceived that their
slender ranks were not able to resist the thick leghers of the enemies, they
began to shrink and look back one upon an other, and so of force were
constreined to retire: and therewithal did cast themselves into a ring, which
though it seemed to be the best way that could be devised for their safety,
yet by the great force and number of their enemies on each side assailing them,
they were so thronged together on heaps, that they had no room to stir their
weapons. Which disadvantage notwithstanding, they ^lue a great number of the
Danes, Hubba slain.
and amongst other, Hubba the brother of Agner, with many other of the Danish
capteins. At length the Englishmen having valiantly foughten a long time with
the enemies, which had compassed them about, at last brake out and got them to
their camp. The victory doubtful.
To be brief, this battle was foughten with so equal fortune, that no man
knew to whether part the victory ought to be ascribed. But after they were
once severed, they took care to cure their hurt men, and to bury the dead
bodies, namely the Danes interred the body of their captain Hubba with great
funeral pomp and solemnity: which done, they held out their journey till
they came to Abington, Abington.
whither the English army shortly after came also, and encamped fast by the
enemies.

In this mean while, the rumor was spread abroad that king Alured had been
discomfited by the Danes, because that in the last battle he withdrew to his
camp. This turned greatly to his advantage: for thereby a great number of
Englishmen hasted to come to his succor. The Danes and Englishmen fight near
to Abington.
On the morrow after his coming to Abington, he brought his army ready to
fight into the field: neither were the enemies slack on their parts to receive
the battle, and so the two armies joined and fought very sore on both sides:
so that it seemed by Englishmen had not to do with those Danes, which had
been diverse times before discomfited and put to flight, but rather with some
new people fresh and lusty. But neither the one part nor the other was minded
to give over: in so much that the horssemen alighting on foot, and putting
their horses from them, entered the battle amongst the footmen, and thus they
continued with equal advantage till night came on, which parted the affraie,
being one of the sorest foughten fields that had been heard of in those days.
To whether party a man might justly attribute the victory, Uncerteine
victory. Thus far Polydor.
it was utterly uncertain, with so like loss and gain the matter was tried
and ended betwixt them. With the semblable chance of danger and glory seven
times that year did the English and Danes encounter in batell, Ran. Higd.
as writers have recorded. At length, when their powers on both parts were sore
diminished, they agreed upon a peace, A peace agreed upon.
with these conditions, that the Danes should not attempt any further war
against the Englishmen, nor bring into this land any new supply of soldiers
out of Denmark. The Danes soiourned at London.
But this peace by those peacemakers was violated and broken, in so much as
they meant nothing less than to fall from the conceived hope which they had of
bearing rule in this land, and of enriching themselves with the goods,
possessions, rents and revenues of the inhabitants. The same year the Danes
soiorned in the winter season at London, according as they had done often
times before.

Rollo a noble man of Denmark with a fresh power enters England, and
begins to waste it, king Alured gives him batell, Rollo saileth over into
France; who first inhabited Normandy, and whereof it took that name; the
Danes break the peace which was made betwixt them and Alured, he is driven to
his shifts by their invasions into his kingdom, a vision appears to him and
his mother; king Alured disguising himself like a minstrell enters the
Danish camp, marketh their behavior unsuspected, assalteth them
ABout the same time, or Ann. 876 ^aith Simon D^n.
there came into England one Rollo, a noble man of Denmark or Norway, with a
great army, and (notwithstanding the peace concluded between the Englishmen
and the Danes) began to waste and destroy the country. King Alured hearing
these news, with all speed thought best in the beginning to stop such a common
mischief, and Matthew Westmin. says, that the Englishmen were put to flight.
After this, it chanced that Rollo being warned in a dream, left England, and
sailed over into France, where he found fortune so favorable to him, that he
obtained in that region for him and his people a country, 30 years after this
he was baptized.
the which was afterward named Normandy,

The Danes which had concluded peace with king Alured (as before you have
heard) shortly after, upon the first occasion, brake the same, and by often
invasions which they made into the country of Westsaxons, brought the matter
to that pass, that there remained to king Alured but only the three
countries of Hamshire, King Alured driven to his shifts.
Wiltshire, and Summersetshire, Edlingsey.
that is to say, the Island of noble men, environed about with fennes and
mareshes.

Whiles he was thus shut up within this Island, A vision if it be true.
he was by dream advertised of better hap shortly to

Shortly after, king Alured took upon him the habit of a minstrell, and going
forth of his closure, repaired to the camp of the Danish king, King (...)
disguiseth himself. Polydor.
only accompanied with one trusty servant, and tarrieng there certain days
together, was suffered to go into every part, and play on his instrument, as
well before the king as others, Fabian.
so that there was no secret, but that he understood it. Now when he had seen
and learned the demeanor of his enemies, he returned again to his people at
Edlingsey, and there declared to his nobles what he had seen and heard, what
negligence was amongst the enemies, and how easy a matter it should be for him
to indamage them. Whereupon they conceiving a marvelous good hope, and
imboldened with his words, a power was assembled together, and spies sent
forth to learn and bring word where the Danes lodged: which being done, and
certificat made accordingly, king Alured coming upon them on the sudden,
Hen^. Hunt.
slew of them a great number, having them at great advantage. 87^


878
About the same time the brother of king Halden came with thirty and three
ships out of Wales into Matthew. We^^.
the country of Westsaxons, on the coast of Devonshire, where the Devonshire
men gave him battle, and slew him with 840 persons of his retinue. Other
write, that Halden himself was present at this conflict, with Inguare,
otherwise called Hungar, and that they were both slain there, with twelve
hundred of their company Simon Dun
(before a certain castle called Kinwith) receiving as they had deserved for
their cruel dealing lately by them practiced in the parties of Southwales,
where they had wasted all before them with fire and sword, not sparing abbeies
more than other common buildings.

King Alured being with that good luck the more comforted, builded a fortress
in the I Will of Edlingsey, afterward called Athelney, Athelney.
and breaking out oftentimes upon the enemies, distressed them at sundry times
with the aid of the Summersetshire men, which were at hand. About the seventh
week after Easter, in the seventh year of his reign, king Alured went to
Eglerighston, on the east part of Selwood, where there came to him the people
of Summersetshire, Wiltshire, and Hamshire, reioising greatly to see him
abroad. Edant^^e.
From thence he went to Edanton, and there fought against the army of the
Danes, and chased them unto their strength, This battle should seem the same
that Polydor speaks of fought at Abingdon. Polychron. John Pike. Gurthrun or
Gurmond baptized, and named Adelstan, is made king of Eastangle.
where he remained before them the space of fourteen days. Then the army of
the Danes delivered him hostages and covenants to depart out of his dominions,
and that their king should be baptized, which was accomplished: for Gurthrun,
whom some name Gurmond, a prince or king amongst these Danes, came to Alured
and was baptized, king Alured receiving him at the fontstone, named him
Adelstan, and gave to him the country of Eastangle, which he governed (or
rather spoiled) by the space of twelve years.

Diverse other of the Danish nobility to the number of thirty (as Simon
Dunelmensis says) came at the same time in company of their king Gurthrun,
and were likewise baptized, on whom king Alured bestowed many rich gifts. At
the same time (as is to be thought) was the league concluded betwixt king
Alured and the said Gurthrun or Gurmond, in which the bounds of king Alureds
kingdom are set forth thus: First therefore let the bounds or marshes of our
dominion stretch unto the river of Thames, and from thence to the water of Lee,
even unto the head of the same water, and so forth straight unto Bedford: and
finally going along by the river of Ouse, let them end at Watlingstreet.

This league being made with the advice of the sage personages as well English
as those that inhabited within east England, is set forth in master Lamberts
book of the old English laws, in the end of those laws or ordinances which
were established by the same king Alured, as in the same book ye may see more
at large.

The English called diverse people Danes whom the French named Normans, whereupon
that general name was given them; Gurmo
HEre is to be noted, that writers name diverse of the Danish capteins, kings
(of which no mention is made in the Danish chronicles.) to Gurmo.
whom they name Anglicus, because he was borne here in England, which
succeeded his father Frotto in government of the kingdom of Denmark, which
Frotto received baptism in England, as their stories tell.

In the eight year of king Alfred his reign, Hen. Hunt.
the army of the Danes wintered at Cirencester, 878
and Wincigi lay at Fulham, and in the year following departed forth of
England, and went into France, 87^
and the army of king Godrun or Gurmo departed from Cirencester, Simon Dun.
Matthew. West.
and came into Eastangle, and there dividing the country amongst them, began
to inhabit the same. In the 14 year of king Alfred his reign, part of the
Danish army which was gone over into France, returned into England and
besieged Rochester. Rochester besieged.
But when Alfred approached to the reskue, 885
and passed over the sea again. King Alfred sent a navy of his ships well
furnished with men of war into Eastangle. the which at the mouth of the river
called Sture, incountering with 16 ships of the Danes, set upon them, and
overcame them in fight: but as they returned with their prises, they
incountered with another mighty army of the enemies, and fighting with them
were overcome and vanquished.

889
In the year following, king Alfred besieged the city of London, London
recovered out of the hands of the Danes.
the Danes that were within it fled from thence, and the Englishmen that were
inhabitants thereof gladly received him, reioising that there was such a
prince bred of their nation, that was of power able to reduce them into
liberty. This city being at that season the chief of all Mercia, he
delivered into the keeping of duke Eldred, which had married his daughter
Ethelfleds, Will. Malm. Ethelfleda.
and held a great portion of Mercia, Colwolphus.
which Colwolphus before time possesed by the grant of the Danes, after they
had subdued K. Burthred (as before is said.) About the 21 year of K. Alfred, an
army of those Danes and Normans, which had been in France, Limer, now Rother.
Andredeslegia
returned into England, and arrived in the haven or river of Limene in the east
part of Kent, near to the great wood called Andredesley, which did contain in
times past 120 miles in length, A castle built at Appledore.
and thirty in breadth. 893
These Danes landing with their people builded a castle at Appledore.

In the mean time came Hasting with 80 ships into the Thames, Simon Dun. At
Milton.
and builded a castle at Middleton, but he was constreined by siege which king
Alfred planted about him, Hasting the captain of the Danes besieged. He
receives an oath.
to receive an oath that he should not in any wise annoie the dominion of king
Alfred, who upon his promise to depart, gave great gifts as well to him as to
his wife and children. One of his sons also king Alfred held at the
fontstone, and to the other duke Aldred was god father. For (as it were to win
credit, and to avoid present danger) Hasting sent unto Alfred these his two
sons, signifieng that if it stood with his pleasure, he could be content that
they should be baptized. Beanfield says M. West.
But nevertheless this Hasting was ever most untrue of word and deed, he
builded a castle at Beamfield. And as he was going forth to spoil and wast
the kings countries, Alfred took that castle, This enterprise was atchiued by
Etheldred duke of Mercia in the absence of the king, as Matthew. West. has
noted. Excester besieged.
with his wife, children, ships and goods, which he got together of such
spoils as he had abroad: but he restored unto Hasting his wife and children,
because he was their godfather.

Shortly after, news came that a great number of other ships of Danes were
come out of Northumberland, and had besieged Excester. Whilst king Alfred went
then against them, the other army which lay at Appledore invaded Essex, and
built a castle in that country, and after went into the borders of Wales,
Seuerne.
and builded another castle near unto the river of Seuerne: but being driven
out of that country, they returned again into Essex. Those that had besieged
Excester, upon knowledge had of king Alfreds coming, fled to their ships, and
so remaining on the sea, roaued abroad, seeking preies. Besides this, Chester
taken by Danes.
other armies there were sent forth, which coming out of Northumberland took
the city of Chester, but there they were so beset about with their enemies,
Great famine
that they were constreined to eat their horses. At length, in the 24 year
of king Alfred, they left that city, and fetched a compass about Northwales,
and so meaning to sail round about the coast to come into Northumberland, Hen.
Hunt.
they arrived in Essex, and in the winter following drew their ships by the
Thames into the water of Luie. The water of Luie, now Lee.
That army of Danes which had besieged Excester, took preies about
Chichester, and was met with, so that they lost many of their men, and also
diverse of their ships.

In the year following, the other army which had brought the ships into the
river Luie, began to build a castle near to the same river, twenty miles
distant from London: Hen. Hunt.
but the Londoners came thither, and giving battle to the Danes, The Londoners
victors against the Danes.
slew four of the chief capteins. But by Simon Dunel. and Matt. Westminster. it
should seem, that the Londoners were at this time put to flight, and that
four of the kings barons were slain in fight. Howbeit Henry Hunt. has
written as before I have recited; and further says, that when the Danes fled
for their refuge to the castle, king Alfred caused the water of Luie to be
divided into three channels, so that the Danes should not bring back their
ships out of the place where they lay at anchor. When the Danes perceived
this, Quathbridge or Wakebridge.
they left their ships behind them, and went into the borders of Wales, where
at Cartbridge upon Seuerne they built another castle, and lay there all the
winter following, having left their wives and children in the country of
Eastangles. King Alfred pursued them, but the Londoners took the enemies
ships, and brought some of them to the city, and the rest they burnt.

Thus for the space of three years after the arriving of the maine army of
the Danes in the haven of The Danish army divided into parts.
the army was divided, so that one part of them went into Northumberland, part
of them remained in the country of Eastangles, and another part went into
France. Also certain of their ships came upon the coast of the Westsaxons,
oftentimes setting their men on land to rob and

Thus like a worthy prince and politic governor, The death of king Alfred.
he prevented each way to resist the force of his enemies, and to safeguard his
subjects. Finally after he had reigned 29 years and an half, he departed
this life the 28 day of October. His body was buried at His issue.
two sons, Edward surnamed the elder, which succeeded him, and Adelwold: also
three daughters, Elfleda or Ethelfleda, Elfleda.
Ethelgeda or Edgiua, and Ethelwitha.

How Elfleda king Alfreds daughter (being married) contemned fleshly pleasure;
IN the end of the former The notable saying of Elfleda.
saying that it was great foolishness to use such pleasure which therewith
should bring so great grief.

To speak sufficiently of the worthy praise due to so noble a prince as
Alfred was, might require eloquence, learning, and a large volume. He was of
person comely and beautiful, and better beloved of his father and mother than
his other brethren. And although he was (as before is touched) greatly
disquieted with the invasion of foreign enemies, Will. Mal^^
yet did he both manfully from time to time endeavor himself to repel them,
and also attempted to see his subjects governed in good and upright justice.
King Alfred his laws.
And albeit that good laws amongst the clinking noise of armor are oftentimes
put to silence, yet he perceiving how his people were grieved with thieves and
robbers, which in time of war grew and increased, devised good statutes and
wholesome ordinances for punishing of such offenders.

Amongst other things he ordained that the countries should be divided into
hundreds and tithings, that is to say, quarters containing a certain number of
towneships adioining together, so that every Englishman living under prescript
of laws, should have both his hundred and tithing; that if any man were
accused of any offense, he should find suertie for his good demeanor: and if
he could not find such as would answer for him, then should he taste extremity
of the laws. And if any man that was guilty fled before he found suertie, or
after: all the inhabitants of the hundred or tithing where he dwelt, should be
put to their fine. By this devise he brought his country into good
tranquillity, so that he caused bracelets of gold to be hanged up aloft on
hills where any common ways lay, to see if any durst be so hardy to take
them away by stealth. He was a liberal prince namely in relieuing of the
poor. To churches he confirmed such privileges as his father had granted
before him, and he also sent rewards by way of devotion unto Rome, and to the
body of saint Thomas in India. Sighelmus the bishop of Shireborne bare the
same, and brought from thence rich stones, and sweet oiles of inestimable
valor. From Rome also he brought a piece of the holy cross which pope
Martinus did send for a present unto king Alfred.

Moreover king Alfred founded three goodly monasteries, one at Edlingsey,
Foundation of monaste^^^
where he lived sometime when the Danes had bereaved him almost of all his
kingdom, which was after called Athelney, distant from Taunton in
Sumersetshire about five miles: the second he builded at Winchester, called the
new minster: and the third at Shaftesburie, which was an house of nuns, where
he made his daughter Ethelgeda or Edgiua abbess. But the foundation of the
university of Oxford passed all the residue of his buildings, which he began
by the good exhortation and advise of Neotus an abbat, in those days highly
esteemed for his virtue and lerning with Alfred. This work he took in hand
about the 23 year of his reign, which was in the year of our Lord 895. 895
So that the university of Cambridge was founded before this other of Oxford
about 265 years, as Polydor gathers. Polydor. The university of Oxford
erected.
For Sigebert king of the Eastangles began to erect that university at
Cambridge about the year of our Lord 630.

King Alfred was learned himself, and given much to study, insomuch that
beside diverse good laws which he translated into the English tongue, gathered
together and published, he also translated diverse other books out of Latin
into English, as Orosius, Pastorale Gregorij, Beda de gestis Anglorum, Boethius
de consolatione philosophiae, and the book of Psalms; but this he finished
not, being prevented by death. So this worthy prince minded well toward the
common wealth of his people, in that season when learning was little esteemed
amongst the west nations, did study by all means possible to instruct his
subjects in the trade of leading an honest life, The virtuous zeal of Alured
to bring his people to an honest trade of life.
and to encourage them generally to embrace learning. He would not suffer any
to bear office in the court; except he were learned: and yet he himself was
twelve years of age before he could read a word on the book, He is persuaded
by his mother, to apply himself to learning.
and was then trained by his mothers persuasion to study, promising him a
goodly book which she had in her hands, if he would learn to read it.

Hereupon going to his book in sport, he so earnestly set his mind thereto,
that within a small time Asserius Meneuensis. Werefridus. John Scot.
and Werefridus the bishop of Worcester, who by his commandment translated the
books of Gregory's dialogs into English. Also I. Scot, who whiles he was in
France translated the book of Dionysius Ariopagita, entitled Hierarchia, out
of Greek into Latin, Grimbald.
Grimbald governor of the new monastery at Winchester, with others.

But to conclude with this noble prince king Alured, he was so careful in his
office, Alured divided the time for his necessary uses.
that he divided the 24 hours which contain the day and night, in three
parts, so that eight hours he spent in writing, His last will and testament
bequeathing half

The body of king Alured was first buried in the bishops church: but
afterward, because the Canons raised a fond tale that the same should walk a
nights, his son king Edward removed it into the new monastery which he in
his life time had founded. Finally, in memory of him a certain learned
clarke made an epitath in Latin, which for the worthiness thereof is
likewise (verse for verse, and in a manner word for word) translated by Abraham
Fleming into English, whose no little labor has been diligently employed in
supplieng sundry insufficiences found in of this huge volume.

NObilitas inhata tibi probitatis honorem
Nobility by birth to thee (o Alfred strong in arme^)
(Armipotens Alfrede) dedit, probita que laborem,
Of goodness has the honor given, and honor toilesome harms.
Perpetuumque labor nomen, cul mixta dolor^
And toilesome harms an endless name; w^ose io^es were always mext
Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori.
With sorrow, and whose hope with fear was evermore perplexe.
Si modo victor eras, ad crastina bella pauebas,
If this day thou were conqueror, the next days war thou dredst.
Si modo victus eras, in crastina bella parabas,
If this day thou were conquered, to next days war (...) spedst,
Cui vel^es sudore iugi, cul sica cruore
Whose clothing wet wit^ daily swe^^ whose blade with bloody stain.
Tincta ^ugi, quantum sit onus^egnare probarunt.
Do pra^e how great a burthan ti^ in roialtie to rain*
Non fuit immensi quisquam per climata mundi,
There has not been in any part of all the world so wide,
Cui tot in aduet sis vel respirare liceret,
One that was able breath to take, and troubles such abide,
Nec tamen aut ferro contritus ponere ferrum,
And yet with weapons weary would not weapons lay aside,
Aut gladio potuit vitae fimisse labores:
Or with the sword the ^oile somnesse of life by death divide.
Iam post transactos regni vitaeque labores,
Now after labors past of realm and lie (which he did spend)
Christus ei fit vera quies sceptrumque perenne.
Christ is ^o him true quietness and scepter void of end.
In the days of the foresaid king Alured, the kingdom of Mercia took end.
For after that the Danes had expelled king Burthred, when he had reigned 22
years, he went to Rome, and there died, his wife also Ethelswida, the daughter
of king Athulfe that was son to king Egbert followed him, and died in Pauia
in Lumbardie. The Danes having got the country into their possession, Cewulfe.
made one Cewulfe K. thereof, whom they bound with an oath and delivery of
pledges, that he should not longer keep the state with their pleasure, and
further should be ready at all times to aid them with such power as he should
be able to make. This Cewulfe was the servant of king Burthred. Within four
years after the Danes returned, and took one part of that kingdom into their
own hands, and left the residue unto Cewulfe. But within a few years after,
king Alured obtained that part of Mercia which Cewulfe ruled, as he did all the
rest of this land, except those parcels which the Danes held, as
Northumberland, the countries of the Eastangles, some part of Mercia, and other.

The year, in the which king Alured thus obtained all the dominion of that
part of Mercia, which Cewulfe had in governance, was after the birth of our
Savior 886, 886
so that the foresaid kingdom continued the space of 302 years under 22
kings, Matthew. West.
from Crida to this last Cewulfe. But there he that account the continuance of
this kingdom, only from the beginning of Penda, unto the last year of
Burthred, by which reckoning it stood not past 270 years under 18, or rather
17 kings, counting the last Cewulfe for none, who began his reign under the
subjection of the Danes, about the year of our Lord 874, where Penda began his
reign 604.

The Eastangles and the Northumbers in these days were under subjection of the
Danes, as partly may be perceived by that which before is rehearsed. Guthrun
K. of the eastangles died 890. Simon. Dun.
After Guthrun that governed the Eastangles by the term of 12 years, one
Edhirike or Edrike had the rule in those parts, a Dane also, and reigned 14
years, and was at length bereued of his government by king Edward the son
of king Alured, as after shall appear. Simon Dun.
But now, although that the Northumbers were brought greatly under. foo^ by
the Danes, 872
yet could they not forget their old accustomed manner to stir tumults and
rebellion against their governors, Egbert king of Northumberland expelled from
his kingdom.
insomuch that in the year 872, they expelled not only Egbert, whom the
Danes had appointed king over one part of the country (as before you have
heard) but also their archbishop Wilfehere. In the year following, the same
Egbert departed this life, Egbert departed this life. Ricsig.
after whom one Rigsig or Ricsige succeeded as king, and the archbishop
Wolfehere was restored home.

In the same year the army of Danes which had wintered at London, came from
thence into Northumberland, and wintered in Lindseie, The Danes winter in
Lindseie.
at a place called Torkseie, and went the next year into Mercia. And in the
year 975, 975
a part of them returned into Northumberland, Ricsig departed this life.
as before ye have heard. In 983
the army of the Danes meaning to inhabit in Northumberland, Guthred ordained
king of Northumberland.
and to settle themselves there, chose Guthrid the son of one Hardicnute to
their king, whom they had sometime sold to a certain widow at Witingham. But
now by the abuise of an abbat called Aldred, they redeemed his liberty, and
ordained him king to rule both Danes and Englishmen in that

When Guthrid was established king, The bishops see removed from holy island
to Chester in the street.
he caused the bishops see to be removed from holy Island unto Chester in the
street, and for an augmentation of the revenues and jurisdiction belonging
thereto, he assigned

Moreover, Privileges granted to S. Cuthberts shrine.
this privilege was granted unto saint Cuthberts shrine: that whosouer fled
unto the same for succor and safeguard, should not be touched or troubled in
any wise for the space of thirty and seven days. And this freedom was
confirmed not only by king Guthrid, but also by king Alured. Finally 894
after he had ruled the Northumbers with much cruelty (as some say) by the
term of a 11 years, or somewhat more. Polydor. Will. Malmes.
He is named by some writers Gurmond, and also Gurmo, and thought to be the
same whom king Alured caused to be baptized. Whereas other affirm, that
Guthrid, who ruled the Eastangles, was he that Alured received at the
fontstone: Will. Malm. Sithrike.
William Malmesburie takes them to be but one man, which is not like to be
true. After this Guthrid or Gurmo his son Sithrike succeeded, and after him
other of that line, till king Adelstane deprived them of the dominion, and
took it into his own hands.

Edward succeeds his father Alured in regiment, he is disquieted by his
brother Adelwold a man of a defiled life, he flies to the Danes and is of them
received, king Edwards provision against the irruptions and forraies of the
Danes, Adelwold with a navy of Danes enters Eastangles, the Essex men submit
themselves, he inuadeth Mercia, and makes great wast, the Kentishmens
disobedience prejudicial to themselves, they and the Danes have a great
conflict, king Edward concludes a truce with them, he makes a great slaughter
of them by his Westsaxons and Mercians, what lands came to king Edward by the
^eath of Edred duke of Mercia, he recouereth diverse places out of the Danes
hands, and gives them many a foil, what castles he builded, he inuadeth
Eastangles, puts Ericke a Danish king thereof to flight, his own subjects
murder him for his cruelty, his kingdom returns to the right of king
Edward with other lands by him thereto annexed, his sister Elfleda governed the
country of Mercia during her life. The xvij. Chapter.
AFter the deceasse of Alured, Edward the elder.
his son Edward surnamed the elder began his reign over the more part of
England, in the year of our Lord 901, 901.
which was in the second year of the emperor Jews, in the eight year of the
reign of Charles surnamed Simplex king of France, and about the eight year of
Donald king of Scotland. He was consecrated after the manner of other kings his
ancestors by Athelred the archbishop of Canturburie. This Edward was not so
learned as his father, but in princely power more high and honorable, for he
joined the kingdom of Eastangles and Mercia with other unto his dominion, as
after shall be showed, and vanquished the Danes, Scots, and Welshmen, to his
great glory and high commendation.

In the beginning of his reign he was disquieted by his brother Adelwold,
which took the town of Winborne besides Bath, and married a nun there, whom
he had defloured, Winborne.
and attempted many things against his brother. Whereupon the king came to
Bath, and though Adelwold showed a countenance as if he would have abidden the
chance of war within Winborne, Hen. Hunt. Adelwold flees to the Danes.
yet he stole away in the night, and fled into Northumberland, where he was
ioifullie received of the Danes. The king took his wife being left behind, and
restored her to the house from whence she was taken. Will. Malm.
Some have written, that this Adelwold or Ethelwold was not brother unto king
Edward, but his uncles son.

After this, king Edward providing for the suertie of his subjects against the
forraies, which the Danes used to make, fortified diverse cities and towns, and
stuffed them with great garrisons of soldiers, to defend the inhabitants, and
to expel the enemies. The English nation practiced in wars, go commonly away
with the victory.
And suerlie the Englishmen were so invred with wars in those days, that the
people being advertised of the invasion of the enemies in any part of their
country, would assemble oftentimes without knowledge of king or captain, and
setting upon the enemies, went commonly away with victory, by reason that
they ouermatched them both in number and practice. So were the enemies despised
of the English soldiers, and laughed to scorn of the king for their foolish
attempts. Hen. Hunt.
Yet in the third year of king Edwards reign, Adelwold his brother came with
a navy of Danes into the parties of the Eastangles, Essex yeeldes to Adelwold.
and even at the first the Essex men yielded themselves unto him. In the year
following he invaded the country of Mercia with a great army, Ran. Higd.
wasting and spoiling the same unto Crikelade, and there passing over the
Thames, rode forth till he came to Basingstoke, Brittenden.
or (as some books have) Brittenden, harieng the country on each side, and so
returned back unto Eastangles with great joy and triumph.

King Edward awakened heerewith, Hen. Hun^.
assembled his people, and followed the enemies, wasting all the countries
betwixt the river of Ouse and saint Edmunds The Kentishmen disobeiing the kings
commandment, are surprised by the enemies. Adelwold king Edwards brother.
The Kentishmen notwithstanding this ordinance and commandment, remained
behind, although the king sent seven messengers for them. The Danes awaiting
their advantage, came together, and fiercely fought with the Kentishmen, which
a long time valiantly defended themselves. But in the end the Danes obtained
the victory, although Forty days says Simon Dun.
which slew many of the Danes, and took great booties both of people and
cattle, remaining in the country the space of five weeks.

The year next ensuing, the Danes with a great army entered into Mercia, to
rob and spoil the country, against whom king Edward sent a mighty host,
assembled together of the Westsaxons and them of Mercia, which set upon the
Danes, as they were returning homeward, and slew of them an huge multitude,
Hen. Hunt.
and diverse other. In the year 912, or (as Simon Dunel. says) 908, the duke
of Mercia Edred or Etheldred departed this life, and then king Edward seized
into his hands the cities of London and Oxford, and all that part of Mercia
which he held. But afterward he suffered his sister Elfleda to enjoy the most
part thereof, except the said cities of London and Oxford, which he still
retained

In the ninth year of his reign, king Edward built a castle at Hertford,
Wightham.
and likewise he builded a town in Essex at Wightham, and lay himself in the
mean time at Maldon, otherwise Meauldun, bringing a great part of the country
under his subjection, which before was subject to the Danes. In the year
following, the army of the Danes departed Chester, or rather Leicester, as I
think.
and slew a great number of men at Hochnerton in Oxfordshire. And shortly
after their return home, an other company of them went forth, Digetune.
and came to Leighton, where the people of the country being assembled
together, fought with them and put them to flight, taking from them all the
spoil which they had got, and also their horses.

In the 11 year of king Edward, a fleet of Danes compassed about the west
parts, and came to the mouth of Seuerne, and so took preies in Wales: they
also took prisoner a Welsh bishop named Camelgaret, at Irchenfield,
Irchenfield.
whom they led to their ships: but king Edward redeemed him out of their
hands, paieng them forty pounds for his ransom. After that the army of Danes
went forth to spoil the country about Irchenfield, but the people of
Chester, Hereford, and other towns and countries thereabout assembled
together, and giving battle to the enemies, put them to flight, and slew one
of their noble men called earl Rehald, Danes discomfited.
and Geolcil the brother of earl Uter, with a great part of their army, and
drove the residue into a castle, which they besieged till the Danes within it
gave hostages, and couenanted to depart out of the kings land. The king caused
the coasts about Seuerne to be watched, that they should not break into his
country: but yet they stale twice into the borders: nevertheless they were
chased and slain as many as could not swim, and so get to their ships. The
I Will of Stepen. Deomedun. Danes sail into Ireland.
Then they remained in the I Will of Stepen, in great misery for lack of
vittels, because they could not go abroad to get any. At length they departed
into Northwales, and from thence sailed into Ireland.

The same year king Edward came to Buckingham with an army, and there tarried
a whole month, building two castles, the one upon the one side of the water of
Ouse, and the other upon the other side of the same river. Turketillus an earl.
He also subdued Turketillus an earl of the Danes that dwelt in that country,
with all the residue of the noble men and barons of the shires of Bedford and
Northampton. In the 12 year of king Edwards reign, the Kentishmen and Danes
fought together at Holme: but whether party had the victory, writers have not
declared. Simon Dun.
Simon Dunelm. speaks of a battle which the citizens of Canturburie fought
against a number of Danish rouers at Holme, where the Danes were put to flight,
but that should be (as he notes) 8 years before this supposed time, as in the
year 904, which was about the third year of king Edwards reign.

After this, other of the Danes assembled themselves together, Anno, 911. Simon
Dun.
and in Staffordshire at a place called Tottenhall fought with the Englishmen,
and after great slaughter made on both parties, the Danes were overcome: and so
likewise were they shortly after at Woodfield or Wodenfield. And thus king
Edward put the Danes to the worse in each place commonly where he came, and
hearing that those in Northumberland meant to break the peace: he invaded the
country, and so afflicted the same, that the Danes which were inhabitants
there, gladly continued in rest and peace. Polydor. Ericke king of Eastangles
But in this mean time, Ericke the king of those Danes which held the country
of Eastangle, was about to procure new war, and to allure other of the Danes
to join with him against the Englishmen, that with common agreement they might
set upon the English nation, and utterly subdue them.

King Edward h^^ing intelligence hereof, purposed to prevent him, King Edward
inuadeth the country of the Eastangles.
and thereupon entering with an army into his country, cruelly wasted and
spoiled the same. King Ericke having already his people in armor through
displeasure conceived hereof, and desire to be revenged, hasted forth to
encounter his enemies: and so they met in the field, and fiercely assailed each
other. But as the battle was rashly begun on king Ericks side, so was the end
very harmefull to him: Ericke put to flight.
for with small a do, after great loss on both sides, he was vanquished and
put to flight.

After his coming home, because of his great overthrow and foul discomfiture,
he began to govern his people with more rigor and sharper dealing than before
time he had used. Whereby he provoked the malice of the Eastangles so highly
against him, that they fell upon him and murdered him: yet did they not gain
so much hereby as they looked to have done: for shortly after, they being
brought low, and not able to defend their country, were compelled to submit
themselves unto king Edward. The kingdom of the Eastang^es subdued by K. Edward
And so was that kingdom joined unto the other dominions of the same king
Edward, who shortly after annexed the kingdom of Mercia unto other of his
dominions, immediately upon the death of his sister Elfleda, whom he permitted
to rule that land all her life.

Elfleda the sister of king Edward highly
NOt without good reason did king Edward permit unto Hen. Hunt. Matthew. West.
Simon Dun.
in so much that during her government, which continued about eight years, it
is recorded by writers, that she Tamwoorth was by her repared, anno 914.
Eadsburie and Warwike.
Watersburie or Weddesburie, Elilsburie or rather Eadsburie, 915
in the forest of De la mere besides Chester, Chester repared, 905. Sim. Dun.
Brimsburie bridge upon Seuerne, Rouncorne at the mouth of the river of Mercia
with other. Moreover, by her help the city of Chester, which by Da^es had
been greatly defaced, was newly repared, fortified with walls and turrets,
and greatly enlarged. So that the castle

Moreover she boldly assalted her enemies which went about to trouble the
state of the country, as the Welshmen and Danes. She sent an army into Wales,
and took the town of Brecknocke with the queen of the Welshmen at
Bricenamere. Also she wan from the Danes the town of Darbie, Queen of the
Welshmen taken. Brecanamere Ran. Higd. Hen. Hunt.
and the country adioining. 918
In this enterprise she put her own person in great adventure: for a great
multitude Darbie won from the Danes.
valiantly defended the gates and entries, in so much that they slew four of
her chief men of war, which were named wardens of her person, even fast by
her at the very entry of the gates. But this notwithstanding, with valiant
fight her people entered, and so the town was won: she got diverse other
places out of their hands, and constreined them of Yorkshire to agree with
her, so that some of them promised to become her subjects: some vowed to aid
her, and some swear to be at her commandment.

Finally, Hen. Hunt.
this martial lady and manly Elfleda, the supporter of her countriemen, and
terror of the enemies, departed this life at Tamwoorth about the 12 of June,
Anno Christ
in the 18 or rather 19 year of her brother king Edwards reign, 919
as by Matthew. West. Matt. West. Simon Dun.
it should appear. But Simon Dunelm. writes, that she deceassed in the year
of Christ 915, which should be about the 14 year of king Edwards reign. Her
body was conveyed to Gloucester, and there buried within the monastery of S.
Peter, which her husband and she in their life time had builded, and translated
thither the bones of saint Oswill from Bardona. The same monastery was after
destroyed by Danes. But Aldredus the archbishop of York, Ranul.
who was also bishop of Worcester, repared an other in the same city, that was
after the chief abbeie there. Finally, in memory of the said Elfleds
magnanimity and valorous mind, this epitaph was fixed on her toome.

O Elfleda potens, o terror virgo virorum,
O Elfleda potens, nomine digna viri.
Te quoque splendidior fecit natura puellam,
Te probitas fecit nomen habere viri.
Te mutare decet sed solum nomina sexus,
Tu regina potens rexque trophea parans.
Iam nec Caesareos tantum mirere triumphos,
Caesare splendidior virgo virago, vale.
O puissant Elfled, o thou maid of men the dread and fear, Translated by
Abraham Fleming.

O puissant Elfled worthy maid the name of man to bear.
A noble nature has thee made a maiden mild to be,
Thy virtue also has procurde a manly name to thee.
It does but only thee become, of sex to change the name,
A puissant queen, a king art thou preparing trophes of fame.
Now marvel not so much at Caesar's triumphs [trim to vieu;]
O manlike maiden more renowmd than Caesar was, a dieu.
After the deceasse of Elfleda, king Edward took the dominion of Mercia (as
before we have said) into his own hands, This Alfwen was sister to Edelfled,
as H. Hunt. says.
and so disherited his niece Alfwen or Elswen, the daughter of Elfleda, taking
her away with him into the country of Westsaxons. By this means he so
amplified the bounds of his kingdom, Strateluid or Stretcled, a kingdom in
Wales.
that he had the most part of all this Island of Britain at his commandment:
for the kings of the Welshmen; namely the king of Stretcled, and of the Scots,
acknowledging him to be their chief sovereign lord, K. Edward a great builder
and reparer of towns. Notingham bridge built.
and the Danes in Northumberland were kept so short, that they durst attempt
nothing against him in his latter days: so that he had time to apply the
building and reparing of cities, towns, and castles, wherein he so much
delighted. He builded a new town at Notingham on the southside of Trent, Matt.
West. Manchester repared. Anno 816. Simon Dun.
and made a bridge over that river betwixt the old town and the new. He also
repared Manchester beyond the river of Mercia in Lancashire, accounted as then
in the south end of Northumberland, and he built a town of ancient writers
called Thilwall, near to the same river of Mercia, and placed therein a
garrison of soldiers: diverse other towns and castles he built, as two at
Buckingham on either side the water of Ouse (as before is showed) and also one
at the mouth of the river of Auon. Henr. Hunt.
He likewise built or new repared the towns of Tocetor and Wigmore, with
diverse other, as one at Glademuth, about the last year of his reign. Some
also he destroyed which seemed to serve the enemies turn for harborough, as a
castle at Temnesford, which the Danes builded and fortified.

At length, after that this noble prince king Edward had reigned somewhat above
the term of 23 years, he was taken out of this life at Faringdon: his body
was conveyed from thence unto Wincheter, and there buried in the new ab^eie. He
had three wives, or (as some have written) but two, affirming that Edgiua was
not his wife, but his concu^ine of whom he begat his eldest son Adelstan,
Polydor.
who succeeded him in the kingdom. This Edgiua (as has been reported) A
dream.
dreamed on a time that there rose a moon out of her belly, which with the
bright shine thereof gave light over all England: and telling her dream to an
ancient gentlewoman, who coniecturing

Heerevpon when she came to ripe years, king Edward by chance coming to the
place where she was remaining, upon the first sight was straight ravished with
her beauty (which is deed excelled) that she could not rest till he had his
pleasure of her, and so begot of her the foresaid Adelstan: by her he had also
a daughter Matt. West. Polydor.
The Scottish writers name her Beatrice, but our writers name her Editha. His
second or rather his first wife (if he were not married to Eguina mother to
Adelstan) was called Elfleda or Elfrida, daughter to one earl Ethelme, by whom
he had issue; The issue of K. Edward.
to wit, two sons Ethelward and Edwin, which immediately departed this life
after their father; and six daughters, Elfleda, Edgiua, Ethelhilda, Ethilda,
Edgitha, and Elfgiua. Elfleda

Edgitha was married to Charles king of France, surnamed Simplex. ^has Edgiua
And Ethilda by help of her brother Adelstan was bestowed upon Hugh son to
Robert earl of Paris, Will. Malm.
for her singular beauty most highly esteemed: since nature in her had showed
as it were her whole cunning, in perfecting her with all gifts and properties
of a comely personage. Edgiua and Elgiua were sent by their brother Adelstan
into

Whilst this land was in continual trouble of wars against the Danes, Ran.
Higd. Will. Malm. Matthew. West.
as before is touched, small regard was had to the state of the church, in
so much that the whole country of the Westsaxons by the space of seven years
together (in the days of this king Edward) remained without any bishop, to
take order in matters apperteining to the church. Whereupon the pope had
accurssed the English people, England first ^^curssed.
because they suffered the bishops sees to be vacant so long a time. King Edward
to avoid the curse, assembled Anno 903.
905, in the which the archbishop of Canturburie Pleimond was president.
Wherein it was ordained, that whereas the province of Westsaxons in times past
had but two bishops, now it should be divided into five diocesses, every of
them to have a peculiar bishop.

When all things were ordered and concluded in this synod (as was thought
requisite) the archbishop was sent to Rome with rich presents, to appease the
popes displeasure. When the pope had heard what order the king had taken, he
was contented therewith. And so the archbishop returned into his country, and
in one day at Canturburie ordained seven bishops, as five to the province of
Westsaxons, that is to say, Fridestane to the sea of Winchester, Adelstan to S.
Ge^man in Cornwall, Winchester. Cornwall. Shireborne. Wells. Kirton. Mercia.
Werstan to Shireborne, Adelme to Wel^es, and Edulfe to Kirton. Also to the
province of Sussex he ordained one Bernegus, and to Dorchester for the province
of Mercia one Cenulfus.

Here ye must note, Will. Malm. says that pope Formosus pronounced this curse.
that where William Malme. Polychro. and other do affirm, that pope Formosus
did accursse king Edward and the English nation, for suffering the bishops sees
to be vacant, it can not stand with the agreement of the time, unless that the
curse pronounced by Formosus for this matter long before was not regarded, 904
until Edward had respect thereto. For the same Formosus began to govern the
Roman see about the year of our Lord 892, Polydor.
and lived in the papasie not past six years, so that he was dead before king
Edward came to the crown. But how so ever this matter may fall out, this ye
have to consider: although that Pleimond was sent unto Rome to advertise the
pope what the king had decreed and done, in the ordeining of bishops to their
several sees, as before ye have heard, yet (as master Fox has noted) the
governance and direction of the church depended chiefly upon the kings of this
land in those days, as it manifestly appears, as well by the decrees of
king Alfred, as of this king Edward, whose authority in the election of
bishops (as before ye have heard) seemed then alone to be sufficient.

Moreover, I think it good to advertise you in this place, that this Pleimond
archbishop of Canturburie (of whom ye have heard before) was the 19 in number
from Augustine the first archbishop there: for after Brightwold that was the 8
in number, and first of the English nation that governed the sea, succeeded
Taduin, that sat three years, Notelin five years, Cuthbert 18 years,
Brethwin three years, Lambert 27 years, Adelard 13 years, Wilfred 28 years.
Theologildus or Pleogildus ^ years, Celuotus or Chelutus 10 years. Then
succeeded Aldred, of whom king Edward received the crown, and he was
predecessor to Pleimond. Hen. Hunt.
A little before the death of king Edward, Sithrike the king of Northumberland
killed his brother Nigellus, and then king Reinold conquered the city of York.

Adelstane succeeds his father Edward in the kingdom, Alfred practicing by
treason to keep him from the government, sanke down suddenly as he was
taking his oath for his purgation; the cause why Alfred opposed himself against
Adelstane, whose praise is notable, what he did to satisfy the expectation of
his people, lady Beatrice king Edwards daughter married to Sithrike a Danish
governor of the Northumbers, by whose means Edwin king Edwards brother was
drowned, practices of treason, the lady Beatrice strangely put to death by
her stepsons for being of counsel to poison her husband Sithrike, her death
revenged upon the tormentors by her father king Edward, and how chronographers
vary in the report of this history. The xix. Chapter.
ADelstane the eldest son of king Edward began his reign over the more part
of all England, Adelstan. Matt. West. Will. Malmes.
the year of our Lord 924, 924
which was in the 6 year of the emperor Henry the first, in the 31 year of
the reign of Charles surnamed Simplex king of France, three months after the
burning of Pauie, and about the 22 or 23 year of Constantine the third, king
of Scotland. This Adelstane was crowned and consecrated king at Kingstone upon
Thames, of Aldelme the archbishop of Canturburie, who succeeded Pleimond. He
was the 24 king in number from Cerdicus or Cerdike the first king of the
Westsaxons. Alfred strives in vain to keep Adelstane from the government.
W^l. Malm. See more hereof in the acts and monuments set forth by M. Fox, vol.
1. leaf 195.
There were in the beginning some that set themselves against him, as one
Alfred a noble man, which practiced by treason to have kept him from the
government: but he was apprehended yer he could bring his purpose to pass,
and sent to Rome there to try himself guilty or not

Pope John the tenth sent unto king Adelstane, to know if he would that his
body should be laid in christian burial or not. The king at the contemplation
of Afreds friends and kinsfolks, signified to the pope that he was contented
that his body should

After that king Adelstane was established in the estate, he endeavored himself
to answer the expectation of his people, which hoped for great wealth to ensue
by his noble and prudent governance. First therefore meaning to provide for the
suertie of his country, Anno 925. Simon Dun. Polydor.
he concluded a peace with Sithrike king of Will. Malm.
And then Adelstane brought the province of the Northumbers unto his
subjection, expelling one Aldulph out of the same that rebelled against him.
There be that write, that Godfrie and Aulafe the sons of Sithrike succeeding
their father in the government of Northumberland, by practicing to move war
against king Adelstane, occasioned H. Hunt.
but other write, that Godfrie was the father of Reignold which wan York,
after that Sithrike had slain his brother Nigellus, as before is mentioned.

The Scottish chronicles vary in report of these matters from the English
writers: Hect. Boethius. The Scottish writers vary from our English authors.
Beatrice daughter to K. Edward as the Scottish writers say. Edwin was not
brother to K. Edward but son to him.
whose chronicles affirm, that in the life time of king Edward, his daughter
Beatrice was given in marriage to Sithrike,

About the same time Adelstane a base son of K. Edward fled the realm,
Adelstane flies the realm.
for doubt to be made away by some like traitorous practice of the Danes.
Shortly after, king Edward understanding that Sithrike went about some
mischief toward him, persuaded his daughter to poison her husband the said
Sithrike. Then Aulafe or Aualassus, and Godfrie the sons of Sithrike, finding
out by diligent examination, that Beatrice was of counsel in poisoning her
husband, they caused her to be apprehended and put to death on this wife.
Beatrice put to death by his stepsons.
She was set naked upon a smithes cold anuill or stithie, and there with hard
roasted eggs being taken out of the hot imbers were put under her armepits, and
her arms fast bound to her body with a cord, and so in that state she
remained till her life passed from her. King Edward in revenge of his daughters
death moved war against the two brethren, Aulafe and Godfrie, and in battle
finally vanquished them, but was slain in the same battle himself.

Thus have the Scottish chronicles recorded of these matters, as an induction to
the wars which followed betwixt the Scots and Danes as confederates against
king Adelstane: but the truth thereof we leave to the readers own judgment.
For in our English writers we find no such matter, but that a daughter of king
Edward named Edgitha or Editha, after her fathers deceasse was by her brother
king Adelstane, about the first year of his reign, given in marriage (as
before ye have heard) unto the foresaid Sithrike king of Northumberland, that
was descended of the Danish blood, who for the love of the young lady,
renounced his heathenish religion and became a christian; but shortly after,
forsaking both his wife and the christian faith, he set up again the
worshipping of idols, and within a while after, as an apostata miserably ended
his life. Whereupon the young lady, Editha a virgin.
her virginity being preserved, and her body undefiled (as they write) passed
the residue of her days at Polle swoorth in Warwikeshire, spending her time
(as the same writers affirm) in fasting, watching, praieng, and doing of
almesdeedes, and so at length departed out of this world. Thus our writers
differ from the Scottish history, both in name and manner of end as concerning
the daughter of king Edward that was coupled in marriage with Sithrike.

Adelstane subdueth Constantine king of Scots, Howell king of Wales, and
Wulferth king of Northwales, the Scots possess a great part of the north
countries, Adelstane conquereth the Scots for aiding Godfrie his enemy; a
miracle declaring that the Scots ought to obey the king of England; king
Adelstane banisheth his brother Edwin, he is for a conspiracy drowned in the
sea, Adelstane repents him of his rigor (in respect of that misfortune)
against his brother; Aulafe sometimes king of Northumberland inuadeth England,
he disguiseth himself like a minstrell and surueieth the English camp
unsuspected, he is discovered after his departure, he assaileth the English
camp, Adelstane being comforted with a miracle discomfiteth his enemies, he
makes them of Northwales his tributaries, he subdueth the Cornishmen, his
death; the description of his person, his virtues, of what abbeis and
monasteries he was founder, his estimation in foreign realms, what precious
presents were sent him from other princes, and how he bestowed them; a
remembrance of Guy the earl of Warwike. The xx. Chapter.
AFter that king Adelstane had subdued them of Northumberland, he was
advertised, that not only Constantine king of Scots, but also Huduale or
Howell K. of Wales went about a privy conspiracy against him. Hereupon with
all convenient speed assembling his power, Will. Malm.
he went against them, and with like good fortune subdued them both, and also
Uimer or Wulferth R. of Northwales, so that they were constreined to submit
themselves unto him, who shortly after moved with pity in considering their
sudden fall, restored them all three to their former estates, but so as they
should acknowledge themselves to govern under him, Matthew. West. The noble
saying of king Ade^stane.
pronouncing withal this notable saying, that More honorable it was to make a
king,

Ye must understand, 926
that (as it appears in the Scottish chronicles) the Scotishmen in time of
wars that the Danes gave the English nation, got a part of Cumberland and other
the north countries into their possession, and so by reason of their near
adioining unto the confines of the English kings, there chanced occasions of
war betwixt them, as well in the days of king Edward, as of this Adelstane
his son, although in deed the Danes held the more Polydoc.
did so much prevail there by earnest suit made to king Constantine, that he
got a power of men, and entering with the same into Northumberland, besiged the
city of Duresme, 934
King Adelstane being sore moved against the king of Scots, that thus aided his
enemies, raised an army, and went northward, purposing to revenge that injury.

At his coming into Yorkshire, Ran. Higd.
he turned out of Sim. Dun.
wasted the country by land unto Dunfoader and Wertermore, and his navy by
sea destroyed the coasts along the shore, even to Catnosse, and so he brought
the king of Scots and other his enemies to subjection at his pleasure, The
Scots subdued.
constreining the

It is said, that being in his journey near unto the town of Dunbar, he
prayed unto God, that at the instance of saint John of Beuerlie, A token showed
iniraculo^ske that the Scots ought to be subject to the kings of England.
it would please him to grant, that he might show some open token, whereby it
should appear to all them that then lived, and should he (...) succeed, that
the Scots ought to (...) subject unto the kings of England. Herewith, the king
with his sword s^ote upon a great stone standing near to the castle of Dunbar,
and with the

After this was Edwin the kings brother a coused of some conspiracy by him
begi^^ against the king, whereupon he was banished the land, and sent out in an
old rotten vessel without rower or mariner, only accompanied with one
esquier, Will. Malm. Matt. West.
so that beingstanding near to the castle of Dunbar, and with the lanched
forth from the shore, 934.
through despair Edwin leapt into the sea, and drowned himself, but the
esquier that was with him recovered his body, and brought it to land at
Withsand besides Canturburie. But James Maier in the annals of Flanders
says, that he was drowned by fortune of the seas in a small vessel, and
being cast up into a creek on the coast of Picardie, was found by Adolfe earl
of Bullongne that was his coosin germane, and honorably buried by the same
Adolfe in the church of Bertine. In consideration of which deed of piety and
duty of mindful consanguinitie, the king of England both heartily thanked
earl Adolfe, and bestowed great gifts upon the church where his brother was
thus buried. For verelie king Adelstane after his displeasure was assuaged,
Repentance too late.
and hearing of this miserable end of his brother, sore repented himself of
his rigor so extended toward him, in so much that he could never abide the
man that had given the information against him, which was his cupbearer, so
that on a time as the said cupbearer served him at the table, and came toward
him with a cup of wine, one of his feet chanced to slide, but he recovered
himself with the help of the other foot, saying, One brother yet has helped
and succored the other: which words cost him his life. For the king remembering
that by his accusation he had lost his brother that might have been an aid to
him, caused this said cupbearer to be straight put to death.

In this mean while, Will. Malm.
Aulafe the son of Sitherike,had given the information against him, which was
late king of Northumberland (who is also named by writers to be king of the
Irishmen, and of many Islands) assembled a great power of Danes, Irishmen,
Scots, and other people of the out Isles, and embarked them in 615 ships and
craiers, with the which he arrived in the mouth of Humber, and there coming on
land, began to invade the country. 937
This Aulafe had married the daughter of Constantine king of Scots, Simon Dun.
by whose procurement, notwithstanding his late submission, Aulafe took in
hand this journey. King Adelstane advertised of his enemies arrival, gathered
his people, and with all convenient speed hasted toward them, and approaching
nearer unto them, pitched down his field at a place called by son
Brimesburie, by others Brimesford, and also Brunaubright, Hen. Hunc.
and by the Scottish writers Browmingfield. Will. Malm.


When knowledge hereof was had in the enemies camp, Matthew. West.
Aulafe enterprised a marvelous exploit, for taking with him an harp, Hector
Boet.
he came into the Englishhis late submission, Ran. Higd.
Aulafe took in camp, Aulafe disguised, comes to view the English camp
offering himself disguised as a minstrell, to show some part of his cunning in
music upon his instrument: and so being suffered to pass from tent to tent,
and admitted also to play before the king, surueied the whole state and order
of the army. This done, he returned, meaning by a cammisado to set upon the
kings tent. But one that had served as a soldier sometime under Aulafe,
chanced by marking his demeanor to know him, and after he was gone, uttered to
the king what he knew. The king seemed to be displeased, in that he had not
told him so much before Aulafs departure: but in excusing himself, the
soldier said: Ye must remember (if it like your grace) that the same faith
which I have given unto you, I sometime owght unto Aulafe, therefore if I should
have betrayed him now, you might well stand in doubt least I should hereafter
do the like to you: but if you will follow mine advise, remove your tent,
least happily he assail you unawares. The king did so, and as it chanced in
thegone, uttered to the king what he knew. The king night following, Aulafe
assaileth the English camp.
Aulafe came to assail the English camp, and by fortune coming to the place
where the kings tent stood before, he found a bishop lodged, which with his
company was come the same day to the army, and had pitched up his tent in that
place from whence the king was removed: and so was the same bishop, and most
part of his men there slain. which slaughter executed, Aulafe passed forward,
and came to the kings tent, who in this meanegone, uttered to the king what he
knew. The king time, by reason of the alarm raised, was got up, and taking to
him his sword in that sudden fright, by chance it fell out of the scabbard, so
that he could not find it, but calling to God and S. Aldelme (as says
Polychron.) his sword was restored to the scabbard again. Ran. Higd.
The king comforted with that miracle, boldly preased forth upon his enemies,
and so valiantly resisted them, that in the end he put them to flight, and
chased them all that morning and day Will. Malm. The enemies discomfited.
so that he slew of them an huge number. Some have written, that Constantine
king of Scots was slain at this overthrow, and five other small kings or
rulers, with 12 dukes, and welneere all the army of those strange nations
which Aulafe had gathered together. But the Scottish chronicles affirm, that
Constantine was not there himself, but sent his son Malcolme, which yet
escaped sore hurt and wounded from the battle, as in the same chronicles ye
may see more at large.

When K. Adelstane had thus vanquished his enemies Ran. Higd.
he went against them of Northwales, whose rulers and princes he caused to come
before him at Hereford, and there handled them in such sort, that they
couenanted to pay him yeerlie in lieu of a tribute 20 pounds of gold, Tribute.
300 pounds of silver, and 25 head of neat, with hawks and hownds a certain
number. After this, he subdued the Cornishmen: and whereas till those days
they inhabited the city of Excester, The Cornish men subdued.
he rid them quite out of the same, and repared the walls, and fortified them
with ditches and turrets as the manner then was, Excester repared.
and so removed the Cornish men further into the west parts of the country,
that he made Tamer water to be the confines between the Englishmen and them.
940
Finally the noble prince king Adelstane departed out of this world, Simon
Dun. The decease of king Adelstane.
the 26 day of October, after he had reigned

He was of such a stature, The de^cription of king Adelstane.
as exceeded not the common sort of men, stooping somewhat, and yellowe haired,
for his valiancie joined with courtesy beloved of all men, yet sharp against
rebels, and of invincible constancy: his great devotion toward the church
appeared in the building, adorning and indowing of monasteries and abbeis. He
built one at Wilton within the diocese of Salisburie, and an Wolstan
archbishop of York.
that lived in his days, for whose sake he greatly enriched that bishoprike.
His fame spread over all the parties of Europe, His estimation in foraine
realms.
so that sundry princes thought themselves happy if they might have his
friendship, either by Mandeuile saw the one half of this crown in France, and
the other at Constantinople, almost 400 years after this time, as he writes.
Of these jewels king Adelstane gave part to the abbie of saint Swithon at
Winchester, and part to the abbie of Malmesburie. Moreover, the king of Norwaie
sent unto him a goodly ship of fine woorkmanship, with gilt stern and purple
sails, furnished round about the deck within with a row of gilt pauises. In
the days of this Adelstane reigned that right worthy Guy earl of Warwike,
Harding.
who (as some writers have recorded) fought with a mighty giant of the Danes
in a singular combat, and vanquished him.

Edmund succeeds Adelstane in the kingdom, the Danes of Northumberland
rebel against him, a peace concluded between Aulafe their king and king Edmund
upon conditions, Aulafe dies, another of that name succeedethwithin with a
row of gilt pauises. In the days him; king Edmund subdueth the Danes, and
compels them to receive the christian faith, Reinold and Aulafe are
baptized, they violate their fealty vowed to king Edmund, they are put to
perpetual exile; why king Edmund wasted all Northumberland, caused the eyes of
king Dunmails sons to be put out, and assigned the said country to Malcolme
king of Scots; the Scottish chroniclers error in perverting the time and order
of the English kings, king Edmunds laws, by what misfortune he came to his
end, how his death was foreshewed to Dunstane in a vision, a tale of the virtue
of the cross, Dunstane reproves duke Elstane, his dream, and how the
interpretation thereof came to pass. The xxj. Chapter.
AFter that Adelstane was departed this life, Edmund.
without leaving issue behind to succeed him in the kingdom, his brother
Edmund, sonnedeath was foreshewed to Dunstane in a vision, a tale of Edward the
elder, borne of his last wife Edgiue, took upon him the government of this
land, Will. Malm.
and began his reign in the year of our Lord 940, 940.
which was in the fifth year of the emperor Otho the 1, in the 13 of Jews
surnamed Transmarinus king of France; and about the 38 year of Constantine the
third king of Scotland. Simon Dun.
The Danes of Northumberland rebelled against this Edmund, and ordained Aulafe
to be their king, whom they haddeath was foreshewed to Dunstane in a vision, a
tale called out of Ireland. Some write that this Aulafe, which now in the
beginning of Edmunds reign came into Northumberland, was king of Norwaie. and
having a great power of men with him, marched forth toward the south parts of
this land, in pupose to subdue the whole: but king Edmund raised a mighty
army, and incountred with his enemies at Leicester. Howbeit, yer the matter
came to the uttermost trial of battle, through the ear^est suit of the
archbishop of Canturburie and York Odo and Wolstan, a peace was concluded; A
peace concluded.
so as Edmund should enjoy all that part of the land. which lies from Watling
street southward, and Aulafe should enjoy the other part as it lies from the
same street northward. Then Aulafe took to wife the (...) Alditha, daughter to
earl Ormus, by who^e counsel and assistance he had thus obtained the upper
hand. But this Aulafe in the year following, after he had destroyed the church
of saint Balter, 941
and burned Tinningham, departed this life. Matthew. West. Aulafe deceasseth.
Then the other Aulafeof the archbishop of Canturburie and York Odo that was
son to king Sithrike, Another Aulafe takes upon him to rule.
took upon him to govern the Northumbers.

After this, in the year 942, king Edmund assembling an army, 942
first subdued those Danes which had got into their possession the cities and
towns of Lincoln, Leicester, Darhie, Stafford, and Notingham, constreining
them to receive the christian faith, and reduced all the countries even unto
Humber under his subjection. This done, Aulafe and Reinold the son of Garmo,
who (as you have heard) subdued York, G^rmo or Godfrey. Will. Malm.
as a mean the sooner to obtain peace, offered to become christians, and to
submit themselves unto him: whereupon he received them to his peace. There be
that write, that this Aulafe is not that Aulafe which was son to king
Sithrike, but rather that the other was he with 944
to Aulafe at the very fontstone, and to Reinold at his confirmation at the
bishops hands. Simon. Dun.
Nevertheless, their wicked natures could not rest in quiet, so that they
brake both promise to

Moreover, Leolin king of Southwales aided king Edmund in this enterprise.
he wasted and spoiled whole Cumberland, because he could not reduce the people
of that country unto due obeisance, and conformable subjection. The two sons
of Dunmaile king of that 946
Herewith upon consideration either of such aid as he had received of the Scots
at that time, or some other friendly respect, he assigned the said country of
Cumberland unto Malcolme king of Scots, to hold the same by fealty of him and
his successors. The Scottish chronicles, perverting the time and order of the
acts and doings of the English kings which reigned about this season, affirm,
that by covenants of peace concluded betwixt Malcolme

But now to the other doings of king Edmund:the third in the year 944, which
was about it is recorded, that he ordained diverse good and wholesome laws,
very profitable and necessary for the commonwealth, Polydor. The laws of
king Edmund.
which laws with diverse other of like antiquity are forgot and blotted out by
rust of time, the consumer of things worthy of long remembrance (as says
Polydor:) but since his time they have been recovered for the more part, and
by master William Lambert turned into Latin, and were imprinted by John Day,
in the year 1568, as before I have said. Finally, this prince king Edmund,
Five years and 7 months has Si. Dun.
after he had reigned six years and a half, he came to his end by great
miisfortune. For (as some say) it chanced, that espieng where one of his
servants was in danger to be slain amongst his enemies that were about him
with drawn swords, as he stepped in to have helped his servant, he was slain
at a place called Pulcher church, or (as other have) Michelsbourgh.

Other say, Pridecire says Si. Dun. Will. Malm. Matthew. West.
that keeping a great feast at the aforesaid place on the day of saint
Augustine the Englishas before I have said. 946
Finally, this prince king apostle (which is the 26 of May, and as that year
came about, it fell on the tuesday) as he was set at the table, he espied where
a common robber was placed near unto him, whom sometime he had banished the
land, and now being returned without license, he presumed to come into the
kings presence, wherewith the king was so moved with high disdain, that he
suddenly arose from the table, and flew upon the thief, and catching him by
the hear of the head, threw him under his feet, wherewithas before I have
said. Finally, this prince king the thief, having fast hold on the king,
brought him down upon him also, and with his knife stroke him into the belly,
in such wise, that the kings bowels fell out of his chest, and there presently
died. The thief was hewn in pieces by the kings servants, but yet he slew and
hurt diverse before they could dispatch him. This chance was lamentable, namely
to the English people, which by the ouertimelie death of their king, in whom
appeared many evident tokens of great excellency, lost the hope which they
had conceived of great wealth to increase by his prudent and most princely
government. His body was buried at Glastenburie where Dunstane was then abbat.

There be that write, that the death of king Edmund was signified aforehand to
Dunstane, who about the same time attending upon the same king, as he removed
from one place to an other, Capgraue.
chanced to accompany himself with a noble man, A vain tale.
one duke Elstane, and as they rode together, behold suddenlietokens of great
excellency, lost the hope which they Dunstane saw in the way before him,
where the kings musicians rode, the devil running and leaping amongst the same
musicians after a reioising manner, whom after he had beheld a good while, he
said to the duke; Is it possible that you may see that which I see? The duke
answered that he saw nothing otherwise than he ought to see. Then said
Dunstane, Bless your eyes with the sign of the cross, Crossing brings
sight of the devils, and crossing drives them away.
and try whether you can see that I see. And when he had done as Dunstane
appointed him, he saw also the feend in likeness of a little short evil
favored Ethiopian dansing and leaping, whereby they gathered that some evil
hap was toward some of the company: but when they had crossed and blessed
them, the foul spirit vanished out of their sight.

Now after they had talked of this vision, Dunstane an interpretor of dreams.
and made an end of their talk touching the same, the duke required of
Dunstane to interpret a dream which he had of late in sleep, and that was
this: He thought that he saw in a vision the king with all his nobls sitas
Dunstane appointed him, he saw also the feend in in his dining chamber at
meat, and as they were there making merry together, the king chanced to fall
into a dead sleep, and all the noble men, and those of his council that were
about him were changed into robucks and goats. Dunstane quickly declared that
this dream signified the kings death, and the changing of the nobles into dum
and insensible beasts betokened that the princes and governors of the realm
should decline from the way of truth, Dunstan sees the devil often, but now
he was become a watter at the table when Dunstane sat with the king.
and wander as foolish beasts without a guide to rule them. Also the night
after this talk when the king was set at supper, Dunstane saw the same spirit,
or some other, walk up and down amongst them that waited at the table, and
within three days after, the king was slain, as before ye have heard.

Edred succedeth his brother Edmund in the realm of England, the Northumbers
rebel against him, they and the Scots swear to be his true subjects, they
break their oath and join with Aulafe the Dane, who returns into
Northumberland, and is made king thereof, the people expel him and erect
Hericius in his room, king Edred takes revenge on the Northumbers for their
disloialtie, the rereward of his army is assalted by an host of his enemies
issuing out of York, the Northumbers submit themselves, and put away
EDred Edred.
the brother of Edmund, and son to Edward 946
or (as other say) 997, which was in the twelfe year of the emperor Otho the
first, and in the 21 year of the reign of Jews K. of France, and about the
third or fourth year of Malcolme the first of that name, king of Scotland. He
was crowned and anointed the 16 Edred.
began his reign over his reign, Hen. Hunt. The Northumbers rebel and are
subdued.
the Northumbers rebelled against him, whereupon he raised an army, invaded
their country, and subdued them by force. This done, he went forward into
Scotland: but the Scots without showing any resistance submitted themselves
unto him, and so both Scots and Northumbers received an oath to be true unto
him, which they observed but a small while, for he was no sooner returned into
the Aulafe returned into Northumberland.
with a great navy of ships, and was ioifullie received of the inhabitants,
and restored again to the kingdom, which he held by the space of four
years, and then by the accustomed disloialtie of the Northumbers he was by
them expelled, and then they set up one Hirke or Hericius the son of one
Harrold to reign over them, Hirke or Hericius.
who held not the estate any long Will. Malm. The disloialtie of the
Northumbers punished.
out of the country by king Edmund, Aulafe returned into Northumberland.
as before ye destroyed the country with fire and sword, sleaing the most
part of the inhabitants. He burnt the abbeie of Rippon, which was kept against
him.

As he was returning homeward, an host of enemies brake out of York, Ran.
Higd. Simon Dun.
and setting upon the rereward of the kings army at a place called Easterford,
Easterford.
made great slaughter of the same. Wherefore the king in his rage meant to have
begun a new Aulafe returned into Northumberland.
as before ye their forsaid king Hirke or Hericius, and offering great rewards
and gifts to buy their peace, they obtained pardon. But because that Wolstane
the archbishop of York was of counsel with his countriemen in reuolting from
king Edred, and advancing of Hericius, king Edred took him and kept him in
prison a long time after, but at length in respect of the reverence which he
bare to his calling, The archbishop of York imprisoned. Matthew. West.
he set him at liberty, and pardoned him his offense. Matthew. Westminster. recites
an other cause of Wolstans imprisonment, as thus. In the year of Grace, says
he, 951, 951.
king Edred put the archbishop of York in close prison, because of often
complaints exhibited against him, as he which had commanded many townsmen of
Theadford to be put to death, in revenge of the abbat Aldelme by them unjustly
slain and murdered.

After this, when Edred had appeased all civil tumults and dissentions within
his land, Will. Malm.
he applied him self to the advancing of religion, wholly followingWestm.
recites an other cause of Wolstans imprisonment, the mind of Dunstane, by
whose exhortation he suffered patiently many torments of the body, and
exercised himself in prayer and other devout studies. This Edred in his latter
days being greatly addicted to devotion and religious priests, at the request
of his mother Edgiua, restored the abbeie of Abington which was built first by
king Inas, but in these days sore decayed and fallen into ruin. Finally,
after he had reigned nine years and a half, he departed this life Edredus
departs this life.
to the great greeuance of men, and reioising of angels (as it is written) and
was buried at Winchester in the cathedral church there. Here is to be noted,
that the foresaid Edred, when he came first to the crown, upon a singular and
most especial favor which he bare toward Dunstane the abbat of Glastenburie,
Dunstane in favor.
committed unto him the chiefest part of all his treasure, as charters of lands
with other monuments, and such ancient princely jewels as belonged to the
former kings, with other such as he got of his own, willing him to lay the
same inthis life to the great greeuance of men, and reioising safe keeping
within his monastery of Glastenburie.

Afterward, when king Edred perceived himself to be in danger of death by
force of that sickness, which in deed made an end of his life, he sent into
all parties to such as had any of his treasure in keeping, to bring the same
unto him with all speed, that he might dispose thereof before his departure out
of this life, as he should see cause. Dunstane took such things as he had
under his hands, and hasted forward to deliver the same unto the king, and to
visit him in that time of his sickness according to his duty: but as he was
upon the way, But was not this a devise thereby to deteine the treasure? for I
do not read that he delivered it out of his hands.
a voice spoke to him from heaven, An angel, or as some thinks a worse
creature.
saying; Behold king Edred is now departed in peace. At the hearing of this
voice, the horse whereon Dunstane rode fell down and died, being not able to
abide the presence of the angel that thus spoke to Dunstane. And when he came
to the court, he understood that the king died the same hour in which it was
told him by the angel, as before ye have heard.

Edwin succeeds Edred in the kingdom of England, his beastly and incestuous
carnalitie with a kinswoman of his on the very day of his coronation, he is
reproved of Dunstane and gives over the gentlewomans company, Dunstane is
banished for rebuking king Edwin for his unlawful lust and lewd life, the
devil reioised at his exile, what revenging mischiefs the king did for
displeasure sake against the said Dunstane in exile, the middle part of England
rebellethye have heard. against king Edwin, and erecteth his brother Edgar in
royal room over them, he takes thought and dies; Edgar succeeds him, he
is a favorer of moonks, his provision for defense of his realm, his policy
and discretion in government, what kings he bound by oath to be true unto him,
eight princes row his barge in sign of submission, the vicious inconveniences
that grew among the Englishmen upon his favoring of the Danes, a restraint of
excessive quaffing; Dunstane is made bishop of Worcester and Ethelwold bishop
of Winchester; justice in Edgars time severely executed, theft punished with
death, a tribute of woolfs skins paid him out of Wales, and the benefit of that
tribute. The xxiij. Chapter.
AFter the deceasse of Edred, his nephue Edwin Edwin.
the eldest son of king Edmund was made king of England, and began his reign
over the same in the year of our Lord 955, 955
and in the 20 year of the emperor Otho the first, in theiustice in Edgars
time severely executed, 28 and last year of the reign of Jews king of
France, and about the twelfe year of Malcolme the first of that name, king of
Scotland. He was consecrated at Kingston upon Thames by Odo the archbishop of
Canturburie. On the very day of his coronation, as the lords were set in
council about weighty matters touching the government of the realm, he rose
from the place, gat him into a chamber Will. Malmes. Polydor.
without any respect or regard had to his royal estate and princely
dignity. Dunstane lately before named abbat of Glastenburie, did not only
without fear of displeasure reprove the K. for such shameful abusing of his
body, but also caused the archbishop of Canturburie to constreine him to
forsake that woman whom unlawfully he kept.

There be that write, John Cap. grave.
that there were two women, both mother and daughter, whom king Edward Will.
Malmes. Polydor.
without any respect or regard had to that either he would take her or her
daughter unto wife. And therefore perceiving that Dunstane was sore against
such wanton pastime as the king used in their company, Dunstane banished the
realm.
she so wrought, that Dunstane was through her earnest travel banished the
land. This is also reported, that when he should depart the realm, the devil
was heard in the west end of the church, taking up a great laughter after his
roaring manner, as Will. Malmes. Polydor.
without any respect or regard had to his behavior, Dunstane sees not the
devil.
spoke to him, and said: Well thou adversary, do not so greatly reioise at
the matter for thou dooest not now so much reioise at my departure, but by Gods
grace thou shall be as sorrowful for my return.

Thus was Dunstane banished by king Edwine, so that he was compelled to pass
over into Flanders, Dunstane departed into exile.
where he remained for a time within a monastery Will. Malm. Edwine displaceth
monks and puts secular priests in their rooms.
the king spoiled many religious houses of their goods, Rebellion raised
against king Edwine Simon Dun.
and drove out the moonks, placing secular priests in their rooms, as namely
at Malmesburie, where yet the house was not empaired, but rather enriched in
lands and ornaments by the kings liberality, and the industrious means of the
same priests, which took up the bones of saint Aldelme, and put the same into
a shrine. At length the Edwin departs this life.
that shortly after, when he had reigned somewhat more than four years, he
died, and his body was buried at Winchester in the new abbeie. EDgar Edgar.
the second son of Edmund late king of England, after the decease of his
elder brother 959
in the 22 year of the emperor Otho the first, in the fourth year of the
reign of Lotharius king of France, 510 almost ended after the coming of the
Saxons, 124 after the arrival of the Danes, and in the last year of Malcolme
king of Scotland. He was crowned and Polydor.
consecrated at Bath, or (as some say) at Kingstone upon Thames by Odo the
archbishop of Tanturburie, being as then not past 16 years of age, when he was
thus admitted king. He was no less endued with commendable gifts ofrealme of
England in the year of our Lord God mind, Edgar a fauorer of moonks.
than with strength and force of body. He was a great fauorer of moonks, and
specially had Dunstane in high estimation. Above all things in this world he
regarded peace, and studied daily how to preserve the same, to the commodity
and advancement of his subjects.

When he had established things in good quiet, and set an order in matters as
seemed to him best for the peaceable government of his people, he prepared a
great navy of ships, The diligent provision of K. Edgar for defense of the
realm.
and dividing them in three parts, he appointed every part to a quarter of the
realm, to wast about the coast, that no foreign enemy should approach the land,
but that they might be incountered and put back, before they could take land.
And every year after Easter, he used to give order, that his ships should
assemble together in their due places: and then would he with the east navy
sail to the west parts of his realm, and sending those ships back, he would
with the west navy sail into the north parts; and with the north navy come
back again into the east. This custom he used, that he might fcowre the seas
of all pirates and thieves. In the winter season and spring time, he would ride
through the provinces of his realm, searching out how the judges and great
lords demeaned themselves in the administration of justice, sharply punishing
those that were found guilty of extortion, or had done otherwise in any point
than duty required. In all things he used such politic discretion, Will. Malm.
that neither was he put in danger by treason of his subjects,into the north
parts; and with the north navy come nor molested by foreign enemies.

He caused diverse kings to bind themselves by oath to be true and faithful
unto him, as Kinadius or rather Induf king of Scotland, Mascutius.
Malcolme king of Cumberland, Mascutius an archpirat, or (as we may call him) a
master rouer, Kings of Welshmen.
and also all the kings of the Welshmen, as Duffnall, Girffith, Huvall, Jacob,
and Iudithill, all which came to his court, and by their solemn oaths
received, swear to be at his commandment. And for the more manifest testimony
thereof, he having them with him at Chester, caused them to enter into a barge
upon the water of Dee, King Edgar roweth on the water of Dee.
and placing himself in the forepart of the barge, at the helm, he caused
those eight high princes to row the barge up and down the water, showing
thereby his princely prerogative and royal magnificence, in that he might use
the service of so many kings that were his subjects. And there upon he said
(as has him reported) that then might his successors account themselves kings
of England, when they inioiedAnd for the more manifest testimony thereof, such
prerogative of high and supreme honor.

The fame of this noble prince was spread over all, as well on this side the sea
as beyond, insomuch that great resort of strangers chanced in his days, which
came ever into this land to serve him, and to see the state of his court, as
Saxons and other, yea and also Danes, Ran. Higd. King Edgar favors Danes.
which became very familiar with him. He favored in deed the Danes (as has
been said) more than stood with the commodity of his subjects, for scarce was
any street in England, but Danes had their dwelling in the same among the
Englishmen, whereby came great harm: English learned to quaffe of the Danes.
for whereas the Danes by nature were great drinkers, the Englishmen by
continual conversation with them learned the same vice. Will. Malm.
King Edgar to reform in part such excessive quaffing as then began to grow in
use, caused by the procurement of Dunstane, nails to be set incups of a
certain measure, marked for the purpose, that none should drink more than was
assigned by such measured cups. Englishmen learn other vices of strangers.
Englishmen also learned of the Saxons,scarce was any street in England, but
Danes had Flemings, and other strangers, their peculiar kind of vices, as of
the Saxons a discordered fierceness of mind, of the Flemings a feeble
tenderness of body: where before they reioised in their own simplicity, and
esteemed not the lewd and unprofitable manners of strangers.

Dunstance was made bishop of Worcester, and had also the administration of the sea of London committed unto him. He was in such favor with thescarse was any
street in England, but Danes had king, Ethelwold made bishop of Winchester.
that he ruled most things at his pleasure. Ethelwold, which being first a
moonke of Glastenburie, and after abbat of Abington, was likewise made bishop
of Winchester, and might do very much with the king. Oswald. Floriacum.
Also Oswald, which had been a moonke in the abbeie of Florie in France, and
after was made bishop of Worcester, and from thence removed to Moonks must
needs write much in praise of Edgar who had men of their cote in such estimation
was highly in favor with this king, so that by these three prelates he was
most counseled. Justice in his days was strictly observed, for although he
were courteous and gentle toward his friends, yet was he sharp and hard to
offenders, so that no person of what estate or degree soever he was escaped
worthy punishment, if he did transgress the laws and ordinances of the
realm. There was no privy thief nor common robber that durst lay hands upon
other men's goods, but he might look to make A tribute instituted of woolskins.
For as it is said, he appointed Iudweall or Ludweall king of Wales to present
him with three hundred woolues yeerelie in name of a tribute, but after three
years space, there was not a woolfe to be found, and so that tribute ceased in
the fourth year after it began to be paid.

The death of Alfred king Edgars wife (or concubine) causes him to fall into a
foul offense, an example teaching men to take heed how they put others in
trust to woo for them; earl Ethelwold cooseneth the king of his wife, the
danger of beholding a woman's beauty with lustful eyes; king Edgar kills
earl Ethelwold to marry fair Alfred his wife; the bloody and unnatural
speech of Ethelwolds base son; examples of king Edgars great incontinencie
IN this mean time, Osborne and Capgraue hold that she was not his wife but a
nun. Will. Malm.
Alfred the wife of king Edgar (as some say) or rather (as others write) his
concubine died, of whom he had begot a son named Edward. The ^^orger.
For albeit at the same time the same went, that Horgerius duke of Cornwall,
or rather Devonshire, had a daughter named Alfred, a damsel of excellent
beauty, whom Edgar minding to have in marriage, appointed one of his noble men
called earl Ethelwold, to go with all speed into Cornwall or Devonshire, to
see if the young ladies beauty answered the report that went of her, and so to
break the matter to her father in his behalf: yet Ethelwold being a young
ioslie gentleman, took his journey into Cornwall, and coming to the
duke,offense. ^^orger.
For albeit at the same time the same was well received, and had a sight of his
daughter, with whose beauty he was straight ravished so far in love, Earl
Ethelwold deceueth the king of his wi^e.
that not regarding the kings pleasure, who had sent him thither, he began to
purchase the good will of both father and daughter for himself, and did so
much that he obtained the same in deed. Hereupon returning to the king, he
informed him that the damsel was not of such beauty and comely personage,
as might he thought worthy to match in marige with his majesty.

Shortly after perceiving the kings mind by his wrongful misreport to be
turned, and nothing bent that way, he began to sue to him that he might with
his favor marie the same damsel: which the king granted, as one that cared
not for her, because of the credit which he gave to Ethelwolds words. And so by
this means Ethelwold obtained Alfred in marriage, which was to his own
destruction, as the case fell out. For when the same of her passing beauty did
spread over all the realm, now that she was mariedwith his majesty. and came
more abroad in sight of the people, the king chanced to hear thereof, and
desirous to see her, devised under color of hunting to come unto the house of
Ethelwold, and so did: where he had no sooner set his eye upon her, but he was
so far wrapped in the chain of burning concupiscence, that to obtain his
purpose, King Edgar seeks the destruction of earl Ethelwold.
he shortly after contrived Ethelwolds death, and married his wife.

Some say, that the woman kindled the brand of purpose: for when it was known,
that the king would see her, Ethelwold willed her in no wise to trim up her
self, but rather to disfigure her in foul garments, and some evil favored
attire, that her native beauty should not appear: but she perceiving how the
matter went, of spite set out her self to the uttermost, so that the king upon
the first sight of hix, beacame so far inamored of her beauty, that taking
her husband forth with him on hunting into a forest or wood then called
Warlewood, King Edgar a murderer.
and after Horewood, not showing that he meant him any hurt, till at length he
had got him within the thick of the wood, where he suddenly stroke him
through with his dart. Now as his bastard son came to the place, the king asked
him how he liked the manner of hunting, whereto he answered; Uerie well if it
like your grace, for that that likes you, ought not to displease me. With
which answer the king was so pacified, that he endeavored by pretending his
favor toward the son, to extenuat the tyrannical murder of the father.
Then did the king marie the countess Alfred, and of her begat two sons,
Edmund which died young, and Etheldred or Egelred.

Besides this cruel act wrought by king Edgar, for the satisfieng of his
fleshly lust, he also played another part greatly to the stain of his honor,
moved also by wanton love, with young damsel named Wilfrid, for after that
she had (to avoid the danger of him) either professed her self a nun, or else
for color (as the most part of writers agree) got hirselfe into a nunrie, and
clad her in a nuns weed, he took her forth of her cloister, and lay by her
sundry times, and begat on her a daughter named Edith, who coming to
convenient age, His licentious life and incontinencie.
was made a nun. A third example of his incontinencie is written by authors,
and that is this. It chanced on a time that he lodged one night at Andeuer, and
having a mind to a lords daughter there, he commanded that she should be
brought to his bed. But the mother of the gentlewoman would not that her
daughter should be defloured: and therefore in the dark of the night
broughtinto a nunrie, and clad her in a nuns weed, he took one of her
maidseruants, and laid her in the kings bed, she being both fair, proper, and
pleasant.

In the morning when the day began to appear, she made have to arise: and
being asked of the king why she so hasted; That I may go to my days work if
it please your grace (quoth she.) Herewith she being stayed by the king, as it
were against her will, she fell down on her knees, and required of him that
she might be made free, in guerdon of her nights work. For (says she) it is
not for your honor, that the woman which has tasted the pleasure of the kings
body should any more suffer servitude under the rule and appointment of a
sharp and rough mistress.

The king then being moved in his spirits, laughed at the matter, though not
from the heart, as he that took great indignation at the doings of the
duchess,

For these youthful parts, and namely for the rauishing of Wilfride (which
though she were no nun, yet the offense seemed very heinous, for that he
should not once touch any woman shadowed under that Note the deep hypocrisy
of Dunstane.
so that by him he was put to his seven years penance, and kept from the
crown till the 12 year of his reign or more. Ran. Higd. Fabian out of Guido
de Colum^^.
For some write that he was not crowned nor anointed king, Will. Malm.
till the 30 year of his age, which should be about the 13 or 14 year of his
reign by that account, since he entered into the rule of the kingdom about the
16 year of his age. In deed one author witnesses, that he was consecrated at
Bath on a Whitsunday, the 13 year of his reign, and that by Hen. Hunt. Ranul.
Hig.
But some which suppose that he was consecrated king immediately upon the death
of Edridus, affirm that he was crowned and anointed king by the archbishop
Odo, Polydor.
Dunstane as then remaining in exile, from whence he was immediately revoked by
Edgar, and first made bishop of Worcester (as has been said) and after the
decease of Odo was advanced to be archbishop of Canturburie. Matt. West.
But by some writers it appears, Simon Dun.
that Dunstane

Toward the latter end of king Edgars days, Fabian. Ran. Higd. The Welshmen
rebel and are chastised.
the Welshmen moved some rebellion against him. Whereupon he assembled an
army, and entering the country of Glamorgan, did much hurt in the same,
chastising the inhabitants very sharply for their rebellious attempts.
Amongst other spoils taken in those parties at that time by the men of war,
the bell of saint Ellutus was taken away, and hanged Fabian. Ran. Higd. The
welshmen rebel and are chastised.
the one unto him, and smote him on the breast with a spear. By reason of
which vision he caused all things that had been taken away to be restored
again. But within nine days after the king died. Whether any such thing
chanced, or that he had any such vision it forces not. Will. Malmet. Hen.
Hunt. King Edgar departs this life.
But truth it is, that in the 37 year of his age, after he had reigned 16
years and two months he departed this life, the 8 day of Iulie, and was
buried at Glastenburie.

This Edgar is highly renowned of writers for such princely qualities as
appeared in him, but chiefly for that he was so beneficial to the church,
namely to moonks, the advancement of whom he greatly sought, Wherefore Edgar
is praised of some writers.
both in building abbeies new from the ground, in reparing those that were
decayed: also by enriching them with great revenues, and in converting
collegiat churches into monasteries, remoouing secular priests, and bringing in
moonks in their places. There passed no one year of his reign, wherein he
founded not one abbeie or other. The abbeie of This Edgar is highly renowned
of writers for Glastenburie which his father had begun he finished. The abbeie
of Abington also he accomplished and set in good order. The abbeies of
Peterborough and Thornie he established. The nunrie of Wilton he founded and
richly endowed, where his daughter Edith^ was professed, and at length became
abbess there. To be brief, Fabian Ran.
he builded (as the chronicles record) to the number of 40 abbeies and
monasteries, Higd. Hen.
in some of which he placed moonks, Hunt.
and in some nuns. By his example in those days, other nobles, as also
prelates, This Edgar is highly renowned of writers for and some of the laity,
did begin the foundation of sundry abbeies and monasteries: as Adelwold bishop
of Winchester builded the abbeie of Elie, and (as some say) Peterborough and
Will. Malm.
Thornie, though they were established by the king (as before is mentioned.)
Also earl Ailewin, at the exhortation of the same bishop Adelwold, Hen. Huna.
builded the abbeie of Ramsey, though some attribute the doing thereof unto
Oswold the archbishop of York, and some to king Edward the elder.

To conclude, Matt. West. Moonks esteemed and secular priests little regarded.
the religious orders of moonks and nuns in these days flourished, and the
state of secular priests was smallie regarded, insomuch that they were
constreined to avoid out of diverse colleges, and to leave the same unto
moonks, as at Worcester and Winchester, where in the new monastery, because
the kings lived not in such sort as was then thought requisite, Ran. Higd. lib.
6. cap. 9.
the prebends were taken from them and given to vicars. But when the vicars
were thought to use themselves no better, but ratherEdward the elder. worse
than the other before them, they were likewise put out, and moonks placed in
their rooms by authority of pope John the 13. This reformation, or rather
deformation was used by king Edgar in many other places of the realm.

He was (as appears by diverse writers) namely in his beginning, cruel
against his own people, and wanton in lusting after young women (as you have
heard before.) Will. Malm. Ran. Higd. Tho. Eliot.
Of stature and proportion of body he was but small and low, but yet nature
had enclosed within so little a personage such strength, that he durst
encounter and combat with him that was thought most strong, Edgar small of
stature but strong and hardy.
only doubting this, least he which should have to do with him should stand
in fear of him. And as it chanced at a great feast (where oftentimes men use
their toongs more liberrallie than needs) Kenneth the king of Scots Kenneth
king of Scots.
cast out certain words in this manner: It may (says he) seem a marvel that
so many countries and provinces should be subject to such a little silliehe
was but small and low, but yet nature had enclosed body as Edgar is. These
words being borne away by a ^ester or minstrell, and afterward uttered to
Edgar with great reproach, he wisely dissembled the matter for a time, although
he kept the remembrance thereof enclosed within his breast: and upon occasion,
at length feigned to go on hunting, taking the king of Scots forth with him:
and having caused one of his servants to convey two swords into a place within
the forest by him appointed in secret wise, of purpose he withdrew from the
residue of his company, and there accompanied only with the Scottish king,
came to the place where the swords were laid; and there taking the one of them,
delivered the other to the Scottish king, The noble courage of king Edgar.
willing him now to assaie his strength, that they might show by proof whether
of them ought to be subject to the other; Start not, but try it with me (says
he:) for it is a shame for a king to be full of brags at bankets, and not to be
ready to fight when trial should be made abroad. The Scottish king herewith
being astonished and maruellouslie abashed, fell down at his feet, and with much
humility confessed his fault, and desired pardon for the same, which upon such
his humble submission king Edward easily granted.

This noble prince had two wives, Egelfrida or Will. Malm.
The state of the realm in king Edgars Ireland subject to king Edgar.
with the city of Dublin, as by authentike records it does and may appear.

Contention amongst the peers and states about succession to the crown, the
monks removed and the canons and secular priests restored by Alfer duke of
Mercia and his adherents, a blasing star with the events ensuing the same,
the rood of Winchester speaks, a pretty shift of
AFter the deceasse of king Edgar, Edward.
there was some strife and contention amongst the Some write that the father
king Edgar appointed Edward to succeed him.
for Alfred the mother of Egelredus or Ethelredus, Simon Dun.
and diverse other of her opinion, John Capg.
would gladly have advanced the same Egelredus to the rule: but the archbishop
Dunstan taking in his hands the baner of the crucifix, presented his elder
brother Edward unto the lords as they were assembled together, and there
pronounced him king, notwithstanding that both queen Alfred and her friends,
namely Alfer the duke of Mercia were sore against him, especially for that he
was begot in unlawful bed of Elfleda the nun, for which offense he did seven
years p^nance, and not for lieng with Wilfrid (as master Fox thinks.) But
Dunstane judging (as is to be thought) that Edward was more fit for their
behoof to continue the world in the former course as Edgar had left it, After
duke of Mercia and other imme^^atlie upon Edgars death before the crown was
established, removed the moonks and restored the canons. Simon Dun.
than his brother Egelred (whose mother and such as took part with her under
her sons authority were likely enough to turn all vpside down) used the
matter so, that with help of Oswald the archbishop of York, and other
bishops, abbats, and certain of the nobility, as the earl of Essex and such
like, he prevailed in his purpose, so that (as before is said) the said Edward,
being the second of that name which governed this land before the conquest, was
admitted king, and began his reign over England in the year of our Lord 975,
975
in the third year of the emperor Otho the second, in the 20 year of the
reign of Lothar king of France, and about the fourth year of Cumelerne king
of Scotland. He was consecrated by archb. Dunstane at Kingston upon Thames, to
the great grief of his mother in law Alfred and her friends. Will. Malm.
About the beginning of his reign a blasing star was seen, signifieng (as
was thought) the miserable haps that followed. And first there insued
barrenness of ground, and thereby famine amongst the people, and morraine of
cattle.

Also duke Alfer or Elfer of Mercia, Alfer or Elfer duke of Mercia.
and other noble men destroyed the abbeys which king Edgar and bishop Adelwold
had builded within the limits of Mercia. The priests or canons, which had been
expelled in Edgars time out of the prebends and benefices, began to complain
of the wrongs that were done to them, in that they had been put out of
possession from their livings, alleging it to be a great offense and miserable
case, that a stranger should come and remove an old inhabitant, for such manner
of doing could not please God, not yet be allowed of any good man, which
ought of reason to doubt least the same should hap to him which he might see to
have been an other man's undoing. About this matter was hard hold, for many
of the temporal lords, John Cap^
and namely the same Alfer, judged that the priests had wrong. Will. Malm.
In so much that they removed the moonks out of their places, Ran. Higd.
and brought into the monasteries secular priests with their wives. Matt. West.
But Edelwin duke of the Eastangles, and Alfred his brother, Simon Dun.
with Brightnoth or Brighnode earl of Essex, withstood this doing, and
gathering an army, with great valiancie maintained the moonks in their houses,
within the country of Eastangles. Hereupon were councels holden, Simon Dun.
as at Winchester, at Kirthling in Eastangle, and at Calne.

At Winchester, Polydor.
when the matter was brought to that pass that the priests were like to have
had their purpose, an image of the rood that stood there in the refectorie
where they sat in council, uttered certain words in this wise; God forbid it
should be so, God forbid it should be so: ye judged well once, but ye may not
change well again. A pretty shift of the moonks to disappoint the priests.
As though (says Polydor Polydor.
Virgil) the moonks had more right, which had berest other men of their
possessions, than the priests which required restitution of their own. But
(says he) because the image of Christ hanging on the cross was thought to
speak these words, such credit was given thereto, as it had been an oracle,
that the priests had their suit dashed, and all the trouble was ceased. So the
moonks held those possessions, howsoever they came to them, by the help of
God, or rather (as says the same Polydor) by the help of man. For there were
even then diverse that thought this to be rather an oracle of Phoebus than of
God, that is to say, not published by Gods power, but by the fraud and crafty
deceit of men.

The matter therefore was not so quieted, but that upon new trouble an other
council was had at a manor house belonging to the king, Will. Malm.
called Calne, where they that were appointed to have the hearing of the
matter, sat in an upper lost. The king by reason of his young years do was
spared, so that he came not there. Here as they were busied in arguing the
matter, either part laieng for himself what could be said, Dunstane was sore
reviled, and had sundry reproaches laid against him: but suddenly even in the
Dunstane by woorking miracles had his will, when arguments failed.
And so this miracle with the other made an end of the controversy between
the priests and moonks, all the English people following the mind of the
archbishop Dunstane, who by means thereof had his will.

In this mean while, king Edward ruling himself Polydor.
Afterward by chance as he was hunting in a forest near the castle of Corfe,
Will. Malms.
where his mother in law and his brother the said Egelred then soiourned, when
all his company were spread abroad The wicked purpose of queen Alfred.
was very glad thereof, for that she had occasion offered to work that which
she had of long time before imagined, that was, to slay the king her son in
law, that her own son might enjoy the garland. Wherefore she required him to
alight, which he in no wise would yield unto, but said that he had stolen from
his company, and

The queen perceiving that he would not alight, caused drink to be fetched,
and as he had the cup at his mouth, The shameful murder of K. Edward.
by her appointment, one of her servants stroke him into the body with a
knife, whereupon feeling himself wounded, he set sprres to the horse thinking
to gallop away, and so to get to his company. But being hurt to the death, he
fell from his Matthew. West.
That place was called Corphes gate or Corfes gate. Fabian.
His body being found was buried without any solemn funerals at Warham.
Sim. Dun.
For they which envied that he should enjoy the crown, Will. Malm.
envied also the burial of his body within the church: but the memory of his
fame could not so secretly be buried with the body, as they imagined. For
sundry miracles showed at the place where his body was interred, made the
same famous (as diverse have reported) for there was sight restored to the
blind, Miracles.
health to the sick, and hearing to the deaf, which are easilier to be told
than believed.

Queen Alfred also would have ridden to the place where he lay, moved with
repentance (as has been said) but the horse whereupon she rode would not
come near the grave, for any thing that could be done to him. Neither by
changing the said horse could the matter be helped: for even the same thing
happened to the other horses. Heerevpon the woman perceived her great offense
toward God for murdering the innocent, and did so repent her afterward for
the same, that besides the chastising of her body in fasting, and other kind
of penance, she employed all her substance and patrimony on the poor^,
Building of abbeies in those days was thought to be a full satisfaction for
all manner of sinues.
and in building and reparing of churches and monasteries. She founded two
houses of nuns (as is said) the one at Warwell, the other at Ambresburie, and
finally professed hirselfe a nun in one of them, that is to say, at Warwell,
which house she builded (as some affirm) in remembrance of her first husband
that was slain there by king Edgar for her sake (as before is mentioned.)

The body of this Edward the second, and surnamed the martyr, after that it
had remained three years at Warham where it was first buried, Elferus.
was removed unto Shaftesburie, and with great reverence buried there by the
forenamed Al^er or Elfer, duke of Mercia, who also did sore repent himself, in
that he had been against the advancement of the said king Edward (as ye have
heard.) But yet did not he escape worthy punishment: for within one year
after, Polydor.
he was eaten to death with lice (if the history be true.) Will. Malmes.
King Edward came to his death after he had reigned three years, or (as other
write) three years and eight months. Whatsoever has been reported by
writers of the murder committed on the person of this king Edward, sure it is
that if he were base begotten (as by writers of no mean credit it should
appear he was in deed) great occasion undoubtedly was given unto queen
Alfred to seek revenge for the wrongful keeping back of her son Egelred from
his rightful succession to the crown: but whether that Edward was legitimate
or not, she might yet have devised some other lawful mean to have come by her
purpose, and not so to have procured the murder of the young prince in such
unlawful manner. For her doing therein can neither be woorthilie allowed, nor
thoroughly excused, although those that occasioned the mischief by advancing
her stepsonne son to an other man's right, deserved most blame in this matter.

Thus far the sixth book, comprising the first arrival of the Danes in this
land, which was in king Britricus his reign, page 135, at which time the most
miserable state of England took beginning.
THE SEVENTH BOOK of the History of England.
Egelred succeeds Edward the martyr in the kingdom of England, the decaie of
the realm in his reign, Dunstane refusing to consecrate him is thereunto
enforced, Dunstans prophesies of the English people and Egelred their king, his
sloth and idleness accompanied with other vices, the Danes arrive on the coasts
of Kent and make spoil of
IN the former book was discoursed the troubled state of this land by the
manisold and mutinous invasions Egelred.
who though they sought to ingrosse the rule of every part and parcel thereof
in to their hands; yet being resisted by the valiantness of the governors
supported with the aid of their people, they were disappointed of their
expectation, and received many

Now because the Danes in the former kings days were reencountred (and that
renowmedlie) so often as they did encounter, and seeking the total regiment,
where dispossessed of their partile principalilie, which by warlike violence
they obtained; and for that the Saxons were interessed in the land, and these
but violent incrochers, unable to keep that which they came to by constreint;
we have thought it convenient to comprise the troubled estate of that time in
the sixth book; the rather for the necessary consequence of matters then in
motion: and here deem it not amiss, at so great and shameful looseness
(specially in a prince) ministering heart and courage to the enemy, to begin
the seventh book. Wherein is expressed the chiefest time of their flourishing
estate in this land; if in tumults, vprores, battles, and bloodshed, such a
kind of estate may possibly be found. For here the Danes lord it, here they
take upon them like souereignes, and here (if at any time they had absolute
authority) they did what they might in the highest degree: as shall be
declared in the unfortunate affairs of ungracious Egelred or Etheldred, the
son of king Edgar, and of his last wife queen Alfred, who was ordained king
in place of his brother Edward, after the same Edward was dispatched out of the
way, and began his reign over this realm of England, in the year of our
Lord 979, 979
which was in the seventh year of the emperor Otho the second, Simon Dun.
in the 24 of Lothaine K. of France, and about the second or third year of
Kenneth the third of that name king of Scotland.

This Egelred or Etheldred was the 30 in number from Cerdicus he first king of
the Westsaxons: through his negligent government, the state of the commonwealth
fell into such decaie (as writers do report) that under him it may be said,
how the kingdom was (...) to the uttermost point or period of old (...) age,
which is the next degree to the gra^e. For whereas, whilst the realm was
divided at the first by the Saxons into sundry dominions, it grew at length
(as it were increasing from youthful years) to one absolute monarchy, which
passed under the late remembered princes, Egbert, Adelstane, Edgar, and others,
so that in their days it might be said, how it was grown to man's state, but
now under this Egelred, through famine, pestilence, and wars, the state
thereof was so shaken, turned vpside down, and weakened on each part, that
rightly might the season be likened unto the old broken years of man's life,
which through feebleness is not able to help it slefe. Dunstane archbishop of
Canturburie was thought to have foreseen this thing,

But (as has been reported) Will. Malmes.
Dunstane then said that the English people should suffer condign punishment
generally, with loss of ancient liberties, By the Lord (says he) and his
blessed mother, this child shall prove to be a slothful person. It has
been written also, that when he was but ten years of age,

This Egelred Polydor.
(as writers say) was nothing given to warlike enterprises, but was slothful,
a lover of idleness, and delighting in riotous lusts, which Ran. Higd.
and spoiled the I Will of Tenet, 980
the town of Southampton, and in the year following they destroyed S. Petroks
abbeie Sim. Dun.
specially in Devonshire and Cornwall. Ran. Higd.
Also a great part of Cheshire was destroyed by pirates of Norway.

The same year by casualtie of fire, 982
a great part of the city of London was burnt. In the year of our Lord 983,
983
Alfer duke of Mercia departed this life, who was coosen to king Edgar, Alfer
or Elfer duke of Mercia departed this life. Alfrike or Elfrike duke of Mercia.
and his son Alfrike took upon him the rule of that dukedom, Fabian.
and within three years after was banished the land. About the Will. Malm.
Matt. West.
And because the K. would not agree with the bishop without moneie at the
only request of Dunstane, the said Dunstane did send him word, that since
he made more account of gold than of God, more of money than of S. Andrew,
patron of the church of Rochester, and more of covetousness than of him being
the archbishop, the mischiefs which the Lord had threatened would shortl^e fall
and come to pass, but the same should not chance whilst he was alive, who
died in the year following, on the 25 of May, being saturdaie.

Of this Dunstane many things are recorded by writers, Vita Dunstani.
that he should be of such holiness and virtue, that God wrought many
miracles by him, both whilst he lived here on earth, and also after his
deceasse. He was borne in Westsaxon, John Capgr. Osborne. Ran. Higd.
his father was named Heorstan, and his mother Cinifride, who in his youth set
him to school, where he so profited, that he excelled all his equals in age.
Afterward he fell sick of an ague, which vexed him so sore that it drove him
into a frenzy: and therefore his parents appointed him to the cure the charge
of a certain woman, where his disease grew so on him, that he fell in a
trance, as though he had been dead, and after that he suddenly arose, and by
chance caught a staff in his hand, and ran up and down through hills and
dales, and laid about him as though he had been afraid of mad dogs. The next
night (as it is said) he gat him to the top of the church (by the help of
certain ladders that stood there for woorkemen to mend the roof) and there
ran up and down very dangerously, but in the end came safely down, and
laid him to sleep between two men that watched the church that night, and
when he awaked, he marvelled how he came there. Finally, recovering his
disease, his parents made him a priest, and placed him in the abbeie of
Glastenburie, where he gave himself to the reading of scriptures and knowledge
of virtue. But as well his kinsmen as certain other did raise a report of him,
that he gave not himself so much to the reading of scriptures, as to charming,
coniuring and sorcerie, which he utterly denied: howbeit learned he was in
deed, and could do many pretty things both in handie work and other
devises: he had good skill in music and delighted much therein. At length he
grew in such favor, that he was advanced into the service of king Adelstane.

Upon a time, as he came to a gentlewomans house with his harp, and hoong the
same on the wall, while he shaped a priests stole, the harp suddenly began to
play a psalm, which drove the whole household in such fear, that they ran out
and said, he was too cunning, and knew more than was expedient: whereupon he
was accused of necromancie, and so banished out of the court. After this he
began to have a liking to women, and when Elfeagus then bishop of Winchester
and his coosen, persuaded him to become a moonke, he refused it, for he rather
wished to have married a young damsel, whose pleasant company he daily
inioied. But being soon after stricken with such a swelling disease in his
belly, that all his body was brought into such state, as though he had been
infected with a foul leprosy, he bethought him self, and upon his recovery
sent to the bishop, who immediately shore him a moonke, in which life he lived
in so great opinion of holiness, as he in time became abbat of Glastenburie:
where on a time as he was in his prayers before the altar of S. George, he fell
asleep: and imagining in his dream, that an ugly rough bear came toward
him with open mouth, and set his forefeet upon his shoulders ready to devour
him, he suddenly wakening for fear, caught his walking staff which he
commonly went with, and laid about him, that all the church rang thereof,
Polychron.
to the great wonder of such as stood by. The common tale of his plucking the
devil by the nose with a pair of pinsors, for tempting him with women, while
he was making a chalice: the great love that the lady Elfleda near kinswoman
to king Adelstane bare him to her dieng day, with a great many of other such
like matters, I leave as frivolous, and wholly impertinent to our purpose:
only this I read, that through declaring of his dreams and visions, he
obtained in the time of king Edgar, first the bishoprike of Worcester, after
the London, and last of all the archbishoprike of Canturburie. But leaving
Dunstane and the fond devises depending upon the commemoration of his life, we
will now return to the doings of Egelred, and speak of such things in the
next chapter as chanced in his time.

The Danes invade England on each side, they are vanquished by the English,
Goda earl of Devonshire slain; the Danes in a battle fought at Maldon kill
Brightnod earl of Essex and the most of this army, ten thousand pounds paid
to them by composition that they should not trouble the English subjects, they
cease their cruelty for a time, but within a while after fall to their bloody
bias, the English people despair to resist them; Egelred addresseth a navy
against the Danes under the earls Alfrike and Turold, Alfrike traitorouslie
Shortly after the decease of Dunstane, Will. Malm. Matt. Westminster. The Danes
invade this land.
the Danes invaded this realm on each side, wasting and spoiling the country
in most miserable wise. They arrived in so many places at once, that the
Englishmen could not well Alias Wecederport. H. Hunt. Simon Dun. Danes
vanquished.
and from thence passing further into the country, were met with by the
Englishmen, who giving them battle, lost their captain Goda: but yet they got
the victory, and beat the Danes out of the field, and so that part of the
Denish army was brought to confusion. Simon Dun.
Simon Dunel. says, that the Englishmen in deed wan the field here, but not
without great loss. For besides Goda Goda earl of Deunonshire slain.
(who by report of the same Matt. West.
and was there overcome and slain with the most part of his people, and so the
Danes obtained in that place the victory.

In the same year, 991
and in the 13 year of king Egelreds reign, when the land was on each side
Ten thousand pounds paid to the Danes. Danegilt.
they should covenant not to trouble his subjects any further. This money was
called Denegilt or Dane money, and was levied of the people. Although other
take that to be Danegilt, which was given unto such Danes as king Egelred
afterward retained in his service, to defend the land frm other Danes and
enemies that sought to invade his dominions. But by what name so ever this
money (which the Danes now received) was called, true it is that hereupon they
ceased from their most cruel invasions for a time. But shortly after they
had resfreshed themselves, Will. Malm.
and recovered new strength, 992
they began to play their old parts again, doing the like mischief by their
semblable invasions, as they had used before. By reason hereof such fear came
upon the English people, that they despaired to be able to resist the enemies.

The king yet caused a navy to be set forth at London, Hen. Hunt. A navy set
forth.
whereof he appointed earl Alfrike (whom before he had banished) to be high
admerall, ioining with him earl Turold. This navy did set forward from London
toward the enemies, who having warning given them from Alfrike, escaped away
without hurt. Shortly after a greater navy of the Danes came, and incountered
with the kings fleet, so that a great number of the Londoners were slain, and
all the kings ships taken: Alfrike a traitor to his country. Matthew. West.
for Alfrike like a traitor turned to the Danes side. Matt. West. makes other
report of this matter, declaring that Alfrike in deed being one of the chief
capteins of the fleet, advertised them by forewarning of the danger that was
toward them, and that when they should come to ioining, the same Alfrike like a
traitor fled to the Danes, and after upon necessity being put to ^light
escaped away with them: but the other capteins of the kings fleet, as Theodred,
Elstan, and Escwen, pursued the Danes, took one of their ships, and slew all
those that were found therein. The Londoners also (as the same Matt. West.
says) met with the navy of the Danish rouers as they fled away, and slew a
great number, and also took the ship of the traitor Alfrike with his soldiers
and armor, but he himself escaped, though with much pain, having played the
like traitorous part once before, and yet was reconciled to the kings favor
again. Henr. Hunt. The son punished for his fathers offense
Upon this mischief wrought by the father, 993
the king now took his son Algar, and caused his eyes to be put out.

About the same time was Bambrough destroyed by the Danes, which arrived after
in Humber, and wasted the country of Lindsey and Yorkshire, on either side
that river. And when the Englishmen were assembled to give them battle, before
they joined, Simon. Dun. Polydor. Matthew. West.
the capteines of the English army, Frena, Godwin, and Fredegist, that were
Danes by their fathers side, began to fly away, and escaped, so giving the
occasion of the overthrow that lighted on their people. But by some writers it
should appear, that after the Danes had destroyed all the north parts, as they
spread abroad without order and good arraie, the people of the country fell
upon them, and slew some of them, and chased the residue. Other of the Danes
with a navy of 94 ships entered the Thames, Aulafe king of Norway, and Swein
king of Denmark were capteins of this fleet, as says Simon Dun.
and besieged London about our lady day in September. They gave a very sore
assault to the city, and assaied to set it on fire: but the citizens so
valiantly defended themselves, that the Danes were beaten back and repelled,
greatly to their loss so that they were constreined to depart thence with
dishonor. 994
Then they fell to and wasted the countries of Essex, Hen. Hunt. Will. Malm. The
king compoundeth with the Danes for money.
Kent, Sussex, and Hamshire, and ceased not till they had enforced the king to
compound with them for 16 thousand pounds, which he was glad to pay to have
peace with them.

Moreover, whereas they wintered that year at Southampton, the king procured
Aulafe king of the Norwegians to come unto Andeuer (where at that time he lay)
upon pledges received of the king for his safe return. Elphegus bishop of
Winchester, Matt. West. Simon Dun. Aulafe king of Norwey baptized.
and duke Ethelwold were appointed by king Egelred to bring Aulafe unto him in
most honorable manner. The same time was Aulafe baptized, king Egelred receiving
him at the fontstone, His promise.
and so he promised never after to make any war within this land. And
receiving great gifts of the king, he returned into his country, and kept his
promise faithfully: but the evils took not so an end, for other of the Danes
sprang up, as they had been the heads of the serpent Hydra, some of them ever
being ready to trouble the quiet state of the English nation.

About this season, John Leland. Simon Dun.
that is to say, in the year of our Lord 995, 995
bishop Aldaine which was fled from Chester The church of Durham builded.
and there began the foundation of a church; so that the sea of that bishoprike
was from thencefoorth there established, and the woods were there cut down,
which before that time covered and ouergrew that place, whereupon it began
first to be inhabited. Earl Uthred, Earl Uthred
who governed that country, greatly furthered the bishop in this work, so
Durham town and minster builded.
came together to rid the woods, and to help forwards the building of the
church and town there.

The Danes inuading the west parts of this land make great havoc by fire and
sword, they arrive at Rochester, and conquer the Kentishmen in field, king
Egelred overcomes
IN the ninteenth year of king Egelreds reign, the Danes sailed about
Cornwall, 997
The Danes invade the west parts of this land.
they robbed and took preies in the coasts of Devonshire and Southwales, and
landing at Wicheport, they burned up the country, and came about unto
Penwithstreet on the south coast, and so arriving in the mouth of Tamer water,
came unto Lidford, and there wasted all before them with force of fire. They
burned, amongst other places, the monastery of Tauestocke
After this they came into Dorcetshire, and passed through the country with
flame and fire, not finding any that offered to resist them. 998
The same year also they soiourned in the I Will of Wight, and lived upon spoils
and preies which they took in Hampshire and Sussex. At length they came into
the Thames, and so by the river of Medwey arrived at Rochester. 999 The Danes
arrive in the Thames.
The Kentishmen assembled together and fought with the Danes, but they were
overcome, and so left the field to the Danes. After this, 1000
the same Danes sailed into Normandy, and king Egelred went into Cumberland,
where the Danes inhabited in great numbers, whom he overcame with sore war,
and wasted almost all Cumberland, taking great spoils in the same. About the
same time, or shortly after, 1001
the Danes with their navy, returning out of Normandy, Exmouth.
came unto Exmouth, and there assaulted the castle, but they were repelled by
them that kept it. After this they spread abroad over all the country,
exercising their accustomed trade of destroieng all before them with fire and
sword. The men of Summersetshire fought with them at Pentho, Pentho.
but the Danes got the upper hand.

Thus the state of the realm in those days was very miserable, for there
wanted worthy chiestains to rule the people, and to chastise them when they
did amiss. There was no trust in the noble men, for every one impugned others
doing, and yet would not devise which way to deal with better likelihood.
When they assembled in council, and should have occupied their heads in
devising remedies for the mischief of the common wealth, Disagreement with
counselors what (...) fruit it brings.
they turned their purpose unto the altercation, about such strifes,
contentions and quarrels as each one had against other, and suffered the
general case to lie still in the dust. And if at any time there was any good
conclusion agreed upon, for the withstanding of the enemy, and relief of the
common wealth, anon should the enemy be advertised thereof by such as were of
aliance or consanguinitie to them. For (as Caxton, Polychr. and others say) the
English blood was so mixed with that of the Danes and Britains, who were like
enemies to the Englishmen, that there was almost few of the nobility and
commons, which had not on the one side a parent of some of them.

Whereby it came to pass, that neither the secret purposes of the king could
be concealed till they might take due effect; neither their assemblies prove
quiet without quarelling and taking of parts. Many also being sent forth with
their powers one way (whilst the king went to make resistance another) did
revolt to his enemies, and turned their swords against him (as you have heard
of Elfrike and his accomplices, and shall read of many others) so that it was no
marvel that Egelred sped no better, and yet was he as valiant as any of his
predecessors, although the moonks favor him not in their writings, because he
demanded aid of them toward his wars, and was nothing favorable to their lewd
hypocrisy. But what is a king if his subjects be not loiall? What is a realm,
if the common wealth be divided? By peace and concord, of small beginnings
great and famous kingdoms have often times proceeded; whereas by discord the
greatest kingdoms have oftener been brought to ruin. And so it proved here, for
whilst private quarrels are pursued, the general affairs are utterly
neglected: and whilst each nation seeks to prefer her own aliance, the
Island it self is like to become a desert.

But to proceed with our monastical writers: certes they lay all the fault in
the king, saying that he was a man given to no good exercise, he delighted in
fleshly lusts and riotous bankettings, and still sought ways how to gather
of his subjects what might be got, as wll by unlawful means as otherwise. The
misgouernement of the king.
For he would for feined or for very small and light causes disherit his
native subjects, and cause them to redeem their own possessions for great
sums of money. Besides these oppressions, diverse kinds of sicknesses vexed
the people also, as the bloody flix, and hot burning agues which then raged
through the land, Sickness vexing the people.
so that many died thereof. By such manner of means therefore, what through
the misgouernance of the king, the treason and disloialtie of the nobility,
the lack of good order and due correction amongst the people, Treason in the
nobility.
and by such other scourges and mishaps as afflicted the English nation in that
season, the land was brought into great ruin, so that, where by strength the
enemy could not be kept off, there was now no help but to appease them with
money. By reason hereof from time of the first agreement with the Danes for 10
thousand pounds tribute, it was inhanced to 16000 pounds, (as you have heard)
and after that at 20000 pounds, then to 24000 pounds, and so to 30000 pounds,
and lastly to 40000 pounds, The inhancing of the tribute paid to the Danes.
till at length the relme was emptied in manner of all that money and coin that
could The death of queen Elgina.
Shortly after it was devised that the king should be a suter unto Richard
duke of Normandy, for his sister Emma, Emma.
a lady of such excellent beauty, Hen. Hunt.
that she was named the flower of Normandy. This suit was begun and took such
good success, that the king obtained his purpose. And so in the year of our
Lord 1002, 1002
which was about the 24 year of king Egelreds reign, he married the said Emma
with great solemnity. Emma daughter of R. duke of Normandy married to K. Edgar.


This marriage was thought to be right necessary, honorable, and profitable for
the realm of England, because of the great puissance of the Norman princes in
those days: but as things afterward came to pass, it turned to the subversion
of the whole English state: for by such affinity and dealing as happened hereby
betwixt the Normans and Englishmen, occasion in the end was ministered to the
same Normans to pretend a title to the crown of England, in prosecuting of
which title, they obtained and made 1012
being saint Brices day, The 13 of November. The murder of the Danes.
in the year 1012, Hownhill, or Houndhill, a place within Merchington parish
beside the forest of Needwood, somewhat more than two miles from Utoxcester.
the same is uncertain: some say at Wellowin in Herefordshire, some at a place
in Staffordshire called Hownhill, and others in other places, but whersoeuer it
began, the dooers repented it after.

But now yer we proceed any further, we will show what rule the Danes kept
here in this realm The miserable state of this realm under the thraldom of
the Danes.
and kept the husbandmens wives, their daughters, maids and servants, using and
abusing them at their pleasures. And when the husbandmen came home, then could
they scarce have such sustenance of meats and drinks as fell for Hector Boet.
the Englishman must stay till the Lord Dane were passed. But in process of
time, after the Danes were voided the land, this word Lord Dane was in derision
and despite of the Danes turned by Englishmen into a name of reproach, Lordane
whereof the word came.
as Lordane, which till these our days is not forgotten. For when the people
in many parts of this realm will note and signify any great idle lubber
that will not labor nor take pain for his living, they will call him Lordane.
Thus did the Danes use the Englishmen in most vile manner, and kept them in
such servile thraldom as cannot be sufficiently uttered.

A fresh power of Danes invade England to revenge the slaughter of their
countrymen that inhabited this I Will, the west parts betrayed into their hands by
the conspiracy of a Norman that was in government, earl Edrike feined
himself sick when king Egelred sent unto him to levy a power against the
Danes, and betraieth his people to the enemies; Sweine king of Denmark
arriueth on the coast of Northfolke, and makes pitiful spoil by fire and
sword; the truce taken between him and Vikillus is violated, and what
reuengement follows; king Sweine forced by famine returns into his own
country, he arriueth again at Sandwich, why king Egelred was unable to
prevail against him, the Danes ouerrun all places where they come and make
cruel waste, king Egelred paieth him great sums of money for peace; the
mischiefs that light upon a land by placing a traitorous stranger in
government, how many acres a hide of land contains, Egelreds order taken
for ships and armor, why his great fleet did him little pleasure; a fresh host
of Danes under three capteines arrive at Sandwich, the citizens of Canturburie
for money purchase safety, the faithless dealing of Edrike against king
Egelred for the enemies advantage, what places the Danes ouerran and wasted.
The fourth Chapter.
Upon knowledge given into Denmark of the cruel murder of the Danes here in
England, truth it is, that the people of the country were greatly kindled in
malice, and set in such a furious rage against the Englishmen, Hen. Hunt. Simon
Dun. The Danes return to invade England.
that with all speed they made forth a navy full fraught with men of war,
Excester taken.
the which in the year following came swarming about the coasts of England,
and landing in the west country, took the city of Excester, and gat there a
rich spoil. One Hugh a Norman borne, whom queen Emma had placed in those
parties as governor or shirife there, 1002
conspired with the Danes, Hugh a Norman conspireth with the Danes.
so that all the country was ouerrun and wasted.

The king hearing that the Danes were thus landed, and spoiled the west parts
of the realm, he sent unto Edricus to assemble a power to withstand the
enemies. Hereupon the people of Hampshire and Wiltshire rose and got together:
but when the armies should join, The counterfeit sickness of duke Edrike.
earl Edricus surnamed de Streona feigned himself sick, and so betrayed his
people, of whom he had the conduct: for they perceiving the want in their
leader, were discouraged, and so fled. Wilton spoiled.
The Danes followed them unto Wilton, which town they rifled and overcame.
From thence they went to Salisburie, and so taking their pleasure there,
returned to their ships, because (as some write) they were advertised that the
king was coming toward them with an huge army. Simon Dun.
In the year next ensuing, that is to say 1004, 1004
which was about the 24 year of K. Egelreds reign, Swein king of Denmark.
Sweine or Swanus, king of Denmark, with a mighty navy of ships came on the
coast of Northfolke, and there landing with his people, Norwich taken by the
Danes.
made toward Norwich, and coming thither took that city, Thetford burnt.
and spoiled it. Then went he unto Thetford, and when he had taken and rified
that town, he burnt it, notwithstanding a truce taken by Uikillus or
Wilfketell governor of those parties with the same king Swain after the taking
of Norwich. In revenge therefore of such breach of truce, the same Uikillus, or
Wilfeketell, Uikillus or Wilfeketell governor of Norffolke.
with such power as he could raise, assaulted the host of Danes as they
returned to their ships, and slew a great number of them, but was not able to
maintain the fight, for his enemies ouermatched him in number of men. And so
he was constrained in the end to give back: Hen. Hunt.
and the enemies kept on their ways to their ships.

In the year following king Swain returned into Denmark with all his fleet,
1005
partly constrained so to do (as some write) by reason of the great famine and
want of necessary sustenance, Swain returned into Denmark. Simon. Dun.
which in that year sore oppressed this land. In the year of our Lord 1006,
1006
king Swain returned again into England with a mighty and huge navy, Hen.
Hunt. Swain returned into England.
arriving at Sandwich, and spoiled all the country near unto the sea side.
King Egelred raised all his power against him, and all the harvest time lay
abroad in

About the beginning of winter they remained in The Danes winter in the I Will of
Wight. They invade Hampshire, Barkeshire, etc.
and in the time of Christmasse they landed in Hampshire, and passing through
that country into Barkeshire, they came to Reading, and from thence to
Wallingford, and so to Coleseie, and then approaching to Essington, came to
Achikelmeslawe, and in every place wheresoever they came, they made clean
work. For that which they could not carry with them, they consumed with fire,
burning up their innes and sleaing their hoasts. In returning back, the people
of the west country Winchester.
They came by the gates of Winchester as it were in manner of triumph, with
vittels and spoils which they had fetched fifty miles from the sea side. In
the mean time king Egelred lay about Shrewsburie sore troubled with the news
hereof, 1007
and in the year next ensuing, 36000 pound says Si. Dun.
by the advice of his council he gave to king Swain for the redeeming of
peace 30000 pounds.

In the same year K. Egelred created the traitor Edrike earl of Mercia,
Edrike de Streona made duke or earl of Mercia.
who although he had married Edgiua the kings daughter, was yet noted to be one
of those which disclosed the secrets of the realm, and the determinations of
the council unto the enemies. But he was such a crafty dissembler, so
greatly provided of slight to dissemble and cloak his falsehood, that the
king being too much abused by him, had him in singular favor, whereas he upon
a malicious purpose studied daily how to bring the Will. Malm.
Moreover, being sent unto them oftentimes as a commissioner to treat to peace,
he persuaded them to war. But such was the pleasure of God, to have him and
such other of like sort advanced to honor in this season, when by his divine
providence he meant to punish the people of this realm for their wickedness
and sins, whereby they had justly provoked his wrath and high displeasure.

In the 30 year of king Egelreds reign, Henr. Hunt. Simon Dun.
which fell in the year of our Lord 1008, he took order that of every three
hundred and ten hides of land within this realm, An hundred acres is an hide
of land.
there should one ship be builded, and of every eight hides a complet armor
furnished. 1008
In the year following, Provision for ships and armor.
the kings whole fleet was brought together at Sandwich, and such soldiers
came thither as were appointed to go to sea in the same fleet. There had not
been seen the like number of ships so trimly rigged and furnished in all
points, in any kings days before. But no great profitable piece of service
was wrought by them: Matt. West.
for the king had about that time banished a noble young man of Sussex called
Wilnot, who getting together twenty sails, lay upon the coasts taking prices
where he could get them. Brithrike the brother of earl Edrike, being desirous
to win honor, took forth four score of the said ships, and promised to bring
in the enemy dead or alive. But as he was sailing forward on the seas, a sore
tempest with an outrageous wind rose with such violence, that his ships were
cast upon the shore: and Wilnot coming upon them, set them on fire, and so
burned them every one. The residue of the ships, when news came to them of
this mishap, returned back to London; and then was the army dispersed, and so
all the cost and travel of the Englishmen proved in vain.

After this, in the harvest time a new army of Danes, under the conduct of
three capteines, Turkill, Danes land at Sandwich.
Henning, and Aulafe landed at Sandwich, and from thence passed forth to
Canturburie, 1009
and had taken the city but that the citizens gave them a 1000 pounds to
depart from thence, 3000 pound says Si. Dun.
and to leave the country in peace. Then went the Danes to the I Will of Wight,
Sussex and Hampshire spoiled.
and afterward landed and spoiled the country of Sussex and Hampshire. King
Egelred assembled the whole power of all his subjects, and coming to give them
battle, had made and end of their cruel harieng the country with the
slaughter of them all, if earl Edrike with forged tales (devised only to put
him in fear) had not dissuaded him from giving battle. The Danes return into
Kent.
The Danes by that means returning in safety, immediately after the feast of
saint Martine, returned into Kent, and ladged with their navy in the winter
following in the Thames, and oftentimes assaulting the city of London, were
still beaten back to their loss.

After the feast of Christmasse they passed through the country and woods of
Chilterne unto Oxford, 1010
which town they burned, Oxford burnt.
and then returning back they fell to wasting of the country on both sides
the Thames. But hearing that an army was assembled at London to give them
battle; that part of their host which kept on the northside of the river,
passed the same river at Stanes, Stanes.
and so ioining with their fellows marched forth through Southerie, and
coming back to their ships in Kent, fell in hand to repare and amend their
ships that were in any wise decayed. Then after Easter, the Danes sailing
about the coast, Gipswich in Suffolk. Simon Dun.
arrived at Gipswich in Suffolk, on the Ascension day of our Lord: and
inuading the country, gave battle at a place called Wigmere or Rigmere, unto
Uikill or Wilfeketell leader of the English host in those parties, on the fifth
of May. The men of Northfolke and Suffolk fled at the first onset given: but
the Cambridgeshire men sticked to it valiantly, winning thereby perpetual
fa^e and commendation. There was no mindfulnesse amongst them of running
away, so that a great number of the nobility and other were beaten down and
slain, Caput formicae.
till at length one Turketell Mireneheued, that had a Dane to his father, first
bagan to take his flight, and deserved thereby an everlasting reproach.

The Danes obteining the upper hand, for the space of three months together
went up and down the countries, and wasted those parties of the realm, that
is to say, Northfolke, and Suffolk, with the borders of Lincolnshire,
Huntingtonshire, and Cambridgeshire where the fens are, gaining exceeding
riches by the spoil of the great and wealthy abbeys and churches which had
their situation within the compass of the same fens. Thetford. Cambridge. Hen.
Hunt.
They also destroyed Thetford, and burnt Cambridge, and from thence passed
through the pleasant mountaine-countrie of She Danes arrive in the Thames. 1011
But they rested not any long time in quiet, as people that minded nothing but
the destruction of this realm. So as soon after, when they had somewhat
refreshed them, they set forward again into the country, passing through
Buckinghamshire, and so into Bedfordshire. And about saint Andrews tide they
turned Northampton burnt by Danes.
and coming thither set fire on that town. Then turning through the west
country, with fire and sword they wasted and destroyed a great part thereof,
and namely Wiltshire, with other parties. And finally about the feast of
Christmas they came again to their ships. Thus had the Danes wasted the most
part of 16 or 17 shires within this realm, How many shires the Danes wasted.
as Northfolke, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, Essex, Middlesex, Hartfordshire,
Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and Bedfordshire,

King Egelred offers the Danes great sums of moneie to desist from
destroieng
THe king and the peers of the realm, understanding of the Danes dealing in
such merciles manner (as is above mentioned) but not knowing how to redress the
matter, sent ambassadors unto the Danes, The king senbeth to the Danes. Simon
Dun.
offering them great 1011
about the feast of S. Matthew in September, they laid siege to the city of
Canturburie, which of the citizens was valiantly defended by the space of
twenty days. In the end of which term it was taken by the enemies, through
the treason of a deacon named Almaricus, Canturburie woone by Danes*
whom the archbishop Elphegus had before that time preserved from death. The
Danes exercised passing great cruelty in the Fabian ex. An^onino.
winning of that city (as by sundry authors it does and may appear.) For
they slew of men, women, and children, above the number of eight thousand. The
archbishop Elphegus taken. Hen. Hunt.
They took the archbishop Elphegus with an other bishop named Godwine; also
abbat Lefwin and Alseword the kings bailife there. They spared no degree, in
so much that they slew and took 900 priests, and other men of religion. And
when they had taken their pleasure of the city, Antoninus. Vincentius.
they set it on fire, and so returned to their ships. There be some which write
that they tithed the people after an inuerted order, Will. Lamb. ex Asserio
Meneuensi, and alijs.
slaieng all by nines through the whole multitude, and reserved the tenth: so
that of all the moonks there were but four saved, and of the lay people 4800,
whereby it follows that there died 43200 persons. Whereby is gathered that
the city of Canturburie, and the country thereabouts (the people whereof
belike fled thither for succor) was at that time very well inhabited, so as
there have no wanted (says master Lambert) which affirm that it had then
more people than London it self.

But now to our purpose. 1112 Henr. Hunt.
In the year next ensuing, upon the saturday in Easter week, after that the
bishop Elphegus had been kept prisoner with them the space of six or seven
months, they cruelly in a rage led him forth into the fields, The archbishop
Elphegus murdered.
and dashed out his brains with stones, because he would not redeem his
liberty with three thousand pounds, which they demanded to have been levied
of his farmers and tenants. This cruel murder was committed at Greenewich
four miles distant from London, the 19 of April, where he lay a certain time
unburied, but at length through miracles showed (as they say, Miracles.
for miracles are all wrought now by dead men, and not by the living) the Danes
permitted that his body might be carried to London, Elphegus buried in London.
and there was it buried in the church of S. Paul, where it rested for the
space of ten years, till king Cnute or Knought had the government of this
land, by whose appointment it was removed to Canturburie. Translated to
Canturburie.


Turkillus the leader of those Danes by whom the archbishop Elphegus was thus
murdered, held Northfolke and Suffolk under his subjection, Will. Malms.
Turkillus held Norffolk and Suffolk.
and so continued in those parties as chief lord and governor. But the residue
of the Danes at length, compounding with the Englishmen for a tribute to be
paid to them of eight thousand pounds, 48 thousand pound as says Sim. Dun. and
M. West. Henr. Hunt.
spread abroad in the country, soiorning in cities, towns and villages, where
they might find most convenient harbor. Moreover, forty of their ships, or
rather (as some write) 45 were retained to serve the king, promising to defend
the realm; with condition, that the soldiers and mariners should have
provision of meat and drink, with apparel found them at the kings charges.
As one author has gathered Swain king of Denmark was in England at the
concluding of this peace, which being confirmed with solemn oaths and
sufficient hostages, he departed into Denmark.

The same author brings the general slaughter of Danes upon S. Brices day,
Matthew. West.
to have chanced in the year after the conclusion of this agreement, that is
to say, in the year 1012, at what time Gunthildis the sister of king Swain
was slain, Gunthildis the sister of K. Swain murdered.
with her husband and her son, by the commandment of the false traitor
Edrike. But because all other authors agree that the same murder of Danes was
executed about ten years before this supposed time: we have made rehearsal
thereof in that place. Howbeit, for the death of Gunthildis, it may be, that
she became hostage either in the year 1007, at what time king Egelred paid
thirty thousand pounds unto king Swain to have peace (as before you have
heard) or else might she be delivered in hostage, in the year 1011, when the
last agreement was made with the Danes (as above is mentioned.) But when or at
what time soever she became hostage, this we find of her, Will. Malm.
that she came hither into England with her husband Palingus, a mighty earl,
and received baptism here. Whereupon she earnestly traveled in treaty of a
peace betwixt her brother and king Egelred: which being brought to pass
chiefly by her suit, she was contented to become an hostage for

Turkillus the Danish captain tells
NOw had Turkillus in the mean time advertised king Swain in what state
things stood here within the realm: Turkillus discloseth the secrets of the
realm to K. Swain.
how king Egelred was negligent, only attending to the lusts and pleasures of
the flesh: how the noble men were unfaithful, and the commons weak and feeble
through want to good and trusty leaders. Howbeit, some Simon Dun.
that Turkillus as well as other of the Danes which remained here in England,
was in league with king Egelred, in so much that he was with him in London, to
help and defend the city against Swain when he came to assalt it (as after
shall appear.) Which if it be true, a doubt may rise whether Swain received
any advertisement from Turkillus to move him to rather to invade the realm:
but such aduertisements might come from him before that he was accorded with
Egelred.

Swain therefore as a valiant prince, Swain prepares an army to invade
England.
desirous both to revenge his sisters death, and win honor, prepared an huge
army, and a great number of ships, with the which he made toward England, and
first coming to Sandwich, tarried there a small while, He landeth at Sandwich.
1013
and taking eftsoons the sea, compassed about the coasts of the Eastangles,
and arriving in the mouth of Humber, sailed up the water, and entering into the
river of Trent, he landed at Gainesbourgh, purposing, Gainsbourgh
to invade the Northumbers. But as men brought into great fear, for that they
had been subject to the Danes in times past, and thinking therefore not to
revolt to the enemy, but rather to their old acquaintance, if they should
submit themselves to the Danes, streightwaies offered to become subject unto
Swain, The Northumbers yield to Swain. The people of Lindsey yield themselves
to him. Simon Dun.
together with their duke named Wighthred. Also the people of Lindsey and all
those of the northside of Watlingstreet yielded themselves unto him, and
delivered pledges. Then he appointed his son Cnutus to have the keeping of
those pledges, and to remain upon the sa^egard of his ships, whiles he
himself passed forward into the country. Then marched he forward to subdue
them of south Mercia: South Mercia.
and so came to Oxford and to Winchester, making the countries subject to him
through out wheresoever he came.

With this prosperous success Swain being greatly encouraged, prepared to go
unto London, where king Egelred as then remained, having with him Turkillus the
Dane, which was retained in wages with other of the Danes (as by report of some
authors it may appear) and were now ready Sim. Dunel.
to defend the city against their countriemen in support of king Egelred,
together with the citizens. Swain, because he would not step so far out of
the way as to go to the next bridge, lost a great number of his men as he
passed through the Thames. At his coming to London, Swain assaulteth London.
he bagan to assault the city very fiercely, in hope either to put his
enemy in such fear that he should despair of all relief and comfort, or at
the least try what he was able to do. The Londoners on the other part,
although they were brought in some fear by this sudden attempt of the enemies,
yet considering with themselves, that the hazard of all the whole state of the
realm was annexed to theirs, since their city was the chief and metropolitan
of all the kingdom, Polydor.
they valiantly stood in defense of themselves, and of their king that was
present there with them, beating back the enemies, chasing them from the
walls, and otherwise doing their best to keep them off. At length, although
the Danes did most valiantly assault the city, yet the Englishmen to defend
their prince from all injury of enemies, did not shrink, but boldly sallied
forth at the gates in heaps together, and incountered with their adversaries,
and began to fight with them very fiercely.

Swain whilst he went about to keep his men in order, as one most desirous
to retain the victory now almost gotten, was compassed so about with the
Londoners on each side, that after he had lost a great number of his men, he
was constreined for his safeguard to break out through the midst of his enemies
weapons, and was glad that he might so escape: and so with the residue of his
army ceased not to journey day and night till he came to Bath, Will. Malm.
Earl of Devonshire as says Matt. West. Polydor.
where Ethelmere an earl of great power in those west parts of the realm
submitted himself with all his people unto him, who shortly after
nevertheless (as some write) was compelled through want of vittels to release
the tribute lately couenanted to be paid unto him for a certain sum of
money, which when he had received, Swain returns into Denmark.
he returned into Denmark, meaning shortly to return again with a greater
power.

King Egelred supposed that by the payment of that money he should have been
rid out of all troubles, of war with the Danes. But the nobles of the realm
thought otherwise, and therefore willed him to prepare an army with all speed
that might be made. Swain returns into England to make war.
Swain tarried not long (to prove to doubt of the noble men to be grounded of
foreknowledge) but that with swift speed he returned again into England, and
immediately upon his arrival was an army of Englishmen assembled and led
against him into the field. Hereupon they joined in battle, which was sore
foughten for a time, King Egelred discomfited in battle.
till at length by reason of diverse Englishmen that turned to the enemies
side, the discomfiture fell with such slaughter upon the English host, that
king Egelred well perceived the state of his regal government to be brought
into utter danger. Whereupon after the loss of this field, he assembled the
rest of his people that were escaped, and spoke unto them after this manner.

The oration of king Egelred to the remanent of his soldiers.
I Should for ever be put to silence, it there wanted in us the virtue of a
fatherly mind, in giving good advise and counsel for the well ordering and due
administration of things in the common wealth, or if their lacked courage or
might in our soldiers and men of war to defend our country. Truly to

Hereupon they fell in consultation, every one alleging and bringing forth
his opinion as seemed to him best: but it appeared they had the woolfe by the
ear, for they wist not which way to turn them. If they should give battle,
it was to be doubted least through treason among themselves, the army should
be batraied into the enemies hands, the which would not fail to execute all
kind of cruelty in the slaughter of the whole nation. And if they stood not
valiantly to show themselves ready to defend their country, there was no
shift but yield themselves. Which though it were a thing reproachful and
dishonorable, yet should it be less evil, as they took the matter; for
thereby might many be preserved from death, and in time to come, be able to
recover the liberty of their country, when occasion should be offered. This
point was allowed of them all, and so in the end they rested upon that
resolution.

King Egelred therefore determined to commit himself into the hands of his
brother in law Richard King Egelred determines to give place unto Swain.
duke of Normandy, whose sister (as ye have heard) he had married. But because
he would not do this unadvisedly, first he sent over his wife queen Emma, He
sends his wife and sons over into Normandy. Richard duke of Normandy.
with his sons which he had begotten of her, Alfred and Edward, that by their
interteinment he might understand how he should be welcome. Duke Richard
received his sister and his nephues very ioifullie, and promised to aid his
brother king Egelred in defense of his kingdom. But in this mean while had
Swain conquered the more part of all England, and brought (by little and
little) that which remained under his subjection. The people through fear
submitting themselves on each hand, king Egelred in this mean time (for the
Londoners had submitted themselves to Swain) was first withdrawn unto
Greenwich, Simon Dun. Hen. Hunt. Turkill.
and there remained for a time with the navy of the Danes, which was under the
government of earl Turkill, and from thence sailed into the I Will of Wight, and
there remained a great part of the winter, 1014
and finally after Christmas himself sailed into Normandy, King Egelred
passes into Normandy.
and was of his brother in law ioifullie received and greatly comforted in
that his time of necessity.

Swain king of Denmark is reputed king of this land, he oppresses the
English people cruelly, and spoileth religious houses, the strange and
miraculous slaughter of Swain vaunting of his victories; the Danish chronicles
write parciallie of him and his end, Cnute succeeds his father Swain in
regiment, the Englishmen send king Egelred word of Swains death, Edward king
Egelreds eldest son comes over into England to know the state of the
country and people of certeintie; Egelred with his power returns into
England; what means Cnute made to establish himself king of this land, and to
be well thought of among the English people, Egelred burns up Gainesbrough,
and kills the inhabitants thereof for their disloialtie; Cnutes flight to
Sandwich, his cruel decree against the English pledges, he returns into
Denmark, why Turkillus the Danish captain with his power compounded with the
Englishmen to tarry in this land, his faithless service to Egelred, his drift
to make the whole realm subject to the Danish thraldom. The seventh Chapter.
Swain having now got the whole rule of the land, was reputed full king, and
so commanded that his army should be provided of wages and vittels to be taken
up and levied through the realm. In like manner Turkill commanded that to his
army lodged at Greenewich, Swain handles the Englishmen hardly.
wages and vittels sufficient should be delivered, for the finding, releeuing,
succouring, and susteining thereof. Swain used the victory very cruelly
against the Englishmen, oppressing them on each hand; to the intent that them
being brought low he might govern in more suertie. The year in which he
obtained the rule thus of thus realm, and that king Egelred was constreined to
fly into Normandy, was in the 35 year of the same Egelred his reign, and
after the birth of our Lord 1014. Swain being once established in the
government, did not only use much cruelty in oppressing the laity, but also
stretched forth his hand to the church, and to the ministers in the same,
fleecing them and spoiling both churches and ministers, without any remorse of
conscience, insomuch that having a quarrel against the inhabitants within the
precinct of S. Edmunds land in Suffolk, he did not only harrie the country,
but also rifled and spoiled the abbeie of Bury, where the body of saint
Edmund rested.

Whereupon shortly after, as he was at Gainesbrough or Thetford (as some say)
and there in his iollitie talked with his Nobles of his good success in
Fabian. S. Edmund fights for the wealth, but not for the slaughter of his
people. Simon. Dun.
he was suddenly stricken with a knife, 1115
as it is reported, miraculouslie, for no man wist how or by whom: and within
three days after, to wit, on the third of February, he ended his life with
grievous pain and torment in yelling and roaring, by reason of his extreme
anguish beyond all measure. There has sproong a pleasant tale among the
posterity of that age, how he should be wounded with the same knife which king
Edmund in his life time used to wear. Thus have some of our writers Albertus
Crantz. Saxo Granamaticus.
than is before mentioned out of our writers: for the said chronicles report,
that after he had subdued England, he took order with king Egelred, whom they
name amiss Adelstane, that he should not ordeine any other successor, but
only the said Swain. Then after this, he returned into Denmark, where using
himself like a right godly prince, at length he there ended his life, being a
very old man.

Notwithstanding all this, when or howsoever he Will. Malm. H. Hunt. Canute or
Cnute.
dominions. But the Englishmen of nothing more desirous than to shake off the
yoke of Danish thraldom besides their necks and shoulders, streightwaies upon
knowledge had of Swains death, with all speed advertised king Egelred thereof,
and that they were ready to receive and assist him if he would make have to
come over to deliver his country out Egelred sent for home.
Edmund K. Egelreds eldest son.
and to understand whether they were constant or wavering in that which they
had promised.

The young gentleman hasting over into England, King Egelred returns into
England
aided with his brother in laws power, and trusting upon the assistance of the
Englishmen, returned into England in the time of Lent. His return was ioifull
and most acceptable to the English people, as to those that abhorred the rule
of the Cnutes endeavor to establish himself in the kingdom.
which was most sharp and bitter to them, although Cnute did what he could by
bountifulness and courteous dealings to have retained them under his obeisance.

And of an intent to procure Gods favor in the well ordering of things for the
administration in the common wealth, he sought first to appease his wrath, and
also to make amends to saint Edmund for his fathers offense committed (as was
thought) against him: insomuch that after he had obtained the kingdom, he
caused a great ditch to be cast round about the land of saint Edmund, S.
Edmunds ditch.
and granted many freedoms to the inhabitants, acquiting them of certain
taskes and paiments, unto the which other of their neighbors were
contributarie. He also builded a church on the place where saint Edmund was
buried, and ordained an house of moonks there, or rather removed the canons or
secular priests that were there before, and put moonks in their rooms. He
offered up also his crown unto the same S. Edmund, Polydor. Fabian.
and redeemed it again with a great sum of money, which manner of doing grew
into an use unto other kings that followed him. He adorned the church there
with many rich jewels, and endowed the monastery with great possessions.

But these things were not done now at the first, but after that he was
established in the kingdom. For in the mean time, after that king Egelred was
returned out of Normandy, Cnute as then soiourning at Gainesbrough, remained
there till the feast of Easter, and made agreement with them of Lindsey, so
that finding him horses, they should altogether go forth to spoil their
neighbors. King Egelred advertised thereof, sped him thither with a mighty
host, and with great cruelty burned up the country, and slew the more part of
the inhabitants, because they had taken part with his enemies. Cnute as then
was not of power able to resist Egelred, Cnute driven to forsake the land. He
was driven thither by force of contrary winds as should appear by Matthew.
West. The cruel decree of Cnute against the English pledges. Will. Malmes.
and therefore taking his ships which lay in Humber, fled from thence, and
sailed about the coast, till he came, to Sandwich, and there sore grieved in
his mind to remember what mischief was fallen and chanced to his friends and
subjects of Lindsey, only for his cause; he commanded that such pledges as
had been delivered to his father by certain noble men of this realm, for
assurance of their fidelities, should have their noses slit, and their ears
stuffed, or (as some write) their hands and noses cut off.

When this cruel act according to his commandment was done, taking the sea,
he sailed into Denmark: but yet took not all the Danes with him which his
father brought thither. For earl Turkill perceiving the wealthinesse of the
land, This Turkill was retained in service with Egelred, as I think.
compounded with the Englishmen, and chose rather to remain in a region
replenished with all riches, than to return home into his own country that
wanted such commodities as were here to be had. And yet (as some thought) he
did not forsake his sovereign lord Cnute for any evil meaning toward him,
but rather to aid him (when time served) to recover the possession of England
again, as it afterward well appeared. For notwithstanding that he was now
retained by K. Egelred with forty ships, and the flower of all the Danes that
were men of war, so that Cnute returned but with 60 ships into his country:
yet shortly after, earl Turkill with 9 of those ships sailed into Denmark,
submitted himself unto Cnute, counseled him to return into England, and
promised him the assistance of the residue of those Danish ships which yet
remained in England, Encomium. Emmae.
being to the number of thirty, with all the soldiers and mariners that to
them belonged. To conclude, he did so much by his earnest persuasions, that
Cnute (through aid of his brother Harrold king of Denmark) got together a
navy of two hundred ships, so roially decked, furnished, and appointed, both
for brave show and necessary furniture of all manner of weapons, armor and
munition, as it is strange to consider that which is written by them that lived
in those days, and took in hand to register the doings of that time. Howbeit
to let this pomp of Cnutes fleet pass, which (no doubt) was right royal,
consider a little and look back to Turkill, though a sworn servant to king
Egelred, how he did direct all his drift to the advancement of Cnute, and his
own commodity, cloking his purposed treachery with pretended amity, as
shall appear hereafter by his deadly hostility.

A great waste by an inundation or inbreaking of the sea, a tribute of 30000
pounds to the Danes, king Egelred holds a council at Oxford, where he
causes two noble men of the Danes to be murdered by treason, Edmund the king:
eldest son marieth one of their wives, and seizes upon his (...) lands;
Cnute the Damsn king returns into England, the Damsn and English armies
encounter, both (...); Cnute makes waste of certain (...), Edmund preuenteth
(...) purposed treason, Edrike
BUt now to return to our purpose, and to show what chanced in England after
the departure of Cnute. 1015
In the same year to the forsaid accustomed mischiefs an unwonted Matt.
West.
Simon Dun.
Also to increase the peoples misery, king Egelred commanded, Will. Malm.
Matthew. West. A council at Oxford. Sigeferd and Morcad murdered.
that 30000 pounds should be levied to pay the tribute due to the Danes which
lay at Greenewich. This year also king Egelred held a council at Oxford, at
the which a great number of noble men

Their servants took in hand to have revenged the death of their masters, but
were beaten back, Edmund the kings eldest son marries the widow of Sigeferd.
which were an earls living, and lay in Northumberland. And when the king
refused to grant his request, he went thither, and seized the same possessions
and lands into his hands, without having any commission so to do, finding the
farmers and tenants there ready to receive him for their lord.

Whilst these things were a doing, Cnute having made his provision of ships
and men, with all necessary furniture (as before ye have heard) for his
return into England, Cnute returns into England.
set forward with full purpose, either to recover the realm out of Egelreds
hands, or to die in the quarrel. Hereupon he landed at Sandwich, and first
earl Turkill obtained license to go against the Englishmen that were assembled
to resist the Danes, (...)
and finding them at a place called Scora^tan, he gave them the overthrow, got
a great booty, and returned therewith to the ships. After this, Edrike
governor of Norwaie made a rode likewise into an other part of the country,
and with a rich spoil, and many prisoners, returned unto the navy. After
this journey atchiued thus by Edrike, Cnute commanded that they should not
waste the country any more, but gave order to prepare all things ready to
besiege London: but before he attempted that enterprise, as others write, he
marched forth into Kent, or rather sailing round about that country, Will.
Malm. Hen. Hunt. Matthew. West. Sim. Dun.
took his journey westward, and came to Fromundham, and after departing from
thence, wasted Dorsetshire, Summersetshire, and Wiltshire.

King Egelred in this mean time lay sick at Cossam; King Egelred sick.
Matthew. West.
and his son Edmund had got together a mighty host, howbeit yer he came to
join battle with his enemies, he was advertised, that earl Edrike went about
the betraie him, and therefore he withdrew with the army into a place of
suertie. But Edrike to make his tratorous purpose manifest to the whole world,
Edrike de Streona ^^eth to the Danes. Simon. Dun. The west country. The people
of Mercia would not yield. Matthew. West. Hen. Hunt.
fled to the enemies with forty of the kings ships, fraught with Danish
soldiers. Hereupon, all the west country submitted it self unto Cnute, who
received pledges of the chief lords and nobles, and then set forward to subdue
them of Mercia. The people of that country would not yield, but determined to
defend the quarrel and title of king Egelred, so long as they might have any
captain that would stand with them, and help to order them. In the year
1016, 1016
in Christmas, Cnute and earl Edrike passed the Thames at Kirkelade, and
entering into Mercia, cruelly began with fire and sword to waste and destroy
the country, and namely Warwikeshire. Warwikeshire wasted by the Danes.


In the mean time was king Egelred recovered of his sickness, King Egelred
recovered of his sickness
and sent summons forth to raise all his power, appointing every man to resort
unto him, that he might encounter the enemies and give them battle. He
assembleth an army in vain.
But yet when his people were assembled, he was warned to take heed unto
himself, and in any wise to beware how he gave battle, for his own subjects
were purposed to betraie him. Hereupon the army brake up, and king Egelred
withdrew to London, there to abide his enemies within the walls, with whom in
the field he doubted to try the battle. His son Edmund got him to Utred, an
earl of great power, Will. Malm. Edmund king Egelreds son.
inhabiting beyond Humber, and persuading him to join his forces with his,
forth they went to waste, those countries that were become subject to Cnute, as
Staffordshire, Leicestershire, and Shropshire, not sparing to exercise great
cruelty upon the inhabitants, as a punishment for their reuolting, that others
might take example thereby.

But Cnute perceiving whereabout they went, politikelie devised to frustrate
their purpose, and with doing of like hurt in all places where he came, passed
through Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Huntingtonshire, and so through the fens
came to Stamford, and then entered into Lincolnshire, Cnute, what countries he
passed through
and from thence into Notinghamshire, and so into Yorkshire, not sparing to
do what mischief might be devised in all places where he came. Utred
advertised hereof, was constreined to depart home to save his own country
from present destruction, and therefore coming back into Northumberland, and
perceiving himself not able to resist the puissant force of his enemies, was
constreined to deliver pledges, Earl Utred delivered pledges to Cnute.
and submit himself unto Cnute. But yet was he not hereby warranted from
danger, for shortly after he was taken, and put to death, and then were his
lands given unto one Iricke or Iricius, Al^ds Egricus.
whom afterward Cnute did banish out of the realm, because that he did
attempt to challenge like authority to him in all points as Cnute himself had.
After that Cnute had subdued the Northumbers, he pursued Edmund, till he heard
that he had taken London for his refuge, and stayed there with his father. Then
did Cnute take his ships, Cnute prepares to besiege London.
and came about to the coasts of Kent, preparing to besiege the city of
London.

In the mean time, King Egelred departed this life. Simon Dun. Matthew. West.
king Egelred sore worn with long sickness, departed this life on the 23 of
April, being saint Georges day, or (as others say) on saint Gregory's day,
being the 12 of March, but I take this to be an error grown, by mistaking the
feastday of saint Gregory for saint George. He reigned the term of 37
years, He is buried in the church of S. Paul at London.
or little less. His body was buried in the church of saint Paul's, in the
north I Will besides the queere, as by a memorial there on the wall it may
appear. He had two wives (as before

This Egelred (as you have heard) had evil success in his wars against the
Danes, and besides the calamity that fell thereby to his people, many other
miseries oppressed this land in his days, not The pride of king Egelred
alienated the hearts of his people.
His affections he could not rule, but was led by them without order of reason,
for he did not only disherit diverse of his own English subjects wishout
apparent cause of offense by plain forged cauillations; and also caused all
the Danes to be murdered through his realm in one day, by some light suspicion
of their evil meanings: but also gave himself

In this Egelreds time, and (as it is recorded by a British chronographer) in
the year of our Lord 984, one Cadwalhon, the second son of Ieuaf took in
hand the governance of Northwales, and first made war with Ionauall his
coosen, the son of Meyric, and right heir to the land, and slew him, but
Edwall the yoongest brother escaped away See the history of Cambriae page 62,
63
who was first disherited, and afterward his eyes put out, and one of his
sons slain. For first Ieuaf was imprisoned by Iago; then Iago with his son
Constantine, by Howell the son of Ieuaf: and afterward the said Howell, with
his brethren Cadwalhon and Meyric, were flaine and spoiled of all their lands.

Edmund Ironside succedeth his father in the kingdom, the spirituality
favoring Cnute would have him to be king, the Londoners are his back friends,
they receive Edmund their king honorably and ioifullie, Cnute is proclaimed
king at Southampton, many of the states cleave unto him, he besieges London
by water and land, the citizens give him the foil, he incountreth with king
Edmund and is discomfited, two battles fought between the Danes and English
with equal fortune and like success, the traitorous stratagem of Edrike the
Dane, king Edmund advisedly defeateth Edriks treachery, 20000 of both armies
slain, Cnute marching toward London is pursued of Edmund, the Danes are
repelled, incountred, and vanquished; queen Emma provides for the safety of
her sons; the Danes seek a pacification with Edmund, thereby more easily to
betraie him; Cnute with his army lies near Rochester, king Edmund pursues
them, both armies have a long and a sore conflict, the Danes discomfited, and
many of them slain; Cnute with his power assemble at Essex and there make
waste, king Edmund pursues them, Edrike traitorouslie reuolteth from the
English to succor the Danes, king Edmund is forced to get him out of the
field, the Englishmen put to their hard shifts and slain by heaps; what noble
personages were killed in this battle, of two dead bodies lately found in the
place where this hot and heavy skirmish was fought. The ninth Chapter.
AFter that king Egelred was dead, Edmund Ironside.
his eldest son Edmund surnamed Ironside was proclaimed king by the Londoners
and others, having the assistance of some lords of the realm, although the
more part, and specially those of the spirituality favored Cnute, The kingdom
goes where the spirituality favors.
because they had aforetime sworn fealty to his father. Some write, that
Cnute had planted his siege both by water and land very strongly about the
city of London, before Egelred departed this life, and immediately upon his
deceasse was received into the city; but the army that was within the city,
not consenting unto the surrender made by the citizens, departed the night
before the day on the which Cnute by appointment should enter, and in company
of Edmund Ironside (whom they had chosen to be their king and governor) they
prepared to increase their numbers with new supplies, meaning eftsoons to try
the fortune of battle against the Danish power. Cnute perceiving the most part
of all the realm to be thus against him, and having no great confidence in the
loialtie of the Londouers, took order to leauie money for the payment of his
men of war and mariners that belonged to his navy, The author of the book
entitled Encomium Emmae says that it was reported that Edmund offered the
combat unto Cnute at this his going from the city, but Cnute refused it.
left the city, and imbarking himself, sailed to the I Will of Shepie, and there
remained all the winter. In which mean while, Edmund Ironside came to London,
where he was ioifullie received of the citizens, and continuing there till the
spring of the year, made himself stong against the enemies.

This Edmund for his noble courage, strength of body, and notable patience to
endure and suffer all such hardness and pains as is requisite in a man of
war, was surnamed Ironside, and began his reign in the year of our Lord
1016, 1016
in the sixteenth year of the emperor Henry the second surnamed Claudius, in
the twentieth year of the reign of Robert king of France, and about the sixth
year of Malcolme the second king of the Scots. After that king Edmund had
received the crown in the city of London by the hands of the archbishop of
York, he assembled together such a power as he could make, and with the same
marched forth toward the west parts, and made the country subject to him. In
the mean time was Cnute proclaimed and ordained king at Southampton by the
bishops and abbats, Ran. Higd.
and diverse lords also of the temporaltie there together assembled, unto whom
he swear to be their good and faithful sovereign, and that he would see
justice truly and vprightlie ministered.

After he had ended his business at Southampton, Hen. Hunt. Simon Dun.
he drew with his people toward London, and coming thither, besieged the
city both by water and land, causing a great trench to be cast about it, so
that no man might either get in or come forth. Many London besieged.
but the Londoners and others within so valiantly defended the walls and gates,
that the enemies got small advantage, and at length were constreined to depart
with loss. Cnute then perceiving that he might not have his purpose there,
withdrew westward, Cnute at Galingham in Dorsetshire put to flight.
and besides Gillingham in Dorsetshire, incountred with K. Edmund in the
Rogation week, and after sore and sharp battle was put to the worse, and
constreined to forsake the field by the high prowess Polydor.
so to get himself out of danger. Shortly after, king Edmund hearing that an
other army of the Danes had besieged Salisburie, Salisburie besieged.
marched thither to succor them within, and immediately Cnute followed him, so
that at a place in Worcestershire called Scorastan, Simon Dun. Matt. West. Wit.
Malm. I battle with equal fortune.
on the four and twentieth of June, they incountred together, and fought a
very cruel battle, which at length the night An other battle with like
success.
for toward evening they gave over well wearied, and not knowing to whom the
victory ought to be ascribed.

Writers have reported, Edrike de Streona his treason. Simon Dun.
that this second day, when duke Edrike perceived the Englishmen to be at point
to have got the upper hand, he withdrew aside, and having by chance slain a
common soldier called Flee ye wretches, flee and get away, for your king is
dead, behold here his head which I hold in my hands. Heerewith had the
Englishmen fled immediately, if king Edmund advised of this stratagem, had not
quickly got him to an high ground where his men might see him alive and
lusty. Heerewith also the traitor Edrike escaped hardly Twenty thousand dead
bodies.
the number of which on either party reckoned, rose to the point of twenty
thousand and above.

In the night following, The armies dislodged.
Cnuse removed his camp in secret wise, and marched toward London, which
city in a manner remained besieged by the navy of the Danes. King Edmund in
the morning when the light had discovered the departure of his enemies,
followed them by the tract, and coming to London with small adoo removed the
siege, The Danes overcome at Brentford. Will. Malm. Hen. Hunt. Fabian. Caxton.
Polydor.
and entered the city like a conqueror. Shortly after he fought with the
Danes at Brentford and gave them a great overthrow. In this mean while queen
Emma the widow of king Egelred, doubting the fortune of the war, sent her two
sons Alfred and Edward over into Normandy unto her brother duke Richard, or
rather fled thither hirselfe with them (as some write.)

Moreover, earl Edrike, perceiving the great manhood of king Edmund, began to
fear, least in the end he should subdue and vanquish the Danes, wherefore he
sought means to conclude a peace, and take such order with him as might stand
with both their contentations, which yer long he brought about. This was done
(as you shall hear) by the consent of Cnute (as some write) Hent. Hunt.
to the intent that Edrike being put in trust with king Edmund, might the more
easily devise ways how to betraie him. But Cnute disappointed of his purpose
at London, and fetching a great booty and preie out of the countries next
adioining, repared to his ships, to see what order was amongst them, which a
little before were withdrawn into the river that passes by Rochester called
Medwaie. The river of Medwaie.
Here Cnute remained certain days, both to assemble a greater power, and
also to hearken and learn what his enemies meant to do, the which he easily
understood.

King Edmund, King Edmunds diligence.
who hated nothing worse than to linger his business, assembled his people,
and marching forward toward his enemies, approached near unto them, and pitched
down his tents not far from his enemies camp, exhorting his people to
remember their passed victories, and to do their good wills, at length by one
battle so to overthrow them, that they might make an end of the war, and
dispatch them cleerelie out of the realm. With these and the like words he
did so encourage his soldiers, that they disdaining thus to have the enemies
daily provoke them, and to put them to trouble, with eger minds and fierce
courages offered battle to the Danes, which Cnute had prepared to receive
whenever the Englishmen approached: and heerewith bringing his men into araie,
he came forth to meet his enemies. Then was the battle begun with great
earnestness on both sides, The battle is begun.
and continued four hours, till at length the Danes began somewhat to
shrink, which when Cnute perceived, he commanded his horssemen to come forward
into the forepart of his dawnted host.

But whilst one part of the Danes gave back with fear, The Danes put to
flight.
and the other came slowly forward, the arraie of the whole army was broken,
and then without respect of shame they fled amain, so that there died that day
of Cnutes side four thousand and five hundred men; The number of Danes slain.
Polydor. Fabian. Ran. Higd. Matt. West.
and of king Edmunds side, not past six hundred, and those were footmen. This
battle was fought as should appear by diverse writers, at Okefort or Oteford.
It was thought, that if king Edmund had pursued the victory and followed in
chase of his enemies in such wise as he safely might have done, Hen. Hunt.
Will. Malmes.
Edriks counsel. he had made that day an end of the wars: but he was
counseled by Edrike (as some write) in no condition to follow them, but to
stay and give time to his people to refresh their weary bodies. Then Cnute
with his army passed over the Thames into Essex, and there assembled all his
power together, and began to spoil and waste the country on each hand. King
Edmund advertised thereof, hasted forth to succor his people, and at Ashdone
in Essex three miles from Saffron Walden, gave battle to Cnute, where after
sore and cruel fight continued with great slaughter on both sides a long time,
duke Edrike fled to the comfort of the Danes, and to the discomfort of the
Englishmen.

Heerevpon king Edmund was constreined in the end to depart out of the field,
having first done all that could be wished in a worthy chiestaine, both by
words to encourage his men, and by deeds to show them good example; so that at
one time the Danes were at point to have given back, but that Cnute advised
thereof, rushed into the left wing where most danger was, and so relieved his
people there, that finally the Englishmen, both wearied with long fight, and
also discouraged with the running away of some of their company, were
constreined to giueouer, and by flight to seek their safeguard, so that king
Edmund might not by any means bring them again into order. Here upon all
the ways and passages being forelaid and stopped by the enemies, the
Englishmen wanting both carriage to make longer

There died on king Edmunds side, Noble men slain at the battle of Ashdone.
Simon Dun. Will. Malm.
duke Edmund, duke Alfrike, and duke Goodwine, with earl Ulfekettell or
Urchell of Eastangle, and duke Aileward, that was son to Ardelwine late duke
of Eastangle; and to be brief, all the flower of the English nobility. There
were also slain at this battle many renowned persons of the spirituality, as
the bishop King Edmund withdraws unto Glocestershire
got him into Glocestershire, and there began to raise a new army. In the
place where this field was fought, are yet seven or eight hills, wherein the
carcases of them that were slain at the same field were buried: and one being
dug down of late, there were found two bodies in a coffin of stone, of
which the one lay with his head toward the others feet, and many chains of
iron, (like to the water-chains of the bits of horses) were

London and other great cities and towns submit themselves to Cnute, be
hastes after Edmund with his power, both their armies being ready to
encounter by occasion are stayed, the oration of a captain in the hearing of
both hosts; the title and right of the realm of England is put to the trial
of combat between Cnute and Edmund, Cnute is ouermat^ched, his words to king
Edmund, both kings are pacified and
IN the mean while that Edmund was bu^ie to leauie a new army in Gloucester,
and other parties of Mercia, Cnute having got so great a victory (as before is
mentioned) received into his obeisance, not only the city of Polydor. Matthew.
West.
Heerevpon, both the armies being ready to give the onset, the one in sight of
the other at a place called Dearehurst, near to the river of Seuerne, by the
drist of duke Edrike, who then at length began to show some token of good
meaning, the two kings came to a communication, and in the end concluded an
agreement, Simon Dun.
as some have written, without any more adoo. Others write, that when both the
armies were at point to have joined, one of the capteins (but whether he were a
Dane or an Englishman, it is not certeinlie told) stood up in such a place,
Matthew. West. says this was Edrike.
as he might be heard of both the princes, and boldly uttered his mind in
former following.

The oration of a captain in the audience of the English and Danish army.
WE have, most worthy capteins, fought long enough one against another, there
has been but too much blood shed between both the nations, and the valiancie
of the soldiers on both sides is sufficiently seen by trial, and either of
your manhoods likewise, and yet can you bear neither good nor evil fortune.
If one of you win the battle, he pursues him that is overcome; and if he
chance to be vanquished, he rests no till he have recovered new strength to
fight eftsoons with him that is victor. What should you mean by this your
invincible courage? At what mark shoots your greedy desire to bear rule,
and your excessive thirst to atteine honor? If you fight for a kingdom,
divide it between you two, which sometime was sufficient for seven kings: but
if you covet to win fame and glorious renown, and for the same are driven to
try the hazard whether ye shall command or obeie, devise the way whereby ye
may without so great slaughter, and without such pitiful bloodshed of both
your guiltless peoples, try whether of you is most worthy to be preferred.

Thus made he an end, and the two princes allowed well of his last motion, The
two kings appoint to try the matter by a combat.
and so order was taken, that they should fight together in a singular combat
within a little Island enclosed with the river of Seuerne called Oldney, Oldney.
with condition, that whether of them chanced to be victor, should be king, and
the other to resign his title for ever into his hands. The two princes
entering into the place, appointed in fair armor, began the battle in sight
of both their armies ranged in goodly order on either side the river, with
doubtful minds, and nothing ioifull, as they that wauered betwixt hope and
fear. The two champions manfully assailed either other, Matt. Westminster. Cnute of
what stature he was.
without sparing. First, they went to it on horssebacke, and after on foot.
Cnute was a man of a mean stature, but yet strong and hardy, so that
receiving a great blow by the hand of his adversary, which caused him somewhat
to stagger; yet recovered himself, and baldly stepped forward to be revenged.
But perceiving he could not find advantage, and that he was rather too weak,
Cnute ouermatched. Cnutes words to Edmund.
and shrewdly ouermatched, he spoke to Edmund with a loud voice on this wise:
What necessity (says he) ought thus to move us, most valiant prince, that
for the obteining of a kingdom, we should thus put our lives in danger. Better
were it that laieng armor and malice aside, we should condescend to some
reasonable agreement. Let us become sworn brethren, and part the kingdom
betwixt us: H. Hunt.
and let us deal so friendly, that thou may use my things as thine own,
and I thine as though they were mine. King Edmund with those words of his
adversary was so pacified, that immediately he cast away his sword, They
take up the matter betwixt them selves.
and coming to Cnute, joined hands with him. Both the armies by their example
did the like, which looked for the same fortune to fall on their countries,
which should happen to their princes by the success of that one battle, After
this, there was an agreement devised betwixt them, so that a partition of the
realm was made, and that part that lies fore against France, was assigned to
Edmund, and the other fell to Cnute. There be that write, Will. Malm.
how the offer was made by king Edmund for the avoiding of more bloodshed, that
the two princes should try the matter thus together in a singular combat. But
Cnute refused the combat, because (as he alleged) the match was not equal.

Thus our common writers have recorded of this Encomium Emmae, Encomium Emmae.
does report in this behalf. Which is that through persuasion of Edrike de
Streona, king Edmund immediately after the battle fought at Ashdone, sent
ambassadors unto Cnute to offer unto him peace, with half the realm of
England, that

Cnute having heard the effect of this message, stayed to make answer till he
heard what his council would advise him to do in this behalf: and upon good
deliberation taken in the matter, considering that he had lost no small number
of people in the former battle, and that being far out of his

Hereupon Cnute calling the ambassadors before him again, declared unto them,
that he was contented For (this says he) I have undertaken to see them paid,
and otherwise I will not grant to any peace. The league and agreement
therefore being concluded in this sort, pledges were delivered and received on
both parties, and the armies discharged. This is alleged touching the partitio^
of the kingdom.


Howbeit the common report of writers touching the death of Edmund varieth from
this, who do affirm, that after Cnute and Edmund were made friends, the
serpent of envy and false conspiracy burnt so in the hearts of some
traitorous persons, that within a while after king Edmund was slain at Oxford,
K. Edmund traitorcuster slain at Oxford.
as he sat on a privy to do the necessaries of nature. The common report has
gone, that carle Edrike was the procurer of this villainous act, and that (as
some write) his son did it. Fabian. Simon. Dan.
But the author that wrote Encomium Emmae, writing of the death of Edmund, has
these words (immediately after he had first declared in what sort the two
princes were agreed, and had made partition of the realm betwixt them:) But
God (says he) being mindful of his old doctrine, This is allged again for
the proof of Edmunds natural death.
that Every kingdom divided in it self can not long stand, shortly after
took Edmund out of this life: and by such means seemed to take pity upon the
English kingdom, least if both the kings should have continued in life
together, they should both have lived in great danger, and the realm in
trouble. With this agrees also Simon Dunel. who says, that king Edmund died
of natural sickness, by course of kind at London, about the feast of saint
Andrew next ensuing the late mentioned agreement. Fabian.


And this should seem true: for whereas these authors which report, Ranul. Hig.
that earl Edrike was the procurer of his death, do also write, that when he
knew the act to be done, he hasted unto Cnute, Hen. Hunt.
and declared unto him what he had brought to pass for his advancement to the
government of the whole realm. Whereupon nute, abhorring such a detestable
fact, said unto him: Because thou have for my sake, made away the worthiest
body of the world, I shall raise thy head above all the lords of England, and
so caused him to be put to death. Thus have some books. Howbeit this report
agrees not with other writers, which declare how Cnute advanced Edrike in the
beginning of his reign unto high honor, Some think that he was duke of Mercia
before, and now had Essex adioined thereto. Diverse and discordant reports of
Edmunds death. Ran. Higd. Will. Malm.
and made him governor of Mercia, and vled his counsel in many things after
the death of king Edmund, as in banishing Edwin, the brother of king Edmund,
with his sons also, Edmund and Edward.

But for that there is such discordance and variable report amongst writers
touching the death of king Edmund, and some fables invented thereof (as the
manner is) we will let the residue of their reports pass; since certain it is,
that to his end he came, after he had reigned about the space of one year, and
so much more as is between the month of June and the latter end of November.
His body was buried at Glastenburie, near his uncle Edgar. With this Edmund,
surnamed Ironside, fell the glorious majesty of the English kingdom, the
which afterward as it had been an aged body being sore decayed and weakened
by the Danes, that now got possession of the whole, yet somewhat recovered
after the space of 26 years under king Edward, surnamed the Confessor: and
shortly thereupon as it had been fallen into a resiluation, came to extreme
ruin by the invasion and conquest of the Normans: as after by Gods good help
and favorable assistance it shall appear. So that it would make a diligent and
marking reader both muse and moorne, to see how variable the state of this
kingdom has been, and thereby to fall into a consideration of the frailty
and uncertainty of this mortal life, which is no more free from security,
than a ship on the sea in tempestuous weather. For as the casualties wherewith
our life is enclosed and beset with round about, are manifold; so also are they
miserable, so also are they sudden, so also are they unavoidable. And true it
is, that the life of man is in the hands of God, and the state of kingdoms
does also belong unto him, either to continue or discontinue. But to the
process of the matter.

Cnute undertakes the total regiment of this land, he assembleth a council
at London, the nobles do him homage, he divides the realm into four parts
to be governed by his assigns; Edwin and Edward the sons of Edmund are
banished, their good fortune by honorable marriages, King Cnute marieth queen
Emma the widow of Egelred, the wise and politic conditions whereupon this
marriage was concluded, the English blood restored to the crown and the Danes
excluded, queen Emma praised for her high wisdom
CAnute, Canute, Knought or Cnute.
or Cnute, whom the English chronicles do name Knought, after the death of
king Edmund, took upon him the whole rule over all the realm of England, in
the year of our Lord 1017, 1017
in the seventeenth year of the emperor Henry the second, surnamed Claudus,
in the twentieth year of the reign of Robert

The said Edwin afterward returned, Will. Malm.
and was then reconciled to the kings favor (as some write) but shortly after
traitorouslie slain by his own servants. Ran. Higd.
He was called the king of churles. Others write, King of ch^rles. Will. Malm.
that he came secretly into the realm after he Ran. Higd.
but Sweno upon remorse of conscience sent them into Hungary, where they found
great favor at the hands of king Solomon, insomuch that Edwin married the
daughter of the same Solomon, but had no issue by her. Edward was advanced

When king Cnute had established things, as he thought stood most for his
suertie, he called to his remembrance, Polydor. King Cnute married to queen
Emma the widow of Egelred, in Iulie, anno. 1017.
that he had no issue but two bastard sons Harold and Sweno, begotten of his
concubine Alwine. Wherefore he sent over to Richard duke of Normandy,
requiring to have queen Emma, the widow of king Egelred in marriage, and so
obtained her, not a little to the wonder of many, which thought a great
oversight both in the woman and in her brother, that would satisfied the
request of Cnute herein, considering he had been such a mortal enemy to her
former husband. Polydor.
But duke Richard did not only consent, that his said sister should be married
unto Cnute, but also he himself took to wife the lady Hestritha, sister to
the said Cnute.

Here ye have to understand, that this marriage was not made without great
consideration and large covenants granted on the part of king Cnute: for before
he could obtain queen Emma to his wife, it was fully condescended and
agreed, The covenants made at the marriage betwixt Cnute and Emma.
that after Cnuts decease, the crown of England should remain to the issue
borne of this marriage betwixt her and Cnute, which covenant although it was not
performed immediately after the deceasse of king Cnute, yet in the end it took
place, so as the right seemed to be deferred, and not to be taken away nor
abolished: for immediately upon Harolds death that had usurped, Hardicnute
succeeded as right heir to the crown, by force of the agreement made at the
time of the marriage solemnized betwixt his father and mother, and being once
established in the kingdom, he ordained his brother Edward to succeed him,
whereby the Danes were utterly excluded from all right that they had to
pretend unto the crown of this land, and the English blood restored thereto,
chiefly by that gracious conclusion of this marriage betwixt king Cnute and
queen Emma. The english blood restored. The praise of queen Emma for her
wisdom.
For the which no small praise was thought to be due unto the said queen, since
by her politic government, in making her match so beneficial to her self
and her line, the crown was thus recovered out of the hands of the Danes, and
restored again in time to the right heir, as by an ancient treatise which
some have entitled Encomium Emmae, Encomium Emmae.
and was written in those days, it does and may appear. Which book although
there be but few copies thereof abroad, gives undoubtedly great light to the
history of that time.

But now to our purpose. Matthew. West.
Cnute the same year in which he was thus married, through persuasion of his
wife queen Emma, sent away the Danish navy and army home into Denmark,
giving to them fourscore and two thousand pounds of silver, which was levied
throughout this land for their wages. Will. Malm.
In the year 1018, 1018
Edrike de Streona earl of Mercia was overthrown in his own turn: for being
called before the king into his privy chamber, and there in reasoning the
matter about some quarrel that was picked to him, he began very
presumptuouslie to vpbraid the king of such pleasures as he had before time
done unto him; I did (said he) for the love which I bare toward you, forsake
my sovereign lord king Edmund, and at length for your sake slew him. At which
words Cnute began to change countenance, as one maruellouslie abashed, and
straightwaies gave sentence against Edrike in this wise; Thou art worthy
(says he) of death, and die thou shall, which art guilty of treason both
toward God and me, since that thou have slain thine own sovereign lord, and
my dear alied brother. Thy blood therefore be upon thine own head, since thy
tongue has uttered thy treason. And immediately he caused his throat to be cut,
and his body to be thrown out at the chamber window into the river of Thames.
But others say, Edrike put to death.
that hands were laid upon him in the very same chamber or closet where he
murdered the king, and straightwaies to prevent all causes of tumults and
hurlieburlies, he was put to death with terrible torments of fierbrands and
links; which execution having passed upon him, a second succeeded; for both his
feet were bound together, and his body drawn through the streets of the
city, and in fine cast into a common ditch called Houndsditch; for that the
citizens threw their dead dogs and stinking carrion wish other filth into it,
accounting him worthy of worse rather than of a better burial. In such haired
was treason had, being a vice which the very infidels and gross pagans
abhorred, else would they not have said, (...); Treason I love, but a traitor I
hate. This was the end of Edrike surnamed de Stratten or Streona, a man of
great infamy for his crafty dissimulation, falsehood and treason,

But there be that concerning the cause of this Edriks death, Simon D^n.
seem partly to disagree from that which before is recited, declaring that
Cnute standing in some doubt to be betrayed through the treason of Edrike, (...)
sought occasion how to rid him and others (whom he mustrusted out of the way.
And therefore on a day when Edrike craved some preferment at Cnuts hands, and
said that he had deserved to be well And can thou (quoth he) be true to me,
that through fraudulent means did fiddest deceive thy sovereign lord and
master? But I will reward thee according to thy deserts, so as from henceforth
thou shall not deceive any other, and so forthwith commanded Erike one of his
chief capteines to dispatch him, who incontinently cut off his head Simon
Dunelmenfis says, that K. Cnute understanding in what sort both king Egelred,
and his son king Edmund Ironside had been betrayed by the says Edrike,
stood in great doubt to be likewise deceived by him, and therefore was glad to
have some pretended quarrel, to dispatch both him and others, whom he likewise
mistrusted, as it well appeared. For at the same time there were put to death
with Edrike earl Norman the son of earl Leofwin, and brother to

Then rested the whole rule of the realm in the kings hands, whereupon he
studied to preserve the people in peace, and ordained laws, according to the
which both Danes and Englishmen should be governed in equal state and degree.
Hen. Hunt. Lords put to death.
Diverse great lords whom he found unfaithful or rather suspected, he put to
death (as before ye have heard) beside such as he banished out of the realm. A
tax raised.
He raised a tar or tribute of the people, amounting to the summer of

Cnute saileth into Denmark to subdue the Vandals, earl Goodwins good service
with the English against the said Vandals, and what benefit accrewed unto the
Englishmen by the said good service, he returns into England after the
discomfiture of the enemy, he saileth over again into Denmark and
incountreth with the Sweideners, the occasion of this war or encounter taken
by Ola^us, his hard hap, unlucky fortune, and woeful death wrought by the
hands of his own unnatural subjects; Cnuts confidence in the Englishmen, his
devour voyage to Rome, his return into England, his subduing of the Scots, his
death and interrement. The twelfth Chapter.
IN the third year of his reign Cnute sailed with an army of Englishmen and
Danes into Denmark, 1019
to subdue the Uandals there, King C^^^passeth into Denmark.
which then sore anncied and warred against his subjects of Denmark. Earl God
wen his service in Denmark.
Earl Goodwine, which had the sovereign conduct of the Englishmen, the night
before the day appointed for the battle got him forth of the camp with his
people, and suddenly assailing the Uandals in their lodgings, easily
distressed them, sleaing a great number of them, and chasing the residue. In
the morning early, when as Cnute heard that the Englishmen were gone forth of
their lodgings, he supposed that they were either fled away, or else turned to
take part with the enemies. But as he approached to the enemies camp, he
understood how the matter went; for he found nothing there but blood, dead
bodies, and the spoil. Cnute had the Englishman in estimation for their good
seriuce.
For which good service, Cnute had the Englishmen in more estimation ever
after, and highly rewarded their leader the came carle Goodwine. When Cnute
had ordered all things in Denmark, as was thought be hoofefull, he returned
again into England: and within a few days after, he was advertised that the
Swedeners made war against his subjects of Denmark, under the loding of two
great princes, Ulfe and Ulafe. 1028
Wherefore to defend his dominions in those parts he passed again with an
army into Denmark,, Cnute (...) again into Denmark.
incountred with his enemies, and received a sore overthrow, loosing a great
number both of Danes and Englishmen. But gathering together a new force of men,
Will. Male.
he set again upon his enemies, and overcame them, constreining the two
foresaid princes to agree upon reasonable conditions of peace. Matthew. West.
Matthew. West.
recounteth, that at this time earl Goodwine and the Englishmen wrought the
enterprise above mentioned, of assaulting the enemies camp in the night
season, after Cnute had first lost in the day before no small number of his
people: and that then the foresaid princes or kings, as he names them Ulfus
and Aulafus, which latter he calls Eiglafe, were constrained to agree upon a
peace. Albernus Crance.
The Danish chronicles allege, that the occasion of this war rose hereof.
This Olanus aided Cnute (as the same writers report) against king Edmund and
the Englishmen. But when the peace should be made between Cnute and Edinund,
there was no consideration had of Olaus: whereas through him the Danes chiefly
obtained the victory. Hereupon Olanus was sore offended in his mind against
Cnute, and now upon occasion sought to be revenged. But what soever the cause
was of this war betwixt these two princes, the end was thus: that Olnus was
expelled out of his kingdom, and constreined to flee to Gerithaslaus a duke in
the parties of Eastland. and afterward returning into Norwaie, was slain by
such of his subjects as took part with Cnute, in manner as in the history of
Norwaie, appears more at large, with the contrariety found in the writings
of them which have recorded the histories of those north regions.

But here is to be remembered, Magnus Olauus.
that the fame and glory of the English nation was greatly advanced in these
wars, as well against the Swedeners as Fabian. Polydor. Hen. Hunt.
Shortly after that Cnute was returned into England, that is to say (as some
have) in the 15 year of his reign, he went to Rome to perform his vow which
he had made to visit the places where the apostles Peter and Paul had their
burial, Other say, that he went forth of Denmark to Rome. Simon Dun.
where he was honorably received of pope John the 20 that then held the sea.
When he had done his devotion there, he returned Anno 1013.
In the year following he made a journey against the Scots, which as then had
rebelled; 1032
but by the princely power of Cnute they were subdued and brought again to
obedience: Will. Malm. Matthew. West.
so that not only king Malcolme, but also two other kings Melbeath and
Ieohmare became his subjects. 1033
Finally after that this noble prince king Cnute had reigned the term of 20
years current, Scots subdued. Hen. Hunt.
after the death of Ethelred, Anno 1035.
he died at Shaftsburie, as the English writers affirm, Will. Malm. The death
of king Cnute.
on the 12 of November, Hen. Hunt. Alb. Crantz.


The trespuissance of Cnute, the amplenesse of his dominions, the good and
charitable fruits of his voyage to Rome redounding to the common benefit of all
travelers from England thither, with what great personages he had
THis Cnute was the mightiest prince that ever reigned over the English people:
The large dominion of K. Cnute. Hen. Hunt. Alb. Crantz.
for he had the sovereign rule over all Denmark, England, Norwaie, Scotland,
and Grants made to the benefit of Englishmen. at the instance of king Cnute.
which were present there at that time: all which at this request, in favor of
those Englishmen that should travel unto Rome, granted (as have said) to
diminish such duties as were gathered of passingers.

He received there many great gifts of the emperor, Fabian.
and was highly honored of him, and likewise of the pope, and of all other the
high princes at that time present at Rome: Polydor. Matt. West.
so that when he came home (as some write) he did grow greatly into pride,
insomuch that being near to the Thames, or rather (as other write) He caused
his chair to be set there, as Matthew. West. says. Hen. Hunt.
upon the sea strand, near to Southhampton, and perceiving the water to rise
by reason of the tide, he east off his gown, and wrapping it round together,
threw it on the sands very near the increasing water, and sat him down upon
it, speaking these or the like words to the sea: Thou art (says he) within the
compass of my dominion, and the ground whereon I sit is mine, and thou know
that no wight dare disoboie my commandments; I therefore do now command thee
not to rise upon my ground, nor to presume to wet any part of thy sovereign
lord and governor. But the sea keeping her course, rose still higher and
higher, and ouerflowed not only the kings feet, but also flashed up unto his
legs and knees. Wherewith the king started suddenly up, and withdrew from it,
saying withal to his nobles that were about him: The saying of king Cnute.
Behold you noble men, you call me king, which can not so much as stay by my
commandment this small portion of water. But know ye for certain, that there
is no king but the father only of our Lord Jesus Christ, with whom he
reigns, and at whose beck all things are governed. Let us therefore honor
him, let us confess and profess him to be the ruler of heaven, Zealouslie
enough, if it had bm according to true knowledge.
earth, and sea, and besides him none other.

From thence he went to Winchester, and there with his own hands set his
crown upon the head of the image of the crucifix, which stood there in the
church of the apostles Peter and Paul, Ran. Higd. Polydor. Matthew. West.
and from thenceforth he would never wear that crown nor any other. Some
write that he spoke not the former words to the sea upon any presumptuousnesse
of mind, but only upon occasion of the vain title, Polydor.
which in his commendation on of his gentlemen gave him by way of flattery (as
he rightly took it) for he called him the most mightiest king of all kings,
Flattery reproved.
which ruled most at large both men, sea, and land. Therefore to reprove the
fond flattery of such vain persons, he devised and practiced the deed before
mentioned, thereby both to reprove such flatterers, and also that men might be
admonished to consider the omnipotency of almighty God. He had issue by his
wife queen Emma, a son named by the English chronicles Hardiknought, but by
the Danish writers Canute or Knute: also a daughter named Gonilda, Polydor.
that was after married to Henry the son of Conrad, which also was afterward
emperor, Alb. Crantz.
and named Henry the third. By his concubine Alwine that was daughter to
Alselme, whom some name earl of Hampton, he had two bastard sons, Harold
and Sweno. He was much given in his latter days to virtue, as he that
considered how perfect felicity rested only in godliness and true devotion
Polydor. Fabian.
to serve the heavenly king and governor of all things.

He repared in his time many churches, abbeies, and houses of religion, which
by occasion of wars had been fore defaced by him and his father, but
specially he did great cost upon the abbeie of saint Edmund, in the town of
Bury, as partly before is mentioned. He also built two abbeies from the
foundation, as saint Benets in Norffolke, seven miles distant from Norwich, and
an other in Norwaie. Which is supposed to be Barelow: for A^hdone it self is
half a mile from thence.
He did also build a church at Ashdone in Essex, where he obtained the victory
of king Edmund, and was present at the hallowing or consecration thereof with a
great multitude of the lords and nobles of the realm, both English and Danes.
1020
He also help with his own hands to remove the body of the holy archbishop
Elphegus, Simon Dun.
when the same was translated from London to Canturburie. The royal and most
rich jewels which he and his wife queen Emma gave

Thus did Cnute strive to reform all such things as he and his ancestors had
done amiss, and to wipe away the spot of evil doing, as suerlie to the
outward sight of the world he did in deed; he had the archbishop of Canturburie
Achelnotus in singular reputation, and used his counsel in matters of
importance. Leofrike earl of Chester.
He also highly favored Leofrike earl King Cnutes laws.
partly agreeable with the laws of king Edgar, and other the kings that were
his predecessors, and partly tempered according to his own liking, and as was
thought to him most expedient: among the which there be diverse that concern
causes as well ecclesiastical as Fox has noted) it may be gathered, that the
government of spiritual matters did depend then not upon the bishop of Rome,
but rather apperteined unto the lawful authority of the temporal prince, no
less than matters and causes temporal. But of these laws and statutes
enacted by king Cnute, ye may read more as ye find them set forth in the
before remembered book of master Willliam Lambert, which for briefness we
here omit.

Variance amongst the peers of the realm about the royal succession, the
kingdom is divided betwixt Harold the bastard son and Hardicnute the
lawfully begotten son of king Cnute late deceassed, Harold has the total
regiment, the authority of earl Goodwine guardian to the queens sons,
Harold is proclaimed king, why Elnothus did stoutly refuse to consecrate him,
why Harold was surnamed Harefoot, he is supposed to be a shoomakers son, and
how it
AFter that Cnute was departed this life, Harold Matthew. West. Will. Malm.
there arose much variance amongst the peers and great lords of the realm
about the succession. The Danes and Londoners (which through continual
familiarity with the Danes, were become like unto them) elected Harold the
base son of king Cnute, Contro^e^s^ for the crown^
to succeed in his fathers room, having earl Leofrike, and diverse other of
the noble men of the north parts on their side. But other of the Englishmen,
and namely earl Goodwine earl of Kent, with the chiefest lords of the west
parts, coueted rather to have one of king Egelreds sons, which were in
Normandy, or else Hardicnute the son of king Cnute by his wife queen Emma,
Simon Dun.
which remained in Denmark, advanced to the place. The realm divided betwixt
Harold and Harticnute.
This controversy held in such wise, that the realm was divided (as some
write) by lot betwixt the two brethren Harold and Hardicnute. The north part,
as Mercia and Northumberland fell to Harold, and the south part unto
Hardicnute: but at length the whole remained unto Harold, because his brother
Hardicnute refused to come out of Denmark to take the government upon him.

But yet the authority of earl Goodwine, The authority of earl Goodwine. H.
Hunt.
who had the queen and the treasure of the realm in his keeping, stayed the
matter a certain time, (professing himself as it were guardian to the young
men, the sons of the queen, till at length he was constreined to give over
his hold, and conform himself to the stronger part and greater number.) And
so at Oxford, where the assembly was holden about the eelction, Harold was
proclaimed king, and consecrated according to the manner (as some write.) But it
should appear by other, that Elnothus the archbishop of Canturburie, a man
endued with all virtue and wisdom refused to crown him: The refusal of the
archbishop Elnothus to consecrate king Harold.
for when king Harold being elected of the nobles and peers, required the said
archbishop that he might be of him consecrated, and receive at his hands the
regal scepter with the crown, which the archbishop had in his custody, and
to whom it only did apperteine to inuest him therewith, the archbishop
flatly refused, and with an oath protested, that he would not consecrate any
other for king, so long as the queens children lived: for (says he) Cnute
committed them to my trust and assurance, and to them will I keep my faith and
loiall obedience. The scepter and crown I here lay down upon the altar, and
neither do I deny nor deliver them unto you: but I forbid by the apostolic
authority all the bishops, that none of them presume to take the same away,
and deliver them to you, or consecrate you for king. As for your self, if you
dare, you may usurp that which I have committed unto God and his table.

But whether afterward the king by one mean or other, caused the archbishop
to crown him king, or that he was consecrated of some other, he was admitted
king of all the English people, beginning his reign in the year of our Lord a
thousand thirty and six, 1036
in the fouretenth year of the emperor Conrad the second, in the sixth year of
Henry the first, king of France, and about the seven and twentieth year of
Malcolme the second, king of Scots. This Harold for his great swiftness,
Harold why he is surnamed Harefoot.
was surnamed Harefoot, of whom little is written touching his doings, saving
that he is noted to have been an oppressor of his people, and spotted with
many notable vices. Harold evil spoken of.
It was spoken of diverse in those days, that this Harold was not the son of
Cnute, but of a shoemaker, and that his supposed mother Elgina, Ran. Higd. ex.
Mariano.
king Cnutes concubine, to bring the king further in love with her, feined that
she was with child: and about the time that she should be brought to bed (as
she made her account) caused the said shoomakers son to be secretly brought
into her chamber, and then untruly caused it to be reported that she was
delivered, and the child so reputed to be the kings son.

Immediately upon advertisement had of Cnutes Matthew. West.
death, Alfred the son of king Egelred, with fifty sail landed at Sandwich,
meaning to challenge the crown, and to obtain it by lawful claim with
quietness, if he might; if not, then to use force by aid of his friends, and
to assaie that way forth to win it, if he might not otherwise obtain it.
From Sandwich he came to Canturburie: and shortly after, earl Goodwine
feining to receive him as a friend, came to meet him, and at Gilford in the
night season appointed a number of armed men to fall upon the Normans as they
were asleep, and so took them together with Alfred, and slew the Normans by
the poll,

How Alfred should claim the crown to himself I see not: ^an. Higd.
for verelie I can not be persuaded that he was the elder brother, though
diverse authors have so written, since Gemeticensis, and the author of the book
Encomium Emmae, plainly affirm, that Edward was the elder: but it might be,
that Alfred being a man of a stouter stomach than his brother Edward, made this
attempt, either for himself, or in the behalf of is brother Edward, being as
then absent, See master Fox acts and monuments, page 112. Simon Dun.
and gone into Hungary, as some write: but other say, that as well Edward as
Alfred ame over at this time with a number of Norman knights, and men of war
embarked in a few ships, only to speak with their mother, who as then lay at
Winchester,

But the lords of the realm that bare their good wills unto Harold, and (though
contrary to right) meant to maintain him in the estate, seemed to be much
offended with the coming of these two brethren in such order: for earl
Goodwine persuaded them, that it was great danger to suffer so many William
Malmesburie says, that Alfred came over, and was thus handeled betwixt the
time of Harolds death, and the coming in of Hardicnute. Others write, that
this chanced in his brother Hardicnuts days, which seems not to be true: for
Hardicnute was known to love his brethren by his mothers side too dearly to
have suffered any such injury to be wrought against either of them in

Thus ye see how writers dissent in this matter, but for the better clearing of
the truth touching the time, I have thought good to show also what the author
of the said book entitled Encomium Emmae writes hereof, which is as
follows, When Harold was once established king, he sought means how to rid
queen Emma out of the way, and that secretly, for that openly as yet he
durst not attempt any thing against her. She in silence kept her self quiet,
looking for the end o these things. But Harold remembering himself, of a
malicious purpose, by wicked advise took counsel how he might get into his
hands and make away the sons of queen. Emma; and (...) ^e out of danger of all
annoiance that by them might be procured against him. Wherefore he caused a
letter to be written in the name of their mother Emma, A counterfeit letter.
which he sent by certain messengers suborned for the same purpose into
Normandy, where Edward and Alfred as then remained. The tenor of which letter
here insueth.

The tenor of a letter forged and sent in queen Emmas name to her two sons.
EMmatantum nomine regina filijs Edwardo and Alfredo materna impertit
salutamina. Du^ domini nostri regis obitum separatim plangimus (filij
charissimi) dumque dietim magis magisque regno haereditatis vestrae priuamini,
miror quid captetis consilij, dum sciatis intermissionis vestrae dilatione
inuasoris vestri imperij fieri quotidie soliditate^. Is enim incessanter vicos
and vrbes circuit, and sibi amicos principes muneribus, minis, and precibus
facit: sed vnum e vobis super se mallent regnare quam istius (qui nunc ijs
imperat) teneri ditione. Vnde rogo vnus vestrum ad me velociter and private
veniat, vt salubre a me consilium accipiat, and sciat quo pacto hoc negotium
quod volo fieri debeat, per praesentem quoque internuncium quid super his
facturi estis remandate. Valete cordis mei viscera.

The same in English.
EMma in name only queen to her sons Edward and Alfred sends motherlie
greeting. Whilst we separatelie bewail the death of our sovereign lord the
king (most dear sons) and whilst you are every day more and more deprived
from the kingdom of your inheritance, I marvel what you do determine, since
you know by the delay of your ceassing to make some enterprise, the grounded
force of the usurper of your kingdom is daily made the stronger. For
incessantly he goes from town to town, from city to city, and makes the
lords his friends by rewards, threats, and prayers, but they had rather have
one of you to reign over them, than to be kept under the rule of this man that
now governs them. Wherefore my request is, that one of you do come with
speed, and that privily over to me, that he may understand my wholesome
advise, and know in what sort this matter ought to be handled, which I would
have to go forward, and see that ye send me word by this present messenger
what you mean to do herein. Fare ye well even the bowels of my heart.

These letters were delivered unto such as were made privy to the purposed
treason, who being fully instructed how to bale, went over into Normandy, and
presenting the letters unto the young gentlemen, used the matter so, that they
thought verelie that this message had been sent from their mother, and wrote
again by them that brought the letters, that one of them would not fall but
come over unto her according to that she had requested, and withal appointed
the day and time. The messengers returning to king Harold, informed him how
they had sped. The yoonger brother Alfred, with his brothers consent, took
with him a certain number of gentlemen and men of war, and first came into
Flanders, where after he had remained a while with earl Baldwine, he increased
his retinue with a few Bullognes, and passed over into England, but approaching
to the shore, he was streightwaies descried by his enemies, who hasted forth
to set upon him; but perceiving their drift, he had the ships cast about, and
make again to the sea; then landing at an other

But earl Goodwine hearing of his arrival, Goodwin was suspected to do this
under a color to betray him as by writers it seems.
met him, received him into his assurance, and binding his credit with a
corporal oath, became his man, and therewith leading him out of the high way
that leads to London, he brought him to Gilford, where he lodged all the
strangers, by a score, a doozen, and half a score together in innes, so as but
a few remained about the young gentleman Alfred to attend upon him. There was
plenty of meat and drink prepared in every

But behold, after they had filled themselves with meats and drinks, and were
gone to bed, in the dead of the night came such as king Harold had appointed,
and entering into every inn, first seized upon the armor and weapons that
belonged to the strangers: Not only Goodwine but other such as king Harold
appointed, took Alfred with his Normans
which done, they took them, and chained them fast

I remember in Caxton we read, that cruel tormentors should cause his belly
to be opened, and taking out one end of his bowels or guts, tied the same to a
stake wh ich they had set fast in the ground; then with needels of iron
pricking his body, they caused him to run about the stake, till he had woond
out all his intrailes, and so ended he his innocent life, to the great shame
and obloquie of his cruel adversaries. But whether he was thus tormented or
not, or rather died (as I think) of the anguish by putting out his eyes,
Encomium Em^^^, as also for that it should seem he might never be so^
directly charged with it, but that he had matter to allege in his own
excuse. But now to other affairs of Harold.

After he had made away his half brother Alfred, Simon Dun. Queen Emma
banished.
he spoiled his mother in law queen Emma of the most part of her riches, and
therewith banished her quite out of the realm: so that she sailed over to
Flanders, where she was honorable received of earl Baldwine, and having of
him honorable provision assigned her, she continued there for the space of
three years, till that after the death of Harold, she was sent for by her
son Hardiknought, that succeeded Harold in the kingdom. Moreover, Harold
made small account of his subjects, Polydor. Harold degenerateth from his
father Hen. Hunt.
degenerating from the noble virtues of his father, following him in few things
(except in exacting of tributes and paiments.) He caused indeed eight marks of
silver to be levied of every port or haven in England, to the reteining of 16
ships furnished with men of war, A name in a readiness.
which continued ever in a readiness to defend the coasts from pirates. To
conclude with this Harold, his speedy death provided well for his fame, Evil
men, the longer they live, the more they grow into misery.
because (as it was thought) if his life had been of long continuance, his
infamy had been the greater. But after he had reigned four years, or (as
other gathered) three years and three months, he departed out of this world
at Oxford, Will. Malm. Hen. Hunt. Will. Malm.
and was buried at Winchester (as some day.) Other say he died at Meneford in
the month of April, and was buried at Westminster, which should appear to be
true by that which after is reported of his brother Hardiknoughts cruel
dealing, and great spite showed toward his dead body, as after shall be
specified.

Hardicnute is sent for into England to be made king; alteration in the state
of Norwaie and Denmark by the death of king Cnute, Hardicnute is crowned, he
sends for his mother queen Emma, Normandy ruled by the French king,
Hardicnute reuengeth his mother exile upon the dead body of his stepbrother
Harold, queen Emma and earl Goodwine have the government of things in their
hands, Hardicnute leuieth a sote tribute upon his subjects; contempt of
officers and denial of a prince his tribute sharply punished; prince Edward
comes into England; the bishop of Worcester accused and put from his see for
being accessarie to the murdering of Alfred, his restitution procured by
contribution; Earl Goodwine being accused for the same trespass excuses
himself, and justifies his cause by swearing, but specially by presenting
the king with an inestimable gift; the cause why Goodwine purposed Alfreds
death; the English peoples care about the succession to the crown, moonke
Brightwalds dream and vision touching that matter; Hardicnute poisoned at a
bridal, his conditions, specially his hospitality, of him the Englishmen
learned to eat and drink immoderatlie, the necessity of sobriety, the end
of the Danish regiment in this land, and when they began first to invade the
English coasts. The xv. Chapter.
AFter that Harold was dead, Hardicnute, or Hardiknought.
all the nobles of the realm, both Danes and Englishmen agreed to send for
Hardiknought, the son of Canute by his wife queen Enma, and to make him
king. Here is to be noted, that by the death of king Canute, the state of
things was much altered in those countries of beyond the seas wherein he had
the rule and dominion. Alteration in the state of things.
For the Norwegians elected oen Magnus, the son of Olauus to be their king,
and the Danes chose this Hardiknought, whom their writers name Canute the
third, to be their governor. Simon Dun. ^ Matt. West. say, that he was at
Bruges in Flanders with his mother when he was thus sent for, being come
thither to visit her.
This Hardiknought or Canute being advertised of the death of his half brother
Harold, and that the lords of England had chosen him to their king, with all
convenient speed prepared a navy, and imbarking a certain number of men of
war, took the sea, and had the wind so favorable for his purpose, that he
arrived upon the coast of Kent the sixth day after he set out of Denmark, and
so coming to London, was ioifullie received, and proclaimed king, and crowned
of Athelnotus archbishop of Canturburie, in the year of our Lord 1041, 1041
in the first year of the emperor Henry the third, in the 9 year of Henry
the first of that name king of France, and in the first year of Mag^^nloch,
alias Machabeda king of Scotland. Incontinently after his establishment in the
rule of this realm, he sent into Flanders for his mother queen Emma, Queen
Emma sent for.
who during the time of her banishment, had remained

Moreover, in revenge of the wrong offered to queen Emma by her son in law
Harold, The body of king Harold taken up, and thrown into Thames.
king Hardicnute did cause Alfrike archbishop of York and earl Goodwine, with
other noble men to go to Westminster, and there to take up the body of the
same Harold, and withal appointed, that the head thereof should be stricken
off, and the trunk of it cast S Clement Danes.
bar at London. He committed the order and government of things to the hands
of his mother Emma, and of Goodwine that was earl of Kent. He levied a sore
tribute of his subjects here in England A tribute raised. Hen. Hunt.
to pay the soldiers and mariners of his navy, as first 21 thousand pounds,
and 99 pounds, and afterward unto 32 ships there was a payment made of a 11
Simo^ Dun. Will. M^lm. Matthew. West. Sim. Dun.
To every mariuer of his navy he caused a payment of 8 marks to be made, and
to every master 12 marks. About the payment of this money great grudge grew
amongst the people, insomuch that two of his servants, which were appointed
collectors in the city of Worcester, the one named Feader, and the other
Turstane, were there slain. In revenge of which contempt a great part of the
country with the city was burnt, and the goods of the citizens put to the
spoil by such power of

Shortly after, Edward king Hardicnutes brother came forth of Norman^ie to
visit him and his mother queen Emma, of whom he was most ioifullie and
honorably welcomed and interteined, and shortly after made return back
again. Matt. West. Ran. Higd. Marianus.
It should appear by some writers, that after his coming over out of
Normandy he remained still in the realm, so that he was not in Normandy when
his Polydor.
Also (as before ye have heard) some writers seem to mean, that the elder
brother Alfred came over at the same time. But suerlie they are therein
deceived: for it was known well enough how tenderly king Hardicnute loved his
brethren by the mothers side, so that there was not any of the lords in his
days, that durst attempt any such injury against them. The bishop of
worcester accused for making away of Alfred.
True it is, that as well earl Goodwine,

Earl Goodwine was also put to his purgation, Earl Goodwin excuses himself.
by taking an oath that he was not guilty. Which oath was the better allowed,
The gift which earl Goodwi^ gave to the king.
by reason of such a present as he gave to the king for the redeeming of his
favor and good will, that is to say, a ship with a stern of gold, containing
therein 80 soldiers, wearing on each of their arms two braceiets of gold of
16 ounces weight, a triple habergion guilt on their bodies, with guilt
burgenets on their heads, a sword with guilt hilts girded to their wa^^es, a
battle are after the manner of the Daues on the left shoulder, a target with
bosses and mails guilt in their left hand, a dart in their right hand: and thus
to conclude, they were furnished at all points with armor and weapon
accordingly. Polydor.
It has been said, that earl Goodwine minded to marie his daughter to one of
these brethren, and perceiving that the elder brother Alfred would disdain to
have her, thought good to dispatch him, that the other taking her to wife, he
might be next heir to the crown, and so at length enjoy it, as afterward
came to pass.

Also about that time, when the lineage of the kings of England was in manner
extinct, the English people were much careful (as has been said) about the
succession of those that should inioie the crown. Whereupon as one Brightwold
a moonke of Glastenburie, that was afterward bishop of Wincester, or (as some
have written) of Worcester, studied oftentimes thereon: it chanced that he
dreamed one night as he slept in his bed, that he saw saint Peter consecrate
and anoint Edward the son of Egelred (as their remaining in exile in
Normandy) king of England. And as he thought, he did demand of saint Peter,
who should succeed the said Edward? Whereunto answer was made by the apostle;
Have thou no care for such matters, for the kingdom of England is Gods
kingdom. Which suerlie in good earnest may appear by many great arguments to
be full true unto such as shall well consider the state of this realm from
time to time, how there has been ever governors raised up to maintain the
majesty of the kingdom, and to reduce the same to the former dignity, when
by any unfortunate mishap it has been brought in danger.

But to return now to king Hardicnute, The death of K. Hardicnute Sim. Dunel.
Matthew. West. 1042
after he had reigned two years lacking 10 days, as he sat at the table in a
great feast holden at Lambeth, he fell down suddenly with the pot in his
hand, and so died not without some suspicion of poison. This chanced on the 8
of June at Lambeth aforesaid, where, on the same day a marriage was solemnized
between the lady Githa, the daughter of a noble man called Osgot Clappa, and
a Danish lord also called Canute Prudan. His body was buried at Winchester
besides his fathers. K. Hardicnute his conditions and liberality in
housekeeping.
He was of nature very courteous, gentle and liberal, specially in keeping
good cheer in his house, so that he would have his table covered four times a
day, and furnished with great plenty of meats and drinks, wishing that his
servants and all strangers that came to his palace, Hen. Hunt.
might rather leave than want. It has been commonly told, Of whom the
Englishmen learned excessive feeding.
that Englishmen learned of him their excessive gourmandizing and unmeasurable
filling of their panches with meats and drinks, whereby they forgot the
virtuous use of sobriety, so much necessary to all estates and degrees, so
profitable for all commonwealths, and so commendable both in the sight of God,
and all good men.

In this Hardicnute ceased the rule of the Danes within this land, The end of
the Danish rulers.
with the persecution which they had executed against the English nation, for
the space of 250 years and more, that is to say, ever since the tenth year of
Brithrike the king of Westsaxons, at what time they first began to invade the
English coasts. Howbeit (after others) they should seem to have ruled here but
207, reckoning from their bringing in by the Welshmen in despite of the Saxons,
at which time they first began to inhabit here, which was 835 of Christ, 387
after the coming of the Saxons, and 35 near complet of the reign of Egbert.

But to let this piece of curiosity pass, this land felt that they had a time
of arrival, a time of inuading, a time of ouerrunning, and a time of
ouerrunling the inhabitants of this maine continent. Whereof manifest proofs
are at this day remaining in sundry places, sundry ruins I mean and wastes
committed by them; upon the which whenever a man of a relenting spirit
casts his eye, he can not but enter into a doleful consideration of former
miseries, and lamenting the defacements of this I Will by Minimam misericordiae
guttam quae maiorest spatioso oceano, as one says) and earnestly desire in
his heart that the like may never light upon this land, but may be auerted and
turned away from all christian kingdoms, through his mercy, whose wrath by
sin being set on fire, is like a consuming flame; and the sword of whose
vengeance being sharpened with the whetstone of men's wickedness, shall hew
them in pieces as wood for the furnace.

Thus far the tumultuous and tyrannical regiment of the Danes, inferring
fullness of afflictions to the English people, wherewith likewise the seventh
book is shut up.
THE EIGHT BOOK of the History of England.
Edward the third of that name is chosen king of England by a general consent,
ambassadors are sent to attend him homewardes to his kingdom, and to inform
him of his election, William duke of Normandy accompanies him, Edward is
crowned king, the subtle ambition or ambitious subtlety of earl Goodwine in
preferring Edward to
Immediately upon the death of Hardiknought, Edward. Hen. Hunt.
and before his corpse was committed Polydor.
his half brother Edward, son of king Egelred begotten of queen Emma, was
chosen to be K. of England, by the general consent of all the nobles and
commons of the realm. Thereupon where ambassadors sent with all speed into
Normandy, to signify unto him his election, and to bring him from thence into
England in delivering pledges for more assurance, that no fraud nor deceit was
meant of the Englishmen, but that upon his coming thither, he should receive
the crown without all contradiction. Edward then aided by his coosine William
duke of Normandy, took the sea, and with a small company of Normans came
into England, where he was received with great joy as king of the realm, and
immediately after was crowned at Win^hester by Edsinus then archbishop of
Canturburie, Hen^. Hunt. Will. Malm. The third of April. 1043
on Easter day in the year of our Lord 1043, which fell also about the fourth
year of the emperor Henry the third surnamed Niger, in the 12 year of
Henry the first of that name king of France, and about the third year of
Macbeth king of Scotland.

This Edward the third of that name before the conquest, was of nature more
meek and simple than apt for the government of the realm, and therefore did
earl Goodwine not only seek the destruction of his elder brother Alfred,
but help all that he might to advance this Edward to the crown, in hope to
bear great rule in the realm under him, whom he knew to be soft, gentle, and
easy to be persuaded. But whatsoever writers do report hereof, sure it is,
that Edward was the elder brother, and not Alfred: so that if earl Goodwine
did show his furtherance by his pretended cloak of offering his friendship
unto Alfred to betraie him, he did it by king Harolds commandment, and yet it
may be that he meant to have usurped the crown to him self, if each point had
answered his expectation in the sequel of things, as he hoped they would; and
therefore had not passed if both the brethren had been in heaven. But yet when
the world framed contrary (peradventure) to his purpose, he did his best to
advance Edward, trusting to bear no small rule under him, being known to be a
man more appliable to be governed by other than to trust to this own wit: and
so chiefly by the assistance of earl Goodwine (whose authority, as
appears, was not small within the realm of England in those days) Edward
came to atteine the crown: whereunto the earl of Chester Leofrike also showed
all the furtherance that in him lay.

Some write (which seems also to be confimed by the Danish chronicles) Ran.
Higd. ex Mariano. Alb. Crantz.
that king Hardiknought in his life time had received this Edward into his
court, and retained him still in the same in most honorable wise. But for that
it may appear in the abstract Polydor. Danes expelled.
nobles of the realm, that no Dane from thenceforth should reign over them,
but also all men of Simon Dun.
Amongst other that were banished, the lady Gonild niece to king Swain by his
sister, Goni^^ niece to K. Swain
was one, being as then a widow, and with her two of her sons, which she had
then living; Heming and Turkill were also caused to avoid. Some write that
Alfred the brother of king Edward, came not into the realm till after Polydor.
and that he did help to expel the Danes, which being done, he was slain by
earl Goodwine and other of his accomplices. But how this may stand, considering
the circumstances of the time, with such things as are written by diverse
authors hereof, it may well be doubted. Nevertheless, whether earl Goodwine
was guilty to the death of Alfred, either at this time, or before, certain it
is, that he so cleared himself of that crime unto king Edward the brother of
Alfred, that K. Edward marieth the daughter of earl Goodwine.
insomuch that king Edward married the lady Editha, the daughter of earl
Goodwine, begotten of his wife Thira that was sister to king Hardiknought, and
not of his second wife, as some have written. Howbeit, king Edward never had to
do with her in fleshly wise. But whether he absteined because he had happily
vowed chastity, either of impotencie of nature, Polydor.
or for a privy hate that he bare to her kin, men doubted. For it was K.
Edward absteineth from the company of his wife.
as he outwardly made show to do, but rather for fear of his puissance
dissembled with him, least he should otherwise put him self in danger both of
loss of life and kingdom.

Howsoever it was, he used his counsel in ordering of things concerning the
state of the common wealth, and namely in the hard handling of his mother
queen Emma, K. Edward deals strictly with his mother queen Emma.
against whom diverse accusations were brought and alleged: as first, for that
Queen Emma despoiled of her goods. She is accused of dissolute living.
contrived to make them away; for which cause she was despoiled of all her
goods. And because she was defamed to be naught of her body with Alwine or
Adwine bishop of Winchester, both she and the same bishop were committed to
prison within the city of Winchester (as some write.) Ran. Higd.
Howbeit others affirm, that she was strictly kept in the abbie of Warwell,
till by way of purging her self, She purges her self by the law Ordalum.
after a marvelous manner, in passing barefooted over certain hot shares or
ploughirons, according to the law Ordalium, she cleared her self (as the world
took it) and was restored to her first estate and dignity.

Her excessive covetousness, Will. Malm.
without regard had to the poor, caused her also to be evil reported of.
Again, for that she ever showed her self to be more natural to the issue
which she had by her second husband Cnute, than to her children which she had
by her first husband king Egelred (as it were declaring how she was affected
toward the fathers, by the love borne to the children) she lost a great piece
of good will at the hands of her sons Alfred and Edward: so that now the said
Edward inioieng the realm, was easily iuduced to think evil of her, and
thereupon used her the more vncurteouslie. But her great liberality employed
on the church of Winchester, which she furnished with marvelous rich jewels
and ornaments, wan her great commendation in the world, and excused her partly
in the sight of many, of the infamy imputed to her for the immoderate filling
of her coffers by all ways and means she could devise. Now when she had
purged her self, as before is mentioned, her son king Edward had her ever
after in great honor and reverence. Ran. Higd.
And whereas Robert archbishop of Canturburie had been sore against her, he
was so much abashed now at the matter, that he fled into Normandy, where he
was borne. But it should seem by that which after shall be said in the next
chapter, that he fled not the realm for this matter, but because he counseled
the king to banish earl Goodwine, and also to use the Englishmen more
strictly than reason was he should.

Why Robert archbishop of Canturburie (queen Emmas heavy friend) fled out of
England, the Normans first entrance into this country, dearth by tempests,
earl Goodwines son banished out of this land, he returns in hope of the
kings favor, kills his coosen earl Bearne for his good will and forwardnes
to set him in credit again, his flight into Flanders, his return into
England, the king is pacified with him; certain Danish rouers arrive at
Sandwich, spoil the coast, enrich themselves with the spoils, make sale of
their gettings, and return to their country; the Welshmen with their princes
rebelling are subdued, king Edward keeps the seas on Sandwich side in aid of
Baldwine earl of Flanders, a bloody fraie in Canturburie betwixt the earl of
Bullongne and the townsmen, earl Goodwine favors the Kentishmen against
the Bullongners, why he refuses to punish the Canturburie men at the kings
commandment for breaking the kings peace; he sets the king in a fury, his
suborned excuse to shift off his coming to the assembly of lords conuented
about the foresaid broile; earl Goodwine bandeth himself against the king, he
would have the strangers delivered into his hands, his request is denied; a
battle ready to have been fought between him and the king, the tumult is
pacified and put to a parliament, earl Goodwines retinue forsake him; he, his
sons, and their wives take their flight beyond the seas. The second Chapter.
YE must understand, Robert archbishop of Canturburie. Frenchmen or Normans
first entered into England
that K. Edward brought diverse Normans over with him, which in time of his
banishment had showed him great friendship, wherefore he now sought to
recompense them. Amongst other, the forenamed Robert of Canturburie was one,
who before his coming over was a moonke in the abbeie of Gemeticum in
Normandy, and being by the king first advanced to govern the sea of London,
was after made archbishop of Canturburie, and bare great rule under the king,
so that he could not avoid the envy of diverse noble man, and (...) of earl
Goodw^^e, as shall appear. About the third year of king Edwards wigne, Osgot
Clappa was banished the realm. And in the year following, that is to say in
the year 1047, 1047
there fell a mavelous great snow, (...)
covering the ground from the beginning of Ianuar^e until the 17 day of March.
Besides this, there happened the same year such tempest and lightnings, that the
corn upon the earth was burnt up and blasted: by reason whereof, there
followed a great

About this time Swame the son of earl Goodwine was banished the land, and
fled into Flanders. This Swain kept Edgiua, the abbess of the monasterue of
Leoffe, (...)
and forsaking his wife, meant to have married the foresaid abbess. Within a
certain time after his banishment, he returned into England, in hope to
purchase the kings peace by his fathers means and other his friends. But upon
some This Bearne was the son of U^ius a Dane, uncle to this Swain up his
mother, the ^^^ter of K. Swain.
and so then fled again into Flanders, till at length Allered the archbishop
of York obtained his pardon, and found means to reconcile him to the kings
favor. H. Hunt.


In the mean time, about the sixth year of king Edwards reign, certain
pirates of the Danes arrived in Sandwich haven and entering the land, wasted and
spoiled all about the coast. Hen. Hunt.
There be that The Danes spoil Sandwich.
After they had been at Sandwich, and brought from thence great riches of gold
and silver, they coasted about unto the side of Essex, and there spoiling the
country, went back to the sea, and sailing into Flanders, made sale of their
spoils and booties there, and so returned to their countries. After this,
during the reign of king Edward, there chanced no wars, neither foreign nor
civil, but that the Rise ^ Gri^fin princes of wales.
The Welshmen in deed with their princes Rise and Griffin wrought some trouble,
but still they were subdued, and in the end both the said Rise and Griffin were
brought unto confusion: although in the mean time they did much hurt, and
namely Griffin, who with aid of some Irishmen, with whom he was alied, about
this time entered into the Seuerne sea, and took preies about the river of Wie:

About the same time, to wit, in the year 1049, 1049
the emperor Henry the third made wars against Baldwine earl of Flanders,
Simon Dun.
and for that he wished to have the sea stopped, that the said earl should not
escape by flight that way forth, he sent to king Edward willing him to keep
the sea with some number of ships. King Edward furnishing a navy, lay with the
same at Sandwich, Hermanus. Contractus. Ia. Meir.
and so kept the seas on Simon Dun.
Also Gosipat Clappa, who had left his wife at Bruges in Flanders, coming
amongst other of the Danish pirates, which had robbed in the coasts of Kent and
Essex, as before ye have heard, received his wife, and departed back into
Denmark wi^h six ships, leaving the residue, being 23 behind him.

About the tenth year of king Edwards reign, Fabian.
Eustace earl of Bullongne, 1051
that was father unto the valiant Godfrey of Bullongne, Matthew. West.
and Baldwin, both afterward kings of Jerusalem, (...) England in the month
of September, to (...) his brother in law king Edward, whose sister named God^,
he had married, she then being the (...) of Gua^ter de Ma^^^t. He found the king
at Gloucester, and being there (...) received, (...).
after he had once dispatched such matters for the which he therefore came, he
took leave, and returned homeward. But at Canturburie one of his he^^ngers,
(...)
(...) roughly with one of the citizens about a lodging, which he sought to
have rather by force than by in treatance, occasioned his own death. (...)
Whereof when the earl was advertised, he hasted thither to revenge the
slaughter of his servant, and five both the citizen which had killed his man,
and eighteen others.

The citizens heerewith in a great fury, got them to armor, (...).
and set upon the earl and his return, of whom they slew twenty persons out
of hand, and wounded a great number of the residue, so that the earl scarce
might escape with one or two of his men from the fraie, and with all speed
returned back to the king, presenting grievous information against them of
Canturburie, The earl (...) to the king.
for their cruel using of him, not only in fleaing of his servants, but also
in putting him in danger of his life. The king crediting the earl, was highly
offended against the citizens, and with all speed sending for earl Goodwine,
declared unto him in grievous wise, the rebellious act of them of Canturburie,
which were under his jurisdiction.

The earl who was a man of a bold courage and quick wit, did perceive that
the matter was made a great deal worse at the first in the beginning, than of
likelihood it would prove in the end, thought it reason therefore that first
the answer of the Kentishmen should be heard, before any sentence were given
against them. Heerevpon, although the king commanded him forthwith to go with
an army into Kent, and to punish, them of Canturburie in most rigorous manner,
yet he would not be too hasty, but refused to execute the kings commandment,
Earl Goodwine offended with the king for favoring strangers.
both for that he bare a piece of grudge in his mind, that the king should
favor strangers so highly as he did; and again, because hereby he should
seem to do pleasure to his countriemen, in taking upon him to defend their
cause against the rough accusations of such as had accused them. Wherefore he
declared to the king that it should be convenient to have the supposed
offenders first called before him, and if they were able to excuse themselves,
then to be suffered to depart without further vexation: and if they were found
faulty, then to be put to their fine, both as well in satisfieng the king,
whose peace they had broken, as also the earl, whom they had in damaged.

Earl Goodwine departed thus from the king, leaving him in a great fury: A
council called at Gloucester. Siward earl of Northumberland, Leofrike earl of
Chester, Rafe earl of Hereford. Will. Malmes.
howbeit he passed little thereof, supposing it would not long continue. But the
king called a great assembly of his lords together at Gloucester, that the
matter might be more deeply considered. Siward earl of Northumberland, and
Leofrike earl of Chester, with Rafe earl of Hereford, the kings nephue by his
sister Goda, and all other the noble men of the realm, only earl Goodwine
and his sons meant not to come there, except they might bring with them a
great power of armed men, and so remained at Beuerstane, with such bands as
they had leauied, under a color to resist the Welshmen, whom they bruted
abroad to be ready to invade the marches about Hereford. But the Welshmen
preventing that slander, signified to the king that no such matter was meant on
their parties, but that earl Goodwine and his sons with their accomplices went
about to move a commotion against him. Heerevpon a rumor was raised in the
court, that the kings power should shortly march forth to assail earl
Goodwine in that place where he was lodged. Whereupon the same earl prepared
himself, and sent to his friends, willing to stick to this quarrel, and if
the king should go about to force them, then to withstand him, rather than to
yield and suffer themselves to be trodden under foot by strangers. Earl
Goodwine means to defend him self against the king. Swain. Ran. Higd.
Matthew. West. Simon Dun. Harold.
Goodwine in this mean time had got together a great power of his countries of
Kent, Southerie, and other of the west parts. Swain like wise had assembled
much people out of his countries of Barkeshire,

On the other part, the earls that were with the king, Simon Dun.
Leofrike, Siward, and Rafe, raised all the power which they might make, and
the same approaching to Gloucester, the king thought himself in more suertie
than before, in so much that whereas

Thus the matter was at point to have put the realm in hazard not only of a
field, but of utter ruin that might thereof have insued: for what on the one
part and the other, there were assembled the chiefest

Some write, Will. Malm. Swain eldest son to Goodwine banished.
how an order was prescribed that Swanus the eldest son of Goodwine should
depart the land as a banished man to qualify the kings wrath, and that
Goodwine and one other of his sons, that is to say, Harold should come to an
other assembly Earl Goodwine fled the realm.
He himself with his sons Swanus, Tostie, and Girth, sailed into Flanders:
and Harold with his brother Leofwine gat ships at Bristow, and passed into
Ireland. Githa the wife of Goodwine, and Judith the wife of Tostie, the
daughter of Baldwine earl of Flanders went over also with their husbands.

Goodwine and his sons are proclaimed outlawes, their lands are given from
them, king Edward puts away the queen his wife who was earl Goodwines
daughter, she clears her self at the hour of her death from suspicion of
incontinencie and lewdness of life, why king Edward forbear to have fleshly
pleasure with her; earl Goodwine and his sons take preies on the coasts of
Kent and Sussex; Griffin king of Wales destroieth a great part of
Herefordshire, and gives his incounterers the overthrow; Harold and Leofwine
two brethren invade Dorset and Summerset shires, they are resisted, but yet
prevail, they coast about the point of Cornwall and join with their father
Goodwine, king Edward makes out threescore armed ships against them, a thick
mist separateth both sides being ready to graple and fight, a pacification
between the king and earl Goodwine, he is restored to his lands and liberty,
he was well friended, counterpledges of agreement interchangablie delivered;
Swanus the eldest son of Goodwine a notable rebel and pirat, his troubled
conscience, his wicked life and wretched death. The third Chapter.
THE king having perfect knowledge, that earl Goodwine had refused to come to
the court in such order as he had prescribed him, and that he was departed the
realm with his sons: he proclaimed them outlawes, and gave the lands of
Harold unto Algar, the son of earl Leofrike, Goodwine and his sons
proclaimed outlawes.
who guided the same very woorthilie, and resigned them again without
grudging unto the same Harold when he was returned out of exile. Also unto
earl Oddo were given the counties of Detionshire and Summersetshire.

Moreover, about the same time the king put his wife queen Editha from him,
The king put away his wife Editha.
and appointed her to streict keeping in the abbeie of Warwell. This Editha was
a noble gentlewoman, well learned, and expert in all sciences, yet her good
name was stained somewhat, as though she had not lived so continentlie as was
to be wished, both in her husbands life time, and after his deceasse. But yet
at the hour of her death (which chanced in the days of William Conqueror) she
cleared her self, in taking it upon the charge of her soul, that she had ever
lived in perfect chastity: for king Edward (as before is mentioned) never
touched her in any actual manner. By this streict dealing with the queen that
was daughter to earl Goodwine, now in time of her fathers exile, it has
seemed to many, that king Edward forbear to deal with her in carnal wise,
more for hatred of her kin, than for any other respect. But to proceed.

In the second year to Goodwines banishment, 1052 Hen. Hunt.
both he and his sons having provided themselves of ships and men of war
convenient for the purpose, came upon the coasts of England, and after the
manner of rouers, took preies where as they espied advantage, namely on the
coasts of Kent and Sussex. In the mean time also Griffin the K. of Wales
destroid a great part of Herefordshire, Griffin king of wales destroieth
Herefordshire.
against whom the power of that country, and also many Normans that lay in
garrison within the castle of Hereford, coming to give battle, were
overthrown on the same day, in the which about two and twenty years before,
or (as some ropies have) thirteen years, the Welshmen had slain Edwine, the
brother of earl Leofrike. Shortly after, earl Harold and his brother
Leofwine returning out of Ireland, Harold inuadeth the shires of Dorset and
Summerset.
entered into the Seuerne sea, landing on the coasts of Summersetshire and
Dorsetshire, where falling to spoil, they were incountred by a power assembled
out of the counties of Devonshire and Summersetshire: but Harold put his
adversaries to flight, and slew thirty gentlemen of honor, or thanes (as they
called them) with a great number of others. Then Harold and his brethren,
returning with their preie and booty to their ships, and coasting about the
point of Cornwall, came and joined with their father and their other brethren,
then soiorning in the I Will of Wight.

King Edward to withstand their malice, had rigged and furnished forth sixty
ships of war, Simon Dun.
with

At the same time that the two sons of earl Goodwine Harold and Leofwine came
forth of Ireland,

The capteines of the navy at Sandwich advertised hereof, made toward the
place where they thought to have found earl Goodwine: but he being warned of
their coming, escaped by flight, and got him out of their danger, whereupon
they withdrew to Sandwich, and after returned to London. Earl Goodwine
advertised thereof, sailed to the I Will of It seems that earl Goodwine was
well friended.
being then at London, he sent abroad to raise all the power, he might make.
But they that were appointed to come unto him, lingered time, in which mean
while earl Goodwine coming into the Thames, and so up the river, arrived in
Southwarke, on the day of the exaltation of the cross in September, being
monday, and their staieng for the tide, solicited the Londoners, so that he
obtained of them what he could desire.

Afterward, without disturbance, he passed up the river with the tide through
the south arch of the bridge, and at the same instant, a mighty army which he
had by land, mustered in the fields on that south side the same river, and
herewith his navy made toward the north side of the river, as if they meant to
enclose the kings navy, for the king had also a navy and an army by land:
but yet since there were few either on the one part or the other, that were able
to do any great feat except Englishmen, they were loath to fight one against
another, whereupon the wiser sort on both sides sought means to make an
atonement: and so at length by their diligent travel, the matter was taken up,
and the armies being dismissed on both parts, earl Goodwine was restored to
his former dignity. Hereupon were pledges delivered on his behalf, that is to
say, Wilnotus one of his sons, and Hacun the son of Swanus the eldest son
of Goodwine. These two pledges were sent unto William duke of Normandy, to be
kept with him for more assurance of Goodwines loialtie.

Some write that Swanus the eldest son of Goodwine was not reconciled to the
kings favor Ran. Higd. Matthew. West. Simon Dun. Will. Malm.
at this time; but whether he was or not, this is reported of him for a truth,
that after he had attempted sundry rebellions against king Edward, he lastly
also rebelled against his father Goodwine, and his brother Harold, and became a
pirate, dishonouring with such manifold robberies as he made on the seas, the
noble progeny whereof he was descended. Finally upon remorse of conscience
(as has been thought) for murdering of his coosine (or as some say his
brother) earl Bearne, he went on pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and died by the way
of cold which he caught in returning homeward (as some write) in Licia: but
others affirm, Ran. Higd. Will. Malmes.
that he fell into the hands of Saracens that were robbers by the high ways,
and so was murdered of them.

At what time William duke of Normandy came over into England, king Edward
promises to make him his heir to the kingdom and crown, the death of queen
Emma, earl Goodwine being grown in favor again seeks new reuenges of old
grudges, causing archbishop Robert and certain noble Normans his adversaries
to be banished; Stigand intrudeth himself into archbishop Roberts see, his
simonie and lack of learning; what manner of men were thought meet to be made
bishops in those days, king Edward begins to provide for the good and
prosperous state of his kingdom, his consideration of laws made in his
predecessors times and abused; the laws of S. Edward usually called the
common laws, how, whereof, and whereupon institured; the death of earl
Goodwine being sudden (as some say) or natural (as others report) his virtues
and vices, his behavior and his sons upon presumption and will in the time
of their authorities; his two wives and children; the sudden and dreadful
death of his mother; her selling of the beautiful youth male and female of
this land to the Danish people. The fourth Chapter.
THe foresaid William William duke of Normandy comes over into England.
duke of Normandy (that after conquered this land) during the time of
Goodwines outlawrie, (...) to this land with (...) of men, and (...) received
of the king, (...) great cheer. Now after he had tarried a season, hereturned
into his country, not without great gifts of jewels and other things, which
the king most liberally bestowed upon him. And (as some write) the king
promised him at that time, Polydor. K. Edwards promise to duke William.
to make him his heir to the realm of England, if he chanced to die without
issue. Shortly after, or rather somewhat before, queen Emma the kings mother
died, and was buried at Winchester.

After that earl Goodwine was restored to the kings favor, because he knew
that Robert the archbishop of Canturburie had been the chief procurer of the
kings evil will toward him, he found means The archbishop of Canturburie
banished.
made complaint in the court there, of the injuries that were offered him: but
in returning through Normandy, he died in the abbeie of Gemmeticum, where he
had been moonke before his coming into England.

Diverse others were compelled to forsake the realm at the same time, both
spiritual men and temporal, as William bishop of London, and Ulfe bishop of
Lincoln. Normans vanished the realm.
Osberne named Pentecost, and his companion Hugh, were constreined to surrender

After that Robert the archbishop of Canturburie was departed the realm, as
before ye have heard, Stigand was made archbishop of Canturburie, (...)
archbishop of Canturburie.
or rather thrust himself into that dignity, not being lawfully called, in
like manner as he had done at Winchester: for whereas he was first bishop of
Shireborne, he left that church, and took upon him the bishoprike of
Winchester by force, and now atteining Ranul. Hig. Fabian. Stigand infamed of
simonie.
he kept both Winchester and Canturburie in his hand at one instant. This
Stigand was greatly infamed for his covetous practices in sale of possessions
apperteining to the church. He was nothing learned: but that want was a common
fault amongst the bishops of that age, for it was openly spoken in those
days, that he was meet only to be a bishop, which could use the pomp of the
world, voluptuous pleasures, What manner of men meet to be bishops in those
days.
rich rament, and set himself forth with

King Edward now in the twelfth year of his reign, Polydor.
having brought the state of the realm quite from troubles of war both by
sea and land, began to foresee as well for the wealth of his subjects, as for
himself, being naturally inclined to wish well to all men. He therefore
considered, how by the manifold laws which had been made by Britains,
Englishmen and Danes within this land, occasion was ministered to many, which
measured all things by respect of their own private gain and profit, to
pervert justice, and to use wrongful dealing in stead of right, clouding the
same under some branch of the law naughtilie misconstrued. Whereupon to avoid
that mischief, he picked out a sum of that huge and unmeasurable mass and
heap of laws, such as were thought most indifferent and necessary, and
therewith ordained a few, and those most wholesome, to be from thenceforth
used; according to whose prescript, men might live in due form and rightful
order of a civil life. The laws of S. Edward. instituted.
These laws were afterward called the common laws, and also saint Edward his
laws; so much esteemed of the Englishmen, that after the conquest, when the
Normans oftentimes went about to abrogate the same, there chanced no small
mutinies and rebellions for reteining of those laws. But here is to be noted,
that although they were called saint Edwards laws, they were for the more part
made by king Edgar; but now by king Edward restored, after they had bin
abrogated for a time by the Danes.

About this time, 1053 or 1054 Hector Boet. Polydor. Will. Malmes. Matthew. West.
earl Goodwine died suddenly (as some have recorded) as he sat at table with
the king: and upon talk ministered of the death of Alfred the kings brother, to
excuse himself, he took a piece of bread, and did eat it, saying; God let me
never swallow this bread down into my chest, but that I may presently be
choked therewith, if ever I was weetting or consenting unto Alfreds death! and
immediately therewith he fell down stark dead. Other say, Ran. Higd. ex
Mariano.
that he ended his life at Winchester, where being suddenly surprised with
sickness, Simon Dun. This is the likeliest tale.
as he sat at the table with the king upon an Easter monday; yet he lived till
the Thursday following, and then died. His earldom was given unto his son
Harold; and Harolds earldom, which was Oxford, was given unto Algar the son
of Leofrike.

This Goodwine, as he was a man of great power, wise, hardy, and politic; so
was he ambitious, desirous to bear rule, and loath that any other person
should pass him in authority. But yet, whether all be true that writers
report of his malicious practices to bring himself and his sons to the
chief seat of government in the kingdom, or that of hatred such slanders
were raised of him, it may of some perhaps be doubted; because that in the
days of king Edward (which was a soft and gentle prince) he bare great rule
and authority, and so might procure to himself evil report for every thing
that chanced amiss: as oftentimes it comes to pass in such cases, where
those that have great doings in the government of the common wealth, are
commonly evil spoken of, and that now and then without their guilt. But truth
it is, that Goodwine being in authority both in the days of king Edward and
his predecessors, did many things (as should appear by writers) more by will
than by law, and so likewise did his sons; Hen. Hunt.
upon presumption of the great puissance that they and their father were of
within the realm.

He had to wife Editha, the sister of king Cnute, of whom he begat three
sons (as some write) that is to say, Harold, Biorne, and Tostie: Polydor.
also his daughter Editha, whom he found means to bestow in marriage upon K.
Edward, Will. Malm.
as before ye have heard. But other write, that he had but one son by Cnutes
sister, the which in riding of a rough horse was thrown into the river of
Thames, and so drowned. His mother also was stricken with a thunderbolt, and so
perished worthily (as is reported) for her naughty doings. She used to buy
great numbers of young persons, and namely maids that were of any excellent
beauty and personage, whom she sent over into Denmark, and there sold them
to her most advantage. After her deceasse (as the same authors record) Goodwine
married another woman, by whom he had issue six sons, Swanus or Swain,
Harrold, Tostie or Tosto, Wilnot, Girth, and Leofrike; of whom further mention
is and shall be made, as places convenient shall serve thereto.

Edward earl of Northumberland discomfiteth Mackbeth the usurper of the
Scottish kingdom and places Malcolme in
ABout the thirteenth year of king Edward his reign (as some write) Matthew.
West. 1054 Hector Boet.
or rather about the nineteeenth or twentieth Simon. Dun. M. West.
who afterward slew the said Mackbeth,

It is recorded also, that in the foresaid battle, in which earl Siward
vanquished the Scots, one of Siwards sons chanced to be slain, whereof
although the father had good cause to be sorrowful, yet when he heard that he
died of a wound which he had received in fighting stoutly in the forepart of
his body, and that with his face toward the enemy, he Henry Hunt. says)
that earl Siward went into Scotland himself in person, he sent his son with
an army to conquer the land, whose hap was there to be slain: and when his
father heard the news, he demanded whether he received the wound whereof he
died, in the forepart of of the body, or in the hinder part: and when it was
told him that he received it in the forepart; I reioise (says he) even with
all my heart, for I would not wish either to my son nor to my self any other
kind of death.

Shortly after, Aldred the bishop of Worcester was sent unto the emperor
Henry the third, Matthew. West 105^
to fetch Edward the son of Edmund Iron side into England, whom king Edward
was desir^us to see, meaning to ordeine him heir apparent to the crown: but
he died the same year after he came into England. This Edward was surnamed the
outlaw: his body was buried at Winchester, Hent Hunt. 1055
or (as an other says) in the church of S. Paul's in London.

About the same time K. Edward by evil counsel (I wot not upon what occasion,
but as it is thought without cause) banished Algar the son of earl Leofrike:
whereupon he got him into Ireland, and there providing 18 ships of rouers,
returned, and landing in Wales, joined himself with Griffin the king or prince
of Wales, and did much hurt on the borders about Hereford, of which place Rafe
was then earl, that was son unto Goda the sister of K. Edward by her first
husband Gualter de Maunt. This earl assembling an army, came forth to give
battle to the enemies, Matthew. West Simon Dun.
appointing the Englishmen contrary to their manner to fight on horssebacke,
but being ready (on the two and twentieth of October) to give the onset in a
place not past two miles from Hereford, The welshmen obtain the victory
against Englishmen and Normans.
he with his Frenchmen and Normans fled, and so the rest were discomfited,
whom the adversaries pursued, and slew to the number of 500, beside such as
were hurt and escaped with life. Griffin and Algar having obtained this
victory, entered into the town of Hereford, set the minster on fire, slew
seven of the canons that stood to defend the doors or gates of the principal
church, and finally spoiled and burned the town miserably.

The king advertised hereof, gathered an army, over the which Harold the son
of earl Goodwine was made general, who followed upon the enemies that fled
before him into Northwales, and stayed not, Stratcluid. Snowdon.
till having passed through Strat^luid, he came to the mountains of Snowdon,
where he pitched his field. The enemies durst not abide him, but got them into
Southwales, whereof Harold being advertised, left the more part of his army in
Northwales to resist the enemies there, The city of Hereford fortified by
Harold.
and with the residue of his people came back unto Hereford, recovered the
town, and caused a great and mighty trench to be cast round about it, with an
high rampire, and fensed it with gates and other fortifications. After this, he
did so much, that coming to a communication with Griffin and Algar at a place
called Biligelhage, a peace was concluded, and so the navy of earl Algar
sailed about, and came to Chester, there to remain, till the men of war and
mariners had their wages, while he went to the king, who pardoned his offense,
and restored him to his earldom.

After this, in the very same year, being the 15 of king Edwards reign, as
some writers affirm, Siward the noble earl of Northumberland died of the
slix, of whom it is said, The deceasse of Siward earl of Northumberland. Ran.
Higd.
that when he perceived the hour of death to be near, he caused him self to
be put in armor, and set up in his chair, affirming that a knight and a man
of honor ought to die in that sort, rather than lieng on a couch like a feeble
and fainthearted creature: and sitting so upright in his chair armed at all
points, he ended his life, and was buried at York. [O stout hearted man, not
unlike to that famous Roman remembered by Tullie in his Tusculane questions,
who suffered the sawing of his leg from his body without shrinking, looking
upon the surgeon all the while, and having no part of his body bound for
shrinking!] The said Siward earl of Northumberland was a man of a giantlike
stature, and thereto of a very stout and hardy courage, and because his son
Walteif was but an infant, and as yet not out of his cradell, the earldom was
given unto earl Tostle one of Goodwins sons.

Edward the son of Edmund Ironside is sent for to be made heir apparent to
crown, his death, the deceasse of Leofrike earl of Chester, the virtues and
good deeds of him and his wife Gudwina, Couentrie free from custom and toll,
churches and religious places builded and repared, Algar succeeds his father
Leofrike in the earldom, he is accused of treason and banished, he recouereth
his earldom by force of arms; Harold is sent with a power against Griffin
king of Wales; the country wasted, and the people
NOt long after, in the year 1057, Aldred bishop of Worcester, was sent over
unto the emperor Henry the third, to fetch Edward the son of Edmund
Ironside into England, whom king Edward was desirous to see, meaning to
ordeine him Edward the outlaw departed this life.
or (as others say) in the church of S. Paul within London. The same year,
that is to say, in the seventeenth year or in the sixteenth year of king
Edwards reign (as some write) 1057 Leofrike earl of Chester departed this
life. Ran. Higd. Mat. West.
Leofrike the noble earl of Chester, or Mercia, that was son to duke
Leofwine, departed this life in his own town of Bromelie on the last

He had a noble lady to his wife named Gudwina, Couentrie made free of toll
and custom.
at whose earnest suit he made the city of Couentrie free of all manner of
toll, except horses: and to have that toll laid down also, his foresaid wife
rode naked through the midst of the town without Churches in Chester built.
Also he builded two churches within the city of Chester, the one called S.
John's, and the other S. Werbrough. The value of the jewels and ornaments which
he bestowed

After Leofriks death, his son Algar was made earl, Hent. Hunt. Algar earl
of Chester exiled. 1058
and entitled in all his lands and seigniories. In the year following, to
wit, 1058 the same Algar was accused again (through malice of some envious
persons) of treason, so that he was exiled the land, whereupon he repaired
again unto his old friend Griffin prince of Northwales, of whom he was
ioifullie received, Simon Dun.
and shortly after by his aid, and also by the power of a navy of ships that
by chance arrived in those parts at that self same season unlooked for out of
Norwaie, 1063 Simon Dun. Mat. West.
the said Algar recovered his earldom by force, as some have written. King
Edward about the twentieth year of his reign, as then remaining at Gloucester,
appointed earl Harold to invade the dominions of Griffin king of Wales. Harold
taking with him a power of horssemen, made speed, and came to Rutland, and
there burned Griffins palace, and also his ships, and then about Midlent
returned again into England.

After this, about the Rogation week, Harold eftsoons by the kings
commandment went against the Welshmen, and taking the sea, sailed by Bristow,
round about the coast, compassing in manner all Wales. His brother Tostie that
was earl of Northumberland, Wales destroyed and harried by the Englishmen. The
welshmen agree to pay their accustomed tribute.
met him by appointment with an host of horssemen, and so ioining together,
they destroyed the country of Wales in such sort, that the Welshmen were
compelled to submit themselves, to deliver hostages, and conditioned to pay
the ancient tribute which before time they had paid. And moreover, they
renounced their prince the forenamed Griffin, so that he remained as a banished
person: and finally, 1064 Will. Malm. Simon. Dun.
about the fifth day of August, they slew him, and sent his head to earl
Harold. Afterward king Edward granted the rule of Wales unto Blengent or
Blethgent, and Rival, Griffins two brethren, which did homage unto him for the
same, and had served under Harold against their brother the foresaid Griffin.
There be which write, that not only Griffin, but also another of his brethren
called Rice, Will. Malm.
was brought to his death by the manfull means and politic order of earl
Harold, and all the savage people of Wales reduced into the form of good order
under the subjection of king Edward.

Shortly after, Harold goes over into Normandy. Polydor.
earl Harold chanced to pass over into Normandy, whither of hap or of
purpose it is hard to define, writers do vary so much in report thereof. Some
write that he made earnest suit to king Edward, to have license to go over to
see his brother Wilnot, Edmerus.
and his nephue Hacune, which (as ye have heard) were delivered as pledges to
king Edward, and sent into Normandy to remain there with duke William, and at
length with much adoo, got leave: but yet he was told aforehand of the king,
that he would repent his journey, and do the thing that should be prejudicial
to the realm. Other write that Harold lieng at his manor of Bosham, Mat. West.
Will. Malm.
went aboard one day into his fishers boat or craier, and caused the same to
lanch forth to the sea for his pleasure: but by misfortune at the same time, a
contrary wind suddenly came about, and drove the vessel on land into France
upon the coast of Ponthieu, where he was taken by the country people, and
presented to the earl of Ponthieu named Guie or Guido, who kept him as
prisoner, meaning to put him to a grievous ransom. But Harold remembering
himself of a wile, dispatched a messenger forth with all speed unto William
duke of Normandy, signifieng unto him, that he being sent from king Edward to
confirm such articles, as other mean men that had been sent unto him before
had talked of, by chance he was fallen into the hands of the earl of Ponthieu,
and kept as prisoner against all order of law, reason, or humanity. Duke
William thus informed by the messenger, sent to the earl of Ponthieu,
requiring him to set earl Harold at liberty, that he might repair to him
according to his commission. The earl of Ponthieu at the dukes request, Harold
is presented to william duke of Normandy. Hen. Hunt.
did not only restore Harold to his liberty, but also brought him into
Normandy, and presented him there to the duke, of whom he was most ioifullie
received.

There be that agree partly with this report, and partly vary: for they
write, that earl Harold took the sea upon purpose to have sailed into
Flanders, and that by force of w^^d he was driven to the coast of Pouthieu, and
so after came into Normandy in manner as before is mentioned. But by what means
or occasion soever he came thither, certain it is, that he was ioifullie
received, Harold was highly welcomed of duke William.
and had great cheer made him by the said duke William, who at that time was
ready to make a journey against the Britains, and took earl Harold with him
to have his company in arms in that iournei, that he might have the better
trial of his valiancie. Earl Harold behaved himself so, that he showed good
proof both of his wisdom and policy, and also of his forwardness to Matthew.
West. Duke William promised to Harold his daughter in marriage.
And to perform this promise, he received a corporal oath, whether willingly
to win the more

Harold at his return into England reports to K. Edward what he had done
beyond the seas, and what the king said unto him in that behalf, who foresaw
the coming of
NOw when Harold should return into England, duke William delivered him his
nephue Hacune, Polydor.
but kept his brother Wilnote with him still as a pledge. Then went earl
Harold into England, Did not I tell thee that thou would do the thing
whereof thou should repent thee, and procure a mischief to follow unto thy
country? But God of his mercy turn that evil hap from this realm, or at
the least, if it be his pleasure, that it must needs come to pass, yet to
stay it till after my days! Some by Harolds purposed going over into
Normandy, do gather, that king Edward foresaw the coming of the Normans; and
that he meant nothing less, When the promise was made by king Edward to make
(...) William (...) heir.
than to perform the promise made unto duke William, as to adopt him his
heir, which promise should seem to be made in time of his banishment, when he
stood in need of his friendship; as the manner of men in such cases is, to
promise much, how so ever they intend to fulfill. But rather it may be
thought, that king Edward had made no such promise at all, but perceived the
ambitious desire of duke William, and therefore would not that any occasion
should be ministered unto him to take hold of. Wherefore, he was loath that
Harold should go over unto him, least that might happen, which happened in deed.

In the four and twentieth and last year of king Edward his reign, Hen.
Hunt. Matthew. West. Fabian. Falling out betwixt brethren.
or therabout, there fell variance betwixt the two brethren, earl Harold and
earl Tostie at Windsor, where the court then lay, in so much that earl Harold
caught Tostie by the hair of the head in the kings presence, and stroke him.
Heervpon, Tostie departing from the court in great anger, came to Hereford in
the marches of Wales, where Harolds servants were preparing for the kings
coming to their masters house, The cruel dealing of earl Tostie.
which servants he took and slew, chopping them in pieces, and threw into this
hogshead of wine a leg, into that barrel of sider an arm, into this vessel
of ale an head: and so into the lomes of meth and tubs of brine and other
liquor he bestowed the parts of the dead car^asses of his brothers servants,
sending the king word that he had provided at his brothers manor, against his
coming, good plenty of sowse and powdered meat, whatsoever he should find
beside.

The rumor of this cruel deed sprang over all the realm, whereupon the
Northumbers, whom he had governed for the space of ten years very cruelly,
took occasion to rebel against him, The Northumbers r^bell against Tostie
their earl.
and slew his servants both Englishmen and Danes, spoiled his houses, and took
away his horses, his armor, and all other his goods and household stuff. The
chiefest cause (as is remembered by some writers) that moved the Northumbers
thus to rise and rebel against Tostie, was for the detestable murder of
certain gentlemen of their country, servants unto Gospatrike, whom the queen
in behalf of her brother had caused to be slain in the court by treason, in
the fourth night of Christmas last past, and also in revenge of other noble
men, which in the last year Tostie himself had commanded to be murdered in
his own chamber at York, whither he had allured them to come under color of
concluding a peace with them. Also the grievous paiments, wherewith he charged
the people of that country, set them in a great rage against him.

But the king advertised hereof, liked not their doings, for that they had
done it without commandment or commission, and therefore sent earl Harold
with an army to chastise them, Will. Malm.
but they were strong enough to withstand him, as those which were assembled in
armor together with the people of Lincolneshire, Notinghamshire, and
Darbishire, and having with them Marcharus or Malcharus, the son of earl
Algar, were come as far as Northhampton, doing much hurt in the parts
therabouts. Howbeit to have the kings peace, they offered to return home, so
that they might have an other earl appointed them, for that they plainly
protested, that they being freemen, borne and bred out of bondage, might not
suffer any cruel governor to rule over them, being taught by their ancestors,
either to live in liberty, or to die in defense thereof. If therefore it might
please the king to assign Marcharus the son of earl Algar to be their ruler,
he should see how obedient subjects they would prove and show themselves to
be, when they should be used after a reasonable and courteous manner. All
things considered, their request seemed reasonable, or at least it was thought
necessary that it should be granted. And so was Marcharus or Malcherus made
earl of Northumberland. Marcharus made earl of Northumberland.
Tostie in great displeasure with his wife and children sailed over into
Flanders, and there remained till after the deceasie of king Edward.

Finally, It Edward departed this life.
after that this courteous prince king Edward had reigned three and twenty
years, Simon Dun.
seven months, and od days, he departed this life at London the fourth of
January, and was buried in the church of Westminster, which he had in his life
time roiallic repared, after such a stately sort as few churches K. Edward his
manners and disposition of mind described.
that his fame of holiness sprang over all. He abhorred wars and shedding of
blood, in so much that when he lived as a banished man in Normandy, he had
this saying oftentimes in his mouth, that he had rather live a private life for
ever, than to obtain the kingdom by the slaughter and death of any A devil
fetching gambols.
but he declaring that he saw a devil plaieng and fetching gambols about that
heap of money,

In diet and apparel he was spare and nothing sumptuous: and although on high
feasts he ware rich apparel, as became the majesty of his royal personage:
yet he showed no proud nor lofty countenance, rather praising God for his
bountiful goodness toward him extended, than esteeming herein the vain
pomp of the world. The pleasure that he took chiefly in this world for
refreshing of his wits,

He was warned (as has been reported) of his death certain days before he
died, A tale of a ring.
by a ring that was brought him by certain pilgrims coming from Jerusalem,
which ring he had secretly given King Edward canonized for a saint.
But to conclude, such was the opinion conceived of his holiness of life, that
shortly after his decease, he was canonized amongst the number of saints, and
named Edward the Confessor. Whilst he lay sick of that sickness, Will. Molms.
Matt. Westminster.
whereof at length he died, after he had remained for two days speechless,
the third day after when he had lain for a time in a slumber or soft sleep,
at the time of his waking, he fetched a deep sigh, and thus said; Oh Lord God
almighty, if this be not a vain fantastical illusion, but a true vision
which I have seen, grant me space to utter the same unto these that stand
here present, or else not. And herewith having his speech perfect, he declared
how he had seen two moonks stand by him as he thought, whom in his youth he
knew in Normandy to have lived godly, and died christianlie. These moonks
(said he) protesting to me the they were the messengers of God, spoke these
words; Because the chief governors of England, the bishops and abbats, are not
the ministers of God, but the devils, the almighty God has delivered this
kingdom for one year and a day into the hands of the enemy, and wicked
spirits shall walk abroad through the whole land. And when I made answer that
I would declare these things to the people, and promised on their behalf, that
they should do penance in following that example of the Ninevites: they said
again, that it would not be, for neither should the people repent, nor God
take any pity upon them. And when is there hope to have an end of these
miseries said I? Then said they; When a grene tree is cut in sunder in the
middle, and the part cut off is carried three acres breadth from the stock, and
returning again to the stoale, shall join therewith, and begin to bud and
bear fruit after the former manner, by reason of the sap renewing the
accustomed nourishment; then (I say) may there be hope that such evils shall
cease and diminish. With which words of the king, though some other that stood
by were brought in fear, yet archbishop Stigand made but a jest thereof,
saying, that the old man raued now in his sickness, as men of great years
use to do. Nevertheless the truth of this prophecy afterward too plainly
appeared, when England became the habitation of new strangers, in such wise,
that there was neither governor, bishop, nor abbat remaining therein of the
English nation. But now to make an end with king Edward, he was of person
comely, and of an indifferent stature, of white hair, both head and beard, of
face ruddie, and in all parts of his body fair skinned, with due state and
proportion of lims as was thereto convenient. In the year before the death of
king Edward, a blasing star appeared, the which when a moonke of Malmesburie
named Eilmer beheld, he uttered these words (as it were by way of prophesieng:)
Thou art come (says he) thou art come, much to be lamented of many a mother:
it is long agone since I saw thee, but now I do behold thee the more terrible,
threatening destruction to this country by thy dreadful appearance. In the
person of king Edward ceased by his death the noble progeny of the Westsaxon
kings, which had continued from the first year of the reign of Cerdike or
Cerdicius, the space of 547 years complet. And from Egbert 266 years.

Moreover, since the progeny of the Saxon kings seems wholly to take end with
this Edward surnamed the Confessor, or the third of that name before the
conquest, we have thought good for the better help of memory to refer the
reader to a catalog of the names as well of those that reigned among the
Westsaxons (who at length, as ye have heard, obtained the whole monarchy) as
also of them which ruled in the other seven kingdoms before the same were
united unto the said kingdom of the Westsaxons, which catalog you shall find
in the description of Britain, page 17, 18, 19.

Here is to be remembered, that as partly before is expressed, Matt. West.
we find in some old writers, how the first kings of seven kingdoms of the
Germane nation that bare rule in this I Will, fetched their pedegrees from one
Woden, who begat of Frea his wife seven sons, that is to say, 1 Uecta, of
whom came the kings of Kent, 1 Fethelgeta, or Frethegeath, from whom the
kings of Mercia descended, 3 Balday, of whose race the kings of the Westsaxons
had their original, 4 Beldagius, ancestor to the kings of Bernicia, and the
Northumbers, 5 Wegodach or Wegdagus, from whom came the kings of Deira, 6
Caser, from whom proceeded the kings of the Eastangles, 7 Nascad alias Saxuad,
of whom the kings of the Eastsaxons had their beginning. And here you must
note, that although the kings of the eight kingdom, that is, of the
Southsaxons or Sussex, were descended of the same people, yet were they not of
the same line. By other it should seem, that Simon Dun. Io. Textor.
and the Northumbers. Moreover, there be that bring the genealogy from Noe or
Noah, the son of Lamech, which Noe was the 9 in descent from Adam, and Woden
the 15 from Noe, as you shall find lib. 6. page 141. col. 2. Noe was the father
to Sem the father of Bedwi, the father of Wala, the father of Hatria or Hathra,
the father of Itermod, the father of Heremod, the father of Sheaf or Seaf, the
father of Seldoa or Sceldua, the father of Beatu or Beau, the father of
Theathwtj alias Tadwa or Teathwy, the father of Geta, reputed for a god among
the gentiles, the father of Fingodulph otherwise Godulph, the father of
Fritwolfe otherwise Fr^uin, the father of Fr^olaf alias Freolater,

The peers are in doubt to whom the rule of the land should be committed, why
they durst not that Edgar Edeling should undertake it though he was interessed
to the same, how William duke of Normandy pretended a right to the crown,
Harold the son of earl Goodwine crowned, proclaimed, and consecrated king;
his subtle and adulatorie
KIng Edward being thus departed this life, Harold.
the peers of the land were in great doubt and perplexity to whom they might
best commit the royal government of the realm. K. Edward departed this life
An Christi 1065, after the account of the church of England.
For there was not any among them that had just title thereto, Matthew. West.
Polydor.
or able and apt to take the charge Edeling, that is, a noble man, and such one
as is come of the kings blood.
that was son of Edmund Ironside, was at the same time lately come into
England, with his mother and sisters out of Hungary where he was borne: yet
for that he was but a child, and not of sufficient age to bear rule, they
durst not as then commit the government of the realm unto him, least (as some
have thought) his tenderness of age might first breed a contempt of his
person, and therewith minister occasion to civil discord, whereby a shipwreck
of the estate might ensue, to the great annoie and present overthrow of such as
then lived in the same. But what consideration soever they had in this behalf,
they ought not to have defrauded the young gentlemen of his lawful right to
the crown. For as we have heard and seen, God, whose providence and mighty
power is showed by overthrowing of high and mighty things now and then, by the
weak and feeble has governed states and kingdoms oftentimes in as good quiet
and princely policy by a child, as by men of age and great discretion.

But to the purpose, beside the doubt which rested among the lords, how to
bestow the crown, the manifold and strange woonders, which were seen and
heard in those days, betokening (as men thought) some change to be at hand in
the state of the realm, made the lords a^raid, and namely because they stood
in great doubt of William duke of Normandy, who pretended a right to the
crown, as lawful heir appointed by king Edward, for that he was kin to him
in the second and third degree. Dukes of Normandy.
For Richard the first of that name duke of Normandy, begot Richard the
second, and Emma; which Emma bare Edward by her husband Ethelred. Richard the
second had also issue Richard the third, and Robert, which Robert by a
concubine had issue William, surnamed the bastard, that was now duke of
Normandy, and after the death of his coosine king Edward, made claim (as is
said) to the crown of England.

Whilst the lords were thus studieng and consulting what should be best for
them to do in these doubts, Harold, the son of Goodwine earl of Kent,
proclaimed himself king of England: Harold proclaimed king of England.
the people being not much offended therewith, because of the great confidence
and opinion which they had lately conceived of his valiancie. Some write
(among whom Edmerus Edmerus.
is one) how king Edward ordained before his death, that Harold should succeed
him as heir to the crown, and that thereupon the lords immediately after the
said Edwards deceasse, crowned Harold for their king, and so he was consecrated
by Aldred archbishop of York, according to the custom and manner of the former
kings, or (as other affirm) he set the crown on his own head without any
the accustomed ceremonies, Matthew. West.
in the year after the birth of our savior 1066, or in the year of Christ
1065, after the account of the church of England (as before is noted.)

But how and whenever he came to the seat royal of this kingdom, certain
it is, that this Harold in the beginning of his reign, considering with
himself how and in what sort he had taken upon him the rule of the kingdom,
rather by intrusion than by any lawful right, studied by all means which way
to win the peoples favor, and omitted no occasion whereby he might show any
token of bountious liberality, Harold seeks to win the peoples hearts.
gentleness and courteous behavior toward them. Sim. Dunel.
The grievous customs also and taxes which his predecessors had raised, he
either abolished or diminished: the ordinary wages of his servants and men of
war he increased, and further showed himself very well bent to all virtue
and goodness, whereby he purchased no small favor among such as were his
subjects.

Whilst Harold went about thus to steal the peoples good wills, An embassage
from N^^mandie.
there came over unlooked for sundry ambassadors from William the bastard
duke of Normandy, with commission to require him to remember his oath sometime
made to the said William in the time of his extremity, which was, that he the
said Harold should aid him in the obteining of the crown of England, if king
Edward should happen to die without issue. This covenant he made (as it is
supposed) in king Edwards days, when (by license of the same Edward, or rather
(as Edmerus writes) against his will) he went over into Normandy to visit his
brethren, which lay there as pledges.

Howbeit at this present, K. Harolds answer.
Harolds answer to the said ambassadors was, that he would be ready to
gratify the duke in all that he could demand, so that he would not ask the
realm, which already he had in his full possession. And further he declared
unto them (as some write) that as for the oath which he had made in times past
unto duke William, E^dmerus.
the same was but a constreined and no voluntary oath, which in law is nothing;
Matthew. West.
since thereby he took upon him to

Duke William having received this answer, Duke William eftsoons sends to
king Harold.
and nothing liking thereof, sent once again to Harold, requiring him then at
the leastwise, that he would Gemeticensis says, Gemeticensis.
and with her (as the same author writes) it was couenanted by duke William,
that Harold should enjoy half the realm in name of her dower. Will. Malm.
Howbeit some write that this daughter of duke William was departed this life
before the coming of these ambassadors, and that Harold thereupon thought
himself discharged of the oath and covenants made to duke William, and
therefore

But howsoever it was, Polydor.
after the departure of these ambassadors, king Harold (doubting what would
ensue) caused his ships to be newly rigged, his men of war to be mustered,
and speedily put in a readiness, to the end that if any sudden invasion
should be made and attempted by his enemy, he might be able to resist them.
About the same time also, and upon the 24 of April (whilst Harold was making
provision to withstand the Norman force) Rog. Houed. Simon Dun.
This blasing star might be a prediction of mischief imminent and hanging
over Harolds head; for they never appear but as prognosticats of afterclaps.
To be resolutelie instructed herein, do but peruse a treatise entitled; A
doctrine general of comets or blasing stars published by a bishop of Mentz
in Latin, and set forth in English by Abraham Fleming upon the apparition of
a blasing star seen in the southwest, on the 10 of November 1577, and
dedicated to the right worshipful sir William Cordell knight, then master of
her majesty's rolls, etc.

Earl Tostie afflicts his brother Harold on sea and land, he takes the
repulse, and persuadeth Harfager king of Norwe^e to attempt the conquest of
England against Harold, Harfager and Tostie with their powers arrive at Humber,
they fight with the Northumbers under the conduct of Edwine and Marchar, and
discomfit them; Harold leuieth an army against them, the rare valiantnes of a
Norwegian souldior; Harfager and Tostie slain in battle; the Norwegians are
foiled and fly; Harolds unequal and parciall dividing of the spoil, he goes
to York to reform things amiss. The ninth Chapter.
Whilst Harold desirous to retain, and very loath to let go his usurped
roialtie, had cracked his credit with the duke of Normandy, and by his lewd
reuolting from voluntary promises ratified with solemn oaths, had also
kindled the fire of the dukes fury against him; it came to pass; that the
proud and presumptuous man was (to begin withal) vexed in his own flesh, I
mean his own kindred. For Tostie the brother of king Harold (who in the days
of king Edward for his cruelty had been chased out of the realm by the
Northumbers) Tostie seeks to disquiet his brother.
returning out of Flanders, Matt. West. says but 40.
assembled a navy of ships from diverse parts to the number of 60, with the
which he arrived in the I Will of Wight, and there spoiled the country, and
afterward sailing about by the coasts of Kent, Polydor. Ran. Higd. Sim. Dun.
he took sundry preies their also, and came at the last to Sandwich: so that
Harold was now constreined to appoint the navy which he had prepared against
the Normans, to go against his brother earl Tostie. Whereof the said Tostie
being advertised, drew toward Lindsey in Lincolnshire, and there taking land
did much hurt in the country, both with sword and fire, till at length Edwine
earl of Mercia, Will. Malm.
and Marchar earl of Northumberland, aided with the kings navy, chased him
from thence, Tostie repelled.
and caused him to fly into Scotland, Polydor. Ran. Higd.
not without some loss both of his men and ships.

This trouble was scarce quieted, but streightwaies another came in the neck
thereof, far more dangerous than the first. For Tostie, perceiving that he
could get no aid in Scotland to make any account of, sailed forth into
Norweie, and there persuaded Harold Harfager king of that realm, Harold
Harfager king of Norweie.
to sail with an army into England, persuading him that by means of civil
dissension lately kindled betwixt the king and his lords (which was not so) it
should be an easy matter for him to make a conquest of the whole realm, and
reign over them as his predecessors had done before. Some authors affirm,
that Harold king of Norwey took this enterprise in hand of his own mind, and
not by procurement of Tostie, Matt. West. Simon Dun.
saying, that Tostie meeting with him in Scotland, did persuade him to go
forward in his purposed business, and that the said Harold Harfager with all
convenient speed passed forth, and with a navy of 300 sail entered into the
river of Tine, Simon Dun. says 500.
where after he had rested a few days to refresh his people, earl Tostie came
also with his power (according to an appointment which should be made between
them.) They ad furthermore, The Norwegians arrive in Humber.
that they sailed forth along the coast, till they arrived in the mouth of
Humber, and then drawing up against the stream of the river Owse, they landed
at length at a place called Richhall, Richhall.
from whence they set forward to invade Hen. Hunt.
the country, and near unto York on the northside of the city, they fought
with the power of the Northumbers, The English men discomfited.
which was led by the earls Edwine and Marchar (two brethren) and there
discomfited and chased them into the city, with great slaughter and bloodshed.

Harold king of England being advertised of this chance, This battle was
fought on the the even of S. Matthew the apostle, as says Si. Dun.
made the more have forward (for he was already in the field with his army,
intending also to come toward his enemies) so that upon the fifth day Will. Malm.
mauger the whole host of the Englishmen, Hen. Hunt.
and slew forty of them or more with his axe, Matt. West.
and might not be overcome, till an Englishman went with a boat under the said
bridge, and through and hole thereof thrust him up into the body with his
spear: yet Matt. West. says that he was The Norwegians discomfited.
the whole host of the Englishmen passed over, and joined with their enemies,
and after a very great and sore battle put them all to flight.

In this conflict Harold Harfager king of the Norwegians was slain, The king
of Norwaie and Tostie slain.
and so was Tostie the king of England his brother, besides a great number of
other, as well in the battle as in the chase: neither did the Englishmen
escape all free, for the Norwegians This battle was fought on the 25 of
September as says Si. Dun.
beating down and killing great numbers of such as assailed them with great
courage and assurance. The residue of the Norwegians that were left to keep
their ships under the guiding of Olaue son to the king of Norwaie, and Paul
earl of Orkneie, after they understood by their fellows that escaped from the
field, how the matter went with Harfager and Tostie, Matthew. West.
they hoised up their sails and directed their course homewards, bearing
sorrowful news Simon Dun.
having first caused them to deliver such hostages as they had received of the
citizens of York. Harold reioising in that he had atteined so glorious a
victory, and being now surprised with pride and covetousness together, he
divided the spoil of the field nothing equally, but to such as he favored he
distributed liberally, M. West.
and to Unequell dividing of the spoil.
reteining still the best part of all to himself, by reason whereof he lost
the favor of many of his men, who for this his discourtesie, did not a little
alienate their good wills from him. This done, he repaired to York, and
there stayed for a time to reform the disordered state of the country, Will.
Malm.
which by reason of those wars was greatly out of frame.

But Harold being more presumptuous and foolehardie, Ea tantum quae ad pedes
iacent contemplans, non autem ventura praeuidens) neglected the kingly care
which he should have had of other parts of his realm, from the which he had
withdrawn himself, and (as it is likely) had not left sufficiently provided
of a convenient vicegerent to govern the same by his warranted authority, and
such fortifications as might expel and withstand the enemy. Which want of
foresight gave occasion to the enemy to attempt an invasion of the English
coasts, as in the next chapt. shall be showed.

William duke of Normandy prepares to invade England and to conquer it, the
earl of Flanders and the French king assist him, the number of his ships, his
arrival at Peuensey in Sussex, upon what occasions he entered this realm; the
pope liked well duke Williams attempt, why king Harold was hated of the whole
court of Rome; why duke William would not suffer his soldiers to wast the
countries where they came; Harold goes toward his enemies, why his unskillful
espials took the Normans (being old beaten soldiers) for priests; Girth
dissuadeth his brother Harold from present incountering with the duke; where
note the conscience that is to be had of an oath, and that perjury can not
escape unpunished. The tenth Chapter.
WIlliam duke of Normandy having knowledge after what manner K. Harold was
busied in the north parts of his realm, and understanding that the south parts
thereof remained destitute of due provision for necessary defense, hasted with
all diligence to make his purueiance of men and ships, that he might upon such
a convenient occasion set forward to invade his enemy. Ia. Meir.
And amongst other of his friends, Baldwine earl of Flanders aided duke
William to conquer England.
unto whom he labored for aid, his father in law Baldwine earl of Flanders
was one of the chiefest, who upon promise of great sums of money and other
large offers made, did aid him with men, munition, ships, and victuals, very
freely. The French king also did as much for his part as lay in him to help
forwards this so high an enterprise. Wherefore when all things were now in a
readiness, he came to the town of S. Ualerie, Will. Geme.
where he had assembled tigither an huge navy of ships (to the number (as some
authors affirm) of three hundred sail; The chronicles of Normandy have 896
ships.
and when he had tarried there a long time for a convenient wind, at length it
came about even as he himself desired. Then shipping his army which consisted
of Normans, Flemings, Frenchmen, and Britains, with all expedition he took the
sea, and directing his course toward England, he finally landed at a place in
Sussex, Duke william landed at Peuensey, now Pemsey.
ancientlie called Peuensey, on the 28 day of September, where he did set his
men on land, and provided all things necessary to encourage and refresh them.

At his going out of his ship unto the shore, one of his feet slipped as he
stepped forward, but the other stacke fast in the sand: the which so soon as
one of his knights had espied, and seeing his hand whereupon he stayed full of
earth, when he rose, he spoke alowd and said: Now sir duke, thou have the soil
of England fast in thy hand, and shall of a duke yer long become king. The duke
hearing this tale, laughed merrily thereat, and coming on land, by and by he
made his proclamation, declaring upon what occasions he had thus entered the
realm.

The first and principal cause which he alleged, Hen. Hunt.
was for the challenge his right, meaning the dominion of

The second was, to revenge the death of his nephue

The third was to be revenged of the wrong done of Harold in the days of king
Edward.

Wherein we have to note, that whether it were for displeasure that the pope
had sometime conceived for the wrong done to the archbishop; Will. Lamb.
or at the only suit of duke William, The pope favored duke Williams
enterprise.
certain it is that the pope, as then named Alexander the second, favored this
enterprise of the duke, and in token thereof sent him a white banner, which he
willed him to set up in the deck of the ship, wherein he himself should
sail. In deed (as writers report) the pope with his cardinals, Matthew. West.
yet now beholding to what end his bold presumption was like to come, with
frowning fortune they showed themselves open adversaries, inclining
streightwaies to the stronger part, after the

Duke William at his first landing at Peuensey or Pemsey Gemeticensis.
(whether you will) fortified a piece of ground with strong trenches, and
leaving therein a competent number of a men of war to keep the same, he sped
him toward Hastings, and coming thither, he built an other fortress there
with all speed possible, without suffering his soldiers to rob or harrie the
country adioining, saying that it should be Will. Malm.
sped him southward, and gathering his people together out of the countries as
he went forwards, at length came near his enemies: and sending espials into
their camp to understand of what strength they were; Matthew. West.
the unskillful messengers regarding smallie their charge, brought word again
of nothing else, Normans berds shaven.
whereas the Englishmen used to suffer to hair of their upper lips to grow at
length. Will. Malm.
But Harold answered, Hen. Marle.
that they were not priests, but wether-beaten and hardy soldiers, and such
as were like to abide well by their captain.

In the mean season, Girth one of Harolds yoonger brethren (considering that
perjury is never left unpunished) Girth would not have his brother king Harold
fight himself.
advised his brother not to adventure Gemeticensis.
for so much as he had been sometime sworn to duke William, but rather to
suffer him and other of the nobility to encounter with the said duke, that
were not bound to him by former oath, or otherwise: but Harold answered that he
was free from any such oath, and that in defense of his country he would fight
boldly with him as with his greatest enemy. Where (by the way) would be noted
the conscience which Girth a yoonger brother made of an oath, not concerning Ah
miser, Tibul. lib. 1.
and si quis primo periuria celat,
Sera tamen tacitis poena venit pedibus.


After peace offered and refused on each side, both armies meet in the field,
the order of the Englishmens attire and arraie, the manner how the Normans were
placed to fight in battle; the dissolute and (...) behauior of (...).
Englishmen the night before the encounter far deffering from the Normans
devout demenour; duke Williams speech upon occasion of wrong putting on his
armor, the battle, betwixt him and king Harold is valiantly tried, the
English by duke Williams politic strategem are deceived, king Harold slain,
his army put to flight and many of them slain after a long and bloody
encounter, many of the Normans, pursuing the English ouerhastilie procure
their own death, they take the spoil of the English, the dead bodies of both
armies are licenced to be buried; the differing reports of writers touching the
manner of Harolds death, a description of his person, his ambition did him much
hurt and hinderance, the number that were slain on both sides, his body
buried at a Waltham, nothing dispraise* worthy in him but his ambitious mind,
a view of his valiantness in a conflict against the Welshman, his rigorous or
rather pitilesse handling of them, his severe law or decree touching their
bounds, they are utterly subdued, and (by the kings leave) the VVelshwomen
marry with the Englishmen, the Saxon line ceasseth, how long it lasted, and
how long it was discontinued by the invasion of the Danes. The eleventh Chapter.
NOw it fortuned that both armies, Will. Malmes.
as well the kings as the earls, being prepared to battle, diverse offers
were made on each side (before they fell to the conflict) for an unity to have
been had betwixt the two princes: but when no conditions of agreement could
take place, they forthwith prepared themselves to try the matter by dint of
sword. And so on the 14 day of October, being saturday, both hosts met in the
field, at a place in Sussex not far from Hastings, whereas the abbeie of
Battle was afterward builded. The order of the Englishmen.
The Englishmen were all brought into one entire maine battle on foot, with
huge ares in their hands, and paled a front with paueises, in such wise that it
was thought impossible for the enemy to break their arraie. Matthew. West.
On the other side, the Normans were divided into several battles, as first
the footmen that were archers, and also those that bare gleiues and axes were
placed in the forefront, The arraie of the Normans
and the horssemen divided into wings stood on the sides in very good order.

All the night before the battle, Hen. Hunt.
the Englishmen made great noise and slept not, Will. Malmes.
but sang and fell to drinking and making of revel and pastime, as though
there had been no account to be made of the next days travel. But the
Normans behaved themselus warily and soberlie, spending all that night in
prayer and confessing their sins unto God; and in the morning earelie they
received the communion before they went forth to the battle. Some write, that
when duke William should put on his armor to go to the field, the back half
of his curasses by chance was set on before by such as help to arm him: at
which chance he took occasion of laughter, saying merrily to them that stood
by; No force, this is good luck, for the estate of my dukedom shall be yer
night changed into a kingdom. Beside this, he spoke many comfortable words
unto his men, to encourage them to the battle. Neither was Harold forgetful
in that point on his part. And so at convenient time when both armies were
ready, they made forward each encounter with other, on the foresaid
foureteenth day of October, with great force and assurance.

In the beginning of the battle, Polydor.
the arrows flue abroad freshlie on both sides, The battle betwixt king
Harold and duke William is begun.
till they came to join at hand strokes, and then preassed each side upon his
counterpart with swoords, axes, and other hand weapons very egerlie. Duke
William commanded his horssemen to give the charge an the breasts of his
enemies battles: but the Englishmen keeping themselves close together without
scattering, received their enemies upon the points of their weapons with such
fierceness and in such stiff order, that many of the Norman horssemen were
overthrown without The policy of duke William to disorder his enemies.
and make a countenance as though they did flee, H. Hunt.
which was quickly done by the Normans, Will. Malm.
and withal they imbattelled their footmen in a new order, so that their
horssemen shifted themselves on the

By this wily stratagem and policy of war, the Englishmen were deceived:
for they beholding the Normans somewhat shrinking back to bring themselves into
the above said order, thought verelie that they had fled, and thereupon meaning
to pursue them before they should recover their ground, they brake their
arraie, and began to follow the chase: whereupon the Normans (perceiving now
that all things A sore foughten battle. King Harold slain.
The Englishmen on the other part fought sore, and though their king was beaten
down among them and slain, yet were they loath to flee or give over; so sharp
was the battle, that duke William himself had three horses slain under him
that day, and not without great danger of his person.

Some of the Englishmen got them to the height of an hill, Will. Malm.
and beat back the Normans that forced themselves to win the hill of them,
Matthew. West.
so that it was long yer the Normans could prevail, being oftentimes driven
down into the botome of the vallie beneath. At length the Englishmen,
perceiving themselves to be ouermatched and beaten down on every side, The
Englishmen put to flight.
and thereunto greatly discouraged with slaughter of their king, began first
to give ground, and after to scatter and to run away, so that well was Chron.
de bello.
that a great number of them falling with their horses and armor into a blind
ditch (shadowed with reed and sedges which grew therein) were smouldered and
pressed to death, Will. Geme.
yer they could be succored or get any relief. The Normans fall into a ditch.
The next day the Normans fell to gathering in the spoil of the field, burieng
also the dead bodies of their people that were slain at the Giral. Camb.
Of the death of Harold diverse report diversely, in so much that Girald
Cambrensis says, that after king Harold had received many wounds, and lost
his left eye, he fled from the field unto the city of Westchester, and lived
there long after, an holy life, as an anchoret in the cell of S. James, fast
by S. John's church, and there made a godly end. But the saying of Girald
Cambren. in that point is not to be credited, because of the unlikelihood of
the thing it self, Will. Malm. Hen. Hunt. Matthew. West.
and also general consent of other writers, who affirm universally that he
was killed in the battle, first being stricken thorough the left eye by the
scull into the brain with an arrow, whereupon falling from his horse to the
ground, he was slain in that place, after he had reigned nine months and nine
days, as Floriacensis does report. He was a man of a comely stature, and of
a hawtie courage, Floriac.
and albeit that for his valiancie he was highly renowned and honored of all
men, Simon Dun.
yet through his pride and ambition he lost the hearts of many. There were
slain in this battle, Henr. Hunt.
besides king Harold and his two brethren, Polydor.
The chronicles of Normandy have of English men slain 67974, and of Normans
6013.
Girth and Leofrike, what on the one side and on the other, above twenty
thousand men.

The body of king Harold being found among other slain in the field, was
buried at Waltham, within the monastery of the holy cross which he before
had founded, and endowed to the behoof of such canons as he had placed there,
with fair possessions. Uerelie (as some old writers have reported) there was
nothing in this man to be in any wise dispraised, if his ambitious mind could
have been stayed from coveting the kingdom, and that he could have been
contented to have lived as subject. Among other manifest proofs of his high
valiancie, this is remembered of him, Ex 6. libro Polycraticon, sieve de nugis
curial^^m.
that being sent against the Welshmen (as before is partly mentioned) knowing
their ready nimblenesse in service, and how with their light armed men they
were accustomed to annoie and distress those that should assail them, John
Sa^ish.
he likewise (to match them) prepared light armed men for the purpose, and so
being furnished with such bands of nimble men and light soldiers, entered upon
the mounteins of Snowdon, and there remained amongst the enemies for the space
of two years. He sore afflicted the Welsh nation, took their kings, and sent
their heads unto the king that sent him about his business, and proceeding in
such rigorous manner as might move the hearers to lament and pity the case, he
caused all the male kind that might be met with, to be miserably slain: and
so with the edge of his sword he brought the country to quiet, and withal
made this law; that if any Welshman from thencefoorth should presume to pass
the limits over Offas ditch with any weapon about him, he should lose his
right hand. To conclude, by the valiant conduct of this chieftaine, the
Welshmen were them so sore brought under, than in manner the whole nation might
seem to fail, and to be almost utterly destroyed. And therefore by
permission of the king of England, the women of Wales joined themselves in
marriage with Englishmen. Finally, hereby the blood of the Saxons ceased to
reign in England after they had continued possession of the same, from the
first coming of Hengist, which was about the year of our Savior 450, or 449,
until that present year of king Harolds death, which chanced in the year
1069. 1069
So that from the beginning of Hengist his reign, unto Harolds death, are
reckoned 916 years, or (after some) 617, as by the supputation of the time
will easily appear. By all the which time there reigned kings of the Saxons
blood within this land, except that for the space of twenty years and
somewhat more, the Danes had the dominion of the realm in their possession:
for there are reckoned from the beginning of K. Swains reign (which was the
first Dane that governed England) unto the last year of K. Hardicnute (the
last Dane that ruled here) 28 years, in which mean space Egelred recovering
the kingdom reigned 2 years, then after him his son Edmund Ironside
continued in the rule one year; so that the Danes had the whole possession of
the land but 25 years in all. Touching this alteration, and others incident to
this Island, read a short advertisement annexed (by way of conclusion) to this
history, comprising a short summarie of the most notable conquests of this
country one after an other, by distances of times successively.

The rule of this realm by Gods providence allotted to duke William, his
descent from Rollo the first duke of Normandy downwards to his particular
lineage, he was base begotten upon the body of Arlete duke Roberts concubine, a
pleasant speech of hirs to duke Robert on a time when he was to have the use of
her person, a conclusion introductorie
NOw, for so much as it pleased God by his hid and secret

The said Rollo or Rou, was son to a great lord in Denmark called Guion, who
having two sons, the said Rou and Gourin, and being appointed to depart the
country, as the lots fell to him and other (according to the manner there used,
in time when their people were increased to a greater number than the country
was able to sustain) refused to obeie that

William Longespee or Longaspata, had to wife the lady Sporta, daughter to
Hubert earl of Senlis, by whom he had issue Richard the second of that name
duke of Normandy, who married the lady Agnes, the daughter of Hugh le grand,
earl of Ye must note that there was one Richard duke of Normandy before Rollo.
the third of that name, Robert and Mauger. He had also by her three daughters,
Agnes otherwise called Emma, married first to Egelred king of England, and
after to K. Cnute: Helloie, otherwise Alix, bestowed upon Geffrey earl of
Britain: and Mawd coupled in marriage with Euldes earl of Charters and Blais.
Richard the third of that name married Judith, sister to Geffrey earl of
Britain, by whom he had issue three sons, Richard, Robert, and William, and
as many daughters: Alix, married to Reignold earl of Burgogne, Elenor married
to Baldwine earl of Flanders; and the third died young, being affianced to
Alfonse king of Navarre. Their mother deceassed after she had been married ten
years, and then duke Richard married secondly the lady Estric, sister to
Cnute king of England and Denmark, from whom he purchased to be divorced, and
then married a gentlewoman called Pauie, by whom he had issue two sons,
William earl of Arques, and Mauger archbishop of Rouen.

Richard the fourth of that name, duke of Normandy, eldest son to Richard
the third, died without issue, and then his brother Robert succeeded in the
estate, which Robert begat upon Arlete or Harleuina daughter to a burgess of
Felais, William surnamed the bastard, afterward duke of Normandy, and by
conquest king of England. Of whose father duke Robert, and his paramour Arlete,
take this pleasant remembrance for a refection after the perusing of the former
sad and sober discourses.

In the year of Christ 1030, Robert, Will. Malm. lib. 3. cap. 1. Ranulph. lib.
6. cap. 19.
the second son of Richard the second duke of Normandy, and brother to
Richard the third duke of that name there having with great honor and wisdom
governed his duke dome seven years, for performance of a penance that he had
set to himself, appointed a pilgrimage to Jerusalem; leaving behind him this
William a young prince, whom seven years before he had begotten upon his
paramour Arlete (whom after he held as his wife) with whose beautiful favor,
Will. Malm. lib. 3. cap. 1. Ranulph. lib. 6. cap. 19.
lovely grace and presence, at her dansing on a time then as he was tenderly
touched, for familiar utterance of his mind what he had further to say, would
needs that night she should be his bedfellow, who else as wiuelesse should have
lien alone: where when she was bestowed, thinking that if she should have laid
her self naked, it might have seemed not so maidenlie a part* so when the duke
was about (as the manner is) to have (...) up her linen, the in an humble
modesty staid her lords hand, Ran. li. 6. ca. 19.
and rent down her smock asunder, from the collar to the very skirt. Heereat
the duke all smiling did ask her what thereby she meant? In great lowlines,
with a feate question she answered again; My lord, were it meet that any part,
of my garments dependant about me downward, should presume to be mountant to
my souereignes mouth upward? Let your grace pardon me. He liked her answer: and
so and so forth for that time.

This duke before his voyage, Will. Malm. lib. 3. cap. 1.
calling at Fiscam all his nobility unto him, Ran. ibib.
caused them to swear fealty unto his young son Willliam, whom he then at
his journey betook unto the governance of earl Gilbert, and the defense of
the governance unto Henry the French king. So Robert passing forth in his
pilgrimage showed in every place and in all points a magnanimity and honor
of a right noble prince, Ran. ibid.
and pleasant withal; who once in Jury not well at ease, in a litter was
borne toward Jerusalem upon Saracens shoulders, and meeting with a subject of
his that was going home toward Normandy: Friend (quoth he) if my people at thy
return ask after me, Ran. ibid.
tell them that thou saw their lord carried to heaven by devils. The Norman
nobility during duke Roberts life, Will. Mal. idem. Ran. idem.
did their duty to the young prince faithfully, but after they heard of his
fathers death, they slackened apace, every one shifting for himself as he
list, without any regard either of oath or obedience toward the pupil their
sovereign. Whereby not many years after, as Gilbert the governor, by Rafe
the childs coosine germane, was slain; the dukedom anon, by murder and
fighting among themselves was sore troubled in all parts. Thus much a litte of
duke Robert the father, and of prince William his son for part of his tender
years.

A notable advertisement touching the sum of all the foresaid history,
wherein the four great and notable conquests of this land are briefly
touched, being a conclusion introductorie, as is said in the argument.
IN the former part of this history it is manifest to the heedfull reader,
Britain inhabited by Brute.
that (after the opinion of most writers) Brute did first inhabit this land,
and called it then after his own name, Britain, in the year after the
creation of the world 2855, and in the year before the incarnation of Christ
1108. Furthermore, the said land of Britain was conquered by C. Julius Caesar,
1 Britain conquered by the Romans.
and made tributarie to the Romans in the 2 Britain conquered and overcome by
the Saxons.
Next after the Britains entered the Saxons, in the third year of king
Uortiger; and in the year of our Lord 450, and they governed until the last
year of king Athelstane, which was in the year of Christ 938. So that the
time of the Saxons first entrance into this realm, and the time of their
regiment was the space of 487 years. Howbeit, in the time of their
government, that is to say, in the 9 year of king Britricus, which was in the
year of 3 Britain conquered and overcome by the Danes.
spoiling and persecuting the people therein most greeuouslie. At the last,
Sweno or Swain the Dane obtained possession royal, in the year of Grace
1012, whose time of regiment lasted about three years. After whom his son
Canutus succeeded, and reigned 19 years. After him Harold his son, who ruled
three years: and after him Hardicnute the son of Canutus, whose government
continued but three years. This Hardicnute was the last king of the Danes, at
which time the Danes were expelled and hunted out of the realm, which was in
the year of our Lord 1042. So that it may appear by this collection, that the
Danes ruled as kings in this land by the space of 28 years. Hereby also it is
evident, that from the time of the first entrance of the Danes into this
realm, until their last expulsion and riddance, was 255 years. Finally the
Normans entered this land likewise, and conquered the same as before is
expressed, 4 Britain conquered and possessed by the Normans.
in the year of our Lord 1067, which is since, until this present year of
our Lord 1585, drawing near to the number of 600 and od years.

Now let these alterations of regiments be remembered [touching the which read a
notable animaduersion in the description of Britain, page 28, 29] and teach us
that therein the judgments of God revealed themselves to special purposes.
And whatsoever has been mentioned before, either concerning the subversion of
people, the desolation of provinces, the overthrow of nobles, the ruin of
princes, and other lamentable accidents diversely happening upon sundry
occasions: let us (I say) as many as will reap fruit by the reading of
chronicles, imagine the matters which were so many years past to be present,
and apply the profit and commodity of the same unto our selves; knowing (as
one wisely said) Post sacram paginam chronica vi^um veritatis typum gerere,
that next unto the holy scripture, chronicles do carit credit. But now to the
sequel, and first to duke William of Normandy.

Thus far the history of England from Noah and his sons, etc: to William
duke of Normandy. Hereafter follows a chronologicall continuation beginning
at the first year of the said dukes reign over this land, until the 25 year
of the Queens most excellent majesty Elizabeth, etc: whose days God in
mercy prolong (like the days of heaven) in peace and prosperity, etc.

