A Brief Discourse of the Scriptures: Declaring the several Stories, Lives,
and Deaths, of the Fathers, from the Creation of Adam, unto the death of
Joseph: Very necessary to be read and practiced, for easy understanding of
the Scriptures in a short time.

Imprinted at London by W. White, dwelling in Cow-lane. 1614.

THE PRINTER To the Reader.
THis short Treatise (Christian Reader) of, The story of the Fathers from Adam
to Joseph, coming to my hands, and being well approved of by many godly and
discreetly zealous men, for the worthiness of the subject, I was, at the
earnest request of sundry my especial good Friends, drawn to commit it (as
thou see) to the Press, for the benefit of many. Of the Author hereof, I
find no mention; yet likely it is to have been penned by an Attendaunt on that
learned Divine M. H. B. as a collection from his Notes or Readings. Perused it
has been, before the authorizing thereof for the print, by a Divine of mature
judgment; who corrected such things as he found faulty therein. Read it
without prejudice or partiality, and I doubt not but the profit, which thou
shall reap thereby for the increase of thy knowledge in holy Scripture, will
preserve thee from all repenting of thy pains.

W. W.

A Brief Discourse of the Scriptures, declaring the several Stories, Lives,
and Deaths, of the Fathers, from the creation of Adam, unto the death of
Joseph: very necessary to be read and practiced for easy understanding of the
Scriptures in a short time.
Jehouah, our God, Jehouah, is one.

Deuteronomy. 6.4.
JEHOVAH is a name of great force, to drive us to the due reverence of Gods
eternal Majesty: for it conteyneth the Wisdom, Power, and Eternity, of God.

His Wisdom,
In giving a Name unto himself answerable to the glory of his Majesty. This
Name was had in such reverence among the Jews, that they trembled to name or
read it, but used the name Adonai, Lord. After their coming from Babel, they
never used the name Jehouah; but a name of twelve letters, containing Father,
Son, and Holy spirit. Jehouah has in it the five Vowels, which are the
sinnewes of all Tongues: And as without them no tongue can be expressed; so
without the true knowledge of Jehovah, no flesh can be saved. It signifies,
Praise me the eternal God. It contains in it, Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

His Power.
In that from Jehovah all creatures have their breathing and their being; which
also in Jehovah is closely expressed: For as it consists of five vowels, so
has it two hh. which Sholers call Aspirations or Breathings; which two
Aspirations make up the number of 7. which is the number of the Sabbath. S.
Paul closely alluding to the name of Jehovah, says, that from him we have our
breathing, and our being: and in Esaias 57.16. the Lord says: The blasting
goes forth from me, and is included in the body; I made the breath. So often
therefore as we breath, we are to remember the Power and Majesty of Jehovah.

His Eternity.
Is closely expressed in these three Letters. t


Whose terminations are Jod, vavv, be.
is a sign of the

Futertense. Presentense. Preterperfectense.


This is made plain in Apoc. 1.4. Who was. is. will be to come.


Our God.
Herein is expressed the Humanity of Christ: for it is neither added to the
Father the first person in Trinity, nor to the holy Ghost the third person;
but to the Son the second person, who was to become ours, by taking our
nature upon him. Some hold it not to be meant of the Humanity of Christ, but
for a word of separation of the God of the Jews from the Gods of the Gentiles.

To remove such absurdity, the holy Ghost in Mark. 12.29. (when there was no
difference between the Jew and the Gentile,) repeateth the very words of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 6.4. The Lord, our God; The Lord, is one: Thrice naming God, as
commanding us thereby to understand Father, Son, and Holy spirit. For this
is always to be observed; Whatsoever God speeketh of himself, is to be taken
in the heauenliest understanding that can be made of it.

Jehovah, our God, Jehovah, is one.
There be three in Heaven, The Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit: And
these three are one.

1. John. 5.7.
The Trinity is here described to be one united Godhead, distinguishable in
persons, but vndeuidable in coeternitie: one in three, and three in one. GOD,
who Created, Redeemed, and Sanctified all. One only wise God, who was showed
in the Flesh, was justified in the Spirit, was seen among Angels, was preached
to the Gentiles, was believed on in the World, and received up into Glory. 1.
Timo. 3.16. Which to know, is the first and chiefest point of all salvation, as
John 17.3. This is eternal life, to know the Father, and him whom he has
sent, Jesus Christ: Which must be obtained by the true understanding of the
Bible, as John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, and in them ye shall find eternal
life. Some will say, it is enough to know Christ crucified. Pilate, Herod, and
Judas the traitor, knew that; yet went to eternal destruction. Wherefore
salvation consists not in outward knowledge, but in renewing the spirit of
our understanding; which stands first in the knowledge and fear of God; then
in the knowing of our selves: which are the first two steps to salvation. For
true Knowledge is the mother of Godliness: and as the Eye is the light of the
Body, so is Understanding the light of the Mind. This a man having truly
learned, he is to meditate of the graces of Christ, offered unto us by his Word.

God has chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the World. etc. Ephesians.
1.4.
HErein we are to consider the loving kindness of God to exceed our deserts,
in loving us to salvation, before we were. The Papists hold merits of
salvation; which cannot any way hold, seeing God of his unspeakable grace, has
elected us unto salvation before we knew him. This mystery of Gods Election,
is not fully received of all, because men take not words of Scripture in their
proper sense, as they are laid down.

Election, is the eternal counsel of God for the saving and rejecting of
some, before the beginning of the world. The Heathen never received comfort by
this; for being told before, of things afterward to come to pass, they could
not know the reason, but thought that the actions of men were governed by the
motions of Stars, and the course of Nature, and not by the decree or
fore-purpose of God; who works every thing according to the counsel of his
own will, and not according to our reason. Then some will say, if God decrees
every thing, why punishes he any thing? It is answered, that punishment
comes from God, by the just desert of the rancor of man's mind. Election, of
his free grace, which he bestows upon who^ he will; as he says, Romans 9.15. I
will have mercy on whom I will have mercy. Therefore the first thing we ought
to know, is our Election: The last, is true Holiness.

That this Election, or loving kindness of God toward us, is of the will of God,
according to the counsel of his own will, and not drawn from him by force,
by help of Saints, or as being by works meritorious of the same, it may
appear.

Esaias. 63.16. Abraham knows us not, neither is Israel acquainted with us; but
thou Lord art our Father, and Redeemer, and of very loving kindness thou have
redeemed us: thy name is Euerlaistng. Romans 8.34. It is Christ only that makes
intercession for us. Esaias. 43.25. I am he only, which for mine own selfs
sake, do away thine offenses, and forget thy sins: for what have thou to
make thee righteous with? Thy first Father offended sore, and thy Rulers have
sinned against me. Thou art like a thing of naught, thy time passes away like
a shadow. Ier. I love thee with an everlasting love: therefore by my mercy
have I drawn thee to me. And John. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the
Father draw him: as it is written, Esaias 54.13. They shall be all taught of God.
Esaias 26.12. Lord, thou have wrought all our works. Phil. 2.13. It is God that
works in you both the will, and also the deed, even of his good will. 2. Cor.
3.5. We are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our
selves; but if we be able, the same comes of God, which made us able. Esaias
51.12. Yea I, even I, am he that in all things gives you consolation. Psalm.
130.7. For with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plentious redemption.
1. Pet. 1.2. We are elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father,
through the sanctifying of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling the blood
of Jesus Christ. Psalm. 90.2. Before the Mountains were brought forth, or ever
the Earth and the World were made, thou art our God, from everlasting to
everlasting: thou turnest man unto dust, and say, return ye sons of Adam.
Romans 9.11. Before the Children were borne, and when they had done neither good
nor evil, that the purpose of God might stand, not by works, but by the
Caller: it was said, The greater shall serve the lesser; as it is written,
Mala. 1.2.3. Jacob have I loved, Esau have I hated. John 13.18. I know whom I
have chosen. Psalm. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven
and in earth, and in the sea, and in all deep places. Romans 11.5.6. There is a
remnant left according to the election of grace. If it be of grace, then it is
not now of works: for then grace is no more grace. But if it be of works,
then it is now no grace: What then? Israel has not obtained that which he
seeks; but the Election has obtained it. 2. These. 2.13. We are bound to
give thanks always to God, because that God has from the beginning chosen us
to salvation, through sanctifying of the spirit: and through believing of the
truth, to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 8.30. Moreover, whom
he appointed before, them also he called. And whom he has called, them also
he justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Now follows the effect of Election, either in respect of the Elect, or
Reject.
And first for the Elect.
THE Elect, whom God in his mercy has saved for his righteousness sake, and
not for their deserts, he guides by the grace of his holy Spirit, as Romans
8.14. As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the Sons of God. Esaias
43.7. All those that are called by my name, I have created, fashioned, and made
for my honor. Yet he leaves them sometimes unto themselves, that they may
acknowledge the weakness of their own nature, as Noah, Lot, Jacob, David,
Solomon, Peter, and others; but never suffers them to fall quite away: as
appears Esaias 54.8. A little while have I forsaken thee; but with great mercy
will I take thee up unto me. When I was angry with thee, I hid my face from
thee for a little season: but through everlasting mercy have I redeemed thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer. The Mountains shall move, and the Hills shall
fall down; but my Loving kindness shall not move, and the bond of my peace
shall not fall down from thee, says the Lord thy merciful lover. Psalm.
37.23. The Lord orders a good man's going, and makes his way acceptable unto
himself: Though he fall, he shall not be cast away: for the Lord vpholdeth him
with his hand. Psalm. 103.10. He deals not with them after their sins, nor
rewards them according to their wickedness: but look how the Heaven is in
comparison of the Earth, so great is his mercy toward them that fear him: for
he knows whereof they be made, and he remembers that they are but dust. He
saves their life from destruction, and crowns them with mercy and loving
kindness. Esaias 54.17. Lo, this is the heritage of the Lords Servants, and
their righteousness comes of me, says the Lord.

The Reject, he leaves to their own selves, hardening their own hearts,
that he may have occasion of judgment against them. Esaias 57.20. They are like
to the raging Sea, that can not rest, whose water fometh with the mire and
gravel: for they have no peace with God. The Wind shall blow them forth, and
Vanity shall take them all away: they are like to Dust before the Wind, and
like to the Chafe in a Summer floor. Psalm. 73.4. The Lord suffers them to
come in no peril of death, but they are lusty and strong: they come in no
danger like other folk, neither are they plagued like other men: And this is
the cause that they be so holden with pride, and overwhelmed with cruelty;
their eyes swell with fatness, and they do even what they lust. They corrupt
others, and speak wicked blasphemy: their talking is against the most
highest. Tush (say they) how shall God perceive it? is there knowledge in the
most highest? Lo, these are the ungodly, and these have riches in possession.
Such were Kaine, the wicked mockers before the floode, Cham, the builders of
Babel, the unclean Cities, Ismael, Esau, Pharaoh, Moab, Ammon: The wicked
oppressers, Saul, Absalon, the Kings of Israel, and the Kings of Babel,
Antiochus the vild, Herod, Pilate, and Judas the traitor; and many others, who
brought upon themselves just cause of eternal condemnation. Psa. 73.18. The
Lord has set them in slipperie places, and casts them down, and destroys
them. Oh, how suddenly do they consume and perish, and come to a fearful
end? Yea even like as a dream does he make their image to vanish. Some
folishly dispute, Why God has not saved all things, seeing he made all? they
are answered, Ier. 12.1. The Lord is more righteous then that he should be
disputed with. Ier. 18.6. They are in the hand of the Lord, as the clay in the
hand of the potter. Romans 9.21. God makes of one lump of clay, one vessel to
honor, and another to dishonor. What if God, willing to show his wrath, and
to make his power known, suffer with long patience the vessels of wrath
appointed for destruction? What art thou that disputest with God? Esaias 45.7. It
is I that created the light and the darkness, I make peace and trouble: even I
the Lord do all these things. Woe be unto him that strives with his Maker,
the Pot-soerd with the Potter. Says the Clay to the Potter, What make thou?
or, thy work serves for nothing? Woe be unto him that says unto his Father,
Why begattest thou; and to his Mother, Why barest thou? Thus says the Lord,
even the holy one and maker of Israel.

That their Sin is the cause of their Condemnation, and God not the author of
it.
Proverbs 29.6. The Sin of the wicked, is their own snare. Esaias 50.1. For
your Offenses, are you sold: and because of your Transgression, is your Mother
forsaken. Esaias 59.2. Their Misdeedes have separated them from their God, and
their Sins have hid his face from them, that he hears them not. They hope
in vain things, imagining deceit, and bringing forth evil: they breed
Cockatrises eggs, and weaue the Spiders web: who so eats of their eggs,
dies; but if one tread upon them, there comes up a Serpent: Their deeds are
the deeds of wickedness, and the work of robbery is in their hands: Their
feet run to evil, they make haste to shed innocent blood: All their
counsels are wicked; harm and destruction are in their ways, but the way of
peace they have not known. In their goinges there is no equity, their ways
are so crooked, that whosoever goes therein, knows of no peace. And this is
the cause: They look for light, and lo it is darkness: They grope like the
blind upon the wall; even as one that has no eyes: They roar like Bears, and
mourn like Doves, looking for health, but it is far from them; for their
Offenses are many, and their Sins testify against the Lord. They will not
confess and acknowledge their Sins but do amiss transgress, and dissemble
against the Lord, and fall away from their God, using presumptuous and
traitorous imaginations in their hearts, casting away equity, truth, and
righteousness: but the Lord holds him self by his own power, and he
susteineth him by his own righteousness. He puts on wrath in stead of
clothing, and takes Jealousy about him for a cloak. Like as when aman goes
forth wrathfully to recompense his enemies, and to be avenged of his
adversaries. But unto Sion he is a redeemer, and of Jacob, which turn from
their wickedness he is a savior, and he will give them an everlasting name
that shall not perish. Esaias. 57.15. Thus says the high and excellent, even he
that dwells in eternity, whose name is the Holy one: I dwell high above, and
in the Sanctuary; and with him also that is of a contrite and humble Spirit,
do I pitch my habitation. Psalm. 104.35. As for sinners, they shall be consumed
out of the earth: and the ungodly shall come to an end. Psalm. 59.12. For the
sin of their mouth, and for the words of their lips, they shall be taken
in their pride: And why? Their preaching is of cursing, and lies. Psalm. 62.4.
Their devise is only how to put him out, whom God has exalted: their delight
is in lies; they give good words with their mouth, but curse with their heart.
Psalm. 69.26. For they persecute him whom the Lord has smitten: and they talk
how they may vex him, whom he has wounded. 2. These. 2.11. Therefore shall
the Lord send them strong delusions, that all they might be damned, which
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness, and obeyed not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus. With everlasting damnation shall they be punished
from the presence of the Lord, and from the presence of his power. Psalm. 51.4.
That he may be justified in his sayings, and clear when he judges.

That in the fullness of time, all should be brought under one head.

Ephesians. 1.10. FVlnesse of time, is here taken for the time of Christ's death,
whose death should accomplish the ceremony and oblation, and break down the
wall between the Jew and the Gentile. When men should look no longer for
salvation only from Jerusalem, but should praise God every where, their
hearts being assured, that they were members of Christ the head. The Heathen
not taking notice of this, could never come to salvation. The blind Jews not
marking this, joined with Chittem in the second degree (which are the Romans)
to crucify Christ the King the most holy: because he testified of himself,
that he was that Day Star which was to appear: That Scepter that should dash
all the sons of Seth: The Ladder by whom the Angels of God ascended and
descended: Shiloh, Emmanuel: the Lion of the tribe of Judah: The Root of
Iessay: The stone which the builders refused: The true Manna: That Spiritual
Rock, that would give wathers of Life: The True Bread that came down from
heaven: He unto whom the crown and Diadem did belong Michael, who thought it
no robbery to be equal with God: The Stone that should punne Nebuchadnetzars
Image to duste: Palmonie the secret Numberer: He who wayeth, numbreth, and
deuideth: the Great Shepherd of his sheep: The True Vine, from whose sides
does proceed wine of everlasting life: He that came to do the will of his
Father: John. 4.10. He that met with the woman of Samaria at Jacobs well, to
whom he promised everlasting water: The Stumling block to the Jews: The Light
to the Gentiles: The Eye to the blind, and an Help to the lame: For that is
his name God is my strength and my righteousness, etc. Wherefore he has made
them Vagabonds over the whole earth, and has brought that Abomination of
desolation upon them, whereby their City and Sanctuary is destroyed: And why?
because they would not know the Fullness of time, the day of salvation. The
Crane, the Swallow, and the Turtle Dove, do know their time, but my people
will not know the time of my coming, says the Lord. Also our Savior Christ
says, Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hipocrites, you can discern the
wind and the weather; but you know not the time of the coming of the son of
man: which they might have known from Dan. 9.24. where the Angel Gabriel
says: 70 Seauens, or 490. years are determined for the death of Christ the
King the most holy, to finish sin, to reconcile iniquity, to bring in
Justice, to seal the vision and prophet, and to anoint the Most Holy. By
which we are constrained highly to esteem of the knowledge of the times: for
they are of as great force to the understanding of the Bible, as the stars
are in the heavens for giving of light. No part of the Bible, but consists of
time, place, or person. If of time, as one third part; then the knowledge
thereof is to be embraced, and in no respect to be despised, as lightly
regarding the use thereof: least striving for darkness, we become children of
darkness, and so lose the light of eternal life; as the Jews and Romans did,
whose recompense has followed: The one deprived of their earthly glory; the
other advanced to glory, to be a stain of eternal damnation.

In the beginning was the word, etc. John. 1.1.
THese words, In the beginning, are the first words in the old Testament,
whose first word in the Hebrew is Bara, which consists, according to the
Hebrew, of three letters, which closely contain in them Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost: as (...) for Ben, which singnifieth Son; (...) for Abba, which
is Father; and (...) for Ruach Hakodesh, which is the Holy spirit. Thus the
Trinity is closely contained in the first word; but in the first verse, is
expressed in open words. In the beginning, God made heaven and earth, and the
spirit of God moved upon the waters: and God said, Let there be light. This is
expounded, John 1.1. in these words. In the beginning was the Word, and the
Word was with God, and that Word was God: showing that Word, in this place, is
taken for the Son of God, by whom he made the world: as John. 1.3. By him
were all things created. And Heb. 1.2. God made all things by his Son, who
rules all things by his mighty power. Wherefore Christ in the days of his
flesh, chose the trade of a Carpenter, John 6.42. Math. 13.55. And in Esaias.
43.10. It is said, This record you must bear me your selves, says the Lord,
that I am God, and even he I am from the beginning. I do the work, and who
shall let it. Thus says the Lord the holy one, our redeemer- Wherein is
distinctly expressed Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

He was the Light, and that Light was the life of man.

John 1.4. LIfe and light, is not here carnally meant, but spiritually. To
which two things, Aaarons Jewel of Vrim and Thummim, had a full relation:
Vrim, signifying Light of the mind: Thummim, Perfection of virtue; which
brings life to the soul. As John. 1.9. Christ is the true light that
lightneth every man. And he that abides in this light has everlasting life.
1. John 1.5. God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. If we walk in
light even as he is light then have we fellowship with him, and the blood of
Jesus Christ shall give us life, and cleanse us from our sin. We the gentiles
were darkness; but now are light in the Lord. Ephesians. 5.8. The understanding of
the stories of the Bible does give a great light to the mind of man, and the
practice gives life unto every one that embraces them: as Deuteronomy. 8.3. and Mat.
4.4. Man lives not by bread only, but by every word which proceeds out of
the mouth of God. The despisers of religion continue in darkness, and light to
them is death: as 1. John 2. 9. He that says he is in light, and hates his
brother, is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes; because the darkness has blinded his eyes, 1. John 5.11. But God has
given us eternal life, and that life is in his Son; who laid down his life
for his Sheep, John 10.15. Wherefore, while we have light, let us walk and
believe in the light, that we may be the children of the light. John 12.36.

The first Adam was made of the Earth, earthly. etc.

The second was made a soul, giving life. etc.

HEre, before the comparison between Adam and Christ, we are to consider the
Creation, wherein we are to understand the Creation of the Heaven, Earth, and
Sea, and all the host of them; which do consist of Wightes visible and
invisible: Invisible, as Angels: Visible, as Sun, Moon and Stars, Fishes,
Fowls, Plants, Herbs, Grass, Beasts, and such like, which God created
before he created Adam, by Christ for Adams sake; because he purposed not to
take the nature of Angels, or of any other creature, but of Adam; and that he
might be known in his power and loving kindness to Adam by his works. For he
fore-purposing to make Adam both King and Father of all the Earth, would not
have his wits entangled with cares for this life, but to have his affections
settled on heavenly things, that he might continue holy and blameless before
him: as Mat. 6.25. Take no care what you shall eat, or what you shall drink;
nor yet for your body, what raiment you shall put on. Behold, the Fowls
neither sow, nor reap, and your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not much
better then they? How much more then shall he do the same for you? For he
knows ye have need of all these things, But first seek the Kingdom of
God, and his righteousness, Math 6.33. For no man's life stands in the
abundance of things which he possesses.

Now follows Adams creation.
He was made the sixth day (as it is gathered in September) of the dust of the
earth upon Mount Moriah; which is a Mountain adjoining to the gates of the
Garden of Eden; into which Garden he was put to dress it, about six of the
clock in the morning, as we account, when men commonly go to labor, as
should appear by the Psalm. 104.23. where it is said, Adam goes forth in the
morning to his labor. This is not particularly meant of Adam, but generally of
all men; no doubt alluding to the time of Adams creation. He had dominion
given him over all things, and wit like to an Angel to give names to all
Beasts, and free liberty to eat of all the Trees in the Garden, The Tree of
knowledge of good, and ill, only excepted. As if God should have said unto
him, (as Moses afterward said to the Children of Israel.) I set here before
you life and death, eat of the one, and live; and eat of the other, and die
eternally. Yet could not he be content with this glorious estate, but did eat
of the forbidden Fruit (by the persuasion of the Woman which God framed out of
Adams Ribbe, and joined to him to be an help for him) before they had
continued in Paradise one day, (as it is written Psalm. 49.20. Adam being in
honor, continues not a night, but is like to the Beasts that perish,) which
Woman was deceived by the subtlety of a Serpent; that is, of the Devil
speaking in a Serpent; which Beast was fittest to possess to the deceiving of
her, because he excelled all other Beasts in the Field in wit. For if an
Ass had said so much to her as did the Serpent, it is very likely she would
have examined the cause further: But he having once been an Angel of light,
but not keeping his first original, being thrown down from Heaven,
continuing his knowledge, though he lost his virtue, was not to seek either
for means, matter, or opportunity, envying their estates, to bring his
murtherous purpose to pass, (for so is he called the Serpent, Apoc. 12.11.
John 8. 44.
the old Devil, or Satan, who was a Murderer from the beginning,) but knowing
the prohibition, comes to the Woman, saying: Yea, has God said, ye shall
not eat of every Tree in the Garden? To whom the Woman answers, saying: We
may eat freely of the fruit of the Trees of the Garden; but as for the Tree
in the midst of the Garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, nor
touch it, least happily you die. Out of which speeches, the Serpent (being a
Ramping and a roaring Lion, going about seeking how he might devour her,)
quickly sucketh advantage, finding her to have digressed from the words of the
Commandment, adding thereto a trick of his own head, says to the Woman: Ye
shall not die at all; but, you shall be as Gods, knowing good and evil. In
that he says, Gods, he means not the true God, (for whatsoever he
speaks, is to be taken in the worst meaning that can be made of it,) but he
means, you shall be in the state of Damnation as Devils, which are called
Princes, Gods of the World: And likely enough that he touched the Fruit,
because she added to the commandment, the word touch.

Now the Woman beholding the fruit, that it was Good to eat. Pleasant to the
eyes. A tree to be desired to get knowledge.


She

took of the fruit, did eat, gave also to her husband, and he did eat.
These 3. properties above, are expounded in John,

Wantonness of the eyes. Lust of the flesh. The pride of life.


By reason of which sin, Adam and Eve seeing their own nakedness, sowed
fig tree leaves together, and hid themselves from the presence of God,
among the Trees of the garden, their souls being then in the state of
Damnation, with a light shining in darkness, but their Darkness not
comprehending the same, showing thereby the weakness of their nature, and of
their posterity, God but a little leaving them to their selves, that when they
had sinned, they had rather hide themselves in Darkness, and seek to stocks
and trees that have no help in them, than to God that made them. But David
afterward being clothed with the spirit of wisdom and understanding,
acknowledges the power of God to ouer-reach the compass of man's vain
imagination, when he says: Whither shall I fly from thy presence? If I take
the wings of the Morning, and fly to the uttermost parts of the World, thou
art there. If I climb up to Heaven, thou art there, If I go down to Hell,
thou art there also. For God who made the eye, shall not he see all the
dwellers upon the earth? who has weighed all men in a balance, numbering the
days and very hairs of the head, dividing to every one their double portion
according to the fore-purpose of his election, being a righteous Judge, sparing
not the person of Adam, though he were a King, and the stateliest King that
ever should be, but calls him to account in the cool of the same day wherein
he was created and fell, punishes him, though not according to the desert of
his transgression, like a merciful Judge that would save, and as a Father that
pittieth his own child, knowing whereof he was made, and that he was but dust,
says to Adam, What have thou done? and leaving him to consider of his sin,
goes to the woman in like tenderness, saying, What have thou done? as if he
should have said, Oh daughter, have I made the heavens and the host thereof;
that is, Angels, Sun, Moon, and Stars, etc. to be thy servants; and the
earth, and all that therein is, to be obedient to thy call, breathing into thy
nostrils life, whereby thou becamest a living soul in the image of God; that
is, in righteousness and true holiness to be a temple, and a Tabernacle for
the holy of the holiest to dwell in; and have thou defiled the same with fond
lusts, regarding the words of the Serpent the Father of lies, not respecting
my power and my severity, that as I made thy body and soul, so I could
destroy the same; whereby thou have purchased the execution of my law
established at thy creation, to thee and thy husband: what have thou done? But
God having examined the matters, and finding them both guilty, and the malice
of the Serpent to be the cause of their guiltiness, never stays judgment,
nor vouchsafes once to reason the matters with him, but presently curses him,
and punishes Adam, and the woman, and curses for their sakes the earth,
plants, and whole course of nature, and made them of obedient servants,
rebellious enemies to Adam, and his posterity. And because Adam was not
deceived, but the woman became into the transgression, he makes her will
subject to the desire of her husband, increasing her sorrows and her
conceptions. Thus he chastises them, but gives them not over, but pronounces
to the woman a short, but a pithy sentence, That the seed of the woman should
break the head of the Serpent. That is to say, I will cause one to be borne of
the Woman's seed, which shall subdue the Devil; and the Devil shall do his
endeavor to trip up his heels, by tempting him.

The particulers whereof, Adam neglected not to examine: and the Woman likewise
understanding from hence, duly marking and embracing the same, that God had a
purpose to save her, gathers from these words, matter enough to save her,
and all the world after her, which receive like comfort of the same Promise:
For she rightly understood that this Seed must needs be Christ, who must come
and take Adams nature upon him, who should be subject to death, that he might
overcome him that had power of death: For she knew, and so did Adam, that if
ever man, being but only man, might work his own redemption, himself was
likeliest to have done it, because he was the chiefest of all the men that ever
should be in the world. But Adam being the goodliest man, and not able to do
it him self, he knew it must needs be God, who must appear in the similitude
of Adams nature, and suffer death, that he might rise again to sit at the
right hand of his Father, to make intercession for the Sons of Adam: They
both, the Man and the Woman, embracing this, obtained the favor of God; and
Adam called his Wives name Euah, that is, Life: to show, that whosoever
believed as she believed, should be partakers of eternal life: as it is
written Romans 10.9. Whose confesses with his mouth, and believes with his
heart, that Jesus Christ is the Son of the living God, he shall be saved.

But Adam and Euah were driven out of Paradise, and Cherubines where set to
keep the way of the Tree of life: and they were clothed with Skins, as it
should appear with the Skins of Beasts, (to show their beastliness) which
God for them had slain, to offer for sacrifice, to teach them the use thereof.
For no doubt God would not destroy the beasts to have them spoiled, seeing
that Adam was not to eat any. And we see that Kaine and Abel offered
sacrifices, as being taught from Adam: whose sacrifices were of two sorts.
Abel offered (as appears) in sincerity of religion. The other for outward
ceremony void of true religion. Wherefore to Abel and his offering God had
respect, but to Kaine and his offering he had no regard. Wherefore Kaine,
being possessed with the Poison of the Serpent, envied Abel, because his works
were good and his own evil; and killed him; and being asked of God why he
had slain his brother, in steed of asking pardon of God, he said, that his
fault was greater then that Gods mercy could forgive it. Against whom, Saint
Augustine cries vehemently, that by how much less the mercy of God could be
inferior to the fault of Kaine, seeing that to forgive, is a thing proper to
God; and to revenge and punish, is far estranged from his nature: by so much
more great was the offense of Kaine in the words he said, then in the murder
he did; seeing that by the stroke of the Sword, he took away but the life of
his Brother; but by the blasphemy of his tongue, he gave death to his own
soul. To kill his Brother, was evil done; but to despair in Gods mercy, was
even a transgression of the Devil: For more do we offend God to esteem him
without mercy, then in any other sin we commit against Man. For which, God
curses him, giving him a mark of a guilty Conscience, always accusing him
of sin against God, and inhumanitie against Nature. Whereupon he goes up and
down wandering as one finding no rest or peace, like an excommunicate person,
from the place of true Religion, into the land of Nod, which signifies,
Fugitive.

This Kaine was the eldest Son of Adam, whom he named Possession, for so
does Kaine signify; as if he had gained a goodly Possession. But seeing what
might be the comfort of such Possession, he calls his other Son Abel, that
is, Vanity; to show, that if a man have never so large Kingdoms or
Possessions, or be never so nobly borne, as Kaine was, (except the Son of
God) it is all but Vanity, and vexation of mind. It is not to be understood
that Adam had now no more Children but Kaine and Abel; for doubtless Adam had
many more Children, as may appear by Kaines Story: For it is said, that Kaine
departed into the land of Nod, and knew his Wife, which must needs be Adams
Daughter, and married before the murder: for we are not to think that Adam
would afterward have bestowed his Daughter upon a Reprobate. The holy Ghost
names only three of Adams Sons, Kaine, Abel, and Seth, to make a
proportionable number answerable to the number of the letters of the words of
the Holy tongue, or the tongue of Adam: For upon three letters, does every word
in that tongue consist.

Kaine does represent the afflicters of such as in this life esteemed the
World, and the pleasures thereof, Vanity; which is Abel. And Seth, whose name
signifies Settled, or Foundation, to show the assurance of his Faith in the
Promises of God, to the confirming of our Faith: which was, that from him must
come that Seed of the Woman, that should bruise the head of the Serpent. This
sentence they and we, and all the World, were and are bound to take notice of.
For this we ought to know and believe so assuredly, that we might show our
selves settled upon a sure Foundation, not upon Sands, where Sea and Wind may
overthrow us; but upon the Rock Christ Jesus, that our building may remain as
the Mount Sion; and as the heavenly Jerusalem, which is builded four square of
three foures of precious Stones, that howsoever we be tossed with afflictions
of this life, we may stand firm, acknowledging Jehovah to be the one true and
everlasting God, Father, Son, and Holy spirit; and that his mercy is like to
eternal Mountains that cannot be removed, wherewith he loved us unto
salvation, before the foundation of the World.

Thus duly considering his Power and Wisdom in the particular actions of the
Creation, Adams fall, the Promise of eternal life; Adams Faith, and his
Sacrifices the shadows of our Redemption; the Seventh day, and the use
thereof; we shall spend our days in beholding our end, and never do amiss:
sorrowing with a godly sorrow as Enosh (whose name signifies Sorrow) did: For
as in our days, so in his, men fell from the true Religion of Adam, of Seth,
and other Godly men which were then alive, turning the grace of God into
wantonness, marrying Wives of Kaines poisoned seed, respecting Beauty, and
other outward gifts, rather then Virtue: not remembering their Grandmother
Enah, that for beholding the Beauty of one forbidden Fruit, commending it to
Adam for the pleasantnes of the Taste, and the unlawful desire that she had of
devilish Knowledge, not long before was driven out of Paradse: whose blessing
of Procreation, was joined with sorrow of Conception: Whose innocent Soul by
breaking but one Commandment, became guilty of eternal death, and lost the
whole glory of Paradise, and was driven out into Mountains, as not worthy to
enjoy the benefit of the Tree of Life in the Garden of Eden. But Enosh being a
Godly man, and knowing that the fruits of worldly sorrow are likewise eternal
Death; and of Godly sorrow Repentance (which word signifies a changing of
Judgment from Ignorance to true Knowledge, to the renewing of the spirit)
names his Son Kenan, Contrite, or Repenting, or a looking back into their
impieties, detesting their vain conversation, to the killing of sin in him
self, and to the embracing of righteousness. For it is not only required of a
man to eschew evil, but withal to do good: to fly darkness, if we will enjoy
the light: to follow the right way, if we will not err: to auoy de the mire
and dirt, if we will be clean and without spot: and forbear to be evil, if
we will begin to be good. For it is not enough for a Valiant man to do what he
may, but also he is bound to attempt nothing but what he ought. And as
repentance is the fruit of godly sorrow; so thankfulness to God for deliverances
from like trials, proceeds from Repentance: Therefore Kenan the Contrite,
names his son, Mahalaleel, My praise God: which none can do effectually,
without a lowly mind, sanctified first by Grace, by the subduing of the flesh.
Mahalaleel knowing that such fruit is required of such a tree, names his
son, Iared, the Lowly: which gifts of grace, God bestows upon such only
as he accepts unto himself; as it is written: Blessed is the man unto whom
God imputes not his sin, etc. So that a man having thus purged himself from
the iniquity of wicked men, marking the rules of Gods eternal Wisdom, He
shall be a vessel sanctified unto honor, meet for the uses of the Lord, 2.
Tim. 2.21. Therefore Iared the lowly, names his son, Henoch, the Holy. Now
God commanding al men to direct their steps by the straight line of his word,
first lays down his will, what we ought to do to please him: and then
induces us thereunto, not only by hope of eternal life, but promises us in
this life long and happy days, as in the eternal Law is expressed: Love God
above all, and thy neighbor as thy self, that thy days may be long in the
land which the Lord thy God gives thee, etc. Henoch therefore being assured of
the infinite mercies of God toward him and his seed, by faith still beholding
(as in a glass) the Redemption by the Son of God, the sum of all
salvation, names his son, Methushelah, Long life, or Speare-death: For even
as the point of a Spear keeps off that which would otherwise destroy; even
so Methushelah kept away the Flood a long time from drowning the World. But
because men should not think that any lives without calamities, least outward
happiness should make men to forget God; Methushelah having heard his fathers,
and himself also (being a Prophet) preach of the destruction of the World by
the Flood, calls his son, Lamech, that is, Stricken, or Heart-wounded: which
is to be understood that in respect that he being near those times of dangers,
many of his posterity were like to be drowned, not only in the flood, but
eternally tormented, for joining with the wicked mockers, which despised the
preaching of the Fathers. But although God throws men's consciences down for
a while with grief of other men's just punishment, yet he rayseth them up
again, giving them hope of his assured Promises, and a sweet comfort of
eternal life. Lamech being thus strengthened with the faith of his Fathers,
aiming still to the sentence of Salvation pronounced in Paradise, calls his
son, Noah, Restorer, or Comforter, saying: This Son shall comfort us,
concerning the sorrow of our hands, and concerning the earth, which the Lord
has cursed. Wherein he shows that he both looked backward to the Creation,
and formard to the Redemption by Christ, The Seed of the Woman, that should
bruise the head of the Serpent.

Thus much for the use of the names of the ten Fathers before the Food in
generll.
Now follows the lives and deaths of the Fathers in particular: and first of
Adam.
There is a great doubt made of the time of the year of Adams Creation, and of
the day of his fall: and is refused as a thing unprofitable to be known, and
Impossible to be proved.
First for the time of his Creation.
IT is certain he was created in September, at the time that Fruits be ripe;
which is at the fall of the Leaf: And that was the fittest time, seeing in the
course of Nature, there was no fitter time to express the nature of Adams
fall. And as the fall of Adam was answerable to the fall of the Leaf, because
by his fall, death was brought upon all: So the death of Christ, being
contrary to Adams fall, because it brought life to all; the fittest time to
resemble this life in the course of Nature, was the Spring: Therefore Christ
dyed at the Spring, to deliver us out of the spiritual Prison, when as all
things show themselves to be delivered out of this earthly Iayle.

Now for the day of Adams fall.
IT was on Friday, the sixth day; the day of Adams creation, at the time of
eating: For we do not read that ever Adam did eat, before he did eat of the
forbidden fruit. Therefore when by the story, the time of eating cannot be
separated in time, reason shows us to join them in time: For, Satan was a
murderer from the beginning; and we must bring it from the beginning as near
as can be, not crossing any Scripture. The searching of this matter, is not of
small importance: For from the true understanding of the Creation, we see the
clearenes of the Redemption; and not marking the Creation aright, is the cause
of much folly: and they that miss of the laws of Creation, are sure to miss
of the laws of Redemption: and Moses making mention of many Times, he would
not have omitted the time of the Fall, except it had been done presently after
the Creation; therefore Adams fall, must needs be laid as near the beginning
as may be, not crossing the Story. The bare Narration shows, that no famous
action went between the Commandment and the Fall. And the shortness of the
time, does show the force of the Adversary. Besides, it is a great sin to
say, that any man, except Christ, could fulfill perfectly any one point of the
Law: for thereby we darken the glory of Christ, and prove him not to have
performed the whole Law.

If Adam had continued until the Sabbath in his innocence, no doubt he would
have kept a perfect Sabbath. And if he had kept a perfect Sabbath, he had
performed some part of the Law, and thereby been partaker with Christ in the
work of our Redemption.

Again, if Adam had continued in the image of God, which is in righteousness
and true holiness, until the Sabbath, he would have performed the ordinances
of the Sabbath; which was, to eat of the Tree of life: for God after his fall,
sets Cherubins to keep the way of the Tree of life, least Adam eating,
should live for ever. Whereby it appears, that if he had eaten thereof
before, he had not fallen. Therefore it cannot be, that Adam continued perfect
unto the Sabbath.

And further it is written, Psalm. 49.20. Adam being in honor, continues not
one night, but is like to the Beasts that perish.

Cedrenus a Greek writer, says; That Adam fell the sixth day of the first
week.

Saint Augustine says; The Woman straight way after her creation before she
accompanied with Adam, became into the transgression: otherwise Kaine had been
conceived without sin.

Theophilact upon Matthew, says; That as Man was formed the sixth day, and did
eat of the Tree the sixth hour: so Christ reforming Man, and healing the fall,
was fastened to the Tree the sixth day, and the sixth hour.

And in the story of the Creation in Genesis, presently after the fall, Moses
speaks of the Redemption. And without we compare the Creation with the
Redemption, we miss of all: For Adam to be compared with Christ, is the sum
of all. And wherefore should all the actions of the Redemption be accomplished
in such rareness, except to be answerable both to the fall, and to the time of
the fall? Wherefore it is needful we should know our thraldom, if we will
receive comfort by the Redeemer, thus.

First, Christ the Restorer, was borne of a Virgin: Why? Because by a Virgin,
destruction came to the world.

Chrysostom compares Eve and Marie together thus. Eve being a Virgin,
hearing the words of the Serpent, and believing them, brought forth Death.
The Virgin Marie hearing the words of the Angel Gabriel, and believing them,
brought forth Life.

Again, why should Christ die on the sixth day, rather then on the fifth, or
fourth? And why was there darkness until the cool of the day, rather then
till the Sun setting? But to make the Redemption answerable to every part of
the Fall: because God, according to the secret counsel of his own will,
before the foundations of the earth were laid, would make the art of Salvation
so easy, and the harmony of the Bible so tunable, that no music in the
world can be more pleasant to the ear, then the meditation of the love of God
toward us in Christ, is comfortable to the heart of man. Therefore, the
meditation of Adams fall, and the victory of Christ, ought to be continually
in our minds.

930.
Adam dies.
THe Hebrews descant very strangely upon the Arithmeticke of Adams years
which he lived; which were 930. upon a sentence in the 24. of Job, where it is
said: All the days of man upon earth, are but a shadow: as if he should say,
All the days of Adam are but Abel; for, Adam in Hebrew signifies Earth, and
Abell signifies shadow, or vanity: Whereby we are taught, that from the Earth
we came, and to the Earth we must return again, according to Genesis 3.19. We
are also to understand from hence, that although God defer his punishments,
yet he is mindful of his promises: for not one tittle or iod of his Word
shall pass; as appears in Adams death, which God before had promised, and
was accomplished, though it were 930. years after. Wherefore, howsoever we be
settled on the pleasures of this life, or be advanced to thrones of Majesty, as
Adam was, we are to know, that it is but a Steward-ship bestowed upon us for a
season; and that in this world, we are to look for no abiding place: for we
are but Grass, we are consumed as Smoke, our days come to an end. A thousand
years in Gods sight, is as yesterday: He turns Adam to dust, and says,
Return to dust ye sons of Adam. He brings our years to an end, as it
were a tale that is told. Wherefore let us pray to God with Moses, To teach us
to number our days aright, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom.

Adam comes short of 1000. years so much, as is the days of man's life.

Iared, Methushelah, and Noah, ouer-reached Adam in long life, because of the
power of the word of God. He died about Mount Moriah, where he was made. He
lived till he saw many Kings, he himself the greatest: and until he had
erected a stately government, and taught them humane arts: who was fittest to
do it, being a King to command whom he would, and what he would, and having
wit excelling all the men in the world. And as in a Princes court it is
requisite to have Noble men some higher and some lower, and men of all degrees;
so Adam lived till he might have a stately Court.

Now if a King should command a Divine to make Adams Will from his Story, he
would make it in this sort. O my Sons, gather you together, and harken unto
the words of your Father Adam, the last that ever he shall speak unto you. I
was void of salvation, and enjoyed not happiness, by disobeying: which
disobedience I then practiced, when I harkened to the persuasion of Heua, and
did eat the forbidden Fruit. I then felt the heavy judgments of God
against sin, and saw my nakedness; whereof I was ashamed. Thereby I brought
death upon all my posterity: which Curse had continued, if the Mercy of God
had not removed it, by offering a Blessing in the Seed of the Woman. I have
ruled you all the days of my life as a Father, that you may learn to choose
Governors, which resemble Fathers in behavior. I have instructed you to love
and obey their government: you must know, that as my salvation rests upon
belief in the Seed of the Woman, so must yours. But the house of Kaine
despising this, and killing Abel, a figure of him who by dying shall overcome
the power of the Serpent, will cause the Flood to destroy the earth. Few shall
embrace this Doctrine: for though eight be saved by the Arc, yet seven only
shall keep sinceerely the belief in this Promise of the Seed of the Woman. My
days have been long, with the rest of your Fathers; but the end of all flesh
is come upon me: for out of the Earth I came, and to the Earth I must return.

Now compare Christ with Adam.
The first Adam was made a soul having life, of earth, earthly: therefore by
the earthly one, came Disobedience. Sin. Judgment. Condemnation. Death.


The second Adam was wade a spirit giving life from heaven, heavenly: Therefore
by the heavenly one, came Obedience. Grace. Forgiveness Justification. Life.


Adam was created on the sixth day, and did eat of the tree the sixth hour. Was
made a man without a Father. made not inferior to the Angels ^ lost all. Was
tempted. lost salvation at the time of eating. Was made Ruler of the world, and
did not hold it. Did fall in the Garden. His soul was in darkness from the sixth
hour until the ninth hour.

Christ Reforming man, and healing the fall, is fastened to the tree the sixth
day, and sixth hour. Was made a man without a Father. Made lower then the
Angels, is crowned with glory, and all the Angels worship him being man;
whereby we may know the world was made subject to man. Was tempted. Brought
salvation to all, at the time of eating. Was made Ruler of the World, and did
hold it. went into a garden to recover Adams fall in the garden. when he
suffered, caused darkness to cover the whole earth, from the sixth hour, till
the ninth hour.



Adam By breaking one Commandment, lost all. Was called to account the ninth
hour. Was debarred of the Tree of life. Was driven out of Paradise. Was the
head of his Wife. was a King. Prophet. Sacrificer.
Lived 1000. years wanting 70.

Christ By fulfilling all the Commandementes, brought life to all. At the ninth
hour yields up the ghost, and goes to give account to his Father. Is the
true Tree of life. on that day, opens Paradise to the poor Thief. The Head
of the Church. was a King. Prophet. Sacrificer.
Was borne 70. years before 4000.



Because these two Tables consist only of Numbers, and that Numbers in the
Scriptures are great helps for the understanding of the same: before we come
to speak of Seth, it is not amiss to lay down what Numbers are of most use
in the Bible: namely, 1.3.4.5.6.7.8.10.12.

ONE.
One: Expressing the union of the Godhead; and from thence, the unity of all
Godly, as being members of one head Christ Jesus: which is made plain Psalm.
133.1. Behold how good and comely a thing it is, for Breathren to dwell
together in unity.

THREE.
Three: Expressing the distinguished Trinity; within which number, many
excellent things fall out still, to put us in mind of the vndeuidable
coeternity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

Adam Kaine Of Adam, the eldest extreme wicked. Abel Seth
Noah Iaphet Sem Cham Of Noah, the youngest wicked.
Terah Haran Nachor Of Terah, the middlemost was wicked. Abram

To show, that neither in eldest, youngest, or middlemost; but in Gods free
election, stands our eternal happiness.

Three Angels appeared to Abraham in his Tent.

Three foures of precious Stones were set in Aarons breast.

Three things reserved in the Arc, The Book of the Law. The Pot of Manna.
Aarons Rod, that did always flourish.


Three taken up in the Old Testament, and three in the New.

Three parts was Jerusalem divided into.

Three Letters the root of every word in the Hebrew tongue.

Three Captiuities of the Jews.

Three times was the Temple grossly polluted by the Babylonians. Antiochi.
Romans.


Three times a year, were the Jews bound to come to Jerusalem to give account
of their Religion.

Three days and nights was Jonas in the Whales belly.

Three nights and days was Christ in the Grave.

Three John's, viz. John Baptist. Luke 1.60. John Evangelist. Mat. 4.21. John
Mark. Act. 12.25.


Job saved three Eliphaz. Sophar. Bildad.
Daniel saved three Ananias. Azarias. Mishael.
Noah saved three Sem. Cham. Japhet.

In the third seventh Iubilee, the Jews fell away, and then Jeremy said: O
Earth, hear the word of the Lord etc.

The Title over Christ on the Cross; was written in Three tongues, Hebrew.
Greek. Latin.


Although it may not be urged, that all these Threes have full relation to the
Trinity, seeing they fall not out by chance, yet we are not to despise the
pleasant harmony, and comfortable use of them, but to think that the wisdom
of God has contrived salvation into such a sweet Art, that very children may
learn the same: and therefore the Scripture is called very fitly a shallow
water, and a deep fountain: shallow, that the Lamb may wade; and deep, that
the Elephant may swim.

FOUR.
Four: Is a square number, and usual.

Heber, the fourth after the Flood.

Judah, the fourth son of Jacob.

Four square, signifies true Religion.

Moses fourth son in the fourth age, was Sacrificer to the Tribe of Dan.

Four times seven Jubilees, the time of Christ's death.

Four, The form of the heavenly Jerusalem.

FIVE.
Five: the letters of Jehovah.

The five Vowels; the sinews of all Tongues.

Christ seedeth 5000. with Five Loaves.

SIX.
Six: The day of Adams creation: which number is often times used in the
Scripture, to put us in mind of the Creation.

Six hundred thousand fighting men came out of Egypt.

Six hundred years old was Noah at the flood.

Six times seven Standinges, had the Children of Israel in the Wilderness.

Six years was the land of Canaan in conquering.

Six Cities of refuge, for one that killed a man by chance, and not of malice,
had the Jews to fly unto.

Six times did the Children of Israel fall before Diuids time, in the time of
the Judges.

SEVEN.
Seven: the number of the Sabbath: which number of Seven, as it is famous for
the Creation; so God comtinueth the same proportion throughout the Bible, to
the Redemption. For as God the Father made the World in six days, and rested
the seventh: so God the Son, having performed his Fathers will, rests the
seventh day in the Grave.

Seven, is a year of Grace.

Seven Planets in the Firmament, which Plato compares to the number of seven
Stars in Apo. 1.16.

Seven years was the land of Canaan plagued, for that Joseph the beloved of
the Lord, should have been slain by his Brethren.

Seven Stones in the Temple: Gods seuenfold Wisdom or Providence, in all his
actions.

Seven eyes to look upon the Building of every Stone in in the Temple of
Jerusalem.

Seven years the land of Canaan was settling in rest.

Seven years the Temple was in building.

Seven years Nebuchadnetzar was a Beast, for destroying the Temple.

Seven Gates in the Temple, before you come to the Holy of Holiest.

Seven Branches did the Candlestick in the Temple stand upon, which had 24.
Knobbes; signifying the six days work, and the seventh day of rest in the
Creation.

Seven Months was the Tabernacle in building.

Seven Jubilees was the Arc in the house of Joseph.

Seven Trumpeters is a great number, that do always sound Gods praise.

Henoch the seventh from Adam. Heber the seventh from Henoch. Isaach the
seventh from Heber. Moses the seventh from Abraham. Joshua the seventh from
Ephraim. Elias taken up in the seventh age from Samuel. Ioram the seventh from
David.

Salomons Temple was consecrated in the seventh month, answerable to the birth
of the Fathers.

The ceremony of the Feast of Tabernacles continued seven days.

After the coming from Egypt, it was seven times seven days before the Law
was given.

Seven times seven days after Christ's resurrection, descended the holy Ghost.

The stories of the Scriptures go by seuens from Moses, till Christ's death,
thus: Seven years the land of Canaan was in conquering, Seven fifties for the
glory of Joseph's house, Seven seuenties for the house of Judah, Seven tennes
for the Captivity.

From the Captivity, to the death of Christ, seven seuenties.

Moses Ceremonies for the most part, were in the seventh Month.

The Manna that was gathered on the sixth day, served for the seventh.

The seventh year the Jews might not plough, sow, nor reap.

In the end of the seven seuens, was the year of Iubilee.

In the seventh seven from Cyrus, the Walls of Jerusalem were built.

Seven times 7000. of the Jews came from Captivity.

Ioakim ends the seventh seventy, with affliction.

Seven years plenty, seven years dearth in the land of Egypt; figured by
seven ears of Corn, and seven Kyne.

Noah lived seven Jubilees after the flood.

Seven thousand in the book of Kings mentioned, that never bowed their knees
unto Ball.

Kaines house cut off in the seventh age.

How often shall I forgive my Brother, till seven times? I say until seven
times seventy times: alluding unto Daniels seuens.

EIGHT.
Eight: The number of the persons saved in the Arc.

Eight: The day of circumcision.

TEN.
Ten: Is a full number, and the highest or last of simple numbers.

All Nations, after the number of 10. begin again, for plain teaching, and
plainness in reckoning.

Ten, is the year of Judgment, or account.

You have Ten words for the creation of the World: And Ten words for the
government of the world.

The Tenth is a holy number, as in Tithes: which is given to us to acknowledge
our duties.

In the Tenth month, the Waters of the Flood abated.

Sem lived to see the Tenth age: a great blessing.

Ten Plagues were the Egyptians plagued with, for afflicting Sems house.

Ten Spies in the Wilderness misbeleeued.

Ten Tribes fell away at Roboams time.

Daniels Beast has Ten Horns: which do represent Ten cruel Kings.

The Beast in the Revelation, has Ten Horns.

The Pope has Ten stately Kingdoms to assist him.

Noah is the Tenth from Adam. Abraham the tenth from Noah.

TWELVE.
Twelve Signs in the Zodiac. Twelve Months in the year. Twelve Fathers
from the Flood to Jacob. Twelve Sons of Jacob. Twelve Fountains in the
Wilderness. Twelve Stones in Jordan. Twelve Stones in Aarons breast.

Solomon had Twelve Stewards, and David Twelve valiant Captains.

Solomon at Twelve years of age, discided the controversy between the Women
for the dead Child.

Christ at Twelve years of age, is found disputing among the Doctors. He
likewise ordained Twelve Apostles: and Twelve times did he appear after his
resurrection.

In the Revelation, of every Tribe is sealed Twelve thousand. The heavenly
Jerusalem is described to have Twelve Foundations of 12. precious Stones,
Twelve Gates, and Twelve Angels, and the Names written of the Twelve Apostles;
and through the City there runs a pure River, and on either side of the
River, the Tree of Life; which bears Twelve manner of Fruits, and bears
Fruit every month in the year; and the leaves of the Tree, do serve to
heal the Nations with.

Now the reason why God in the beginning laid down in close signification,
and such easy proportions, the whole scope of his government to the Worlds
end, is to show that his Wisdom is infinite; and that nothing in the
Scriptures does fall out by chance, but by his forepurpose, according to the
secret counsel of his own will, to make us still look back unto the
Creation.

130.
Seth borne (Genesis 5.) when Adam is 130. years old.
ADam was make in the image of God, Seth is begotten in the image of Adam: to
show that whatsoever is borne of the flesh, is flesh; and whatsoever is borne
of the spirit, is spirit. When Adam was 130. years old, he begets Seth,
being (as may be gathered) not one day more, nor one day less: And this rule
serves for all the Ten Fathers before the Flood. The holy Ghost keeping an
exact Chronicle of the times, begins at Adam, and so goes forward, laying
down the particular ages of the Fathers unto the Flood, saying: When Adam is
130. years old, Seth is borne. Now if he had been one day more, the number had
not been perfect; if one less, it had not been exact. We may better therefore
conclud, that all the ten Fathers were borne on the sixth day, that is, the day
of Adams creation, rather then on any other day, seeing it can not well be
denied, and that it crosses neither Story, nor rule of Religion.

Seth, signifies Settled, or, Foundation. He knew the Creator, and that the
world should be founded upon him.

Esaias 58.11. The Wicked have no sure foundation, but are like to the Chafe in
a Summer floor: But the Godly shall be like a fresh watered Garden, and like
the Fountain of water that never leaves running; whose foundation is laid
for many generations. For as a Tree that has sure roots, will bear many
Branches: so, to be settled in Religion, as Seth was, many things will appear
to be of singular force.

Seth died, being 912. years old. 1042.


Now compare him with Christ, thus.
Seth His name signifies Foundation. He was begotten in the image of Adam.

Christ The Rock, and sure Foundation of his Church. The very caracter of his
Father.



Enosh borne, when Seth is 105. years old. 235.

In these numbers, you have 10. multiplied by 10. and 5. which is the number of
the letters of Jehovah.

HIs name signifies Sorrowful. Every man is called sorrowful Enosh: and the
Hebrew tongue sometime calls a man Enosh: and sometimes Adam. The Caldeans
call a man Enosh, but not Adam, because they had not the antiquity of the
Creation of the world. In Enosh his time, Religion decayed in the house of God:
for which, the Flood came and drowned the World.

This Sorrow, is called a Godly sorrow; to which, the Lord has added a
Blessing, as Mat. 5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall receive
comfort. And Ecclesiastes 7.5. Crauitie is better then laughter; for when the
countenance is heavy, the heart is reformed. And Christ in Luke 6.21. says,
Blessed are ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh.

Christ being sorrowful for the negligence of the Jews, knowing* that they
should be plagued for not embracing the Promise to Abraham, Isaacke, and Jacob,
weepeth over Jerusalem, saying: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, (O sight of peace! O
sight of peace!) If thou had known those things that belong to thy peace;
And so with grief and sorrow of heart, he leaves off, as not able to express
the sum of his sorrow. Again, with like sorrow he says: How often would I
have gathered you together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens, and you would
not?

1140.
Enosh dyed, being 905. years old.

325.
Kenan borne, when Enosh was 90. years old.
HIs name signifies Contrite, or small store. Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the poor
in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. Esaias 57.15. Thus says the
High and Excellent, even he that dwells in Eternity, whose name is the Holy
one: I dwell high above, and in the Sanctuary; and with him also that is of a
Contrite spirit do I dwell, that I may heal a troubled mind, and a Contrite
heart. Psalm. 51.17. An humble and Contrite heart, the Lord does not despise:
Therefore shall every godly man praise the Lord without ceasing.

1235.
Kenan dyed, being 910 years old.

395.
Mahalaleel borne, when Kenan was 70. years old.
You have in this number ten seuens, or seven multiplied by ten, which is 70:
which is the number of his nativity; wherein you have a sweet resemblance of
the Creation: of which number, many excellent things are to be spoken, which I
will handle afterward.

THis name signifies, My praise God. Leah names her fourth son Judah, (the
Father of Shiloh) Praise God, for so his name likewise signifies. The use of
this, ought to be embraced of all, seeing it stretches to the salvation of
all. It appears hereby, that the godly Fathers in ancient time, had
wonderful regard in naming their Children. For if you do mark the whole
Stories of the Bible, you shall find very few notable men, whether they were
godly or wicked, but they contain rare matter in their names.

From Mahalaleel we are taught, to Praise God aright; that is, in sincerity of
spirit, with sound knowledge grounded upon the truth of his word. David
knowing that praise giving to God, is not only required at our hands, but also
at every creatures in their kind: bids the whole course of Nature, Praise
the Lord. And in Psalm. 47.6. he says: O sing praises, sing praises unto our
God: O sing praises, sing praises unto our King: for the Lord is high, and to
be feared: He is the great King upon all the earth, sing praises therefore
with understanding. He shows us a reason in the 19. Psalm. 1. when he says:
The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handie
work. One day tells another, and one night certifieth another, etc.
Therefore, let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be always
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my Lock, and my Redeemer. Whereby we are
taught, that the true praise of God, consists not only in outward
acknowledging of his works, and his judgments, (for that the wicked are
often times compelled to confess, as Pharaoh, Nebucadnetzar, and others;) but
we must praise God so, as that all our thanks, and all our actions, may tend
to the acknowledging of the Redemption by Christ. For so does David In this 19.
Psalm, he begins with the Creation, and ends with the Redemption. Let us
therefore with him also say, Psalm. 103.1. Praise the Lord, O my soul; and all
that is within me, praise his holy name; which forgiueth all thy sin, and
heals all thine infirmities: which saves thy life from destruction, and
crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness. And Psalm. 105.1. O give thanks
unto the Lord, and call upon his holy name, tell the people what things he
has done. O let your songs be of him, and praise him, and let your talking be
of all his wondrous works. Rejoice in his holy name: Let the heart of them
rejoice, that seek the Lord. O seek the Lord and his strength, seek his face
evermore.

1290.
Mahalaleel died, being 895. years old.

460.
Iared borne, when Mahalaleel was 65. years old.
For this number 65. it is the half of 130.

HIs name signifies Lowly, or, Meek. He was 162. years old before he
married: because, at that time he had knowledge of the Flood that it should
come: therefore he consecrated his son to God.

How precious a virtue this Meekness is, and how highly to be embraced, we
may know by open experience, if we examine how God from the beginning, has
governed the World: for God respects not the person of any man, that he
should fear him. He overthrew the rebellious Nimrod, and the rest of the
Nephews of Noah, that would have a Name; and turned their speech into Babbling.
He plagued that flouting Ismael, and quayled that doughtie Esau. He drowned
stout Pharaoh in the red Sea, and overthrew the iron Chariots of Sisera at the
waters of Mageddon. He smote diverse Nations, and slew mighty Kings: Schon
King of the Amorites, and Ogg the King of Basan, and all the Kingdoms of
Canaan. He foiled the proud Philistine, and heawed the horn of Agag in
pieces. He made Iesabel a prey for Dogs, and wicked Achab to be slain in
the vallie of Iesrael. He made king Ioakim to be buried like an Ass, and
profane Nebuchadnetzar to eat Grass like an Ox. He made drunken Baltasar
to tremble like a Leaf, and Antiochus the vilde, to be deuowred of Worms: to
show, that he regards not proud looks, or fears the Kings displeasure:
For he sets up Kings, and pulls down Kings, as Luke 1.48. He looked on
the low degree of his Handmayde. He has showed strength with his Arm: He
has scattered the proud in the imaginations of their hearts. He has put
down the Mighty from their seats, and has exalted the Humble and Meek: As
Joseph out of the Dungeon, David from the Sheepcoates, Daniel from the Lions
den, Peter and John from mending their Nets, and made them Rulers over
mighty Nations, and Teachers to the Princes of the earth. Matthew. 5.5.
Therefore blessed are the meek, for they shall receive the inheritance of the
earth.

Christ being meek, was led as a Sheep unto the slaughter, not epening his
mouth.

Iared died, being 962. years old. While he lived, 1422.
there was no proclayming of the Flood, but presently after there was.

7. Henoch (the seventh) borne, 622.
when Iared was 162. years old.
HIs name signifies Holy, or, Dedicated to God. The name shows his fathers
affection, in giving him unto God; answerable unto Abraham in offering Isaacke.
Henoch of Kaine, was contrary in signification to this Henoch: the one,
Dedicated to God; the other, to the Possessions of this World. For Kaine after
his curse, wandering to the land of Nod, builds a City, and calls it after
the name of his son Henoch. The other Henoch, though indeed a rare man, yet
was 65. years without any mention of his integrity: And after that his
holiness is made manifest in this, that he found favor with God; his calling
was very glorious, being made a Preacher, to declare salvation to all that
would believe in Christ; and his own actions of life to be performed in the
highest degree of virtue. Whereby we are taught to be holy and blameless
before God, not giving our members subjects unto wantonness or pleasures of
this life; but esteeming the world, as though it were not; and possess it, as
though we possessed it not: putting on the New man Christ Jesus, that we may be
holy, even as he is holy.

7. You have here the number of Seven, to show that Henoch is the seventh from
Adam: for so he is called in the Epistle of Jude. He was no doubt, a very rare
man, seeing that he is commended of the Holy Ghost to have Walked with God, to
have his years answerable to the days of the Sun, and registered to be the
seventh from Adam, a Sabbath keeper; for his years do agree with the number of
the Sabbath: which number of Seven, or of the Sabbath, throughout the Bible,
does still put us in mind of the Creation, and so of the true keeping of the
Sabbath. For in the beginning, God made the World in six days, and rested the
seventh, and hallowed and sactified the same, and commanded it to be kept Holy
throughout all generations: And to resemble the same in his Creation before
there was a Sabbath, he made the seven Stars in the Heavens, which the
Philosophers call Planets, which have force in the whole course of Nature;
which he in his wisdom placed there, that the very Heathen, and such as would
not take notice of the Sabbath, might have the name thereof in their mouths,
although they made no use thereof in their hearts.

987^
Henoch is taken up, being 365. years old.

His taking up, did show what should be the state of the Godly. He was taken
up in despite of the wicked, and in recompense of his own faith. He was
taken up 57. years after Adams death, all the Fathers being then alive: And it
may be the Fathers did see him taken up, as a figure of Christ's ascension. The
wicked might then say, Where is the appearance of the Flood: for Adam is dead,
and Henoch is taken up, and all things continue as from the beginning? In that
God bestowed so short life upon Henoch, it shows that he would bestow
greater blessings on him in an other kind.

His years are answerable to the days of the Sun 365. years, a year for a
day. And as the Sun excels all other Stars in brightness; so did his
life excel all other men then alive in the World, for virtue. He is also
said, to have Walked with God, to be a preacher of Righteousness, to be taken
up.

These four special commendations are of equal glory: and we may be
assured by these testimonies, that his Godliness was very rare. The Grecians
say, that he left a book behind him of his preaching: But thereby (as much as
in them lies) they call into question the truth of the Scriptures. For first,
by this opinion they derogate from the glory of Moses, that he should not be
the first writer. Secondly; from the wisdom of God, which took order to lay
down the lives of the fathers in so short Arithmatique, and would thereby have
his wisdom wonderful to those which should come after: which had been to
small purpose, if Henoch had left a book of his preaching. But the Grecians
thus being answered, it follows that Henochs prophecy was against the words
of the wicked, and against the contempt of religion, which wicked men showed in
not believing the preaching of the flood. Saint Jude in his Epistle, from the
circumstances of the men and manners of the People to whom Henoch preached,
gathered what might be the sum of Henochs preaching, in this sort: Behold the
Lord comes, how? as at the giving of the Law, With thousands of his Angels,
to give judgment against all men, and to rebuke all the ungodly among them, of
all their wicked deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
cruel speakings which wicked sinners have spoken against him. Upon which
words, the Grecians not knowing the course of the Hebrews, in their fained
speeches say, that Henoch left a book of his preaching behind him.

Now compare him with Christ.
Henoch Was a Prophet: for he prophesied of the destruction of the World by
the Flood* Walked with God, His days were as the days of the Sun. Was taken
up, being the seventh from Adam.

Christ Was a Prophet, and prophesied of the destruction of the world. did the
will of his father. Is the bright Son of Justice: whose days, in the Psalms
are likoned to the days of the Sun. In the Scriptures, is the seventh that
ascended:



To weete, 1. The son of the Widow of Sarepta. 1. King. 17.22. 2. The
Shunamites son, whom Eliseus brought again to life. 2. Kings 4.35. 3. The
Soldier buried by Elizeus corpse. 2. kin. 13.21 4. Iairus daughter. Math. 9.25.
5. The Widows son. Luke 7.15. 6. Lazarus. John 11.44. 7. CHRIST.


That is, 3. in the Old Testament, New Testament,
and the Lord was the seventh.

Methushelah borne, when Henoch was 65. years old. 687.

His name signifies Long life, or, Spear death.

Methushelah died, being 969. years old, ( Sem being 98. 1656.
) the seventh that died after Adam, as his father Henoch was the seventh that
was borne after Adam. He died but a few days before the Flood, to show that
he being a just man, kept away the Flood, and lacked but 31. years of 1000.
Now it is not to be understood that he lived full 969. years, for he lived
but a few days of his last year. For if his years be cast, you shall see he
dies in the year of the Flood. The Flood came not in the first month, because
Methushelah the^ lived. The tenth day of the second month the Flood came,
Methushelah was dead before that time. His days were the exact rule of the
Flood, for so long as he lived the waters could not ouerflow the earth: he
being dead, the waters might ask God whether they should now work vengeance
to the wicked? No says God, Noah shall mourn him a month, as the children of
Israel mourned Jacobs death: afterward, this month of sorrow being ended,
then they demand of God again, whether now the wicked should be overwhelmed
with waters? God answered, no: for Noah shall have a Sabbath of preparation.
This being finished, the Flood covers the face of the earth.

Methushelah, spoil death, or, Spear death. Christ Died, and rose again, and
re^i^ed, that he might be Lord of quick and dead. Suffered death, that by his
death, he might overcome him that had the power of death.

874.
Lamech borne, when Methushela was 187. years old.
HIs name signifies Stricken, or, Heart-wounded. He is called so in respect of
some inward griefs that he should bear for the afflictions of the world. You
have an other Lamech of Kaines house, but of contrary nature to this Lamech.
Lamech of Kaine, was a striker: Lamech of Seth, stricken: the one a Preacher of
destruction to the world: the other, an example of impiety to the world; and
being 1600. years after Kaine, knew Kaines story. He had two Wives: it was
not so from the beginning. Some hold, that he was the first that had two Wives:
but doubtless many others had the like; but God in one, does show the manners
of the rest. He says to his Wives, I will kill a man, etc. So that as the
world began with killing, so it continued in wickedness and violence. The
other Lamech, does make a confession full of contrition, and in naming his
Son Comforter 600. years before the Flood, shows that he was a Prophet of
very lively skill.

1651.
Lamech died five years before the Flood, being 777. year old, (and Sem 93.)
His age runs upon seuens: for what he wanted in long life, he had it in
casting a sweet account. If Lamech had had the age of his Fathers, he might
have seen the Flood.

Compare him with Christ.

Christ is both outwardly stricken, and inwardly wounded. Outwardly, when in
the open Hall he was buffeted, scourged, and spitted at, and upon the Cross
pierced both hands, feet, and sides. Inwardly, when he was reviled with
blasphemous speeches at his death; and when in stead of Drink to comfort him,
they gave him Gall and Myrre mingled together: but most especially, when his
gyltlesse soul did suffer vnconceaueable torments, to redeem our gyltie
souls and bodies from the thrall of Satan; as may appear, when from his sides
issued Water and Blood.

Noah borne, when Lamech was 182. years old. 1056.

HIs name signifies Comforter, or, Restorer. The faith of Lamech no doubt, was
clear concerning salvation, by the seed of the woman, in that he named his
son Comforter, or, Restorer. As if he had said, though for inpiety, all the
world be destroyed; yet I am assured that the Promise made to Adam, must of
necessity be performed, or else no flesh can be saved. In this faith Adam,
after he had transgressed by eating of the forbidden Fruit, was saved. In
this faith, Abel offered up a greater Sacrifice then Kaine. In this faith,
Henoch walked with God, and was no more seen; for he was taken up. In this
faith, all the Fathers obtained eternal life. In this faith, Noah became a
Preacher of Righteousness, and an executor of true Judgment, and prepared the
Arc to the saving of his household, etc. Heb. 11.

10. This ten is to show that Noah is the tenth from Adam: Multiply Henoch by
Noah, that is the number of the Sabbath, by the full number 10. you have the
number 70. which throughout the Bible is famous, and of great force for light
in the Sorry. In this tenth age, Gods justice over all flesh was extended.

Compare him with Carist.
Noah Was a preacher of righteosnesse. Found grace before God.

Christ Was the true preacher of righteousness. Dan. 9.24. Grew in favor with
God and man. Luke 2.52.



Noah was a King. Prophet. Sacrificer.

Christ was a King. Prophet. Sacrificer.



1535.
In Noah's. 480. Cxx. Years begin Genesis 6.
WHerein Noah made the Arc: for so long was he in making it; not because he
could not have made it sooner (for God could have commanded it to be made with
a word, as well as he made all the world) but to show the patience and long
suffering of God, in sparing his judgments, that they who would not hear the
preaching of Noah, might justly be condemned.

Many things fall out in the Bible, whose number are answerable to this of
120. years.

120. Nations paid tribute to bring the Jews home from Captivity.

The government of the Persians was about 120. years.

120. Several Nations, that is, some of every Nation, were at Jerusalem after
Christ's Resurrection.

The Hebrews descant very strangely with the letters of Jehovah, and the 120.
years wherein the Arc was in making, thus. Multiply 120. by the letter --
which is 5. then you have 600. which is Noah's age at the Flood, with the
letter, which is 10. then you have 6000. The end of the world. This is the
consent of all the Hebrews.

Here is a doubt to be discussed, concerning the words spoken in Genesis 6. The
occasion of the doubt arises thus.
God says in Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not always strive with man, his days
shall be an hundred and twenty years. In Genesis 5.32. Noah's age is reckoned,
and he is then said to be Five hundred years old, and begets Shem, Cham,
and Iapheth. When his age is reckoned again at the Flood, the sum is but
Six hundredth years: So that if the sixth Chapter be in time after the fifth,
and in the fifth Noah is 500. years old, and that afterward, God says, The
days of all flesh shall be an hundredth and tweentie years, then Noah at the
flood must be 620. years, for put 120. to 500 and you have 620. but his age at
the Flood is but 600. Therefore some think that either the Chronicle is false,
or else the 20. years were shortened: like as it was in Ierusalems straytes,
least no flesh should be saved. To answer this doubt, we must observe, that it
is no reason in divinity, that because a matter comes, or is made mention of
in a Chapter afterward, that the time therefore of that story or action
follows the Chapters or actions going before; for this is but a circumstance
of method: For Moses in penning the Scriptures, used this order. He lays
down things of like nature together, as Genealogies together, and such like,
though they differ in time; because else he should make often repetion of the
same things. The observation of this, caused the Hebrews to set down this
Rule, that Moses in penning his Story, does not regard the circumstance of
first and latter. To weete, he does not set down that in the first place,
which is first in time; and so that which is latter in time, afterward; but
sometimes that which is latter, in the first place; and that which is first in
time, in the last, as the necessity of the narration gives occasion. This
being thus made plain, the doubt is easily discussed; for neither is Noah 620.
years old at the Flood, neither are the years of the Flood any thing
shortened, but the Chronicle is altogether true. For if we refer the 120.
years of the Flood, 20. years before that Chapter in which it was said Noah
was 500. years old, and begot Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, then do we make all
things agree, without crossing one another: and this of necessity we must
needs do: For seeing God has laid down the generals in proper and plain
terms, we must so cast the particulars, that they may make the general true,
and no way alter it. Besides, we have a like example: for although all the
lives and deaths of the Fathers before the Flood, are reckoned and summed up
together in one Chapter, we must not think that all their lives are
precedent to the Chapters following. For the Chronicles shows that Lamech
lived 5. years before the Flood, and Methushelahs death and the beginning of
the Flood, are very near: Even so here this sentence of the 120. years, is
to be counted before the fifth Chapter wherein Noah's age is reckoned: and for
the shortning of the days in Ierusalems besiedging, the holy Ghost says, it
shall be so; but for the shortning of the days at the Flood, we have no such
warrant in Moses: Therefore we are not to believe it.

1536.
Cxx. years begin Genesis 6. In which the spirit of Christ preached while the Arc
was in making.
Upon this sentence, there depends a great question, whether Christ descended
into Hell in his humane soul. The cause why this question is necessary to be
handled, is because diverse of the ancient Fathers hold opinion of Christ's
descent into Hell in his humane soul: Whose opinions having been so
superstitiously received, have drawn others of latter time, into the like
errors. But if men would follow the plainnes laid down in the Bible, and
with humility search it, avoiding curiosity, they need not trouble themselves
with the errors of the Fathers. The words of the text. 1. Pet. 3.18. are
these Christ was dead concerning the flesh, but was quickened by the Spirit. By
the which he also went and preached to the spirits in prison, which in times
past disobeyed, when once the long suffering of God abode in the days of Noah,
while the Arc was in making. Now the words whereupon this error is grounded,
are these. Christ being dead as concerning the flesh, went and preached to the
spirits in prison. Upon this they gather, that the spirits mentioned there, are
meant those in Hell: and went and preached, that is, after he was dead. But if
we compare these words with the residue, and consider the time when this
preaching was, we shall see Saint Peter means nothing less, than the
descending of Christ's soul into hell. For first, the text says, He went and
preached by the same spirit by which he was quickened. This spirit is of
necessity the Godhead* For what spirit was there that could loosen the
sorrows of death that they should not hold him, and raise Christ from the
dead, but the Godhead of Christ? Then the souls of all men, Godly or ungodly,
being immortal, cannot die; and therefore this quickening, cannot be meant of
his humane soul, for it needed none. Besides, we must consider to whom Saint
Peter wrote, to wit, to the Jews. Now seeing Christ taught nothing but Moses
and the Prophets, and the Apostles nothing but what they learned of Christ;
with what conscience could Saint Peter write a story to the Jews of the
seueere justice of God, which was never in Moses? for Moses never mentions
Christ's descent into Hell, there to cause the wicked to be more tormented.
Therefore seeing this old opinion gathered out of the works of the fathers,
and bred by them, maintains manifest absurdities, we must seek for another
exposition. If we consider the old Testament, we shall find that Eliphaz in the
book of Job. preaches the same doctrine that S. Peter does, and therefore
will serve for an exposition. Eliphaz resoneth with Job thus: Have thou, O Job,
marked the way of the world wherein wicked men have walked, which were cut off
by time, and whose foundation was covered with waters, which said unto God,
depart from us? And yet what could he do more for them? he filled their houses
with good things, yet they refused the way of the Almighty. So S. Peter
speaks, that the spirit of God went in like manner, as he is said to come
down at the overthrow of Babell by confounding their tongues, and when he
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, and preached in Noah, to weete, the time while
the Arc was in making. To whom? to the Spirits now in prison: Why? because
they said to God, Depart from us, we will none of thy ways. Thus we see the
words of S. Peter made plain.

This time of 120. years, Saint Peter calls, The patience and long suffering
of God. The Jews in a Book called Zoar, expound S. Peter's words in this
sort. The Lord comes to plague the Wicked for their unbelief, six months
with Water, six months with Fire; hot and cold, and sent them all to
Gehenna, which is Hell: not that they meant so, (the story of the word by
plain eyesight controlling it) but that the anger of God was as grievous to
their souls, as the Waters of the flood which wrinckled their bodies. Christ
in the Gospel compares the Flood with the end of the World: for in the days
of Noah, they had rich Iubal to feast them, and cunning Tubalkain to delight
them in building, or such like devises; and fair Nahamah that they might
marry according as their eyes lusted, till the Waters of the flood overwhelmed
them: so shall it be in the end of the World. Eliphaz. counsels Job, that
considering the end of these men, he should be at peace with God before our
substance be cut off, and the fire consumed the rest of them.

1556.
Iaphet borne when Noah was 500. years old.
HIs name signifies Persuaded. He was the eldest Son of Noah; whereof many
seem to doubt: which being examined by Scripture, will appear most certain.
In Genesis 5.32. it is said, Noah being 500. years old, he begets Sem, Cham,
and Iapheth. Now it is certain, they were not borne all at once; for the
plain Story crosses that. In Genesis 7.6. Noah is said to be Six hundredth
years old, and the Flood comes. Then he must needs have a Son that is
100. years old: It could not be Sem, for he was but an hundredth year old, two
year after the Flood, Genesis 11.10. Neither was it Cham, for he was younger
then Sem, for Noah said, He knew what his youngest Son had done. The reason
of this doubt arises, because Sem is named first in Genesis 5.32. whom Moses
(penning the Story long after) placed first, to show that Sem was the most
worthy, and had the prerogative of first borne, because Christ was to come
from him, according to the Promise made to Euah in Paradise: The seed of the
Woman, shall break the head of the Serpent.

Sem borne, when Noah was 502. year old. 1558.

HIs name signifies, Name, or, Renown. Whereby we are to understand, that
Noah had a wonderful assurance of the Promise in Christ in calling him Sem, or
as we say, Name. And withal, we are to seek by the like faith to be renowned,
that our Names may be written in the Book of Life. For Solomon says Pro.
22.1. and Eccle. 7.3. A good Name is more worth then a precious Ointment: But
God will put out their Names from under Heaven, that flatter themselves in
their wickedness, and whose root bears Gall and Wormwood, as he
commanded. Deuteronomy. 25.19. Put out the Name of Amalecke from under Heaven, he is
the beginning of Nations, but his latter end shall perish utterly.

These numbers, are the sum of the years from the Creation to the Flood;
which are gathered by the particular Natiuities of the ten Fathers before the
Flood.

Adam. 130. Seth. 105. Enosh. 90. Kenan. 70. Mahalaleel. 65. Iared. 162.
Henoch. 65. Methushelah. 187. Lamech. 182. Noah. 600.
These particulers being added, they make the years of the world at the Flood,
1656.

This half shows that at the Flood, the days of man were shortened half in
half, as Psalm. 89.45. The Lord has shortened the days of youth.

1656.
The Flood is brought upon the old World. etc.
THe Flood is a resemblance of the destruction of the world, and was the
greatest judgment of the world, till the world shall be consumed with fire.
Therefore the story of the Flood does cause us to consider of things past, and
to have judgment of things to come. For in the Flood are rare examples
concerning waighing, numbering, and dividing. It was 40. days in rayning: the
like time in abating. God has numbered, waighed, and divided. The second day of
the seventh month. The times do show, that God does weigh and number
wonderfully all the affairs of men: but men did not then know what God would
do, because he had hardened their hearts; and scorning Noah all his life time,
they were ashamed then to fly unto him; but the Flood came for the sins of
man; for the blood of Abell, came the Flood, and washed them all away. Yea, the
very waters that were under the earth advanced themselves above men.

Further, in this story of the Flood, these three things are chiefly to be
considered, The Arc. Persons that were saved. Time of the continuance of the
Flood.


And first for the Arc.
THe Arc was made about Mount Libanon, where the Cedars for Salomons Temple
were had, and it was six score years in making: Which time, in S. Peter is
called, The long suffering of God. The forty years in the Wilderness was a
famous thing; but the making of the Arc was more famous, and the time thrice
so long. Not any thing so famous as the Arc, except the Lords death. The
proportion of height, depth, and breadth, are described Genesis 6.15. The height,
is the tenth part of the length. The Beasts were in the middlemost place; the
fodder above, the dung beneath. And God bids us mark the quantity of all the
Beasts of the earth by the bulk of the Arc. There is much speech taken from
the Arc to the Church: but the consequent of the one, follows not in the
other.

In the Arc were Beasts clean and unclean. Some in the Arc did perish.
They that were out of the Arc did perish. The Waters did hold up the Arc.
In the Church are faithful and unfaithful. Some in the Church do perish. So
the Turk being out of the Church, does perish. The Waters does wash them
clean away that are without.
The tossing upon the waters, does represent the troubles which the Church of
God is to endure in this life. Again, no man of modesty but may know, that it
was no pleasant life for Noah and all his family to dwell a whole year upon
the waters, and to abide the noysomnesse of all kinds of Beasts in the Arc,
which came to the Arc at the appointment of God, to the condemnation of all
the world. For it appears, that the very brute Beasts had more regard to
themselves, than the wicked mockers which despised the preaching of Noah, and
the making of the Arc, who said, where is the appearance of his coming! Ever
since the Fathers died, all things continue in one state: Winter, Summer,
Spring, Harvest, etc. And while they were thus saying, the Flood comes and
washes away their foundations. But says S. Peter, in this they are willingly
ignorant, for even as before the Flood, they married, feasted, builded goodly
houses, etc. even to the day that Noah entered into the Arc, and never thought
the preaching of Noah true, because all things continued still in the same
sort, they thought it impossible that the waters which were beneath the
valleys could cover the highest mountains fifteen cubits: and yet this they
might have known, that as the waters in the Creation covered the earth till
God commanded them to go to their Channel; even so again at the
commandment of God, they could return to cover it. Saint Pteer therefore
adds, that these men were willingly ignorant.

The Arc rested upon Mount Ararat, which is a Mountain in Armenia, and
signifies, Take away fear. Whereby we are to note, that Whosoever dwells
under the defense of the most High, and shall say unto the Lord, thou art my
Hope, my strong Hold, and my GOD in whom I put my trust, shall not be afraid
for any Terror by night, nor for the Arrow that flies by day, for the
Pestilence that walks in darkness, nor the Sickness that destroys in the
noone day. For a thousand shall fall at their right hand, and ten thousand at
their left hand; but they shall not be touched. With their eyes shall they see
the raward of the ungodly: for the Lord is their hope, and he has set his
house of defense very high. With long life will he satisfy them, and through
his loving kindness, will he show them his salvation. Let every one therefore
say, The Lord is my Light and my Salvation; whom then shall I fear? The Lord
is the strength of my life, whereof then should I be afraid? for in the time of
trouble, he shall hide me in his Tabernacle, and set me up upon a Rock of
Stone.

Now compare Christ and the Arc together.
The Arc had a Door, by the which Noah and his household entered into it, to the
saving of them. Mount Ararat, take away fear.
Christ Is the Door by whom we enter into the Holy of Holiest, to the saving of
our souls. Is that Mount Ararat, upon whose shoulders if we rest, we need not
fear what man can do unto us.



The persons were Noah, Iaphet, Sem, Cham,
and their Wives. Pas. 30.3 The Lord has brought my soul out of Hell, and
kept my life from them that go down to the pit.

By faith Noah prepared the Arc, to the saving of his household. Heb. 11.7.

Noah Walked with God; therefore it is certain, that the spirit of Christ
preached by him. For S. Peter gives a rule. The spirit of Christ spoke in all
the Prophets. His calling was very glorious, being made a Preacher to declare
salvation to all which would believe in Christ. How he was received, it is
manifest, seeing he prevailed with a very few: yet the word of God is not in
vain. For seeing they refused the mercy of God offered in Christ, it is
certain Noah would preach the Judgments of God, the other part of the
Gospel, which the Latins call Excommunication; the Hebrews, The Lord
comes. The Hebrews, and with them the Greek Orators, do use to feign
Prosopopeia, which is a Conference or Communication, when they mean to
express things more at full. So we may imagine Tubalkaine to say; Surely Noah
is an honest man, and pays well for his work, and he has with very great
charges kept a great sort of Laborers these six score years: What should he
mean by this? Surely, answers Iubal, I will tell you strange things: Seven
of my best Rams, and seven of my best Ewes ran from my flock right-foorth
to the Arc, and there they went in. And an other standing by, replyeth: I am
sure I can tell (says he) as great a marvel as this: for coming by a Wood,
I saw a fearful Lion and a fierce Lioness, and they went as gentlely by me
as two Lambs, not offering to do me any hurt, and came to the Arc, and there
were Plankes set, and they went in. Yea says an other, I saw a huge Bear do
the like. And so they might speak of the rest of the Beasts This might drive
them to an amazedness, but this could not save them. And hereby it is
apparent, that it is not in our power to repent when we list: for this is not
repentance, to be sorry for our sins, (there is no man so wicked, but has
done so,) There must be also a turning to God; which is never, except we be
lightened by his spirit. The Lord uses first to offer mercy; which if it be
contemned, be hardens our hearts, that thereby we may be made more fit for
his judgments.

Cham was saved in the Arc, to be a scourge for all the rest. And if you mark
through the Bible, you shall find that God deals in the like severity. For
every good Family, has one of Chams impiety to persecute him.

ADAM had The Serpent, to tempt him.

Abel had Kaine, to kill him.

Isaac had Ismael, to floute him.

Jacob had Esau, to pursue him.

Joseph had His own brethren, to sell him.

Job had His Wife and Friends, to reprove him.

The Israelites had Pharaoh, to afflict them.

David had Saul and Absolon, to persecute him.

The Jews had The Babilonians, The Medes and Persians, The Grecians, The
Syrogrecians,
to subdue them.

CHRIST had She Jews, and Romans, to Crucify him.

The time of the continuance of the Flood, is thus described.
IN the days of the Flood, Moses teaches two things: the days of the
Month, and the days of the whole Year. For he writes that the Flood began
the Seventeenth day of the second Month, and that the Waters prevailed 150
days; and that the next day after 150. was the Seventeenth day of the seventh
Month. Six and forty days had passed before the Flood: for the Seven and
Forty day (I mean the Seuenteeth day of the Second month) the Flood began.
Join One Hundred and Fifty with Six and Forty, they make plainly One
hundred nintie and Six days, which divided by Thirite, leave Six exact
months, and the Seventeenth days of the seventh Month in which Moses
writes, that the Arc rested. Hereby it is most evident, that in ancient time
they had 30. days to a Month. Moreover, a moderate expounder of Moses, shall
find 365. days in the year of the Flood; thus. The first day of the tenth
Month, 271. days from the beginning of the year, the tops of the
Mountains were descouered: Noah tarried yet 40. days: When 311. days were
past, then he sent forth a Raven, which houered a long time, he names not the
time, but as 7. upon 7. in the Dove is expressed: so 40. upon 40. is here to be
understood. So then there are days 351. to which add the 14. last in which the
Dove was twice sent forth, then you have days 364. after the 14. days in
which the Dove returned not. Moses reckneth the first day of the Month, in
these words: In the 601. of the age of Noah, the first day of the first Month
the waters were dried up. Concerning the 5. days, every six years they make
a leap Month, and the odd quarter of a day in 120. years, make a leap
Month.

Thus much for the use of the Fathers before the Flood.
Now follow the Fathers after the Flood, whose Story contains unto the
Promise given unto Abraham. 427. years.
Some thing will I speak of the general use of them both together.

We have two stays, the Fathers before the Flood, and the Fathers after the
Flood. The sum of all, is nothing else, but to know God, and him whom he sent
Jesus Christ: For surely, the spirit of God has in such plainness penned
down the Story of the Scriptures, that all the world must wonder at the
wisdom of God laid down so shortly, and plainly. Before the Flood he taught
nothing but the Gospel, adding to the doctrine thereof, Kaines Murder, and
Lameches Adultery. And after the Flood, we have not ten notable Fathers as
before: For Terah the father of Abraham fell away, and worshipped strange Gods.
And surely, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are glorious and excellent for
the distinguishing of times: so are the Numbers of the ages of the Fathers. And
through the Scripture for the clearenes of the Word, Times are general, or
particular: General, from Adam to the Flood, and from thence to Abraham's
promise, from thence to the coming out of Egypt, then to the building of
Salomons Temple, then to the burning thereof by the Babilonians, and then to
the end of the Captivity, and from thence to the death of Christ. These are
the sum of all the Times: the proof of these, is scattered through the
Scriptures.

Thus much for the two Tables in general.

After the Flood.
Noah and Sem be here handled again, because their story continued through
and after the Flood.

Compare Noah with Adam, and you shall see that Noah is another Adam.
Adam Was an husbandman. Became into transgression by eating unlawfully. And
Euah after their transgression, seeing their nakedness, sewed Fig Tree leaves
to cover them: and the very same words that God spoke to Adam in Paradise for
ruling and increasing, the very same he renews to Noah. Had the tree of Life
in Paradise, for a seal of conservation. Had two younger Sons good, and the
elder wicked.

Noah was an husbandman. Became into transgression by drinking unlawfully.
After his transgression having his nakedness uncovered, is covered by Sem and
Japhet. Had the Rainebow as a covenant of preservation. Had two eldest Son
good, and the younger wicked.



Kaine the eldest son of Adam was cursed.

Cham the youngest son of Noah, even to Canaan his youngest son, was cursed.

The one against nature, killed his Brother: The other against humanity,
uncovered his Fathers nakedness.

Adam before the Flood, might eat no Flesh. Noah after the Flood, might eat
Flesh, the Blood only excepted; because in the Blood of every thing is the
life; and the life of every thing will God require at every creatures hand:
from the severity of which, a commandment against Murder was given to Noah.

The reason why they might eat Flesh after the Flood, and not before, may be,
because the days of man being shortened at the Flood half in half, the
bodies of men were afterward of a more weak constitution: and then you read
first of planting of Vines for Wine, which was added to be an help in
digestion, to the strengthening of the body, and quickening of the vital
spirits, as in Psalm. 104.15. Wine does make the heart glad, and Oil does
cause a cheerful countenance.

Noah was drunk, and uncovered in the midst of his Tent; and awaking from his
Wine, he knew what his youngest Son had done, and said, Cursed be Canaan: a
slave of slaules shall he be. (Now Noah would not curse Cham, because God
blessed him, but he cursed Canaan his Nephew the Son of Cham: who as some
suppose derided also his Grandfather.) Blessed be the God Sem. And, God will
persuade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem. Upon these three sentences do
the chief Stories of the Bible depend. For whatsoever plagues does befall the
Egiptians, the Canaanites, Ethiopians, Blackemores, Babylonians, and such like,
is contained within Chams curse. Whatsoever blessing is promised or performed
to the Jews, is comprehended within Sems blessing. Whatsoever promises of
mercy and saving health, was prophesied of to the Gentiles, is understood
under these words, And God will persuade Iaphet to dwell in the Tents of Sem.

The Prophet Noah spoke not at random, when he said: Blessed be the God of Sem.
But what is there spoken short, in due time is drawn out longer; and the not
regarding the blessing to Sem, does make many things in the new Testament, to
be neglected.

And first for CHAM.
HIs name signifies, Hot, or, Choleric: And those Countries did his Sons
(after the confusion of Tongues) possess; namely, in Africa in the South
country. Cham the Prince of Affricke, (the spreader of wickedness) inhabited
the fourth part of the World with his Families. His House never got any
victory, but for some especial punishment to be showed upon Sems house. Cham
had a curse in this world, and doubtless in the world to come.

He had four Sons: The first, Cush, of whom came the Ethiopians, or in our
tongue, Burnt-faces: The second, Mitzraijm, of whom the Egiptians come, for
Mitzraijm does signify Egypt: The third, Put, of whom the Lybians and
Blackamores come: And the fourth, Canaan, of whom the Canaanites come, in whom
the curse of Cham was pronounced; notwithstanding it falls out also in all
his other Sons. And as Canaan was a slave of slaves; so are they that are of
the like infidelity: so that oftentimes for the horrible impiety of one man,
the whole Nation fares the worse.

This Canaan had eleven Sons, and himself made the twelfe; and his Country
was called Canaan, which once was Paradise. And as Paradise to Adam resembled
the state of Heaven: so did the land of Canaan, to the Israelites, and the
Jews: for it was a Land abounding with all good things. In Paradise was the
Tree of life: in Canaan, CHRIST was borne the true Tree of life. Adam
neglecting the true service of God in Paradise, was driven from thence. The
Jews neglecting their Sabaothes, and finally the knowledge of Christ, were
likewise driven out of Canaan. But as notwithstanding Adams fall, salvation in
Paradise was promised to all the world: so notwithstanding the sin of the
Jews, Christ in Canaan, wrought the full salvation of all the world.

These eleven sons of Canaan were settled in one soil, that is, in Canaan
(which is about 160. miles from North to South, and 60. miles from East to
West.) Their names are Zidon who built Tyrus, the glory of the world for
trafique of Merchandise Heth Gebusi, who after Sems death, (as it should
appear) possessed Jerusalem. Amori Girgashi, of whom there were some left till
Christ's time, as Matt. 8. 28; Hiuits, of whom Abraham bought his burying
place, of whose kindred also Esau took him Wives. Arkite, Siuite, Aruadite,
Zemathite, Hemathite. It is supposed there were so many Tongues as there were
Nations: but it was no otherwise then our Cornish and Northern men differ in
their tongues. These were Lords of the whole soil to plant, buyld, and
replenish it against time to come, that the twelve Trybes of Israel might have
Vineyardes that they never planted, and Houses they never builded. Whereupon
Moses says Deuteronomy. 32.8. When the most high God divided to the Nations their
Inheritance, he appointed the borders of a people according to the number of
the Sons of Israel. And when God promises to Abraham Genesis 15.18. that he
will give his seed a Land that shall flow with Milk and Honey, he bordereth it
from Egypt to the great River Euphrates; within which borders, are contained
the several Lordships of Canaan and his Sons, namely, the Kenites, the
Kenesites, the Cadmonites, the Hithites, the Pheresites, the Gyaunts, the
Amorites, the Cananites, the Girgashites, and the Gebusites.

Because Cham scorned his father, who was the restorer of all the world,
therefore his Country was to be given to Sems House the Jews; and they were
driven out of their Land by the Sword of Joshua, except some few, who were left
in the Land to be Spurs in the sides, and Thorns in the eyes of the
Israelites, who were to possess it; that when through the abundance of wealth
they grew to forget God, they might be chastened with his rod of correction.
Thus Shams curse is extended even unto Canaan his youngest son, and he is
made a Servant of servants to Sem, that the blessing of Sem might appear, and
the open cursed should serve the open blessed, although it be nine hundred
years after Noah's Prophecy, to show that although God suffer the wicked a
while, and does defer his punishments until the sin of the Amorites come
to a full ripeness, that yet he is a righteous Judge, and sits upon a fiery
Throne, from whose presence does issue Ryuers of fire, to consume all such as
will not learn to know The Seed of the Woman to be able to break the head of
the Serpent; nor desire to dwell in the Tents of Sem, acknowledging the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaacke, and the God of Jacob, to be the true GOD, that
keeps covenant with all, whose Garments were washed in Wine, and his Mantell
in the blood of Grapes: nor mark that Shiloh is that Emmanuel, God with Us;
who is that Stone that can grind the mightiest Giant in the land of Canaan to
powder: Who have eyes, and will not see how God with fire from Heaven consumed
their Cities, turned Lots wise into a Pillar of Salt, ouerthew their kinsmen
Pharaoh in the read Sea, and made the Walls of Jericho to fall down without
violent hands?

Chams House was not plagued for building Babel only, but for falling from the
Religion of Sem; and his posterity had a deadly mind against true Religion.
And as Cham and the rest are in Gehenna in darkness, so in Scripture, they are
left in darkness; for there is no time of any mentioned when they died, but
are left in darkness.

The wicked men of Canaan would never yield to the truth, but praised Gods of
Gold, Brass, and Stone.

Now follows for Iaphet.
HIs name signifies, Persuaded. He had seven Sons, Gomer, Magog, Madai, of
whom came the Meedes. Jauan, of whom the Grecians and Romans come: And Tubal,
and Mesech, of whom the Muscouites come: And Tiras, of whom the Thracians come.
Of these, were the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their Lands.

Iaphet, he was pertaker with Sem in the action of covering their Father, but
Sem had the prerogative of the Promise concerning Christ, notwithstanding
Iaphet was the elder. And if you mark through all the Bible, you shall not find
the first borne of any of Christ's ancestors to have the Promise pronounced to
them in open terms, because Christ the first begotten of his Father, would
not come according to the lust of the flesh, or course of nature, but by grace.
Sem in regard of that, had the glory of God preached in his Tents, until the
acceptable Child did come, in whom all Nations should be blessed. And when the
glory of Sems house, which were the Jews, was extinct, John was banished into
Patmos, and is commanded to write to the seven Congregations in Asia the
lesser, (where Iaphets sons were first settled, to so many Congregations as
Iaphet had sons.) Grace and peace from him that was, and is, and which is to
come; and from the seven Spirits expressed in Esaias 11.7. which are before his
throne, and from Jesus Christ, which is a faithful witness, and first begotten
of the dead, Alpha, and Omega, the first and the last, who was dead; but is
alive, and behold he lives for ever and ever, and has the keys of Hell and of
Death: and gives light and life to Iaphet the Gentile, who was in darkness and
in the shadow of death, persuading him to dwell in the tents of Sem, to be a
dweller in the spiritual Canaan, and a Citizen in the heavenly Salem, where
there is no earthly Temple: For God almighty, and the Lamb, are the Temple of
it.

Now for SEM.
SEM being an hundred years old, begets Arphaxad two years after the
Flood. So old was Abraham when he begat Isaacke.

He is in virtue equal with any before the Flood.

This Sem was a King. Prophet. Sacrificer.


He signifies, a Name: to teach them, that they should look to him in whom
Sem, and the whole world should be blessed.

He had five Sons, Elam. Ashur. Arphaxad. Lud. Aram.


Elam, of whom the Persians. Ashur, of whom the Assirians. Arphaxad, of whom
CHRIST. Aram, of whom the Aramites. Lud, of whom the Lidians.

There be diverse which condemn Genealogies, warranted thereby (as they say) by
Saint Paul's Council to Thimothie: Neither that they give heed to Fables and
Genealogies, Endless, which breed rather questions, then godly edifying by
Faith. Indeed seeing Genealogies are of great consequence to the proving of
Christ to be the Messiah: the Jews to cross this, feign diverse of their own,
which S. Paul calls Endless, and therefore to be avoided, as also tales
invented by them, whereby they corrupted the story of the Scriptures. But this
condemns not the Genealogies, which the Holy Ghost penneth, but rather
approves them. And if we do but cross the account laid down by the
Heathen, we do obscure the evidence of the Scriptures. Thus much for the
answer of this objection.

Arphaxad borne, when his father Sem was 100. 1658.
years old, Noah 602. and Iaphet 102.
HIs name signifies, Healing. Some hold that the Caldeans come from him.

CHRIST heals all our infirmities.

Shelah borne, Arphaxad being 35. years old. 1693.

HIs name signifies, a Branch, or, Twigge. He was the Eather of the
Shelanites.

Heber borne, Shelah being 30. years old. 1723.

HEber a representer of the Son of God; who beginning to be thirty years
old, builds up the decayed walls of the Gentiles.

Thirty years after the promise given to Abram, was it before his seed began
to be afflicted. Joseph being thirty years old, expounds Pharaohs Dream.

Heber signifies, Pilgrim, or, Stranger: So his faithful seed confessed
themselves to be. Says Abraham, I am a Stranger and Pilgrim, Give me a place
for money to bury my dead. So says Saint Peter, repeating the same Story. I
beseech you as Pilgrims and Strangers, to abstain from fleshy lusts, which
fight against the soul. And Christ the chiefest of Heber, said. The Foxes have
holes, and the Birds of the air have nestes; but the Son of man has not
whereon to lay his head. Hebers posterity went as strangers flitting from Land
to Land, Looking for a City, whereof GOD was the builder. Heb. 11.10.

This Heber is from the Creation, the fourteenth, two seuens, a double Henoch.
He is the fourth after the flood, as Judah is the fourth son of Jacob, of
whom Christ came. He is the seventh from Henoch, a man for rare blessings to
be compared with Henoch, and is the same in force that Henoch is, although you
would think them clean contrary: and so they are in signification, but in
effect of divinity all one: For Henoch signifies Dedicated to God; and Heber,
Pilgrim, or, Stranger: and he that is a stranger upon earth, despising the
state of worldly pomp, is a Citizen with God: therefore whosoever will be a
true Henoch, must also be a true Heber.

And if we will be holy before God, and acceptable vessels for the use of his
Temple, we must bear Palm boughs in our hands, that is, sing Hosanna to
the highest, and be estranged from the vain conversation of this earthly
Paradise: so shall our names continue famous through many Generations, as
Hebers did, and we shall speak the praises of God in our own tongues; for we
will not consent with Nimrod to the building of our own Confusion, whereby we
might be shaken off from the favor of God, as he and his adherents were.

Hebers glory is further enlarged, in that the Hebrew tongue takes the name
from him. The Jews kept this sinceerely, till they went into Captivity into
Babylon: but when they came from thence, they began to stammer; for they
learned the tongue of the Babylonians. Malachy ends the old Testament, and
the Hebrew tongue: for though Scholars write Hebrew, yet upon the first sight
it is apparent to be the writing of man, so far it differs from the style
of the holy Spirit.

There be one thousand seven hundred fifty and eight roots in the Hebrew
tongue. And this is a wonderful thing, that the bare actions of the Creatures
should express Hebrew wordet, as a horse runninig upon a cawsey, the sound of
his feet is much expressing this noise Ratsat, which in Hebrew is, to run: the
noise which birds make by clapping their wings when they fly is of this sound
Goth, which in Hebrew signifies a Foul. The Grecians cannot find out the
roots of their tongue. The Lord took such order in penning of the old
Testament, that one skillful in the Hebrew tongue will easily know if there be
a sentence or a word put in, nay; if there be but a letter added, so that they
are very unwise, that persuade others, or believe themselves that the books of
Judith and Tobie are Canonical scriptures: for they are not Hebrew, neither
were they received at any time by the ancient Hebrews, who where so perfect
and ready in the text of the old Testament, that they could tell how many times
the letter Aleph was used in the Bible: so that to believe these books to be
Scriptures, is to cross the testimony of the Jews for their own story: and
if they knew our opinions herein, they would condemn us for missing of
Religion.

This Heber was a vary happy man, and his happiness made manifest, in that
none that lived after him came to his days: for he being a Prophet, knew how
heavy the curse of God would be upon the sons of men for building the tower
of Babel: therefore he names his son Peleg, Divided. The Hebrew name is
half the abridgment of the story, as it falls out for the most part.

He had also great cause of sorrow and heaviness, in that thirteen families
of Ioctaines sons, to whom Heber was Graundfather, went quite away, and were
far from Jerusalem; and being out of the favor of God, were bereaved of
salvation: so that Chams house might seem to have greater blessings, for they
dwelt near to Jerusalem, and Jacobs sons in Egypt,, married with Chams
daughters. Jacobs sons called themselves Hebrews, because the story of
Heber is the most famous of all the Fathers,

1757.
Peleg borne, Heber being 34. years old.
HIs name signifies, Division. In his days the tongues of those that built
the Tower of Babel, were confounded. In the consideration of which story,
Time, Place, Persons.
are to be understood: Time, at or a little before Pelegs birth. Place, a Plain
in the land of Shinear. Persons 70. of Sem. 27. Iaphet. 14. Cham. 29.



These 70. spoke one language, the tongue of Heber, and going from the East,
they found a plain in the land of Shinear, where they abode and made brick in
stead of stone, and slime in stead of mortar, and joining with Nimrod, said,
Let us make us a Sem, that is, a name, even in despite of the blessing of Noah
bestowed upon Sem. But God scattered them from that place, into the upper face
of all the earth, and they left off to build the City, therefore the name of
it is called Ba-bell (that is Come confusion) because there the Lord confounded
the language of all the earth. Babell is, Babbling, both in Hebrew, and in
English.

1 This half shows, that as the days of men at the 2 Flood were cut off
half in half; so likewise at the confusion of Tongues: for none after Peleg,
comes to half Hebers years.
As at the confusion of tongues, there was great falling out about words,
because one could not understand another: so hitherto all the world is at
variance for the understanding of words. And as the builders of Babell fell to
Babbling; so the despisers of divinity shall fall to Babbling. Therefore it were
to be wished, that every man in the world understood the Hebrew tongue.

All nations in the earth are compelled to take notice of this story,
whenever they hear any man speak in an other tongue, which they understand
not; For entering into the consideration thereof, they are driven presently to
examine the story of the Genesis ^0. in which they may see the just and severe
dealing of God to such as envy the blessing of their brother: for going from
sin to sin, they had their tongues divided, and their dwellings scattered.

It appears by this story that the dealinges of Cham and his sons were in
the same kind that Kaines were.

Kaine after his Curse, wandering like a Vagabond from the place of true
Religion, into the land of Nod, which signifies, Fugitive, builds a City,
and calls it after the name of his Son Henoch.

Cham after his curse goes wandering about from the place that Noah lived, and
Sem sacrificed at, unto the land of Shinear, which signifies Shake off, and
there he built a City of Confusion.

From which story also we may observe the judgments of God, that wherein a man
offends, he or his seed is commonly punished; for it is certain that all
the actions of wicked are a harmony with Gods dealings, though in respect of
the wicked, they agree not with virtue.

The sons of Sem for joining with rebellious Nimrod of Cham, as it were
flouting their Fathers blessing to furnish up the number of 70. made Brick for
the buylding of the Tower of Confusion. 70. of Sems posterity 600. years
after, were forced to go into the land of Cham, and there compelled to be
Brickmakers under Pharaoh King of Egypt, because they despised the blessing of
Sem, and remembered not the story of the 70. Families that buylt the Tower of
Babel. To show that when in prosperie men forget God, turning his Graces into
Wantonness, and his Blessings into folish Pleasures; that he will take his
blessings of Bread and Wine and Oil from us, and drive us into foreign
Nations amongst Egiptian Dogs, to seek relief: Whose succor shall be yokes
of heavy bondage, to punish us in the same pleasure wherein we offended.

All the 70. Families do afflict Sem for this, before he has his full
renown: and in scattering of Iocktanes sons, they are placed farthest off
Jerusalem, of any.

Peleg, Divided, Christ is Palmoni, the secret numberer, that weghieth,
numbreth, and divides.

Unto the building of the Tower of Babel, we have, Sem, Name. Arphaxad,
Healing. Sale, Spoiling Heber, Pilgrim. Peleg, Divided.
Put these together, and you have a short sentence.

A good Name like precious Ointment to heal and bind up the ruined branches of
poor Pilgrims, walking in and out here on earth like strangers, as having no
abiding place: for God will divide to every one according to his works.

1787. Regu borne, A breaking a sunder, or, evil. 1819. Serug borne, Bough,
Plant, or, principal Vine 1849. Nachor borne, Dry. 1878. Terah borne, Smelling.
These like a principal Vine, moystned with good sap, and healed by grace,
gave a good smell, though Terah falling to Idolatry, had almost extinguished
the heat thereof.

AN evil Plant that has lost his sap, and is become dry, being not watered
with the deaw of Heavenly grace, can give no good smell: which appears, in
that Terah quite forgetting that ever God created and consumed the world, and
brought the devises of the sons of Noah his great Graundfather to open shame
of eternal memory, scattering them up and downelike vagabonds over all the
earth, figuring the calamities of their latter ages, (the punishment whereof
chiefly was to be performed in his own kindred) became an Idolater, as Joshua.
24.15. Your Fathers in old time, worshipped strange Gods, even Terah the father
of Abraham. etc. But mark the event: For even as the sons of Sem for joining
with the rest, were scattered with the rest; so the posterity of Terah by
Abram, even the best of them, namely the Jews, were once scattered Vagabondes
over all the earth, for not embracing the covenant of Abraham, Isaacke, and
Jacob: But in mercy gathered together again to the Mountain of grace, to
Jacobs Well, that gives everliving Water to so many as would acknowledge
Christ the Rock, to the Land that flowed with Milk and Honey: To Bethel, the
house of Jehovah, where they might see a Lather reaching from Heaven to Earth,
with Angels ascending and descending. To that fresh springing hill of Sion,
which is watered with the deaw of Hermon: from whence it runs like the
precious Ointment that ran down from Aarons beard, to wash away their former
uncleanness, and so purge their filthy leprosy, that they might be a sweet
smelling Sacrifice unto the Lord, holy and acceptable before his Throne, having
an high Sacrificer to enter into the Holy of Holiest, to make intercession for
them, that they might be free from Confusion, and delivered out of the bondage
of the outward and spiritual Babel. But even as the Dog returns to his
vomit, and the Hog to his wallowing in the Mire, so these Jews of
uncircumcised hands and hearts, forgetting all those, and many more benefits
of God bestowed upon them, crucifying Christ the King of glory, the God of Sem:
and not remembering their former punishments, are once again so scattered over
the face of the earth, that while the world endures, they shall be vagabondes,
and never gathered together again: to teach us, that if God spared not them,
nor suffered them to continue in their transgressions, being his peculiar
people, that we are to look for no other recompense then they had, if we
despise the knowledge of Christ, as they did.

Terah has three Sons,

Haran, Nachor, Abraham,


as Adam and Noah had.

1996.
Peleg died, being 229. years old.

He had not half the years of his father Heber: the most aged man after the
Flood lived not to half Methushelahs years; to show the Curse that came by
the Flood: so every man in the world, has part of Gods Curse by the Flood.

1997.
Nachor died, being 148. years old.

2006.
NOAH died, being 950. years old.

He lived after the Flood 350. years, that is, 7. Fifties, or 7. Jubilees of
years, as many as were from conquering the Land of Canaan, to the government
of Samuel. Noah's whole life, was a singing of Salvation to the holy Lamb,
seeing all the world drowned, and he only saved.

Noah died, two years after Abram was borne. So God stirs up one good man
after another, oftentimes.

ABRAM borne, 352 years after the Flood. 2008.

HIs name signifies, Hie father, being the tenth from Noah: An other
establisher of Religion, as Noah (the Restorer or Comforter) was, the tenth
from Adam. And as in Noah's days he being the tenth from Adam, Gods justice
over all flesh was extended: So in Abrams, he being the tenth from Noah, Gods
mercy to all the world is pronounced.

When Terah is 130. years old, Abram is borne. So old was Adam when he begat
Seth, a foundation of Religion: Jacob a bringer of Religion into Egypt, is 130.
years old when he stands before Pharoh. Iehoiada the high sacrificer, saves
Ioas the Kings Son from the malice of Athalia, which had destroyed all the
rest of the Kings seed, and dies being 130 years old. While he lived, Joas
kept Religion and Worshipped the God of his Father. After his death, he fell
away and suffered incense to be offered in the groves, to whom Zacharias the
Son of Barachias said, Is this the reward of all my Fathers pains, that as
soon as my Father is dead, you forsake the true God, and worship the Gods of
the Nations? For which cause Ioas caused him to be slain between the Alter
and the Temple. So that as death is contrary to life; and as at the birth of
Seth and Abraham, the graces of God were manifested to the world: so at
Iehoiadahs death, the Tribe of Judah lost all Religion.

It is a question how Torah being an Idolater, could name Abram, Hie Father;
son so does the word signify. He might guess like a worldly man, that his
Son Abram should be likely to be Rich and Mighty, and so should have many
under him. Howsoever it was, this is certain, that God directed the tongue of
this Idolater to set forth and preach his glory, though his life had no show
of virtue.

Here is an other question to be discussed of the age of Terah, when he begat
Abram.
Of Terah his age when he begat Abram.
SOme will have Abram to be borne at Terahs Seuentieth year, because in Genesis
11.26. it is said, Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nachor, and
Haran. Whereupon they gather, that Abraham was the first borne, because he is
put in the first place, and that he was borne in that year of Terah, to wit,
the Seventy. But they mark not, that Terahs Sons are reckoned, not
according to their age, but according to their dignity, as Genesis 5. The sons
of Noah; Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, are so rehearsed, that in the first place there
is mention made of Sem, who for all that, was not the first borne, neither
could be borne in the Five hundredth year of Noah, fith two years after the
Flood in which year he begat Arphaxad; he was but an hundredth years old. Now
the first of this opinon whom I follow, was Calvin, that famous Doctor of the
Church of Geneua, who in his Commentaries upon Genesis 11.27. expresses it in
plain words. Him followed Beroaldus, who did much in the illustrating of
time, and Mangoldus. This demonstration is set down, Act. 7. Abraham is said
to go out of Haran after his father Terah died. Now Terah lived 205. years.
And Abraham went out of Haran in the 75. year of his age: which years if you
subtract from, Terahs age, there remain 130. years, in which Abrams nativity
falls. The same may be confirmed by Sarahs age Abrams wife, who is thought to
be the Daughter of Abrams brother. Abram exceeded her no more but ten years:
whereupon it follows, that he was borne long after him that was both his
Brother, and Father in law. Abram therefore was called, and began his
Peregrination in the 2084. year of the world, the very same day that his
posterity went out of Egypt, namely, the 15. of Nisan, as it is said in Exodus
12.

The third ioynct of this first time, which contains the divine covenant of
Abraham, ends in the year when the Law was given, in which the Israelites by
the goodness of God, were brought forth, and delivered out of Egypt by many
and strange Miracles. This contains 430. years, which is confirmed by the
testimony of S. Paul, who expressly says, Gal. 3.17. That the Law began 430.
years after the confirming of the Covenant or Testament. And concerning the
confirmation of which Covenant he speaks, he expresses in that which went
before, namely, of that same which was made, when being called of God, he went
out of Haran: For in verse. 8. he cyteth the same Promise: In thee, shall all
the Nations of the earth be blessed. Which Genesis 12. is rehearsed in the
narration of his calling, verse. 3. Hitherto also it appertains, which is
written Exodus 12. verse. 40. The Peregrination of the Children of Israel, (as
learnedly and truly translateth that worthy man Beroaldus) which they dwelt in
Egypt, was Four hundred and thirty years. Which surely the Seventy
Interpreters so translate, that they account the Peregrination of the Fathers
made in the Land of Canaan, in this dwelling.

Neither does the place of Genesis 15. verse. 13. concerning the Seed of Abrham to
be afflicted 400. years, hinder it. For Abraham's Peregrination, is to be
derived from his Calling, and his Seed began to be afflicted when Isaacke the
Son of Promise borne 25. years after his Calling, being a Child peradventure
of five years old, suffered the scoffinges of Ismael borne of the Hand-mayde:
which surely the Apostle Gal. 4.29. expressly names Persecution. Add
hereunto the rest which Isaacke and Jacob suffered among Strangers. Now that
time wherein the Israelites abode in Egypt, that it is far wide of 400.
years, is clearer then the light at noone day, to them which consider that
Koath the Son of Leui went down into Egypt, and lived 133. years, and that
his Son Amram lived 137. years, Exodus 6. and that Moses his Son was 80.
years old when he went out of Egypt: All which make but 350. years; and if
from these, those years be subduced, which they lived after their Sons were
borne, the years remaining, would be few. But these things Doctor Beroaldus,
and others, have learnedly set forth. Those notable men, Bullinger,
Phlinspachius, Scalinger, and others, agree unto it.

It is said, that Terah being 70. years old, begets Abram. Haran. Nachor.


The Jews say, That Abraham was the eldest: but thereby they bring notable
absurdities: for they agree that Sara was Harans Daughter; she is but Ten
years younger than Abram, and then Abram being elder than Haran, and yet
married his daughter but Ten years younger then her Husband, Haran must needs
beget her at Nine years of age, which is impossible: Therefore it is certain,
that Nachor and Haran were elder then Abram. For if we look to Genesis 12. and
consider that Abram being Seventy and five years old received the promise,
and to Saint Stephens Oration Act. 7.2. by which it appears, that Terah was
dead before Abram had the promise, or else the promise might have had reference
to Terah as well as to Abram, we shall by good Arithmetique cast Terah at the
birth of Abram to be 130. years: for take 75. years out of 205. which is the
time that Tenah lived, and there remains 130, the age of Terah when he begat
Abram.

To enlarge this further.

If Abram had been the eldest, Sem would not have given him the blessing; for
then he should have died before Sem: and men do not give their inheritance to
their sons which die in their life; but he would rather have kept it for
Isaac, with whom he lived 50. years: this may be made plain by another of
the same sort. Rebecca being with child, and they both striving in her womb,
asks counsel what should become of her? The question is of whom? Sem being
dead, it is manifest either of Heber or of Abraham. Thus you may see that
without the knowledge of the times, we could not avoid these errors.

SARAH borne. 20

SArah is the same in signification that Iiscah is: for Sarah signifies
Queen, So does Iiscah. Her name was afterward called Sarai, that is, My
Queen.

She is thought to be Iiscah the Daughter of Haran, and so she is, for
Abraham calls Lot Brother, which could not be but in respect of marriage: for
Lot was the son of Haran, and brother to Iiscah; therefore in that meaning
Abram, speaks truly.

You have a very easy reckoning of the times, if you begin at Sarahs
fifteenth year of age, when she was fit as is were to be a Tabernacle for
Abraham.

From Sarahs 15. year of age to the building of Moses Tabernacle, 480. These
comparisons prove the Providence of god to be plain, and his counsel easy.

From thence to the Building of Salomons temple. 480. Third of Cyrus; when the
Proclamation went forth for building the second Temple. 480. Government of
Pontius Pilate, in whose time Christ built his spiritual Temple. 480.
These comparisons prove the Providence of god to be plain, and his counsel
easy.

2026.
Regu died, being 239. years old. 2049.
Serug died, being 230. years old.


2083.
The Promise is given to Abraham at his 75. year of age.
430.
THat is, Christ is promised to Abraham after the flesh, Genesis 12.3. 430. years
before the giving of the Law. The Promise to Adam in Paradise, and to Sem after
the Flood, is here renewed to Abraham, when he is 75. years old: so many
years old, as there be Fathers of Christ from Adam to Iosepth.

Saint Matthew beginning at Abraham, reckons them but 42. that is, three
Fourteenes, or six Seuens: but Saint Luke reckoning them, brings Christ from
Adam, and shows their number to be 75. Saint Matthews meaning was, to prove
him King of the Jews: and Saint Luke, to show, that he is the Seed of the
woman.

Seventy five has in it, Ten Seuens: and Five, the number of the letters of
Iebouah.

God changes Abrams name from Abram, to Abraham of Haman, a Multitude, because
in him all the Nations and multituds of the earth should be blessed, like unto
Noah, a new Comforter.

He left his Country, and his fathers house, and went to a Land which God
would show him: so Saint Paul teaches saying, By faith Abraham when he was
called, obeyed God, to got into a place which he should after receive for an
inheritance: and he went out not knowing whither he went. In this faith, Moses
a high Son, refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter. Saint Luke
testifies of him, Act. 7.2. That the God of glory appeared to our Father
Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran, and said unto
him, Get the out of thy Country, and from thy kindred, and come into a Land
that I shall show thee. Then came he out of the Land of Chaldea, and dwelt in
Charran, and from thence when his Father was dead, he brought him into the
Land of Canaan: but he had no inheritance in it, no not the breadth of a foot.
Yet God promised, that he would give it him to possess, and to his seed
after him, when as yet he had no Child. Wherefore, Believing in God, it was
counted to him, for righteousness. For the promise to Abraham that he should
be the heir of the world, was not given him or his seed through the law, but
through the righteousness of faith, Romans 4. In Nehem. 9.7.8. You have there in
the prayer of Nehemiah, an abridgement of all this Story, how the Lord chose
Abram, and brought him out of Vr of the Chaldees, and called him Abraham, and
found his heart faithful, and made a covenant with him to give his seed, the
Land, etc.

S. Paul in Act. 17. reasons with the men of Athens thus. You Grecians, you
are of Iapheth, and that your Country is Ionia; and ye are the Sons of the
earth. Be it known unto you, that God at the first, made all mankind of one
blood, to dwell on all the face of the earth, and assigned the seasons which
were ordained before, and the bounds of their habitations: for he divided unto
them the Land, according to the number of the Sons of Israel: Now ye Heathen,
your own Poets say, ye are the generation of God: and we may observe that in
all the Ceremonies of Moses, there is a great preuiledge laid down for the
Heathen: and it is said by saint Paul, God which justifies the wicked even
Abram being an Idolater, The Gentiles are no worse, therefore they have no
cause to despair, And where it is said in this story of Abraham, that he
forsook his father and his fathers house: Saint Steven Act. 7.4. shows, that
it was at the time his father was dead, for otherwise it had been an hard
example, and Gods actions must be so wisely disposed, that the very Heathen
must acknowledge them to be just, which they would not have done if he had left
his father, he being alive.

It is further added, that Abraham was rich, he was of behavior quiet: for to
avoid strife and contention betwixt his Shepherds and the Shepherds of Lot,
he willed him to choose whether he would take to the right hand or to the left.
Lot choseth the best for eye sight, though by the close counsel of God
ordering his choice, it proved far contrary

Abraham was politic, for he had 318. Soldiers of his own family: which he
himself had instructed: and he used recreation, and in curiosity did not
contemn it; for otherwise he could not have made his men so expert warriors
and surely there is nothing disturbeth religion more then curiosity.

He was a stately man, and courageous, and had authority of life and death,
else could he not have kept so many in good order. His moderation appears
also in that he suffered Sara to rule at home: he was politic in choosing the
night to set on his enemies: for seeing he was in the favor of God, he was
sure he could not walk in darkness, and it was the fittest time to make his
enemies afraid.

2090.
Melchisedech King of Salem: a figure of the Son of God, meets Abraham.
IT is a question who this Melchisedech should be. It is most certain it is
Sem the son of Noah: Which may be gathered from the circumstance of the
Story, being modestly expounded. Heb. 7.1. This Melchisedech king of Salem,
met Abraham as he returned from the slaughter of the Kings, to whom also
Abraham gave tithes of all things: first he is called by interpretation, King
of Righteousness: and after that, King of Salem, that is to say, King of
Peace: without Father, without Mother, without kindred; and has neither
beginning of days, nor end of life, but is likened to the Son of God.

He was Without Father, without Mother, when Abraham met him, five ages after
Babels building, Abraham being alive; he was unknown of his own kindred. He
had no end of life in the old world, for he lived through the Flood: and no
beginnig of days in the new world.

Christ in respect of his Godhead, had no Mother: and in regard of his Manhead,
he had no Father.

Surely our men be very unadvised, that because Calvin, and a few Gretians, do
stagger in this opinion whether Sem should be Melchisedech, therefore they
will not admit the truth hereof, as though they should be a rule of truth unto
them. But to answer them: first the consent of all the Jews is, that Sem is
Melchisedech: and if he be not, then let us see what inconveniences will follow.

First, he must be a godlier man then Sem, that crosses Sems blessing,
Blessed be the God of Sem. Besides, it stands not with Religion, that any man
should be rare in the highest degree, no prophecy going before it to warrant
his rareness. But this is the cause why men be deceived. The Grecians err in
this, and are the cause why others have erred. It was not possible for them to
know the truth thereof: for the Jews appointed by Ptolomeus Philodelphus to
translate the Bible, seeing there was such difference of the birth of men after
the Flood, both in comparison with those before the Flood, and those after,
that their story might not be flouted of the Egiptians, add of purpose 1500.
years to the Fathers after the Flood; for seeing Terah begot Abraham at 130.
And because Sem begot Arphaxad at 100. years old, to every one where wants
an hundred, they put in an hundred: as, Arphaxad lived 35. years, and begot
Selah, They translate, Arphaxad lived 135. years, and begot Selah; and so in
the rest: by which reckoning, Sem is dead before the time he should meet with
Abraham.

Saint Ierom, accquainted with the Hebrews dealings, knew that their consent
was, that Sem was Melchisedech, and so he affirms. Besides, it is not likely
that any of Chams house should be like to the Son of God, being a cursed
generation. Again, if it be objected that Moses does not call Melchisedech
Sem, and therefore it is likely he was not Sem: this objection is thus
answered. Moses penneth his story short, because he knew all the Jews were
acquainted therewith. And as for the Author to the Hebrews, setting him down
to be without Father, without Mother, we must consider in what sense and
meaning he speaks: for seeing it is added by Moses in Melchisedechs story,
that he was king of Salem; and it is not possible for a king to be borne
without Father, without Mother; and it was never the meaing of the holy Ghost,
to cross the course of the creation: therefore we must look for some other
exposition, then that which the bare litterall sense will afford upon the first
sight. This therefore is the Author to the Hebrews meaning: He was now to call
to the Jews mind, one who in their story was a figure of the Messiah. Now
seeing Christ the Savior of the world, as he was God, had no Mother, and as he
was man, no Father; therefore to make this plain, that is, to make
Melchisedech a figure answerable to this truth, he so speaks of him, as if he
were without Father or Mother, because he resembled the Son of God. Now the
author to the Hebrews might very safely use this kind of speaking: For Sem
being borne before the Flood, and in Abraham's time being a Grandfather of eight
degrees, must needs be thought to Abraham's Soldiers, to be without Father,
without Mother, who had neither beginnig of days, nor end of life. So that a
soldier of Abraham's camp might ask some one of Canaan: Good Man of Canaan,
who is this goodly Old man with a hoarie beard? He would answer thus: He is
called the Just King, and his Town is named the Quiet town: For when all the
other Kings his neighbors are at variance, he only lives in peace. And when
Elam overcame five Kings, no man offered him any violence. We have in every
Village a several God: but he sacrifices to the God (as he says) that made
us, and them. And mark what I shall tell you: When he offers an Ox or a
Ram to his God, which (he says) made the heavens and the earth, fire comes
from heaven to consume it: and he seems to be so strong, that none of us
shall live to see his days. In this respect therefore the Author to the
Hebrews affirms that he was without father, without mother, who has neither
beginning of days, nor end of life. For in proper sense it cannot be true.

Ismael borne, his father Abram being 86. year old. 2094.

He was borne of Hager an Egiptian, whom Sara gave to Abraham, because her
self was barren.

When Ismael was thirteen years old, as Genesis 17.25. Abraham took Ismael, and
every man child among the men of his house, and circumcised the foreskin of
their flesh the same day as God had commanded: which ceremony of Circumcision
continued unto Christ: but since his death, it is abrogated with the rest of
the Ceremonies of the Law, and is of no force unto salvation; as Gal. 5.3. I
Paul testify, that if ye be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing at
all: for whosoever is Circumcised, is bound to keep the whole Law: And, as
many as are justified by the Law, are fallen from Grace: for in Jesus Christ,
neither is Circumcision any thing worth, nor uncircumcision; but Faith, which
works by love, as Abok. 2.4. The just shall live by his Faith.

The day of Circumcision was the eight day: the seal was answerable to
Baptism. We have no special story of eight to be compared with this, but
the eight that were saved in the Arc. The ceremony of the day is answerable
to the number of the persons; and the seal it self, answerable to the waters
of the Flood: to the which answers Baptism, which now saves us.

Ismael had twelve sons and one daughter. Jacob had twelve sons and one
daughter. Ismael was answerable in outward blessings to Isaac and Jacob, but
not in spiritual; for he was borne after the flesh: and although he were the
son of Abraham, he was not the son of Abraham as it is written, They are
not all children because they are the seed of Abraham, But in Isaacke shall thy
Seed be called: that is, they which are the children of the flesh, are not
the children of God: but the children of the promise, are counted for the seed.

In the Bible there are two Ismaels, the one an Egiptian by the mother: the
other, by the father. The one of Abraham by the mother: the other, of Abraham
by the father: Both these, were enemies to the true seed of Abraham. This
Ismael, flouted the promise in Isaac: the other Jsmael, kills Godoliah, he
being left a Gouerner of the seed of Isaacke, Ismael was upon every man's head,
and every man upon his head, seeing he persecuted Isaacke.

2096.
Arphaxad died, being 438. years old. Genesis 11.12.13.

Isaacke borne, Genesis 21.5. when Abraham is 100. 2108.
years old, and Sara 90. years old, according to Genesis 17.17.
HIs name signifies, Laughter. When Isaacke is promised, Sara laughed, so did
Abraham; so did Ismael laugh at Isaacke. These three laughters in Hebrew are
expressed by one word, but there is great difference. Sara Laughed as at a
thing unlooked for: for she said, I am now nintie years old, and my Lord an
hundred, shall I now give my self unto lust, seeing it cease to be with me
as with other Women? And the Lord said, Is any thing impossible with God?
Abraham laughed as rejoicing thereat: for it is said, Abraham believed in God,
and it was reckoned to him for righteousness. Jsmael laughed, as flouting at
Isaacke, as though he were such a goodly fellow in whom the Promise should be
established. You have this Story renewed again in the New Testament: For the
Angel Gabriel says unto Marie; For with God nothing is impossible. Elizabeth
comes to salute Marie, and she says, Blessed is she that believes: for
those things shall be performed, which are told thee from the Lord.

It is said of Abraham, that he laughed when the Angel promised he should
have a Son; thereby signifying his rejoicing. Isaacks life was answerable to
this joy: for he had no affliction in Canaan; only he was driven to go to
Abimelech King of the Philistines, and dwelt in Gerar, where he was somewhat
injured.

Abraham praying for Ismael that God would bless him, he says, I will make of
him a mighty Nation: but in Isaacke shall thy seed be called.

It is written, that Abraham had two Sons: one by a Servant, and one by a
Free woman: But he which was of the Servant, was after the Flesh; and he which
was of the Free woman, was by Promise: which things are spoken by an
allegory. For these Mothers are the two Testaments; the one which is Hagar of
Mount Sinay, for Hagar or Mount Sinay, is a Mountain in Arabia, which gendreth
unto bondage, and it answers to Jerusalem which now is, and she is in
bondage, with her Children. But Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the
Mother of us all: for we are after the manner of Isaacke, children of the
Promise. But as then he which was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that
was borne after the spirit: even so is it now. But what says the Scripture?
Put out the Servant and her Son: for the Son of the Servant shall not be
heir with the Son of the Free woman. Then we are not Children of the
Servant, but of the Free woman. Gal. 4.21.

2113. Ismael, and Hagar, are expelled Abraham's house. Genesis 21.10.

It was said unto Abraham, that his Seed should be afflicted in a Land that is
not theirs 400. years, and should serve them, and they should entreat them
evil. Now if we reckon the time of the abode of the Children of Israel in
Egypt, we shall find it but 215. years; for Jacob goes into Egypt 185.
years after the Promise of the 400. years: So that they were not in Egypt
full 400. years; but they were afflicted first and last 400. years: For
Ismael the Egiptian flouteth Isaacke, and begins the 400. year. And Pharaoh
the Egiptian in the end of 400. years, afflicts the Seed of Isaacke. And as
the Seed of Sem were afflicted by Came 400. years; so afterward about that
time, were they also afflicted by Iaphets seed ruling in Egypt.

It may be objected, How is Ismael an Egiptian, seeing he is of Abraham? He
is by the Mothers side an Egiptian, for Hagar was of that Country: and by this
exposition, it falls out to be true. We have for to warrant this, the like in
the Story of the Kings, where one being an Egiptian, is called of the Kings
seed, because one of his Ancestors married with a wife of Judah. This Story
is mentioned in 1. Chro. 2 34. it is thus said: Shesan had no Sons but
Daughters, and Shesan had a servant an Egiptian named Iarchthang, and Shesan
gave him his Daughter to wife. In 2. King. 25.22. after that the King of Babel
had overthrown Jerusalem, he left people in the land of Judah to till the
ground, and to exercise manual trades, which were made tributaries, and he set
Gedoliah ruler over them. Then came Ismael the son of Nethaniah to Gedoliah
to Mizpah, and Gedoliah swear unto them, that they should not fear to serve
the King: for by that means it should be well with them, and they should dwell
with them in the Land: But in the seventh month, Ismael the son of Nethaniah
the son of Elishama of the Kings seed, came and slew Gedoliah, and he died.
Here Ismael which was by his Fathers side Iarchthange an Egiptian, is called
of the Kings seed, sixteen ages after; because his auncestor Iarchthange
married one of Judah. And surely it is likely by this, that the Kings seed was
wonderfully decayed, 1. Chro. 2.35 Ier. 41.2.
when as one by an Egiptian (his great Grandfather, having only married in
Judah) should be called of the blood Royal. And without question, Shesan was
very wicked in despising the glory of the Tribe of Juda, which he openly
showed when he married his Daughter to an Egiptian. His name in Hebrew
answers to Ismaels manners afterward: for the Hebrews affirm, that
Iarchthange is so harsh and loathsome to be pronounced, as no word of like
tediousness in all the Hebrew tongue. So likewise Ismaels manners are as
detestable as the earth can afford. Thus you see how Ismael Abraham's son, may
rightly be called an Egiptian.

Sara reasons with Abraham, concerning the sending away of Hager and Ismael:
she might have great cause to be grieved at the flouting of Ismael; for we may
imagine her to have used such like speeches as these; I have been content to
have gone with you from Vr of the Chaldeans, from my Fathers house, and mine
own kindred: Besides the tediousness of the travel, I have sustained great
vexation and disquietnesse, by the fear which I might have, when you went to
fight with the four Kings. For my behavior toward you, it has always
been pleasing: My self being barren, I gave you my Maid, that yet by her I
might have children: for this, even Hagar despises me. It had been better
form to let Eliazar of Damascus have enjoyed the Blessing: Now God has sent
me a Son, see how he is flouted. Surely, if you do me right, and that which
appertains to justice, you must drive out this Bondwoman and her Son: for
this Son of the Bondwoman shall not be heir with my Son Isaacke. This
dealing of Sara, God approoueth, and wills Abraham to hear her voice, though
it seem grievous to him.

Here we may see by the mocking of Ismael, that the wicked ever persecuteth
the godly. Asa makes a Law, that whosoever will not seek the Lord God of
Israel, shall be slain. The wicked make as seueere Laws. But here is the
difference; the Laws of the godly are so reasonable, that every one may see
presently the equity of them: on the contrary, it is enough in the Laws of
the wicked, That it is the Kings pleasure; or, that it satisfies their Humors.

To return, we may guess that Isaacke was five years old when Ismael mocked
him: for otherwise Isaacke could not have perceived it. Ismaels flouting might
be after this sort; Is this he that shall have the Promise, in whom the
Nations shall be blessed? a goodly one, I warrant you: What continuance or
strength can there be in him, seeing at the time of his birth, his father and
mother were very old, and decayed in strength; and yet when he is weaned,
there must be great Festing and jolly cheer? If we consider what an offense it
is esteemed, if one being a Subject, or otherwise inferior, should
contumeliously and despightfully taunt and vpbraide the Heir apparent to a
Kingdom, we will think this an injury not sufferable. If we observe the
time when the Children of Israel came out of Egypt, which was about Easter; and
that this time of flouting, and that time, makes 400. years, we shall find
that this mocking was likewise about Easter.

Selah died. Cen. 11.14.15. being 514. years old. 2126.

Josephus thinks, that Jsaacke was appointed to be sacrificed at 35. years.
Codomanus is of opinion, 2140.
that Isaacke at this time was offered being now 32. years old and three
quarters, answerable to the death of Christ at his death, seeing his death was
a figure of the death of Christ. There is nothing precisely determined by the
Scriptures: and therefore it is left for us to follow which we will.

This Isaacke, in respect of the commandment of God, that he should be offered
up; and the obedience of Abraham in offering him, was dead, and was restored to
Abraham as if he had been risen from the dead. He was offered on Mount Moriab,
a part of the Mountain of Sion, called afterward Jerusalem. Of this Christ
speaks: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that saw those things that concern
thy peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes; therefore thou art Iebus, that
is, trodden down. God alters the name Moriah, to Jerusalem, because he would
have kept in memory Abraham's Obedience, and Sems Religion; and therefore
gives it a name comprehending both: for in respect of Abraham, he calls it
Iirie, Abraham giving it the name Jehovah Iirie, that is, In the Mount will the
Lord be seen. In respect of Sem, he keeps the name of Salem still; and so it
is called Iirie Salem, The sight of Peace.

From this Story, the Jews might have known the death of Christ, seeing
Christ compares them together; and yet by putting Christ to death, have saved
the world, though not heaped condemnation on their own heads: for as it was
prophesied, that one man must die for all the people; so they might have thus
reasoned: we know this is the Messiah, and that he must die for the sins of
the people. Isaacke being a figure, and this time wherein he now is on the
earth agrees with Daniels seauens. Therefore as Abraham offered up Isaacke; so
let the high Sacrificer according to the law, put him to death: but then as
Saint Peter speaks, if they had known this, they would not have crucified
the Lord of glory. But as the windows of Salomons Temple be narrow without
and wide within; so Christ speaks of parables, that they are therefore
spoken, that in hearing they should not hear; and, in seeing they should not
see, least they should repent and be saved. The author to the Hebrews says,
By Faith, Abraham offered up Isaacke, and he that received the promise,
offered his only begotten Son; to whom it was said, In Isaacke shall thy
seed be called; for he considered that GOD was able to raise him up even
from the dead, from whence he received him also after a sort. Christ in the
Gospel affirms, that Abraham saw my days (That is, in Isaacke) and
rejoiced. God speaks from heaven to Abraham in this sort; By my self have I
sworn, because thou have done this thing, and have not spared thine only
Son, therefore will I surely bless thee. In Romans 8.32. Saint Paul speaks
thus, What shall we then say to these things, if God be on our side, who can be
against us, who spared not his own Son, but gave him to death for us? How
shall he not with him give us all things also?

Compare Isaacke with Christ.
Was not Abraham our Father, justified by Works, when he offered his Son
Isaacke upon the Altar? Iam. 2. Isaacke was bound. Isaacke after three days,
was offered up to death, and after a sort revived to life.
God spared not his own Son, but gave him for us all to death. Christ was
bound. Christ having suffered death, rises up again the third day to life.


Sara died, being 127. yeayes old. 2145.

She was buried in Canaan in the Field of Machpelah, which Abraham hought of
the Hittits. This place they would have given Abraham freely; for they
confessed that he was a Prince of God amongst them, but he would buy it,
because they should not say, that they had made Abraham rich: wherefore we must
know, if we will be godly, that all our life is but a Pilgrimage, and that we
are but Strangers; and that all our Inheritance is nothing else but a place for
Burial. The Hebrews expound Sarahs death, a mortification and dying unto
sin.

Rebecca is married to Isaacke. Genesis 24.47. when he is 40. years old. 2148.


She is the Daughter of Bethuel the Son of Nachor the Son of Terah, and
Brother of Abraham: her Grandfather Nachor was an Idolater; but her Grandmother
Milka is thought to be of a good Religion, in that two of her Sons, Bethuel
and Kemuel have El, the mighty God, in their names. Isaacke goes to
Mesopotamia for a Wife of his own kindred, for in Canaan there were none of
his own kindred; and of the women of the Land, he might not marry. Jacob his
Son, likewise goes to Mesopotamia to Laban the brother of Rebecca, and there
takes him Wives of the same kindred.

2158.
SEM died, Genesis 11.10. being 600. years old: borne 98. years before the
Flood, and was taught by Methushelah and Lamech; who saw Adam many years.
THis Sem was a great King, and lived six hundred years, as Noah before the
Flood. He is called Melchisedech, the King of Peace. He dwelt at Salem, where
his name continued 65. ages, half one hundred and thirty; answerable to Seth,
till that the Apostles received the holy Ghost after the ascension of Christ.
He is resembled to the Son of God.

Sems house believed that Christ should come, till he came: and when he came,
they denied him, and were cut off.

2168.
Esau, and Jacob, borne, Genesis 25.25. their grandfather Abraham bing 160 and
their father Isaacke 60. years old.
THe first matter in this Story to be considered, is, how the two Twins in
Rebeckahs womb are called two Nations. Malachi speaking in the person of God,
says: I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau. So Saint Paul says to the Romans.
Ere they were borne, it was said, the elder shall serve the younger; as it is
written, Esau have I hated, and Jacob have I loved. Romans 9.13.

Esaus description is thus laid down in the Scriptures. First, that he was
Hayrie, that he was of great courage; and at his birth, Jacob holds him by
the heel: God thereby showing at their birth, what should be the course of
their lives afterward. Homer makes mention, that Vl^sses overthrew Ajax by
striking him on the Leg. The Greek translators handle it so, and call him
Thermistes, that is to say, a Heeler.

Esau was a Hunter, living like the Ruffians and Roysters of our time: He
sells his Birthright for a mess of Pottage; for Jacob would not give it
unto him, except Esau would first swear to sell him his Birthright. Says
Esau, I am contented; for it will be so long ere it will be enjoyed, that I,
and my Sons Son, shall be dead first: So with an Oath he sold Jacob his
Birthright: therefore he was called Edom, Read Pottage.

No doubt Jsaacks men knew this to be a rare Blessing: and seeing he had
despised it, they must needs, when soever they called him Edom, keep his
wickedness in memory: for by this sale, he despised Noah, Some, Heber, and
Abraham, and all his victories; in the faith of which Blessing, Abraham
overcame so gloriously. This is the first combat by which Jacob, a Heeler,
supplanteth Esau.

The whole posterity of Esau bare the name of this infidelity: he thought it
a long time to the performance of a Promise to be accomplished almost 400.
years after; aiming (like a profane worldling) at the outward Inheritance of
the Land of Canaan, and not respecting the Blessing of the spiritual Salem.
He was the eldest, and extreme wicked; notwithstanding he was the Son of a
righteous Father; to show that the sinceerest nature of the godliest men, is
extreme wicked. He was to Jacob, as Kain to Abel, and as Ismael to Isaacke.
And as in his own person he persecuted and sought the death of his brother
Jacob, so his posterity were continual enemies to the seed of Jacob.

Ameleck of Esau lay in wait for the children of Israel, when they went out of
Egypt, to destroy them: but God commanded them to put out his name from under
Heaven. Wicked Haman would at once have destroyed all the Jews: but he, and
his ten Sons were hanged.

Haman was of Agag the Amalekite of Esau. In him is performed a Prophecy in
Numb. 24.20. Amaleck is the beginning of Nations, but his latter end shall
perish utterly. Herod of Edom, likewise seeks to put Christ the true Israel,
to death: wherein you may see the malice of Esau to continue even till Christ.

Esau was hated of God before he was borne: therefore whatsoever he did, it
turned still into a curse unto him. He prepares Venison for his Father, and
the whiles loses the blessing of eternal Life. He would please his Father by
marrying into Abraham's stock, and marryeth Ismaels Daughter: He wept for the
Blessing, but found no place of repentance, though he sought the Blessing with
tears. In like sort is the repentance of every wicked man, when he is touched
with the conscience for sin, he will then acknowledge his sin, and with
tears show forth sorrow for his transgressions; but through the hardness of
his heart which can not repent, he returns (like to Esau) to his vomit
again.

And further, we are to note in this Story, how Esau by haste, not willing to
stay for the Promise till the time appointed, felt the heavy judgment of God:
we have the like example of this haste. and the like punishment, in Saul.
Samuel anointed Saul King, and willed him to go before him to Gilgal, and to
stay for him seven days till he come. Saul tarryeth seven days according
to the time appointed, but Samuel came not; therefore the people were
scattered: Saul seeing the peoples minds severed, that he might unite them
again, offered a burnt Offering. Then came Samuel, and rebuked him, saying:
Thou have done foolishly, thy Kingdom shall not continue: the Lord has sought
him a man after his own heart. Thus have you the like example, both for
story, and prophecy.

Jacobs Story will appear the better, by declaring Esaus, even as contraries
are set together, that thereby every one may show the clearer.

His name signifies Supplanter, or Heeler; and all his life shows him to be
contrary to Esau. The one an image of al Impiety: the other, a mirror of al
Godliness. The one, a Persecutor: the other, persecuted: The one, a despiser
of Grace; the other, an imbracer of Virtue.

You have from the Creation to Jacob, two and twenty Fathers; answerable to
the two and twenty Letters in the Hebrew tongue: So Epiphanius in Ankorato
handles them.

Thus by comparisons, God makes his dealinges easy to be kept in memory.
Jacob, though the two and twenty from Adam, yet the third Seventh of those that
were borne after Adams creation.

Now the Chronicle is ended for particular lives: for after Jacobs Story, the
Scripture contains whole Stories of whole States and Kingdoms.

Noah is the tenth from Adam, Abraham the tenth from Noah, Jacob the twelfe: so
you have the two and twenty. The Hebrews admire the patience of God, that ten
whole ages God gave them to repent; and yet Esaias says, That the Lord looked
about, and saw that there was none good upon the earth.

The seventy Interpreters translating the old Testament into Greek, thrust in
one Kenan, whose name is not in the Hebrew. If the reason be demanded why they
did so? this may be answered. The 70. Interpreters knew, that a great deal of
wisdom was contained in the comparison between the two and Twenty Letters
of the Hebrew tongue, and the two and Twenty Fathers. Now because they envied
the Egiptians, and were loath they should gain any wisdom by them, of purpose
they add Kenan, to disturb this proportion, and so they make Jacob the
twenty three. S. Luke setting down the Genealogy of Christ, alleges
Kenan, following the Genealogy penned by the Seventy Interpretors: for S.
Luke was to take it as he found it, and he knew that all the Jews were well
acquainted with the reason why Kenan was added: Therefore there could no danger
grow in his time, though Kenan were kept still in the Genealogy. Beza
translating the new Testament, leaves him out; for the which the Jesuits
accuse him. Now Beza, to the end ignorant men should not stagger by finding him
in Luke which is not in Moses, leaves him out: and this may Beza do well
enough; for any one may know, that S. Luke never meant, that Arphaxad begat
Kenan, seeing that he adds, being, as men supposed, the son of Arphaxad,
to wit, of those men that knew not the meaning of the Translators. Besides,
Epiphanius being a Grecian, and being acquainted with the Greek Translation,
yet concludes the Fathers under the number of Two and twenty.

Jacob is called, The beloved of the Lord, before he was borne: in which he is
answerable to David, whose name signifies Beloved: and to our Savior Christ,
of whom it was said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

ISaacke is blind, Sem, Heber, and Abraham, being dead, only Esau and Jacob
alive to enjoy the Blessing after Isaacks death. Now if we examine the sequel,
we shall see that if Isaacke had not been blind, he would for his part, have
brought destruction upon the whole eart; for he would have blessed Esau, who
upon any occasion would have sold it; and besides, being very wicked in
despising it, would have brought the heavy wrath of God upon his posterity for
disobedience. Therefore his blindness was a great blessing, even as Saint Paul
speaks, Eueriething turns to the best, to the children of God.

Isaacke wills Esau to go and kill him some Venision, that his soul may
bless him before he die. So the Prophets use to desire meat before they
prophecy, that being refreshed, they may be the fuller of spirit and
cheerfulness. The Hebrews dispute from this place, whether Isaacke was
grown into poverty: Some think he was, by reason of the famine which fell
in Canaan, and because the Philistines kept not covenant with him, for which
cause, Sampson afterward takes occasion to plague them, and that justly: Aben
Ezra is of this opinion. Rebecca she hears this Commandment of Isaacke, and
knowing that speediness in despatching, is oftentimes a great cause of
advantage, wills Jacob to go and fetch a Kid, that thereof she might make
pleasant meat for Isaacke. Jacob is afraid, she comfort him: for she had
her warrant from God, that the elder should serve the younger; and therefore
she boldly aduentureth. He comes to Isaacke, who supposes him to be Jacob
by his voice, but feeling the roughness of his hands and neck, is persuaded
that it is Esau, and blesses him. When he was blessed, in comes Esau with
his venison, and prays his Father to bless him. Isaacke was now astonished to
think of this subtlety. His spirit must needs be full of fear, to think
how he whom he would have blessed, the Lord would not choose. Isaacke
therefore seeing the event, acknowledges the election of God in Jacob, and
concludes that he shall be blessed.

Now here is a question to be handled; when Jacob says: I am thy son Esau:
and Isaacke answers: It is Jacobs voice: Whether Jacob does lie or not. This
answer of Jacobs, if we expound in the best sense, is no lie: for then it is
no more but a kind of speech, called Ironia. So God speaks in Genesis 3.22.
Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil. So Christ in
the Gospel comes to his Disciples, and finding them asleep, says, Sleep
henceforth. We may answer it further, thus: Jacob in respect of the purpose
of God, which chose him for the blessed, might very well be called the only
Son. Besides, in regard of civil right, now he was his eldest Son, seeing
he had bought the Birthright of Esau. Whether it were a lie or no, we will
leave it to God: and we can not altogether condemn this answer, seeing God
approoueth it by giving Jacob the blessing.

Plato says, When men are dead, we cannot ask them what they meant: Therefore
we must expound their speeches and their actions, to the best meaning. And
further, words are not always to be taken in proper kind of speaking; for
Abram defends himself, that Sara was his Sister, to wit, the Daughter of his
Father, but not the Daughter of his Mother. Joseph swears, By the life of
Pharaoh: if you take the words as they lie in proper sense, he sinned greatly,
and was even for his oath, the worst of all Jacobs Sons. But Salamo-Iirkie
expounds him thus: By the life of Pharaoh you are Spies, that is, Pharaohs
life is a Worms life, which in account is no life: even so are ye no Spies in
truth, though you may seem so to be. So likewise Hushas answers Absalom; for
when Absalom saw Hushai David's Counselor, he asks him, Is this thy kindness
to thy friend? Why wentest thou not with thy friend? meaning David. Hushai
answers, Nay, but whom the Lord and his people, and all the men of Israel
chose, his will I be, and with him will I dwell. This sentence has a double
meaning; either that he meant to serve Absalom, or King David. Therefore, when
things are spoken doubtfully, we must mark how men may in wit expound them.

Abraham died, Genesis 25.78. being 175. years old. 2183.
He was buried in Hebron.

Heber died, Genesis 11.16.17. being 464. years old. 2188.
He was the longest liver of any that was borne after the Flood.

Ismael died, being 137. years old. 2231.

THe Prophet Esaias cap. 60.7. prophesying of the calling of the Gentiles, names
the two eldest Sons of Ismael, Nebaioth and Kedar, saying, The Rams of
Nebaioth, shall serve thee: and the Sheep of Kedar, shall be gathered unto
thee.

Again, he names two of Abraham by Ketura, Sheba and Seba: which two names,
do also contain the Gentiles by Cham, and the Gentiles of Sem by Iocktan: So
that under the names of the most worthy Gentiles, which are the Gentiles by
Abraham, he shows the calling of all the Gentiles in the World. Whereby we
are taught, that Isreal's posterity was not wholly rooted out of the favor of
God, as Ameleckes was.

Jacob goes to Laban. Genesis 28.5. 2245.

He goes into the Country of Mesopotamia to Laban, there he serves twenty
years. 20.
This Laban was the son of Bethuel, and brother to Rebecca, and of the house
of Nachor the brother of Abraham and Haran, who remained in the land of the
Caldies after Abraham's departure: so that Laban, though of Mesopotamia, yet is
near kinsman to Jacob.

Jacob in this Journey, goes over Jordan with his Staff and Scrippe, as
closely and secretly as he could, that thereby Esau might not know of his
departure: for Esau was mighty; and, as it appears afterward, had a band of
four hundred men.

Jacob going to Haran, stays by the way all night, because the Sun was
down, and laid of the Stones of the place under his head, and slept. There
he sees the vision of the Ladder; and when he awaketh, he says, Surely the
Lord was in this place, and I was not ware of it. Then he rose and took up the
Stones, and made a Pillar, and called it Bethel: for he said, this is no other,
but the House of Jehovah, and the Gate of Heaven.

He sees a Ladder. etc.
THis Ladder represents Christ: the foot on the Earth, his Humanity: and
the top reaching to Heau enhis Deity: the Angels of God ascending and
descending, the Mediations betwixt God and us: and the Lord standing above upon
it, the readiness of the Father, to receive our Prayers. This is expounded,
John 1.51. Ye shall see the Heavens open, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of man.

In this vision of the Ladder, we see the whole Mediation of Christ is showed
to Jacob: And if we duly consider it, there could not be a fitter Similitude
in the whole course of Nature to represent the Mediation, then the Ladder: for
even as in a Ladder, if two or three Steps be broken, the Ladder is to no
use, seeing we can neither ascend nor go down by it: even so the whole
Mediation is so united and knit together, that by despising any one part, we
bereave our selves of the benefit of the whole.

After that Jacob was come to Haran, he served Seven years for Rachel. Laban
gives him Leah, and deceives him, and uses this excuse, That it was not the
use of the Country, that the younger should be served before the elder. Leah
is said to be Contrite. Here we may see what it is to enjoy the truth of Gods
Religion, and to worship him truly. Leah commits a great sin: and though
God make her fruitful, yet this event excuses not the fault before committed.
She knew very well, that she could not enjoy salvation by staying with her
Father: and we are to make the best collection of the actions of the best
Women; and therefore (no doubt) the zeal that she had to know God, made her to
venture so far. No doubt, this was a great sin, and yet a far greater to
have been married to an unfaithful Husband: for thereby there was no hope left
for salvation. And we see that Christ chooses to come of Leah by Judah, rather
then of Rachel. God himself only knows how far he will pardon so great
offenses.

Then he serves Seven years for Rachel. Leah is fruitful; she has
Reuben, and says, The Lord has Looked on my tribulation. Then she conceived,
and bare Simeon, and says, Because the Lord Heard that I was hated, therefore
he has given me this Son. She conceived again, and bare Leui, and says,
Now my Husband will be Joined unto me, therefore she named him Leui (Joined.)
Then she bare Judah, and said, Now will I Praise the Lord. The Heathen by the
light of Nature will confess, that the Lord looks on their tribulation, and
helps them; that he hears their hatred, and reuengeth it: But they cannot
for all these benefits, praise the Lord: Therefore she as a Prophet, knowing
that Christ should come of Judah, Pray seth God for so glorious a blessing. Then
she left bearing for a time.

Rachel gives Bilha to Jacob, she bears Dan (Judgment,) and says, God has
given Sentence on my side: Afterward, Nepthali, (Wraftling.)

Leah does the like, and gives Jacob, Zilpha, who bears Gad (a Company,)
and Asher (Happy.) Leah after bears Isachar (Wages or Reward;) then Zebulon
(God has given me a goodly Dowry;) and last, Dina, a Daughter (Judgment.) So
God showed judgments to the Sichemites, for rauishing of her.

2260.
Fourteen years after, Joseph (Increase) is borne. A rare man: and we commonly
see, that rare men have great expectation before their birth.

After this, Jacob like a good Philosopher, enricheth himself by using Rods
of diverse colors. Joseph in Egypt uses a kind of policy to take away the
Lands from the people, and to bring them to the King. These actions at the
first, might seem unlawful, because the cause is hid from us; though
afterward the purpose of God appearing, they are approved

2255.
Judah borne, his father Jacob being 87. years old.
He was the fourth Son of Jacob; his mother names him, Praise God: Whereby
it appears, that she looked for Redemption by Christ, respecting the Promise
concerning the Seed of the Woman, to be accomplished in him. It could not so
have appeared by naming Ruben, Simeon, or Leui; for a wise Philosopher might
have given those names: But Judah, containing a name of heavenly comfort,
shows a spirit governed by the holy Ghost.

2264.
Jacob goes from Laban. Genesis 31.17.
WHere he had bin twenty years, two seuens and a six; in which number, is
contained the Creation, and the Sabbath: And as any one may gather, closely
expressed seven years plenty, and seven years dearth.

As he returned from Laban, he feared his brother Esau: But the Angel of God
met him to comfort him; therefore he calls the name of the place Mahanaim,
that is, Gods Host. This Camp of Angels is repeated in the Song of Songs,
and applied to Christ, as the company of an Army. So David likewise
affirms, that the Angels of God do pitch their Tents about them that fear
him. When Absalom is destroyed, David and his Camp were at Mahanaim, the place
where the Angel met Jacob. Wherein we are to learn, that God so disposes
the actions of his elect, that he regards their goinges out and their
commings in, and marketh all their Paths; that whether they be at home with
their Father, or abroad among Strangers, they are shadowed under the defense of
the most High, whose dwelling is in eternity,

After this, he wrastleth with the Son of God, (that is, in likeness of the
same nature, which he afterward took upon him) until the break of the day,
and would not let him go till he had blessed him. Therefore he called him.
Israel, a Conqueror. This is expounded in Oseas: By his strength, he had power
with God. To show, that as he had power with God, so he should prevail with
men. Then he erected an Altar there, and called it Penuel; for says he, I
have seen Ged, face to face.

This story of Jacob, is repeated in John 1.47. where Christ says to
Nathaniel, Behold a true Israelite, in whom there is no guile. Nathaniel is
called the true Israelite, in that he acknowledged Christ to be the Son of
God: which he might know by casting Daniels Seauens.

Afterward he is reconciled to his brother Esau, and beyond Jordan he
dwelt, near Sichem; where Dina is deflowred.

Er Onan Selah
borne. Er and Onan were married to Thamar, and committed grievous sins before
God, and therefore he destroys them.

2276.17.
Joseph is sode into Egypt when he is 17. years old: so long was he nourished
at home of Jacob.
Joseph Dreameth that the Sun, Moon, and eleven Stars, worshipped him. Genesis
37.9. meaning his Father, Mother, and his eleven Brethren; of whom in the
creation, the twelve Signs in the Zodiac had a full reference: showing
thereby, that God in his Counsel at the Creation, had a great regard to the
number of the Sons of Jacob, which were to be borne more then two thousand
years after. He has the like regard at the confusion of Tongues, in settling
Canaan and his eleven Sons in a soil which Jacobs sons should afterward
possess.

For declaring this Dream, the poison of the Serpent possessing his Brethrens
hearts, they were moved with envy, and sold Joseph into Egypt. Judah caused
him to be sold, to save his life: but Judas Iscariot, (that is, which falls
away for reward) sold Christ, to loose his life. Math. 26.15,

Jacob deceived his father Isaacke with a Kidd. Genesis 37.31. When Joseph is
sold, his Brethren sprinkleth the blood of a Kidde upon his party colored
Coat, and brought it home to their Father, and said, a wild Beast had slain
him.

Jacob was 20. years from his father Isaacke, and did not see his face. Joseph
was 20 years from his father Jacob, before he sees his face.
To show, that wherein a man offends, therein he shall be punished.

Joseph the son of Jacob, fed Israel in Egypt, as putting meat into the
mouth of a Child. Joseth the son of Jacoh, takes the child Jesus, and his
Mother Mary, and flees into Egypt Mat. 2.14. and properly puts meat into
the Childs mouth.
Er and Onan died, Genesis 38.7. 2280.

ER and Onan having committed a horrible sin before God, are slain, and no
seed left unto them. Then according to the custom, Thamar thought to have had
the third son Selah, to have raised up seed: but Judah neglecting it, she
attyred her self like a light woman, and lay in the way as Judah should go to
the Sheepshearing: Whom Judah knew, and at the time, she bare two Children,
Phares and Serah: For which fact, Judah would have burt her. Whereby we may
know, that before the Law given by Moses, they had the same equity of Justice
for punishing of sin, that they had afterward.

In Moses Law, a Magistrate might not be condemned under three witnesses.

Thamar condemns Judah by three witnesses: his Seal. Bracelet. Staff.


From this deed of Judah we may understand, the prerogative that his Brethren
should praise him, could not be meant of himself: but herein is manifest the
gifts of God to be of Grace, and not of Nature: for if Judah had been rare of
godliness, the prerogative of Nature might seem to have caused Christ to have
come of him.

2288.
Isaacke died, Genesis 35.29. being 180. years old.
He is the longest liver after Heber, and lives longer then Abraham: to show,
that he was a Child of Promise; for if Abraham begetting him when he was old,
he should have died quickly, what rare blessing had it been to Abraham? And
therefore, that the power of God might be seen even in the weakness of man,
Isaacke has a longer life then Abraham, or any after him. Hereupon it may be
concluded, the Book of Tobias to be false, because it makes Tobias life so
long, and thereby seems to cross Jacobs Blessing. Besides, we shall find
that in Nehemias time, they which came out of Captivity do outliue any in the
Scriptures that come after; and these men were accounted old. The longest liver
of them, comes short of Isaackes age.

Ezrom borne: of him nothing is spoken.

2298.17.
Jacob goes into Egypt, Genesis 47.5. He is nourished of Joseph 17. years.
215.
NOw for this number of 215. how is that performed, Genesis 15.13. where God says
to Abraham, Thy seed shall be evil entreated in a Land that is not theirs 400.
years, seeing they continue in Egypt but 215. years? They were afflicted by
some of Egypt, 400. years; for Ismael the Egiptian by Hagar, mocketh Isaacke
in the beginning of the 400. years, and that Mocking, in the Scripture is
called Persecution: And in the end of the 400. years, they were afflicted unto
the coming out of Egypt: so that they were not in Egypt 400. years; but they
were afflicted first and last, 400. years.

Psalm. 105.23. Israel came into Egypt, and Jacob was a Stranger in the land of
Cham; to confirm the covenant that he made with Abraham, and the oath that he
swear unto Isaacke; which he appointed to Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an
everlasting Testament, saying: Unto thee will I give the Land of Canaan, the
lot of your inheritance: when as yet there were but a few of them, and they
Strangers in the Land, what time as they went from one Nation to another, and
from one Kingdom to another people. He suffered no man to do them wrong, but
reproved even Kings for their sakes, saying: Touch not mine Anointed, and
do my Prophets no harm. Yet he called for a Dearth upon the Land, and
destroyed all the provision of Bread. But he had sent a man before them, (Genesis
39.1.) even Joseph which was sold to be a Bond-seruant; whose feet were hurt
in the Stocks, and the Iron entered into his soul, until the time that his
cause was known. The word of the Lord tried him.

This Famine over all the land of Canaan, may appear to be a punishment on
Jacobs samilie, for selling Joseph into Egypt.
Jacob goes into Egypt, and there tells Pharaoh, 1298.
that he was 130. years old: though Pharaoh in his demand, meant no more
then a Heathen man would, to wit, to know his years, and the age of his life;
ye^ God so disposes Jacobs answer, that he signifies unto him, that his
coming into Egypt with Seauentie souls, is answerable in a contrary degree,
to the first scattering of the Seauentie Families at the building of the Tower
of Babel. In forty eight years, there came three discentes from Jacob.
Whereby it appears, that Judah and Pharez could not be much elder when they
begot children, then Solomon was when he begot Roboam; which was about twelve
years of age. By means of which speedy increase, there were of these
Seauentie, in two hundred and fifteen years, Six hundred thousand fighting
Men, besides Women and Children, godly, and of the household of faith: to show,
how God could perform his Promise to Abraham, that He would make his seed as
the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand of the Seashore. Hereupon Abacucke
says, that the Councels of God are eternal: thereby teaching us to mark
diligently the time wherein God performs his Promises: which may be made
familiar by examples in this sort. It is said, Genesis 3.15. The Seed of the
Woman shall break the head of the Serpent.

This was not performed, till Christ took flesh of the Virgin, and became Man;
which was 4000. years wanting but 70. after the Promise made to Adam. Satan,
to try this, tempts Christ, and is overthrown. Abraham goes forth of his
Country, to embrace the Promise, that God would give him a Land, 430. years
before his Seed should enjoy it. But the true performance was long after, that
is to say, in Christ: as Zacharias speaks, Luke 1. To perform the oath which
he swear to our forefather Abraham, that he would give us. God speaks as
though presently it should fall out; but seeing one thousand years in his
sight, a^^^^ one day, we must mark how his Counsels are eternal. It was
spoken in King Achaz, days by Esaias. 7.14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive a
Son. He, nor his seed, saw the performance thereof: So was Isaacke a figure
of Christ; and the Lamb kept it in memory. Daniel in his time prophesies of
70. Seauens, or 490. years before Christ the King should be killed, to
perform every Vision and Prophecy.

2315.
Jacob died in Egypt, etc. Genesis 49.33.
He is brought from Egypt to Canaan, to be buried in Hebron with Abraham and
Isaacke, as a sign that he looked for the Resurrection, and inioying of the
spiriturll Canaan. This place Caleb afterward claymeth for an Inheritance,
when he comes into the Land: for it was the first Purchase, and a
signification of our Pilgrimage in this life, having here no abiding place.

Now let us compare the Iourneyes of Abraham, Jacob, Jacobs sons, and Christ,
together.
Abraham Was borne in Mesopotamia. He goes to Canaan. He returns to Egypt.
He dies in Canaan.
Jacob Was borne in Canaan. He goes to Mesopotamia. He returns to Canaan. He
goes into Egypt. He is brought to Canaan.
Jacobs sons Are borne in Mesopotamia. They dwell in Canaan. They multiply in
Egypt. They return to Canaan; and after that, are carried into Babel, an other
Egypt.
CHRIST Is borne in Canaan. He goes to Egypt. He returns to Canaan, and
there he dies, and brings a new Babel or Egypt; the Romans on the Jews, to
destroy them.

Rambam, an old Hebrew, makes another comparison in the events thus. Jacob
himself was used well in Egypt: but his posterity was plagued by the Kings,
which lived after him in Egypt.

In Babylon those that went into captivity, were plagued, as Sidrack, Misack,
Abednago; but their posterity found relief in Cirus and Darius, conquering
the Babilonians.

Now it is necessary to speak of the place where Jacob died.

This place was Egypt, Chams Country, long ago accursed. Where it is spoken
in the Prophets, that in Egypt men spoke with the tongue of Canaan: The meaning
of it is thus much. That when Christ shall come to preach, his teaching shall
be of such power, that it shall convert (in all Countries, as well Egypt; as
Grecia, Barbaria, and all other the Countries of the Gentiles which knew not
God) souls unto God; which being converted, shall speak the tongue of Canaan,
that is, their tongues shall praise God for their Redemption by Christ, which
is the tongue of Canaan. This continues yet true: for there it no Country,
nor Nation, where God has not had, or has those which unfeignedly believe the
Gospel. Yet if it be objected, that the tongue of Canaan was Hebrew, how then
shall a simple Ploughman understand it? This objection is thus taken away. It
is not necessary for a simple Ploughman or tradesman to be a skillful
Hebrecian; for he may be saved without the knowledge of the tongue, seeing by
the Bible translated, he may learn the Religion of Canaan; and that learning,
will teach him the tongue of Canaan. If they reply further, that the Papists
say, the Translations be corrupted, and therefore it is necessary he should be
cunning in the original. For answer to this reply made from the Papists
argument: If any doubt of the truth of the Translations, he may resort to
learned Preachers, which can easily resolve him. And for the Papists, if the
controversy be between them and us, the original must determine it.

It is said, that Jacobs sons were of Cham. It is not meant his twelve
Sons, for they were borne before he came into Egypt: but that place of
Scripture has special referrence to the two sons of Joseph, Ephraim and
Manasses, who are recconed to be Jacobs Children: For Joseph marrying an
Egiptian, by whom he had them, they by the Mothers side, are of Cham; and so
Jacobs Children in this sense, are of Cham.

Thus much for the place.

Now follows his Will. Genesis 49.2.
Hear ye Sons of Jacob, and hearken to Israel your Father.

Here he repeateth his own name, Israel, that is, Mighty with God. The
occomplishment of this strength was fulfilled when they came from Egypt.

As there is no Commonwealth but stands of those that be Wanton, of men
ouerreached with Choler, of Judges, of Husbandmen, of Merchants, of men of
Trade, of Warriors to defend from foreign invasion: so are Jacobs twelve
Sons of all degrees in life.

In placing them here thus, their Dignity is regarded, and not their
prerogative of Birth: for then Reuben should be first.
IVD A has the prerogative, that His Brethren shall praise him: Yet if we
look into his life, this could not be meant of him; for who looser then he,
who lay with his daughter Thamar? But herein is manifest the gifts of God to
be of Grace, and not of Nature. For if Judah had been rare for godliness, then
the prerogative of Nature might seem to have caused Christ to have come of
him. Judah his Story of Praise God, is repeated by S. Paul, Romans 2.25. where he
says, Whose praise is not of men, but of God. So every man that knows the
birth of Christ, and imbraceth the truth thereof with constancy, not turning
for the love of reward, his praise is of God, though the world hate him.

JOSEPH, he Exceedes in virtue, and therefore has wonderful blessings; for
among the thirteen Judges, six are of his Tribe: By which glory, his
posterity began to despise the Tribe of Judah; for at Roboams time, they say, 1
Kin. 12. What have we to do with the house of Iessai? What have we to do with
the house of David? to your Tents O Israel, to your Tents. But the Lord
plagued them with a Plague ever to be kept in memory, as the Prophet Jeremy
says, Ier. 7.12. Mark what I have done to Siloh: (which was a City in the
Tribe of Ephraim.) And in Psalm 78.67. He forsook the Tabernacle of Siloh, even
the Tent that he had pitched among them. He refused the Tabernacle of Joseph,
and choose not the Tribe of Ephraim; but choose the Tribe of Judah, even the
hill of Sion, which he loved. Concerning the prosperity of Joseph's house,
Nazeanzenus notes, that he himself was more afraid of the subtleties of
Satan in his prosperity, then in his adversities.

NEPHTALI, Of him this only is spoked, Gen 49. He is a Hind let go, giving
goodly words: Which was performed when Barack of Nephtali, and Debora of
Ephraim, sang for the overthrow of Sisera at the waters of Mageddon. Judge. 5.1.
etc. Now, whereas you have Abacuck to bring a mess of Pottage to Daniel in the
Lions den, some Jew that made that, never meant so: but from that place of
Abacuck, The just shall live by his Faith. Abac. 2. fayneth a comparison, that
as Pottage preserves this natural life from perishing; so the meditating by
Faith on the Promises of God in Christ, kept our souls from wavering by
distrust: and by that confidence, Daniel was saved from the mouth of the Lions.

BENJAMIN, A child very virtuous; Rachel calls him Ben-oni, Son of my
sorrow, but Israel calls him Benjamin, Son of my right hand. Moses in Deuteronomy.
33.12. in his blessing, says, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety
by him; and God shall dwell between his shoulders. And so he did; for the
Temple was afterward built in the Tribe of Benjamin. His Tribe has the first
King, though he be the meanest of the Tribes. Benjamin continues till the
evening: When the other Tribes fell away, he only with Judah at Roboams time:
he only with Judah in Cyrus time, joined for the building of the Temple.
Hester of Benjamin, saved all Judah from the practice of Haman. Paul of
Benjamin, was one of the last Builders of the spiritual Temple.

DAN: Moses in his blessing in numbering the Tribes, leaves out Simeon. And in
the Revelation when the Tribes are sealed, Dan is left out. Thereupon the
Grecians think, that Antichrist shall come of the Tribe of Dan. That is not
so; but Moses being of Leui, in blessing the Tribes, puts in Leui, and
speaks largely of his spiritual blessings. Joseph's Sons are not to be
left out, because they were adopted: therefore to keep the number of Twelve,
he must leave out some. Simeon was the fittest, because he was without
repentance. Leui must be reckoned, seeing his was a spiritual inheritance, and
the Lord promised to be his inheritance: therefore Dan must be omitted. And
this may be the reason; When the children of Israel came into the land of
Canaan, the Tribe of Dan causes the first Idolatry, and therefore that Tribe
was justly plagued: And in this Tribe Idolatry continued till the remoouing of
the Arc from Siloh. But yet this we must understand, that though Dan is not
named, yet in respect his Tribe are Jacobs Sons, the Tribe is comprehended in
the general Blessing: And Moses concludes, that seeing that the eternal God
is his refuge; Israel the Fountain of water shall dwell in safety.

ISACHAR, Was content to live under tribute, or labor like a Merchaunt, or
like to an Ass couching down between two Burdens, rather then to seek
glory by leading Bands of men.

REVBEN, He lost his prerogative, because he Went up to his Fathers bed;
therefore he is light as Water, he shall not excel. Reuben has one of
David's Captains of his Tribe: but it is presently added therewith, Thirty
better then he. Reuben shows some compassion to Joseph, and would not have
him killed, but cast him into some Pit. Judah thought that might be too long
ere he would be pispatched, and therefore sells him.

SIMEON and LEVI, Their wrath was fierce; yet because Leui afterward
repented, and showed tender affection to Joseph, and was zealous in destroying
Idolaters, therefore he had a Blessing in Moses Will. Simeon never showed any
tender affection to Joseph; and therefore when his Brethreh come into Egypt,
and Joseph accuses them for spies, he keeps Simeon in prison till they come
down again, as a kind of punishment for his former malice. His sin against
the Sichemites was exceeding great: and seeing he never showed any sign of
repentance, he was justly cut off from the hope of a Blessing. By this we may
learn to reject the authority of the Book of Judith: First, because she is
said to be of the Tribe of Simeon. If we mark this well, we shall see how
this Book can not be Scripture; for we must note, that it is no small glory,
to have the spirit of God pen a Book of ones actions. If there be but a
sentence spoken in the commendation of any in the Scripture, it is a great
weght of glory. Now if we look to Jacobs Will, and see that he has a Curse
and not a Blessing: and in the course of Scripture afterward, no mention of any
repentance that Simeon and his Tribe showed, nor any zeal of Religion
expressed, how can this stand with Jacobs Prophecy* nay, it clean crosses
it, and makes it frustrate. For seeing Jacob as a Prophet, tells all his
Sons what should befall them in the last days, to every one and his Tribe,
so long as the Kingdom of the Jews, and their policy stood; and in his Will
makes no mention of the Book of Judith, We must by admitting this Book,
accuse the spirit of God of ignorance. Besides, it is a Story: and yet the
time thereof does not fall out within the compass of any time, neither before
the Captivity, neither after: and therefore to be rejected. And for my
opinion, I make as much account of Ovid Metamorphosis, as of Judith: for Plato
says, That in Fables, there a Truth revealed secretly. Thus we are to think
likewise of the book of Tobie.

LEVI, He repented, when Amram of the Tribe of Leui saved Moses.

ZABVLON, Was a Merchaunt, and Delighted in Ships. In Greek, Canaan is
called Phenicea, and the men of Canaan, Phenices. Aristotle, a thousand years
after Moses, makes mention of a River Tartesus; he meant the Sea Tharsis: and
the Phenices brought Gold, and had such plenty, that their Ankers were
thereof. No doubt he had heard of Salomons time, wherein Gold and Silver was no
more esteemed then Stone. This trauayling of Jacobs Sons into far
Countries, must needs make the Heathen have a taste of Religion: And Moses he
willed the Heathen to resort to the Mountain where the Temple was built.

ASER, Was a Farmour, To provide pleasures for a King. You have in the old
Testament, little spoken of him; but because his Tribe should not think
themselves excluded the favor of God, you have in the new Testament Anna, that
is, Grace (a very rare Woman for godliness) the daughter of Phanuell (that is,
see God,) of the happy Tribe of Aser: for Aser signifies Happy.

GAD, He shall Lead an Host of men. This was performed when Reuben, Gad, and
half of Manasses, gave a great over throw to the Haggarines, about the time
that Saul was anointed King.

Thus we may see that whatsoever is requisite in palicie for the maintenance of
a Commonweal, you shall find expressed in the lives and behavior of the
Sons of Israel.

2369
Joseph died, Genesis 50.26. being 110. years old.
BY Faith, Joseph when he died, made mention of the departing of the Children
of Israel out of Egypt, and gave commandment of his bones. Heb. 11.22.

Now because many excellent things are to be said of Joseph before his death,
when he was in Egypt, and in the Sinay sight no years laid down, I will
here handle them together.

God prospered him in Egypt in all his actions. And even as God blessed Lahan
for Jacobs sake; so he blessed Joseph's Master* for Joseph's sake.

Joseph was a goodly person, and well favored: which commendation in the same
words is bestowed upon David, Sam. 16.^3* the same of Daniel, and the same of
Christ.

Joseph would not be defiled with the fornication of Egypt: Daniel would not
be defiled with the unclean diet of Babel.

Joseph expounds Pharaohs Dream: Daniel expounds Nebuchadnetzars Dream.

Joseph was made Ruler over Egypt: Daniel was made Ruler over Babel.

Joseph being in Prison, found favor with the Master of the Prison. Daniel
found favor with the Kings Chamberlain.

Joseph's name was changed by Pharaoh: Daniels name was changed by
Nebuchadnetzar.

Joseph was falsely accused: Christ was falsely accused.

Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh: Jesus is baptized
beginning to be thirty years old.

Joseph was in Prison between two Thieves; the one of them was saved, the
other condemned: Christ was crucified between two Thieves; the one of them was
saved, the other condemned. Yet notwithstanding all these Blessings of God
upon Joseph, (to show that even the best have their infirmities) his Virtues
were darkened very much, in that he marries an Egiptian woman. Genesis 41.50.
Which was altogether unlawful. For Esau before doing the like, is blamed; and
Rebecca having an special care over Jacob, least he should commit the like
wickedness, sends him to Laban to choose a Wife of his own kindred. Abraham
had the like care for Isaacke. And Moses afterward forbids it by a Law;
thereby confirming the unlawfulness thereof. Seven hundred years after, is
this sin punished in Israel: for Jeroboam received Religion of Egypt, and
makes two Calves, whereby all Israel became Ipolaters.

FINIS.
The Table
Page. Jehovah, The signification and efficacy. Page. 1. The Wisdom, Power,
and eternity of God. Page. 1.2. Our God, Page. 2. The Trinity described.
Page. 3. Of Election. Page. 4.5. The effect of Election. Page. 6.7. In the
fullness of time all shall be brought under one head. Page. 9.10. In the
beginning was the word, etc. expounded. Page. 11. He was the Light, etc. what
is meant by it. Page. 12. The Creation of the World Page. 13. Adams creation,
the day, the hour, and place: with the time, and continuance in Paradise. etc.
Page. 14.15. What is meant by the Seed of the Woman, etc. Page. 17. Adam and
Eve driven out of Paradise. Page. 18. Of Kaine and Abels offeringes, with the
signification of their names, agreeing with their conditions. Page. 18.19. Also
the interpretation and use of the names of the Fathers from Adam to Noah. Page.
19.20.21.22. The time of the year and day of Adams creation. Page. 23.24.25.
Adams death, and the place where. Page. 26.27. Christ compared with Adam. Page.
28.29. Of the number one. Page. 29. Of three. Page. 30. Of four. Page. 31. Of
five. Page. 32. Of six. Page. 32. Of seven. Page. 32.33.34. Of eight. Page.
34. Of ten. Page. 34.35. Of twelve. Page. 35. Of Seth borne, and what use of
him. Page. 36. Seth compared with Christ. Page. 37. Of Eno^h, and what of him.
Page. 37. Of Kenan. Page. 38. Of Mahalaleel. Page. 38.39. Of Jared. Page.
40.41. Of Henoch. Page. 41.42.43. Of Henoch compared with Christ. Page. 44. Of
Methu^helah. Page. 45. Of Lamech. Page. 46. Of Noah. Page. 47. Of Noah compared
with Christ. Page. 47* 48. When Noah began the Arc, the place, and how long in
building. Page. 48. Of Japhet, and the signification of his name. Page. 52. and
67. Of Sem, and his name. Page. 53. and 68. Of the Flood, and the things to be
considered thereby. Page. 54.55.56. Christ and the Arc compared together.
Page. 57. The time of the continuance of the Flood. Page. 59. Adam and Noah
compared together. Page. 62. Of Cham, and his issue. Page. 64.65.66. Of Heber
and his name: with the rare use of his Story. Page. 69.70.71 Of Peleg, and the
rare use of him. Page. 72.73.74. Of the birth of Abraham, and his name. Page.
77. A question discussed about Terabs age when he begat Abraham. Page. 78.79.
Of Sarah, and the signification of her name. Page. 81. The Promise given to
Abraham. Page. 82. Melchisedech showed to be Sem. Page. 84.85. Of Ismael and
his Story. Page. 87.88. Of Jsaacks birth, and name. Page. 89. Of Jsaacks age
when Jsmael flouted him. Page. 92. Of Jsaacks age when he was to be sacrificed,
answerable to Christ's death. Page. 93. Jsaacks compared with Christ. Page. 95.
Esau and Jacob borne, with their stories depending. Page. 96.97, etc. Jsaacks
blindness: a great blessing to the children of God. Page. 100.101. Jacob goes
to Laban. Page. 103. Jacob in his journey sees a Ladder: the interpretation
thereof. Page. 104. Jacobs Wives and Children, with the interpretation of their
names. Page. 105.106. Jacobs departure from Laban: and his wrestling with God.
Page. 106.107. Joseph's Dream, and his selling into Egypt. Page. 108. Jacobs
journey into Egypt. Page. 110.111. Jacob dies in Egypt. Page. 112. The
Iournies of Abraham, Jacob, Iocobs sons, and Christ, compared together.
Page. 113. Of the place where Jacob died. Page. 114. Of Jacobs Will, and the
blessing of his Children according to the worthiness of their tribes, and
posterity to come. Page. 115.116.117 118.119.120. Of Joseph's death, and of his
excellent worthiness. Page. 120.121.
The Figures in the margent, are the years of the world.

FINIS.

