OCCASIONAL Meditations. BY IOS: EXON. Setforth by R. H. The second Edition.

LONDON. Printed by W. S. for Nath. Butter. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, My very good Lord, JAMES Lord Viscount Doncaster.
RIGHT HON:
FInding these Papers amongst others lying aside in my Fathers study, whereof I
conceived good use might be made, in regard of that Spiritual advantage which
they promised; I obtained of him good leave to send them abroad, whereto he
professed himself the more easily induced, for that his continual and weighty
employments in this large and busy Diocese will not yet afford him leisure to
dispatch those his other fixed Meditations on the History of the new
Testament; In the mean time, the expressions of these voluntary and sudden
thoughts of his, shall testify how fruitfully he is wont to improoue those
short ends of time, which are stolen from his more important auocations; and
(unless my hopes fail me) the Pattern of them may prove not a little
beneficial to others. Holy minds have been ever wont to look through these
bodily objects, at spiritual, and heavenly; So SVLPITIVS reports of S. MARTIN,
that seeing a Sheep newly shorn, he could say; Lo here is one that has
performed that command in the Gospel; having two Coats she has given away
one, and seeing an Hogheard freezing in a thin suite of skins; Lo (said
he) There is Adam cast out of Paradise, and seeing a meadow, part rooted up,
part whole; but eaten down; and part flourishing, he said, The first was the
state of Fornication, the second of Marriage, the third of Virginity: But what
do I seek any other author, then the Lord of Life himself? Who upon the
drawing of water from the well of SHILO, on the day of the great Hosanna, took
occasion to speak of those Living waters, which should flow from every true
believer, John 7. 37; and upon occasion of a bodily feast* Luke 14. entered into
that Divine discourse of Gods gracious inuitation of us to those Spiritual
viands of grace and glory. Thus, me thinks, we should still be climing up in
our thoughts, from Earth to Heaven; and suffer no object to cross us in our
way without some Spiritual use, and application; Thus it pleased my Reverend
Father sometimes to recreate himself, whose manner has been, when any of
these Meditations have unsought offered themselves unto him, presently to se^
them down; a course which I wish had been also taken in many more, which
might no doubt have been very profitable.

These, as they are, I send forth under your Honorable Name, out of those many
respects, which are, in an hereditary right, due to your Lordship, as being
apparent heir to those two singular Patrons of my justly Reverenced Father,
The eminent virtue of which your noble Parents in a gracious Succession yields
to your Lordship an happy example; which to follow is the only way to true
Honor; For the daily increase whereof here; and the everlasting crown of it
hereafter, his prayers to God shall not be wanting, who desires to be accounted.

Your Lordship devoted in all homble observance, TO: HALL.

OCCASIONAL MEDITATIONS.
The Proeme.
I Have heedlesly lost (I confess) many good thoughts, these few my Paper has
perserued from vanishing; The example whereof may prehaps be more useful then
the matter; Our active Soul can no more forbear to think, then the Eye can
choose but see, when it is open; would we but keep our wholesome notions
together, Mankind would be too rich; To do well, no object should pass us
without use, Every thing that we see, reads us new lectures of Wisdom, and
Piety; It is a shame for a Man to be ignorant, or Godless, under so many
Tutors. For me, I would not wish to live longer, then I shall be better for my
eyes; and have thought it thankeworthy; thus to teach weak minds, how to
improoue their thoughts, upon all like occasions. And if ever these lines shall
come to the public view, I desire, and charge my Reader, whosoever he be, to
make me, and himself so happy, as to take out my lesson; and to learn how
to read GODS great Book, by mine.

OCCASIONAL MEDITATIONS.
I.
Upon the sight of the Heavens moving.
I Can see nothing stand still but the Earth; all other things are in motion;
Even that Water which makes up one Globe with the Earth, is ever stirring in
ebbes and flowings; the clouds over my head, the Heavens above the clouds;
these, as they are most conspicuous, so are they the greatest patterns of
perpetual action; what should we rather imitate then this glorious frame? O
God when we pray that thy will may be done in Earth, as it is in heaven,
though we mean chiefly the inhabitants of that place, yet we do not exclude
the very place of those blessed inhabitants, from being an example of our
Obedience. The motion of this thy Heaven is perpetual, so let me ever be
acting so mewhat of thy will; the motion of thine Heaven is regular, never
swaruing from the due points; so let me ever walk steddily in the ways of thy
will; without all diuersions, or variations from the line of thy Law; In the
motion of thine Heaven, though some Stars have the^^ own peculiar, and
contrary courses, yet a^ yield themselves to the sway of the main
circumuolution of that first mouer; so, though I have a will of mine own, yet
let me give my self over to be ruled, and ordered by thy Spirit in all my
ways;

Man is a little world; my Soul is heaven, my Body is earth; if this earth be
dull and fixed, yet O God, let my heaven (like unto thine) move perpetually,
regularly, and in a constant subjection to thine holy Ghost.

II.
Upon the sight of a Dial.
IF the Sun did not shine upon this Dial, no body would look at it; in a
cloudy day it stands like an vselesse post, vnheeded, unregarded; But when once
those beams break forth, every passenger runs to it, and gazes on it; O
God, whiles thou hidest thy countenance from me, me thinks all thy Creatures
pass by me, with a willing neglect; indeed, what am I, without thee? And if
thou have drawn in me some lines, and notes of able indowments, yet, if I be
not actuated by thy Grace, all is, in respect of use; no better then nothing:
But, when thou renuest the light of thy loving countenance upon me, I find a
sensible, and happy change of condition; me thinks, all things look upon me
with such cheer, and observance, as if they meant to make good that Word of
thine; Those that honor me, I will honor; now, every line and figure, which
it has pleased thee to work in me, serve for useful, and profitable
direction; O Lord, all the glory is thine; give thou me light, I shall give
others information; both of us shall give thee praise.

III.
Upon the sight of an Eclipse of the Sun.
LIght is an ordinary and familiar blessing; yet so dear to us, that one
hours interception of it sets all the world in a wonder. The two great
Luminaries of heaven, as they impart light to us, so they withdraw light from
each other. The Sun darkens the full Moon, in casting the shadow of the
Earth upon her opposed-face; The new Moon repayes this blemish to the Sun,
in the interposing of her dark body betwixt our eyes, and his glorious beams;
the earth is troubled at both: O God, if we be so afflicted with the
obscuring of some piece of one of thy created Lights, for an hour, or two;
what a confusion shall it be, that thou, who art the God of these lights, (in
comparison of whom they are mere darkness) shall hide thy face from thy
creature for ever? Oh thou that art the Sun of righteousness; if every of my
sins cloud thy face; ye^ let not my grievous sins eclipse thy light; Thou
shinest always, though I do not see thee, but, oh, never suffer my sins so
to darken thy visage that I cannot see thee.

IIII.
Upon the sight of a gliding Star.
HOw easily is our sight deceived? How easily does our sight deceive us? We
saw no difference betwixt this Star and the rest; the light seemed alike,
both whiles it stood, and whiles it fell; now, we know it was no other, then a
base ^limie meteor, gilded with the Sunbeams; and now, our foot can tread
upon that, which ere while our eye admired; Had it been a Star, it had still,
and ever shined; now, the very fall argues it a false and elementary
apparition; Thus our Charity does, and must mis-lead us in our Spiritual
judgments; if we see men exalted in their Christian profession, fixed in the
upper region of the Church, shining with appearances of Grace; we may not
think them other them stars, in this lower firmament; but, if they fall from
their holy station, and embrace the present world; whether in judgment or
practice, renouncing the Truth, and power of godliness; now we may boldly say,
they had never any true light in them; and were no other then a glittering
composition of Pride, and hypocrisy; O God, if my charity make me apt to be
deceived by others, ^et me be sure not to de^eiue my self; perhaps, some of
these apostating Stars have thought ^hemselues true: let their mis-carriage
make me ^eedfull; Let the inward ^^ght of thy Grace more ^onuince my truth to
my self, then my outward profession can represent me glorious to others.

V.
Upon a fair Prospect.
What a pleasing variety is here o^ Towns, Rivers, Hills Dales, Woods,
Meadows each of them striving t^ set forth other; and al^ of them to delight
the eye? So as this is no other then a natural; an^ real Landscape drawn b^
that Almighty, and ski^^full hand, in this table o^ the Earth, for the
pleasure of our view; no other creature besides Man is capable to apprehend
this beauty; I shall do wrong to him that brought me hither, if I do not
feed my eyes, and praise my Maker; It is the inter mixture, and change of these
objects that yields this contentment both to the sense, and mind; But, there
is a sight, O my Soul, that without all variety, offerres thee a truer and
fuller delight; even this Heaven above thee: All thy other prospect ends in
this; This glorious circumference ^ounds, and circles, and inlightens all that
thine eye can see; whether thou look upward, or forward, or about thee, there
thine eye alights, there let thy thoughts be fixed.

One inch of this lightsome Firmament has more beauty in it, then the whole
face of the Earth; And yet, this is but the floor of that goodly fabric, the
outward curtain of that glorious Tabernacle: Could thou but (Oh that thou
could) look within that veil, how should thou be ravished with that
blissful sight? There, in that incomprehensible light, thou should see him
whom none can see, and not be blessed; thou should see millions of pure and
maiesticall Angels, of holy and glorified Souls: there, amongst thy Fathers
many mansions thou should take happy notice of thine own: Oh the best of
earth, now vile and contemptible; Come down no more, O my Soul, after thou
have once pitched upon this heavenly glory; or if this flesh force thy descent,
be unquiet till thou art let loose to immortality.

VI.
Upon the frame of a Globe casually broken.
IT is hard to say whether is the greater, Man's art, or Impotence; He that
cannot make one spire of grass, or corn of sand, will yet be framing of
Worlds; he can imitate all things, who can make nothing; Here is a great world
in a little room, by the skill of the workman, but in less room, by
mis-accident; Had he seen this, who upon the view of Platoes Book of
Commonwealth eaten with Mice, presaged the fatal mis-carriage of the public
State; he would sure have construed this casualty as ominous: What ever become
of the material world, (whose decay might seem no less to stand with divine
Providence, then this Microcosme of indiuidual man) sure I am, the frame of the
moral world is, and must be dis-ioynted in the last times: Men do and will
fall from evil to worse; He that has made all times has told us that the
last shall be perilous; Happy is he that can stand upright, when the world
declines; and can endeavor to repair the common ruin with a constancy in
goodness.

VII.
Upon a Cloud.
Whether it were a natural Cloud, wherewith our ascending Savior was
intercepted from the eyes of his Disciples, upon mount Olivet, I inquire not;
this I am sure of; that the time now was, when a Cloud surpassed the Sun in
glory; How did the intentive eyes of those ravished beholders envy that happy
meteor; and since they could no more see that glorious Body, fixed themselves
upon that celestial Chariot, wherewith it was carried up. The Angels could
tell the gazing Disciples (to fetch them off from that astonishing prospect)
that this JESUS should so come again, as they had seen him depart; He went up
in a Clo^ud; and he shall come again in the clouds of heaven, to his last
judgment; O Savior, I cannot look upward, but I must see the sensible
monuments; both of thine ascension, and return; let no cloud of Worldliness,
or Infidelity hinder me from following thee in thine Ascension, or from
expecting thee in thy return.

VIII.
Upon the sight of a Grave dug up.
THe Earth, as it is a great deuourer, so also it is a great preserver too:
Liquors and Fleshes are therein long kept from putrefying; and are rather
heightened in their Spirits by being buried in it; But above all, how safely
does it keep our bodies for the Resurrection; we are here but laid up for
custody; Balmes, and sere-clothes, and leads, cannot do so much as this lap
of our common Mother; when all these are dissolved into her dust (as being
unable to keep themselves from corruption) she receives and restores her
charge: I can no more withold my body from the earth; then the earth can
withhold it from my Maker. O GOD, this is thy Cabinet or shrine, wherein ^hou
please to lay up ^he precious relics of ^hy dear Saints, until ^he
Iubilee of Glory; with what confidence should I commit my self to this sure
reposition, whiles I know thy word just, thy Power infinite?

IX.
Upon the sight of Gold melted.
THis Gold is both the fairest, and most solid of all metals; yet (...) the
soonest melted wit^ the fire; others, as the^ are courser, so more chu^lish,
and hard to b^ wrought upon by a dissolution; Thus, a sound an^ good heart is
most easi^^ melted into sorrow and fear, by the sense of Gods judgments;
whereas the carnal mind is stubburne, and remorselesse; All metals are but
earth, yet some are of finer temper then others; All hearts are of flesh, yet
some are, through the power of grace, more capable of Spiritual apprehensions:
O GOD, we are such as thou will be pleased to make us: Give me an heart that
may be sound for the truth of Grace, and melting at the terrors of thy Law; I
can be for no other, then thy Sanctuary on earth, or thy Treasury of heaven.

X.
Upon the sight of a Pitcher carried.
THus those that are great, and weak, are carried by the ears up and down of
Flatterers, and Parasites; Thus ignorant and simple hearers are carried by
false and mis-zealous teachers, yet, to be carried by both ears is more safe,
then be carried by one; It argues an empty pitcher to be carried by one alone;
such are they that upon the hearing of one-part, rashly pass their sentence,
whether of acquiall, or censure.

In all disquisitions of ^idden Truths, a wise man will be led by the ^ares,
not carried; that ^^plies a violence of pas^^on ouer-swaying iudge^ent; but in
matter of ^uill and occurrence, and vnconcerning rumor, it is good to use the
Ear, not to trust to it:

XI.
Upon the sight of Tree f^^^ blossomed.
Here is a Tree over laid with blossoms it is not possible that a^ these
should prospe^ one of them must need^ rob the other of mo^sture, and growth; I
do not love to see an Infa^cie ouer-hopefull; (...) these pregnant beginnings
one faculty staru^ another, and, at last, leau^ the mind sap-lesse, an^
barren; as therefore w^ are wont to pull off some of the too-frequent
blossoms, that the rest man thrive, So, it is good wisdom to moderate the
early excess of the parts, or progress of ouer-forward childhood. Neither
is it otherwise in our Christian profession; a sudden and lavish ostentation of
grace may fill the eye with wonder, and the mouth with talk, but will not, at
the last, fill the lap with fruit.

Let me not promise too much, nor raise too high expectations of my
undertakings; I had rather men should complain of my small hopes, then of my
short performances.

XII.
Upon the report of a Man suddenly struck dead in his Sin.
I Cannot but magnify the justice of GOD, but withal I must praise his Mercy;
It were woe with any of us all, if GOD should take us at advantages; Alas,
which of us has not committed sins worthy of a present revenge; had we
been also surprised in those acts, where had we been? Oh GOD, it is more
then thou owe us, that thou have waited for our repentance; It is no more
then thou owe us, that thou plaguest our offenses; The wages of sin is
Death; and it is but justice to pay due wages: Blessed be thy Justice that
have made others examples to me: Blessed be: thy Mercy, that have not made me
an example unto others. *

XIII.
Upon the view of the Heaven and the earth.
What a strange contrariety is here? The Heaven is in continual motion, and
yet there is the only place of rest; the Earth ever stands still, and yet
here is nothing but unrest and unquietness; Surely, the end of that heavenly
motion is for the benefit of the Earth; and the end of all these earthly
turmoyles is our reposall in heaven; Those that have imagined the earth to
turn about, and the heavens to stand still; have yet supposed that we may
stand, or sit still, on that whirling Globe of earth: how much more may we be
persuaded of our perfect rest above those moving Spheres? It matters not, O
GOD, how I am vexed here below a while; if, ere long, I may repose with thee
above, for ever.

XIIII.
Upon occasion of a Redbre^^ coming into his Chamber.
PRetty bird, how chea^fully do thou sit an^ sing, and yet know n^^ where
thou art, nor whe^^ thou shall make thy ne^^ meal; and, at nigh^ must shroud
thy self in (...) bush, for lodging; Wh^^ a shame is it for me, th^^ see
before me so libera^ provisions of my GOD and find my self s^ warm under my
ow^ roof, yet am ready (...) droupe under a distru^^full, and unthankful
du^^nesse. Had I so little certainty of my harbor and purueyance, how
hartlesse should I be, how careful; how little list should I have to make
music to thee or my self; Surely, thou, came not hither without a
providence, GOD sent thee not so much to delight, as to shame me, but all in a
conviction of my sullen unbelief; who under more apparent means, ^m less
cheerful, and ^onfident, Reason and ^aith have not done so much in me, as in
thee, here instinct of nature; want of foresight makes he more merry, if not
more happy here, then the foresight of better things makes me.

O God, thy providence is not impaired by those Powers thou have given me
above these brute things; Let not my greater helps hinder me from an holy
security, and comfortable relyance upon thee.

XV.
Upon occasion of a Spider i^ his Window.
THere is no vice i^ man, whereof ther^ is not some analogy i^ the brute
Creatures: (...) amongst us Men, there are Thieves by land, and Pirates by sea,
that live by spoil and blood; so is there in every kind amongst them variety
of natural Sharkers; the Hawk in the air, the Pike in the river, the Whale
in the sea, the Lion, and Tiger, and Wolf in the desert, the Waspe in the
hiue, the Spider in our window. Amongst the rest, see how cunningly this little
Arabian has spread out his tent, for a prey; how heedfully he watches for a
Passenger; so soon as ever he hears the noise of a Fly a far off, how he
hastens to his door, and if that silly heedlesse. Traveler do but touch upon
the verge of that unsuspected walk, how suddenly does he seize upon the
miserable booty; and after some strife, binding him fast with those subtle
cords, drags the helpless captive after him into his cave. What is this but an
Emblem of those Spiritual free-booters, that lie in wait for our souls:
They are the Spiders, we the Flies; they have spread their nets of sin, if
we be once caught, they bind us fast, and hale us into Hell.

Oh LORD, deliver thou my soul from their crafty ambushes; their poison is
greater, their webs both more strong, and more insensibly wouen; Either teach
me to avoid tentation, or make me to break thorough it by Repentance; Oh let
me not be a prey to those fiends that lie in wait for my destruction.

XVI.
Upon the sight of a Rain in the Sunshine.
SVch is my best condition in this life, If the Sun of GODS countenance shine
upon me, I may well be content to be wet with some rain of Affliction; How
often have I seen the Heaven ouer-cast with clouds and tempest; no Sun
appearing to comfort me; yet even those gloomy and stormy seasons have I rid
out patiently, only with the help of the common-light of the day, at last,
those beams have broken forth happily, and cheared my Soul; It is well for my
ordinary state, if through the mists of my own dullness, and Satan's
tentations, I can descry some glimpse of heavenly comfort; let me never hope,
whiles I am in this Veil, to see the clear face of that Sun without a
shower: such happiness is reserved for above; that upper region of glory is
free from these doubtful and miserable vicissitudes. There, O GOD we shall
see as we are seen. Light is sown for the Righeous, and joy for the upright
in heart.

XVII.
Upon the Length of the way.
HOw far off is yonder great Mountain? My very eye is weary with the
foresight of so great a distance; yet time and patience shall overcome it;
this night we shall hope to lodge beyond it; Some things are more tedious in
their expectation, then in their performance. The comfort is, that every step I
take, sets me nearer to my end; When I once come there, I shall both forget
how long it now seems, and please my self to look back upon the way that I
have measured.

It is thus in our passage to Heaven; my weak nature is ready to faint under
the very conceit of the length, and difficulty of this journey; my eye does not
more guide, then discourage me; Many steps of Grace, and true obedience, shall
bring me insensibly thither; Only, let me move, and hope; and GODS good
leisure shall perfect my Salvation. O Lord, give me to possess my Soul with
patience, and not so much to regard speed, as certainty; When I come to the top
of thine holy hill, all these weary paces, and deep sloughes shall either be
forgotten, or contribute to my happiness in their remembrance.

XVIII.
Upon the Rain and Waters.
What a sensible interchange there is, in Nature, betwixt union, and division;
Many vapors rising from the sea, meet together in one cloud; that cloud falls
down divided, into several drops; those drops run together, and in many
rills of water, meet in the same channels; those channels run into the brook,
those brooks into the rivers, those rivers into the Sea; one receptacle is for
all, though a large one; and all make back to their first, and maine
original: So it either is, or should be with Spiritual gifts; O GOD, thou
distillest thy Graces upon us, not for our reservation, but conueyance; those
many-fold faculties thou let fall upon several Men thou would not have
drenched up, where they light; but would have derived, through the channels
of their special vocations, into the common streams of public Use, for
Church, or Commonwealth; Take back, O Lord, those few drops thou have rayned
upon my soul, and return them into that great Ocean of the Glory of thine
own bounty, from whence they had their beginning. *

XIX.
Upon the same Subject.
MAny drops fill the Channels, and many Channels swell up the brooks, and many
brooks raise the Rivers, over the banks; the brooks are not out, till the
channels be empty; the rivers rise not, whiles the small brooks are full; but
when the little rivulets have once voyded themselves into the main streams,
then all is overflowed. Great matters arise from small beginnings; Many littles
make up a large bulk; Yea what is the World but a composition of atoms. We
have seen i^ thus in civil estates; th^^ empayring of the Commons has often
been the raising of the great; their streams have run low^ till they have
been heightened by the confluenc^ of many private inlets* Many a mean channel
has been emptyed, to make up their inundation; Neither is it otherwise in my,
whether outward, or spiritual condition: O GOD, tho^ have multiplied my drop^
into streams, As out o^ many minutes thou ha^^ made up my age, so out o^ many
lessons thou have made up my competencie of knowledge; thou have drayned many
benificent friends to make me competently rich. By many holy motions, thou
have wrought me to some measure of Grace:

Oh, teach me, wisely and moderately to enjoy thy bounty; and to reduce thy
streams into thy drops, and thy drops into thy clouds, humbly, and thankefully
acknowledging whence, and how, I have all that I have, all that I am:

XX.
Upon occasion of the lights brought in.
What a change there is in the room, since the light came in* yea in our
selves? All things seem to have a new form, a new life; yea, we are not the
same we were: How goodly a creature is light, how pleasing, how agreeable to
the spirits of man? no visible thing comes so near to the resembling of the
nature of the soul, yea of the God that made it; As contrarily, what an
uncomfortable thing is darkness; in so much as we punish the greatest
malefactors with obscurity of Dungeons; as thinking they could not be
miserable enough, if they might have the privilege of beholding the light;
yea, hell it self can be no more horribly described then by outward darkness:

What is darkness but absence of light? The pleasure, or the horror of light,
or darkness is according to the quality and degree of the cause, whence it
arises; And if the light of a poor candle be so comfortable, which is nothing
but a little inflamed air, gathered about a moystened snuff, what is the
light of the glorious Sun, the great lamp of Heaven? But much more, what is
the light of that infinitely-resplendent Sun of righteousness, who gave that
light to the Sun, that Sun to the world; And, if this partial, and
imperfect darkness be so doleful, (which is the privation of a natural o^
artificial light) how inconceivable, dolorou^ and miserable, shall tha^ be,
which is caused through the utter absence of the all-glorious GOD* who is the
Father o^ lights? O Lord, how justly do we pity those wretched Souls, that
sit in darkness and the shadow of death, shut up from the light of the saving
knowledge of thee, the only true God; But, how am I swallowed up with horror,
to think of the fearful condition of those damned souls, that are for ever
shut out from the presence of GOD, and adjudged to exquisite and everlasting
darkness. The Egyptians were weary of themselves, in their three days
darkness, yet we do not find any pain that accompanied their continuing
night; What shall we say to those woeful souls; in whom the sensible presence
of infinite torment shall meet with the torment of the perpetual absence of
GOD? O thou, who art the true light, shine ever* through all the blind corners
of my Soul; and from these weak glimmerings of Grace, bring me to the perfect
brightness of thy Glory. *

XXI.
Upon the same Occasion.
AS well as we love the light, we are wont to salute it, at the first coming
in, with winking, or closed eyes; as not abiding to see that; without which we
cannot see. All sudden changes (though to the better) have a kind of trouble
attending them; By how much more excellent any object is, by so much more is
our weak sense mis-affected in the first apprehending of it: O LORD, if thou
should manifest thy glorious presence to us here, we should be confounded
in the sight of it; How wisely, how mercifully have thou reserved that for our
glorified estate; where no infirmity shall dazzle our eyes; where perfect
Righteousness, shall give as perfect boldness, both of sight, and fruition.

XXII.
Upon the blowing of the Fire.
We beat back the flame, not with a purpose to suppress it but to raise it
higher, and to diffuse it more; Those afflictions, and repulses which seem to
be discouragements, are indeed the merciful incitements of grace. If GOD did
mean judgment to my Soul, he would either withdraw the fuel, or power
water upon the fire, or suffer it to languish for want of new motions; but now,
that he continues to me the means, and opportunities, and desires of good, I
shall misconstrue the intentions of my GOD, if I shall think his crosses sent
rather to dampe, then to quicken his Spirit in me.

O GOD, if thy bellows did not sometimes thus breath upon me, in spiritual
repercussions, I should have just cause to suspect my estate; Those few weak
gleeds of Grace that are in me, might soon go out, if they were not thus
refreshed; still blow upon them, till they kindle; still kindle them, till they
flame up to thee.

XXIII.
Upon the barking of a Dog.
What have I done to this Dog, that he follows me with this angry clamor?
Had I rated him, or shaken my staff, or stooped down for a stone, I had
justly drawn on this noise; this snarling importunity. But, why, do I wonder
to find this unquiet disposition in a bruit creature, when it is no news with
the reasonable.

Have I not seen innocence, and merit bayed at by the quarrelsome, and envious
vulgar, without any provocation save of good offices? Have I not felt (more
then their tongue,) their teeth, upon my heels, when I know, I have deserved
nothing, but fawning on? Where is my grace, or spirits, if I have not learned
to contemn both?

O GOD, let me rather dye then willingly incur thy displeasure; yea, then
justly offend thy godly-wise, judicious, conscionable servants; but if humor or
faction, or causeless prejudice fall upon me; for my faithful service to
thee; Let these bawling currestyre themselves, and tear their throats, with
loud, and false censures, I go on in a silent constancy, and if my ear be
beaten, yet my heart shall be free.

XXIIII.
Upon sight of a Cock fight.
HOw fell these Creatures out? Whence grew this so bloody combat? Here was
neither old grudge, nor present injury. What then is the quarrel? Surely
nothing but that which should rather unite, and reconcile them; one common
Nature; the are both of one feather. I do not see either of them fly upon
Creatures of different kinds; but whiles they have peace with all others, they
are at war with themselves; the very sight of each other was sufficient
provocation. If this be the offense, why does not each of them fall out with
himself, since he hates, and reuenges in another, the being of that same
which himself is?

Since Man's sin brought Debate into the World, nature is become a great
quarreller.

The seeds of discord were scattered in every furrow of the Creation, and came
up in a numberless variety of antipathies, whereof yet none is more odious,
and deplorable, then those which are betwixt creatures of the same kind. What
is this but an image of that woeful hostility which is exercised betwixt us
resonables, who are conjoined in one common humanity, if not, Religion?

We fight with, and destroy each other, more then those creatures that want
reason to temper their passions: No beast is so cruel to man, as himself;
where one man is slain by a beast, ten thousand are slain by man. What is
that war which we study and practice, but the art of killing? What ever
Turks and Pagans may do, O Lord how long shall, this brutish fury arm
Christians against each other? Whiles even devils are not at enmity with
themselves, but accord in wickedness, why do we men so mortally oppose each
other in good?

Oh thou, that art the GOD of Peace, compose the unquiet hearts of men, to an
happy and universal Concord, and at last refresh out Souls with the
multitude of Peace.

XXV.
Upon his lying down to rest.
WHat a circle there is of humane actions, and events? We are never without
some change, and yet that change is without any great variety; we sleep, and
wake, and wake and sleep; and eat and euacuate and recreate, and labor in a
continual interchange, yet has the infinite wisdom of God, so ordered it,
that we are not weary of these perpetual iterations, but with no less
appetite enter into our daily courses, then if we should pass them but once
in our life. When I am weary of my days labor, how willingly do I undress
my self, and betake my self to my bed; and ere Morning, when I have wearied
my restless bed, how glad am I to rise and renew my labor?

Why am I not more desirous to be unclothed of this body, that I may be
clothed upon with Immortality? What is this but my closest garment, which when
it is once put off, my Soul is at liberty and ease. Many a time have I lain
down here in desire of rest, and after some tedious changing of sides, have
risen sleepelesse, disappointed, languishing in my last uncasing, my body shall
not fail of repose, nor my Soul of joy; and in my rising up, neither of them
shall fail of Glory; What hinders me, O GOD, but my infidelity from longing
for this happy dissolution? The world has misery and toil enough, and Heaven
has more then enough blessedness to perfect my desires of that my last and
glorious change. I believe, Lord, help my unbelief?

XXVI.
Upon the kindling of a Charcole fire.
THere are not many Creatures but do naturally affect to diffuse and enlarge
themselves; Fire and Water will neither of them rest contented with their own
bounds; those little sparks that I see in those coals, how they spread, and
enkindle their next brands; It is thus morally both in good, and evil; either
of them dilates it self, to their Neighborhood; but especially this is so
much more apparent in evil, by how much we are more apt to take it. Let but
some spark of heretical opinion be let fall upon some unstable, proud, busy
spirit, it catches instantly; and fires the next capable subject; they two
have easily inflamed a third; and now the more society, the more s^eed* and
advantage of a public combustion. When we see the Church on a flame, it is too
late to complain of the flint and steel; It is the holy wisdom of
superiors to prevent the dangerous attritions of stubborn, and wrangling
spirits; or to quench their first sparks in the tinder.

But, why should not Grace and Truth be as successful in dilating it self
to the gaining of many hearts? Certainly these are in themselves more winning,
if our corruption had not made us indisposed to good: O God, out of a^ holy
envy and emulation at the speed of evil, I shall labor to enkindle others with
these heavenly flames, it shall not be my fault if they spread not.

XXVII.
Upon the sight of an humble and patient Beggar.
SEe what need can do; This man, who in so lowly a fashion croucheth to that
Passenger, has in all likelihood as good a stomach as he, to whom he thus
abaseth himself; and if their conditions were but altered, would look as
high, and speak as big to him, whom he now answers with a plausible and
dejected reverence.

It is thus betwixt God; and us: He sees the way to tame us, is to hold us
short of these earthly contentments: Even the Sauagest Beasts are made quiet
and docible, with want of food, and rest; Oh GOD, thou only know what I
would do, if I had health, ease, abundance; do thou in thy wisdom and mercy
so proportion thy gifts, and restraints, as thou know best for my soul. If
I be not humbled enough, let me want; and so order all my estate; that I may
want any thing save thy self.

XXVIII.
Upon the sight of a Crow pulling off wool from the back of a Sheep.
HOw well these Creatures know whom they may be bold with? That Crow durst not
do this to a Wolf, or Mastiue; The known simplicity of this innocent beast
gives advantage to this presumption.

Meekness of spirit commonly draws on injuries.

The cruelty of ill natures usually seeks out those, not who deserve worst,
but who will bear most.

Patience and mildness of Spirit is ill bestowed where it exposes a man to
wrong and insultation;

Sheepish dispositions are best to others; worst to themselves. I could be
willing to take injuries; but I will not be guilty of provoking them by lenity;
for harmlesnesse let me go for a Sheep, but whosoever will be tearing my
fleece; let him look to himself.

XXIX.
Upon the sight of two Snayles.
THere is much variety even in Creatures of the same kind. See there, two
Snayles; One has an house, the other wants it; yet both are Snayles; and it is
a question whether case is the better; That which has an house has more
shelter, but that which wants it, has more freedom; The privilege of that
cover is but a burden; you see if it have but a stone to clime over, with what
stresse it draws up that beneficial lode; and if the passage prove strait,
finds no entrance: whereas the empty Snaile makes no difference of way; Surely,
it is always an ease, and sometimes an happiness to have nothing; no man is
so worthy of envy as he that can be cheerful in want:

XXX.
Upon the hearing of the street cries in London.
What a noise do these poor souls make in proclaiming their commodities?
each tells what he has, and would have all hearers take notice of it; and yet
(GOD wot) it is but poor stuff that they set out, with so much ostentation; I
do not hear any of the rich Merchants talk of what bags he has in his
chests, or what treasures of rich wares in his storehouse; every man rather
desires to hide his wealth; and when he is urged, is ready to dissemble his
ability. No otherwise is it in the true Spiritual riches; he that is full of
Grace, and good works, affects not to make show of it to the world, but rests
sweetly in the secret testimony of a good Conscience; and the silent applause
of GODS spirit witnessing with his own; whiles contrarily the venditation of
our own worth, or parts, or merits, argues a miserable indigence in them all;
O GOD, if the confessing of thine own gifts may glorify thee, my modesty
shall not be guilty of a niggardly unthankfulness; but for ought that
concerns my self, I cannot be too secret; Let me so hide my self that I
may not wrong thee; and wisely distinguish betwixt thy praise, and my own. *

XXXI.
Upon the Flies gathering to a galled Horse.
HOw these Flies swarm to the galled part of this poor Beast; and there sit
feeding upon that worst piece of his flesh; not meddling with the other sound
parts of his skin; Even thus do malicious tongues of Detractors; if a man have
any infirmity in his person or actions, that they will be sure (...) gather
unto, and dwell upon: whereas his commendable parts, and well-deseruings are
passed by, without mention, without regard; It is an envious self-love, and
base cruelty that causes this ill disposition in men; In the mean time this
only they have gained, it must needs be a filthy Creature, that feeds upon
nothing but corruption. *

XXXII.
Upon the sight of a dark Lantborne.
THere is light indeed, but so shut up, as if it were not; and when the side is
most open, there is light enough to give direction to him that bears it, none
to others: He can discern another man by that light, which is cast before him,
but another man cannot discern him; Right such is reserved knowledge; no man
is the better for it, but the owner; there is no outward difference betwixt
concealed skill; and ignorance; and when such hidden knowledge will look
forth, it casts so sparing a light, as may only argue it to have an
unprofitable being; to have ability without will to good; power to censure,
none to benefit: the suppression or engrossing of those helps which GOD
would have us to impart, is but a Thieves Lantern in a true man's hand; Oh
GOD, as all our light is from thee, the Father of Lights, so make me no
niggard of that poor Rush-candle thou have lighted in my Soul; make me more
happy in giving light to others, then in receiving it into my self.

XXXIII.
Upon the hearing of a Swallow in the Chimney.
HEre is Music, such as it is; but how long will it hold! When but a cold
morning comes in, my guest is gone, without either warning, or thanks; This
pleasant season has the least need of cheerful notes; the dead of winter
shall want, and wish them in vain: Thus does an ungrateful Parasite: no man
is more ready to applaud, and enjoy our prosperity, but when with the times our
condition bigins to alter, he is a stranger at least; Give me that Bird which
will sing in winter, and seek to my window in the hardest frost; there is no
trial or friendship but adversity; He that is not ashamed of my bonds, not
daunted with my checkes, not aliend with my disgrace, is a friend for me; One
dram of that man's love, is worth a world of false and inconstant formality.

XXXIIII.
Upon the sight of a Fly burning it self in the Candle.
Wise SOLOMON says, the light is a pleasant thing; and so certainly it is;
but there is no true outward light which proceeds not from fire: The light of
that fire then is not more pleasing, then the fire of that light is dangerous;
and that pleasure does not more draw on our sight, then that danger forbids our
approach: How foolish is this fly, that in a love and admiration of this
light, will know no distance, but puts it self heedlesly into that flame,
wherein it perishes; How many boutes it fetched, every one nearer then other,
ere it made this last venture; and now that merciless fire taking no notice of
the affection of an ouer-fond Client, has suddenly consumed it; Thus do those
bold and busy spirits, who will needs draw too near unto that inacessible
light; and look into things too vvonderfull for them, So long do they houer
about the secret counsels of the Almighty, till the vvings of their
presumptuous conceits be scorched, and their daring curiosity has paid them
with everlasting destruction; Oh LORD, let me be blessed with the knowledge
of what thou have revealed, Let me content my self to adore thy divine
wisdom in what thou have not revealed; so let me enjoy thy light, that I may
avoid thy fire. *

XXXV.
Upon the sight of a Lark flying up.
HOw nimbly does that little Lark mount up singing toward Heaven, in a right
line; whereas the Hawk, which is stronger of body, and swifter of wing, towr^^
up by many graduall compasses to his highest pitch? that bulk of body, and
length of wing hinders a direct ascent, and requires the help both of air,
and scope to advance his flight; whiles that small bird cuts the air without
resistance, and needs no outward furtherance of her motion; It is no otherwise
with the souls of men in flying up to their Heaven; some are hindered by those
powers which would seem helps to their saring up thither; great wit, deep
judgment, quick apprehension, sends men about with no small labor for the
recovery of their own incombrance; whiles the good affections of plain simple
souls raises them up immediately, to the fruition of God; why should we be
proud of that which may slacken our way to Glory; why should we be
dishartened with the small measure of that, the very want whereof may (as the
heart may be affected) facilitate our way to happiness?

XXXVI.
Upon the singing of the Birds in a Spring morning.
HOw cheerfully do these little Birds chirpe and sing out of the natural joy
they conceive at the approach of the Sun, and entrance of the Spring; as if
their life had departed, and returned with those glorious and comfortable
beams; No otherwise is the penitent and faithful soul affected to the true
Sun of Righteousness, the Father of lights? When he hides his face, it is
troubled, and silently mournes away that sad Winter of Affliction; When he
returns, in his presence is the fullness of joy; no song is cheerful enough
to welcome him; Oh thou, who art the GOD of all consolation, make my heart
sensible of the sweet comforts of thy gracious presence, and let my mouth ever
show forth thy praise.

XXXVII.
Upon a Coal covered with ashes.
NOthing appears in this heap, but dead ashes; here is neither light, nor
smoke, nor heat, and yet, when I stir up these embers to the bottom, there
are found some living gleeds* which do both contain fire, and are apt to
propagate it; Many a Christians breast is like this hearth; no life of Grace
appears there, for the time, either to his own sense, or to the apprehension
of others, whiles the season of temptation lasts, all seems cold and dead;
yet still at the vvorst, there is a secret coal from the Altar of Heaven raked
up in their bosom; which upon the gracious motions of the Almighty, does both
bewray some Remainders of that divine fire, and is easily raised to a perfect
flame; Nothing is more dangerous then to judge by appearances: Why should I
deiect my self, or censure others for the utter extinction of that spirit,
which does but hide it self in the soul for a glorious advantage?

XXXVIII.
Upon the sight of a Blackemore.
Lo, there is a Man whose hew shows him to be far from home, his very
skin bewayes his Climate; it is night in his face, whiles it is day in ours;
What a difference there is in men, both in their fashion, and color; and yet
all Children of one Father? Neither is there less variety in their insides;
their dispositions, judgments, opinions differ as much as their shapes, and
complexions, That which is beauty to one, is deformity to another; We should
be looked upon in this man's Country, with no less wonder, and strange
coyness, then he is here; our whiteness would pass there for an unpleasing
indigestion of form; Outward beauty is more in the eye of the beholder, then
in the face that is seen; in every color that is fair which pleases: The
very Spouse of Christ can say, I am black but comely; this is our color
Spiritually, yet the eye of our gracious GOD and Savior can see that beauty
in us, wherewith he is delighted; The true MOSES marries a Blackemore, CHRIST
his Church: It is not for us to regard the skin, but the Soul: If that be
innocent, pure, holy, the blots of an outside cannot set us off from the love
of him who has said; Behold, thou art fair my Sister, my spouse; if that be
foul and black, it is not in the power of an Angelical brightness of our
hide, to make us other then a loathsome Eye sore to the Almighty; O GOD., make
my inside lovely to thee; I know that beauty will hold; whiles weather,
casualty, age, disease may deforme the outer-man, and mar both color and
features.

XXXIX.
Upon the small Stars in the Galaxie or milkie Circle in the Firmament.
What a clear lightsomnesse there is in yonder Circle of the Heaven above the
rest? What can we suppose the reason of it, but that the light of many smaler
stars is united there, and causes that constant brightness? And yet those
small stars are not discerned whiles the splendour which arises from them is
so notably remarkable: In this lower heaven of ours, many a man is made
conspicuous by his good qualities, and deserts, but I most admire the humility
and grace of those, whose virtues and merits are usefully visible, whiles their
persons are obscure; It is secretly glorious for a man to shine unseen;
Doubtless it is the height that makes those stars so small, and insensible;
were they lower, they would be seen more; there is no true greatness without
a selfe-humiliation; we shall have made an ill use of our advancement, if by
how much higher we are, we do not appear less; If our light be seen, it
matters not for our hiding.

XL.
Upon the sight of Boys playing.
EVery age has some peculiar contentment; Thus we did, when we were of these
years; Me thinks I still remember the old fervor of my young pastimes. With
what eagerness and passion do they pursue these Childish sports; Now, that
there is a whole handful of cherry-stones at the stake, how near is that
boys heart to his mouth, for fear of his play fellows next cast? and how
exalted with desire and hope of his own speed; those great unthrifts who
hazard whole Manors upon the Dice, cannot expect their chance with more
earnestness, or entertain it with more joy, or grief: We cannot but now
smile to think of these poor and foolish pleasures of our Childhood; there is
no less disdain that the Regenerate man conceiues of the dearest delights of
his natural condition; He was once jolly, and iocond, in the fruition of the
world: feasts and revels, and games, and dalliance were his life; and no man
could be happy without these; and scarce any man but himself; but when once
Grace has made him both good and wise, how scornfully does he look back at
these fond felicities of his carnal estate; now he finds more manly, more
divine contentments; and wonders he could be so transported with his former
vanity. Pleasures are much according as they are esteemed; One man's delight is
another man's pain; Only Spiritual and Heavenly things can settle and satiate
the heart with a full and firm contentation; Oh GOD, thou art not capable
either of bettering, or of change; let me enjoy thee; and I shall pity the
miserable fickleness of those that want thee; and shall be sure to be
constantly happy. *

XLI.
Upon the sight of a Spider and her Web.
HOw justly do we admire the curious work of this Creature? What a thread
does it spin forth? What a web does it weaue? Yet it is full of deadly poison;
There may be much venom, where is much Art; Just like to this is a learned,
and witty Heretic; fine conceits, and elegant expressions fall from him, but
his opinions and secretly-couched doctrines are dangerous, and mortal; were
not that man strangely foolish, who because he likes the artificial drawing
out of that web, would therefore desire to handle, or eat the Spider that made
it? Such should be our madness, if our wonder at the skill of a false teacher
should cast us into love with his person, or familiarity with his writings;
There can be no safety in our judgment or affection, without a wise
distinction; in the want whereof we must needs wrong GOD, or our selves: GOD,
if we acknowledge not what excellent parts he gives to any Creature; our
selves, if upon the allowance of those excellencies, we swallow their most
dangerous enormities.

XLII.
Upon the sight of a Natural.
OH God, Why am not I thus? What has this man done, that thou have denied wit
to him? or what have I done that thou should give a competency of it to me?
What difference is there betwixt us but thy bounty, which has bestowed upon
me what I could not merit, and has withheld from him what he could not
challenge. All is, O God, in thy good pleasure, whether to give, or deny;
Neither is it otherwise in matter of Grace. The unregenerate man is a
Spiritual fool; no man is truly wise but the renewed; how is it, that whiles
I see another man besotted with the vanity and corruption of his nature; I have
attained to know God, and the great mystery of Salvation, to abhor those sins
which are pleasing to a wicked appetite? Who has discerned me? Nothing but thy
free mercy, O my GOD; why else was I a Man not a brute Beast? Why right shaped,
not a Monster? Why perfectly limmed, not a cripple? Why well-fensed, not a
fool? Why well affected, not graceles? why a vessel of honor, not of wrath?
If ought be not ill in me, O LORD, it is thine; Oh let thine be the praise,
and mine the thankfulness.

XLIII.
Upon the Loadstone and the Iett.
AS there is a civil commerce amongst men for the preservation of humane
Society, so there is a natural commerce which GOD has set amongst the other
Creatures for the maintenance of their common being; There is scarce any thing
therefore in nature, which has not a power of attracting some other; The fire
draws vapors to it, the Sun draws the fire-Plants draws moisture, the
Moon draws the Sea, all purgative things draw their proper humors, a natural
instinct draws all sensitive Creatures to affect their own kind; and even in
those things which are of imperfect mixtion, we see this experimented, So as
the senseless stones and metals are not void of this active virtue; the
loadstone draws Iron, and the iett, rather then nothing, draws up strawes,
and dust; with what a force do both these stones work upon their several
Subjects; is there any thing more heavy and unapt for motion then Iron, or
steel? Yet these do so run to their beloved loadstone, as if they had the
sense of a desire and delight; and do so cling to the point of it, as if they
had forgotten their weight for this adherence. Is their any thing more apt for
dispersion then small strawes, and dust? yet these gather to the Iett, and so
sensibly leap up to it, as if they had a kind of ambition to be so perferred;

Me thinks, I see in these two a mere Emblem of the hearts of men, and their
spiritual attractiues; The grace of Gods spirit, like the true Loadstone, or
Adamant, draws up the iron heart of man to it, and holds it in a constant
fixednesse of holy purposes, and good actions; The world like the Iett draws
up the sensual hearts of light and Vain men, and holds them fast in the
pleasures of sin. I am thine iron, O Lord, be thou my Loadstone. Draw thou me
and I shall run after thee: Knit my heart unto thee that I may fear thy name. *

XLIIII.
Upon hearing of Music by night.
HOw sweetly does this Music sound in this dead season? In the day time it
would not, it could not so much affect the ear? All harmonious sounds are
advanced by a silent darkness; Thus it is with the glad tidings of Salvation;
The Gospel never sounds so sweet, as in the night of persecution, or of our
own private affliction; It is ever the same, the difference is in our
disposition to receive it. O God, whose praise it is to give songs in the
night, make my prosperity conscionable, and my crosses cheerful.

XLV.
Upon the fanning of Corn.
SEe how in the fanning of this Wheat, the fullest and greatest grains lie
ever the lowest; and the lightest take up the highest place; It is no otherwise
in mortality; those which are most humble, are fullest of Grace; and often times
those have most conspicuity, which have the least substance; To affect
obscurity or submission, is base and suspicious; but that man whose modesty
presents him mean to his own eyes, and lowly to others, is commonly secretly
rich in virtue; Give me rather a low fullness then an empty advancement;

XLVI.
Upon Herbs dried.
THey say those herbs will keep best, and will longer retain both their hew
and verdure, which are dried thus in the shade, then those which are suddenly
scorched with fire, or Sun;

Those wits are like to be most durable, which are closely tutored with a
leisurely education;

Time and gentle Constancy ripens better then a sudden violence; Neither is
it otherwise in our spiritual condition; A wilful slacknesse is not more
dangerous, then an ouer-hastening of our perfection; If I may be every moment
drawing nearer to the end of my hope, I shall not wish to precipitate.

XLVII.
Upon the quenching of Iron in water.
Hark how that Iron quenched in the water hisseth, and makes that noise, which
whiles it was cold, or dry, it would never make; we cannot quench hot and
unruly desires in youth without some mutiny, and rebellious opposition.

Corruptions cannot be subdued without some relucation, and that reluctation
cannot be without some tumult: After some short noise, and smoke, and
bubbling, the metal is quiet and holds to the form, whereinto it is beaten,
O GOD, why should it trouble me to find my good endeavors resisted, for the
little brunt of a change, whiles I am sure this insurrection shall end in an
happy peace?

XLVIII.
Upon a fair colored Fly.
WHat a pleasant mixture of colors there is in this Fly; and yet they say, no
fly is so venomous as this; which by the outward touch of the hand corrodes
the inmost passages of the body;

It is no trusting to colors, and shapes; we may wonder at their Excellency;
without dotage upon their Beauty. Homeliness makes less show, and has less
danger; Give me inward virtue and usefulness; let others care for outward
glory.

XLIX.
Upon a Glow-worme.
WHat a cold Candle is lighted up in the body of this sorry Worm? There needs
no other disproofe of those that say there is no light at all without some
heat; Yet sure an outward heat helps on this cool light; Never did I see any
of these bright worms but in the hot months of Summer; in cold seasons,
either they are not, or appear not, when the nights are both darkest, and
longest, and most uncomfortable. Thus do false-hearted Christians in the warm
and lightsome times of free and encouraged profession, none shine more then
they; In hard and gloomy seasons of restraint, and persecution all their formal
light is either lost, or hid; Whereas true Professors either like the Sun shine
ever alike, or, like the Stars, shine fairest in the frostiest nights: The
light of this worm is for some show, but for no use; any light that is
attended with heat can impart it self to others, though with the expense of
that subject wherein it is; this does neither wast it self, nor help others;
I had rather never to have light, then not to have it always; I had rather not
to have light; then not to communicate it.

L.
Upon the shutting of one Eye.
WHen we would take aim, or see most exquisitely, we shut one eye: Thus must
we do with the eyes of our Soul; When we would look most accurately with
the eye of Faith, we must shut the eye of Reason; else the visuall beams of
these two apprehensions, will be crossing each other, and hinder our clear
discerning; Yea rather, let me pull out this right eye of Reason, then it
shall offend me in the interruptions of mine happy Visions of GOD.

LI.
Upon a Spring Water.
HOw this Spring smoketh, whiles other greater Channels are frozen up; this
water is living, whiles they are dead; All experience teaches us that
Well-waters arising from deep springs, are hotter in Winter, then in Summer;
the outward cold does keep in, and double their inward heat. Such is a true
Christian in the evil day; his life of Grace gets more vigor by opposition;
he had not been so gracious, if the times had been better; I will not say
he may thank his enemies, but I must say he may thank God for his Enemies;
O GOD, what can put out that heat, which is increased with cold? How happy
shall I be, if I may grow so much more in Grace, as the World in Malice? *

LII.
Upon Gnats in the Sun.
What a Cloud of Gnats is here? Mark their motion; they do nothing but play
up and down in the warm Sun, and sing; and when they have done, sit down
and sting the next hand, or face they can seize upon; See here a perfect
emblem of Idleness and Detraction; how many do thus miserably mispend their
good hours? Who after they have wasted the succeeding days in vain, and
meerely-vnprofitable pastime, sit down, and backe-bite their Neighbors. The
Be sings too sometimes, but she works also: and her work is not more
admirable, then useful; but these foolish Flies, do nothing but play, and
sing to no purpose; even the busiest, and most active spirits most recreate,
but to make a Trade of sport, is for none but lazy Wantons.

The Be stings too; but it is when she is provoked; these draw blood,
vnoffended, and sting for their own pleasure: I would be glad of some
recreation but to enable, and sweeten my work; I would not but sting sometimes
where is just cause of offense. But God bless me from those men, which will
ever be either doing nothing, or ill.

LIII.
Upon the sight of Grapes.
Mark the difference of these Grapes; There you see a cluster, whose grapes
touch one another, well ripened; here you see some straglers, which grow
almost solitarily, green and hard. It is thus with us, Christian society
helps our progress; And, woe to him that is alone; He is well, that is the
better for others; but he is happy by whom others are better.

LIIII.
Upon a Corn field ouergrowne with Weeds.
Here were a goodly field of Corn, if it were not ouer-laid with Weeds; I do
not like these reds, and blewes, and yellowes, amongst these plain stalks and
ears: This beauty would do well elsewhere; I had rather to see a plot less
fair, and more yiedling; In this Field I see a true picture of the World;
wherein there is more Glory, then true substance; Wherein the greater part
carries it from the better; Wherein the native Sons of the Earth outstrip
the aduentitious brood of grace; Wherein Parasites and unprofitable hangbyes
do both rob, and overtop their Masters; Both Field and World grow alike,
look alike; and shall end alike; both are for the fire; whiles the homely and
solid ears of despised Virtue shall be for the garners of immortality.

LV.
Upon the sight of Tulipaes and Marygolds, etc. in his Garden.
THese Flowers are true Clients of the Sun; how obseruant they are of his
motion, and influence? At even, they shut up, as mourning for his departure,
without whom they neither can nor would flourish, in the morning, they welcome
his rising with a cheereful opennesse, and at noone, are fully displayed in a
free acknowledgment of his bounty: Thus does the good heart unto God; When thou
turnedst away thy face I was troubled, says the man after Gods own heart; In
thy presence is life, yea the fullness of joy: Thus does the carnal heart to
the world; when that withdrawes his favor, he is dejected; and reuiues with a
smile: All is in our choice; whatsoever is our Sun will thus carry us; O God,
be thou to me, such as thou art in thy self; thou shall be merciful in
drawing me; I shall be happy in following thee.

LVI.
Upon the sound of a cracked Bell.
WHat an harsh sound does this Bell make in every ear? The Metal is good
enough; it is the rifte that makes it so vnpleasingly iarring; How too like is
this Bell to a scandalous and ill-liued Teacher? His calling is honorable; his
noise is heard far enough; but the flawe (which is noted in his life) marres
his Doctrine; and offends those ears which else would take pleasure in his
teaching; It is possible that such a one, even by that discordous noise may
ring in others into the Tryumphant Church of Heaven; but there is no remedy for
himself but the fire; whether for his reforming, or judgment. *

LVII.
Upon the sight of a blind Man.
HOw much am I bound to GOD that has given me eyes to see this Man's want of
eyes? With what suspicion and fear he walks? How does his hand and staff
examine his way? With what jealousy does he receive every morsel, every
draught, and yet meets with many a post, and stumbles at many a stone, and
swallows many a fly. To him the world is as if it were not, or as if it were
all rubbes, and snares, and downfalls; And if any man will lend him an hand, he
must trust to his (how ever faithless) guide without all comfort save this,
that he cannot see himself mis-carry. Many a one is thus Spiritually blind,
and because he is so, discernes it not; and not discerning complains not of
so woeful a condition. The God of this world has blinded the eyes of the
Children of disobedience; they walk on in the ways of death; and yield
themselves over to the guidance of him who seeks for nothing but their
precipitation into Hell. It is an addition to the misery of this inward
occaecation, that it is ever joined with a secure confidence in them whose
trade and ambition is to betray their Souls.

What ever become of these outward senses which are common to me with the
meanest, and most despicable creatures; O Lord, give me not over to that
Spiritual darkness, which is incident to none but those that live without
thee, and must perish eternally, because they want thee.

LVIII.
Upon a Beech-tree full of Nuts.
HOw is this Tree ouerladen with mast, this year? It was not so the last;
neither will it (I warrant you) be so the next; It is the Nature of these free
Trees, so to power out themselves into fruit, at once, that they seem
afterward either sterile, or niggardly: So have I seen pregnant wits (not
discreetly governed) ouerspend themselves in some one maister-peece so
lauishly, that they have proved either barren, or poor and flatt in all other
subjects. True-Wisedome as it serves to gather due sap both for nourishment,
and fructification, so it guides the seasonable and moderate bestowing of it in
such manner, as that one season may not be a glutton, vvhiles others famish: I
would be glad to attain to that measure and temper that upon all occasions I
might always have enough, never too much.

LIX.
Upon the sight of a piece of Money under the Water.
I Should not vvish ill to a Covetous man, if I should wish all his Coin in
the bottom of the River; No pauement could so well become that stream; no
sight could better fit his greedy desires; for there every piece, would seem
double, every teston would appear a shilling, every Crown an Angel. It is
the nature of that element to greaten appearing quantities; vvhiles we look
through the air upon that solid body, it can make no other representations:
Neither is it otherwise in spiritual eyes, and objects; if we look with
carnal eyes through the interposed mean of sensuality, every base and
worthless pleasure will seem a large contentment; if with weak eyes we
shall look at small and immateriall truths aloof off, in another element of
apprehension, every parcel thereof shall seem maine, and essential; hence
every knack of heraldry in the sacred genealogies, and every Scholasticall
quirke in disquisitions of Divinity, are made matters of no less then life,
and death to the Soul. It is a great improuement of true wisdom to be able
to see things as they are, and to value them as they are seen. Let me labor
for that power and stayednesse of judgment, that neither my senses may deceive
my mind, nor the object may delude my sense. *

LX.
Upon the first rumor of the Earthquake at Lime, wherein a Wood was swallowed
up with the fall of two Hills.
GOod LORD; how do we know when we are sure? If there were Man or Beast in
that-Wood, they seemed as safe as we now are; they had nothing but Heaven
above them, nothing but firm Earth below them; and yet in what a dreadful
pit-fall were they instantly taken; There is no fence for Gods hand; A man
would as soon have feared that Heaven would fall upon him, as those Hills? It
is no pleasing our selves with the vnlikelyhood of divine iudgemens. We have
often heard of Hills covered with Woods, but of Woods covered with Hills I think
never till now; Those that planted or sowed those Woods, intended they should
be spent with fire, but, Lo, GOD meant they should be devoured with Earth;

We are wont to describe impossibilities by the meeting of Mountains, and
behold here two Mountains are met, to swallow up a Valley; What a good God it
is whose providence ouerrules, and disposes of all these events?

Towns or Cities might as well have been thus buried, as a solitary Dale, or
a shrubby Wood: Certainly the God that did this, would have the use of it reach
further then the noise; this he did, to show us what he could, what he might
do; If our hearts do not quake, and rend at the acknowledgement of his
infinite Power, and fear of his terrible judgments as well as that Earth did,
we must expect to be made warnings, that would take none.

LXI.
Upon the sight of a Dormouse.
AT how easy a rate do these Creatures live that are fed with rest; So the
Bear and the Hedgehog (they say) spend their whole winter in sleep, and rise
up fatter then they lay down; How often have I enuyed the thriuing drowsinesse
of these Beasts; When the toil of thoughts has bereaved me of but one hours
sleep; and left me languishing to a new task; and yet, when I have well
digested the comparison of both these conditions, I must needs say, I had
rather waste with work, then batten with ease; and would rather choose a
life profitably painful, then vselessely dull and delicate. I cannot tell
whether I should say those Creatures live, which does nothing; since we are
wont ever to notify life by motion; Sure I am their life is not vital; For
me, Let me rather complain of a mind that will not let me be idle, then of
a body that will not let me work.

LXII.
Upon Bees fighting.
What a pity it is to see these profitable, industrious Creatures fall so
furiously upon each other, and thus sting and kill each other, in the very
mouth of the Hiue; I could like well to see the Bees do this execution upon
Waspes, and droanes, enemies to their common stock, this savors but of
Justice; But to see them fall foul upon those of their own wing, it cannot
but trouble their owner, who must needs be an equal leeser by the victory of
either; There is no more perfect reesemblance of a Commonwealth, whether
civil, or sacred, then in an Hiue: The Bees are painful and honest
Compatriots, laboring to bring Wax and Honey to the maintenance of the public
state; The Waspes and Droanes are unprofitable and harmefull Hangbyes, which
live upon the spoil of others labors; whether as common Barattors, or strong
Thieves, or bold Parasites, they do nothing but rob their Neighbors. It is
an happy sight when these feel the dint of Justice, and are cut off from
doing further mischief; But to see well-affected and beneficial Subjects
undo themselves with duells, whether of Law, or Sword; to see good
Christians of the same profession, shedding each others blood, upon quarrels of
Religion, is no other then a sad and hateful spectacle; and so much the more,
by how much we have more means of reason and Grace to compose our
differences, and correct our offensive contentiousnesse; Oh GOD, who art at
once the Lord of Host, and Prince of Peace, give us war with spiritual
wickedness, and Peace with our Brethen. *

LXIII.
Upon Waspes falling into a Glass.
SEe you that narrowmouthed glass, which is set near to the Hiue, mark how
busily the Waspes resort to it; being drawn thither by the smell of that sweet
liquor wherewith it is bayted; see how eagerly they creep into the mouth of
it; and fall down suddenly from that slippery steepness, into that watery
trap, from which they can never rise; there, after some vain labor, and
weariness, they drown, and dye; You do not see any of the Bees look that
way; they pass directly to their Hiue, without any notice taken of such a
pleasing Bayt; Idle and ill disposed persons are drawn away with every
temptation; they have both leisure and will to intertaine every sweet
allurement to sin, and wantonly prosecute their own wicked lusts till they
fall into irrecouerable damnation;

Whereas the diligent and laborious Christian, that follows hard and
conscionably the works of an honest calling, is free from the danger of these
deadly intisements, and lays up honey of comfort against the Winter of evil;
Happy is that man who can see and enjoy the success of his labor; but, how
ever, this we are sure of; if our labor cannot purchase the good we would
have, it shall prevent the evil we would avoid. *

LXIIII.
Upon a Spring in a wild Forest.
Lo here the true pattern of Bounty; What clear crystal streams are
here, and how liberally do they gush forth and hasten down, with a pleasing
murmur, into the Valley; Yet you see neither Man nor Beast, that takes part of
that wholsome and pure water; It is enough, that those may dip who will;
the refusal of others does no whit abate of this proffered plenty; Thus
bountiful Housekeepers keepers hold on their set ordinary provision, whether
they have guests, or no; Thus conscionable Preachers power out the living
Waters of wholesome Doctrine, whether their Hearers partake of those blessed
means of Salvation, or neglect their holy endeavors; Let it be our comfort
that we have been no niggards of these celestial streams, let the world
give an account of the improuement.

LXV.
Upon the sight of an Owl in the twilight.
WHat a strange Melancholicke life does this Creature lead; to hide her head,
all the day long, in an yuie-bush, and at night, when all other Birds are at
rest, to fly abroad, and vent her harsh notes; I know not why the ancients
have sacred this Bird to wisdom, except it be for her safe closeness, and
singular perepicacity; that when other domestical and ayrie Creatures are
blind, she only has inward light to discern the least objects for her own
advantage; Surely thus much wit they have taught us in her; that he is the
wisest man, that would have least to do with the multitude; that no life is so
safe as the obscure; that retiredness, if it have less comfort, yet less
danger and vexation; Lastly, that he is truly wise who sees by a light of his
own, when the rest of the world sit in an ignorant and confused darkness,
unable to apprehend any truth, save by the helps of an outward illumination.

Had this Foul comne forth in the day time, how had all the little Birds
flock't wondering about her, to see her uncouth visage, to hear her untuned
notes; she likes her estate never the worse, but pleases her self in her
own quiet reservedness; It is not for a wise man to be much affected with
the censures of the rude and unskillful vulgar, but to hold fast unto his own
well-chosen and well-fixed resolutions; Every fool knows what is wont to be
done; but what is best to be done, is known only to the wise.

LXVI.
Upon an arm benumbed.
HOw benumbed and (for the time) senseless is this arm of mine becomne, only
with too long leaning upon it?

Whiles I used it to other services, it failed me not, now that I have rested
upon it, I find cause to complain; It is no trusting to an arm of flesh; On
whatsoever occasion we put our confidence therein, this relyance will be sure
to end in pain, and disappointment; O GOD, thine arm is strong and mighty;
all thy Creatures rest themselves upon that, and are comfortably sustained; Oh
that we were not more capable of distrust, then thine omnipotent hand is of
weariness and subduction. *

LXVII.
Upon the Sparks flying upward.
IT is a feeling comparison (that of JOB) of man borne to labor, as the
sparks to fly upward; That motion of theirs is no other then natural;
Neither is it otherwise for man to labor; his mind is created active, and apt
to some or other ratiocination; his joints all stirring; his nerves made for
helps of moving; and his occasions of living call him forth to action: So as an
idle man does not more want Grace, then degenerate from Nature. Indeed, at the
first kindling of the fire, some sparks are wont, by the impulsion of the
Bellows, to fly forward, or sideward; and even so, in our first Age, youthly
vanity may move us to irregular courses; but when those first violences are
overcome; and we have attained to a setlednesse of disposition, our sparks
fly up, our life is labor; And why should we not do that, which we are made
for? Why should not GOD rather grudge us our being, then we grudge him our
work? It is no thank to us that we labor out of necessity; out of my
obedience to thee, O GOD I desire ever to be employed; I shall never have
comfort in my toil, if it be rather a purueyance for my self, then a
Sacrifice to thee. *

LXVIII.
Upon the sight of a Raven.
I Cannot see that Bird but I must needs think of ELIAH; and wonder no less
at the miracle of his faith then of his provision; It was a strong belief that
carried him into a desolate retiredness to expect food from Ravens; This
foul, we know, is ravenous; all is too little that he can forage for
himself; and the Prophets reason must needs suggest to him, that in a dry
barren Desert bread and flesh must be great dainties; yet he goes aside to
expect victuals from that purueyance; He knew this Foul to be no less
greedy, then unclean; Unclean, as in Law, so in the nature of his seed; What
is his ordinary prey but loathsome carrion? Yet since GOD had appointed him
this Cator, he stands nor upon the nice points of a fastidious squeamishness,
but confidently depends upon that uncouth provision; And accordingly, these
unlikely purueyours bring him bread and flesh in the Morning, and bread and
flesh in the Evening.

Not one of those hungry Ravens could swallow one morsel of those viandes,
which were sent, by them, to a better mouth; The River of Cherith sooner failed
him, then the tender of their Service No doubt, ELIAHS stomach was often up
before that his incurious diet came; When expecting from the mouth of his Cave,
out of what Coast of Heaven these his Seruitors might be descryed, upon the
sight of them, he magnified, with a thankful heart, the wonderful goodness
and truth of his GOD; and was nourished more with his faith, then with his
food: O GOD, how infinite is thy providence, wisdom, power? We creatures are
not what we are, but what thou will have us; when thy turn is to be served,
we have none of our own; Give me but faith, and do what thou will.

LXIX.
Upon a Worm.
IT was an homely expression which GOD makes of the state of his Church, Fear
not, thou Worm JACOB; Every foot is ready to tread on this despised Creature;
Whiles it keeps it self in that cold obscure Cell of the earth (wherein it
was hidden) it lay safe, because it was secret, but now that it has put it
self forth; of that close Ca^e, and has presented it self to the light of
the Sun, to the eye of Passengers; how is it vexed with the scorching beams,
and wrings up and down, in an helpless perplexity; not finding where to
shroud it self; how obnoxious is it to the fowls of the air, to the feet of
men, and beasts? He that made this Creature such, and calls his Church so, well
knew the answerablenesse of their condition: How does the World ouer-looke, and
contemn that little slocke, whose best-gard has ever bin secrecy? And if ever
that despicable number have dared to show it self, how has it (...) scorched,
and tramp^ed upon, and entertained with all variety of Persecution? O Savior,
thy Spouse fares no otherwise then thy self; to match her fully, thou have
said of thy self, I am a Worm and no man; Such thou were in thine humbled
estate, here on earth; such thou would be; But, as it is a true word that
he who made the Angels in Heaven, made also the Worms on earth, so it is no
less true, that he who made himself and his Church Worms upon Earth, has
raised our nature in his person above the Angels, and our person in his Church
to little less then Angels; It matters not how we fare in this Valley of
tears, whiles we are sure; of that infinite amends of Glory above.

LXX.
Upon the putting on of his Clothes.
What a poor thing were Man, if he were not beholden to other Creatures? The
Earth affords him flax for his linen, bread for his belly, the Beasts his
ordinary clothes, the Silke-worme his bravery; the back and bowels of the
Earth his metals and fuel; the Fishes, Fowls, Beasts his nourishment; His
wit indeed works upon all these, to improve them to his own advantage; but
they must yield him materials, else he subsists not. And yet we fools are
proud of our selves, yea proud of the cast Suites of the very basest Creatures:
There is not one of them that have so much need of us; They would enjoy
themselves the more, if Man were not; Oh GOD, the more we are sensible of our
own indigence, the more let us wonder at thine alsufficiency in thy self; and
long for that happy condition, wherein thou (which art all perfection) shall
be all in all to us.

LXXI.
Upon the sight of a great Library.
What a world of wit is here pack't up together? I know not whether this sight
does more dismay, or comfort me; it dismayes me to think, that here is so
much that I cannot know; It comforts me, to think that this variety yields so
good helps to know what I should; There is no truer word then that of SOLOMON,
There is no end of making many Books; this sight verifies it; There is no end;
indeed, it were pity there should. GOD has given to Man a busy Soul; the
agitation whereof, cannot but through time and experience, work out many
hidden truths; to suppress these would be no other then injurious to
Mankind; whose minds like unto so many candles, should be kindled by each
other: The thoughts of our deliberation are most accurate; these we vent into
our Papers; What an happiness is it, that, without all offense of Necromancy,
I may here call up any of the ancient Worthies of learning, whether humane, or
divine, and confer with them of all my doubts? That I can at pleasure summon
whole Synodes of Reverend Fathers, and acute Doctors from all the Coasts of the
Earth; to give their well-studyed judgments in all points of question which I
propose? Neither can I cast my eye casually upon any of these silent Masters,
but I must learn somewhat: It is a wantonness to complain of choice;

No Law binds us to read all; but the more we can take in, and digest, the
better-liking must the minds needs be; Blessed be GOD that has set up so
many clear Lamps in his Church.

Now, none but the wilfully blind can plead darkness; And blessed be the
memory of those his faithful Servants, that have left their blood, their
spirits, their liu^^ in these precious Papers* and have willingly wasted
themselves into these during Monuments, to give light unto others.

LXXII.
Upon the red Cross on a door.
OH sign fearfully significant; this Sickness is a Cross indeed, and that a
bloody one; both the form and the color import Death; The Israelites doors
whose lintells were besprinkled with blood, were passed over by the destroying
Angel; here, the destroying Angel has smitten, and has left this mark of
his deadly blow; We are wont to fight cheerfully under this Ensign abroad,
and be victorious; Why should we tremble at it at home? Oh GOD, there thou
fightest for us, here against us; Under that we have fought for thee, but
under this (because our sins have fought against thee) we are fought against
by thy judgments.

Yet Lord, it is thy Cross, though an heavy one; It is ours by merit, thine by
imposition; O Lord, sanctify thine affliction, and remove thy vengeance.

LXXIII.
Upon the change of Weather.
I Know not whether it be worse, that the Heaven look upon us always with one
face, or ever varying; for as continual change of Weather causes uncertainty
of health, so a permanent setlednesse of one season, causes a certainty of
distemper; perpetual moisture disolues us, perpetual heat euaporates or
inflames us; cold stupefies us, drought obstructs and withers us; Neither is it
otherwise in the state of the mind; if our thoughts should be always
Volatile, changing, inconstant, we should never attain to any good habit of
the Soul, whether in matter of judgment, or disposition; but if they should
be always fixed, we should run into the danger of some disperate extremity;
to be ever thinking, would make us mad; to be ever thinking of our crosses,
or sins, would make us hartlesly dejected; to be ever thinking of Pleasures
and Contentments, would melt us into a loose Wantonness; to be ever doubting,
and fearing, were an Hellish servitude; to be ever bold, and confident, were a
dangerous presumption; but the interchanges of these in a due moderation, keep
the Soul in health; O GOD, howsoever these Variations be necessary for my
Spiritual condition; Let me have no Weather but Sunneshine from thee; Do
thou lift up the light of thy countenance upon me; and stablish me ever with
thy free Spirit.

LXXIIII.
Upon the sight of a Marriage.
WHat a comfortable and feeling resemblance is here of CHRIST, and his Church:
I regard not the persons, I regard the institution; Neither the Husband, nor
the Wife are now any more their own; they have either of them given over
themselves, to other; not only the Wife, which is the weaker vessel, has
yielded over her self to the stronger protection, and participation of an
abler head; but the Husband has resigned his right in himself over to his
feebler consort; So as now, her weakness is his; his strength is hers; Yea
their very flesh has altered property; hers is his, his is hers; Yea their
very Soul and Spirit may no more be severed in respect of mutual affection,
then from their own several bodies: It is thus, O Savior, with thee and thy
Church; We are not our own, but thine; who have married us to thy self in
truth and righteousness; What powers, what indowments have we but from, and
in thee? And as our holy boldness dares interesse our selves in thy graces, so
thy wonderfully-compassionate mercy vouchsaues to interesse thy self in our
infirmities; thy poor Church suffers on Earth, thou feel in Heaven; and as
complaining of our stripes, can say, Why persecutest thou me?

Thou again art not so thine own, as that thou art not also ours; thy
Sufferings, thy Merits, thy Obedience, thy Life, Death, Resurrection,
Asscension, Intercession, Glory; yea thy blessed Humanity, yea thy glorious
Deity, by virtue of our right, of our Union, are so ours, as that we would not
give our part in thee for ten thousand Worlds.

Oh gracious Savior, as thou can not but love and cherish this poor and
unworthy Soul of mine, which thou have mercifully espoused to thy self; so
give me Grace to honor and obey thee, and forsaking all the base and sinful
riuality of the World, to hold me only unto thee whiles I live here, that I
may perfectly enjoy thee hereafter.

LXXV.
Upon the sight of a Snake.
I Know not what horror we find in our selves at the sight of a Serpent?
Other Creatures are more loathsome, and some no less deadly then it; yet,
there is none, at which our blood rises so much, as at this; Whence should
this be, but out of an instinct of our old enmity? We were stung in
Paradise, and cannot but feel it: But here is our weakness; It was not the
body of the Serpent that could have hurt us, without the suggestion of sin;
and yet we love the sin whiles we hate the Serpent; Every day are we
wounded with the sting of that old Serpent, and complain not; and so much more
deadly is that sting, by how much it is less felt: There is a sting of guilt,
and there is a sting of remorse; there is mortal venom in the first, whereof
we are the least sensible; there is less danger in the second; The Israelites
found themselves stung by those fiery Serpents in the Desert; and the sense of
their pain sent them to seek for Cure; The World is our Desert; and as the
sting of Death is Sin; so the sting of Sin is Death; I do not more with to
find ease then pain; If I complain enough, I cannot fail of cure; O thou,
which art the true brazen Serpent, lifted up in this Wilderness, raise up mine
eyes to thee, and fasten them upon thee; thy mercy shall make my soul whole,
my wound sovereign.

LXXVI.
Upon the ruins of an Abbey.
IT is not so easy to say what it was that built up these Walls, as what it
was, that pulled them down; even the wickedness of the Possessours;

Every stone has a tongue to accuse the Superstition, Hypocrisy, Idleness,
Luxury of the late owners.

Me thinks I see it written all along, in Capital letters upon these heaps;
A fruitful Land makes he barren for the iniquity of them that dwell therein;
Perhaps there wanted not some Sacrilege in the Demolishers; in all the
carriage of these businesses, there was a just hand, that knew how to make an
wholsome and profitable use of mutual sins; Full little did the Builders, or
the in-dwellers think that this costly and warm Fabric should so soon end
violently in a desolate rubbish: It is not for us to be high-minded, but to
fear; No Roof is so hye, no Wall so strong, as that sin cannot level it
with the Dust; Were any pile so close that it could keep out air, yet it
could not keep out judgment where sin has been fore-admitted;

In vain shall we promise stability to those Houses which we have made
witnesses of, and accessaries to our shameful uncleannesses, The firmness of
any building is not so much in the matter, as in the owner, Happy is that
Cottage that has an honest master, and woe be to that Palace that is
viciously inhabited.

LXXVII.
Upon the discharging of a Piece.
GOod LORD; how witty men are to kill one another? What fine devises they have
found out to murder a far off? To slay many at once; and so to fetch off
lives; that whiles a whole Lane is made of Carcasses with one blow, no body
knows who hurt him? And what honor do we place in slaughter? Those arms,
wherein we pride our selves, are such, as which, we, or our Ancestors have
purchased with blood? The Monuments of our Glory, are the spoils of a subdued
and slain Enemy; Where contrarily, all the titles of God sound of Mercy, and
gracious respects to Man: God the Father is the maker and preserver of men; God
the Son is the Savior of Mankind; God the Holy Ghost styles himself the
Comforter: Alas, whose image do we bear in this disposition, but his, whose
true title is the Destroyer? It is easy to take away the life, it is not easy
to give it; Give me the man that can devise how to save Troops of men from
killing, his name shall have room in my Calender; There is more true honor in
a Ciuick garland, for the preserving of one Subject, then in a Laurel, for the
victory of many Enemies; Oh God; there are enough that bend their thoughts to
undo what thou have made, enable thou me to bestow my indeauors in repriuing,
or rescuing that which might otherwise perish; Oh thou who art our common
Savior, make thou me both ambitious, and able to help to save some other
besides my self.

LXXVIII.
Upon the tolling of a Passing Bell.
HOw doleful and heavy is this summons of Death; This sound is not for our
ears, but for our hearts; it calls us not only to our prayers, but to our
preparation; To our Prayers for the departing Soul; to our preparation for our
own departing; We have never so much need of Prayers, as in our last Combat;
then is our great Adversary most eager; then are we the weakest, then nature
is so ouer-laboured, that it gives us not leisure to make use of gracious
motions; There is no preparation so necessary as for this Conflict; all our
life is little enough to make ready for our last hour; What am I better then
my Neighbors? How often has this Bell reported to me the farewell of many more
strong and vigorous bodies then my own; of many more cheerful and lively
spirits? And now what does it, but call me to the thought of my parting? Here
is no abiding for me; I must away too; Oh thou that art the GOD of comfort,
help thy poor Servant that is now struggling with his last enemy; His sad
friends stand gazing upon him, and weeping over him, but they cannot succor
him; needs must they leave him to do this great work alone; none but thou, to
whom belong the issues of death, can relieve his distressed and ouer-matched
Soul; And for me, let no man dye without me; as I dye daily, so teach me to
dye once; acquaint me before hand with that Messenger, which I must trust too;
Oh teach me so to number my days, that I may apply my heart to true wisdom.

LXXIX.
Upon a Defamation dispersed.
WEre I the first* or the best that ever was slandered, perhaps it would be
somewhat difficult to command my self patience, Grief is wont to be abated
either by partners, or precedents; the want, whereof deiects us beyond measure,
as men singled out for patterns of misery: Now, whiles I find this the common
condition of all that ever have been reputed virtuous, why am I troubled with
the whisperings of false tongues? O GOD, Si Christus Iudam passus est, cur non
ego patiar Birrhichionem? Dial. de S. Martine Sever. Sulpit.
the Devil slandered thee in Paradise; O Savior, men slandered thee on earth
more then Men or Devils can reproach me; Thou art the best, as thou art the
best, that ever was smitten by a lying and venomous tongue: It is too much
favor that is done me by malicious lips, that they conform me to thy
sufferings; I could not be so happy if they were not so spightfull; Oh thou
glorious pattern of reproached innocence, if I may not dye for thee, yet let
me thus bleed with thee.

LXXX.
Upon a ring of Bells.
WHiles every Bell keeps due time, and order, what a sweet and harmonious
sound they make? All the nieghbour Villages are cheared with that common
Music; but when once they jar, and check each other; either iangling
together, or striking preposterously, how harsh and unpleasing is that noise;
So that as we testify our public rejoicing by an orderly and well-tuned
peale; So when we would signify that the Town is on fire we ring confusedly.

It is thus in Church and Commonwealth; when every one knows and keeps their
due rancks, there is a melodious consort of Peace and contentment; but when
distances, and proportions of respects are not mutually observed; when either
States or persons will be clashing with each other, the discord is grievous,
and extremely prejudicial; such confusion either notifieth a fire already
kindled, or portendeth it; Popular States may ring the changes with safety; but
the Monarchical government requires a constant and regular course of the set
degrees of rule and inferiority, which cannot be violated without a sensible
coffeehouse, and danger; For me, I do so love the peace of the Church and
State, that I cannot but, with the charitable Apostle, say, Would to God they
were cut off that trouble them; and shall ever wish either no iarres, or no
clappers.

LXXXI.
Upon the sight of a full Table at a Feast.
WHat great Variety is here, of flesh, of fish, of both, of neither; as if both
Nature and Art did strive to pamper us; Yet me thinks, enough is better then
all this, Excess is but a burden, as to the prouider, so to the Guest; It
pitties and greeues me to think what toil, what charge has gone to the
gathering of all these daintyes together, what pain so many poor Creatures
have been put to, in dying for a needless Sacrifice to the Belly; what a
Penance must be done by every accumbent; in sitting out the passage through
all these dishes; what a task the stomach must be put to in the concoxion of
so many mixtures; I am not so austerely scrupulous as to deny the lawfulness
of these abundant provisions, upon just occasions; I find my Savior himself
more then once at a Feast; this is recorded as well as his one long Fast:
Doubtless our bountiful GOD has given us his Creature, not for necessity
only, but for pleasure: But these exceedings would be both rare, and
moderate; and when they must be, require no less patience then temperance;

Might I have my option, Oh GOD, give me rather a little with peace and love;
He whose provision for every day, was thirty measures of fine flower, and
threescore measures of Meal, thirty Oxen, an hundred Sheep, besides Venison,
and Foul, yet can pray, Give me the Bread of sufficiency; Let me have no
perpetual Feast but a good Conscience; and from these great preparations (for
the health both of Soul and body) let me rise rather hungry, then surcharged.

LXXXII.
Upon the hearing of a Lute well played on.
THere may be (for ought we know) infinite inventions of Art, the possibility
whereof we should hardly ever believe, if they were fore-reported to us; Had
we lived in some rude, and remote part of the World, and should have been
told, that it is possible only by an hollow piece of Wood, and the guts of
Beasts, stirred by the fingers of men, to make so sweet and melodious a noise,
we should have thought it utterly incredible; yet now that we see and hear
it ordinarily done, we make it no wonder; It is no marvel, if we cannot
fore-imagine, what kind, and means of harmony GOD will have used by his
Saints, and Angels in Heaven; when these poor matters seem so strange to our
conceits, which yet our very senses are convinced of; Oh GOD, thou know
infinite ways to glorify thy self by thy Creatures, which do far
transcend our weak, and finite capacities; Let me wonder at thy wisdom and
power, and be more awful in my adoratious, then curious in my inquiries.

LXXXIII.
Upon the sight and noise of a Peacocke.
I See there are many kinds of Hypocrites; Of all Birds this makes the fairest
show, and the worst noise; So as this is an Hypocrite to the eye; There are
others, as the Blackbird, that looks foul and sooty, but sings well; this is
an Hypocrite to the Ear; There are others that please us well, both in their
show, and voice, but are cross in their carriage and condition, as the
Popingay, whose colors are beautiful, and noise delightful; yet is apt to
do mischeife in scratching and biting any hand that comes near it; These are
Hypocrites both to the eye* and ear; Yet there is a degree further (beyond the
example of all brute Creatures) of them, whose show, whose words, whose actions
are fair, but their hearts are foul, and abominable;

No outward beauty can make the Hypocrite other then odious:

For me, let my profession agree with my words, my words with my actions, my
actions with my heart; and let all of them be approved of the GOD of truth.

LXXXIIII.
Upon a penitent Malefactor.
I Know not whether I should more admire the Wisdom or the Mercy of God in his
proceedings with men; Had not this man sinned thus notoriously, he had never
been thus happy; whiles his courses were fair, and civil, yet he was
graceless; now his miscarriage has drawn him into a just affliction; his
affliction has humbled him; God has taken this advantage of his humiliation,
for his Conversion: Had not one foot slip't into the mouth of Hell, he had
never been in this forwardness to Heaven;

There is no man so weak, or foolish, as that he has not strength or wit
enough to sin; or to make ill use of his sin. It is only the goodness of
an infinite GOD, that can make our sin good to us, though evil in it self;
Oh GOD, it is no thank to our selves, or to our sins, that we are bettered
with evil; the Work is thine, let thine be the Glory.

LXXXV.
Upon the sight of a Lilly.
THis must needs be a goodly Flower that our Savior has singled out to
compare with SOLOMON, and that not in his ordinary dress, but in all his
royalty* Surely the earth had never so glorious a King as he, Nature yielded
nothing that might set forth royal magnificence, that he wanted; yet he that
made both SOLOMON and this Flower, says that SOLOMON in all his royalty was
not clad like it; What a poor thing is this earthly bravery that is so easily
ouermatched? How ill Judges are we of outward beauties that contemn these
goodly Plants, which their Creator thus magnifies; and admire those base
metals, which he (in comparison hereof) co^temnes: If it be their
transitoriness that embaseth them; what are we? All flesh is Grass, and all
the glory of man as the flower of Grass: As we cannot be so brave, so we
cannot be more permanent; Oh GOD, let it be my ambition to walk with thee
hereafter in white; Could I put on a robe of stars here, with proud HEROD,
that glittering garment could not keep me from Lice, or Worms; Might I sit
on a Throne of Gold; within an house of Iuory, I see I should not compare with
this Flower; I might be as transitory, I should not be so beautiful; What
matters it whether I go for a flower, or a weed, here; whethersoeuer, I must
wither: Oh thou which art greater then SOLOMON do thou cloth me with thy
perfect Righteousness, so shall I flourish for ever in the Courts of the House
of my God.

LXXXVI.
Upon the sight of a Coffin stuck with Flowers.
TOo fair appearance is never free from just suspicion; whiles here was
nothing but mere Wood, no Flower was to be seen here, now that this Wood is
lined with an unsavory Corpse, it is adorned with this sweet variety; the fur
whereof that Coffin is made, yields a natural redolence alone; now that it is
stuffed thus noysomely, all helps are too little to counteruaile that sent of
corruption; Neither is it otherwise in the living;

Perpetual use of strong perfumes argues a guiltines of some unpleasing
savor. The case is the same Spiritually; an ouer-glorious outside of
Profession implies some inward filthiness that would feign escape notice; Our
uncomely parts have more comeliness put on; Too much ornament imports extreme
deformity; For me, let my show be moderate, so shall I neither deceive
applause, nor merit too deep censure.

LXXXVII.
Upon the view of the World.
IT is a good thing to see this material World; but it is a better thing to
think of the intelligible World; this thought is the sight of the Soul,
whereby it discerns things, like it self, Spiritual, and Immortal; which
are so much beyond the worth of these sensible Objects, as a Spirit is beyond a
body, a pure substance beyond a corruptible, an infinite God above a finite
Creature; O GOD, how great a word is that which the Psalmist says of thee,
that thou abasest thy self to behold the things both in Heaven, and Earth?

It is our glory to look up even to the meanest piece of Heaven; It is an
abasement to thine incomprehensible Majesty to look down upon the best of
Heaven; Oh, what a transcendent Glory must that needs be, that is abased to
behold the things of Heaven? What an happiness shall it be to me, that mine
eyes shall be exalted to see thee; who art humbled to see the place, and state
of my blessedness: Yea, those very Angels that see thy face, are so
resplendantly glorious, that we could not ouer-liue the sight of one of their
faces, who are feign to hide their faces from the sight of thine; How many
millions of them attend thy Throne above, and thy Footstool below, in the
Ministration to thy Saints? It is that thine invisible world, the Communion
wherewith can make me truly blessed; Oh GOD, if my body have fellowship here
amongst Beasts, of whose earthly substance it participates; Let my Soul be
united to thee, the God of Spirits; and be raised up to enjoy the insensible
society of thy blessed Angels; Acquaint me beforehand with those Citizens and
affairs of thine Heaven; and make me no stranger to my future Glory.

LXXXVIII.
Upon the stinging of a Waspe.
HOw small things may annoy the greatest? even a Mouse troubles an Elephant, a
Gnat a Lion; a very Flea may disquiet a Giant; What weapon can be nearer to
nothing then the sting of this Waspe? Yet what a painful wound has it given
me; that scarce-visible point how it enuenomes, and rankles, and swells up the
flesh? The tenderness of the part adds much to the grief;

And if I be thus vexed with the touch of an angry Fly, LORD, how shall I be
able to endure the sting of a tormenting Conscience? As that part is both most
active, and most sensible, so that wound which it receives from it self, is
most intollerably grievous; there were more ease in a nest of Harnets, then
under this one torture: O GOD, howsouer I speed abroad, give me Peace at home;
and what ever my flesh suffer, keep my Soul free.

Thus pained, wherein do I find ease but in laying Honey to the part infected?
That Medicine only abates the auguish; How near has Nature placed the remedy
to the offense? Whenever my heart is stung with the remorse for sin, only
thy sweet and precious merits, O blessed Savior, can mitigate, and heal the
wound; they have virtue to cure me, give me grace to apply them; that
sovereign receipt shall make my pain happy; I shall thus applaud my grief, It
is good for me that I was thus afflicted. *

LXXXIX.
Upon the Araignment of a Felon.
With what terror does this Malefactor stand at that Bar? His hand
trembles, whiles it is lift up for his trial; his very lips quake, whiles he
says, not guilty; his countenance condemns him before the Judge; and his
fear is ready to execute him before his Hangman: Yet this Judge is but a
weak man, that must, soon after, dye himself; that sentence of Death, which
he can pronounce, is already passed by Nature upon the most innocent; that act
of death, which the Law inflicteth by him, is but momentany; who knows whether
himself shall not dye more painfully? O God, with what horror shall the guilty
Soul stand before thy dreadful Tribunal in the day of the great Assizes of
the World? Whiles there is the presence of an infinite Majesty to daunt him; a
fierce and clamorous Conscience to give in evidence against him; Legions of
ugly, and terrible Devils waiting to seize upon him; a Gulf of unquenchable
Fire ready to receive him; whiles the Glory of the Judge is no less
confounding, then the cruelty of the Tormenters; Where the Sentence is
unavoidable, and the Execution Everlasting, Why do not these terrors of thee,
my GOD, make me wise to hold a privy Sessions upon my Soul, and actions; that
being acquitted by my own heart, I may not be condemned by thee; and being
judged by my self I may not be condemned with the World?

XC.
Upon the Crowing of a Cock.
HOw harshly did this note sound in the ear of PETER; Yea pierced his very
heart? Many a time had he heard this bird, and was no whit moved with the
noise; now, there was a Bird in his bosom that crow'd louder then this; Whose
shrill accent conjoined with this, astonished the guilty Disciple:

The weary labourer when he is awakened from his sweet sleep by this natural
Clock of the Household, is not so angry at this troublesome Bird, nor so vexed
at the hearing of that unseasonable sound, as PETER was, when this Foul
awakened his sleeping Conscience, and called him to a timely repentance; This
Cock did but crow like others; neither made, or knew any difference of this
tone, and the rest; there was a divine hand that ordered this Mornings note to
be a Summons of Penitence; He that foretold it, had fore-appointed it: that
Bird could not but crow then; and all the noise in the Highpriests Hall could
not keep that sound from PETER'S ear, But, O SAVIOVR, could thou find
leisure, when thou stoodst at the Bar of that unjust, and cruel Judgment,
amidst all that bloody rabble of Enemies, in the sense of all their fury, and
the expectation of thine own Death, to listen unto this Monitor of PETER'S
Repentance; and upon the hearing of it, to cast back thine eyes upon thy
Denying, Cursing, Abiuring Disciple? O Mercy without measure; and beyond all
the possibility of our Admiration; to neglect thy self for a sinner, to attend
the repentance of one, when thou were about to lay down thy life for all.

Oh GOD, thou art still equally merciful. Every Elect Soul is no less dear
unto thee: Let the sound of thy faithful monitors smite my ears: and let the
beams of thy merciful eyes wound my heart, so as I may go forth and weep
bitterly. *

XCI.
Upon the Variety of thoughts by way of Conclusion.
When I bethink my self how Eternity depends upon this moment of life, I
wonder how I can think of any thing but Heaven: but, when I see the
distractions of my thoughts, and the aberrations of my life, I wonder how I can
be so bewitched, (as whiles I believe an Heaven) so to forget it. All that I
can do, is to be angry at my own vanity. My thoughts would not be so many,
if they were all right; there are ten thousand by-ways for one direct? As
there is but one Heaven, so there is but one way to it; that living way,
wherein I walk by Faith, by Obedience. All things, the more perfect they are,
the more do they reduce themselves toward that unity, which is the Center of
all perfection: Oh thou who art one, and infinite, draw in my heart from all
these straggling, and unprofitable Cogitations; and confine it to thine Heaven,
and to thy self, who art the Heaven of that Heaven. Let me have no life but
in thee, no care but to enjoy thee, no ambition but thy Glory; Oh make me
thus imperfectly happy before my time; that when my time shall be no more, I
may be perfectly happy with thee to all Eternity.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
MED. FOL. 1 Upon sight of the Heavens moving. 1. 2 Upon the sight of a Dial.
4. 3 Upon sight of an Eclipse. 7. 4 Upon sight of a gliding Star. 9. 5 Upon a
fair prospect 12. 6 Upon the frame of a Globe casually broken. 16. 7 Upon a
Cloud. 18. 8 Upon the sight of a Grave dug up. 20 9 Upon the sight of Gold
Melted. 22. 10 Upon the sight of a Pitcher carried. 24. 11 Upon sight of a Tree
full blossomed. 26. 12. Upon the report of a man suddenly struck dead in his
sin. 28. 13 Upon the view of the Heaven and the Earth. 30. 14 Upon occasion
of a Redbrest coming into his Chamber 32. 15 Upon occasion of a Spider in his
window. 34. 16. Upon the sight of a Rain in the Sun shine. 38. 17. Upon the
length of the Way. 40. 18 Upon the Rain and Waters. 42. 19. Upon the same
Subject. 45. 20 Upon occasion of the lights brought in. 48. 21 Upon the same
occasion. 53. 22 Upon the blowing of Fire. 54* 23 Upon the barking of a Dog.
57. 24 Upon sight of a Cockfight. 59. 25. Upon his lying down to rest. 63. 26
Upon the kindling of a Charcole fire. 66. 27 Upon the sight of an humble and
patient Beggar. 69. 28 Upon the sight of a pulling pulling off Wool from the
back of a Crow Sheep. 71. 29 Upon the sight of two Snayles. 73. 30 Upon the
hearing of the Street-cryes in London. 75. 31 Upon the Flies gathering to a
galled Horse. 78. 32 Upon the sight of a dark Lantern. 80. 33 Upon the
hearing of a Swallow in the Chimmey. 82. 34 Upon the sight of a Fly burning it
self in the Candle. 84. 35 Upon the sight of a Lark flying up. 87. 36. Upon
the singing of the Birds in a Spring-morning. 89. 37. Upon a Coal covered with
ashes. 91. 38. Upon the sight of a blackmore. 93. 39 Upon the small Stars in
the Galaxie, or milky Circle in the firmament. 96. 40 Upon the sight of Boys
playing. 98. 41 Upon the sight of a Spider and her Web. 102. 42 Upon the
sight of a Natural. 104. 43. Upon the Loadstone and the Iett. 107. 44 Upon the
hearing of Music by night. 111. 45. Upon the fanning of Corn. 112. 46 Upon
Herbs dried. 113. 47. Upon the quenching of Iron in Water. 115. 48 Upon a
fair colored fly. 116. 49. Upon a Glow worm. 117. 50 Upon the shutting of
one Eye. 120. 51 Upon a Spring water. 121. 52 Upon Gnats in the Sun. 123. 53
Upon the sight of Grapes. 125 54 Upon a Corn field ouer-growne with Weeds.
126. 55 Upon the sight of Tulipaes and Marygolds in his Garden. 128. 56 Upon
the sound of a crak't Bell. 130. 57 Upon the sight of a blind Man. 132. 58 Upon
a Beech-tree full of Nuts. 135. 59 Upon the sight of a piece of money under the
water. 137. 60. Upon the first rumor of the Earthquacke at Lime, wherein a
Wood was swallowed up with the fall of two Hills. 140. 61 Upon the sight of a
Dormouse. 143. 62 Upon Bees fighting. 145 63 Upon Waspes falling into a Glass.
149. 64 Upon a Spring in a wild Forest. 152. 65 Upon the sight of an Owl in
the Twy-light. 154. 66 Upon an arm benum med. 157. 67 Upon the sparks flying
upward. 159 68 Upon the sight of a Raven. 162 69 Upon a Worm. 166. 70. Upon
the putting on of his clothes. 169. 71 Upon the sight of a great Library. 171.
72 Upon the red-Crosse on a Door. 175. 73 Upon the change of Weather. 177 74
Upon the sight of a Marriage. 180. 75 Upon the sight of a Snake. 184. 76 Upon
the ruins of an Abbey. 187. 77 Upon the discharging of a Piece. 190. 78 Upon
the telling of a passing Bell. 193. 79 Upon a Defamation dispersed. 196 80 Upon
a ring of Bells. 198. 81 Upon the sight of full Table at a Feast. 201 82 Upon
the hearing of a Lute well plaide on 204. 83 Upon the fight and noise of a
Peacocke. 207. 84. Upon a penitent Malefactor. 209. 85. Upon the sight of a
Lilly. 211. 86 Upon the sight of a Coffin stuck with flowers. 214. 87 Upon the
view of the World. 216. 88 Upon the stinging of a Waspe. 220. 89 Upon the
Araignment of a Felon. 223. 90. Upon the Crowing of a Cock. 226. 91 Upon the
variety of thoughts by way of Conclusion. 230.
FINIS.
Occasional Meditations, not before set forth.
XCII.
Upon the sight of an harlot carted.
With what noise and tumult, and zeal of solemn justice is this sin
punished; the streets are not more full of beholders, then clamours; Every one
strives to express his detestation of the fact, by some token of revenge; one
casts mire, another water, another rotten eggs upon the miserable offender;
neither indeed is she worthy of less: but, in the mean time, no man looks
home to himself; it is no uncharity to say, that too many insult in this just
punishment, who have deserved more; Alas, we men value sins by the outward
scandal, but the wise and holy God (against whom only our sins are done)
esteems them according to the intrinsecall iniquity of them: and according to
the secret violation of his will and justice; thus, those sins which are
slight to us, are to him heinous. We ignorants would have rung David's
adultery with Basins, but, as for his numbering of the people, we should have
past it over as venial; The wise justice of the Almighty found more wickedness
in this, which we should scarce have accused; Doubtless there is more
mischief in a secret infidelity, which the world either cannot know, or cares
not to censure, then in the foulest adultery; Public sins have more shame,
private may have more guilt; If the world cannot charge me of those; it is
enough that I can charge my Soul of worse: let others rejoice in these
public executions; Let me pity the sins of others, and be humbled under
the sense of my own.

XCIII.
Upon the smell of a Rose.
SMelling is one of the meanest, and least useful of the senses; yet there is
none of the five, that receives or gives so exquisite a contentment as it; Me
thinks there is no earthly thing that yields so perfect a pleasure to any
sense, as the odor of the first rose does, to the sent: It is the wisdom and
bounty of the creator so to order it, that those senses which have more
affinity with the body, and with that earth whereof it is made, should receive
their delight and contentation by these things which are bred of the earth; but
those which are more spiritfull, and have more affinity with the Soul, should
be reserved for the perfection of their pleasure, to another world; There, and
then only, shall my sight make my soul eternally blessed.

XCIIII.
Upon a cancelled Bond.
WHiles this obligation was in force, I was in servitude to my parchment; my
bond was double, to a payment, to a penalty; now, that is discharged, what is
it better then a waste scrole; regarded for nothing but the witness of its
own voydance, and nullity. No otherwise is it with the severe Law of my
Creator; Out of Christ it stands in full force, and binds me over either to
perfect obedience, which I cannot possibly perform, or to exquisite torment,
and eternal Death, which I am never able to endure; But now, that my Savior
has fastened it cancelled to his cross (in respect of the rigor and
malediction of it) I look upon it as the monument of my past danger and
bondage: I know by it, how much was owed by me, how much is paid for me; The
direction of it, is everlasting, the obligation (by it) unto death is
frustrate: I am free from curse, who never can be free from obedience. O
Savior, take thou glory and give me peace.

XCV.
Upon the report of a great loss by Sea.
THe earth and the water are both of them great givers, and both great takers:
As they give matter and sustentatio^ to all sublunary creatures, so they take
al back again, insatiably devouring, at last, the fruits of their own wombs.
Yet, of the two, the earth is both more beneficial, and less cruel; for, as
that yields us the most general maintenance and wealth and supportatio^; So it
does not lightly take ought from us, but that which we resign over to it, and
which naturally falls back unto it; Whereas the water, as it affords but a
small part of our live-lode, and some few knacks of ornament So it is apt
violently to snatch away both us and ours: and to bereave that which it never
gave: it yields us no precious metals, and yet in an instant fetches away
millions; And yet, notwithstanding all the hard measure we receive from it, how
many do we daily see that might have firm ground under them, who yet will be
trusting to the mercy of the Sea; Yea how many that have hardly crawled out
from a desperate ship wrack, will yet be trying the fidelity of that unsure,
and untrusty element: O God, how venturous we are, where we have reason to
distrust, how incredulously fearful, where we have cause to be confident? Who
ever relied upon thy gracious providence, and sure promises, O Lord, and has
mis-carryed? Yet here we pull-in our faith, and make excuses for our
diffidence; and if Peter have tried those waves to be no other then solid
pavement under his feet, whiles his Soul trod confidently; yet when a billow
and a wind agree to threaten him, his faith flagges, and he begins to sink: O
Lord, teach me to doubt where I am sure to find nothing but uncertainty; and to
be assuredly confident, where there can be no possibility of any cause of
doubting.

XCVI.
Upon sight of a bright sky full of stars.
I Cannot blame Empedocles if he professed a desire to live upon earth, only
that he might behold the face of the heavens; surely (if there were no other)
this were a sufficient errand for a man's being here below, to see and observe
these goodly spangles of light above our heads, their places, their quantities,
their motions: but the employment of a Christian is far more noble, and
excellent; heaven is open to him; and he can look beyond the veil, and see
further above those stars, then it is thither; and there discern those
glories, that may answer so rich a pavement; upon the clear sight whereof, I
cannot wonder if the chosen vessel desired to leave the earth, in so happy an
exchange. O God, I bless thine infiniteness, for what I see with these bodily
eyes; but, if thou shall but draw the curtain and let me by the eye of faith
see the inside of that thy glorious frame, I shall need no other happiness
here; My Soul cannot be capable of more favor then sight here, and fruition
hereafter.

CVII.
Upon the rumors of Wars.
GOod Lord, what a shambles is Christendom becomne of late? How are men killed
like flies, and blood poured out like water? Surely the cruelty and ambition of
the great have an heavy reckoning to make for so many thousand souls; I
condemn not just arms; those are as necessary, as the unjust are hateful;
even Michael and his Angels fight; and the style of God is the Lord of Hosts.
But woe be to the man by whom the offense comes; Usurpation of others rights,
violation of oaths and contracts, and lastly erroneous zeal are guilty of all
these public murders. Private men's injuries are washed off with tears, but
wrongs done to Princes and public States are hardly wipt off but with blood.
Doubtless that fearful comet did not more certainly portend these wars,
then these wars presage the approach of the end of the world; The earth was
never without some broils, since it was peopled but with three men; but so
universal a combustion was never in the Christian world since it was: O
Savior, what can I think of this, but that, as thou would have a general
peace upon thy first coming into the world, so upon thy second coming thou
meanest there shall be a no less general war upon earth: that peace made
way for thy meek appearance; this war for thy dreadful and terrible.

XCVIII.
Upon a Child crying.
IT was upon great reason, that the Apostle charges us not to be children in
understanding. What fools we all once are? Even at first, we cry, and smile
we know not wherefore; we have not wit enough to make signs what hurts us, or
where we complain; we can wrye the mouth, but not seek the breast, and if we
want help, we can only lament, and sprawle, and dye. After, when some months
have taught us to distinguish a little betwixt things, and persons, we cry for
every toye; even that, which may most hurt us; and, when there is no other
cause, we cry only to hear our own noise, and are straight stilled with a
greater; and if it be but upon the breeding of a tooth, we are so wayward, that
nothing will please us; and if some formerly-liked knack be given to quiet us,
we cast away that which we have, if we have not what we would seem to like.
We fear neither fire, nor water, nothing scarres us but either a rod or a
feigned bug-beare; we mis-know our parents; not acknowledging any friend but the
Tailor, that brings us a fine coat, or the Nurse that dresses us gay; The more
that our riper years resemble these dispositions, the more childish we are,
and more worthy both of our own and others censure.

But again, it was upon no less reason that the Apostle charges us, to be
children in maliciousness: Those little innocents bear no grudg; they are
sooner pleased, then angry; And if any man have wronged them, let them but have
given a stroke unto the Nurse, to beat the offender, it is enough; at the same
instant they put forth their hand for reconcilement, and offer themselves unto
those arms that trespassed. And when they are most froward, they are stilled
with a pleasant song: The old word is, that an old man is twice a child; but I
say, happy is he that is thus a child always. It is a great imperfection to
want knowledge, but of the two, it is better to be a child in understanding,
then a man in maliciousness.

XCIX.
Upon the beginning of a sickness.
IT was my own fault, if I looked not for this; All things must undergo their
changes; I have enjoyed many fair days; there was no reason I should not at
last make account of clouds, and storms; Could I have done well, without any
mixtures of sin; I might have hoped for entire health; But, since I have
interspersed my obedience with many sinful faylings, and enormities, why do I
think much, to interchange health with sickness? What I now feel I know; I
am not worthy to know what I must feel; As my times, so my measures are in the
hands of a wise and good God; My comfort is, he that sends these evils,
proportions them; If they be sharp, I am sure they are just; the most that I
am capable to endure, is the least part of what I have deserved to suffer:
Nature would said be at ease; but, Lord what ever become of this carcass,
thou have reason to have respect to thine own glory; I have sinned and must
smart; It is the glory of thy mercy to beat my body for the safety of my soul.
The worst of sickness is pain, and the worst of pain is but death: As for
pain, if it be extreme, it cannot be long; and if it be long' (such is the
difference of earthly, and hellish torments) it cannot be extreme; As for
death, it is both unavoydable, and beneficial; there ends my misery, and
begins my glory; A few groans are well bestowed for a preface to an immortal
joy. Howsoever, O God, thy messenger is worthy to be welcome; It is the Lord,
let him do whatsoever he will.

C.
Upon the challenge of a promise.
IT is true; an honest man's word must be his master; when I have promised I am
indebted, and debts may be claymed; must be paid; but yet, there is a great
deal of difference in our engagements; Some things we promise because they
are due; some things are only due, because they are promised. These latter,
which are but the mere engagements of courtesy, cannot so absolutely bind us,
that notwithstanding any intervention of unworthiness, or misbehaviour in the
person expectant, We are tied to make our word good; though to the cutting of
our own throats. All favorable promises presuppose a capacity in the
receiver; where that palpably fails, common equity sets us free; I promised
to send a fair sword to my friend; he is, since that time turned frantic; must
I send it, or be charged with unfaithfulness, if I send it not? O God, thy
title is the God of truth, thou can no more cease to be faithful, then to
be; How often have thou promised, that no good thing shall be wanting to thine,
and yet we know thy dearest children have complained of want? Is thy word
therefore challengable? Far, far, be this wicked presumption from our
thoughts. No: These thy promises of outward favors are never but with a
subintelligence of a condition: of our capablenesse, of our expedience. Thou
see that plenty, or ^ase would be our bane; thy love forbeares to satisfy us
with an harmfull blessing: We are worthy to be plagued with prejudicial
kindnesses, if we do not acknowledge thy wisdom, and care in our want. It is
enough for us that thy best mercies are our dues, because thy promises; we
cannot too much claim that which thou have absolutely engaged thy self to
give, and in giving shall make us eternally happy.

CI.
Upon the sight of flies.
WHen I look upon these flies; and gnats, and worms, I have reason to think;
What am I to my infinite Creator more then these? And if these had my reason,
why might they not expostulate with their Maker, Why they are but such; why
they live to so little purpose, and dye without either notice or use; and if I
had no more reason then they, I should be (as they) content with any
condition; That reason which I have, is not of my own giving; he that has
given me reason, might as well have given it to them; or, have made me as
reason-lesse as they; there is no cause why his greater gift should make me
mutinous, and malecontent; I will thank my God for what I am, for what I have;
and never quarrel with him, for what I want.

CII.
Upon the sight of a fantastical Zelote.
IT is not the intent of grace to mold our bodies anew, but to make use of
them, as it finds us; the disposition of men much follows the temper of their
bodily humors. This mixture of humors, wrought upon by grace, causes that
strange variety, which we see in professions pretendedly religious; when grace
lights upon a sad melancholic Spirit, nothing is affected but sullenness, and
extreme mortification; and dislike even of lawful freedom; nothing but
positions, and practices of severe austerity; when contrarily, upon the
cheerful and lively; all draws toward liberty and joy, those thoughts do
now please best, which enlarge the heart to mirth, and contentation; It is the
greatest improvement of Christian wisdom to distinguish (in all professions)
betwixt grace and humor; to give God his own glory, and men their own
infirmityes.

CIII.
Upon the sight of a Scavenger working in the channel.
THe wise providence of God has fitted men with spirits answerable to their
condition; If mean men should bear the minds of great Lords, no servile
works would be done; al would be commanders, and none could live; If
contrarily, great persons had the low spirits of drudges, there could be no
order, no obedience; because there should be none to command; now, out of this
discord of dispositions, God has contrived an excellent harmony of government,
and peace: since the use which each sort must needs have of other, binds them
to maintain the quality of their own ranks; and to do those offices which are
requisite for the preservation of themselves, and the public. As inferiors
then must bless God for the graces and authority of their betters; So must
Superiors no less bless him for the humility and serviceablenesse of the
meaner; and those which are of the midrank, must bless him for both.

CIIII.
Upon a pair of Spectacles.
I Look upon these, not as objects, but as helps; as not meaning that my sight
should rest in them; but pass through them; and by their aid, discern some
other things which I desire to see; many such glasses my soul has and uses:
I look through the glass of the creatures, at the power and wisdom of their
maker: I look through the glass of the Scriptures at the great mystery of
redemption and the glory of an heavenly inheritance; I look through Gods
favors, at his infinite mercy; through his judgments, at his incomprehensible
justice; but as these spectacles of mine presuppose a faculty in the eye, and
cannot give me sight when I want it, but only cleares that sight which I have;
no more can these glasses of the creatures, of Scriptures, of favors and
judgments enable me to apprehend those blessed objects, except I have an eye
of faith whereto they may be presented; these helps to an unbeleeving man, are
but as spectacles to the blind. As the natural eyes, so the spiritual have
their degrees of dimnesse; but I have ill improved my age, if, as my natural
eyes decay, my spiritual eye be not cleared and confirmed; but at my best I
shall never but need spectacles, till I come to see as I am seen.

CV.
Upon moates in the Sun.
How these little moats move up and down in the Sun, and never rest, whereas
the great mountains stand ever still, and move not, but with an earthquake;
even so light and busy spirits are in continual agitation, to little purpose;
whiles great deep wits sit still, and stir not, but upon extreme occasions:
were the motion of these little atoms as useful, as it is restless, I had
rather be a moat then* a mountain.

CVI.
Upon the sight of a bladder.
EVery thing must be taken in his meet time; let this bladder alone till it
be dry, and all the wind in the world cannot raise it up, whereas, now it is
new, and moist, the least breath fills, and enlarges it; it is no otherwise in
ages, and dispositions; inform the child in precepts of learning and virtue,
whiles years make him capable, how plyably he yields, how happily is he
replenished with knowledge and goodness; let him alone, till time and ill
example have hardened him; till he be settled in an habit of evil, and
contracted, and clung together with sensual delights, now he becomes utterly
indocible; sooner may that bladder be broken then distended.

CVII.
Upon a man sleeping.
I Do not more wonder at any man's art, then at his, who professes to think of
nothing, to do nothing: and I do not a little marvel at that man who says he
can sleep without a dream; for the mind of man is a restless thing: and
though it give the body leave to repose it self, as knowing it is a mortal and
earthly piece, yet it self being a spirit, and therefore active, and
indefatigable, is ever in motion: give me a sea that moves not, a Sun that
shines not, an open eye that sees not; and I shall yield there may be a
reasonable soul that works not: It is possible that through a natural, or
accidental stupidity, a man may not perceive his own thoughts; (as sometimes
the eye or ear may be distracted, not to discern his own objects) but in
the mean time, he thinks that, whereof he cannot give an account; like as we
many times dream when we cannot report our fancy. I should more easily put my
self to school unto that man, who undertakes the profession of thinking many
things at once: Instantany motions are more proper for a spirit, then a dull
rest. Since my mind will needs be ever working, it shall be my care that it may
always be well employed.

CVIII.
Upon the sight of a deaths-head.
I Wonder at the practice of the ancient both Greeks, and Romans, whose use was
to bring up a deaths-head in the midst of their feasts, on purpose to stir up
their guests, to drink harder, and to frolic more; the sight whereof, one
would think should have rather abated their courage, and have tempered their
jollity; but however it was with them, who believed there was nothing after
death; that the consideration of the short time of their pleasures, and being,
spurred them on to a free and full fruition of that mirth and excess, which
they should not long live to enjoy; yet to us that are Christians, and
therefore know that this short life does but make way for an eternity of joy,
or torment afterward, and that after the feast, we must account of a
reckoning; there cannot be a greater cooler for the heat of our intemperate
desires, and rage of our appetites, then the meditation of the shortness of
life, and the certainty of death: Who would over-pamper a body for the worms?
who would be so mad as to let himself loose to that momentany pleasure of sin,
which, ere long, must cost him everlasting pain, and misery. For me, me
thinks this head speaks no other language then this; Leese no time, thou art
dying, do thy best, thou may do good but a while, and shall fare well for
ever.

CIX.
Upon the sight of a left handed man.
IT is both an old and easy observation, that however the senses are alike
strong, and active on the right side, and on the left; yet that the limbs on
the right side are stronger then those of the left; because they are more
exercised then the other; upon which self same reason it must follow, that a
left handed man has more strength in his left arm, then in his right; neither
is it otherwise in the soul: our intellectual parts grow vigorous with
employment, and languish with dis-use: I have known excellent preachers, and
pregnant disputants that have lost these faculties with lack of action; and
others, but meanly qualified with natural gifts, that have attained to a
laudable measure of abilities, by improvement of their little. I had rather
lack good parts, then that good parts should lack me; Not to have great
gifts is no fault of mine, it is my fault not to use them.

CX.
Upon the sight of an old unthached Cottage.
THere cannot be a truer emblem of crazie old age; Moldred and clay walls; a
thin, uncovered roof; bending studds; dark and broken windows; in short,
an house ready to fall on the head of the indweller: The best body is but a
cottage; if newer, and better timbred, yet such as age will equally impair,
and make thus ragged, and ruinous; or, before that, perhaps casualty of fire or
tempest; or violence of an enemy; One of the chief cares of men is to dwell well;
some build for themselves, fair, but not strong; others build for posterity,
strong but not fair, not high; but happy is that man that builds for
eternity, as strong, as fair, as high as the glorious contignations of heaven.

CXI.
Upon the sight of a fair pearl.
What a pure and precious creature is this, which yet is taken out of the
mudde of the sea; Who can complain of a base original, when he sees such
excellencies so descended? These shel-fishes that have no sexes, and therefore
are made out of corruption, what glorious things they yield, to adorn and make
proud the greatest princesses? Gods great works go not by likely-hoods; how
easily can he fetch glory out of obscurity, who brought all out of nothing?

CXII.
Upon a screene.
ME thinks this screene, that stands betwixt me and the fire, is like some
good friend at the Court, which keeps from me the heat of the unjust
displeasure of the great; wherewith I might perhaps otherwise be causelessly
scorched; but how happy am I, if the interposition of my Savior, my best
friend in heaven, may screene me from the deserved wrath of that great God,
who is a consuming fire?

CXIII.
Upon a Burre-leafe.
NEither the vine, nor the oak, nor the Cedar, nor any tree, that I know,
within our climate, yields so great a leaf as this weed, which yet, after all
expectation, brings forth nothing but a burre, unprofitable, troublesome; So
have I seen none make greater profession of religion, then an ignorant man;
whose indiscreet forwardness yields no fruit but a factious disturbance to the
Church, wherein he lives; Too much show is not so much better then none at
all, as an ill fruit is worse then none at all.

CXIV.
Upon the singing of a Bird.
IT is probable that none of those creatures that want reason, delight so much
in pleasant sounds, as a bird; Whence it is, that both it spends so much time
in singing; and is more apt to imitate those modulations which it hears from
men; Frequent practice (if it be voluntary) argues a delight in that which we
do; and delight makes us more apt to practice; and more capable of perfection
in that we practice; Oh God, if I take pleasure in thy law, I shall meditate
of it with comfort, speak of it with boldness, and practice it with
cheerfulness.

CXV.
Upon the sight of a man Yawning.
IT is a mavelous thing to see the real effects and strong operation of
consent, or Sympathye, even where there is no bodily touch; So one sad man puts
the whole company into dumps; So one man's yawning affects, and stretches the
jaws of many beholders; So, the looking upon bleare eyes taints the eye with
blearenesse; From hence it is easy to see the ground of our Saviors
expostulation with his persecutor; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? The
Church is persecuted below, he feels it above, and complains; So much as the
person is more apprehensive, must he needs be more affected. O Savior, thou
can not but be deeply sensible of all our miseries and necessities. If we
do not feel thy wrongs, and the wants of our brethren, we have no part in
thee.

CXVI.
Upon the sight of a tree lopped.
IN the lopping of these trees, experience, and good husbandry has taught men
to leave one bough still growing in the top; the better to draw up the sap
from the root; The like wisdom is fit to be observed in censures; which are
intended altogether for reformation, not for destruction; So must they be
inflicted, that the patient be not utterly discouraged, and stripped of hope, and
comfort; but that, whiles he suffers, he may feel his good tendered, and his
amendment both aimed at, and expected. O God if thou should deal with me as
I deserve, thou should not only shred my boughs, but cut down my stock, and
stock up my root; and yet thou do but prune my superfluous branches, and
cherishest the rest; how unworthy am I of this mercy, if whiles thou art thus
indulgent unto me, I be severe and cruel to others, perhaps
lesse-ill-deserving then my self?

CXVII.
Upon a Scholar that offered violence to himself.
HAd this man lain long under some eminent coffeehouse, it had been easy to
find out the motive of his mis-carriage; Weak nature is easily over-laid with
impatience; it must be only the power of grace, that can graple with vehement
evils, and master them: But here the world cannot say what could be guilty of
occasioning this violence; this man's hand was full; his fame untainted; his
body no burden; his disposition (for ought we saw) fair; his life guiltless;
yet something did the tempter find to aggravate unto his feeble thoughts, and
to represent worthy of a dispatch; What a poor thing is life, whereof so
slight occasions can make us weary? What impotent wretches are we when we
are not sustained? One would think this the most impossible of all motions;
naturally, every man loves himself; and life is sweet, death abhorred; What is
it that Satan can despair to preswade men unto, if he can draw them to an
unnatural abandoning of life, and pursuit of death: Why should I doubt of
prevailing with my own heart, by the powerful overruling of Gods spirit, to
contemn life, and to affect death, for the sake of my Savior (in exchange of
a few miserable moments, for eternity of joy) when I see men, upon an
unreasonable suggestion of that evil spirit, cast away their lives for
nothing, and so hastening their temporal death, that they hazard an eternal?

CXVIII.
Upon the coming in of the Judge.
THe construction of men and their actions is altogether according to the
disposition of the lookers on. The same face of the Judge without any inward
alteration, is seen with terror by the guilty, with joy and confidence, by the
oppressed innocent; like as the same lips of the bridegroom drop both myrrh
and honey at once; honey to the well disposed heart; myrrh to the rebellious:
And the same cup relishes well to the healthful, and distasts the feverous;
the same word is, though a sweet, yet a contrary savor to the different
receivers: and the same Sun comforts the strong sight, dazles the weak; For
a man to affect either to do, or speak that which may be pleasing to all men,
is but a weak and idle ambition, when we see him that is infinitely good,
appear terrible to more, then he appears lovely. Goodness is it self with
what ever eyes it is looked upon: There can be no safety for that man that
regards more the censure of men, then the truth of being; He that seeks to
win all hearts, has lost his own.

CXIX.
Upon the sight af a heap of stones.
Under such a pile it was, that the first martyr was buried; none of all the
ancient Kings had so glorious a tomb; here were many stones, and every one
precious; Jacob leaned his head upon a stone, and saw that heavenly vision of
Angels ascending, and descending: Many stones light upon Stevens head, in the
instant of his seeing the heavens opened; and Jesus standing at the right hand
of God: Lo, Jacob, resting upon that one stone, saw but the Angels; Steven
being to rest for once under those many stones, saw the Lord of the Angels,
Jacob saw the Angels moving; Steven saw Jesus standing; As Jacob therefore
afterward, according to his vow, made there an altar to God; so Steven now in
the present, gathers these stones together, of which he erected an holy altar,
whereon he offered up himself a blessed sacrifice unto God; and if there be a
time of gathering stones, and a time of casting them away; this was the time
wherein the Jews cast, and Steven gathered up these stones for a monument of
eternal glory: O blessed Saint, thou did not so clearly see heaven opened,
as heaven saw thee covered; thou did not so perfectly see thy Jesus standing,
as he saw thee lying, patiently, courageously under that fatal heap: Do I
mistake it, or are those stones, not flints and pebles, but diamonds and
rubies, and carbuncles to set upon thy crown of glory?

CXX.
Upon sight of a Bat and Owl.
THese night-birds are glad to hide their heads all day, and if by some
violence they be unseasonably forced out of their secrecy, how are they
followed, and beaten by the birds of the day? With us men it is contrary, the
sons of darkness do with all eagerness of malice pursue the children of the
light: and drive them into corners, and make a prey of them: the opposition is
alike, but the advantage lies on the worse side; Is it for that the spiritual
light is no less hateful to those children of darkness, then the natural
night is to those cheerful birds of the day? Or is it for that the sons of
darkness, challenging no less propriety in the world, then the fowls do in
the lightsome air, abhor and wonder at the conscionable, as strange and
uncouth: howsoever, as these Bats and Owls were made for the night, being
accordingly shaped, foul, and ill-favored; so we know these vicious men, (how
ever they may please themselves) have in them a true deformity; fit to be
shrouded in darkness; and as they delight in the works of darkness, so they
are justly reserved to a state of darkness.

CXXI.
Upon the sight of a well-fleeced sheep.
What a warm winter coat has God provided for this quiet innocent creature?
as indeed, how wonderful is his wisdom and goodness in all his purveiances;
those creatures which are apter for motion, and withal most fearful by
nature, has he clad somewhat thinner, and has allotted them safe and warm
boroughs within the earth; those that are fit for labor and use, has he
furnished with a strong hide: and for man whom he has thought good to bring
forth naked, tender, helpless; he has endued his parents, and himself with
that noble faculty of reason, whereby he may provide all manner of helps for
himself; Yet again so bountiful is God in his provisions, that he is not
lavish; so distributing his gifts, that there is no more superfluity, then
want; Those creatures that have beakes, have no teeth; and those that have
shells without, have no bones within; All have enough, nothing has all:
Neither is it otherwise in that one kind of man, whom he meant for the Lord
of all; Variety of gifts is here mixed with a frugall dispensation; None has
cause to boast, none to complain; Every man is as free from an absolute defect,
as from perfection; I desire not to comprehend, O Lord, teach me to do
nothing but wonder.

CXXII.
Upon the hearing of Thunder.
THere is no grace whereof I find so general a want in my self, and others,
as an awful fear of the infinite majesty of God; Men are ready to affect, and
profess a kind of familiarity with God, out of a pretense of love, whereas if
they knew him aright, they could not think of him without dread, nor name him
without trembling; their narrow hearts strive to conceive of him, according to
the scantling of their own strait, and ignorant apprehension; whereas they
should only desire to have their thoughts swallowed up with an adoring wonder
of his divine incomprehensiblenesse; though he thunder not always, he is
always equally dreadful; there is none of his works which does not bewray
omnipotency: I blush at the sauciness of vain men, that will be
circumscribing the powerful acts of the Almighty within the compass of
natural causes; forbearing to wonder at what they profess to know; Nothing
but ignorance can be guilty of this boldness; There is no divinity but in an
humble fear, no philosophy but in a silent admiration.

CXXIII.
Upon the sight of an hedg-hogge.
I Marvelled at the first reading, what the Greeks meant by that proverb of
theirs; The Fox knows many pretty wiles, but the hedg-hogge knows one great
one: but when I considered the nature, and practice of this creature, I easily
found the reason of that speech, grounded upon the care, and shift that it
makes for its own preservation; whiles it is under covert it knows how to
bar the fore-dore against the cold Northern, and Eastern blasts; and to
open the back-doore for quieter and calmer air; When it is pursued, it knows
how to roll up it self round, within those thorns with which nature has
environd it, so as the dog, in stead of a beast, finds now nothing but a
ball of pricks, to wound his jaws; and goes away crying from so untoothsome a
prey: He that sent the sluggard to school to the pismire, sends also in
effect the careless and imprudent man to the hedg-hogge; whiles he says, if
thou be wise thou shall be wise for thy self: The maine care of any creature
is self-preservation; whatsoever does that best, is the wisest. These creatures
that are all body, have well improved the instincts of nature, if they can
provide for their bodily safety; Man, that is a reaso^able Soul, shall have
done nothing, if he make not sure work for the better part. O God, make me
Soulewise, I shall never envy their craft, that pity my simplicity.

CXXIV.
Upon the sight of a Goat.
THis creature is in an ill name; it is not for any good qualities, that God
has made choice of the goat, to resemble the wicked and reprobate soul; It
is unruly, and salacious, and noisome; I cannot see one of them, but I
presently recall to my thoughts the woeful condition of those on the left hand;
whom God has set aside to so fearful a damnation. They are here mixed with
the flock, their color differs nothing from the sheep; or if we do discern
them, by their rougher coat, and odious sent, we sever our selves from them;
but the time shall come, when he shall sever them from us, who has appointed
our innocence to the fold, and their harmefulnesse to an everlasting
slaughter. Onwards, if they climb higher then we, and feed upon those craggy
clifts which we dare scarce reach to with our eyes; their boldness is not
greater then their danger, neither is their ascent more perilous, then their
ruin deadly.

CXXV.
Upon the sight of the blind and the lame.
HEre is a true natural commerce of senses; The blind man has legs; the
lame man has eyes; the lame man lendes his eyes to the blind, the blind man
lendes, his legs to the lame; and now both of them move; where otherwise,
both must sit still, and perish; it is hard to say whether is more beholden to
other; the one gives strength, the other direction; both of them equally
necessary to motion; though it be not in other cases so sensible, yet surely
this very trafique of faculties is that, whereby we live, neither could the
world subsist without it; one man lends a brain, another an arm; one a
tongue, another an hand; he that knows wherefore he made all, has taken
order to improve every part to the benefit of the whole; What do I wish ought
that is not useful? And if there be any thing in me that may serve to the
good of others, it is not mine, but the Church: I cannot live but by others,
it were injurious if others should not likewise share with me.

CXXVI.
Upon the sight of a Map of the World.
WHat a poor little spot is a country? A man may hide with his thumb, the
great territories of those, that would be accounted Monarchs. In vain should
the great Cham, or the great Mogull, or Prester John seek here for his Court;
it is well, if he can find his kingdom, amongst these parcels: And, if we
take all together these shreds of Islands, and these patches of Continent, what
a mere indivisible point they are in comparison of that vast circle of heaven
wherewith they are encompassed? It is not easy for a man to be known to that
whole land wherein he lives: but if he could be so famous, the next country
perhaps never hears of his name: and if he can attain to be talked of there,
yet the remoter parts cannot take notice that there is such a thing: and if
they did all speak of nothing else, what were he the better? Oh the narrow
bounds of earthly glory: Oh the vain affectation of humane applause: Only that
man is happily famous, who is known, and recorded in heaven.

CXXVII.
Upon the sight of hemlocke.
THere is no creature of it self, evil: mis-application may make the best,
so: and there is a good use to be made of the worst: This weed which is too
well proved to be poisonous, yet to the Goat is medicinal: as serving by the
coldness of it, to temper the feverons heat of that beast: so we see the
Marmoset eating of spiders, both for pleasure, and cure: Our ignorance may not
bring a scandal upon Gods workmanship, or if it do, his wisdom knows how to
make a good use even of our injury: I cannot say but the very venom of the
creatures is to excellent purpose, how much more their beneficial qualities?
If ought hurt us, the fault is ours, in mis-taking the evil for good: in the
mean time we owe praise to the maker and to the creature a just and thankful
allowance.

CXXVIII.
Upon a Flowre-de-luce.
THis flower is but unpleasingly fulsome for sent, but the root of it is so
fragrant, that the delicatest Ladies are glad to put it into their sweet
bags: contrarily the rose-tree has a sweet flower, but a savour-lesse root,
and the saffron yields an odoriferous and cordial spire, whiles both the
flower, and the root are unpleasing: It is with vegitables, as with metals,
God never meant to have his best always in view; neither meant he to have all
eminences concealed. He would have us to know him to be both secretly rich,
and openly bountiful. If we do not use every grace in its own kind, God
leeses the thanks, and we the benefit.

CXXIX.
Upon the sight of two trees, one high, the other broad.
Those trees that shoot up in height are seldom broad; as contrarily, those
trees that are spreading, are seldom tall: it were too much ambition in that
plant, which would be both ways eminent: Thus it is with men; The covetous
man that affects to spread in wealth, seldom cares to aspire unto height of
honor: the proud man, whose heart it set upon preferment, regards not (in
comparison thereof) the growth of his wealth: There is a poor shrubbe in a
valley; that is neither tall nor broad, nor cares to be either, which speeds
better then they both: the tall tree is cut down, for timber, the broad tree
is lopped for firewood: besides that the tempest has power on them both,
whereas the low shrubbe is neither envied by the wind, nor threatened by the
axe, but fostered rather, for that little shelter, which it affords the
shepherd: If there be glory in greatness, meannesse has security: Let me
never envy their diet, that had rather be unsafe, then inglorious.

CXXX.
Upon the sight of a drunken-man.
REason is an excellent faculty; and indeed, that which alone differenceth us
from brute creatures; without which what is man but a two-legged beast? and, as
all precious things are tender, and subject to miscarriage, so is this above
others; the want of some little sleep, the violence of a fever, or one cup too
much puts it into utter distemper; What can we make of this thing (Man I cannot
call him?) He has shape; so has a dead corpse, as well as he; he has life,
so has a beast as well as he; Reason, either for the time he has not, or,
if he have it, he has it so depraved, and marred for the exercise of it, that
brutishness is much less ill-beseeming; Surely, the natural bestiality is so
much less odious then the moral, as there is difference in the causes of
both; That is of Gods making, this of our own It is no shame to the beast, that
God has made him so, it is a just shame to a man, that he has made himself a
beast.

CXXXI.
Upon the whetting of a sith.
REcreation is intended to the mind, as whetting is to the sith; to sharpen
the edge of it; which otherwise would grow dull, and blunt; he therefore that
spends his whole time in recreation, is ever whetting, never mowing; his grass
may grow, and his steed starve; as contrarily he that always toils, and never
recreates, is ever mowing, never whetting; laboring much to little purpose: as
good no sith, as no edge: Then only does the work go forward, when the sith
is so seasonably, and moderately whetted, that it may cut, and so cuts that it
may have the help of sharpening: I would so interchange, that I neither be
dull with work, nor idle and wanton with recreation.

CXXXII.
Upon the sight of a looking-glass.
When I look in another man's face, I see that man, and that man sees me, as
I do him: but when I look in my glass, I do not see my self: I see only
an image or representation of my self: howsoever it is like me, yet it is not
I: it is for an ignorant child to look behind the glass, to find out the
babe that he seeeth: I know it is not there: and that the resemblance varies
according to the dimnesse, or different fashion of the glass. At our best, we
do but thus see God here below: One sees him more clearly, another more
obscurely: but all in a glass: Hereafter, we shall see him, not as he
appears, but as he is: So shall we see him in the face, as he sees us: The
face of our glorified Spirits shall see the glorious face of him who is the God
of Spirits: In the mean time, the proudest dame shall not more plie her
glass, to look upon that face of hers, which she thinks beautiful, then I
shall gaze upon the clearest glass of my thoughts, to see that face of God,
which I know to be infinitely fair, and glorious.

CXXXIII.
Upon the shining of a piece of rotten wood.
HOw bright does this wood shine? When it is in the fire, it will not so beam
forth, as it does in this cold darkness: What an emblem is here of our future
estate? This piece, whiles it grew in the tree, shone not at all, now that it
is putrified, it casts forth this pleasing luster: Thus it is with us: whiles
we live here, we neither are, nor seem other then miserable: When we are dead
once, then begins our glory, then does the soul shine in the brightness of
heavenly glory, then does our good name shine upon earth in those beams which
before envy had either held in, or over-cast.

Why are we so over-desirous of our growth, when we may be thus advantaged
by our rottenness?

CXXXIV.
Upon an Yvie tree.
BEhold a true Emblem of false love: here are kind embracements, but deadly:
how close does this weed cling unto that Oak, and seems to hug, and shade
it? but in the mean time draws away the sap, and at last kills it: Such is an
harlots love, such is a parafites: Give me that love, and friendship, which is
between the vine, and the elm, whereby the elm is no whit worse, and the
vine much the better: That wholesome and noble plant does not so close wind it
self about the tree, that upholds it, as to gall the bark, or to suck away
the moisture: and again the elm yields a beneficial supportation to that
weak (though generous) plant. As God, so wise men know to measure love, not by
profession, and complement, (which is commonly most high, and vehement in the
falsest) but by reality of performance: He is no enemy that hurts me not: I
am not his friend whom I desire not to benefit.

CXXXV.
Upon a quartan ague.
I Have known when those things, which have made an healthful man sick, have
been the means of making a sick man, whole. The quartan has of old been justly
styled the shame of Physicians: Yet, I have more then once observed it to be
cured by a surfeit: One devil is so^etime used for the ejection of another; Thus
have I also seen it in the sickness of the Soul: The same God whose justice
is wont to punish sin with sin; even his mercy does so use the matter, that
he cures one sin by another; So have we known a proud man healed by the
shame of his uncleanness: a furious man healed by a rash bloodshed. It matters
not greatly what the medicine be, whiles the Physician is infinitely
powerful, infinitely skillful; What danger can there be of my safty, when God
shall heal me, as well by evil, as by good?

CXXXVI.
Upon the sight of a loaded cart.
IT is a passionate expression, wherein God bemoanes himself of the sins of
Israel, Ye have pressed me as a cart is pressed with sheaves; An empty cart
runs lightly away, but if it be soundly laden, it goes sadly, sets hard,
groans under the weight, and makes deep impressions; the wheels creak, and
the axeltree bends, and all the frame of it is put unto the utmost stresse, He
that is o^nipote^t can bear any thing but too much sin; his Justice will not let
his mercy be over-strained; No marvel if a guilty Soul say, Mine iniquity is
greater then I can bear; When the infinite God complains of the weight of
men's sins; But, let not vain men think that God complains, out of the want
of power, but, out of the abundance of mercy: He cannot be the worse for our
sins; we are. It grieves him to be over-provoked to our punishment; Then
does He account the cart to crack, yea to break, when he is urged to break
forth into just vengeance; O Savior, the sins of the whole world lay upon
thee, thou sweatedst blood under the load: what would become of me, if I
should bear but one sheafe of that load; every ear whereof, yea every grain
of that ear were enough to press down my Soul to the nethermost hell?

CXXXVII.
Upon the sight of a Dwarf.
AMongst all the bounteous gifts of God, what is it that he has equally
bestowed upon all? except it be our very being, whiles we are; he has not
given to all men the same stature of body, not the same strength of wit, not
the same capacity of memory, not the same beauty of parts, not the same measure
of wealth, or honor; thus has he done also in matter of grace: there are
spiritual dwarfes, there are giants; there are perfect men, children, babes,
embryons; this inequality does so much more praise the mercy, and wisdom of
the giver, and exercise the charity, and thankfulness of the receiver; the
essence of our humanity does not consist in stature; he that is little of
growth, is as much man, as he that is taller; Even so also spiritually, the
quantity of grace does not make the Christian, but the truth of it. I shall be
glad, and ambitious to add cubits to my height; but withal it shall comfort
me to know, that I cannot be so low of stature, as not to reach unto heaven.

CXXXVIII.
Upon an importunate Beggar.
IT was a good rule of him that bad us learn to pray of beggars; with what
zeal does this man sue, with what feeling expressions, with how forceable
importunity? When I meant to pass by him with silence, yet his clamor draws
words from me; when I speak to him, though with excuses, rebukes, denialls,
repulses, his obsecrations, his adjurations draw from me that alms which I
meant not to give; how he uncovers his sores, and shows his impotence, that
my eyes may help his tongue to plead; With what oratory does he force my
compassion? so as it is scarce any thank to me that he prevails. Why do I
not thus to my God? I am sure I want no less then the neediest; the danger of
my want is greater; the alms that I crave, is better, the store and mercy of
the giver infinitely more, Why should thou give me, O God, that which I care
not to ask? Oh give me a true sense of my wants, and then I cannot be cool
in asking, thou can not be difficult in condescending.

CXXXIX.
Upon a medicinal potion.
HOw loathsome a draught is this? how offensive, both to the eye and to the
sent, and to the taste? yea, the very thought of it, is a kind of sickness;
and, when it is once down, my very disease is not so painful, for the time,
as my remedy; how does it turn the stomach, and wring the entrayles, and
works a worse distemper, then that whereof I formerly complained; And yet, it
must be taken for health; neither could it be so wholesome, if it were less
unpleasing; neither could it make me whole, if it did not first make me sick.

Such are the chastisements of God, and the reproves of a friend; harsh,
troublesome, grievous; but in the end they yield the peaceable fruit of
righteousness.

Why do I turn away my head, and make faces, and shut mine eyes; and stop my
nostrils, and nauseate, and abhor to take this harmless potion for health,
when we have seen Mountebanks to swallow dismembered toades, and drink the
poisonous broth after them, only for a little ostentation, and gain? It is
only weakness, and want of resolution that is guilty of this queasinesse; Why
do not I cheerfully take, and quaffe up that bitter cup of affliction, which
my wise and good God has mixed for the health of my soul?

CXL.
Upon the sight of a wheel.
THe Prophet meant it for no other then a fearful imprecation against Gods
enemies, O my God, make them like unto a wheel; whereby what could he intend
to signify, but instability of condition, and sudden violence of judgment;
Those spoakes of the wheel that are now up, are, sooner then sight or thought
whirled down; and are straight raised up again, on purpose to be depressed;
Neither can there be any motion so rapid, and swift, as the circular. It is a
great favor of God that he takes leisure in his affliction, so punishing us
that we have respites of repentance: there is life and hope in these degrees
of suffering; but, those hurrying and whirling judgeme^ts of God, have nothing
in them but wrath, and confusion. O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger; I
cannot deprecate thy rebuke; my sins call for correction; but I deprecate
thine anger; thou rebukest even where thou love; so rebuke me, that whiles I
smart with thy rod, I may rejoice in thy mercy. *

FINIS.
The Table.
MED. FOL. 92 Upon the sight of an harlot carted. 233 93 Upon the smell of a
rose. 236 94 Upon a cancelled bond. 238 95 Upon the report of a great loss by
Sea. 240 96 Upon sight of a bright sky full of stars. 244 97 Upon the rumors
of Wars. 246 98 Upon a child crying. 249 99 Upon the beginning of a
sickness. 253 100 Upon the challenge of a promise. 256 101 Upon the sight of
flies. 260 102 Upon the sight of a fantastical Zelote. 262 103 Upon the sight
of a Scavenger working in the channel. 264 104 Upon a pair of Spectacles. 266
105 Upon motes in the sun. 269 106 Upon the sight of a bladder. 270 107 Upon a
man sleeping. 271 108 Upon the sight of a deaths-head. 274 109 Upon the sight
of a left handed man. 277 110 Upon the sight of an old unthached Cottage. 279
111 Upon the sight of a fair pearl. 281 112 Upon a screene. 282 113 Upon a
Bur-leafe. 283 114 Upon the singing of a Bird. 285 115 Upon the sight of a man
Yawning. 285 116 Upon the sight of a tree lopped. 288 117 Upon a Scholar that
offered violence to himself. 290 118 Upon the coming in of the Judge. 293 119
Upon the sight of an heap of stones 296 120 Upon the sight of a Bat and Owl.
299 121 Upon the sight of a well-fleeced sheep. 301 122 Upon the hearing of
Thunder. 304 123 Upon the sight of an Hedge hog. 307 124 Upon the sight of a
Goat. 310 125 Upon the sight of the blind and the lame. 312 126 Upon the sight
of a Map of the World. 314 127 Upon the sight of hemlocke. 317 128 Upon a
Floure-de luce. 319 129 Upon the sight of two trees, one high, the other broad.
320 130 Upon the sight of a drunken-man. 323 131 Upon the whetting of a sith.
325 132 Upon the sight of a looking-glass. 327 133 Upon the shining of a piece
of rotten wood. 329 134 Upon an Yvy tree. 331 135 Upon a quartan ague. 333 136
Upon the sight of a loaded cart. 335 137 Upon the sight of a Dwarf. 338 138
Upon an importunate Beggar. 340 139 Upon a medicinal potion. 343 140 Upon the
sight of a Wheel. 346
FINIS.

