The Contemplation of Mankind, containing a singular discourse after the Art
of Phisiognomie, on all the members and parts of man, as from the head to the
foot, in a more ample manner than hitherto has been published of any.

In the place next after the Chapter of the forehead, has the Phisiognomer
added a proper Treatise of the signification of sundry lines seen in most
men's foreheads: which in sundry disputations with a skillful Jew, he at the
last obtained.

In the work also has the Phisiognomer learnedly placed for instruction sake,
many strange and rare examples that he knew and judged in his time.

In the end is a little Treatise added of the signification of Moles, seen in
any member or part, either of the man or woman, written by a worthy Grecian
named Melampus.

All which, englished by Thomas Hill.

1571.

The glory of the Honorable, is, the fear of God.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



To the Noble and Right worthy prince, Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Earl Marshall
of England, and Knight of the honorable order of the Garter.
AS Man the excellentest Creature, does confess the Almighty to be the
author and framer of the whole world, with all things contained therein, even
so of duty must he faithfullye grant, God to be the fountain and spring of
all wisdom and knowledge, out of which, this science and Art of Phisiognomie
(as a part of Philosophy) has her proceeding, for if a man diligently
behold, not only the sundry and variable forms and shapes of living
creatures, but also the form and fashion of man himself, shall well perceive
such marvelous differences of countenances, such diverse lineaments of the
body, and they all greatly diffring one from another, so that man may not, nor
ought to attribute it to hap, casualtie, or fortune, but only to the great
providence and will of almighty GOD, which extends it self unto the numbering
of the hears of man's head, as our savior witnesses in the Evangelist S.
Mathevve. And therefore it is no absurd thing to affirm those small and
little lineaments appearing on sundry parts of man's body, by God to be
appointed, for the great comfort and behoof of man's nature, to the end he might
enjoy the perfect use, and full knowledge of them. And although the weakness
of man's nature be such, as it cannot redily attain the knowledge of them, yet
it is the part and duty of every good and well disposed mind to search out
the excellent works, and secrets of nature, so far forth as the almightye
power and heavenly governor does permit and suffer him, and therein to note and
consider the magnificencie and w(...)me of the highest workman: the which very
bright shall shine out, and as apparauntlye be seen in the least and smallest
creatures, as in the greatest and largiest bodies. The learned Aristotle in his
book De animalibus, diligently beholding and considering the two small
beasts, the Be and the Ante, does not a little marueyle at their divine
workmanship and cunning. But to be brief* there is nothing contained in the
excellent frame and Theater of this world, that requires not great
admiration, and the same of purpose appointed, for the only use of nature*
therefore in times past among* the ancient Philosophers, it was an undoubted
principle taught in their schools, that all things were formed and made unto
some certain end and purpose. This mighty wisdom of God, although it does
most bountifully show and express it self in every work, yet in man's
nature, which far excels all other in dignity and worthynesse, and in
which the singular impressions of God are decerned, it does offer all things
to consideration and vewe more plainly, more clear, and more abundaunt. This
well understood and known to the ancient students of wisdom, did prefer
man's nature to be considered before all others; and in the same they as much
^arueised at the great diversity and disposition of minds, as at the
lineamentes of the body. And they both carefully and diligently endeavored to
appoint every condition and quality, his proper body, and to each body
contrariwise, his proper qualities and conditions, thereby to obtain and
purchase the truth. The ancient Poet Homere took upon him lively to
describe that worthy Thersites, in comparing his manners and conditions to the
notes seen on his body. The like also did Dares Phrygius in his long Catalogue
of noble Piers, where he cunningly applied their conditions with their forms
and lineamentes seen. This Dares wrote that the valiant Aeneas was well
colored of body, tending unto a redness, in personage square set, having
cheerful and smyling eyes, and these somewhat declining to a blackness, and
therefore Dares reports him eloquent, gentle, friendlye of behavior, wittye
and politic in his counsels, pleasant at times, valiant in his attempts, and
virtuous. The jolly warrier Antenor, he describes to be talle of stature,
slender in body, in his members nimble and quick, and therefore judged to be
wary, and crafty in his doings. But the valiant Achylles is described to be
big and large breasted, fair spoken, gentle, strong membred, and with great
strength of the arms; having a curled head, a cheerful or smyling
countenance, and the hears of the head of a brown Chest nut color, by which
notes, he was judged not only fierce in arms, but also of great courage, mixed
with curtesis and liberality. Many more examples of antiquity might herebe
alleged, were it not that I think these sufficient for our turn, to note the
antiquity of comparisons, between the bodily forms and lineaments, and
between their dispositions, courage, and wit: Like to these, many may be read
and seen in Aristotle, Suctonius* and other of the Poets, who have left in
writing to us, sundry Pamphlets of this Art, extant in many places, in which,
it may evidently appear, how much it has been accounted and esteemed in times
past. For the skillful Antenor (by the report of Homere) being a man expert in
the Art of Phisiognomie, took upon him to consider, and diligently to vewe,
the personages and forms both of the courageous Ulysses and Menelaus,
pronouncing the one in conditions and nature, far diffring from ye other.
Menelaus, says he, was a person of few words, yet grave and wise in counsel,
but the jolly Ulysses for his proud show and boasting in words, did he
pronounce like to ye winter snowes. Seeing this knowledge has so long time
been observed and exercised of so excellent and famous men, what shall it let
or stay me, not to apply my study and pen thereto, and the rather for that
it is lawful for every man to decerne, as far as he can, the quality and
conditions of the heart: seeing the secret matters lying deep in the breast,
are many times bewrayde by the outward gestures, what singular commodity the
knowledge of this Art brings with it, may evidently appear in this, that
oftentimes men happening into acquaintances and friendshippes, such as they
suppose to be most friendly, most sound, and most faithful: for the more
part are found dissemblers, unfaithful, turnecotes most hurtful, and most
perverse in their doings. And without this Art, a man can not so well detect
their falshoode and doings, as to find out and know Thersites from the mighty
Hector, or the effeminate Ulysses and subtle Catiline, from the worthy Fabius
and Camillus. If ever this were in any age a necessary science, then no doubt
in this our time, being most perverse and wicked, it is most profitable and
necessary. For who does not see in our days, how the impudent Thersites, the
subtle Ulysses, and the most seditious Catiline, do rage. For this cause most
prudently were appointed in times paste (as some report) in the Courts of
kings, and noble Princes, certain learned men able to discover the facts and
minds of their subjects, soldiers, and others conversant about them. The
learned Aristotle in his book of government, wills that comely men be
chosen in office and made Magistrates, and not misshapen and deformed. In
another place he admonishes men to beware of those persons, which are marked
by nature, according to the common opinion of men: an evil favored and
crabbed countenance, does evermore yield untoward conditions. For by the
agreement of all writers, the countenance is evermore a bewrayer of the mind,
and Martial in his twelfth book describes by these signs and notes, his
pieuish Zoilus and wicked backbyter, in two proper verses.

Crine niger, ruber ore, breuis pede, lumine laesus, Rem magnam praestas Zoile,
si bonus es. These englished, are thus much in effect.

Thy hears are black, thy fete be short,
purblinde to, with bearde readde,
A good deed do (the Proverb says)
and then cut of thy headde.
The Greek Poet Agadius, described also a certain lymping or halting person
in this sort, (...).

Which may thus be translated.

Why doste thou limpe and halt,
thy mind is lame I see,
These outvvard signs are tokens plain
of secret ill in thee.
If Pompeius had used this diligence in beholding and considering the
countenance, he would not so lightly have credited, and been seduced by
Achylles and Septimus, nor the valiant Caaesar had happened into the hands of
Brutus and subtle Cassius, by whom they and their company were lamentably
murdered, Further, this Art procures no small commodity and profit to
Schoolemaysters, in searching out and knowing the aptness and pregnancie of
their scholars unto learning. For if they deal like honest and faithful
tutors, they ought to receive none into their school to be instructed in
learning and Arts, contrary to their capacity, but rather follow the example
of Apollonius Alabandensis, that divine and rare Schoolemayster, of whom Cicero
writes in his book De Oratore. This man (says he) although he customablye
read and taught scholars for a stipende and gain, yet would he suffer none
under him, to lose their time, if he perceived their wits unapt to attain
Oratorye: but rather wylled them to leave of and cease that study, and to
follow that skill and Art that he knew and saw them inclyned unto. Which
example if our schoolemaysters and tutors would endeavor to practyse and
follow, we should then enjoy and have many more excellent scholars, in all
laudable studies and Arts, than at these days are known to be. Here I think
it good time to end, not meaning to wade or proceed any further in the
infinite praises of so singular an Art, thereby to hinder your honors grave and
serious studies, with this my rud and simple work, the which although it be
not worthy to crave the protection of so Noble a personage, yet am I (the
author thereof) bold to intrude and thrust it upon your Grace, to the intent
that through your Graces favorable protection, it may possess a free passage,
Zoilus be put to silence, and I encouraged to show my simple skill and small
judgment hereafter in matters more pleasant and delectable. God preserve your
Grace, and increase your meditations and thoughts, in all godliness and
virtue, and send you long health, and the years of the mighty Nestor.

Amen.
Yours most humble, Thomas Hill.

The Preface to the Reader, and diligent traueyler, in the Art of Phisiognomie.
Seeing it is true (gentle Reader) that the first and principallest point of
wisdom is to know God, the second to know our selves, and the third to
know our duties toward our neighbors: it must needs then be granted and
confessed, that those means which lead us to the nearest understanding and
perceiving of them, are both good, profitable, and necessary: wherefore great
folly rules these men, who by their slender and faint arguments, would
condemn and banish Philosophy. The which after the mind of S. Paul, does
force us to the understanding and knowledge of the second, and also by the
agreement and consent of all the learned, does thoroughly instruct us in the
last. The people of the world, lifting up their minds to the Elements,
beholding the motions, alterations, chaunges, the several courses of the
lights, and Planets, with their infinite observations: looking down again
upon the earth, and there in seeing the compass, the situation, and
magnificence thereof, with the wonderful working of nature, did acknowledge a
God, the maker of them, and therein did confess his power and omnipotency.
The Philosopher Ariopagita, being without the swift hearing of things, done in
Iewrie, when he saw the wonderful and unnatural darcknesse that suddenly
ran over the face of the earth, durst affirm the world to draw to an end,
or else the maker and framer of it, to suffer violence. In Athens (the mother
and nurse of learning) where the Philosophers had their long resting place, by
learning acknowledged a greater God, then by corrupt nature they could attain
unto: when by the witness of S. Paul, they erected an altar ( ignoto deo) to
the unknown God. I have read of a proud king of England, whom the water
(notwithstanding his fierce, and thundering commandment) would not obey, but
still rose higher and higher, to the wetting of his feet, with shame enough
confessed a god, to whom the waters were obedient. By Philosophy we learn to
know our selves, the diversity between Mankind and other Creatures: the
excellency of the one over the other, in some points, and the excellency of
the other in other points. Reason has made man, to differ from the brutishe
generation, and therefore more excellent, but by his disabilitie and weak
ruling of himself, the other is his superior. The beast does all things, by
the instinct and provocation of nature: Man without reason, not able to bridle
his sensuality, degenerates from that he ought to be, and becomes more
monstrous with sin, sensuality, lust, and all other wicked vices, than any
other monster in form and shape. By Philosophy we learn, what is just,
honest, comely, profitable, decent, virtuous, and Godly: and again what is
dishonest, vnseemoly, vicious, and to be abhorred. To make a particular praise
of Philosophy, the treaty would not be so long and tedious, as the adventure
great, I should hasard a greater enterprise, than any heretofore durst take in
hand: but generally whatsoever proceeds from reason, it is Philosophy. If
reason proceeds from a natural disposition or inclination, if it come by
experience, or forced by learned means, it is Philosophy. Peradventure some
there be (more curious a great deal, than their holy living requires) that
do impugn some part of Philosophy, as a thing or Art not necessary or meet
to be known and studied. These men I suppose either never knew, or else have
forgotten what makes a man. Reason tells, if a whole body or substance
lacks a part, it is become lame and imperfect. If a man wants a member or
joint, it cannot be said, there is the whole and perfect form of a man: no
more can Philosophy be perfect, if any one part be plucked away. The Art
of divination by the Stars, the face and hand, is a percell of Philosophy,
and grounded upon long experience, and reason: and therefore not so wicked and
detestable as some men do take and repute these. Although it be an Art
wherewith many be deceived (through the greedy desire of gain) yet it is no
good consequent to say, that the Art therefore is frivolous and naught.
Divinity, being the words of God, perfect and most pure, where lurketh no
deceyte nor leasing, suffers abuse: for the devil could allege it against
Christ: and Antichrist therewith persecuteth his members: because some men with
wine be drunken, is wine therefore naught? Put a knife into a mad man's hand,
he knows not how to use it: but a wise, discreate, and sober man, will never
hurt himself wittingly with it. Though some men do guess at randon, as
touching the proper conditions and qualities of persons, yet the Art laudable
and certain is not to be blamed: neither is it to be condemned, though
sometimes he pronounces clean against the persons manners, and conversation.
Tullie witnesses (4. Tusculanarum) about the end, of a certain Phisiognomer
named Zopirus, which took upon him to behold, and judge the natures and
dispositions of many persons, by the forms of their faces, and lineaments of
the body: among which he was requested to behold the form of the learned
Hippocrates, and failing in his judgment, for that he only pronounced by the
lineaments of the body, what by nature he was inclined unto, and not what by
learning and virtue he was become, was of many laughed to scorn: although the
wise Hippocrates, well allowed and confirmed his judgment, saying by nature he
was the like, that the Phisiognomer had pronounced of him. Therefore I admonish
every one, that will rightlye pronounce and judge in this Art, that they first
consider and view all the parts of man, and not to judge rashly by any one
member alone: so shall they be sure not to be deceived, I mean to understand
and know the truth of the natural disposition, and yet may they fail of the
man's conditions, which Socrates well declared in himself. For when he on a
time (as utters Aristotle) sent two of his scholars, with his table or Image
lively drawn and counterfeyted by a cunning workman, to that famous
Phisiognomer Phylemon: who after he had diligently viewed, and considered one
member with another, pronounced Socrates to be a leacherous person, subtle, a
deceyuer, covetous, and given to wickedness. This judgment so much moved the
scholars, that they bitterly rebuked the Phisiognomer. And in their return,
opening this judgment to Socrates, confessed that Phylemon had truly reported
of him in all points, and swarued not one iotte from a truth after nature: but
the study of Philosophy, and honesty, had so brideled his desires and wicked
nature, that he became a new man. By this a man may conclude, that our will to
be subicct under the government of reason and grace: and that through these we
may bridle nature in us, turning the prouocations of them unto goodness. For
the Chollerick or yrefull man may either by grace repress his fury and lust,
or else alter the same in correcting of vices. The malicious man also may
either by grace aswage his lust, or else turn the same against the evil: and
so like may be done, in all other natural inclinations resting in us.
Experience teaches how many given to sundry kind of vices, after they by Gods
grace begin to have a sweet taste of Gods word, do shake of their woonted
nature, and become altered and changed fellows. Saul by Gods spirit, of a
persecutor, became a Martyr, of a blood sucker, an innocent and meek Lamb. I
might here recyte a number of Godly examples, it I wist these were not enough,
to prove mine intent. It is not to be decyded, what Gods holy spirit can do.
It works miracles, it works wonders contrarse to nature, it turns old
Adam (in us) into new Adam, contrary to all sense and understanding of man: and
then no marueyle, though the Phisiognomer do fail, where nature fails. Much
more (gentle Reader) I might say, but that I suppose this is sufficient, to
show unto thee, the right use of Phisiognomie. I will leave the whole
commendation of the Art, unto thine own judgment, and experience. If by
practice thou shall find any certainty in it, then reject it not as vain and
frivolous, but if thou can not attain unto the certain knowledge thereof:
yet let not thine ill fortune, condemn the judgments and experiences of a
number well learned and practiced in this Art: neither think ill of me, who
wishes unto thee very well, and have taken these pains altogether for thy
sake. Somewhat I have seen by experience, all that thou have here, gathered
out of the best writers: much more I have read, and the best of that, I also
give thee. So many as shall receive any fruit or commodity by me, let them
give thanks unto the worshipful and high learned man, Master Dee, by whose
help and aid at the beginning, I received such monuments and principles, as
gave me great light unto this knowledge, and unto whom also thou art greatly
bound: for that he wishes well unto his Country men, and has taken great
pains to do his Country good. Thus leaving (gentle reader) to trouble you any
longer: I commit you to God, wishing only your favor, in the furthering of
this my simple work.

Et feliciter vale.
Ioannis Coci ogdoastichon.
INternae facies spectabilis indolis index,
Aestus, quo rapimur, prodere signa solet.
Hinc foris augurium capitur, natura quod intus
Seminat, and motus indicat ipsa satos.
Sed retrusa rei latet experientia tantae:
Ni iuuet experti nos manus artificis.
Praestitit at nobis insigniter Hillus, ab art
Pectoris vt iudex quilibet esse queat.
Nicolai Leihi ogdoastichon ad Lectorem.
INdole qua quis sit, vultu dignoscere, Thomas
Hillus depingit, qua ratione queas.
Plurima doctorum peruoluens scripta virorum
Optima decerpsit sedulus, instar apis.
Nec piget immensos illum nauasse labores,
Quod, quantum in sese est, vtilis esse studet.
Vt gratis donat, quaecunque haec munera praebet:
Sic voto satis est, fi tibi gratus erit.
HEre Thomas Hill depainteth plain,
the picture of the mind,
Which way you may by countenance,
the disposition find.
Pervsing many monuments
of ancient writers he,
Electing still that's excellent,
does imitate the Be.
It nothing yrkes him labors great,
nor traueyles to bestow,
In any thing he can devise,
that profit seems to show.
As he does gratis give thee these,
what ere they seem to be.
So has he all his with, if he
be grateful unto thee.
Thomas Hillus Londinensis, ad proprium librum, vt animo constanti iniurias
multorum perferat.
Iliber, and videas ne te patientia vincat,
Inuida verba feras, and patiare sat est.
Nedum natus eras suspendebaris, adunco
Naso, te verbis inuidus increpuit.
Quid faciet tandem cum iam perfectus abibis:
In proprium iacet, tela retorta caput.
Itamen; and parui facias haec garrula verba,
Dum placeas doctis, hoc tibi sufficiat.
Thomas Turnerus ad candidum Lectorem.
FRontis vt est index speculum, fic prorsus in ips^
Front, velut speculo, mentis imago patet.
Illud quisque, suo tantum non lumine captus,
Perspicit, at sapiens solus vtrumque videt,
Lumina nil Lyncis, nil sunt specularia Momi,
Frons docet hic, quicquid pectora clausa geru^^.
The Books request.
MY suit (good Reader) is but small,
and such, as I am sure
Your courtesies on my behalf
may easily procure.
Your favor is the thing I ask:
and nothing else I crave:
For that in l^e of traueyle done,
Hill (only) see^th to have.
A recompense sufficeing well,
and counteruayling aye,
The black reproach that Momus tongue
enforces day by day.
To learned sort I only sue:
I force not Momus ne Zoylus crew.
Antonius Molinus ad lectorem Tetrastichon.
(...)*
Si studiose voles hominum cognoscere mores,
Ex hac multiplici corporis harmonia:
Haec animo voluat vigili noctesque, diesque,
Auctorem rerum laudet vbique Deum.
Gulielmus Fildus in nomine Hilli ad quemuis Zoilum.
ZOile macrescas; solus tua damna rependen^.
Non cura^n oster liuida verba liber.
A nullo petijt precibus, flexitue fauorem,
Complicuit nullos in sua vota viros.
Zoile tu tibi sis flagrum, sed tempore longo,
Quare, age, tu inuideas Zoile perpetuo.
To the gentle reader.
IF mighty Mountes, and hautie hills,
to foreign Nations brings
Both joy and wealth, by virtue of
the fruit that thereon springs,
As well by roots, and sundry herbs,
to ease the sick of care:
As fountaynes, metals, stones, and iemmes,
of virtue strange and rare.
What cause have we then in this I Will,
to joy with gladsome mind:
That have a Hill wherein we may
more precious jewels find.
As for experience, lo, behold
here blazed before thine eyes,
A worthy Iem wherein we may
with little exercise
Suck out such sap of learned skill,
as shall be for thy gain:
And learn to shun those ylles to come,
which may turn thee to pain.
And also thou thy luchie fate
may learn so too foresee:
That by preferring of the same,
good haps may rise to thee.
Wherefore since he this toil has took,
and for thee traueyles still:
Thou can not choose but let him have,
both thy good word and will.
M. N.

AETATIS SUAE TH 42.



A large and pleasant discourse of the whole Art of Phisiognomie, orderly
uttering all the special parts of man, from the head to the foot, in a more
ample manner than hitherto has been published.
Of Phisiognomie in general. Capit. j.
THE PHILOSOpher Aristotle and Concylatour agree, that to all living creatures,
it is a matter common, as to suffer and do of a natural inclination: which as
the same in beasts is named a violence, even so in men this is by a contrary
manner named an inclination. For as much (as by way of example) in the
Chollericke, is known an inclination to ire: in the Melancholic, to fear: in
the Sanguine, to mirth: and in the Phlegmatic, to sluggishnesse. All which
inclinations, are reported to be the vtterers both of the natural motions and
conditions in men, which by reason and wisdom be well governed. Which well
appeared by Hypochrates, who by his face was judged wicked, yet through
Philosophy known to be well conditioned. But in beasts for ye lack of reason,
are these affections and conditions as Aristotle utters in his book de
secretis secretorum, may not be governed: in that they live and persevere after
their sense, and appetite. By which evidently appears, that Phisiognomie to
be a necessary and lawdable science, seeing by the same a man may so readily
pronounce and foretell the natural aptness unto the affections, and
conditions in men, by the outward notes of the body. Which although a man may
thus foretell the natural motions, and actual conditions: yet of this, is it
not accounted, so perfect and firm a science: seeing by the same a man may
err, in sundry subjects having grace and wisdom. But in that men (for the
more part) do live after a sensual will in themselves, and that none but the
wise and godly (which is by an inward working of the spirit) do live after
reason: For that cause is this Phisiognomy accounted and named a science: which
instructs a man by the outward notes, to foretell the natural motions, and
actual conditions, that consist and dwell in many persons, especially in
those, which live after their affection, and appetites, rather than governing
themselves by reason. And of this did the learned ( Bias Priaenias) report,
that there lived and were more of the wicked, than of good persons: in that so
many are led, and moved after a sensual will, than procured by reason:
which causes that man (as Aristotle affirms) to swerve and fall from a
mean, in many manners: but the same is approached unto and purchased, by one
manner of way. And two kinds there are of the notes: as certain, which of the
elementarie quality conceived, that utter and signify the affections of the
mind: as does the hearinesse of the breast, which is a note of ire, through
the hot heart. And certain are of property, as the declyning of the head to
the right side in the walking, which is the note of a Cynede as Aristotle
reports: and this like is neither gathered of a hot, nor cold cause, but of
the property. Yet do the Perypatetickes (as writes Aristotle secundo
priorum) utter, that not any one affection to consist and be in man, or any
condition of nature: but that a like note is outwardly to be seen on the
body: by which not only that passion or condition may be uttered, but the
fortune unto good or evil by the accydentall notes may be judged: And although
the spirit (as unto understanding) is from the body elevated: yet (as unto
the other parts and powers) is the spirit comprehended of the body. Although
the inner affectes of the spirit can not be judged by the outward notes of the
body: yet may the accydences of the spirit and mind, according to those which
together alter both spirit and body be judged, as Aristotle reports in
secundo priorum. Auerro is utters that the accidences not natural, cause no
note but in the spirit: as if any knows the Art of Music: he has the note
in the spirit, and not in body formed of the same. The looks also of men,
although they do not differ in the essential kind: Yet do these differ in
the kind accedentall. So that the accidental difference of looks in man,
does only suffice, for the difference of conditions. But if any shall here
object, that sentence written in the seventh chapter of saint John's Gospel:
where our Savior wills none to judge rashely, after the utter appearaunce of
the face or look, but to pronounce and judge a righteous judgment. To this
may thus be answered, that the same saying of the Lord was spoken unto them,
which in very deed were wicked persons, of malicious conditions: yet not of
the matter and cause do they procure a judgment, but through the accepting of
persons, and in the hate or contempt of men: are they so alienated from the
truth of the matter in judging, which otherwise must be eschewed, and that
especially where the person is occupied in the celestial doctrine. This is
also to be learned and noted, that any person (as before uttered) to judge
alone by the face, mightily to err and be deceived, so that necessary it is,
to gather and mark sundry other notes of the body, and after to pronounce
judgment; and the same not firmly, but coniecturally: As by this example may
well appear, that if the Phisiognomer earnestly beholding and vewing any
merry person by nature, does see him at that instant time (through some hap)
very sad of countinaunce, and does of the same judge him to be sad by
nature, where he contrariewise is of nature merry: or otherwise appearing then
merry; shall judge him of the same to be of nature merry, where perhaps, by
nature he is given to be sad: must needs (through these like) greatly err,
and be deceived in judgment. Here also note, that there are two manner of
passions, as the one natural, and the other accidental. The accidental are
those, which consist of the spirit, and for the same, that they consist of the
spirit, no alteration in body is caused: as of the Art, and science: and
these by notes in the body are not indicated. But the natural, which for that
they consist in us, as before taught: for that cause does some alteration
appear in the body: as ire, fear, and such like, of which hereafter (in this
work) shall be entreated. To be brief, this Phisiognomie is aknowledge which
leads a man to the understanding and knowing both of the natural motions,
and conditions of the spirit: and the good or evil fortune, by the outward
notes and lines of the face and body. Yea by the pases many times is the heart
bewrayed, and the voices (as Aristotle reports) are notes and vtterers of the
inner thoughts: all which under the Phisiognomicall science are contained.
Lucius Scylla, and Cesare dictatoure by the help of this science found out
and judged the wily crafts and disceites of their adversaries many times:
that secretly conered their malicious minds, by their fair shows. The most
singular and prudent Plato in his Phisiognomie utters these words: that the
man which has members like to any beast insueth his nature: as he which has
an Aquiline or hauked nose, uses and exercyseth Aquiline conditions, as
magnanimity, cruelnesse, and greedy catching. The common sort at this day,
without any reason and learning, do pronounce and judge certain matters very
strange of men: as when he says of any foul look, this person pleases me
nothing. They also say, God defend and keep me from the fellowship of that
person marked: as are the bunch backed, and gogle eyed persons. By which
euydently appears, that the bodily notes of Phisiognomating by the natural
conditions of men do procure and cause a great probablenesse, although no
necessity. To conclude, all the workings and passions of the spirit, appear
to be matched and joined with the body: which especially appears in the
passions of the concupiscible or desirefull spirit: as are ire, meekness,
fear, pittifulnesse, mercy, and such like: which are not caused, without the
local motion of the heart dilating, and drawing together. Of this, the bodies
of diverse men, are diversely disposed, according to the diverse dispositions of
spirits: in that men's spirits through diverse members, are diversely disposed
in their passions. To end, the conditions and natural affections, that
consist in the sensytiue part: is reported of the Philosopher Aristotle, to be
the sense gyuer, being common both to men and beasts.

The known signs and notes, both of the healthful and sick bodies, after
the condition of the four qualities.
First the signs and notes of a hot quality. The. ij. chapter.


THose bodies naturally hot, do most speedily increase, and wax fat: as
the like in young children, does well appear. But after years such wax dry,
their veyues apparent in the places, and beating fast. Also their breath
strong, their voice loud, mighty and great of strength, Iustie and strong to
coeate, and much or very often desiring thereto. Such also do feed well,
brook and digest their meats. Further they have much hear on their head, and
in other places the like, where as naturallye the same should grow: and that
thick bristled, specially on the breast. The cause of which proceeds
through the much heat of the heart: as the like may appear (after the mind
of ancient men) both in the Lion, and Cock.

The signs of those bodies of a cold complextion or quality. The. iij.
chapter.


THose bodies naturally cold, doc slow increase and come to a fatness, their
veins appear big and apparaunt, but their pulses beat slow. Also their
breath low in the hearing, having a small voice, and weak to c^eate: so that
sildome desiring thereto, of the which such beget few children. They also be
great sleepers, and sleeping often: yet eating little, weakly digesting, and
bearing their meat evil. Further, such be white of skin, with some redness
mixed: and in the feeling appear cold, with the hears thume and slow in the
growing, whether the same be black or white. Also dull of wit, fearing or
trembling of a light cause, and weak to labor.

The signs of those bodies of a moist quality. The. iiij. Chapter.


THose bodies naturally moist, be tender and soft of flesh, corpulent, with
their joints and bones hid, and weak of strength, that they can not long,
or but a while endure to labor, so that the weariness of labor is soon
espied, and seen in them. Also, such fear and tremble in a manner for every
cause, coveting to sleep much, and delighting to coeate often: having besides
thin hears on the head, and but little in quantity. The eyes often waterie
and running, yet in wit foreward, and apt to learn.

The signs of those bodies, of a dry quality. The. v. chapter.
THose bodies naturally dry, be well descerned, rough in the feeling, and
lean in flesh, yet strong and may well endure to labor, feeding well, and their
joints also in the places very apparaunt. Besides such have much hear on the
head and in ye other places: and that rough, and curled.

The signs of temperate and helthfull bodies. The. vi. chapter.


THose bodies temperate and helthfull do feed and drink sufficiently,
according to the congruencie of nature, and digest the like: so that things
needful be sauerie to them, and do hunger also in due hours, ioying besides
with such as be merry, and sleeping their full sleeps. Further thincking
themselves both light of body to go light on the ground, and sweating
lightlye: yet seldom sneesing, and wax meanly fat, but colored and read
in the face, and in the feeling hot. Besides in them the five senses have
congruent force, according to the agreement of the age, body, and hour.

The signs of distemperat and vnhelthfull bodies. The. vii. chapter.


THose bodies distemperate and vnhelthfull, be in all points unlike to the
bodies temperate and helthfull: so that such do euilly eat, and that very
little, and force not to drink. Also they do euilly digest and brook their
meat, and to them things be unsavory, whereof they hunger not in due hours,
and give not themselves to be thoroughly cheerful, and merry, neither
rejoicing in them which laugh and be merry, but rather always sad, and the
like contynuing. Further such make their sleeps unquietly, and suppose
themselves heavy, and to go heavily on the ground, and sildome (or in a
manner) sweat any thing at all: also gape, or sneese often, and stretch their
arms out and abroad. So that such be either pale, or over high colored in
the face, and in them also are the five senses weak, and such as cannot long
endure to labor: yea they soon forget matters, spitting much and often, and
much filth seen commonly in their noses. Also they be (in a manner) throughout
fat, and their flesh blown or puffed up like to the nose, and their hands
and feet, do sometimes sweat, and their eyes do like run.

The signs of a good nature and memory. The. viii. chapter.


THat person is of a singular memory, and understanding, and well fashyoned in
nature, which has both moist and soft flesh, being a mean between
roughness and lenity, and mean of stature, and has a ruddie countinaunce
suffused with whiteness, and a gentle or friendly look: whose hear on the
head is plain lying, and has the eyes meanly big, which decline to a
roundenesse, and the head meanly big with an equality: the neck well
proportioned, and the shoulders declining downewardes, or the like rather
ready to fall. Being not fleshye about the shankes and knees, and has a
clear and mean voice, between small and great, of a mean laughter, and not
in deriding: and has also the palms of the hands long, with long fingers,
and his countinaunce framing after a cheerful and merry sort.

The signs of a good understanding and nature, after Conciliatour. The. ix.
chapter.


THat man is of a singular nature and understanding, whose flesh is tender and
soft, with a meandness between grosenesse and leanenesse tending. And that
the face be not much fleshye, the shoulder points somewhat bearing up, the
belly and back not fleshie, the sides decently extensed: mean of stature, and
gentle of countinance. That his color also be a mean between white and red:
being somewhat bright and clear, and the skin thin. Further, that the
hear of the head, be of a mean thickness, abourne in color, and between
plain and curled, the eyes between variable and black, and the bearde in a
mean manner, sufficiently thin and fair.

The signs of hot and dry bodies. The. x. chapter.


THose bodies after full grouth be thick, bushy of hear, and the hear on the
head, thick and black. Also their bodies in the end be found lean, and in
feeling appear hot: having besides a thickenesse of skin, and rough, and
strong synewes: and have also both the veins, bones, and joints, much
apparaunt: a low voice, their pulses beating very fast, and their moving the
like: yea, they be bold, stout, and obstinate with all. These hitherto Rasis.

The men of a temperate nature, and this borrowed out of Conciliatour.


THe stature of such persons, obtain an equality between the three
Diamiters: And between a fatness and leanesse, possess the like a mean
habit: the color of these is white mixed with red: their skin appears
thin and clear: their hands and feet in all dispositions, possess a
mean, their heads are proportionally formed, to the body: yet great unto the
respect of the whole body, and flatted like to a Ball of Wax lightly
compressed with both the hands on each side. Their nostrils figured erect,
lineally and very fair, the eyes in color like to the Lions, or between the
black and variable a mean. In which (after the mind of the Author) a clear
moisture consists. The hears on the head in the form appearing a mean:
for that in every body a mean consists: the like in these which are by the
part of the spirit: as in the conditions and others a temperate condition is
found. And to this disposition, the contrary show forth and utter their
unlike.

Of the equality of the same nature, and this written of Aristotle, unto king
Alexander.


THe Philosopher Aristotle learnedly utters, that the equaler and more
temperate creature to which a meandness of stature agrees: has the eyes
black, and hears of the head of like color, with a roundnesse of the
countinaunce: but the whiteness of skin in that creature commixed with a
redness: and a swartishe color temperate consisting in that subject, with an
integrity of the body: having also an uprightness of stature: yea a meanness
of the head, formed in the smalnesse and bigness, a person also using the
raritie of words, but when need shall require: and a meanness discerned in
the sounding of voice. When that nature declyneth to a blackness and
yellowness, then is the best temperancie consisting in the same creature: for
this creation and habit (Oh Alexander) shall well please and like thee: and
such a person retain continually about thee. Here mighty Alexander do I
enterpret by manner of the condition of form: but thou shall f^^e and prove
the same, in the certainty and uprightness of understanding.

The Phisiognomie of the notes of a sapient Philosopher, and this borrowed of
the learned Conciliatour.
THis singular man affirms his stature to b^ upright with an equallitie of
the flesh, the color of the skin white pertaking, with a mean redness: the
form of his head compowned sufficient big and large: the eyes conditioned
between a black and variable color, whose look is ^iscerned like to one
merry: the hands formed plain with a seemly division of the fingers, and
modest articulation: the hears on the head seen between many and few, and a
mean condition consisting between the plain and crisped, blackishe and
yellow in color, having a mean bearde and fair, and sufficiently thin:
these hitherto Conciliatour.

The signification and judgment of the abouesayde, uttered by the ancient
Rasys.
THis worthy Physician, opens the notes of the abouesayde person: that he
ought to be of an upright stature, having the flesh of the body throughout
equal: the skin white* myxed with a small redness. The hears on the head
discerned a mean, between the plenty and few, and between the plain and
crysped, and abourne in color. The hands formed seemly and plain, and the
fingers comely distaunt a sunder. The forheade (in respect of the head) formed
big, the eyes comely conditioned, and a mean between the black and
variable: the flesh soft in the feelin^, gentle of countinaunce, and the look
discerned as one smyling: These hitherto Rasis.

The signs of cold and moist bodies, after Rasys. The. xi. chapter.


THose bodies be judged soft in the feeling, and naked of hear, which have
gentle and soft hears on the head, the veins appearing narrow and the joints
hid, having besides corpulent bodies, and very fat. And that make their
sleeps weakly, and unquietly: and slow of moving, but slower in their pase
going. Further, such bodies be either cold and dry, or hot and moist: and
have mixte dispositions, according to the dispositions of the simples, of which
they be compouned: and as the like to any of them, they do approach, or that
there be between them a mean. These hitherto Rasys.

The deuyding of mankind into two forms or natures: and a perfect description
or distinction of the man from the woman, after Physiognomy: uttered by the
singular Conciliatour. The. xij. chap.


THe wise and skillful Phystognomers, in their examinations, do divide
mankind into two forms, as into the Masculynitie and Feminitie, according to
the property of the spirit. For man naturally, except his procreation be
hindered, is perfiter than the woman, both in conditions and anions. First, he
is of a lively mind and courage, and unto a brunte or an attempt pressed and
vehement: yet slowly moved to ire, slowly pleased, advised in businesses, in
due and fytte times studious, abroad lyberall, stowte, just, trusty,
inconstant or wandering from place to place, and true of his word. Of which
Auicen (writing of the conditions of persons) reports, that man is the
subtiller: and that women are more pitiful and gentle than men: more
conuertible, lighter persuaded, sooner seduced, enuiouser, fearefuller,
vnshamefaster, more foolish, liars, more fraudulent, more receive frawde, more
esteeming trifles, slower, tenderer, weaker, and more prone, or sooner drawing
into familiarity, and into company with an other. This like utters the
Philosopher, in lib. 9. de hystoria Animalium, cap. primo: that man in nature
is perfitest: and for the same cause, the proportions of all the members and
parts are seemelier, and stronger compact: in so much that the woman is more
pitiful and mercifuller, yea readyer to tears and weep, than the man: yet
envious, full of complayntes, euiller speaking, backbyting, and slaundering.
Besides more sorrowful, careful, and dispayring, than the man: yea more
impudent; a greater liar, lighter deceived, apter to call to memory or
remember matters: unto these watchfuller, sluggisher, lesser sturring abroad,
and lesser desiring meat. But the man (as above uttered*) lyuelier, more
stirring, and stronger. Auerrois primo phisico. commen. 81. utters, that the
woman is ^npe^fiter than the man: and the femininitie happens to man by
accidence (an other text opens) of the depriving. And the learned Ioannitius
in hisagogis reports, that the man differs from the woman, in the same,
that he is hotter and drier than the woman, and she contrariwise colder and
moyster than he. And the singular Aristotle utters; in primo de animali: that
the: worthiest, noblest, and with us more common and known, yea and the more
stable and safe creature, is man. And in the. (...). de animalib. Aristotle
reports, that man among all other creatures, is accounted the worthier: and
of the virill kind, the Males are stronger, and stowter, than the Females:
except in the Bear, and Lybarde, as. 8. de Animalibus. In all the kinds of
Beasts, the Females have a more dead mind, and are less pacient, and may
sooner be converted, and are sooner angered, and sooner appeased, and a^e of
a^^^^er heat: they are bosides rash and hasty, and inuericundious: and have
a small head, the face and neck stender, the breast and shoulder points
narrower, the rybbes lesser, but the haunches big, and buttockes the like^
the legs also are slender, the hands and feet slender and thin. The
Females in all the kinds of Beasts (as before reported) are four^^e
fearefuller, and p^^uisher or ^^owarder condicioned than the Males. These
hitherto, Almansor secundus. The woman for the more part is light of belief,
and ungracious or froward in conditions. The light belief, signifies the
malice of understanding: but the temperate is more congruent, as reports
Hyppocrates, in lib. secretorum. But if the man possesses the woman's
properties: whose note appears, that he is unfaithful, an ill reporter, and
a liar: and this rather, when he draws near to the woman, by the
counterfayting, the often shifting, and decking of parts. The like may be
said of the woman's qualities, when she often exercyseth and follows near
man, in the apparelling and decking of her body like to him: as did that manly
woman Fracassa, of whom shall fully be uttered, in the proper place. The
Philosopher Arystotle reports, that the person which leans with the body to
the right side in the going, to be effeminate, in that he is of a moist
quality, and soft of skin. The like of these Cocles noted, to have a soft
skin, a clear and fair throat, effeminate legs, and for the more part
were slender, but the haunches were big and soft, the face white, and
pympled, the voice small, low, and horsely: like to the common Harlot,
haunting very often man's company: and these have many other notes, which for
that they are more at large uttered, in other places of his book, he does here
wittingly omyt them. And in his time was a certain noble person imprisoned,
being one of these. And an other effeminate person he saw of the City of
Luca, being of. lx. years, which hanged or leaned to the left side as he went,
and had a red color in the face, so fair a throat as the clear woman, the
face pimpled, the hears of the head trussed and finely trimmed, the voice
small and soft, and to be brief, he was a very effeminate person and Cyned.
The man (to come unto the matter) by the part of the composition of habitude,
ought to be as Conciliatour utters: that is, the perfect man (if the
lascivious nature disturbeth not the order) has a big head, the face in
breadth and length, equally stretched out, according to proportion: the neck
big, lively and sinewed, the breast strong and large, the shoulder points
and ribs big to the back, and before, strongly coupled and joined together:
the back throughout sinewed, and strong ioynted, the belly but meanly fleshie,
the hips and buttockes, lesser and smaller than the woman's: to conclude in all
parts much bigger and stronger than the woman, unless any accident may
contrary the abouesayde, as in the kind of rapine or greedy catching birds,
a temperate nature found. The woman ought to have a contrary composition, as a
small head, a long face, a small neck, a large throat, and somewhat eminent,
the breast narrow, the shoulder points flat lying, the flanckes and ribs
slender, the back like: but the hips and buttockes, bigger than the man's: the
legs in a manner of one bigness throughout, the feet small, the heels flat,
short arms, the hands and fingers small, the lips thin, and the chin
round, with a certain pit or denting in, whether the same be of length or
breadth, the flesh soft in feeling, and long comely hears on the head: yet
little and small hears on the breast, belly, hands, and feet, through her
cold complexion: and of the same weaker of strength and courage, and less
bold through her narrow breast which she has, yet coupled she is to man to
yield (by their consents) a natural tribute to the world. The gelded persons
become not only weak of body, but in mind and courage little differ from
the woman, as the Philosopher Aristotle reports. This worthy lesson also the
Philosopher vttreth, that he wishes to fly and eschew that woman's company,
when she is of composition manly: for there is a sure token in her, both of
luxury, and wickedness, but contrary, judge the courage of such men, which
in composition be effeminate.

The judgment of the colors of the whole body. The xii. chapter.


THe color is many ways changed, according to the commixion of the humors:
and according to the dominion of them intensiuely and remissinely, by which
also a man must Phisiognomate. For the judging of colors, except the proper
effect be adjoined to his cause: error to the iudger, must in many happen. So
that their natures and qualities cannot easily be judged, except a man
diligently consider the proper country in which each be borne: for that we see
in many places, and chiefly in Italy, many nations dwelling together, like as
the Jew, Turk, Schauone, Greek, and high Almayne, and many others. Whose
mixed natures must be considred, if a man will rightly phisiognomate, and judge
upon any of these above named, or of any other nation besides. Seeing those
people dwelling far North, be strong of body, comely of color, soft of
flesh, big bellied, yet simple, yrefull, of small learning, mean of
counsel, unstable, liars, deceyuers, and boasters. And on such wise temper
your judgment, according to the nature of the place and country, where such
are borne: which in an other chapter happily, I will further write of. But to
return unto the matter, understand that the white, wanne, and yellowish color
is a note of the deminished decoction: if this dimunition therefore happens,
the goodness of nature shall like be diminished. For which cause, fly and
eschew the company of a wanne, and yellow colored man, for that he is given
to vices, and luxury: but this luxury, does the Philosopher here mean to be
the immoderate appetite of the thankful matter, in causing evil works unto
others hurt and less, and not of the coeating alone: in that coldness, is a
contrary unto yt lust: seeing the lust is caused, of hotenesse and moystnesse.
For the wanne, and yellow color, does here rather argue coldness. Further,
the wanne color, is the way and beginning of the mortifying of natural heat,
and extinction of the same: by which reason appears, that the wanne color
does no otherwise differ from the black, but as to the remission of the
mortifying. And by this wanne color, is to be understood the leadie color.
The learned Auicen writes, that the whytenesse of color is a note of the
depriving of blood, or the scarcity of it with a coldness, for if this
color should proceed of a whotnesse, and that with the Choleric humor, then
should it tend unto a cytrinesse. Further Auicen writes, that the ruddie
color, does signify the plenty of blood: the red and somewhat red color,
does declare the hotenesse of quality: yet more does the somewhat red color,
declare the red choler: and the red color, the sanguine choler. Here further
is to be noted, that the color somewhat red, does signify the depriving of
blood: although there appears not the red choler, as the like happens in the
helthfull bodies. But a very swart color, as between the black and yellow
appearing, does rather signify coldenesse, through which, the blood then is
deminished and congealed: and that little so congealed, is through the same
turned into a blackness, which changes the color of the skin. And this we
name a wanne or yellow color, according to the intensine, and remissiue
dominion. The honey color, signifies a coldness and drienesse: for as much
as the color is the same which insueth a pure black choler. So that the
whytenesse of color, follows the condition of flewme, and quality of the
moisture: but the greenenesse of color does rather argue the blood congealed,
which then tends to a blackness: so that the same commixed to the flewme, is
made green: yet does the whytishe graye color, rather signify a flewmatick
coldness, mixed with a little red choler. And after the opinion of many
Physicians, the color is for the more part changed, through the liver: unto a
reddishnesse and whytenesse: and through the milt, into a swartnesse. Further
Auicen writes, that the swart yellow color, does argue the red choler: but
the darck brown color, does signify the black choler. And the like in (a
manner to this) affirms Auerrois, which writes that in an equal climate, the
swart yellow color, does declare that the red choler, to govern the
chollerick: but the darcke brown color does testify in the same climate, the
dominion of the black choler. Auicen also writes, that the body comes red,
through the dominion of blood, and white in color (as the Iuorie) of the
flewmatick humor. Besides these, the complexion having a mixte color, both of
the white and red, is after the estimation, a mean temperated.

Rasis also reports, that the quality of the body through the color, and
habitude of the same: of the feeling and operations, and of the matters yssuing
from the body, is so known. For the white and swartishe color, and of a
whytenesse and graynesse mixed: and the wanne and leadie color, do innuate a
cold complexion: But the red, reddish, the high red, and bl^ake red, all these
demonstrate a hotenesse of complexion: and if a cleerenesse and thinness be
conjoined to the color: the cleerenesse and thinness of humors, are then
declared. But if a troublednesse and grosenesse be mixed to it, the grosenesse
of humors is then signified. The white color besides to which a redness,
with the thinness and cleerenesse is admixed, does demonstrate an equallitie
of the complexion. That if a redness shall abound, and the cleerenesse shall
be lesser, the dominion of blood is there signified. But if the redness shall
so much be diminished, that it approaches to the color of yuorie, does
innuate the paucitie of blood. Which if the same shall yet be more diminished,
in such manner, that of the same appears in a manner nothing at all, the dark
wanne color proceeds: which portendeth the paucitie both of choler and
blood, and the dominion of flewme in that body. But if this color approaches
to a whytenesse, to which a greenenesse is admixed, then insueth the same,
which of the Physicians is named a leadie color: which declares a diminution
of the blood and red choler, and indicateth the dominion of the black choler
and flewme. The swartish color, if the same shall approach to a redness, or
that to it this admixed, does demonstrate a gross blood to bear sway,
according to the quantity, which to it is approached, or if a redness to it be
admixed. And the color perfitely swartishe, which is approached to a greenesse,
does declare the dominion of the black choler. But bodies colored with a red color, which is found to draw nearer to a whytenesse, are of a cold
complexion. If the color, shall appear nearer to a greenenesse or graynesse,
shall be of a hot complexion. But the other are cytrine bodies, which to a
whiteness partake a near subtilnesse: which color in the helthfull, or in
whom the multitude of blood consists, and not for the dominion of choler.
So that these bodies are not cytrine, but accydentally or by accydence. Yet the
other bodies perfitly cytrine, are somewhat clear, which like persevere at any
time. And these are, chollericke bodies. There are besides of these certain,
which with a cytrinesse, approach to a greenenesse and swartish color,
pertaking a small fayrenesse: in which either choler bears swaye: whose
complexion is proved and known to be worser than all others. The Liver and
Mylt, having the like quality and condition, are for the more part diseased:
and the health of these bodies, is not firm, nor permanent or contynuing. But
the bodies having a darcke color, which are nearer to a cytrynesse, are of a
hot complexion: and near to the red choler. And those which have a
greenenesse admixed, are less^ hot, and pertayne to the black choler.

Conciliatore reports, that the black color, very soft, does declare a
weak, fearful, and crafty man, applied unto them which dwell far South,
like as the Indian: and that because such are Melancholic: whose property is
to be fearful. Again, the Moors and the Egyptians, and through the
inordinate heat, under which they be borne, are thereby but weak.

If the red color shall be sparsed with a white, does then declare stowte
and strong persons,

The color which is a mean between these two, does denote a temperament of
quality, proportioned to them, which dwell under such a clymate.



The color between a yellowness not tincted, and a blackness, which
changes into a clear brown: does declare a good wit, and honest manners.
Such persons the Philosopher Aristotle, willed king Alexander to retain to his
person, and about him.

The color covered with a palenesse, does testify a weak and fearful
person, and that such a one to be bereft and taken in the love of a woman: and
applied after the kind, unto heresies: except this happens in passions.

When the color shall be a swart camelline, mixed to a palenesse: does then
demonstrate such a person to be a babbler, indiscreet and full of ire.

The blackness of color like to the clear horn, in any man, is a note of
adustion: and this is general, as well in the members, as in the color of the
hears of the head.

Whose color is a dark green, or black, and not soft in the feeling, does
argue such persons to be prone unto ire.

A ruddie color of the body, is an argument of a mischievous man, and endued
with variable manners.

The color very read, does declare such a person (of experience known) to
be crafty, and applied to the Fox: also the proverb utters, that we
sildome see a little man meek, and a ruddie man faithful, but the godly I
here except.

The face read spotted, so that the greater redness appears in the
forehead, and free from the eyes: does declare a shamefast person, and applied
unto the passion: for that the shamefast face for the more part, is covered
with a redness.

The color white, with some read mixed, does argue strong and stowte persons,
applied unto the Septentrionals.

The color mightily and over white, is contrary to virtue, for that the same
signifies the person to be a sluggarde: for as much as he is of a phlegmatic,
and cold quality, and through the same fearful.

That color which is deformed with a palenesse, does testify a weak and
fearful person, and a hafter or ouerthwarter: if that neither sickness, nor
earnest study, be the cause of that palenesse.

The color swarter, and mixed with a palenesse: does declare that person to be
a glutton, a babbler, and indiscreet, both of ire, and tongue.

That person which has a redness simply, with a pleasant moving and playing
of the lips, and enlarging of the nostrels: does argue such a man's mind to
be occupied and troubled with a most great ire, and referred unto the
accidences of the passion.

The cheeks and eyes red above, with a certain moisture like to watery
pimples: do denote such to be Drunkards, and lovers of Wine, and strong
drinks: applied to the men, of the City of Pauie.

If the eyes appear read and dry, then does it declare such a person to be
stout, and soon moved to ire: and referred to the passion, which like so
happens in that action.

The eyes appearing very black, do declare such a person to be fearful, and
covetous of gain.

The eyes a white gray, and troubled: are notes of a fearful person: and
compared to the Goat and sheep.

The eyes not very black, to a yellowness tending, like to the Lions: does
declare an honest and friendly person, compared to the Lion and Eagle.

And a meannesse of color, with an abatement: does signify shamefastness and
honesty.

And whose inner parts of the lips, shall not be with a certain redness
colored: is then of the Physicians judged sickly.

When the veins both of the temples, and behind the neck, do appear to
wax read, otherwise to swell out, and that the eyes seem prominent and
bloody: do argue an yrefulnesse so vehement, that they incur unto a
madness: and referred to the passion.

When the countinaunce appears all read, does then either declare a
shamefastenesse, or to be a Wine bibber: and this redness is readilye known
by tokens of the eyes, and by the custom of it.

That person which has a fyrie redness on the breast, and face, is in^amed
with ire, and easilye comes frantic and mad: as the like of these, the
Phisiognomer has known by experience, in sundry persons, and referred to the
passion.

The red color of the hears of the head intensed, is a note of crafty
wiles and deceytes, of much ire, and of fransinesse, when as the same declares
the abundance of choler.

The brown Chestnut color, does declare uprightness, and the love of
justice: and all report, especially Nuncius naturae, in the seventh book of
the nature of beasts, and in the first Chapter, of the condition of a Nurse,
where he utters, that of those, the better and healthfuller sort are they,
which be brown in color, than the white woman, and have a helthfuller milk:
the self same affirms Auicen. 4. de animalibus.

Those persons having a flerie read color, or near to it, do retain anger
long, that hard to be qualified and appeased, and hard to be ruled, when they
be angered: and such are referred to the passion, that is, unto the manner
appearing, in any such grievously angered.

Those persons which have the veins of the neck extensed, and appearing big
and eminent out, with a red color tincted, do retain anger long: and such
an ungracious anger, that hard it is to be appeased.

Those also (as the Philosopher writes) be referred to the manner appearing,
for that in such an ire this happens, as that the veins to be extended and
magnified, through the boiling and swelling up of the blood, and spirits from
the heart, which so retch out those veins as is aforesaid: and the like judge
in the forhead, where we utter judgment of the lines there seen.

The judgment of the color, and substance of the hears of the head, and in
all other places of the body. The xiii. chapter.


NVncius naturae vttreth, in lib. 2. de partibus. cap. 14. animalium, that of
all living creatures, man in especial, is thickest and has most plenty of
hears on the head. The cause of which matter is applied, as well unto a
necessity, as unto the reason of a help and succor. For necessary it was
that the hears should be, both for the moisture of the brain, and seames of
the scull: for where ye most quantity of humors and heat is, there of
necessity must ye great plenty of hears grow, for the reason and cause of a
defense, that ye daily increasing and growing of the hears, covering the
head, may so defend and succor it from the extreme cold, and mighty heat.
Seeing man's brain in proportion, is greatest and moystest, for that cause it
needs especially a defense. etc.

Isydore reports, that the hears of the head were ordained of nature, to
cover and beseem the head: and that these might so defend the brain from the
cold, and heat of the Sun.

Albertus in lib. de animalibus. cap. 3. reports, that the hears proceed of
the grosser vapors issuing by the poores of the skin of the head, sent
forth by heat, through the narrow holes of the skin, which dried and
hardened in the coming forth, through the outward cold of the air. And the
hears of the head which slowly increase (through the lack of blood) is a
note, that the complexion to be very moist. That if these speedily increase,
is a note that the body declyneth unto a dryness.

But to come to the matter, the hears of the head do naturally declare, the
qualities and quantities of humors, and the conditions of the spirit or mind.

The Philosopher also (in. 5. de generatione animalium, cap. 3.) utters, that
the cause of the bigness and smalnesse of the hears of the head, is most
chiefly caused, and grow out of the skin, and not out of the flesh: when the
humor in them is euaporated, and breaths forth: seeing we see that the gross
hears do spring out of a thick and gross skin, and the small hears out of
a thin and soft skin, these hitherto Aristotle.

So that when hotenesse and dryness be conjoined, the hears of the head do
much sooner grow, and wax many and thick. For as much, as the much quantity,
signifies a hotenesse: and the bigness of them, a much fumositie. And for
that cause in young men, there is a more quantity, than in children: for as
much, as the matter of children is vaperous, and not humerous. And the
contraries of these, do follow their contraries. Further, the signification by
the part of the figure, is that the crispednesse declares a hotenesse, and
dryness: for the same is caused, when it finds a tortuousnesse both of the
holes and powers: but this doubt is not here resolved, when as the complexion
is altered, although the two first matters be changed. The playnnesse and flat
lying of the hears of the head does signify a contrary, that is, coldness
and moystnesse, as evidently appears. As touching the part of the color, the
blackness signifies a hotenesse: which blackness is here meant like to the
clear horn: with a roughness, and somewhat tortuous. The whitishnesse
signifies a coldness: but the citrinnesse and redness, signifies an
equality: and the whitishnesse does either argue a vehement coldenesse, as the
horinesse: or a strong and mighty dryness, which like happens in the
vegetalles, when they are dried: which from their blackness, or greenesse,
pass into a whytenesse: and this like happens not to men, but in the end of
drying sicknesses. Auerroys (quarto colligit capitulo) of the notes of the
complexion of the whole body reports, that the signification of the color
of the hears of the head, is not verified (for the more part) but in temperate
climates: although in every climate, may be somewhat comprehended, in comparing
the men of that climate dwelling there under. As for example in the Germans
and Moors, of which the Moors are black, and their hears are crisped, with
an uttermost tortuousnesse: yet not for this, is their complextion hot, but
rather these notes ought to be attributed to the outward heat, seeing they are
known rather to be cold, through the heat vaporating. But the Germans,
Wendenland people, and those which dwell in the cold countries, are white of
body, their hears yellow and plain: yet not for this, is it generally to be
said, that they be cold: but rather that their complexion is very hot, in
that the heat is included in the inward parts of their bodies: as the like
happens, in the winter time. Gallen vttreth, that the white hears of the head,
do declare a cold complexion: and the quality of a deminished coldness, has
the hears of the head yellow to Gold: and the complexion of a diminished
hotnesse, has the hears of the head read in color.

Auerroys writes, that in whom coldness is lesser than hotnesse, has golden
or yellow hears on the head, in that the yellowness, does signify the
complextion of a diminished coldenesse. And the redness of hears on the head,
do declare a complextion of lesser hotenesse, than is the quality having
black hears: and this (for a truth) is true, in that the redness is near,
and a neighbor unto blackness: and like the yellowness, and witness. The
golden color of the hears, has an equal and temperate quality, of the
yellow, and red, mixed and compound together, these hitherto Auerroys.

The airs and Countries, have an operation, in the cause of the hears of the
head, which diligently is to be observed and noted: seeing it is not to be
doubted at, that so well in the black hears, as ye yellow, is the equality of
a like complexion declared: here we apply Jupiter, seeing it has an ayreall
nature. Nor in the hears of the Illirian, the blackness, which of his
quality, signifies a hotenesse, when as their kind has the same.

The ages also do work, in the matter of the hears of the head: for that
young men, be like to the Meridionals, children like to the Septentrionals: and
old age, as a mean between both.

The hears of the head much in a child, do argue that his quality (as he
grows) turns into the Melancholy: and in an old man the like, signifies
that he is presently Melancholic.

By these we understand, that the hears of the head lying plain, do denote a
coldness of the brain, especially when they are soft in the feeling: for
these do then declare a fearfulness, and pusillanimitie: applied to the
Indians, and sheep: for as much as this is a moist complexion, as the learned
Albertus utters.

Those which have the hears of the head so much crisped, that these be in
condition like to the dried Pepper, as the Indians are: which dwell under such
hot places, that do make black and crisped the hears so much, even like to
the dried Pepper: by which most writers, do digestiuely note a weakness.
When in them shall be a most great resolution wrought: and that moisture, is
diminished, then does old age fast come on. For such which dwell in those
Countries, become old at. xxx. years, and their hearts are fearsfull, and
weak of courage: which well declares that the kinds in them, be much
resolved:

The bodies dwelling in hot Countries, are lighter than others: as the same
witnesses Aristotle in Methaphoricis: where he puts a difference of the
Countries, in Phisiognomating.

Conciliatore in.10. partic. proble. reports, that for the much hotnesse,
causing the moisture to euaporate forth, by which accidence their members are
like wynded and wrythed, and generally the living things of those clymates:
which euydently is declared by green wood dried, which depryued of the proper
moisture, appears winded and wrythyne: when the moisture does not equally
breath forth through out: except it has a viscous moisture very unctuous. For
which cause (in Phisiognomating) it behooves to consider many matters, and
notes.

The color of the hears of the head yellowish, like to honny: do declare the
dominion of coldness, through the heat covered in the moisture as the like
are in children: yet the persons dwelling Northerly, have the like condition,
through the region: which much beguileth in Phisiognomating upon the like
subject. And such persons to Venus are attributed, so that the same be either
of nature or by Art. The hears of the head gross and black are applied to
Saturn: yet is not the same to be like considered of them, as of the
Spaniards: for this declares them to be subject, to the earthly, and shadowye
moisture.

The hears very black and rough, and not plain lying, do signify a
hotnesse in that person: as ye white hears, do indicate a cold complexion.

Ionnitius in hysagogis utters, that there are four manner of colors of the
hears of the head: that is to say, the black, the red, the gray or flaxine,
and the hoarie. The black color proceeds through the great and much
quantity of the kindled choler: or by the much combustion of the blood: but
the red color, through the mightiness of heat, not adust: of which the
hears are always caused red: the flaxine color, proceeds of the abundance
of Melancholy: but the hoarie white, is caused of the overmuch lack of
natural heat, and through the effect of rotten flewme: and this for the most
part is caused in old persons. And these sometimes declare, ye veneral
conditions.

The color of the hears, like to the clear horn, are attributed to the
nature of Mars: So that the hears be not gross, but somewhat small, and this
through the subtilnesse of the humors. And that they also be black through an
intensed heat which like appears in the bred baked on coals, from which the
moisture flies, so that by ye long lying on coals the same is made black.
When in the other parts of the body, there is an over much hearinesse seen,
there do the stars of Saturn and Mars work their virtue, and such are
noted to be robbers, or lurckers by the high way, especially when the eye
brows be very thick, joining over the nose, and that the eye liddes be
hearie: but when the breast shall be only hearie, does declare a hot, and
stout person.



The whole body covered with hear, both thick and rough: does denote such a
person to be of a more brutish will and nature, than manly. When the nape of
the neck from the head, shall be hearie: does denote that person to be strong,
and courageous: and such, applied to the Lion.

When the Phisiognomer, (by any occation procured) came either to Princes
courts, or Noble men's houses, would at the first behold, and thoroughly
consider on every side, the Officers, and servants about the Prince, or
Lord: but especially, their faces. As touching these, did on a time (at
request moved) view and earnestly mark the faces both of the Officers, and
other servant, continually attendant on the person, of a noble Prince, named
Astorgius Fauentnus: but among these, he especially regarded the Secretary of
this prince, whose personage and form, was on this wise. This Secretary (by
report of the Phisiognomer) was small of stature, in body slender; the color
of skin and face wanne, a little neck and somewhat short, Mercuries line in
the forheade, conditioned in a retrograde manner, the other positures of the
face and body, in a manner aunswerable to the figure here demonstrated: as
touching the iesture of body, he went upright, making short paces, and troade
very fast on the ground. And the Phisiognomer in further considering the
others about this Noble man, perceived sundry of them to be both subtle, and
crafty deceivers: through which their Lord by them, he thoroughly conceived,
to be greatly abused and indamaged: but specially through the occasion and
means, of that notable deceyuer (the Secretary) above described. All which
the Phisiognomer well weting, did (by a similitude, framed to the Prince) utter
these words: that he as an Angelical rose, was in a manner suffocated and
choked by the wicked thorns daily conversant about him.



Thus by many outward signs, may a man find out the qualities of the mind
and courage. As when a woman is aparelled and decked in man's apparel: which
does then declare her nature to draw near to man's. As the like did that woman
of courage named Fracassa, who commonly used to wear (by the report of the
Phisiognomer) man's apparel: and would upon a brauerye many times, arm her
self at all points to just, and run sundry times so armed at the ring. The
form of which woman (by the earnest view of the Phisiognomer) was on this wise:
she had a small head, and Pineapple like, a neck comely formed, large
breasted, seemelye arms, aunswering to the body: but in her other parts, as
in the hippes, buttockes, thighs, and legs, nere agreeing to man's. This
manlye woman also walked upright in body, treading light on the ground, and
bearing her head playing, like to the Heart. The other notes of this woman, did
the Phisiognomer for brevity sake here omit. Yet he thus concluded, that by
the sundry notes, which he vewed, she was prone, to come to a violent death.



These verses of the Italian Franciscus Asculanus, may aptly be applied in this
place: touching the great deceyte, and subtle practices of many Strumpets, in
their deckings, and other wanton alurements to the mighty harm and undoing of
many men: as the like well known by that coragious woman above described, who
drew (for the personage and singular beawtie) many a worthy Capitane and
Soldier to her company. For which cause, this man moved with a love and
pity toward his countriemen, wrote these, by the way of a perswation, in
the mother tongue, as follow.

De non credati a femina scioccha,
E non vacenda lor ficta bellezza
Ma riguardati come dentro fioccha
Miri la mente cum gli occhij cerueri
Che alhora perderai la sua vaghezza
De lei mirando li socij misteri.
That some light and understanding may be conceived by these verses, he
utters in them, that he would his country men to beware of the counterfeyt
beawtie of most women with them: in that the same not natural, but like framed
by Art, with waters, tinctures, and such like. The Phisiognomer also
reports, that many women like delighted to garnishe and deck up themselves,
carry the head after the manner of the Heart, with the eyes rolling, and
turning here and there: still turning the head, one whils on the right side, an
other whiles on the left, yea upward and downewarde: which argues an
especial unstableness, and an insatiable luxury in that creature. In so much
that if they intensiuely possess or have these, then such be for the more
part ercmeriti: and of experience (says the Phisiognomer) do I report this.

Where sundry men are named to be Effemynate, is understood and meant two
ways: the one, when as such be delighted to go in apparel, and decked with
ornaments like to women: the other, to appear laciuious, and weak both of
will, and courage. The quality of which apparently declares, that the mind
(for the more part) does like ensue and answer, to the dispotion of the
body. For such be noted of experience to be unfaithful, and evil reporters,
and liars, in that they thus through their counterfayting, answer in parts,
to the kind fraudelent and wily.

Further, the youthful delights in men, is seen unto twenty years, or
near upon: for that the natural heat, is all that time covered, and hind of
the moisture. The knowledge of which, is well discerned, through their members
then being soft: that suffer in a manner as the women.

The wearing of heavy garments customably does perfitly argue a heavy brain:
but the garments light, do witness, a light brain: which rule and note, much
furthereth the person minding to Phisiognomate on any subject.

The hears of the head, blackish in color, if they be meanly thin, (as
writes Palemon) and the like Albertus, Aristotle, and Consiliatore: do then
denote honest conditions, and both a good disposition, judgment, and nature in
that person.

The hears of the head yellowish and meanly thin, do denote that the
Sun, and Mercury to bear sway, in the qualities and nature of that person,
after the mind of the Phisiognomer, which I thereto agree.

The learned Consiliatore writes, that he which has the hears of the head,
and in all other parts of the body standing upright is argued by judgment
fearful: for that such persons in great fear appear the like: which for
that applied to the condition of the passion. A like reason of the same
utters Albertus, which affirms that the windy moisture, is cause of such
an uprightness and staring of the hears. Yet be the hears sometimes crisped,
curled, and hard, which proceed through the dryness in the sharp heat, is
causing and working the like. The worthy man Almansor writes, that the
crispednesse of the hears, and of these standing upright: do demonstrate a
hot quality, and hastye nature in that person.

Here in the first persons touching the color of ye hears, and the
effeminacie of parts, does the Phisiognomer aptly apply the Moon and Venus:
but in the second kind, does he nearer attribute the Sun, or rather Mars.

The hears of the head lying flat, and reaching out on the foreheade: do
denote a strong person* yet brutish (of likelihood) in conditions: for that the
powling of heads in our time, may greatly beguile the iudger: and these
applied to the Bear, and other wild beasts.

A like judgment (the Philosophers) utters, that the roughness of the
hears of the head, do denote in many (lacking education and grace) the
rudeness of manners, and wild behavior.

The hears of the head after the mind of the Philosopher Aristotle, very
thin, do indicate an effeminate mind, for the lack of blood, through which
not only a slownesse, but a womanly courage, and dullness in conceyuing is
procured.



A much quantity of the hears of the head lying flat, and appart on the
middle of the foreheade folding, and winding upward toward the brain, or
crown of the head: do argue (after the agreement of Authors) that such a
person to be both subtle and wilye: yet in honest and just causes not found
so advised and witty: for which reason, attributed of the Phisiognomer to the
barbarous sort.

The hears of the head, flat lying of either side, descending to the
forheade: do declare such a person condicioned, to the nature of the Horse.

The hears next the temples small and thin* do denote a cold person and
weak of strength* the reason of which seems to be, for that the temples
supply that place, where the great Arters and Uaines do end. And in this, the
place should naturally be hot, through which causing the engendering of
hears, in that the same is procured of heat. For which cause, when the hears
of the temples be small and thin, do then denote the lack of natural
heat: and applied to women being there bare of hears.

The hear by the temples, thin, yet found stiff: do then denote not only
a fearful person, but cold also by nature.

The hears thick growing about the temples and ears: do denote that person
(of experience known) to be of a hot nature, and prone to the veneriall act.

The hears in that place, if they shall be big, and whiter: do then denote
untaught manners, and rude conditions: applied to those brutishe sort, named
the Fryselande men.

The hears in the same place, if they shall be either perfect black, or
flaxine of color* do then argue a violent and furious mind: applied (of the
likelihood) to the Boar.

The hears soft and thin, and exceeding small: do then declare an
effeminate mind, and courage: and that this person not only lacking blood,
but to be dull of sense, and slow.

When the hears shall be yet much thinner, do then innuate a crafty, hard,
or near, and covetous person: applied (after quality) to the fearfulness,
and covetousness, both of the Barbarian, and Assirian: for that the Assirians,
are by nature exceeding covetous.

The hears much and gross, and flat lying, with a hearinesse of all the
body, in a child: do witness the Melancholy to ensue, that is to say, to
become frantic and mad.

When the hears in age are much increased, then do they represent the much
adustion above nature: which so causes the sickness of innocence, and
foolishness.

The uttermost line or creast of the hears of the head, if the same reaches
and goes from the forhead: does then argue a crafty person, having a
perverse, and wicked understanding.

The uttermost line or creast of the hears, if the same extends to the
forhead: does then note such a person to be stout, and somewhat wild. This
like is thus pronounced by reason of the hotenesse, and such are properly
applied to the nature of Mars.

The uttermost line or creast, if behind the forepart of the head (at which
ended the beginning of hears) discendeth toward the nape of the neck: does
then argue such a person in wicked matters, to be crafty, but in the good,
lacking discretion, and lecherous.

Such a line from the forepart, when the same is far higher from the nape of
the neck: does then demonstrate such a person to be slow, fearful, of an
effeminate mind, and many times irefull.

The hears of the head, yellow as Gold, do declare such to be right
Sollistians: that is to say, of a proud and hawty mind, and vain glorious

The hears of the head soon hoarie, do indicate the lack of natural heat,
or putred flewme: and these sometimes witness veneriall conditions.

If a man by the Art and skill of Phisiognomie, may find to place in the
forhead, and face, both Mercury, and Mars: then such (of skill known) be
found through the inclination, to addict their minds to Alchymie, and in the
same to invent the great deceyte in mettalles, and false coining of money, and
imagine many euilles pernicious: of which condition (being at Uenice) I saw
two like beheadded, for such a wicked fact, in the year. 1565. Whose bodies
and heads (after the order of the Country) were immediately burned with the
scaffolde into ashes: but of these the elder and principal, was much more
spiced with the notes of Saturn retro- grade.

Women by nature wax not balde, in that the quality of them draws near,
and is like to the nature of children.

The gelded persons wax not balde, in that they be changed into the feminine,
or womanly nature: but few such (at this day) be here with us: except those by
hap, caused through the incision of a rupture.

To conclude the horinesse, and whitish flaxen color of the hear of the
head, is caused of a flumaticke quality, and such of nature, draw near to
the quality of women: as experience, like teaches of the same.

Of the judgment of the head, by the bigness, figure, and disposition. The.
xiij. Chapter.


Seeing the head of all other parts of man, is most open to be seen: it shall
therefore be good to utter largely of the constitution and form thereof. Which
the Philosopher seems to destinguish and divide into seven forms, of these
the first form he utters to have no imminencie or bearing out before, but
behind: the second form, that an imminency contains in the forpart, and net
in the hinder: the third form, that the head again lacks an imminency
before, and not behind, and that the same be formally round: the fourth form,
that the temples, in respect, have a more bearing out, then either the
forepart, or the hinder: the fifth form, that it be in form like to the Pine
Apple: the sixth form, that there be a greater distaunce from the ears before,
then behind: the seventh form, that it be in a most comely manner
proportioned: and in these do Gallen, Auicen, Auerroys, and diverse other
learned agree.

So that the head being either over big or over small proportioned, is
nothing at all lyked of them: in that the same is corrupted, and hindered, of
the proper virtue. For such having the like form, when they approach unto an
understanding, appear evidently to be harmed and hindered. As a small head is
evermore corrupted: even so a big head appears sometimes good, and
sometimes viciated and evil.

But the best formed head, allowed of the learned, is that, which has an exact
round^nesse, and is on either side a little depressed, with an imminencie
before and after: so that where the temples are, a certain playnenesse may
appear: as by example, that a certain balle of wax made exactly round,
should be somewhat depressed of either side: than should that round form
(as the Geometricians affirm) most apt to receive forms, aunswerable to
proportion.

For which cause, the more lawdable head, is that, which has a mean form in
the proportion, and bigness, and contains a decent roundnesse, which besides
enjoys an imminency, before and after, tempered with a little compression or
flatnesse. Auicen writes, that the cause of smalnesse of the head in the
creature, is the paucitie or small quantity of matter: but the cause of
bigness of the head, is the great quantity of matter, being spermaticall.

The brain after Rasis, ensues and answers to the form of the scull: for
if the scull shall be small, then will the brain be like. and ^contra.

The figure also of the scull, if the same be corrupted, then is the form of
the brain like corrupted. Besides the head in smalnesse superfluous, must of
necessity be evil.

That head is commended, which in bigness is a mean, having a comely
roundenesse: and decent eminency both behind, and before: and has from both
the ears a little flatnesse: this Almansor.

So that man's head (among all other beasts) has proportionally much brains.
The males (of knowledge uttered) have more brains, than the females: although
the effect may sometimes show a contrary to this. But of these which are
seldom caused, or rather by accidence, is neither Art, nor science uttered.
Man's head (of the diligent search) is known to have more joints, than all
other beasts. The man also is found to have more joints, than the woman. The
head of a comely and due form, is fashioned like a hammer, in which the fore
and hinder part bear out: for otherwise can this not make a due direction and
government: the reason of which is, for that the ventricles have a due form
to receive the quantities of spirits in every place: as that the forepart to
imagine and judge, the hinder especially to remember. But the middle ventricle,
when the form of it is lightly compressed and flatted, then is the bethincking
part so much the nobler, and worthyer: for that in the same small place, is the
best unity, to distinguish the congruent, from the incongruent, of the object
consisting in the forepart. When the form of the head before is depressed, and
dented in, then fails the judgment of the creature: when the hinder part
lacks in the emmencie, or is depressed, then like fails the remembrance.
There consists also a weakness in moving of the sinews, and by the
consequent of the whole body: in that by the strength of the brain, is the
strength like uttered of the neck, and sinews. And as the largeness of the
shoulderpoynts, even so of the breast, stanckes, and bones. Consiliator
writes, that the head of a seemly form and manner, does increase both sense,
and virtue: and denotes in that person both magnificencie, and a gravity of
wit. The head small and not in due proportion formed, does argue the
contrary to these before. So that when the head shall be great, then will the
brain be like big: in that the brain is the beginner and worker of all the
senses. Again, if the head be great, then are the senses many: and econtra.

To have a most big head (as Tarreus writes) and that in due form: does
denote a comlynesse of manners, and good conditions in that person.

The head great, with a diverse form proportioned, and the sinews small, with
a comely form of the neck: notwithstanding small, and the bones small: is a
note of an evil composition and form of the brain.

Such having a big head without due form (are for the more part) Nidiots and
fools, and unapt to learn, or to be taught: which sign and note is
accidentally gathered of the Ass, having a big head. This also is verified,
when as ye head, to the neck and body is not aunswerable, and proportioned
orderly after nature.

The head big, and the neck small, is an evil sign: for that the virtue
forming, lacks in that creature, and the matter also is inobedient: of which
ensues a simplysitie of wit, and the lack of discretion, in that person.

The head great, proportioned agreeablye to the body, or rather to the neck,
so that the neck be strong and meanly big, with strong and big sinews:
not without good reason, and deserte, is the same laudable and commended.



The head Pineapple formed, after the condition of a sharp upright pillar, in
such manner, that the nether part shall be big and round, but the upper part
sharp to a Pineapple fashioned: does argue in that person, an unshame
fastness irefulnesse, greedy catching, and rash boldness: which proceeds
through the hotenesse, and drienesse of the brain. Such (for the more part)
are the forms, and conditions of the Ianewies, and many of the hypocritical
religious.

The person which much sturreth to and fro, and not long abiding in a place: is
noted bold, and irefull: and such a person seems to have a hot brain.

The head big, with the other signs denoting wit, is an apt receptacle
and place for good Arts: but otherwise is the same, when as the head is
great, and not aunswering to the other members.

If the form of the head (as before uttered) becomely, with the fore ventricle
of a good form and sufficient moist, is then laudable: in that the attayning,
and impr^nting of kinds is by the moisture caused, but the retencion caused
through the dryth, which is contained in the hinder part. When the brain is
great, then are caused big sinews, which of that reason argue dryness in
the places: for these of their proper nature be known cold and dry. And of
this the virtue memoratiue is made strong in retayning the kinds, and by that
help reserueth them long.

The head with the middle ventricle, somewhat compressed, or flatted of either
side: does denote ye virtue of bethinking, to be in compowning prompt and
ready: and like in dividing the same, which is attained, through the unity of
spirits, in that place gathered.

The head spericall or thoroughly round, does denote, a quick moving,
unstableness, forgetfulness, small discretion, and little wit in that
person: for this motion of the spirits, never ceasseth nor rests: as in
many Frenchmen and Spaniardes, and the like in certain Germans, has been
observed and noted. For when the form of the head is through round, then is
the middle ventricle large, and the spirits working in the same so large,
until these find a large place, which in the mean time are not sufficiently
united: and on such wise is the virtue extimatiue weakened, by that the
spirits are carried round about the bounds of the same. Insomuch that such
men having the like formed heads, do (of a proper quality, and condition)
promise much, but perform little: these also are known, to be importunate,
cou^tous, and envious, thinking only of the present time (and the same
slenderly) so that for the time past, and the same to come, these take no care,
nor think any whit thereof. For which cause (the Phisiognomer wills) that no
man assuredly trust, any such persons, which especially be found (after
skill) to have the body much chollericke, or melancholicke: seeing such
conditions in sundry persons of like form, has been observed many times by
the Phisiognomer, which were most true. Further he reports, that if any of
these happen in authority and bear rule: they are not only seduced by light
credit, but prove to be ravening Wolves, and put forward themselves to utter
their cruelty, and (become in time) wicked Tiraunts. The meaner sort of these,
are given to be robbers by the high way, yea, and murderers of men, except
their virtuous education, and fearing of God, do otherwise contrary these
dispositions in them. He further instructs, that if the habitude and form of
the abouesayde body be sanguine, then is the aforsayd qualities much abated in
the same creature, so that such a subject is but a little inclined to like
manners ano conditions, through the goodness of this complexion.

Here in this place, somewhat agreeing to the abouesayde, does the Phisiognomer
place an example, for instruction sake, which is on this wise.



A certain Almayne he noted on a time, being Secretary to a worthy Prince,
in that country, who in the time of wars being in camp with the Prince,
espiedon a time by hap, a body Lowse creeping on his hose: which seeing, was
much abashed thereat, and being in that amazement, required his man to take him
off, saying to him scrupulously, that he in no manner wittingly would stea a
creature of God. etc. The form of this man, as the Phisiognomer, did
diligently note him, was after this manner: he had a sphericall or very round
head, a narrow forehead, slender neck, thin and narrow shoulder points,
loins, and hippes, with the other parts, of the body weak and ill formed,
and to these the breast narrow, and Marses line in the foreheade weak, and
evil fashioned: sundry other notes he perceived both in the hands and face,
which for brevity he omitted: but to conclude, the Phisiognomer found by
sundry notes, that this faint hearted Secretary, was not only fearful,
but light of belief, and brutishe, in conditions.

The head small must of necessity be evil, in that such a person lightly
falls sick, and within is the brain little, with a straightness or
narrowness of the ventricles: in which, the spirits drawn narrow, are so
let, that they cannot orderly work a due use and effect: and these pressed
together are in such manner inflamed, and choked, that they neither may duelye
imagine, dispose, nor remember. So that such persons like formed, are known to
be fearful, yea, irefull, and retayning ire long: through the intensed
drienesse of the brain, and the distempered heat. These be also of a small
judgment, and understanding, and neither can orderlye discern: they both
compass, and work false matters, yea, evil speakers, bablers, and double
tongued: from which the Phisiognomer counseleth a man to fly and shun, as he
would avoid his wicked enemy: except grace, and prayer, bridle and temper the
effects above uttered.

The head unseemly long, and twhart fashioned to an Organ pipe, does not
only denote vnshamefastenesse, but an impudency, and ^^^^ish conditions.

The head short, yet the same perfect round* does by the (opinion of the
Philosopher) denote such a person, not only to be empty, and void of honest
gifts, and virtue, but lacking wisdom. The head Pineapplelike formed, does
indicate unshamefastness in that person: the rather, and of more likelihoode,
if the other notes answer ^ this Consiliatore.

The head flat and plain, does argue that vice of ambicion, and sensuality,
in the person mightily bearing sway. The head eminent or bearing out in the
fore part, does like note a haughtiness, and arrogancy in the creature: after
the opinion of the abouesayde Phisosopher.

The head in the foreparte vallied, depressed, and holow: does denote an
irefull, and deceytefull person: but such which have the holowe of the hinder
part of the head flatted: are noted after Art, to be fearful persons:
applied to the kind like.

The head big with a largeness of the forhead, and countinaunce unto a
Giant: does argue such a person to be slow, yet strong in the composition of
body, and gentle of behavior: but that person (of the Philosopher) is
reported unapt to be taught, and to learn: and applied for that cause unto the
Ox.

The head long, and somewhat protensed or stretched out, to the form of a
hammer (even as the heads of ye Swichyners, for the more part are) does
indicate such a person to be reasonably fearful, diligent, circumspect, and
aforeseer in weighty matters, and affairs.

The head right out formed, in the middle plain, and in a manner flat, being
also of a mean bigness: does indicate such a person not to be only witty,
but stout, and of a great courage.

The head throughout well formed, does note such a person, to possess a
singular wit, to be one of a good aduisement, and consideration, yea liberal
in gifts: but by the report of Consiliatore, this person sometimes will be
fear full, and faint hearted.

The head to be either small or big, is understood and meant, according to
the measure, and proportion of the whole body: this Albertus.

The head short, does declare such a person, to lack reason, understanding
and wit: as report Palemon, Albertus, and Con^yliatore.

The head in the hinder part hollow, does denote an irefull person, wily,
and deceytfull: and these according to the notes aunswering to the other
parts, of the head and body.

And in whom you shall epsy the temples holowe of either side, such (by the
agreement of the Philosophers) shall you judge and pronounce to be cruel,
deceitful, and great discemblers, with other conditions scarcelye tolerable.

These hitherto, of the judgments of the head* next follows the judgments
of the foreheade, after the rules and order of the Art: as a member and part
greatly to be regarded, both for the composition, and lines (worthy memory)
seen in the same.

Of the form, nature, and judgment of the forheade. The. xv. chapter.


THe face as Aristotle writes, is that part only which evermore is bare, and
this especially in man.

The forehead is that part or space of the face which properlye is between the
highest of the brows upward, and the eyes downewarde.

The breadth of the foreheade, begins from the root of the nose, where the
eielids do end: and reaches upward, unto the garlande seam^ about the head.

The length of the foreheade is understood and meant, after the breadth of the
body, which way the hearie sinews are seen to stretch and run. As the like
manner and form, many of the best learned, the Phisiognomer observed to have.
And at Rauenna, he beheld the image of that learned Dante, who had the like
form. Here note, that a man must consider all other parts, with the
condicioned form of the head, and the agreement of the countinaunce or face,
for otherwise is not this verified and true.

By the round foreheade, shall you conceive and understand a certain
sphericall or very round eminency, and bearing outward: such a form of
necessity, must be granted to lack in the length of the foreheade. The cause
of this is, for that the spirits in the same empty place, are reuerberated
and inflamed, and that the inflammation long continues: Which reason and saying
is confirmed, when such have a short neck and chollericke, in that the
inflammation of blood is lightly caused and abiding.

The forhead is an vtterer of heaviness, mirth, clemency, and cruelty: of
which the proverb arises, that the flattering person, shows a smooth and
smiling foreheade: the irefull man a gathered, knitting, and clowdie forehead.

Aristotle affirms, the forhead to be the seat or place of modesty, and
honor: and the same for the neerenesse of the imaginatiue virtue, which with
the common sense in the foreparte of the brain, is placed as principal of the
head, by force of whose virtue, either heaviness or mirth, comeliness or
uncomeliness, are suddenly carried unto the judgment of reason, and by the same
judged. Of this we name such to have a shameless and brazen forehead, which
put away or set aside all bashfulnesse and shame.

The foreheade through the discending of all the sinews from the brain, to
perform the sense, is as it were a certain tower and fortress, unto whose
hollownesse do the five sensitive sinews concur of the outward senses,
through whose help, from all the obiectes of the senses, at the seat of
reason, is judgment caused.

The skin of the foreheade, which with a certain musculous, and thin
substance fastened to it, is united or joined together: that the inner parts
of the hands, and soales of the feet, with the tendons, do agree and work
together.

The foreheade, distinguished or divided of the bones, lying under the utter
skin, does only consist of two mouable skins: and briefly, the whole is
lose in it self: and of the same, is undoubtedly moved, by a voluntary
motion.

The skin of the foreheade, does move together with the eye liddes, by
certain muscles and sinews: at the opening, and shutting together of the eyes.

The musculous thickenesse, lying under the skin of the foreheade, by which
the eye brows are drawn up, and the motion of the foreheade caused, has his
hearie fastnings tending downewarde: which cut ouertwhart, by an unskillful
Chirurgian, does after cause, that the whole skin of the foreheade, does slide
or fall down to the eyes.

The plain and even forheade without any wrincles, is the same which does
bear or bosse nothing outwardes: but contains or has a certain evenness
through out. And such persons are noted (of the Phisiognomer) to be
contentious, and full of variances: the reason is, for that the same signifies
a gross skin of the foreheade, and of the consequent, a like wit: and the
hardenesse of flesh, which cannot be placed, of which the rudeness of
understanding ensues, through the Organ not due proportioned. And such also be
hot and dry persons, which is the cause of the tention of the foreheade: so
that through the paucitie of understanding, they be caused brawlers and
contentious.

In all matters, is their a certain outward note, by which we find those
that are not answering to the eyes, yt is to say, the inward notes not seen.
Of this appears that the nature of the proper matter has his, and Philosophy
natural has his, which it skilfully notes.

The person that has a big foreheade, is slow, and dull witted, compared
unto the Ox, in that the Ox is a slow beast, which has a big foreheade.
But the foreheade small, does denote an unstable person.

The foreheade large, does indicate such a person to be inclined often to
change both mind and purpose: but if the foreheade be very large, then such a
person (for the more part) is noted to be a fool, of small discretion, and
dull witted: as both Aristotle and Auicen write. The foreheade to be large
(after the agreement of writers) is meant to be formed with a due quantity,
both in the length, and breadth.

The foreheade round and fleshie, does argue such a person to be irefull: if
the same especially be bearing or bossing out, and with this lacking
discretion, dull and slow: who of the Philosopher, aptly applied to the Ass.

The forehead overmuch standing forth, that the same seems bossed out in the
middle: does signify the excess of choler, and such (for the more part) are
disposed and inclyned unto the Chollericke and hastye passions: as unto the
fransinesse, and furious hastiness. A like to this that if the foreheade has
(as it were) a proper bearing forth, or knobbe bossing out, and certain
dentings in, or little furrows to be seen: does (by practice of the
Phisiognomer) signify such a person to be rash, wily, and false of promise:
yea, this like (by the report of Adamantius) does denote sometimes
foolishness, and fransinesse or madness in that creature: so that the other
signs and notes of the parts, answer and agree.

The foreheade little and narrow, does indicate such a person to be foolish,
and a small likelyhoode in him to be taught, or to conceive any learning to
purpose: yea nastie, sluggish, and a gluttinous feeder: applied for these to
the grunting Sow. But the foreheade small, that is thin of skin, and very
narrow, in a swarte person: does denote him to be lascivious, soon moved to
ire, over liberal, seeking desirouslye acquaintance, and a note of small
wit in him.

Here note, that the foreheade small and having a thin skin, does indicate in
that creature subtle, and moouable spirits, and econtra. For the spirit, is
a subtle substance, aereall, clear, and produced of the lightest, and most
thin part of blood, by which the virtue of life is carried, unto the proper
actions of the same. So that where the overmuch thickenesse is of the
foreheade, there of necessity must the gross spirits be engendered, which are
not apt to meditate or conceive deepelye, for the expulsive virtue, which is
weaker in that person. And the virtue united, is stronger or mightier, than the
same dispersed: so that the spirits united, can not aptly discern the
congruent actions, through the over empty, large, and phlegmatic place.

The foreheade over thin of skin, and wrineled, does argue the lack of
brain, and consumption of the substauntiall moisture: as the like appears in
aged persons: and in those, which by daily and continual sicknesses are
wasted, and brought very lean.

The foreheade long, does witness such a person to be witty, apt to learn
or to be taught: yet somewhat vehement in causes, many times. For these, of the
Philosopher, aptlye applied to the fierce Dog. new acquaintance, and a note of
small wit in him.

Here note, that the foreheade small, and having a thin skin, does indicate
in that creature, subtle and mooueable spirits, and ^contra. For the spirit
is a subtle substance, aereall, clear, and produced of the lightest, and
most thin part of blood, by which the virtue of life is carried unto the proper
actions of the same. So that where the overmuch thickness is of the forehead
there of necessity must the gross spirits be engendered, which are not apt to
meditate or conceive deeply for the expulsive virtue, which is weaker in that
person: and the virtue united is stronger or mightier then the same dispersed:
so that the spirits united, can not aptly discern the congrue^t actions,
through the over empty, large, and flegmaticke place.

The foreheade over thin of skin, and wrinkled: does argue the lack of
brain, and consumtion of the substanciall moisture: as the like appears, in
aged persons: and in those, which by daily and continual sicknesses are
wasted, and brought very lean.

The foreheade long, does witness such a person to be witty, apt to learn
or to be taught: yet somewhat vehement in causes, many times. For these of the
Philosopher aptly applied to the fierce Dog.

The foreheade square, having an equal and moderate largeness, agreeable to
the head, and face, or according to the manner of the other parts does argue
such a person to be virtuous, witty, of honest conditions, and of likelyhoode
to be hardy and courageous: for which (of the Philosopher Aristotle) aptlye
applied unto the Lion.

The foreheade plain, and wholye without wrincles: does indicate such a
person, to seek and be desirous of great honor, and the same above his reach
and possibility to be compassed: being one also of small discretion,
spiteful, and very irefull, or that continues long angry, obstinate, and
full of strife. A like to this, does Adamantius write: that the foreheade long,
lean, and holow: to testify such a person, fearful, crafty, and desirous
of honor.



The foreheade that bosseth out unto the edge, is of some allowed, especially
if the same well answers to the head. But if such a roundnesse occupyeth,
and causes the smooth and plain stretching out at length of the temples, and
that the same is bare of hear: does indicate in that person the towardness,
and worthynesse of wit, the desire of honor, and arrogancy, such also
val^antly attempt, bold and mighty enterprises: as the same noted sundry
times, of the worthy Phisiognomer Cocles.

The person that draws or knitteth together the skin, in the myddle of the
forehead, with the ouerbroowes: is not only noted to be wayward, and irefull,
but greedily bent and fixed, to the horrible excess, and greedy coveting of
money, much to be detested: as Palemon, Loxius, Morbeth, Conciliatore, write.

The foreheade (as Thaddeus Hagecius reports) stretched out plain and even,
and the same as one smilyng, does argue such a person to be a flatterer, and
hardely to be trusted: as the same of experience noted: which manner of
appearance the Philosopher Aristotle, does attribute and apply to the kind of
the passion: in that the forehead thus stretched, throughout equal and smoth,
is labored (as it were) by a made or dissembling means. The same also is
named of the Phisiognomer (and Thaddcus agreeeth thereto) a counterfayted
foreheade, when it thus appears wholly retched out plain and smooth. As by a
like may well appear in such persons, at what time they flatter: and in the
Dog fawning for an intent, which then makes smooth the foreheade.

The foreheade clowdie through wrincles, does signify such a person to be
bold, fierce, courageous, and terrible: compared of the Philosopher for the
like, to the furious Bull, and Lion.

A mean condition of the foreheade, between the former uttered, does by
judgment (of all writers) decently agree: and such a person has been noted
(for the more part) to be gentle, civil, of an honest nature, and endued with
good conditions: as these, of experience noted, by the well practiced
Phisiognomer Cocles.

The foreheade appearing in a sad manner, with a heavy countinaunce: does
argue such a person to be full of mourning and heaviness, and applied to the
effect: in that such which wayle and mourn, have then a heavy countinaunce,
and be full of sorrow.

The foreheade drawn together or wrincled in the middle, does signify such a
person to be irefull, and revenging.

The foreheade long, lean, and holowe: does denote such a person to be
fearful, crafty, and desirous of honor.

The foreheade hanging down, and shadowed as it were: does indicate such a
person much inclined and prone to shed tears: for which reason, these of the
Philosopher are aptlye applied, to the kind of the passion: and to this, do
the later writers agree.

The foreheade big, is always caused through the bigness of the bone,
grosenesse of the flesh, and thickenesse of the skin: contrariwise the
foreheade small, is through the thinness of the bone, flesh, and skin: as
both the Philosopher Aristotle, and Palemon, with others do write.

The foreheade appearing deformed, through the many wrincles deep, by which
the same named foul: does signify a sorrow full person, and applied (of
Aristotle) to the kind of the passion: in that such, which sundry times
vexing, and grieved in mind, do then utter and show a like wrincled, and
deformed foreheade.

The foreheade bare of hear (as Thaddaeus Hagecius writes) and having a
plain and even skin, except the same within the upper face above, or over
the nose, does signify a malicious person, deceytfull and full of ire, yea,
contentious many times.



The forehead clowdie or lowering, and wrincled yet in the mydle of the same
more wrincled: does together indicate with the two best virtues (as both
stoutnesse of courage and wit) the most hateful vice of cruelty, to consist
in that creature after the mind of the Philosopher.

The foreheade very great, round in form (by the bearing out) and bare of
hear: does not only argue (by the agreement of all writers) such a person to
be hardy, and stout, of will hardlye to be brideled, but a dissembler and
lyare: the rather if the other parts answer.

The foreheade long, with the countinaunce or face long, and slender, and
chinne like slender and thin: does not only (after the mind of the
Phisiognomer, and Thaddaeus) denote such a person to be rigorous and cruel, but
bearing rule, to be a Tiraunt.

The foreheade confused by wrincles, and the face appearing puffed up, through
an overmuch fatness, does indicate an unstable, flegmaticke, gro^e, and dull
witted person, by the agreement of Palemon, and sundry other learned.

The foreheade narrow, to be foolish: and the same long in form, unapt to
learn. This high swolen or bolned out, and round: to be a deceyner subtle,
and wilye. The foreheade wrineled, to have deep cogitations, and burdened with
cares. The same round in the bossing out, to be not only envious, but
crafty. The foreheade large (after breadth) does denote such a person, not
only honest condicioned, but free of expenses, and liberal in gifts: as
Loxius, Philemon, Palemon, and sundry other writers report.

Certain report, and rightly in the same, that the foreheade overmuch
wrincled, does argue unshamefastness in that person: the reason is, when the
virtue apprehensiue and conceyuing is weakened, the same then cannot orderly
discern the congruent, from the incongruent: of which insueth those that are
wrought without shamefastness. The cause of this is, in that the forepart of
the brain* is very moist, and of the over much moisture is this great
wrinckling caused of the forheade.



Yet note, that the wrinckling of the foreheade may like be procured of two
causes, as of dryness and moisture: saving the difference is, that the same
which proceeds of dryness, does not occupy the whole foreheade: so that this
signifies irefulnesse in that creature: and anger in the other person of a
moyster quality. The reason is, for that the person discerns not the same,
which causes and retayneth both the ire, and hatred, without due cause: and
such also are known (for the more part) to be full of variaunces, and strife,
yea covetous, and evil tongued. Oh how many vain Physicians be there (says
the Phisiognomer) which nothing at all regard, nor care for the science of
phisiognomy: yea, they in a manner wholly deride the professors of the same,
through their simple travail, and study bestowed in the science. Auicen
reports in secunda quarti, Capi. 26. that necessary it is for a Physician by
Phisiognomy, dilygently to consider in the face, eyes, and other members, the
evil form not natural: and that he especially regards at the first whether
the same form and note be natural, and according to the indiuiduate like
aunswering, so to pronounce judgment. The like words in a manner, reports
that worthy man Galen, in his first book of complexions.

Henricus and Guido, in a proper chapter of the Pockes write, that such having
a short foreheade (as to length) and both the temples flat, and cheek bones
large, be prone and apt to come unto that impostumation or swelling in the
throat, named (of many) the kings evil: for that in such creatures the
matter redily is derived and sent to the neck: but this especially happens to
children, through gulositie and much feeding, and both thinness, and moisture
of body: yea the same the more verified, when as the head (to the Iudger)
appears big, and not due proportioned.

Conciliatour thus writes, that the person which has an even stretched, and
smoth forhead, with a certain shining in the same, is denoted to be not only
a flatterer, but deceytfull, so that hardly to be trusted. And many like were
the Bononians which Conciliatore observed and noted in his time. The cause of
this tention and evenness of the foreheade, does the Phisiognomer suppose to
proceed, through the chollericke quality, for that by his dryness the skin
stretches out plain: but the cleerenesse or shining, does denote the
subtilenesse of skin, and humors: and by the consequent, of the spirits: so
that the like foreheade* does argue a ready wit: but such be fair spoken,
using mirth and delectable words, to the end of purchasing somewhat: for
which cause aptly named worldly flatterers, and deceitful through the moving
of the spirits.

Such having wrincles playted or gathered together, in the foreheade right up
retching, especially unto the angle of the nostrelles: are denoted to be
persons full of care, and deep thoughts, bethinking weighty and serious
matters, through the sad humor melancholy.

Such having the foreheade parted (as it were) here and there, or the same
rough in sight, or otherwise very hollow in the middle (as if the same to a
gutter dented in) with an evenness throughout, by a loasenesse of the skin,
appearing as one smiling: be not only noted subtle, and very crafty, but
covetous and very near or hard persons to deal withal: yea, this note
perhaps in some, may indicate foolishnesss.

The foreheade much awry formed, bearing out both high and round: does
declare such a person to be weak of courage, neither profitable to himself,
nor to any other, impudent, lacking both reason and wit: as the greek
author Adamantius, writes.



The foreheade gathered and wrincled to a cloud, along the foreheade, or down
the middle of it toward the nose, as if the skin were plaited: does signify
such a person to be irefull, furious, and revenging: applied of the Philosopher
Aristotle, to the Bull, and Lion.

Such a person having a shadowed and low foreheade, with a pensiveness of
look: does not only argue a mourning and heavy mind, and given to much
sadness, but sundry times to be irefull: if we may credit the commentatour
Gulielmus Nurice.

That singular Philosopher Ptolomeus paruus writes, that the person having a
long, high, and large foreheade, to be honest condicioned, much bearing, and
suffering injuries, yet of great likelyhode to increase in riches: this like,
does the learned Conciliatour report.

The foreheade appearing even and smoth, does denote such a person to be
effeminate, both in courage and will: according to the agreement of Phylemon,
Palemon, Loxius, Aristotle, Conciliatour, and the Greek author Adamantius.

Micael Scotus utters, that whose foreheade in the temples, shall appear as
pu^^ed up, through the grosenesse of flesh: in such manner, that the like
person has the cheeks filled with flesh: does signify him to be very
inconstant of mind, proud, irefull, and of a gross or dull wit: the reason
of which is, the grosenesse of the temples, and flesh: and of the ^awes and
cheeks, does argue the grosenesse of humors, and dominion of heat, in that
the fame is cause of the irefulnesse, and rudeness of wit. Such did the
Phisiognomer always see, to have a big head, with the form evil, and
unorderly proportioned.

The foreheade that seems crooked in form, and the same both high and
round: does signify, or rather is an apparaunt note of folishnesse, and
impudency in that creature.

These hitherto of the judgment of the forhead: to which added (as matter
agreeable) of the three principal lines, commonly seen in most men's
foreheades, with the skillful judgment of those, and other notes there
appearing in sundry subjects: much furthering all such as mind rightly to
Phisiognomate by this Art.

The judgment of certain Lines seen in the foreheade. The. xvj. chapter.
THe Phisiognomer reports, that there came unto his understanding and
knowledge, a certain skillful Jew, which could by Art Phisiognomate and
pronounce great matters by the only sight of the face, but especially the
foreheade: in divining matters past, and to come. He also could utter of
riches, honors, and calamities: yea of the fortune and infortune, both of the
Father and Mother, and many other matters besides. The same skill when he
desired of ye Jew (by earnest suite to learn) he utterly refused, and denied
this request of his: so that forced he was to use sundry questions and
disputations with him: by which at the length he perceived and found, that
this person was wholly ignorant of phisiognomy, so well Metaphorical, as of
the members, and planets: saving only by certain lines, which at the last
through his industry and labor conceived. And in these (says the
Phisiognomer) have I found and learned a singular practice, and an infallible
or most certain truth, which I attained by a long time of practice. So that
this worthy jewel, and most rare secret, he purchased after the manner above
uttered, not minding to hide the skill, but rather furthering and uttering the
same, to the uttermost of his power: which he thought most agreeable, to
publish next after this chapter of the foreheade, as in a most apt place to
ensue.

The instruction and knowledge of which is on this wise: first conceive that in
the flat and even forhead shall you sometimes see there several lines,
reatching out the length of the foreheade: which after the mind of the
Phisiognomer, do importe and signify three ages, that is to say, childhoode,
youth and old age. This childhoode does he here mean from birth, unto. xxv.
years: and youth, from xxv. unto fifty years: and old age, from fifty to
the term and end of natural life: as the same hereafter shall playner
appear, in the condition of the lines. But for a readier intelligence of the
former words, conceive this example here under demonstrated, which evidently
to the eye utters these three lines, representing the three ages, in most
persons.

To come unto the matter, ^ two nether lines, being under the three
principal, which make sometimes ye form of an angle above: are attributed, the
one unto Saturn, standing on the right side, and that other unto the Moon,
appearing on the left side. Of these, that line also on the right side ascribed
unto the father: and the other on the left side, unto the Mother.



So that in the same place, where these lines appear whole, there (of
knowledge) we affirm the good hap and fortune to be: especially, if these
show and be strayte: in that such lines appeering crooked, do e^ermore argue
the contrary: and the same, either more or less, according to the strength,
and weakness of them.

Further, the three ages in all persons, are attributed unto the two upper, and
sixth planet Mercury: as here under by this figure does plainer appear, lively
counterfeyted to the eye.



Of which the first, and neathermost toward the nose, is named Mercuries line,
which represents the first age: for that in such an age and time, all persons
then be aptest to conceive and attain both learning, sciences, and handie
crafts: yea, this is named of most men, the floorishing age, although the same
somewhat wanton, and unconstant.

The second line upward (named Jupiters) represents the second age, which
the Phisiognomer names, the time of veneration, and wisdom: for that in the
same age are the large show of decent conditions, and liberallitie uttered:
yea both the stabilitie in religion, and discretions in men, and their laudable
actions. Further, where virtues are embraced, vices left and detested. Where
also is (in men) a fruitful and commendable wit uttered: where besides is
the mother of honesty indicated: all which by Jupiters line are (after the
agreement of sundry writers) represented, and expressed.

The third line (after the mind of the Phisiognomer) represents a third
age: which of all men is known, to be the time of sadness, and covetousness:
yea the wearing out of pleasurs, and the end of natural life. If this line be
fortunate, the same then does indicate an increase by husbandry, land, howses,
and all such matters which appertain unto the office of old age: so that to
such a third line, are all these agreeable, which are attributed to Saturn.

Some perhaps will argue and say to the Phisiognomer, that this is the age of
devotion: to which I thus answer, that old men, in very deed be then more
inclined and bent to serve God seeing that age is then dissolved, and become
impotent unto the wanton pleasure, and luxuries: through which these are the
more prone, and disposed unto prayer, and the faithful serving of God*

The time (to come to the matter) of youth, is known to be natural, and not
through endeavor, for which cause, a more affiaunce and trust, is to be had and
found in them for the more part.

So that in the same place, where this line is broken, there the infortune is:
as either sickness, impouerishment, or any other hinderance.

If the two nether lines (next the nose) be whole, and that these, form as it
were an angle and cone above: do then denote (as the Phisiognomer has many
times experienced) that such persons to have a notable fortune unto the
attaining and purchasing both of riches, and promotions. Although few such
there be, which possess and enjoy the like note.

Further, the said two nether lines, under the three principal, are thus
applied: that is, the right line unto the planet Saturn, and the left line,
unto the Moon. The right line also is attributed to the father, but the left
line to the mother. By which understand that according to the presence and
form of the lines: so judge of the fortune and infortune of that person.

But when the said two lines, do retch and meet into the form of a
triangle, and that there appears an overthwart line stretched and crossing
above the nose: yet in such manner, that the same forms not with the others, a
perfect tryangle: does then denote a competent fortune unto such a person, and
this according to the strength of the lines there seen. For where these lines
are broken of, lacking, or crooked: there they witness and signify the
infortune to succeed*

If a line appears in the myddle, under the lines, in the Dyameter of the
nose: does then argue a singular fortune, and the great increase of riches.

The Philosopher Ptholomeus paruus writes, that if one line, reaches along
the forehead, as from the right side unto the left, does then promise such a
person (after nature) to live three score years.

If two lines shall the like stretch a long the foreheade: do then promise
such a person to live unto the age of three score and ten years.

If three lines the like, then unto four score years.

If four lines the like stretched a long the foreheade, do then signify
four score and ten years. And if five lines the like stretched a long, do
then declare a hundred years: as the learned Ptholomeus writes.

If the three lines above described, are crossed of other lines, do then
denote hatred, troubles, and persecutions, for the more part.

If the said crossings of the lines, shall make an angle, and that one line be
bigger then the other: in such manner that the same stretches over the angle
above the nose: does then signify that such a person has enemies, but they
shall not greatly harm him. But further of this form, of the angle crossed,
may a man learn and understand, in any work of Paulmestrie: that utters
matter of the quadrangle of the hand: as touching friends and enimyes: And
even the same is wytnessed, by the signs of the forehead.

If neither angle, cross, or overthwart line, shall appear on the forehead,
does then signify a luckie continuance and glory in works, and a most
happy estate, unto the end of life.

The sharp crossing of lines, to the manner and form of a pinnacle: does then
demonstrate both household, and familiar enemies, or enemies of the own
kindred: as Morbeth the Cardinal writes.

If any two lines of the forhead, are near joining together, in any part: do
then demonstrate discord, and contention, with many persons.

The comeliness and good proportion of the three princypall lines of the
forehead: does denote a worthy fame, and singular wit, as sundry Authors
write, and the same affirms the Phisiognomer.

If many lines are discerned in the foreheade, then (so appearing) those are
named the sisters of the three principal lines: as writes the former Morbeth.
If but one line only, is seen or does appear in the forehead, then according
to the manner and form of the same, and place where that appears, with the
age of the person, and dominion of the Planet, must a man like judge.

If no line at all shall appear in the forhead: then by reason, no judgment at
all can be pronounced.

When in the breaking, those lines appear crooked in this manner, as the
example here under of the one playner expresses: does then signify the
greater infortune to that person. As the like by observation was noted, in a
certain Italian, and sundry others.



If any of the lines appears crooked or bended upward as a Bow: does then
indicate the greater infortune: But if any line downewarde stretched, then the
lesser infortune, is signified by the same: as Mantuanus and Cocles write.

When in the crooking, any of the lines shall be crossed, especially Marses
line: does then signify violent death, unto that person: and this (according
to the positure, and place of the line) shall like be judged to happen either
in the second, or third age.

The veins very big appearing, in the forehead: do denote the exceeding
quality of choler, and that such a person to be exceeding yrefull.

These hitherto of the judgment, of the three principal lines, appearing and
to be seen (in a manner) in the foreheads of most subjects: which diligently
observed, and noted by due circumspection, shall in the end find this rare
and Golden secret, hid a long time from many good wits, yea and of these
sufficiently skillful in other laudable Arts. And that this Jewel may not
appear mutilate, and vnpersite, for the lack of more principles and
instructions to further the same: I intend to publish a singular treatise very
rare, and known but to few students, entitled Metoposcopie, or by a more
known name, the vewe and beholding of all the lines appearing in the forehead,
beginning orderlye from Saturnes line, unto the Moons, written by a most
learned Mathematican and Physician, named Thaddaeus Hagecius of Hagek: to which
added unto the number of three score examples, lively counterfayted: that he by
diligent travail, noted and observed: which no doubt will much help, and
further those, that mind to judge on subjects, by the aid of those faithful
instructions, and lively examples: published in this perfect manner, by that
worthy man above named: for recompense of which trauayles, he in my (opinion)
well deserves immortal memory, among other of the learned Philosophers:
which commendation and oppinion of mine, I refer to the wisdom of the
readers, at the coming forth of the treatise: in the mean time I wish the
readers, to use these instructions above uttered. Next follows the judgment
of the ouerbrowes, as a part belonging to the forhead: by which singular matter
may be learned and known.

The form and judgment of the ouerbrowes. The. xvij. chapter.


THe learned Philosopher named Nuncius naturae, writes in the second book (
de partibus Animalium) that the ouerbroowes, and eye lyddes were ordained for
special helps to the face, as to ornate, and beseem the same, with the
avoiding of other inconveniences.

The place of the ouerbroowes (as writes Cocles) is a part of the foreheade,
and formed of nature in that seat, where the bones knit and join together.
The ouerbroowes also were ordained to man (as reports Thaddaeus) both for
profit, and comeliness sake: these for profit, that the moisture and sweat
falling from the forehead, might (as a penthouse to the eyes) so cast off the
moisture destilling, and like the humors and moisture falling from the head
(through the same e^eising) shoot them of, without harm to the eyes. The like
words in a manner, utters the Phisiognomer Cocles.

The ouerbroowes (as reports Cocles) were appointed by God and Nature, in the
knitting and joining of the bones: for that in many old persons they grow and
wax so long, that of necessity, and for comeliness sake, they must be
clypped.

The causes of the hears (as writes the Phisiognomer) are noted to be four:
as the efficient, the material, the formal, and final. The efficie^t cause
of the hears, is procured two ways: the one is natural heat, which
eleuateth the humors from the moisture of the body, and sends or carries
them forth unto the skinny parts. The other is the cold air, which both
thickneth and coagulateth those humors, and reduces them into the form of
hears. The material cause, is two ways, the first is far off, and is the
corporal moisture: the second cause is near, and is the earthly vapor or
humor, which is euaporated from the moisture. The formal cause, is the form
of the hears, as the length and roundenesse of them. The final cause, is ye
diversity of hears, as to the decking and beseeming of the body, like as are
the hears of the ouerbroowes, of which out intent is to write fully and at
large in this chapter.

The ouerbroowes have a hid virtue, to express the affections of the mind:
of which this proverb that the person rayseth or lifts up the ouerbrowe:
meant by the same, that such a one to be arrogant, and proud. And such
appearing like, does the learned Thaddaeus, rightly name hawty, and sour of
countinaunce.

The right ouerbroowe is more raised, and bended, than the left: in that all
the parts through the cause of moving, do decline and lean, unto the upper
sight. The right kidney in like manner is known to be higher placed, than is
the left: as the abouesayde Thaddaeus writes.

Such having the ouerbroowes ^erye hearie, be noted peevish, and overthwart in
words: the reason is, for that the much quantity of hears, does argue the
great plentye of hot and addust matter, through the cause of heat and
adustion: of which insueth, or is procured, the uncomeliness of speech,
through ye swiftness of words, and hasty talk. Their manners in like condition
be untoward, and eluishe: seeing the understanding and worthy behavior, is
not caused, but through a temperament, and depriving of adustion. For of the
great adustion, is the brain evermore heated: or a light cause heateth,
through the notable heating: and by the consequent, such be clatterers, and
furious: and they neither think, nor can think and direct in their words a
good or right discourse.

The ouerbroowes stretched upward, if of the hears discende unto the
beginning of the nose, and upward elevated unto the temples, do denote the
dominion of heat and drith: and such are known to be crafty, and wicked of
conditions.

Conciliatore writes, that whose ouerbrowes appear whole, and not seauered of
hears between each, are noted heavy and sad persons, applied unto the
similitude of the affection, and passion: as both Aristotle, Albertus, and
others report.

Morbeth the Cardinal writes, that whose ouerbrowes are stretched unto the
nose, and re^ch upward to the temples, in such manner, that the hears spread
to either side of the brows: be not only noted simple, unshamefast,
envious, foolish, without fraud or deceyte: but insatiable and gluttinous,
applied to the Sow.

The ouerbrowes black, not much crooked, and divided with a space, are most
commended: for such ouerbrowes had our Savior Jesus Christ, and the chaste
virgin his mother: as the singular Nicephorus Preacher, and chief pastoure of
Constantinople church, and writer also of the ecclesiastical hystories
reports, in the end of his first book.

The ouerbrowes thin, and of a mean bigness, do argue a moderation in that
creature, and the goodness of humors: for such having the like ouerbrowes,
are noted to be ingenious, and searchers of deep secrets: as both the
Phisiognomer Cocles, the learned Philemon, Conciliatore, Albertus, and others
agree in the same.

The Phisiognomer Cocles reports, that when the ouerbrowes appear thick of
hears, and so plentiful or aboundaunt, that these (as the Philosopher
writes) do discende to the beginning of the nose, and appear through the
same whol^ formed together: do then signify great adustion: and such having
like ouerbroowes, are melancholicke, and of an evil nature: yea wicked
persons, and sometimes thieves, rauishers of maidens, Murderers, but deceyuers
always: and to be brief, all vices, and wickedness, are comprehended and
known in th^se persons. Of which she natine Philosopher, in his mother tongue,
wrote these warning verses, which follow.

NOn te fidare, de le gointae cigliae
ne de le folte, se guercia ^lo luce,
Che chi le porta, guarda non te piglie.
impio danimo, ladro, falso, efello,
Cum bell parlare, suo tempo conduce,
rapace lupo, cum vista dagnello.
Non fu may guercio, cum lalma perfecta,
che non portasse, de malicia schermo,
Sempre seguendo, la superba secta.
These hitherto, Franciscus Asculanus.

In these verses above noted, does the Physiognomer declare and report, that
the squynt or gogle eyed persons, to be greedy catchers, covetous,
dissemblers, and malicious: and in a manner so evil inclyned, as such having
the ouerbrowes joined, through the hears thick growing between: and the like
may be said of those having but one eye, so that the other parts are
agreeing. And generally these think all evils, if we may credit the
Physiognomer.

This gogling of the eyes, is caused many ways, as Auicen writes ( tertia
tertij capitulo. 28. de strabositate) where he vttreth, that sometimes the
gogling of the eyes, is caused through the mollifying and looseness of
certain Lacertes. etc. and after the same he reports, that this gogling is
sometimes caused through a dryness, as the like happens in sharp agues. etc.
and this (says the Physiognomer) serves aptest vino^ our purpose: in that the
same corroborateth the dryness, which is cause of the hears, and t^^ causes
also are assocyated, unto the procuring of a wicked effect. And I never saw
(says the Physiognomer) the goggle eyed person, without a mighty heap of
vices, full of fraudulent iniquities, and contumelious: and the like do I
affirm of the one eyed persons, having the other notes aunswering, as above
taught.



The ancient Rasys affirms, that such having much hear on the ouerbrowes,
are noted full of thoughts, and very pe^si^e, or most commonly sad: and their
speech unseemly* and gross. So that this text confirms choler adust, and
melancholy humors: and is the cause also of many thoughts, and that such muse
and be think great matters. A like note the Phisiognomer diligently marked, in
sundry robbers by the high way (as above reported) by the said Cocles. And
such also are de^^o^rers of Maidens, thieves, and murderers for the more part*
if their faces be covered with a palenesse, or wholly pale: and on sundry like
formed, the Phisiognomer pronounced judgment by order of law, and death to
ensue: which not long after happened, to the admiration of such which knew of
the same.



An example of a notable thief, and ingenious in stealing and robbing, who in
the Physiognomers time, was hanged for his wicked factes: does he here place by
the way, for the better furthering of such, as mind to judge by the Art, on
subjects like proportioned. This person, (to come to the matter) was figured,
on this wise: he was of a mean stature, lean and slender of body, and
proportioned in the* members and parts of the same. The hears of his head
black, curled, thin and long* the forheade square, and in the middle even,
the hears of the ouerbrowes bended, and thick, and in the discending joined
in the cone of the nose. The eyes were mean of form, deep standing in the
head, having glystering and fiery spots: the cheeks somewhat bearing out,
through the help and means of the bones there placed. The face was long, the
nose mean, as the same protensed unto the mouth, and chollerick of form, the
part under the nose foucated: the mouth small, the lyppes thin, and the
nether (as the same were downward) folded. The chinne extending to a
sharpness, or in a manner sharp downward, and on the top foucated, and
round, the bearde small and thin. The color of the face was white, shed or
covered with a certain pal^nosse, his pa^e in going like to the Pecockes, and
that in a soft manner. His stature after nature, was rather upright, than
stouping or crooked: yet crookedly did this person walk by himself, as one
musing by the way. His legs were slender, the feet small and fine, the
heels little and very flat: he went very seemly, and neat in apparel. The
shoulder points behind, were somewhat big, and a little crooked. The hands
fair and comely, with the fingers long, and paulmes long. He was a person (by
report of the Physiognomer) of few words, yet quick of speech: and his
actions for the more part, were done with much expedition, through a passing
wit, great boldness and courage* In as much as unto the Physiognomy of the
Planets, the Phisiognomer affirms, that the blackness of the hears of the
head, and thinness of them, and cryspidnesse, and quickness of speech, and
motion of the body, and nose protensed and chollerick or hooked, these
indicated that Marses virtue to bear swaye in him: for as much as in the
respect of body, he had the breast large, and shoulder points big: which
together were a note of hotenesse* in that person. The thinness of the hears,
signified a dryness to be in him. His pase musingly, or as one full of
thought, with the eye liddes drawn or gathered together, and ouerbrowes
joining, through the thickness of hears over the cone of the nose: the eyes
hollow or deep standing, and Peacockes pase. The eyes thus low situated did
denote a Saturnine disposition in him: and this especially the fewness of
words, and hardness in uttering them. The longnesse of face, with the cheeks
like figured, as above vftered: the lips thin, and color of the face
wanne, indicated a Mercuriall disposition, the forhead especially square. The
ouerbrowes arcuated, the lips small, the sharpness of chinne, and the
Fossils of them: the decking or even dressing of the hears, and fine
apparelling of the whole body: fine feet, with the heels small and flat,
indicated a veneriall disposition. The glystering eyes and spottie, were by
reason of the dries of the Animal spirits consisting in the brain: For that
the same fyrinesse and adustion procures men (without the great grace of God)
unto theftes and robberies. Saturn also increases dryness in that person: of
the Sun, the Moon and Jupiter I write not, in that I remembered not the notes
agreeable, at the writing of this.

It suffiseth us (says the Phisiognomer) that we only write, how Saturn and
Mars beared swaye, and procured this person unto theftes, Venus unto gaming:
and Mercury was in place, in his genyture, which caused him to be ingenious.
And hereof it succeeded, that this person had a small and thin beard. To
conclude, this conceive that the members which possess a cold and moist
matter, the Phisiognomer attrybuteth to the Moon: the members which inioye a
hot and dry quality, he applies to Mars: the members which contain a cold
and dry nature he applies to Saturn: the hot and moist to Jupiter: the hot
and dry more temperate to the Sun. The hot and moist members vncompact, and
not much solyde and round, nor very loase, nor much erected and clear, does
he attribute to Venus. The members long not protensed, and slender, are of
Mercury. Of the Saturnine and Martial slenderness, does the Phisiognomer
here omit to write, willing the iudgers in this Art, diligently to consider
the Saturnine lines, both in the foreheade and hand: and to learn the
Phisiognomie of the Planets, before they enterprise to judge on any subject. In
that the forms, colors, clenly decking of parts, and all other special
members of the body, a^e to be fully considered and beholden: before any
minds to phisiognomate, on the proper indiuiduate.

The Phisiognomer Cocles here utters an other example, yet easier to be
conceived, and understood of all persons, than the other above taught, which
is on this wise. A certain Governor, named Valentinus Caeser, the son of a
mighty man when he governed, which was a murderer, a great deceyuer, a breaker
of true faith, a spoyler of women, and a most great liar: had the eyes
glystering, which signified that person to be governed of Mars: in the night
time he exercised revels, banketing, and women: and this he followed in the time
of his most serious affairs: he seeledome gave care or heard any of his
subjects causes. He was a man given to be solitary, and full of thoughts and
musing, sometimes prodigal, and of no stable religion: he also was covetous,
and fearful, yet bold in words, and endued with a singular eloquence: in
diverse public matters to be heard, or in places of justice he threatened: and
this caused, through the disposition of Saturn and Mars, as above uttered. He
was a person, having a most detestable wit: especially about wicked
businesses, which proceeded of Saturn, and Mars. The color of the skin was
wan, and had an aquiline nose, which witnessed the disposition and nature of
Mars. But at the meeting of the three upper planets in Cancer, dyed that
mighty man above noted: whom some report, was Pope Alexander the sixth, which
seemed to be an enemy in ecclesiastical matters (but in what manner) I cannot
iustlye report. To be brief, about the time of the death of this Pope, happening
at the great conjunction in Cancer, lost this man his government, and sore
vexed with a grievous sickness.

And thus above his stock and kindred advanced, was at that time infortunated,
and thrown into prison. This person was most vile in deeds, and bold in
words in that the Satuurnine dysposition bare sway in him. And of this it
came to pass, that he was so great a dissembler, and deceyuer of many: for
when he was come unto his uttermost cyment, he vanished as a smoke or vapor:
in that Mercury of the Alchymisters, was evil fixed and coniealed. But the
salt Armoniacke, and salt Alkali, were separated from the iuyces of the herbs.

Such which be accustomed to wear gergious apparel, many (...) and Jewels;
like to time he exercised revels, banketing, and women: and this he followed in
the time of his most serious affairs: he seeledome gave care or heard any of
his subjects causes. He was a man given to be solitary, and full of thoughts
and musing, sometimes prodigal, and of no stable religion: he also was
covetous, and fearful, yet bold in words, and endued with a singular
eloquence: in diverse public matters to be heard, or in places of justice he
threatened: and this caused, through the disposition of Saturn and Mars, as
above uttered. He was a person, having a most detestable wit: especially
about wicked businesses, which proceeded of Saturn, and Mars. The color of
the skin was wan, and had an aquiline nose, which witnessed the disposition
and nature of Mars. But at the meeting of the three upper planets in Cancer,
dyed that mighty man above noted: whom some report, was Pope Alexander the
sixth, which seemed to be an enemy in ecclesiastical matters (but in what
manner) I cannot instlye report. To be brief, about the time of the death of
this Pope, happening at the great conjunction in Cancer, lost this man his
government, and sore vexed with a grievous sickness.

And thus above his stock and kindred advanced, was at that time infortunated,
and thrown into prison. This person was most vile in deeds, and bold in
words in that the Satur^^^^e dysposition bare sway in him. And of this it
came to pass, that he was so great a dissembler, and deceyuer of many: for
when he was come unto his uttermost cyment, he vanished as a smoke or vapor:
in that Mercury of the Alchymisters, was evil fixed and coniealed. But the
salt Armoniacke, and salt Alkali, were separated from the iuyces of the herbs.

Such which be accustomed to wear gergious app^^^ll* many (...) and Iew^ls*
like to women: or that be much delighted to wear and use sweet powders, and
pleasant Pomanders: are reported to be spiced with the disposition and nature
of Venus.



Whose hears of the ouerbroowes are descended down ward from part of the
nose, and retched upward from part of the temples: is noted unshamefast, and
dull of wit. For the unshamefastness, proceeds through a furious hotnesse,
and overmuch moving: and the dullness, through the same cause: as Rasis,
Palemon, Loxius, Adamantius, and sundry others affirm, and the Physiognomer
with them.

The ouerbroowes thin of hears, and of a mean bigness, do insinuate a
temperament, through the goodness of humors: and through the seperating from
very much adustion. And such by report of the Physiognomer, are noted
ingenious, and searchers of deep secrets.

That worthy man Rasis reports, that the ouerbroowes long, do signify
arrogancy, and unshame fastness in that creature: the cause, did the
Phisiognomer above utter.

Conciliatore writes, that* when the hears of the ouerbroowes are stretched
unto the temples: such a person is known to be nastie or uncleanly: and of
some noted to be a mocker, and dissembler: which the Phisiognomer seems not
to have noted in his time.

Certain affirm, that the ouerbrowes long, do argue such a person to be
arrogant, leacherous, and unshamefast: which matters truly are increased, for
the more part in old age. As the Physiognomer* Cocles noted, in sundry
indiuiduates.

The learned Auicen writes, ( primo de animalibus) that when the hears of the
ouerbrowes descend by incuruation or crooking, from part of the nose, does
signify a sharp, that is, a ready wit and ingenious, in wicked and
detestable matters or businesses. When the hears be stretched and crook, to
the outside of the eye corners lachrimall: such a person (by report of the
Physiognomer) is noted, to exercise jesting, and to play the iester, and to
have his felicity therein: except education, otherwise contrary the same.

The hears of the ouerbroowes, if they shall be stretched, and lie so strait
as a line in length, and these long: do demonstrate an evil, weak, and
feminine mind: applied by the like, to women. And these manner of eye brows
(says the Physiognomer) do I attribute to Venus: and such he saw (for the
more part) to be Cynedes: or else very lurutious.

The ancient Palemon writes, that if the hears of the forehead or brows, be
stretched unto the middle of the nose, and that thick appearing, but unto the
parts which consist on either side, little: is an argument of magnanimity,
and of most singular virtue of mind, in that creature. The hears in the same
place stretched strayte out, do denote such a person to be fearful, yet
endued with deceytes, if we may credit Palemon.

Auicen (primo de animalibus) reports, that when the ouerbrowes are stretched
according to a right line, does signify a femynine: mind: he also writes,
that the hears of the ouerbrowes hanging downewarde, to signify an: envious
person: the ouerbrowes crooking, do* denote a weak mind, and feeble courage.
The^ ouerbrowes so much crooking, that they appear almost joined to the nose,
do denote a subtle, and an ingenious person. Such ouerbrowes (says the
Physiognomer) declare a studyous person: and applied for that reason, to the
Planet Mercury.

When the ouerbroowes shall be thin, in the dyametre commensurated, and that
these are large: this person (by report of the Phisiognomer) is noted, to be of
a quick and ready understanding. Some write, that if the ouerbrowes bended,
are joined together at the cone of the nose, do argue a subtle, and a
studious person. If these there knit (by the agreement of all writers) do
witness a sad person, yet not the wysest, as the Phisiognomer noted the same.

Here the Physiognomer propowneth a solemn Problem, that may be demanded,
why the hears of the ouerbrowes, are more increased in old age, than in
youth: to which he thus seems to answer, that seeing the generatiue vapors
of the hears of the ouerbrowes, which are carried or sent forth, by the joints
of the bones, and in youth are compact, and well joined, through the tenacitie
of moisture: for that cause the vapors can not have their free passage forth,
seeing the penetration in them at that age is prohibited. But the moisture of
the self same joined in old age, is consumed and dried: whereof the bones are
caused more open, and the vapors free do consequently ascend, through which
the hears of the ouerbroowes are then procured to grow long.

The hears of the ouerbroowes thick, and so long stretched out, that they
seem in a manner to shadow the sight: do denote in that person, the excess
of heat. The ouerbrowes thin of hears, and the places much fleshie: do
signify a flow, and dull capacity, and coldness ruling in the principal
members: as the learned Thaddaeus writes.



The hears of the ouerbrowes near touching, and in a manner ionned together,
are noted to be the woorste condition of all others: in that the broowes like
formed, do argue a wicked person, full of mischief, ungracious works and
deeds, and given to wicked Arts. As the like, the learned Joan. Indagines
affirms, that he observed in sundry old Witches, brought to the stake to be
burned, that had the like ouerbroowes. The learned Physician Thaddaeus
reports, that he observed a ioly Captain, a far traueyler, yea a Pyrate
on the Sea, and rauisher of Maidens (in the City named Nymburge) three years
before, he was cruelly slain of the Lartarians: who had the like ouerbrowes,
with the eyes glistering, and fyrie spots in them, having also an yrefull and
fierce countinaunce, and wanne of color in the face. That the form of this
person, may nearer be understood and learned of the professors of the Art,
conceane this figure here before demonstrated lively to the eye.

The hears of the ouerbroowes white (as reports Joan. Indagines) do argue
an effeminate person, lightly believing and foolish. If the crooking of the
hears declyneth unto the temples, and unto the bossing out of the cheeks,
does denote such a person to be negligent and foolish. The ouerbrowes, if they
retch out long, and appear thick of hears: do signify a person meditating,
and bethinking mighty matters, as the Phisiognomer reports.



The Physiognomer. Cocles here placesh an other example, of a certain person
that he noted (in his time) which by reason of the overmuch hotnesse consisting
in him, was known to be a a fool full of words, furious, yrefull, evil
tongued, and impatient, whose positure and form of parts was on this wise. He
had the head pinaple like, the voice loud and sownding, quick of speech, and
in stature small, musculous, Sanguine, yet tending unto choler. The ears were
great, the forehead bearing or bossing out, after a round manner, the ouerbrowes
joined together, and much hearie, the eyes small, hollow standing, glistering,
and fiery: the nose flat and holowe in the middle: the cheeks bonie, and
somewhat flat: the mouth great, the lips thick, and folded or turned outward:
the teeth big: the chinne sharp, and long: the face long: the neck gross,
and short: small was the distaunce, between the heart, and brain: by which
appears, that the skill of the Anothomye, is very necessary in this Art.
The shoulder points were great and elevated, with a largeness of the breast:
the part before (named Methaphrenon) was eminent and fleshie, the Hipocondria
great: the legs short and musculous: the arms long, and gross or big, the
feet big, and articulated: the heels great: the soales of the feet holowe:
a swiftness in pace, and treading short. He bare the head (by turning hither
and thither) after the manner of the Heart: over all the body, he was most
hearie: having a red color in the face: which notwithstanding was a darcke
f^erie. In the hands he had the Cardiacke, and middle natural line, very
large separated, and were most read: with the mensall line naked, and alone:
in the paulme of the hands, were only three lines: with the rest of the
tubercles, and other lines infortunated and depressed: that denoted a most
beluine or brutish nature, to consist in that person.

For as much as Michael Scotus has friuolusly written of the ouerbroowes, for
that cause does the Phisiognomer Coeles, wittingly ouerpasse his sayings in
this Chapter: considering they do so far disagree, from the lively Art. And
the learned Ioannes Picus, greatly discommendeth this Scotus, affirming him to
have written no weighty matters of importance, but rather trifles, and of
these full of superstition. These hitherto of the ouerbroowes, with the lively
examples described of ye Phisiognomer, much furthering all such as be delighted
in the Art: next to this does he utter, both of the uses, and judgment of the
eye liddes.

The form and judgment of the eye liddes, and hears of the liddes. The.
xviij. chapter.


ISydore writes, that nature ordained the cover of the eyes, or eye liddes, to
defend the eyes from outward harms: as from flies, moths dust, strawes, and
such like, that might otherwise fall into them. The eye liddes also be the
couers, with which the eyes are covered: and (of Isydore named) the eye liddes,
in that these ^ouer and hide the eyes in sa^tie. For the same cause, the like
is to be learned and understood of the nature, and diversity of the hears:
as before in the other chapter, of the ouerbrooines. Here in this chapter, has
the Phisiognomer diligently gathered together, the sayings of the learned
Conciliatore, and others, although but a few notes of them were to be found.

The eye liddes, which on the eye aproched nigh the angle, in the lacrimall
part, if the ^ame be exceeding small and thin: does denote the disposition of
the manner, and malice of the form. The cause of ye smalnesse of hears, does
little the matter indicate.

The thinness of the hears, does argue the subtilnesse of matter, that is, of
the humors, and the dominion of choler. Such are known to be malicious,
vicious and wicked: yet consider diligently, all the other passions of choler.
When that place shall be fleshier, like to the Rites eien, then does the same
denote craftiness, and an evil hotnesse, and is also a chollericke fool. For
which cause (says the Phisiognomer) beware of the chollericke, not regenerated
of the holy Ghost.

The lacrymall or inner corner of the eye, when the same is little and narrow:
does signify a crafty person, as Auicen reports, primo de Animalibus.

The upper eye lidde bearing out, rather blown up: then full appearing, and
somewhat declining over the eye: does argue that person to be hawne and
disdainful.

If the eye lyddes do doeline downwards, full and very thick, especially
when they be covered with a redness: does indicate such a person to be a
ruinous and wastefull drunkarde. The reason is, for that these signify a
weakness of the eyes* and by the consequent, of the brain. So that through
such a weakelsesse, the like persons fear the drinking of wine. As the same,
Phisiognomer observed and noted in many, haunting tauernes, and such often
drinking Maulmesie^: of which one, the like was a certain Countryman of his,
being an exceeding quarter and drinker of Wines.

That if the nether eye lidde shall be small, a narrow drawn together, in
such manner, that it covers but the white of the eye: does denote the body to
be governed of a dryness of humors. If this like happens in any cause; of
verte sharp passions unless nature has so wrought the same (as Hypocrates
witnesses) does then pronounte death at hand.



The ancient Rasis reports, that when the hears of the eye liddes (so named
of the beating of them) do crook downwards, or be naturally wrythed unto one
part: do indicate such a person to be crafty, and a liar.

Why the liddes are placed on the eyes, does Gulielmus Nurice thus define: that
by them the condition and quality of the eyes, might the readier and better be
defended and preserved from the outward matters: even as the sheath; on a
sword: for that cause, such a person which has a grosser or thicker eye
lidde, does further see from him: for as much as these preserve the light of
the eyes, from the outward heat, and cold. And of this, many beasts see
further off, than men: and this caused, through the grossness or thickness
of the eye liddes.

The corners of the eyes, when they be delated, do then argue a sickness or
disease, of the eyes. And if these have any fleshie bearing out, do denote
drunkenness: especially when the eyes are bearing out, and the eye liddes be
dry: as in many the like, the Physiognomer has observed and noted.

The upper eye liddes, covering the nether: do argue (by the report of
Conciliatore, Albertus, and others) long life.

The corners of the eyes dylated and large, through the cause of a smyling eye:
does indicate a leacherous person: and this note, applied (of the Philosopher)
to Venus.

The often beating, or panting of the eye lids, does argue such a person to be
fearful, and vexed often with a frensinesse: as Palemon, Loxius, and sundry
others report.

The eye liddes thin (and in health) are best commended: For these declare, a
lawdable mind, nighest approaching to God, through an upright behavior.

The judgment of the spases, between the eye brows: after the mind of
Michaell Scotus. The xix. chapter.


THe spaces between the eye broowes, near joining together: declare that
person to be a niggard, envious, very much desirous of bewtifull things,
having a strange fortune, and more rigorous than gentle in behavior.

The spaces between the eye broowes, if they be large: do denote such a
person to be of a dull capacity, yet of a great boldness, very trusty in
need, of a perfect and an upright friendship: these hitherto Michael Scotus:
if we may credit the agreement of these sayings.

The nature and judgment of the mouings of the eyes. The. xx. chapter.


THe Phisiognomers confirm their sayings, by the signs and notes of the eyes:
in that the notes which are discerned in the eyes, be figures and vtterers of
the affections of the heart.

The eye is the isntrumental member of sight, whose quality is moist, in a
round form figured, with a certain playnesse: and formed with seven coats,
and three humors, as writes the learned Sillanus (super nono Almansoris.)

The passions of the mind, as trouble, mirth, love, hatred, and such like: are
especially declared and uttered by the eyes: after the agreement of all writers.

The especial colors of the eyes, are known to be four: as the black,
whytishe, variable, and gray: as the worthy Canamusalis (in libro oculorum,
cap. tertio) reports, and the like Iesuhalis.

The round form of the eyes, is better moving, perfiter, and vncorruptibler,
through the lacking of corners: as all the learned agree in the same.

The cornered eyes, have very often superfluous moisture standing in them: as
writes the singular Constantine, in libro oculorum.

A perfect form and condition of the eyes, does denote an honest person: as
writes Gulielmus Nurice, Conciliatore, Albertus and others.



The eyes big and emynent, do argue weakness, and a feeble courage: in
that these be so caused big, through the much abundance of moisture of the
brain: in which is coldness, that sheadeth a long by the members, and
extinguisheth the blood. So that such a brain is colder, and moyster, than it
ought to be: and in such a body should be the lack both of natural blood, and
courage. And as the spirit and store of blood, procures boldness in men, even
so does the cold and moist quality, contrary work and cause fearfulness.

Rasis reports that the eyes emynent and big: do argue such a creature to
be fearful: and applied to the Hare, Cunny, and Frogge.

The eyes outward extended, do denote (after the mind of Rasis) such a person
to be foolish: but the eyes deep standing, do denote such a person to be
subtle, and of evil conditions, through the part of the wicked quality: yet
such be of a good and sharp sight, and see further, than the emynent eyes do:
in that the visible spirit is more gathered in the deep eyes, and the seeing
virtue stronger, yea the light is received in greater quantity: as by
experience is known in the Gunner, which minding to shoot strayt, winketh
with the one eye: and like the Carpenter, in the laying of his line right:
these hitherto Auerroys. But through the contrary cause, such having the eyes
emynent be weak of sight, and see nothing so far off. The large eyes tending
into a breeth of the body, like unto the eyes of the Parthians, do indicate
the moisture of body, in that creature.



Such having the eyes elevated, and standing high out, do see from them (as
above uttered) but a little way: the cause is, in that when the eye is
eminenter, it is then further distaunt from the brain: which is noted, the
well spring of the eyes. So that through the far distaunce from their spring,
that is the brain, such eyes are hindered to see far: where otherwise the
eyes standing deep, do see sooner and further, yet such are noted to be of
evil conditions. Further, conceive that through the eminency of the eyes,
diverse matters visible are represented: so that such in a short time, can
discern and judge matters. Such also are bablers without judgment, through
the forepart moist: as before uttered, of the forehead. And for that cause, are
noted unshamefast, and foolish: the self same (in a manner) does the learned
Asculanus (in his mother tongue) write in libro Cerbae, on this wise.

Gli ochij eminenti, et in figura grossi
Gli ochij veloci cum lo batter sermo,
Matti e falsi, and de mercedae scossi.
By which he concludes, that such are without dyscretion, through the small
discourse, and paucytie of understanding. He also utters an other kind in
these, as the eyes moving fast and quick, which are a note of hotenesse: and
argues irefulnesse, luxury, and boldness: applied to the Hawke, and Fawcon.



The slow moving of the eyes, is a note of coldness: and declares sadness,
and fearfulness in that creature. Such which with the eyes, move the eye
lids together, are weak, and of a feeble mind, as Palemon, writes. The eyes
which shut, and open together: do indicate a wicked and traiterous person. If
water shall stand in them, does then denote a studious person, and an earnest
searcher of Arts: as writes Aristotle, Albertus, and Phylemo.

Conciliatore writes, when the eyes are difformally moved, as that one whiles
they run, and an otherwhiles cease running (although by these as yet) no
wicked fact or michiefe be committed and done: in cogitation notwithstanding
the mind is known, to be occupied with the like. And such generally, the
Phisiognomer has noted to be of wicked conditions: and prone through such a
conioyning to come to a violent or evil death. Yea such a like note, has the
Phisiognomer often observed, in many robbers by the high way.

The Philosopher Ptholomie writes, ye the eyes yellow (so that the same
proceeds of no sickness) do signify such a person to be a deceyuer, and
cruel: as the Phisiognomer Cocles observed and noted, in sundry Bawdes, and
Murderers. Further such a color, does indicate the dominyon of choler, with a
most great adustion: of which occasion, cannot otherwise be caused, but the
dominion of malignity.



The eyes which swiftly move, with a sharpness of sight, are noted thieves,
unfaithful, and deceyuers: yea such a note, has the Phisiognomer experienced,
and judged many, which after were hanged. Of these one the like, was the son
of M. Iulianus de Pontremulo, brought up, and frayned couragiouslye (from
child age) under a valiant and pollitike Captain, named Francesco Rouerso:
on whom he pronounced judgment, in the year of man's redemption. 1492. And
before the presence of M. Bartholomew (de S. Marino) a famous Chirurgian, and a
most special freende of the Phisiognomers* And as this Cocles had before
pronounced and judged of the yolig man, even so came it to pass (through the
lack of grace) that he was hanged, in the year of our Lord. 1496.

And this Physiognomer on an other, named Tadeus Gu^dottus, pronounced a like
judgment, which also for theft (as he reports) was hanged, by sentence of
the law. For these are well known to have a subtle wit, and the same proner
or readier unto the evil. The like confirms that worthy Conciliatore, where
he writes, that the eyes swiftly moving, and appearing sharp of look, are
noted crafty, unfaithful and Thieves: as of nature, these are uttered* The
cause is, in that through the subtilnesse of wit, theft proceeds, and the
strange deceyuing. For the subtle wit proceeds, through the subtilnesse of
humors, of which insueth the hotnesse of complexion, as above uttered. And the
moving, proceeds through a hotnesse: so that when the hotnesse is great,
then is the swiftness intensed.

The look fired, is not caused but of the ^uermuch, and fired thought, and of
the often desire to deceive. By which reason, for two causes, are the like in
such a subject, that is, the moving; which the intensed hotnesse signifies:
the other is, the sharpness of wit, to the deep cogitation and thought, to
work evil. The self same Rasis reports, where he writes, that whose eyes
move fast, and be sharp of look, is a deceauer, crafty, and a thief. Yet
may here some argue, that Thieves are Melancholic: in that Melancholy,
proceeds of a cold, and dry humor: for which cause, the contrary of this
is, as before uttered. To the same, does the Phisiognomer thus answer, that
this is not always certain or true: in that there has been seen* (says*
Cocles) that Martial persons were Thieves, and robbers by the high way: and
that those were found Chollericke and Melancholic: as shall after appear, in
the Phisiognomie of the Planets, and great work of Chyromancie (to come forth)
of the nature of Mars, yet may it be, through the accydences of the mind,
that these are caused Melancholic adust: which like, that the same is by
accydence, the Phisiognomer observed and knew of experience, in sundry
Bawdes, common Dysars, and robbers by the high way, which applied their minds
and wits in these.



The wanne and yellow color, both sometimes indicate the complexion or
quality of choler adust: yet the same tending unto Melancholy. If to a
whytenesse, to which a greenisse is admired, heat inseweth, which of the
Physicians, is properly named a leadie color, as writes Almansore, lib.
secundo. capit. 1. So that this is a swartishe color, if the same appears
nighe so a redness (or a redness mixed to it) which demonstrateth that the
gross blood to bear sway, even as the quantity which approaches to it, or as
the redness which is mixed to it. This color (by the agreement of the
Physicians) is as the color of the lunges, when the same is newlye drawn
forth of a beast, that is properly named wanne of color. The same (of the
lunges) which after the drawing forth, begins to putrify, and swell up, and
a wanne or leadie color appears in the same. Here note, that the
Phisiognomer wylleth a man, to beware and take heed of the like colored
persons, in that these are very evil, and wicked: if so be these in habitude
(as Cocles reports) be not laudable or comely. Such a color the Phisiognomer
noted, in sundry Cardinals, that were very wicked in their deeds. Yea these
of like color he noted to be drunkards, luxurious, and practisers of false and
wicked matters, without any shame: as the like of experience, the Phisiognomer
reports to have known. He further writes, that the Melancholicke aduste,
are leacherous, unlearned, and exercise swynishe conditions: when as their
heads be spericall, or Pineaple like, and having fat cheeks. Yea when the
adustion is overmuch, then such incur and fall into a frensinesse. The
Phisiognomer noted, yea he judged (before the learned) sundry of a like
complexion, that became foolish: and of these, two were Students at that time,
who after the increase of this melancholy, became foolish, according to the
judgment of the Phisiognomer.



The eyes small, do argue such a person to be perverse, foolish, and faint
hearted, applied of the Philosopher to the Ape: the reason is, in that when the
creature is hot and dry, he is then malycious of the humors and spyrites:
and is a betrayer through the hotenesse and dryness, proceeding of the
Chollericke adustyon. For which cause, such are deceyuers, and partake of the
Melancholye humors: of which fearfulness, and foolishness ensues through a
dryness. The deepenesse of the eyes proceeds through a dryness, which
dries up the moisture of the muscles and lygamentes. Of which insueth a
drawing together into the inner parts, and the brain to be exhausted. And the
paucitie of the matter of the eyes, does signify in the moisture proportioned,
the dominion of dryness and melancholye adust, or a dryness adustyue: and for
this, are fearful, and deceyuers, like to the Ape: as the same experience
demonstrateth.

When the eyes are situated after length of the body (for that these naturally
in mankind, are situated according to the breadth of the same) this is then
named monstrous, that is, not agreeable to nature: the cause of which is the
great hotenesse, as before sufficiently uttered. Of which a deceyuing and envy
insueth, through a daily or continual desire unto the exercising and
committing of evil factes, for the firinesse of ye spirits, and discrazed or
disturbed brain. Of the same Rasys utters, that when the eyes shall be
placed or situated as into length of the body, do then demonstrate the like
creature, to be subtle, and a deceyuer. And one like to these (by the report
of the Phisiognomer) was the brother of Hieronimus Sauonarola, who in very
deeede, was known to be a great seducer, and beguyler of the people: yea, a
deceyuer of deceyuers, and the proper invention of disceyte consisted in him,
so that not a like known or to be found in his time: this great deceyuer (as
Cocles utters) for the more coloring and hyding of his frawdes, published
new Statutes and Laws for the people, in the rich City of Florence. The
Physyognomie of whom, was on such wise: he had a small head, and the same in
Pineaple form: the eyes were, according to length of the body: the nose
hooked, or like to the Eagles bill: the lips thick: the color of his face
was wanne aduste, and the neck leaning or bending to one side: and a note of
the great hotnesse of his complexion was, that he could not endure to wear on
his head, any other under his Cap, then a fine and thin linen cloth, for
that the hears always shed of, how thin soever he went covered on the
head: and balde he was (through this continual shedding of hears) which
argued the dominion of dryness to consist in the forepart of the head. And
throughout the whole boby, he was (by report of the Phisiognomer) most hearie:
a note also of great adustion, in that person. For which cause (says Cocles)
beware and take heed, of such false Prophets, or (that I may aptlyer name
them) wicked deceyuers, thus complexioned and formed: but have an eye
especially to such, whose whole complexion is most adust.

Rasis reports ( in secundo ad Almansorem) that many spots in the eyes
appearing, do indicate an evil person: the rather, when the eyes shall
appear variable of color, which signifies the wickeder person. For the
varieties of the eyes proceed not, but of a hotnesse which cleuateth the
vapors unto the eyes: of which, how much the more the variety of the eyes is,
so much the more does the same argue an intensed hotnesse. By that reason, how
much the more diverse the spots are, so much the more is the adustion: and by
the consequent declares the variety of humors, and greater adustion, and
this does manifest the adustion of the spirit: of which the great deceyuer (as
Cocles utters) for the more coloring and hyding of his frawdes, published
new Statutes and Laws for the people, in the rich City of Florence. The
Physyognomie of whom, was on such wise: he had a small head, and the same in
Pineaple form: the eyes were, according to length of the body: the nose
hooked, or like to the Eagles bill: the lips thick: the color of his face
was wanne aduste, and the neck leaning or bending to one side: and a note of
the great hotnesse of his complexion was, that he could not endure to wear on
his head, any other under his Cap, then a fine and thin linen cloth, for
that the hears always shed of, how thin soever he went covered on the
head: and balde he was (through this continual shedding of hears) which
argued the dominion of dryness to consist in the forepart of the head. And
throughout the whole boby, he was (by report of the Phisiognomer) most hearie:
a note also of great adustion, in that person. For which cause (says Cocles)
beware and take heed, of such false Prophets, or (that I may aptlyer name
them) wicked deceyuers, thus complexioned and formed: but have an eye
especially to such, whose whole complexion is most adust.

Rasis reports ( in secundo ad Almansorem) that many spots in the eyes
appearing, do indicate an evil person: the rather, when the eyes shall
appear variable of color, which signifies the wickeder person. For the
varieties of the eyes proceed not, but of a hotnesse which cleuateth the
vapors unto the eyes: of which, how much the more the variety of the eyes is,
so much the more does the same argue an intensed hotnesse. By that reason, how
much the more diverse the spots are, so much the more is the adustion: and by
the consequent declares the variety of humors, and greater adustion, and
this does manifest the adustion of the spirit: of which the varieties of
conditions proceed, and the mighty heap of vices. So that of the great
variety, is the honest and lawdable judgment, debased or caused the woorser.



The look of the eyes like to the woman, causes the same disposition, as of
such a complexion: and is the same in conditions as the woman, as luxurious,
and inuericundious: for which cause such men of like nature, be luxurious, and
inuericundious. Of which Rasis reports, that when the look is like to a
childs, and that his whole face and eyes seem or appear as he smyled, this
is a light hearted person, and given to mirth, without taking care of the
affairs of the world. The eyes appearing wholly smyling (as one laughing) with
therest of the face in like manner, be flatterers, luxurious, and ill reporters
or slaunderers. Some of this allege a cause, and report that the mirch, and
length of life, to proceed of a good complexion: whose cause are the lawdable
humors, and pureness of them, through his agreement. So that the cause of
life is hotnesse, and moystnesse: but of death, coldness and dryness. The
complexion of young men, is hot and moist: but of old men cold and dry: and
the note of the same is, that such which coeate much, do live a short time:
and the gelded after nature longer, than those not gelded: and the aged men
which have much flesh, do live longer, in that the causes of much flesh, is a
hotnesse and moystnesse. By which reason children, that are hot and moist, be
among other ages merry, and joy through their complexion: and be without cares
of the mind. So that such, like to children in countinaunce, are the like in
complexion: not be thincking earnest, or weighty matters.

When the eyes appear in redness to the burning coal, such a person is noted
to be wicked, and obstinate: the reason is, in that the fyrie color, does
indicate a most intensed choler, by reason of the hotnesse: and he is vicious,
and obstinate, as appears in the verses in the first place.



Whose eyes be in color like to the Gotes eine, is argued foolish: the reason
is, that when a creature resembles to any beast, such a person is of the like
nature, complexion, and conditions as in many places before like uttered. So
that such Gotes eine do indicate foolyshnesse, and great simplicity. The
Phisiognomer many times looked on such a beast and found the eyes somewhat
variable, with a certain troubled matter about the ring and sight of the eye,
which declared (after his judgment) a complexion very fiegmaticke, and watery,
of which fearfulness, and foolishness insueth.

The eyes which are like to the Cowes eyne, do portende a madness to succeed
in that creature: seeing the eyes like to Cowes eyne in men, do argue a like
complexion. For the complexion of such a beast, is cold and moist, of which
the eyes are great: so that through a coldness and moystnesse, is the
slownesse and dullness of understanding caused, of which a madness and
simplicity ensues.

The eyes gray of color (to the sky) dry seeming, and dimmie: such a person
(wills the Philosopher) that a man to eschew, so nigh as he may: for that
this gray color in dry eyes, is a note of wicked persons. The color of the
eyes, which represents ye color of Dile, does witness a strong person. The
yelowishe color of the eyes, does indicate a strong, and stout person. The
eyes appearing much black of color, is denoted to be of a hard nature, and
fraudulent. The deepenesse of the eyes, is through a dryness, drying the
muscles and ligaments: of which ensues a gathering into the inner parts (as
before uttered) and the brain exhausted. The eminency of the eyes represents
many objects, of which a peevish discourse ensues, through a confusion of the
objects.

If the eyes shall be small and prominent out, like to the Creauis eyne: do
denote the lewdness of conditions and foolishness. The reason is, in that the
smalenesse of the eyes, does witness the paucitie or littleness of matter:
but the emynencie of them, does indicate the overmuch moisture in the fore
ventricle, where the spirits are let, and of this lacks judgment. The
emynencie also of the eyes, is the cause of the representing of many objects,
insomuch that such a one, can not discern the congruent, from the incongruent:
of which does the pieuishe and beastly discourse ensue, through the confusion
of the obiectes.



The eyes tending upward, as the Ox eyne, which (and with this) appear
read, and are most great: do indicate a most wicked person, lewd of
conditions, a fool, a bibber, and a drunkard. The reason of this effect is, in
that the same signifies the weakness of brain: for as much as such a form,
proceeds of a moist brain. And of the weakness of brain, is the
drunkenness caused, through the vapors ascending, which together disturb the
brain. The same elevation of the eyes, proceeds by accidence: in that this
is caused through the overmuch hotnesse, whose note is the red color, or the
red color indicateth. For of an overmuch hotnesse, is the disturbance (of the
rational spirit) caused: as the like we daily see, in the fyrie yrefulnesse
of men. Such eyes the Phisiognomer noted, in the City of Viteberge, by one
Nicholas a Barbier: which in a manner, was customably or daily drunk.

The eyes directed with the look upward, quyuering, and with a palenesse of
countinaunce infected, do denote such a person to be of a fierce and an
inhumaine wit, of an envious nature, and sometimes a murderer.



If any by nature, has the eyes appearing turned upward: such a one of
nature, is Lybidinous: applied to the manner appearing, in the dead bodies. And
in persons at the instaunt coeating, as writes Aristotle, in his Problemes.
For the eleuating of the eyes, is by accydence: in that the same is caused,
through the overmuch hotnesse, whose note is, the redness of color: of which
is a troubling, of the rational spirit caused: as we daily see, in the
intensed yrefulnesse of men.

The eyes appearing retorte, if they tend to the right side: do denote
foolishness: but if these tend to the left side, then they pronounce
incontinencie: as the learned Palemone, in his Phisiognomy utters.

The extensed eyes, with the extension of the count inaunce, do denote such
persons to be malicious, and wicked: the reason is, for that the same extension
is procured of a dryness, and hotnesse, through which the hot spirit is
caused evil.

He which has the eyes like to the Ass, is noted foolish, and dull of
nature: the reason is, in that they be of a cold and dry quality, of which
the impression of kinds is hard to enter: so that by the same reason, such
are foolish: referred after the manner, to the slow Ass.



The woorser eyes are they, which have either white, black, read, or any
other colored spots in them: in that such a person, is less constaunt, then
any others: yea so hardly to be trusted, that rather to be shunned: except
grace, and godly education help herein. And such a note, the Phisiognomer many
times observed and considered, in diverse Princes, Noble men, and iolye Lawyers,
in authority. Here might a man question and demand, how it happens, that
such a variety of colors, appears in the eyes: to which the Phisiognomer
thus answers, that seeing the eyes are very clear, and of a thin
substance, which is caused of the waterie humors consisting in them, of which
the eyes are formed: For that cause, do the visiue spirits, declare their
qualities in the eyes. That these also are of a thin substance, does well
and manifestly appear in the (...)4w when (...)h has (...)h (...): in that
such a one does then t4spe a (...)if and (...)4lking essagl, at the beholding
of the same, with iedwbol t4spse: yea and at that time, do such cetinef
dr^ilchi ylineg in the readle: if a man may credit, the saying of the ancient
writers in this.

The eyes appearing, as they were hid in the head, that is, standing hollow
inward, do further see: and such a person these argue, to be suspicious,
malicious, of a wicked ire, and perverse condition: yet very mindful,
especially of injuries, bold, cruel, deceytfull, a liar, enuyous, leacherous.
etc. as that Michael Scotus reports.

The ancient Rasis utters, that many spots appearing about the sight of the
eyes: do witness an evil person: and the woorser are those spotted eyne
known, if they be variable of color. The varieties of the eyes, do no
otherwise proceed, than of the heat eleuating the vapors unto the eyes: and
how much the more variety there appears of the eyes, so much the more does
this argue the inward hotenesse to be. How much the more variable, or diverse
in form, the spots are, so much the more and greater, is the adustion of the
spirits elevated: of which both the varieties of conditions, and the great
heap of vices proceeds. So that of the great variety, is the honest, and
lawdable judgment, procured the woorser, of all likelihood.

Such persons which have the eyes shyning, are noted to be lybidinous: and for
the form, applied of the Philosopher Aristotle, unto the Cock, and Raven.

The eyes in redness, appearing unto the burning coal: do indicate a most
wicked, and obstinate person: and the cause is, for that the fyrie color, does
witness a most intensed choler, by reason of the hotnesse: as before uttered,
of the Physiognomer Cocles.





He which has mean eyes, declyning unto the Celestial color (or to the
color of the sky) or unto a blackishnesse: such a person is noted, to be of a
perfect understanding, faithful, and saruisable. The like conditioned eyes,
the Philosopher Aristotle commended highly unto king Alexander. And the same
seems the learned Auicen to utter ( primo canticorum, de varietate oculoru^)
which argue a temperament: if so be the eyes appear, to the color of the
Antymonye: for these denote, a sharpness and readynesse of wit.

The worthy Almansor reports, that those the learned name the better eyes,
which appear as (between the black and variable) a mean: if with this, these
are not much shyning, nor that (...), nor Cytrynesse appears in them: (...)
such eyes, do^ demonstrate a good nature, dis^^^tion and wy^te: The reason is,
for that these (...) private and f^ee, from the adustion of choler, (...)
adust Melancholy.

The color of the eyes celestial, or unto the Sky, and black, or a dark
yellowe, whereas (...) spots in any mane^ appear, and are caused of moist
humors temperate, without any adulti^^^ of which a spirit like to nature is
represented* (...) of wit, and speculation (...) that creature, after the mind
of Nun^u^ naturae, and Conciliatore.



The variable color of the eyes, signifies that the spirit of fight (in that
creature) to be the more and cleerer: and such the Phisiognomer always know,
and saw to be well borne) that is, well complexioned, and that those ^o ^e
Philosophers, and searchers of Sciences, and deep matters: of which one the
like, wa^ that learned Philosopher, and singular searcher of natural and hid
secrets, named Alexander Achillinus a Bononian. And many others Cocles ^^ted,
among which was that Dominicus ^uso^s Ariminensis, a man singularly learned*
and a witness bearer of the Phisiognomers L^^^brations. And Cocles never
beheld, nor noted any learned Lawyer, but that he had the eyes without any
spot in them.

The worser eyes are they, which have either the white, black, or read
spots, or of any other color in them, for that such a person (as is
aforesaid) is to be mislyked: yet except herein those, which be pained with
the web in the eye, of which the like has been known, both honest, and
godly in conversation.

Conciliatore utters, that the eyes variable, big, and graye in color: if
these shall be with read spots (especially dustie) and that the same be like
unto a corrupt black: and orderly move with the look, to one side: do
denote a troubled mind, and vicious of fact: yet by nature bold and ingenious.



By the eyes (not always the whole eyes) but the black of them conceive: in
that it is the black only, which shows and utters the matters, that we
see.

Whose black of the eyes be read over, are so irefull at times, that such
quight forget, what they do, for the furious anger, they be in.

It has been observed, that in the white of the eyes, where veins appearing,
were filled with blood, and waring read, that such declared the person to be
very irefull and hasty: as Phylemon, and the ancient Rasis report.

When the one sight of the eye, seems or appears far greater, then the
other: do signify (by the agreement of writers) not only an evil nature,
but wicked conditions in that creature.

The reddish spots in the eyes, but not very read, and rather or more
declining to a blackenesse: so that to the beholders, these appear and seem
blackish: do denote such a person to be of a courtious mind, just, honest,
and ingenious: by the agreement of the most Phisiognomers.

The eyes which shine (as with little spots of brightness) within: do
denote such to be clenly, gracious, and well conditioned: as the Phisiognomer
of experience affirms.



The eyes with spots (appearing altogether read) yet these not round, but
rather square: and like to the fire shining, both within and beneath: and that
the others behind them are pale and others also grayishe: and that the circles
without the sight, compassing and enclosing, are bloudye: and that there is a
bigness of the eye: and that both the eye liddes, and apples of the eyes do
move: do argue such a creature, to be of a cruel mind, above all measure: a
sheader of his own households, friends, or kindreds blood: yea devising, and
attempting all kinds of mischiefs, and subuerting all manner of matters, with
great disceyte and craft. For such were the eyes (by report of the
Phisiognomer) of that most, wicked (...); named Ezelinus de Romano,

Such small spots appearing in the eyes, how much the redder and lesser these
shall be, so much the greater ire, injuries, and detestable euilles, they
witness in that creature: but the greater, and darcker spots; do diminishe
these wicked (...) finally take them away; or abate these (...) as the most
Met oposcopers, agree in (...)

The black or bloody spots, in the black or swartish sightes of the eyes:
do witness a wicked person, and a poysoner: unless grace (...) this. But the
pale spots, do indicate such a creature to be (...) deceytfull, and somewhat
incl^^ed unto wickedness. Here note, that how much the colors of the
spots, be mightier: so much the greater are their effects. For that by their
darckenesse, how much the same be (as is before uttered) so much the lesser are
the euil^, and mischiefs: by the report of Rasis, Consiliatore Phylemon, and
others.

There be eyes (like colored) to the Rainebowe, which if these are dry, do
argue madnesse^ but if the eyes be moist, then do they signify magnificencie
and wisdom, yet with (...) and pronenesse unto the venereal act. The (...)
eyes, like to water shining, do denote such a creature to be honest
conditioned, gentle, and friendly, after the mind of Ptholomeus paruus.

The sight of the eyes, if the same shall be black, and closed with the
aforesaid cytrynesse: or that if this appears goldenist color (as the
Physicians write) does indicate a flux of blood, by the nether parts,

That Philosopher Ptholomeus paruus utters, that the eyes big, and the
ouerbroowes long appearing, do signify short life, if other notes agree with
this: for such a note, had that Lodo^^^^s de Blanc^is, a Bononian of noble
birth: which the skillful Phisiognomer Cocles (...) to be of a short peryode,
by this, and other like notes that he considered: who in very (...) according
to the conjecture, lived but a short time after: and sundry others he judged,
having the like notes, that ended their peryode in a short time.



The person which has the eyes long (...)ted, with the ouerbroowes long; such
a person shall be learned, of a deep understanding, and (...)* yet by the
agreement of the most Phisiognomers, but short lived.

He which has the whiteness in the eyes, tending unto a blackness, does
(...) man, and living (by the report of the Phisiognomer) in honor. The upper
eye liddees, (...)over the nether (as before uttered) do demonstrate (of
experience known) long life.

The eyes small and round, do argue (after the mind of the Phisiognomer)
such a creature, to turn willingly unto the evil: so that the face withal,
be covered with a palenesse: these hitherto, Ptholomeus paruus.

Whose eyes shall be vehemently moving, and a little quiuering or beating: do
indicate a most wicked person, in that a most inward hotenesse is declared: by
reason of the spirits abounding, and flowing (unto the compass about) of the
eyes. Of which the ancient Rasis reports, that the swiftness of the
opening, and shutting of the eyes, does signify a hotenesse in that creature.

The eyes quick and ready moving, and sharp of look, do indicate such a
person, to be a greedy catcher: applied for the manner unto the catching Hawke.
That if the beating of the eye liddes shall be often, does then indicate a (...)
creature.



Who^e balls of the eyes are drawn or carried unto one side properly, whether
does are ^niformallye, or (...) moved, do (...) evil conditions, and a
wicked person, from whom, just cause is to (...) and ^^^e. For (...) these are,
moved uniformly* conceive that his mind is prone unto mischiefs and
wickedness: and that the creature to be polluted, with murders domestical,
wicked mea^es and marriages: as were the Gestes, and marriages (by report of the
ancient) of Thies^is, and Atrei, of M^^^^^ and I^^sonis, whose children were
spoiled, and (...) ^^as pieces, with the hands of the proper parents.

But when the eyes are one wh^^es turned to one side, an other whiles moved
back, and these an other whiles stand still, such manner of wicked facts by
them, are as yet not (...), although in mind and cogitation occu(...) the
like: as the learned Co(...), and Ptholomeus paruus report.

The eyes big veyned, and dry appearing: do argue a frensinesse present or
to come: by report of the most Phisiognomers.

The h^llow eyes smi^^^^, like such determined or purposed to work decey^s,
(...) be the cheeks, the ouerbroowes and lips, are moved withal, do then
pronounce the cogitations of wicked purposes, and deceytes: If the eye liddes
especially do sometimes meet, and sometimes touch together, for then do
they denote a most wicked cogitation, to consist in that creature.

The ancient Auicen (primo de animalibus)* utters* that the eyes trembling,
do signify a lightness, that is, an unstableness of mind in that creature.

The eyes covered with a dumnesse, do argue such a person to be endued with
evil Arts, unfaithful, and vn^odest in his doings.



The eyes contrary to the above said, are best: that is to say clear
through, and that no other sign of evil be^^o^ shall contrary the ^^^ie* and
such manner of eyes, ^^th Palemon report, that the mighty ^ry^^ the Empero^^
h^^^*

The eyes clear, of a big light, (...) that (...) with a graynesse, and
^^^ddynesse do argue rashness, and madness* but if they have a m^a^^^ state,
then do these signify, a good disposition of mind.

The meannesse of the eyes, between the black, and variable, is commo^nded:
yea among the other manners aforesaid: unless they be much shining, either
very cytrine in color, or red. But spotted with blood, do argue such to be
rash, and doing their businesses, which they (purposed before) speedily.

The eyes big and clear, with a brightness shyning: do (...) a person to
be just, apt to learn, before seer, and a wyttie admonisher or warner: and such
like eyes, was the learned Socrates supposed to have.

The eyes overmuch standing out, read, and small: do argue an (...) mind*
and tongue, and an unstable person in purpose.

The abouesayde Palemon reports, that the eyes promynent or standing out,
shyning, trembling, and beating, and that these are small: do witness such to
be (...).

(...), do (...) to (...).

(...) writes* (...) such a (...) bethincking a(...) of wine, a wran(...)ding
covetous. Of such a mean form were the eyes of king Alexander known and
reported to be. And so much is only said of these, which as unto the form and
standing of the eyes are reduced.

The eyes smyling and most great, do denote such a person to be a dullarde,
leacherous, and not careful or providing for the time coming.

The sad eyes are not altogether to be feared, for that (of the moisture) these
are occupied in cogitation: and do denote the studies of honest Arts. That if
with these, the ouerbroowes, and forehead be large, with a playnnesse
congruent, and the eye liddes lawdable: do witness an honesse, and lawdable
wit, gentle, and grave.

The eyes sad, and dry, and with this a roughness or wrinckling of the
forehead, and an earnest beholding of the look, and casting down^ of the eye
liddes: do denote such a person to be hurtful, cruel, and leaving nothing
unattempted.

The eyes somewhat moist, and looking dreadful: do denote such a person to be
prone to ire, sharp, furious in talk, and in actions hasty: yea rash and
hastily speaking, and most wicked. But the dry eyes, do denote ungracious and
wicked conditions: when with this, these shall be decerned small, and hollow,
do denote woorser* then the abouesayde.

The eyes, dry, and of a sadder look: do witness such a person to be very
gentle, and friendly: as Palemon reports.

The Philosopher in Methaphoricis utters, that from whose eyes, do hang like
to water drops: are known to be lovers of Wine, yea they wax balde, and
referred unto the passion: for that in such a disposition is the moisture, and
feebleness of the brain declared: and most of the ancient, agree in the same.

In whom before the eyes like to drops appear, and show out: are noted to be
lovers of sleep: and referred unto the passion, in that such do like hang
(arysing from sleep) which appear in the eyes: as the Phisiognomer has often
observed, in many subjects.

Here conceive, that the blearednesse of the eyes is ^^^sed, through the
gathe^^^^ ^^^^ther of g^^sse blood* and of the (...) ^^m^^^, (...) the eye
^^de^, and in the thin^^ (...) compassing the eyes, engrossing or (...) them on
such wise. The like (as before reported) are naturally sleepers, and referred in
like manner unto the passion, or congruencie. Seeing such a manner swelling of the
eyes is caused, through a long sleep, after the Noone meal eaten. For when in
sleep the meat is digested, and by the consequent some fumes are elevated
unto the brain: those fumes or vapors then, through the coldness of brain
engrossed, do discende unto the eyes, as above vttred: insomuch, that by such
a means, a swelling of the eyes round about appears: after the agreement of
the Phisiognomer, and others.

The blearednesse of the eyes, in regarding the disposition: do denote such a
person to be a bibber, and dronkarde: if this like proceeds, of no other
cause. When these shall be, with a falling of the eyes, do then indicate such
a person to be a lover of sleep. Which also is referred unto the passion, as
both Albertus, and Conciliatore learnedly report.

The eyes big, do witness such a creature to be dull in conceauing, and
slow in the proper actions: applied for the form, unto the Ox. The (...)
small, are faint hearted, and (...) of cou^age referred unto the apparancie and
the Ap^ after the minds of the Philosopher A^^st^tle and Auic^n.



The eyes being a mean, as between the small and big appearing: do
signify that person to be well complexioned, and of honest conditions.

The meannesse of the eyes in form, does in^nate both a goodness, and
pureness of (...) in that treasure: after the agreement of sundry writers.

Such which have the eyes hollow standing, are supposed to be malicious:
applied for the form, unto the Ape: But such which have the eyes emynent, are
noted foolish, and applied unto the apparau^cie.

The eyes standing very hollow, is worthy no commendation at all: but such
eyes which stand hollow, and that big withal, are not to be reprehended.

The eyes hollow, and small: do witness such a person to be mutable,
deceytfull, a betrayer, and corrupted both with envy and disdain.

The eyes hollow, looking, smylingly, do denote such a person to be a
bethinker of evils.

The eyes standing a little hollow, are bold, and stowte, and applied to the
Lion. But the eyes somewhat more standing out, are gentle: and applied to the
Ore.

The sight of the eyes black, does portende a slow person, and a dullarde: by
the report and agreement of all writers.



The sightes of the eyes (in whose compass about) like to little* Pearls
shall appear, do denote an envious person, full of words, fearful, and
most wicked, as Rasis reports.

The Balls and sightes of the eyes broad: do indicate evil conditions, in
that creature: as writes Palemon.

The balls of the eles small, do indicate evil, and perverse conditions. And
in whom you shall espic the circles, which are about the sightes, to be
unequal, such are known, and noted of experience, to be fools.

Haly Abbas (primo theoricae* capitulo. 24.) wills a man to beware, that he
be not deceived in the knowledge of the black color: for (says he) you shall
see his eyes appearing with a sharp look, and unto the same which he shall
behold, the eyes shining: as these in a manner were beholden, of some bright
body right against: and his words are known to be uttered in a fumbling
manner, and out of course or order.

When the eyes shall be thw^^^ appearing, and shall have a sharp Ague, do then
denote, shortly after death: as the worthy Hyppocrates utters in his learned
book of secrets.

If the eyes shall appear (long open together) does indicate foolishness, and
unshamefastness: as the learned Albertus reports.

The eyes very black, do argue such to be fearful: and this never fails
the like. Yea these note such, to be greedy of gain: for the black color
very deep, is known to signify fearfulness* as both the Philosopher
Aristotle in Methaphoricis, and the ancient Auicen (primo de Animalibus) write.

The eyes appearing palishe, do denote such a person to be prone to deceyte.

The eyes not very black, but to a yealownesse declining; do denote a good
nature, and to be strong.



The eyes either white or gray, do denote such a person to be fearful: and
of the white color, it seldom or never fails the like.

The eyes black, notable in brightness, do argue such to be evil
conditioned, deceytfull, and wicked. The person which has black eyes, and a
little smiling withal, is denoted to be such a one that is greatly inclined
and prone to all filthiness.

The eyes not very gray in color, but to a seemly manner, like to the color
of ye Lions eyes, do denote such a person to be of an honest nature and good
mind, and for the form applied to the Lion and Eagle.

The gray color of the eyes, is here meant to be like unto the color of the
Owl, or rather of the color of the Iayes wings, which are chaungeable of
color.

The eyes appearing veynie, do denote such a person to be frantic; and
applied to the Goat. And veynie be those eyes named, which be full of small
and very little lines a length, much like to small veins: through which, the
color of the eyes is changed. And such of this are of a diminished
imagination, which serves to the understanding and applied to the sheep.

The eyes flerie appearing, are unshamefast: and applied for the form to the
dog: and such also are greedy catchers, and contentious. The eyes are then
named fiery, when like to fire these shine, burn, and twinckle: So that the
like persons kindled with ire, see not, or if they see, one thing seems two,
in their sight.



Auerrois (in de sensu and sensato) instructs at large, the causes. The
especial token of yrefulnesse, is the natural redness in the veins of the
eyes.

The diverse colored eyes, do argue such to be fearful, and applied unto the
passion: for that the like which are afraid, become suddenly pale, and
possess through that fear an unequal color.

Such having the eyes appearing or looking merrily, are noted to be luxurious,
and applied for the form unto the Cock, and Goat, or Raven: that is, having
the eyes like to them, which cheerfully and lovingly look on any matter: for
these then show a certain gladsome and merry look.

The eyes and cheeks red, do signify such to be lovers of wine, and
drunkardes.

The eyes reddish, and dry, are stowte, courageous, and hasty unto ire.

The eyes gray or troubled, do argue such to be fearful, and applied to the
Sheep and Goat.



The eyes mean, and low standing, do demonstrate such to be shamefast, and
honest of conditions. The mean color of the eyes, with the other notes
orderly agreeing, does not only witness a goodness of sight, but a good
understanding and knowledge to consist in that creature.

The eyes standing out, and reddish, do argue such to be libidinous, and
gluttons.

The eyes standing in a manner, short or small, and bearing a little out: do
indicate such a person to be covetous, very greedy of gain, and earnestly
laboring after the same. If he also draws or knitteth together the
foreheade, with the ouerbroowes, to the middle of the same: such a person is
then so much the couetouser, and more desirous of gain.

The Woolfe is a ^east* greedy, yrefull, wily setting upon, bold, and
violent. And those parsones which to the kind of this beast are applied, be on
this wise: that is to say, having very crooked noses, stretching downwards, ye
ouerbrowes joining together, rough heared, small eyes, and shutting often,
somewhat hollow standing, the head small and round, rough heared in body,
long hear on the head, and fast compowned in legs: So that such
proportioned after this manner (above vttred) are crafty parsons, wicked, oying
in the shedding of blood, and prone to ire, or soon angry. And thus the
Phisiognomer ends with the matter of the eyes.

What notes to be learned, in judging of the face and countinaunce. The. xxj.
chapter.


THe faces of such well borne and complexioned, are on such wise: that is, mean
of composition in the cheeks, and temples, dec^^ing unto a fatness. Such a
creature (after Phisiognomie) is judged just, loving, faithful, and of a good
understanding. Of which Ecclesiasticus. xiij. reports, that man's heart
alters the face, either to the good, or evil.

When Jacob by the face of Laban, found out the hatred toward him, he turned
then unto his wives, and said: I knew by the face of your father, that he is
no more like in friendship toward me that he was yesterday. For even his
countinaunce, is a silent vtterer to me of his mind, the contrary.

The gladsomnesse or mirth of the face, proceeds of a merry heart: but the
heaviness or sadness of look, is caused of a heavy heart.

The face is often taken, and that simply, for the natural look of any: but
the countinaunce signifies, the qualities of the mind: so that a deformed
look, is of a rare felicity: as the learned Isidorus (ethimologiarum. xj.)
utters.

Whose face appears fleshie, is lightly coveting: and applied unto the Ox,
as the Philosopher Aristotle utters in Methaphoricis.

Whose face by nature appears red, is shamefast and merry: but whose face
appears pale of color, the same by nature is known to be fearful: as the
Philosopher Aristotle reports.

The face appeering lean, does argue a careful person, and sometimes a
betrayer: as the learned Albertus, and Conciliatore utter.

The face seen fleshie, does indicate such a person to be fearful, applied
for the quality to the Heart and Ass: as Aristotle, and the learned Palemon
write.

The face that appears small, does witness such a creature to be faint
hearted, and fearful: applied for the quality, to the Ape, and Cock: as the
learned Conciliatore reports.

The worthy Conciliatore writes, that whose face appears very big, is
noted (by the agreement of other writers) to be slow and sluggish in the proper
actions: for the same denotes a much matter, and flewmaficke, not regulated:
applied for the quality unto the Ox, and sluggish Ass.

The face appearing very bony, does witness such a creature to be laborious,
fearful, and of a cold nature, after the mind of the Phisiognomer.

The learned Palemon writes, that a mean form of the face, as neither to
big, nor to small, is perfect good, and signifies an honest person: by the
agreement of Auicen, Albertus, Conciliatore, and others.

Whose face is judged small in form, is reported to be a person ungentle in
conditions, and a niggarde: applied after the manner, unto the apparauncie
known.

The face seen very fleshie, does indicate a sluggishnesse of actions,
foolishness, and ye great desire of coeating to consist in that creature:
through the matter abounding of the flesh, and gross humors, not so
flegmaticke, as before has been uttered: in ye hotnesse there bears sway,
after the mind of the Phisiognomer. For which cause, such desire vain and
impossible things: yea the like persons by the report of Phylemon, are light of
belief, and daily study or exercise them in eating, drinking, and in the
wanto^ desire of coeating. If the others correspondent, shall be connexed, that
is, the greatness of the two ventricles.

The Philosopher Aristotle, in his treatise of Phisiognomie (of the members)
utters: that he which has a fleshie face, is indicated to be less sapient,
importunate, a lyare, and glutton.

The person which has a slender or lean face, is noted (after the mind of
the Philosopher Aristotle) to be circumspect in his doings, and argues a
subtle understanding, as the Mercurians, possess and have. That creature
which has a long face, is known of experience, to be froward, and injurious.

The worthy Philosopher Aristotle utters, that both of horses and men, the
same is known: that whose face is wrinckled of nature, and not by accidence,
is begotten of feeble parents: for that the strength of the heart, where as the
same is feebled, draws the skin together. And is a note of the weakness
of the principal members.

The learned Palemon, and Ptholomeus Paruus write, that a lean or thin face,
does witness such a person, to be full of thought, and cares.

The ancient Rasis utters, that such a creature, having ye face like to one
drunken: is lightly overtaken with strong drink, and procured drunck, as the
Phisiognomer reports of experience.

The creature, after the mind of the learned Rasis, having a modest, and
shamefast face, is denoted to have the like conditions, and to be gentle.

An yrefull face (after Rasis) does indicate yrefulnesse; which like happens
to be found, both in other vices, and virtues: for that the face of like
nature, to the like passion, is even subject actually to the same.

The face marvelous round, does innuate such a creature, to be foolish, but
the same appearing very big, is indicated to be slugguish in the proper
actions, and of a dull capacity.



A very small face seen, does argue such a person to be evil, crafty, a
flatterer, a niggarde (for the more part) and fearful. The reason seems to
be, in that the smalnesse of the head, proceeds of the matter of the humor,
and subtle spirit, with a dryness: and through the evil composition, of
which flattery is caused, and fearfulness, which is a sister of tenacitie: as
before taught, in sundry places.

Conciliatore instructs, that a deformed face, does seldom argue good, and
honest conditions. Nor a wrie countenance (of nature) can utter (after the
opinion of Aristotle) laudable actions, and conditions: nor such a creature (of
experience known) is greatly fortunate. And this note, sufficiently appears,
of the congruent apparancie.

Whose face appears long, is noted unshamefast, and injurious: and this
caused through the mighty hotenesse (after the opinion of the Phisiognomer
Cocles which is cause of the lengthning out of the same, that such through
this, are so inuericundious. The person which has blown temples, and that the
veins, and arteryes appear great: i^denoted (after the mind of Rasis) to be
very yrefull and furious.

The face fleshie, if with an evil fauourednesse formed: does indicate such a
creature to be fearful, and frantic at times: after the opinion of Palemon,
and others.

The face gross, with a bigness of the jaws, and rusticall look, does
denote a dull capacity, and rude nature, as the Philosopher reports.

The face reddish of it self, does witness such person to be rough or
sturdie, and cruel. And if the cheeks be only red, then judge such a person
to be often drunk, or at the least, often ouerseene with drink.

The learned Conciliatore writes, that the face small, and covered with a
yealow color, does indicate such a creature to be vicious, a deceyuer, and
dronkard: as* Aristotle reports, that the same seems to declare. This very
often has been experienced, in the Phisiognomers time, especially in sundry
Princes, head Capitaines of armies, Secretaries, and Imbassadours, which (at
that day) were supposed among them, both sapient and skillful: that knew
wittily to deceive, and find out a deceit.

Whiles Cocles remained at Rome, he there noted a most wicked person and
leacherous: whose habitude in this place (by the way of an example) he minds
to utter and descrybe, after this manner.



He was very small or short of stature, in manner like to a Dwarf, whose
hears on the head, were much in quantity, and great: especially about the
temples, were these seen black: his face and countenance appeared round, and
fleshie inform, the forehead big, and fleshie in like manner: the ouerbrowes
great, through the much quantity of hears: the eyes big tending outward: in
the corners of which, were seen many fiery spots, his look was sturdy and
wildlie: the Pellicles about the eyes, puffed up: the cheeks were fleshie: the
ears found great: the nose big and short: in whose middle appeared a
hollownesse, like unto (the little Dogs) of Spain. The nostrils were seen
to be large open, the mouth (in respect of the habitude) great: the lips in
form found very thick: and turned outward, after the manner of the
Mur^yans^ the chinne discerned big and round: the color of the whole face,
appeared wanne adust: the bearde found thick and black: the neck known to
be gross, and lively stirring: the teeth placed thick, or thick standing
together, and big appeared: the under chinne seen very fleshie: the breast
formed large, with great pappes: the arms short and fleshie, the hands short,
and in like manner fleshy: the fingers small compouned, and muscled or brawned:
the nails seen short inform, pale, black, and rough: the shoulder points
found very fleshie: the back (in respect of the constitution of body) large,
and fleshie: the belly found big to a Tonne: the Pecten seen very hearie,
and thick, or much in quantity: the ^diry discerned full of apparent veins:
the flanckes and buttocks were fleshie: the Peritoneon or space between the
legs, bearing outward: the hippes big, and seen fleshy: the legs (in
respect of the personage) were slender: the feet small, and but a little
brawned: the souls of the feet, were formed with an equal upper face, or
evenness throughout, and fleshie: the whole personage was found hot, and
moist: with a swiftness of pase in his going: the steps treding short, and
the eyes appeared protensed, and large open in the going: the speech uttered
very quick: breathing strong, and thick together: the whole body seen most
hearie.

As touching the form of this man's hand: A the Paulme (through the flatnesse
of the montes) was not hollow. B The life line was stretched out long, and red
in color. C The upper angle was separated. D The middle natural line, was
seen red and thwart in form, and evil situated. E The mensale line was found
great, and with inordynate creastes. F The monte of Venus bearing up full. G
with the Sister of the life line, situated on the monte. H There was a
Tryangle, no where formed in the hand. Jupiters monte not lyned, and evil
colored, with the Character C. placed on the same Tubercle.



And on the back of that finger were lines seen, formed to a star. I The
Zone or girdle of Venus, in the proper place, appeared read. K The Suns
monte, evil conditioned. L Mercuries Tubercle, appeared obscure or dark
shadowed. The Moons place ^. figured with such a character. M The life line
was gross, between the thombe, and forefinger. Thus was this most wicked
man, formed in personage, and lyned in the hand. So that through such a
habitude, he used both kinds of coei2ngt3, as well with the 2l1sm as 2le1smf:
and other detestable matters he exercised, not here meet to be uttered. To
conclude, he was the most vicious person, of all others, that ever the
Phisiognomer understood, or knew in his time.

In a man the face remains, but the countenance does alter: so that the
countinaunce is named of the Latin word Volando, which properly in English
signifies a flying or vanishing away.

The countinaunce appearing sour, through the form and condition of the
lips, cheeks, forehead, and grinning: does indicate such a person, to be a
fool, and frantic at times: by the report of the Phisiognomer.

A cheerful and smyling countinaunce seen, does innuate such a creature to
be given unto mirth, and to be lybidinous after nature.



The face often sweating, and that of a light or small stirring: does argue
hotnesse, or a hot condition to consist in that person. And such a creature
is known of experience, to be leacherous, gluttonous, and a great feeder. Of
which insueth indygestion, and a sickness to come: as the Phisiognomer has
sundry times noted.

The face appearing valled or dented in, and rather more lean than fat, does
innuate such a creature to be injurious, envious, a liar, contentious, cruel,
yea a murderer: if the same especially be annexed unto adustion, and that the
color be either wanne, or yellowe appearing: as the same (the Physiognomer
sundry times) has observed and known.

And every countenance, when the same appears full of flesh, and fat:
does denote (by the agreement of most writers) such a creature to be sluggish,
and given unto pleasure and wanton actions.

The face appearing very much awrye, lean, and long: procures after the
mince of the Phisiognomer) a rude creature in condition, malicious, and
envious: and the same, affirms learned Rasis.

A sad countenance, does indicate sadness, and heaviness of mind in that
creature: but the frowning look, does denote such a person, to be a
bethincker, and an imagyner of deep matters: yea wily, fearful in actions,
and indeuoreth himself to be crafty.

The face well proportioned, both in the form of the flesh, color, and in
the parts connexed: does argue a lawdable life or disposition, and flowing in
virtues. Yet many men has the Phisiognomer Cocles observed and noted, which
were near unto an infortune: whose look or countenance before (although it
were, or seemed hid unto the same time) yet their countenance after became
difformable: so yt their faces were caused more difformable, then these to fore
appeared: and their eyes were drawn awrye, that they seemed leering, with
their eye liddes gathered, and eye brows shed downewarde: and had the other
notes to these aunswering. And the Phisiognomer this noted many times: and the
like he judged of a person, named Petrus Capreolus: who succeeded, and came
unto the like estate, as the skillful Phisiognomer Cocles had prognosticated of
him.

The face seen hollow, from the beginning of the forehead, unto the end of
the chinne, that the nose and mouth seem placed, as they were in a valley,
does innuate evil conditions, especially if the same be with a wanne, or
adust color. For such has the Phisiognomer known, to have been murderers,
full of words, contentious, yea Pirates, and thieves.

Take heed (says Cocles) that you be not deceived, in the judgment of the
leaprous: for as much as their eyes are round, and the veins eminent or
bearing outward, and a cytrinesse of color mixed unto the redness: and such
are caused very quick of styrring, and possesses a straitness the
Nosethrilles, with a most vehement or mighty horcenesse: in such manner, that
the like creature is known to speak, as it were in the nose. The Gummes also
of such creatures, and the ends of their noses, are known to be eaten away:
their skin besides is caused rough, and the hears of the ouerbroowes shed
away: al which by the face, may artly be known: as the learned Arnoldus de
villa noua, reports.

A small face and countinance, does witness a small and base wit. The
countinaunce formed exceeding big, does denote sluggishnesse in actions, a
dull capacity, and foolishness.

What to be noted and judged, of the condition and form, of the nose and
Nosethrilles. The. xxij. chapter.


Man's face (after the mind of the Methaposcoper) is thin and very passible,
and no part there is of man's body, which like expresses and utters the
passion of the mind, as the face properly does. Of which the mind altered by
any cause, the Methaposcopers can readily epsy and judge. The passible place
also of the face, are the eyes which the Philosophers name to be the windows,
and messengers of the mind, and next to these is the forehead. For we daily
see in the place, that the veins extenced in many subjects, when such are
angered, do swell in a marvelous bigness. The next part passible to these, is
the Nose, in that the same is Cartilaginous (as without flesh) except that when
the virtue of ingendring, is mighty from the beginning of generation. So that
this, before the other parts, causes man's face especially, to be either
comelye, or deformable.

When the nose is stretched and retching unto the mouth, with a decent
bigness: does then argue the bigness of the Cartylage, and the multitude or
much quantity of flesh, which compasses the same Cartilage: in that the same
cannot be caused, but through a great hotenesse. For the property of heat is
to dilate and lengthen out: so that the Nose, when the same is protensed or
stretched unto the mouth, does indicate the complexion of the whole
indiuiduate to be hot: of which both honesty, and boldness proceeds, and
is caused in that creature.

The Nosetrilles big and large, do witness the Testicles great: and that
such a person to be leacherous, a betrayer, deceytfull, a liar, envious,
covetous, a niggarde, of a gross wit, and somewhat fearful, as certain
report: yet the cause of this matter, they allege not, as the Phisiognomer
witnesses.

Here the Phisiognomer reports, that the nature of heat is to dilate, but of
cold to shrink, and gather together: so that through the largeness of the
Nosetrelles, is the cause of the hot complexion known, of which the great
testicles proceed, and luxury in that creature: forthrough the multitude of
Sperme, must the receptacle of necessity be great and large, that the same
may receive, and contain the Sperme, or matter of the Sperme, unto the
digesting of it. Of the gross humors, is the grosenesse and bigness of
members procured, and by the co^sequent are the spirits gross: so that of this
grossness, is the rudeness of wit caused, as the Philosopher Aristotle
utters ( in libro. 2. de partibus Animaliu^ capit. 4.) of which a tenacitie,
and covetousness insueth: in so much as such cannot (through the same)
rightlye discern.

The nose does argue the quality of the heart: in that a big nose, does
indicate the hotenesse of the heart, and irefulnesse in that creature. And
through this hotenesse (after the mind of Conciliatore) is the priuitie of man
enlarged and caused great, as before uttered. Of which, certain report these
words in Latin.

Ad formam nasi, dignoscitur hasta Baiardi. By a like reason (says the
Phisiognomer) may a man argue of the woman's privy place, under these words in
Latin.



Nam mulieris pes est, signum oris verendae. The nose either big, or small:
does argue by the like, the man's, and woman's (...) to be: in that the same
being great, does proceed of the gross matter, and heat intensed.

The 2P of the ^4552m, is the note of (...).

For the 2P long, straight, and slender: does like argue (...) to be: and
econtra.

The measure of (...) hif ^2ph4, is the proportion and measure of the (...) of
(...), in every one. Of which a learned Physician utters the same, under
these words in Latin.

Ad formam pedis, tu nosces porta^ mulieris. The smalnesse and thinness of the
skin of (...), of a (...): is only known by the condition of the (...) of
the ^4mh52 in every one: for if the B1l31 of the ^4mh52 are B2gg3: then do
they declare the like (...) or 1l3B1 of the (...) to be, if but (...), then
likewise (...). etc.

The Nosetrelles are the larger parts of the Nose, where the holes of
breathing and smelling be seen, and by which, the humor of the brain, is
purged,

The Nosetrelles of the Nose, do like declare the genitours to be (if we may
credit the Phisiognomer) for if these be big and large, then like are the
genitours of Man, judged to be big and large: but if the Nosetrilles appear
small and narrow, then like are the genitours judged small etc. Of which this
rule seldom fails, except by accidence: as either through a sickness, or by
the often tractions with the hand: which practice (as the Phisiognomer
reports) is more commonly exercised of the Cynedes or effeminate persons:
which by that manner of dealing, have greatly increased this member: as he of
experience, has known in many. And he also utters of skill known, that in
many persons, is the right hand bigger, than the left: in that the same (by
his reason) comes oftener in use.

The Nose big and hawked to the Eagles bill, does argue such a creature to
be stowte, cruel, and greedye catching: for that this proceeds of a great
heat. And such of this, are known to be yrefull, revenging, and doing
unlawful things. For this drawing together of the nose, is caused by reason of
the hotnesse: as evidently appears in a leather skin, thrown into the
fire: which through heat of the fire, gathers together: so that of the same,
such ar^ known to be hot* and by the consequent Chollericke, and stowte, by
reason of the hotnesse bearing sway. Also these for the other part and cause,
are yrefull and revenging (as before uttered) in that such workinges proceed,
of an excessive hotnesse. Of the Aquyline nose, does the skillful Asculanus
write (in the mother tongue) after this manner, in his book de Cerbae.

LImpia forma cum laquilino naso,
viuer desia de lo ben daltrui:
Finche la morte vien cum limpio caso*
Gentil magnifico fora de pietade,
Semprediserue non guardando a cui:
si come fera senza humanitate.
This Philosopher Asculanus concludes, that such are cruel, and handling or
working false matters: and procure or do all things without any regard of the
right or wrong, even unto the death, and these without humanity at all: for as
much as such a Chollerick body, does indicate a ravening mind and will. The
experience of which, the Phisiognomer had many times, especially in sundry
Princes: and of these, one was an Italian king, whose fame was sufficiently
didulgated, and known to all Italy. But here ryseth a doubtful question,
worthy to be known: and the same is, which the Phisiognomer Cocles grants
unto, that there be two chollerick subjects found, having both Aquyline or
hawked noses: and of these, the one known and found to be, of a chollerick
complexion, and the habitude chollerick: the color also of that creature,
seen to be Cytryne or wanne aduste. But the habitude of the other person,
known to be perfect, and of a good complexion, that is Sanguine: yet the same
tending unto choler.

Of the first (in aunswering unto this doubt) I say (says the Phisiognomer)
that he is of an intensed malignitie, by reason of the corroboration, through
the same spirit, which is conjoined wholly in the Chollerick subject, both of
nature, and by accidence. By accydence (says Cocles) I speak, through the
wanne color, which signifies a cold complexion, and Melancholic adust:
which that color properly causes. As the like, the Phisiognomer Cocles
observed and noted, in a certain Italian Prince, which altogether was a wicked
person, and causer of the destruction of much people, and a sower of discord
and debate among many. But the end of this creature was detestable, unto the
utter infamy both of him and his lynage. But of the second and other person I
say, that when the habitude is Sanguine, it is possible, that of the
Chollerick, to be made or caused Sanguine, and of the Sanguine Chollerick by
accydence, when the ages alter these. So that a man may conclude, that when
this in a Sanguine body, the same is then of a remissyue or qualified
malignitie. The reason is, for that the blood is a snaffle or bridle unto the
choler, by which the malice of it is depressed. And one (of like condition
(says the Physiognomer, was that famous Chyromancer Galasius nigrisolus
Carpensis: For as much as his complexion was known to be Sanguine, and a
little flewmaticke: and very effeminate he was: yet from the shoulders
upward, tending unto the Chollerick quality: so that not free he was, from
the vices above noted. And sometimes is the same depressed, through the part of
the complexion and composition, as before uttered.

The Aquyline or hawked nose (after the mind of Conciliatore) seen in a body
very Chollerick, that is, Cytrine or wanne aduste, is noted the wickedder
conditioned: by the words above uttered of the Phisiognomer.

The Aquyline or Hawked nose, decerned in a Sanguine body, or of such a like
quality, tending unto Choler: is of Auicen judged, not so evil.

The Aquyline nose in joint manner joined to the foreheade, does indicate such
a person to be stowte, and hardy: applied after form unto the Eagle. This
manner of ioynting or to be ioynted unto the forehead, is understood and meant
of him which has the emynencie or bearing out toward the forhead, and such
are named to be greedy catchers, of the heat and dries caused: and
signifies also such to be yrefull, violent in wrath and chollerick.

Here the Phisiognomer takes in hand, to describe Charles the French king,
whose figure or picture naturally, and lively counterfayted with colors, by a
singular Paynter in a Table: was brought and showed unto the Phisiognomer, for
him diligently to behold: which at the earnest request, and entreaty so did:
and he further, learned, of a religious Hermit, the whole composition of this
kings body, which was on this wise. He had a big head, the Nose exceeding
hawked, and great, the lips somewhat thin, the chinne round, and pitted or
dented in, the eyes big, and somewhat bearing out, the neck short, and not
sufficient strong in the composition, the breast and back large: the loins and
flancks sufficient great: the belly fleshie: the buttockes reasonable large:
the haunches and legs, slender: yet sufficient big unto the length: of the
seete does the Phisiognomer here nothing utter. Thus in proportioning all the
members together, the Phisiognomer pronounced, that this mighti^ king, was
short lived: and that his death proceeded by a Catherrall and feeble matter,
fuming from the stomach, and like discending again from the head to the
stomach, and of such causes aunswerable. etc. Although some there be which
report, that he dyed of poisoning.

The Phisiognomers reason of this judgment was, in that his head, nose, and
breast, etc. were big, and indicated the multitude of matter, and the same
inobedient consisting in him: through which the virtue ruling, could not direct
the whole body, for his evil composition. Of which is to be learned, that
every sign is a representer of his proper note: for as much as the same
slenderness in the hippes, signified the virtue and strength of the brain, to
be feeble and weak: and caused an evil quality, or condition of the sinews:
and disorder of the royal members: without whose good agreement, it is
impossible, that life could be long in that creature. He was also known to be
luxurious, and the reason agreeable (is above vttred of the Phisiognomer) which
confirms that the nourishment, which ought by due nature to be converted and
run unto the haunches, and legs, was by that manner of life, otherwise
converted into Sperme. So that this king was of like nature and disposition, as
above described of the Phisiognomer: yet the quality (as it should seem) of
lesser malice in the members, contrary working unto a hotenesse of the heart:
and he was wanne of color, which by accydence signified the dominion of
coldness and Melancholye to consist in him. And the self same (he reports)
(...) the Aquvline or hawked nose, did somewhat depresse. But the emynencie or
bearing out of the eyes signified, that the fore ventricle of the brain, was
flewmatick: which to conclude, fortified (as he says) the shortness of life:
and according as the Phisiognomer had judged on this king, even so he learned
and understood, that a short time he reigned.

The French king that reigned, in the Phisiognomers time, for his evil
habitude, and composition of body, lived and reigned but a short time:
according as the skillful Phisiognomer had judged and pronounced, at the sight
of his picture, brought unto him, earnestlye to vewe and behold: the personage
or counterfayte of whom, was on this wise: he had the head somewhat sharp in
composition, the forhead narrow, the eyes appearing big, and emynent: the
face showed lean, the hears of the head, seemed of nature short: the
Nosethrils appeared large, and bearing up, the lips showed thick, but the
chinne appeared sharp: the neck short, and slender formed: the shoulders
showed lean and narrow: the arms and hands were decerned slender and long
in form: the epiglotis emynent: the furcle of the breast appeared narrow, and
the breast like narrow in form: the stature of this king, appeared rather
crooked or stooping, then upright: the body of this creature, was found
Chollerick: the moving of the eyes decerned, and known to be swifte, and
rolled or turned upward in the motion: the legs (to be brief) were seen
slender, in composition. As touching the laudable praises of this king, the
Phisiognomer found not any justly to report: in that his vices, were is known
unto many, and diuulgated (in a manner) every where.

But in returning unto the purpose, there was an other Aquyline nose, which
could not so well put in practice or exercise his government, as the other
above uttered: whose name was Codrus (a man known) to be a singular learned
Poet in the Latin tongue, and had the fame and segnyoritie for the Greek
tongue: whose corporature and personage was on this wise: he had the head
congruently formed: the forehead was plain, and of a mean bigness: the eyes
stood sufficient hollow: and in color like unto the gray sky, not shyning
or glistering: the nose for med like unto the Eagles bill: the face found
long: the lips seen reasonably formed, as these somewhat thin: the chinne
appeared dented in: the neck found long: the Epyglottis emynent: the shoulder
points large, and somewhat bearing out: the breast and haunches found slender
and narrow: the thighs, and shanckes seen small: yet these agreeable unto the
other parts, of the body: the heels found flat: the feet were long and
slender.

Of which notes Almansor secundus utters, that the sharpness of the nose,
the long neck, the voice sharp, or small, and the comlynesse of complexion,
demonstrated together a dryness in that creature, through the part of the
chollerick quality. But his composition of body, was found small: and the
place of the stomach, decerned narrow: his digestion also of meat, was known
to be both weak and small, through the little and narrow stomach: his heart was
found to be cold, through the length of his neck: he was besides conetous and
fearful, which is contrary unto magnanimity or boldness: in that the same
proceeds of a hot quality. Yet had this person a ready wit, through the
comely form of the head: for as much as the knitting and conioyning of the
spirits was laudable, by which, the decent Organe, aptly served unto reason:
especially, for the eminency of the foreheade in breadth: but the breast, the
ribs, the heels, and the neck, were found all effeminate, which (as above
uttered) be contrary unto magnanimity: the Aquyline or hawked nose indicated
(as the Phisiognomer reports) his covetousness: that so mightily (by his
report) bare sway in him. Thus says he, a man must proportionate, all the
members together: for otherwise shall it be in vain, to judge or pronounce any
matter at all (after the mind of the Physiognomer) on any subject.



The nose seen flat, does signify such a person to be luxurious, hasty in
wrath, and faint hearted: for the dominion of the moisture, and flowme in that
creature: as the learned Conciliatore reports.

Here concraue (says the Phisiognomer Cocles) that when the nose appears
flat, then is a hotnesse and moisture indicated in that person: for as much
as the hotnesse of the Aquyline or hawked nose, is caused with a dryness. So
that the flat noses are procured through a hotnesse and moisture: in that the
moisture causes, the enlarging of the nose: of which such are known hot and
moist, that properly cause the luxury in them.

When any report such persons, that they are hasty in wrath, the same
proceeds (as the Phisiognomer reports) of an overmuch hotenesse: and the
inflammation of spirits moved and procured, through the abundance of matter:
and of that inflammation (by the report of Cocles) is the prefulnesse caused in
such. An other cause, shall here be uttered, in that the inflammation of the
spirit, can not soon or speedily be cooled, through the narrow passage: as
shall appear, in the matter following.

Of which, the singular Philosopher Asculanus, in the mother tongue, wrote
these worthy verses ensuing.

EL concauato e anchora il naso simo,
ciascun di loro a la luxuria acosta:
Piu del secundo dico che del primo.
chi la subtle e ne lextremo aguzo,
Ouero rotundo cum obtusa posta:
mouesi ad ira el primo come cuzo:
Laltro e magnanimo, e dae grave style.
The person which has a short nose, and the same flat: is judged (after the
mind of the Phisiognomer) to be lascivious: and as some write, to be a thief.

The nose seen short, the mouth formed small, and the teeth found short and
big: do denote (after the mind of the worthy Conciliatore) a moist and
cold complexion.

The sharpness of the nose seen, the neck found long, the voice heard
small and comely: are apparaunt notes of a temperate chollerick quality: as
the learned Rasis, the worthy Albertus, Ptolomeus paruus, and other report, and
Cocles with them.

Here conceive, that the nose formed broads in the middle, and appearing bended
unto the top: does indicate such a creature, to be full of words, a liar, and
yrefull. The reason is, in that the same elevation or rising of the nose, and
hollownesse unto the middle: is procured of the chollericke quality, and
paucitie of the Cartylage: For as much as Choler has consumed that persons
heat, and caused a drawing together of the skin in that part, as above
uttered (of the Aquyline nose) so that the parts, which shall not be
impouerished or lessened (by the same) of flesh: is because the fleshy part
has a viscous and clammie moisture, through which, the same is not so soon
and lightly resolved. The cause of the yrefulnesse in that creature proceeds
of choler, and through the passages hyndered, as shall after appear in the
proper place.

The Phisiognomer Cocles reports, that he has many times noted of
experience in infinite subjects: and in all his life time, he never saw any,
which were not possessed with a heap of vices, especially for lying, or for
their ymagining lies: and this caused, by the Chollericknesse consisting in
them: for which cause, this Cocles wills a man to beware, and take heed, of
the felowshipping with such: as of all which (says he) experience in short
time, will instruct thee perfect.

The Nose formed sharp at the end, does indicate such a person to be a liar,
contentious, and yrefull: the reason is (as the Phisiognomer reports) in that
such are of a chollericke quality, for as much as the leanness, and
sharpness of the Nose, does for the more part happen, through the abundaunce
of choler. The same end also has, narrow passages, in which the air can not
pass nor enter, to cool the heart: so that of this, it long remains
inflamed: which is cause of the contending, and quarrelling of that person.



The like creature (by report of the Phisiognomer) was that Antonius, a learned
scribe and notarie. Yea he noted many other Country men of his, to be like:
among the number of which, Cocles observed and knew a jolly fellow of the
like nature, and conditions, named Vandinus de Fauentia, which was a betrayer
of his courteous Lord, and principal ayder, son unto the noble Astorgius
Fauentia: by whose means, and other mighty deceyuers about him, was this
gentle Lord by commandment, conveyed or carried unto prison in Rome, and shut
up as close prisoner, in that goodly strong Castle, named Sancti Angeli: where
not many Months abiding, was lamentably murdered, of a most cruel Bastard,
by a headlong fall, as the Phisiognomer learned and understood: which wicked
creature after the fact committed, miserably pyned away, even like an image of
war, standing in the hotest Sun.

When the Nose shall be meanly small, a little dry upward, and at the end
raised up, and the nether part or end, turned again upward: or that his
cleft be proceeding from beneath, unto the part turned upward, toward the cone
of the Nose: does then indicate luxury, or such an abuse of the body, not
here decent to be uttered: as the learned Conciliatore in his Rubricke of
Phisiognomie reports.



The like of this, the Phisiognomer Cocles observed and noted sundry times,
especially in one of the Senate house, of the noble city of Bononie: which
for reverence unto the noble house, and honesty sake, he refuses to name. The
cause is, forasmuch as such are of a moist, and sanguine quality, tending unto
choler: and these universally (by report of the Phisiognomer) are luxurious,
in both the kinds, even as the same through the pricking forward of choler,
which daily inflameth the blood.

And the regitine nature of the whole body, moves or stirs forward the
expulsive virtue, unto the sending forth of ye noyous matter superfluous, and
expels the same unto the congruenter places, by the apt passages: and
sends the same forth unto the ^rd^y, in that it is the cause of the erection
of it. So that such help forewarde themselves, by a proper industry, not
decent (for honesty sake) to be here uttered, when as the desired subject is
not at hand. And ye apparaunt notes of these persons are, that such have the
nose big and blunt especially at the end: and the nostrils wide and large,
through the grosenesse or bigness of the nose.



The singular Aristotle (in Methaphoricis) utters, that such having ye nose
big at the end, are of an earnest and ready mind, unto the concupiscence
of the desired act: such also are known to be base, and of no reputation,
applied for the form unto the Ox: in that such especially in the venereall
act, are so prone and easily moved, that they covet in mind what person so
ever they see, which especially is known to be true: for the active coeating
as with women: for such after the sight of women, seem in a manner to mourn
unto themselves: as the Bull does after the Cow: and such ( Asculanus
reports) that they are yrefull.

The self same note utters Rasis under these words: that whose nosethrilles
are found to be large, is argued to he a person luxurious.

Such which have the nose formed big and broad, are vnsesible, unshamefast,
unapt to learn, and sluggish, applied after the form unto the Sow, having
the like nose. The reason of this is, for as much as such having the nose
grosser or bigger at the end than in any other part, and that large, are
inuericundious, unapt to learn, and insensible. That is, rude: for which
cause, such are applied unto the Sow, having the like nose, and the like
conditions in a manner.

The nose sharp at the end, does denote such a person to be yrefull, applied
after the kind unto the dog: as Conciliatore reports.

He which has a meruaylous short nose, does argue such a person to be an
accuser, and a pickthanke: as the skillful Phylemon and Palemon report.



The nose formed sharp at the end, and the same thin, yet upward toward
the foreheade more gross: does denote (of experience known) that such a
person hardly to remitte his ire: applied for the kind (after the mind of
Conciliatore) unto the yrefull Dog.

The nose formed bloont at the end, and round withal: does indicate such a
creature to be stowt of courage: applied of the Philosopher Aristotle for the
kind, unto the hardy Lion. The same note by relation, sufficiently appears
to most men at this day.

The end of the nose seen small and sharp, like to the form of the birds
beck or bill, and generally long: does declare such a person to be hasty,
foolish, and like stirring to and fro: as the learned Rasis reports, and of
him compared unto the bird. And the same like, does the long, and thin nose
signify.



The nose very retort, or the same turning back or upward, does (for the
more part) denote, the like perverse mind, and conditions, to consist in that
creature.

The nose formed from the forehead unto the mouth a long crooking, and hard or
very stiff: does denote such a person to be unshamefast, applied for the
form (of Aristotle) unto the Raven. And such were known naturally to be
thieves, as Gulielmus Nurice reports.

The like utters the Phisiognomer, that such a person is known many times
to be a thief, and by the consequent unshamefast: forasmuch as this
exposition, is aptly aunswering or agrees: and it appears like by the
relation which he here utters, in that such (after ye form) are applied unto
the Raven. For the Raven is well known, to be a wily and deceytfull Bird,
purchasing many things by stealth, and hyding those in privy places.

The Nose found rising, and copping up, toward the foreheade, like unto the
Eagles beak: are noted to be stowt, bold, and greedy catchers: applied of
Aristotle (after the kind) unto the Eagle: and as the same in many, has of
the Phisiognomer been diligently noted.

The Nose appearing hollow, with the foreheade formed round, and eminent
upward, does indicate such a person, to be luxurious: applied after the kind,
unto the Cock: and this note sufficiently appears, by the relation.

The nose formed great, yet in a comely manner throughout: does argue such a
person to be honest, and gentle conditioned, after the mind of Conciliatore.

The Nose great, and at the end appearing with an unseemly bigness: does the
like declare (as above uttered) that such a person, to be insensible, unapt to
learn. etc. applied for the form, unto the Sow.



The Nose seen in the upper part depressed, or flat formed: does argue the
feebleness of courage, and foolishness in that creature: and this besides is
a note, of womanly lightness to consist in him: after Rasis.

The Nose on such wise formed, that the same from the foreheade immediately
crooketh: such a person (after the mind of learned) Plato, Albertus, and
Conciliatore) is judged impudent, and a privy filcher: applied for the form,
unto the subtle Raven.

The Nose in comely form crooking, does indicate an honest mind, and singular
wit: as the worthy Conciliatore reports, in his Rubricke of Phisiognomie,
and Cocles the like.

Here conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that the declyning of the Nose, on the
laterall parts of man: as if unto one side only of the position, it shall
decline: does denote a hurt to happen, from the Girdle steed, unto the lowest
part. But if the nose downewarde shall be divided, on either side, of the
position: does then indicate a sickness, or a stripe to happen: and this
either of the primitive, or antecedent cause.

The nose at the end, formed somewhat flat: does declare such a person to be
bold, and liberal: applied for the form, unto the Lion.

The nose appearing red, with the root and hole within, and breeds drawing
unto a swelling, like to the Strawberry: does argue such a person, to be a
great drinker of wine, and often druncke: and such for the more part, are moist
of quality, and luxurious: especially if such a note be found, in bodies of a
small stature: and this was a practice, first found by the Phisiognomer Cocles.

The Nosethrilles formed wide, do denote such a creature to be yrefull: and
this note proceeds, of the overmuch hotenesse of the heart: for how much the
more open and wide these are, so much the greater ire they signify. The
singular Conciliatore (in his Rubriek of Phisiognomy) reports, that such
having the nosethrilles stopped, are noted foolish, and of a small
understanding.

The Nosethrilles (after nature) thin, and very large open: do denote after
the mind of the Phisiognomer) such a person to be yrefull, cruel, and of a
disdaynfull mind.

The Nosethrilles formed thin, and long retching, are by nature nere unto
birds: but the same proportionally agreeing unto men, is a note of lightness,
and an unstableness of mind, as Conciliatore learnedly utters.

The Nosethrilles appearing thin and sharp, do witness such a person
(after the mind of the Phisiognomer) to be full of complaints.

The part of the Nosethrilles, joining unto the foreheade, if from the forehead
extending, the same be with a comely composition, and that well joining
together: in such manner, as this be neither to high, nor to low fixed of
nature: but even direct (as a line or creast) discendeth: does then indicate
(by the report of the Phisiognomer) a manly note, and courage in that creature,
yea constancy, and wisdom: applied of Aristotle for the form, unto the
hardy Lion. But if the part of the Nosetrilles be lower or flatter, and that
deeper than the abouesayde, does argue the vndiscreatnesse of mind, and
weakness of strength, and courage: seeing the same is known to be the note
of a femenine lightness.



If the Nosetrilles in the top directly elevated, extend whole: do indicate
an evil government and distemperaunce in that creature. And such are those,
which in the inward end of the gristle be raised up unto the creast, and do
so discende to the Nose: which when these be direct, do (after the opinion of
the Phisiognomer) procure, the disorder of the tongue, in the uttering of
speech and sounding words.

The greater and wyder Nosethrilles simply, are (of all the Metoposcopers)
better allowed and commended, than the lesser form of them.

The lesser Nosethrilles, by the agreement of Plato, Phylemon, and Ptholomeus
paruus, are naturallye ascribed unto servile wits, ouerthwarters, wranglers,
and to thieves.

The Nosethrilles formed large open, do witness such a creature to be addicted
or given unto mirth, and strong in the composition of body.

The Nosethrilles seen very narrow, round formed, and as they were confusedly
shut together: do witness (after the opinion of the learned Conciliatore in
his Rubricke of Phisiognomie) foolishness, the unaptness to learn, and the
feebleness of courage in that creature.

The ancient Rasis, and Albertus report, that the largeness of the
Nosethrilles, and the much quantity of flesh on the Jaws, and the little
quantity of hears on the cheeks, do signify a moist complexion.

The Nosethrilles appearing very blunt, do argue such a person to be foolish:
but the Nosethrilles formed final, do indicate a perverse mind, and peeuishe
conditions.

The hears which grow within the Nosethrilles of man, if these be many,
thick growing, and big appearing: do argue an unstable mind, and gross
wit, as Conciliatore reports and the Phisiognomer Cocles of experience,
affirms the same.

If the hears within the Nosethrilles, are found few and soft: do witness
after the mind of the Phisiognomer a ready wit, apt to learn and honest
condicioned.

The judgment of the form and condition of the ears. The. xxiij. chapter.


THe ears declare the temperament, and proportion of the principal members,
and especially the brain, which experience certifieth us. For that the brain
does sometimes send forth a noisome matter behind the ears, of which is
there engendered and caused many times an impostume, and the same according to
the diversity of the humors. Of which the Physicians name these, the clensing
places of the members, and superfluities.

The ears great, are engendered and caused through the multitude of matter, in
the beginning of generation, of the strong virtue. And all such in a manner
which have great cares (as the Phisiognomer has noted) are known to have a
short neck, and head sufficient comelye, and are Sanguine: and such for the
more part tending unto choler, or unto gross blood somewhat adust. Such also
are impatient, and lightly angry. For which cause, the Philosopher reports,
that such are foolish, (this being excepted) that they are of a good mind and
intention, that is, after the departure of the inflammation, and kindling about
the heart: for as much as this declares a hotnesse of the heart, through the
veins and arteries, as in the Anothomy may well be decerned. And such are of a
good memory, in that they have a seemly neck, being an expresser of the
brain, and demonstrating a good disposition: and perhaps through the
Collericke quality, is the retention of kinds, and through the quality of the
sinews, which are of a dry nature. After the quayling and abating of
injuries, such are of a good intention, in that these cause a good discourse:
and noted to be long lived: for as much as in them is a good proportion,
between the heat and moisture. And such a person which possesses a mean, is
moderate in his actions. The self same is confirmed of the Philosopher, in
lib. i. Animalium, cap. 11. Where he reports, that those which are most apt
and ready in hearing, be well nurtexed and conditioned. Such (says he) have a
note of the best manners, which possess mean ears.



The ears great, and directed above measure, are notes of foolishness, or
that such to be bablers: as the Philosopher Aristotle utters. The self same
reports Auicen pri. de Animalibus: that when the first pulpe, that is, of the
ears, is joined with the flesh of the iawe, does signify a fool, and vain
person.

The Philosopher also utters, in Methaphoricis, that such persons which have
small ears, like to the Ape: have (of that reason) Apishe conditions. But such
that have big ears, are noted to be dullards, and applied to the Ass. And
if any shall see a person have the ears formed like unto the Dogs, are noted
to have the best, and to be in a mean manner, these hitherto Auicen. So that
such having the ears over small, are noted Apishe, that is, they have Apishe
conditions: in which a man may see, that malignitie and deceyte to have
dominion in them.

Such having the ears over great in respect of the quantity of body, are
Asses, that is, fools, and of a dull understanding: as the former Aristotle
reports, primo de Animalibus.

Such having the ears mean in quantity, is a good note, for that the same
proves by the similitude, of the disposition in good Dogs.

Rasis reports, that whose ears are big, is a fool, yet long lived after
nature: when the ears are erected up and very great: do indicate the
multitude of matter, and the same inobedient as to the due form: and the
dominion of dryness indicated, which is cause of the erection or standing
upright.

The ears flexible or bending, do demonstrate the proportion of heat and
moisture: and the moisture is cause of the bending: as the like appears in a
skin and wood, which when they are crooked or winded inward, are moist, for
otherwise are their parts broken, if we see their matter to be dry. And of
this it is, that Ptholomie the Philosopher reports, that the ears great and
bended downward, do denote riches.



When the ears are very small, the paucitie of matter and weak virtue of the
brain is signisied: and the chollericke matter argued: of which the subtle
spirits caused: so that such have a wit or be ingenious in evil works, and
are thieves, foolish, and so covetous, that they desire all things. And
through that coveting, such are luxurious: and understood perhaps of the
immoderate appetites, and not of the power or force of the matter.

The learned Palemon utters, that when the ears shall be promynent and very
great, foolishness and garrulitie is signified in that creature: and such are
known to be covetous. But the ears which are as they were cut, and very
short and parted, does Loxius report, to attempt and commit a deceyte.

The ears formed semicircularly, and creasts connexed, in the middle somewhat
flat toward the center, and of a mean bigness, which decently stand to the
head, do witness a goodness of nature. But the ears over round, signify
such a person to be unapt to learn. The ears long and narrow, are reported
to be the notes of envy.

The ears lying or standing close with the head, are reported to signify
dullness and singgishnesse, as Albertus utters: the reason and cause of the
signification, is for that the hertue formatiue, when the Organes are directly
formed: or that the instrument of heat and the kind quayleth or wants,
causes that the malice of the matter does so enlarge the ears out of measure:
or through the dryness or scarcity of the same, causes them to draw
together, and be narrow, in respect of the due proportion: and of this can not
govern the works of the spirit: but that the ears like ensue, according to
the plenty and scarcity of matter, for as much as they thus proceed of the
indiuisions of nature, these hitherto Albertus: I (says the Phisiognomer) have
noted many old men, and found them to have great ears, and not small in that
age.

So that the small ears (after the agreement of most writers) do denote short
life: in this agrees Ptholomie the Philosopher, where he reports, that the
ears small, be a note of short life: and if the ears be hearie, do indicate
long life. The reason is, that the smalnesse utters the paucitie of matter:
and when these be hearie, do denote the matter to be sufficient strong in
virtue, to heat the brain with a lawdable heating: in that the hears are
caused through the vapors elevated of the hotnesse of the heart, and all the
other members.

The ears hearie, do pronounce a good and ready hearing, which is a note of
the kind and heat: and for that cause, I report the same. But the ears
perhaps of some man are over great, and of some small, of some mean, of some
standing far of from the head, of some contrariwise less flat to the head,
some being of a mean disposition: so that among these two, a mean of all the
kinds which hitherto has been uttered, do signify a goodness of nature.

Some report, that the ears gristly, do indicate such a person to be
Melancholic, or of a Melancholic quality. But the ears great, do denote
the dominion of the Melancholic humor: as the like appears in the Hare, and
Ass, which have great ears, and are foolish. So that such having the like
ears, are of a like nature: and the Melancholic humors do not repugne unto
the length of life.

Conciliatore utters, that the form of the ears, denoting the temperament,
and goodness of nature consists always of a semicirculare form, and in
figure of a mean greatness, and the creastes or lines connexed, in the myddle
somewhat flat toward the Center, and standing seemly to the head: For the
contrary positure of the ears, do denote a contrary, to the abouesayde.

The ears marvelous great, and standing out: do witness foolishness,
garrulitie, and imprudencie. Ptholomie the Philosopher utters, that the
creature which has thin and dry ears, shall never possess the wealth of
the world: and the same signifies a complexion very chollerick, of which the
exhauste intention proceeds in the congruent workings, and argues a most
great vnstabilitie in that person. The self same Ptholomie utters, that the
person which has equinas aures, morietur dominus vel princeps.

Conciliatore utters, that some report, that the ears small, do denote
malignitie in that creature: The ears over round, to be unapt to learn. The
ears long, do argue the person to be envious. The broad ears fixed, in a
right manner with the head, do indicate a slownesse in that creature.

The hears which are within the ears, if these be many, thick and long, do
indicate an earnest mind, in the desire of the actual lust of the body.

The signification and judgment of the form of the cheek bones, and cheeks.
The.xxiiij. chapter.


THe balls of the cheeks, are the parts bearing out, under the eyes: and
these also named the cheek bones: as writes Gulielmus Nurice.

The Jaws are the parts of the cheeks, out of which, the hears of the beard
in man begin, and grow: as writes the learned Isydore, in lib. 11. capit.
primo.

The cheek bones are often taken and named of the Phisiognomers, for the Iaw
bones: and like the worthy Constantine defines them, and Conciliatore, in his
Rubricke of Phisiognomie.

The cheek bones after Constantine, and Gulielmus Nurice, do especially
declare the complexion or quality of mankind.

The cheek bones or cheeks, very read or ruddie appearing, yet myxed with a
whiteness tempered, and in substance formed not over gr^sse or fat, but
meanly fleshie: do indicate a hot, and moist quality, and temperament of
the same: as Gulielmus Nurice, Phylemon, and others report.

If the cheeks shall be white in color, without any redness mixed: do
signify an excess of the quality (especially of flewme) in that creature: as
the Philosopher, Gulielmus Nurice, Conciliatore, and Cocles report.



The cheeks in substance, seen leave and thin, and either swartishe, or
cytryne in color: do demonstrate a hot and dry complexion in that person,
or the dominion of an overmuch dryness and heat, as appears in the
chollericke.

But if the cheeks shall be, or appear, as they were wanne in color, and
formed thin in substance, or seem lean of flesh: do indicate the excess
of dryness and coldenesse, to consist in that creature: as the like condition,
appears in the Melancholicke. So that the cheeks (after the agreement of
Authors) are evident vtterers of the affections of the mind, and notify his
quality: for according to the affections of the mind, proceeding or caused
either of a sudden fear, or sudden joy, do the cheeks suddenly become
pale, or otherwise appear read: these hitherto Constantine.

The Phisiognomer Cocles reports, that when age comes hastily on age, that
such a person seems old before the natural time, then is the same a most
special note of the shortness of life, which in the face is apparently
decerned. But this rule has his most effectuous judgment, both in children
and sicknesses, especially in the same, which the Physicians name the Ethicke
or consumption of age, a sickness in very deed, speedily hastening death.



The ancient Rasis reports, that whose flesh of the cheeks appears
gross, and thick compact: is noted to be of a gross nature. The learned
Conciliatore like vttreth, that the cheeks fo^^ed gross and thick of flesh,
do denote sluggishnesse in that creature, and to be an excessive drinker of
strong Wines: but some report violence, or a wicked will to consist in that
person: which argument of the others, is rather to be allowed than this
judgment, by the agreement of the most Phisiognomers.

The cheeks formed over thin of flesh, do argue malignitie, and wicked
conditions in that person: as both Palemon, and Ptholomeus Paruus write.

The balls of the cheeks decerned soft, and long in form: do denote such a
person, by the report of the Phisiognomer, to be an importunate talker.

The balls of the cheeks formed somewhat long, do declare such a person, to
be a trifler, and teller of vain matters and news.

The cheeks are so named of the Phisiognomers, forasmuch as in these, the
teeth and hears are naturally ingendered.

The Phisiognomer Cocles of knowledge reports, that the cheeks or Iaw bones,
are eminent from the upper part of the mouth, with a length of the cheek
bones, through the part of composition: and such (of observation) are known to
be malicious, especially in unlawful* and incongruent matters: and these are
applied, for the part of the Jaws; unto the Ox and (...) (...).

But if the Jaws shall be formed short, with such an eminency or bearing out,
from the upper part of the mouth: do indicate such a creature to be malicious,
an evil reporter, violent in actions, and envious, this especially is
verified, when as there shall lack the substance of flesh, or the same appear
but thin: these hitherto, the words of the skillful Cocles.



The Philosopher Aristotle unto the mighty King Alexander uttered, that the
cheeks formed full* with the temples appearing blown: do denote such a
person to be con^o^^io^s, hasty in words, and very irefull: the self ^a^e
reports Conciliatore, in his Rubricke of Phisiognomie.

The cheeks so small situated, that from the eyes these seem parted off: do
arguethe fullness of humors: and that the same creature (after the mind of
the Phisiognomers) to be grieved with the burden of them.

The roundenesse of the cheeks formed after nature, indicateth envy, and
deceytfull condycions: to consist in that person: after the mind of Phylemon.

The full or rather fat cheeks, are significations for the more part, of a
sluggarde, and drunckarde: if we may credit the ancient Phisiognomers.

The cheeks discerned soft, and ill fashioned, do argue such a person (after
the common proverb) to be long tongued, importunate, and talkatiue, and this
the Phisiognomer Cocles utters of experience.

The worthy Philosopher Aristotle, in Methaphoricis utters, that the cheeks
appearing red above, do witness such a creature to be a drunkarde, or great
drinker of wine: and referred unto the similitude of the passion: in that such
which latelye have been angered and vered, appear of a blushing redness,
especially about the eyes, kindled and caused in the beginning of the ire. The
cause is sufficiently uttered before of the Phisiognomer, in the chapter of the
nature of the face.

Of the condition, nature, and judgment of the mouth. The, xxiiij. chapter.


THe singular Isidore (in. xj. Ethimologiarum capit. primo) writes that the
mouth is so named in Latin Os: for that by it, as by a door, all men
naturally and usually put in meat, and cast forth the spittle prepared: or for
that all meats and sustenaunce pass by the same into the stomach, and all
words issue forth of the same, to the understanding of minds.

To come unto the matter, in the former chapter it has been sufficiently
uttered, that the bigness of members proceeds through heat, especially the
mouth, which represents the natural and spiritual members: as of these,
especially the stomach. For how much, the proportion of the stomach is unto
the mouth, so much is the proportion of the mouth, aunswering unto the stomach:
for that the inner members, are known of the Phisiognomers to be hot. Of
which reason, how much the intentiuer the heat is, so much the greater will
the resolution of parts be. For where a great resolution consists, there of
necessity must ensue, that a restoration aptlye be procured: which otherwise
can not be caused, but through the benefit and help of meats, that ought to
be in a sufficient quantity: of which the spirits are actiuely engendered, and
these in great quantity, which properly cause in that creature ire,
boldness, yea quarrelling, and fighting. Of which it succeeds, that the
worthy Philemon, Palemon, Albertus, and Conciliatore report: that the creature
which has a great and wide mouth, is a gluttonous feeder; yet hardy; and
prone to fight.

The self same words utters Rasis, that the person which has a great
mouth, is known to be a gluttonous feeder; and bold.

The mouth formed small, is noted to be of a feminine nature. But the mouth
deterned great and wide, does witness ire, boldness, quarrelling, and
fighting: such also are known of experience, to be gluttonous feeders.

The mouth formed ouerwyde, that the same appears, as it were wyder cut of
purpose: does indicate such a creature to be a gluttonous feeder, wicked,
fieree, lightly moved to fight, and cruel: who for the proper conditions,
applied unto the bruts beast. Certain report, and Ptholomeus paruus with them,
that these, are full of words, bosters, tellers of vain tales and news,
enuyous, liars: and after a manner, appear stark foolish.

The mouth having a small clesing, and opening: does denote such a creature to
be peasable, yet many times found unfaithful, and faint hearted: the reason
of this contrary, is the same which was above uttered of the Phisiognomer.

The mouth in the proper sight or being, having a seemly quantity in the
greatness, with the lips thin, and appearing small in the closing: and to
these, the eyes showing smilingly, with the rest of the face agreeablie
aunswering: does indicate a libidinous person, a Cynede or an effeminate
creature, and a liar: as the worthy Conciliatore in his Rubricke of
Phisiognomie utters.

A small mouth in form, appearing prominent outward, does denote wicked
conditions in that person, to be false in promise, and a betrayer.

The mouth discerned small, having thin lips, does witness a feeble mind,
and courage: but this person deceytfully, and malicious.



Where or in whom the mouth shall appear very far bearing out, and round,
with a thickness of the lips, and that the upper lip foldeth outward: is
for the form (applied of the Philosopher) unto the Hog: and signifies by
the agreement of Authors, that such a creature to be nastie, peevish, cruel,
and a fool: as the Phisiognomer of experience, has many times noted.

The best condicioned mouth, after the agreement of the Phisiognomers, is when
the same appears not over moist: in that the moisture of the mouth, and
lips, does argue fearfulness, and malignitie in that creature, as the
worthy Albertus, reports: and the same the Phisiognomer Cocles affirms of
experience.

The mouth that sauoureth sweet, especially in the breathing: does indicate
an honest person, witty, both in the giving, and retayning: wary, secret,
coveting fair things, and faithful: yet easily led, either unto the good
or evil, through his light believing: if we may credit Michael Scotus.

The mouth that sauoureth ill in the breathing, does denote such a creature to
be diseased in the Liver, besides of a gross understanding, lightly credyting,
of a base wit, a coueter of other men's goods, lascivious, deceytfull, a liar,
a teller of vain matters and news: if Michael Scotus, may be believed.

Whose mouth in the speaking, is drawn awrie: is noted of experience, to be
diseased with a rewme discending from the head: yet is the same either
stronger, or weaker procured, even as in the doubling, unto the other
proportions: and this of observation, does the Phisiognomer Cocles witness.

The judgment of the form, and condition of the lips. The. xxvij. chapter.


AT the end of the Jaws, are the lips formed: which are compowned of a soft
flesh: in that these by a double motion, are aptly moved: as in the one, by a
proper manner upward, and in the other by the motion downewarde: and these
caused, by motion of the laws, from one to the other, both in the closing and
opening: which is the cause, why the lips are named to have a good, and
perfect motion. The utility of them (by the agreement of all the
Phisiognomers) is and serves for the furthering and helping of speech: and
that these may (through the help of the laws) aptly and well close together,
for the better beseeming of the countenance.

The color of the lips, toward the opening of the mouth is read, through
many veins of blood deryued unto that place: the note of which is, in that
these often, and much inquantitie bleed: and are of a light cause broken, and
quickly or very soon cut. The common hurtes there happening, are especially
cured (after the mind of the Phisiognomer) with the same, named of the
practioners Mel Rosatum: for he reports, that he has often experienced the
same in many subjects.

There may notes also be gathered and conceived, by the colors of the lips:
for that the natural color, in the edges of the lips (after the mind of
Constantine) ought to be read: through the thinness of skin, which lightly
of the heat or color of the blood, receives a Rosy quality. Of which, as
this worthy Constantine reports: that the redness of the lips indicateth,
the pureness of complexion, and the vnmyxing together of troubled blood: and
the note both of the good, and strong virtue in that creature.

The wanness of the lips, argues the contrary to the same above: in that
the virtue of blood, and natural heat are lacking in that creature: so that
such having the like lips, are noted to be sick: as the worthy Rasis
reports.

When the lips are formed big, these do represent the multitude of matter,
drawn unto them through heat: and the grosenesse or bigness of them, is
caused through the gross humors and spirits, of which the dullness of wit
ensues, and foolishness: procured by reason of the hotnesse, except the
nether lip be decerned loose hanging, and waterie running.

But if the lip be decerned upright, and thick in form, that is, compact or
stiff: in such a person, does the Phisiognomer (of experience) apply there the
Planet Marse.

A like reason the Phisiognomer utters, that when the mouth is formed great,
if the lips appear loose and hanging: in that part of the creature, is the
Moon of him, and others aptly ^pplyed.



The nether lip decerned loose hanging, and folding downewarde, and that the
same appears very red in color: does argue (happening in the woman) to be a
most sure note, of the great desire unto the veneriall act, and unshame
fastness in that creature: as the same, the Phisiognomer Cocles observed and
noted, in a famous Curtysane of Rome, named Isabella di ^una: The like note
seen in children, signifies that the creature in time, to grow and become a
Cynede or effeminate person: especially, if the countenance and eyes appear
smyling and the creature grown unto a ripe age: as the same the Phisiognomer
Cocles reports, that he noted in a certain noble man, of the like condition.

Briefly to write, all the other members according to the nature and property
of them, are each attrybuted unto his proper Planet: as shall after appear
more at large, in the third book of the Physiognomers to come forth,
entitled the Phisiognomie of the Planets.

The worthy Loxius, Phylemon, Plato, Aristotle, Albertus, and Conciliatore
report: that the lips decerned cheerful, and somewhat smyling, happening with a
merry countenance: do argue such a creature to be wantonly disposed, and
lybidinous: yea such sometimes are known to be crafty, deceyuers, and
thieves: of which one the like, was that wicked Chyrurgian (a countryman of the
Phisiognomers) named Seraphinus de pisis, that he diligently noted.

The lips of the mouth formed very gross, loose hanging, or overmuch
folding out: do indicate such a creature to be simple, lightly or soon
credyting, and of a dull capacity: these also denote a flewmatick humor
moystening, to consist in that person: compared of Aristotle, for the form
unto the aged Ass, having the like lips.

If the lip within be seen not lively, or not a fair red in color: does
argue a matter not regulated, and gross humors to consist in that creature:
of which a dull capacity, and bellume understanding ensues: yea the same
sometimes denotes a sickness present, or that shall shortly follow.

The Philosopher Aristotle (in Methaphoric is) utters, that such which have
the lips formed thin, and in the edges appearing to hang loose out: in such
manner, that the upper lip is seen stretched over the nether, at the closing
and joining of the lips: are denoted to be bold, stowte, and of great
courage: applied for the form, unto the courageous Lion. The like condition of
these, may a man see in the Mastie Dogs of our Realm: which have such
hanging lips, as to all men known.

Such which have the lips hard, and thin formed, and a bearing out
decerned about the Canyne or sharp teeth: do indicate a rude understanding in
that creature, unapt to learn, and furious in actions: applied for the form,
unto the grunting Hog. The cause of these (as the Phisiognomer Cocles
supposes) is the paucitie of matter, and the dominion of dryth: in that the
same consumes the moisture of the lips, but this about the Canyne teeth, it
can not so wast or consume: for as much as the moisture consisting in such a
place, is known to be viscous and clammy. Such also by reason of the dries
(says the Phisiognomer) multiplied in the brain, are noted to be foolish,
and deceytfull: applied after the manner, unto the Swyne. So that whose lips
are decerned thin and hard, and about the Canyne teeth bearing up: such
persons seen the like, are referred unto the Swyne.



The nether lip decerned greater, than the upper: does denote such a
creature to be unapt to learn, simple, of a small understanding, and foolish.

The heather lip seen swelled, unto the sharp or Canyne teeth: does indicate
such a person to be full of rancour, and malice, and contentious.

Such which have the lips formed gross, and the upper hanging over the
nether lip: are denoted (by report of the Philosopher Aristotle) to be of a
simple understanding, of a dull capacity, and foolish: applied for the form,
unto the slow and dull Ass.

Whose upper lip shall appear promynent or bearing out with the gummes, does
witness such a creature to be a lover of discord, and occupying or busying
himself in strifes, and controversies: applied for the form unto the Dog:
these hitherto, borrowed out of the Phisiognomy of Aristotle.

Such having the upper lip so elevated, that the gummes, that is, the flesh on
the teeth, and the teeth themselves are decerned: are known (as the
Phisiognomer reports of experience) to be full of variaunce, and
contumelious, yea often rebuking: applied for the similitude unto the Dog,
especially, and the same, according to the apparaunt congruencie seen. For the
Dog when he purposes to bite, shows then the teeth by the gathering up of
the lips.

The lips formed small and thin, and the mouth decerned little: do
indicate the imbecillitie of mind, and craftiness to dwell or consist in that
person.

The ancient Rasis reports, that whose lips are decerned great: is denoted
foolish, of a dull capacity, and unapt to learn. The self same does the
worthy Philosopher. Aristotle utter, in his Phisiognomie of the members that
such a person which has thick lips, is known to be foolish, and of a
simple capacity.

The much bearing out of the lips, does witness such a person (after the
mind of the Phisiognomer) to be foolish, full of words, contentious, and
hardy.

Certain report, that whose lips shall be formed congruently thin, and not
much folded or turned outward: does denote such a person to be secret in all
matters, wary, of a good perseverance, yet yrefull at times, and of a
singular or ready wit. The cause is, for that the same declares a
congruent matter, unto the subtilnesse of the humors, and spirits, which is
the reason and cause of the wit. But the yrefulnesse consisting in that
creature, proceeds through the subtilnesse of the spirits, prone and apt unto
the kindling of it.

Such having the lips with the gummes, formed on the teeth prominent or
bearing out: do indicate an evil tongued person, a wrangler, yrefull, and
inclined to work injuries: for these properly referred unto the Dog: as the
singular Palemon utters.

Whose lips shall be seen well colored, and these rather thin, then
gross or thick: does signify such a person to be well conditioned in all
matters, and lightly changed, either to the good, or evil, but rather prone
unto virtues, then unto vices: as Michael Scotus utters: and there (after the
mind of the Phisiognomer) is the planet Jupiter represented.

Whose lips are decerned not sufficient equal or a like throughout, in such
manner, that the one be grosser or thicker, than the other: does witness such a
person, to be more simple, than wise: and of a variable fortune, as certain
report.

The Philosopher Ptholomeus paruus, utters, that the outward lips formed
small, and somewhat folded or turned outward, do denote such a person to be
full of words, very envious, and an accuser. The reason is, for that the
paucitie or smalnesse of the lips, does witness the small quantity of
matter, and the dominion of coldness: but the folding or turning outward of
them, does declare a dryness, drawing together the hearie sinews: of which
ensues that the animal spirits are incongruent, unto the decerning of
whatsoever is spoken: and the envy through the same, proceeds, and is like
caused.

The worthy Ptholomeus Paruus utters, that the upper lip folding or
turning upward, and the nether downward: do signify a misery or
wretchedness of life, and uncomely conditions. Of this the Phisiognomer saw,
and found a singular experience, especially in the poor* and needy people.
For the weakness of the animal spirits (says he) is signified, to consist
in them: of which the wit properlye has not place or ^rate in that creature.

The lips formed thin, if the upper be turned and folding outward, and the
same lose hanging: do denote such a creature, to be a deceyuer, subtle, and a
thief for the more part.

The lips decerned gross or thick, like to the Dogs: do indicate such a
person to be a deceyuer, an accuser, and wicked in conditions: these hitherto
borrowed out of the Phisiognomie of Ptholomeus paruus.

The lips of the Moors are not to be judged upon, but of those which ^well
and are conuersaunt amongst them, and their qualities, there shall note: for
which cause sufficient it is, to judge in general of those realms, and
countries, more known to us.

Of the form, nature, and judgment of the teeth. The. xxvij. chapter.


THe canine or sharp teeth of men, if these be long, fast standing, and
bearing outward: do argue such a person to be a glutton, irefull, fierce, and
laciuious: applied for the forni^, unto the Dog and Boar.

The cause I suppose (says the Phisiognomer) through the abundance of the
radical moisture, or spermaticall matter, which declares a most great
dominion of heat, and strength in the principal members, of which a hasty
dissoluing of the substaunciall moisture ensues, that cannot be restored, but
through the much eating of meat, whose plentiful substance this greatly
needs: for which cause, such are inordinate as before uttered: and as the same
appears by relation, in the Dog and Boar.

And such the Phisiognomer has known of experience, to be wasters of their
own substance great drinckers, disceyuers, whorehunters, maintayners of
harlottes, and murderers, especially if any other proportion aydeth and
confirms the same.

The ancient Rasis reports, that whose teeth are discerned weak, thin
set, and small: do argue the whole body to be weak: and both feebleness
in that creature, and the shortness of life. The self same utters the said
Rasis, in the buying of servant: and the Philosopher Aristotle uses the same
words, in his Problemes.

The worthy Aristotle also reports ( in secundo de Animalibus) that such
having the teeth thin set, are noted to be short lived. The self same does
Rasis affirm, under these words. That whose canine or sharp teeth are
decerned long, and strong set, is argued to be a glutton, an evil person, and
vicious of body.

The like words in a manner utters the learned Conciliatore, in his Rubricke
of Phisiognomie. That a noise caused through the teeth, does denote a
frensinesse in that person: which like does sometimes happen to children
sleeping, when they are troubled with worms, as the skillful Physicians report.



The teeth formed big and broad, whether these stand inward, or are seen
outward: do argue a vain person, lascivious, simple, of a slender capacity,
and having a bouine wit: for that the same witnesses gross spirits to
consist in that person, proceeding of gross humors.

The teeth most dry, without any moisture decerned to stand in them, yea and
wholly dry in a sick person: do denote death at hand: forasmuch as the
radical moisture is then consumed: and their bodies remain and are, as a
Lamp without Oil. In a healthful body, the like seen, do signify a
sickness to come, and the same shortly.

The teeth seen full of rewme, or a distilled water from the head appearing in
them: do signify a disease of the head or stomach, through the
participation and occasion of the head, and lungs: causing this distillation
from the head into the nose and eyes, the Catharre, the Cough, the Squincie in
the throat, and the impostume of the Jaws. But any of these, this procures
either more or less, according to the contrary working of the members: as
unto the beholder, may evidently appear. Such beasts having the teeth
indented like to a Saw, only drink by licking with the tongue: but such
having the teeth formed whole, do drink by supping, as the famous Philosopher
Aristotle reports.

The teeth formed small, and weak to chewe, both thin set, and short
appearing, do indicate (after Michael Scotus) a feeble courage, a tender
capacity, fearful, lightly persuaded, either unto the good or evil, of a
reasonable wit, and faithful: but as he writes, such a person is short lived.

The teeth (after Michael Scotus) not even formed, neither in the bigness, nor
in the standing of the Gummes: so that there appear of them narrow, broad,
thin, and thick teeth? do denote a disoainefull person, envious, bold,
wary, and of a ready wit: if a man may credit this Scotus.



The teeth formed very long, and as they were sharp, somewhat thin set, yet
strong in the chewing: do witness (after the mind of Scotus) such a person
to be a glutton, envious, bold, deceytfull, suspicious, a liar, and
inuericundious.

The teeth (as M. Scotus reports) appearing cytryne, or brown color,
whether these be short or long formed: do argue such a person to be more
foolish then wise, a gross feeder, lightly credyting, of a diverse
understanding, suspicious, envious, a coueter of other men's goods, and a liar.

The teeth formed big and broad, whether these declyne, or stand in and
out, or that they appear thick, or thin set: do witness (after M. Scotus
such a person to be vain, lightly credyting, simple, of a tender capacity, a
gross feeder, lascivious, and a liar.

The teeth decerned strong, and thick set: do indicate (as Michael reports,
long life in that creature, to be a teller of news, self willed, a stowte
person, lightly credyting, desirous of bewtifull things, and of a dull
capacity.

The teeth decerned weak, few in number, thin set, and small: do indicate
(after M. Scotus) such a person to be weak of body, shortlyued, gentle,
shamefast, tractable, trusty, lightly credyting, of a ready capacity, and
wary: these hitherto borrowed out of the Phisiognomie, of M. Scotus.

Of the condition, and judgment of the tongue. The. xxvii. chapter.


THe tongue is a member which is extended out of white flesh, both hard and
well moving, and this the color and use of it declares: the redness which
consists in it, is caused of many small veins and little arteries, which
proceed and come unto it, especially unto the nether part of the same,
through which this appears in the nether part redder, than in the upper: and
this is known to be a spungie matter, full of powers: For experience
instructs us, that the same is bloody, in consideration that the solution of
the continuitie of the same, is only cured in short time, with the simple
Rosed Honey.

The tongue not only serves for the clean and perfect uttering of words in
smyting the teeth to cause the sound of them, in the issuing forth: but the
same also helps to distinguishe all manner of tastes, yea the letters
perfitely to express, as the learned Aristotle utters.

The tongue folded or turned downewarde, and stutting or stammering: does argue
an humorall laske of the belly: as the worthy Hypocrates reports, in. 32.
Aphoris. sextae secto.

Such encombred with this humorall laske, become stutters or stammerers,
through the matter descending from the head, which enters and is drunk into
the Spungynesse, and lacertes of the tongue: and of this engrossed or caused
thick, through which enlarging, the same of necessity must be shortened. So
that of the same cause, such stut or stammer: yea Rasis reports, that the
stammering, dothannuate the moystnesse of quality. Somethere be, which are
caused to stut of nature: of which that noble Physician Aetius writes.

Such having the tongue tied before, cannot perfitly utter or pronounce the
letter S* but sound the same like God: and such of the singular Aetius, are
named proper stammerers.

The tongue tied behind, cannot pronounce the letters. R and T. as Galen
reports: but breaking the letter R. sound the same like to the letter L. and
such of him, are aptly named lyspers.

The flixe named Diarrhaea, is a flixe or laske of the belly, with the only
shedding of humor, without an inflammation or exulceration: when the humors
especially discende from the head. So that when any utters the words with
difficulty, it is then a note of Diarrhaea to molest that creature. With which
disease, the Phisiognomer reports himself to have been encombred in child
age: for as much as in many subjects, this sickness much molesteth and
abounds in that age: but grown unto ryper years, the same then seaseth.

The stammerers (says the Phisiognomer) do many times fear, to drink any
headdy Wine, in that these are so soon drunk, through the weakness of
brain. Hereof it is, that the dronkarde so stammereth, and maffleth in the
mouth, that he readily can not bring forth this common word or number, as
(thirty three) in no manner. For as much as the vapors of the Wine, are drunk
into the Spungynesse of the tongue: of which this is enlarged, and hindered of
the natural site.

The ancient Hyppocrates in suis Secretis utters, that the heaviness of the
tongue, happening in a young man: pronounces after the lightness of the same
sudden death: the like witnesses, the learned Galen.

When the tongue is discerned gross, big, and large: does argue a rude wit:
as the Phisiognomer many times noted: this also does represent flewmatike
humors, to consist in the brain of that creature, or in the other parts of
his body.

The learned Conciliatore reports, that the stammering, and often repeating
of the fore syllable and word, before the full uttering and speaking of the
word, does denote such a creature, to be prepared and prone unto the
Melancholy quality.

The tongue by a swift motion drawn together, and through the corrupting and
breaking of the words, causing a repiticion: does witness such a person to be
foolish, hasty in wrath, and yrefull. This especially caused, through the
mouablenesse, and hotnesse of the spirits, hastening forward, the vtteraunce
and pronouncing of words, without consideration.

When the tongue shall be discerned so heavy as a stone, and in a manner
appearing immouable: does denote (after the mind of the Philosopher) a
sluggishe person, slow in actions, and of a dull capacity.

The tongue discerned thin, does represent a subtle wit, through the decent
matter, both of the humor and spirit: although the same may declare a hot,
and peradventure a Chollericke quality, after the mind of the Phisiognomer.



Ptholomie the Philosopher utters, that the tongue decerned long, and red: to
signify wisdom: for as much as the same witnesses lawdable humors, to
consist in that creature.

In kysses (by report of the Phisiognomer) may much be known and found: For a
certain creature I saw (says he) which thrust forth the tongue, nigh a
paulme breadth: and the same sundry times experienced in my sight, as a matter
of admyration, and worthy to be noted. And of this is known to the wise, that
the virtue of the muscles to be voluntary. etc.

The tongue seen white in color, does indicate poverty and myserie to ensue
to that creature, except mightier notes prevail: as the singular Philosopher
Ptholomeus Paruus reports.

The learned Conciliatore writes, that the tongue decerned, as the same
infected of the natural color: does denote a weak estate and evil
condition, to consist in that person: especially of the breast and belly.

The person which has such a long, gross, and round tongue, that with the
same thrust forth, he may easily lick the Nose: does witness such a person
(after nature) to imitate the Ox, in conditions: as the same (the Phisiognomer
diligently noted) in a neighbor of his.

The learned Auerrois (in de sensu and sensato) vttreth, that when the tongue
has drunk in, and received certain humors, the taste of the same is then
corrupted: and like is to be conceived, of the instruments of the other senses.

The tongue ouerfast speaking (as reports Michael Scotus) does denote such a
person to be more simple than wise, of a dull wit and understanding, lightly
crediting, and conuertible, either unto the good or evil.

The tongue that stutteth in the uttering of words (says Michael Scotus) does
indicate such a person to be very simple, vain, unconstant, yrefull: yet from
his ire easily brought and appease^, and willing to serve.

The tongue (as reports Michael Scotus) decerned big and rough, does
witness a circumspect person, reasonably willing to serve, secret to
himself, disdainful, a betrayer, vain, a teller of news, fearful, and yet
having a reasonable sufficiency of many things.

The tongue (as Michael Scotus utters) decerned thin, does signify a
circumspect person, ingenious, yet lightly fearful, soon crediting, and
conuertible unto the good, or evil. These hitherto Scotus.

The nature, forms, and judgment of voices. The. xxix. chapter.


THe cause why in some persons, the voice is heard big: in some uttered
small: in some decerned big and small together: and in some after a horce,
and aspere manner: is for that (as the Philosopher utters) there are three
principal conditions, that concur unto the voice. The one is, the virtue of
the lungs in forcing or procuring forward the breath, in reuerberating unto
the root of the tongue, or unto the pype of the lunges. The other and second
is, through the air expelled again, to reuerberate the same. The third is,
the pype of the lungs, unto the root of the tongue, where the air and breath
is reuerberated. Of which, how much the sounding virtue consists strong, to
expel much breath, and the pype of the longes formed large, that the same
receives great plenty of air: so much the greater and lesser, appears the
voice: but how much the virtue appears weak, and the weason or pype of the
lunges consists weak, so much the smalnesse and shrilnesse of voice
proceeds: and the same insueth, according to the virtue moving, and
swiftness of the breath.

The grosnesse of the voice, proceeds through the slownesse of moving, in
that creature: of which, how much the virtue does lesser move the air or
breath, so much the more subtilnesse or smalnesse, and shrilnesse has the
voice: through which, this proceeds and is caused (after the mind of the
Phisiognomer) the swifter.

How much the more air or breath (says he) shall be gathered and received
into the subject, so much the grosser or bigger will the voice succeed and be,
and the same procured through the slownesse of moving.

The asper or rough voice, proceeds through a dryness, of the pype of the
lungs. But the horce voice is caused, through a superfluous moisture, which
descends from the head, unto the pype of the lunges, which (as it should
seem) so hinders and lets the breath to pass in that creature.

The equality and sweetness of the voice, proceeds and is caused through a
temperament of the pype of the lunges: when the same consists and is neither
to dry, nor moist. For this is a note that the quality of the heart not to be
resisting or letting, but that a proportion of all living things, may be
found and known: and in these, the females are decerned to be of a weaker and
shriller voice, than the males: except the Cow, as the Philosopher ( in quinto
de Animalibus) utters.

The person which has a big voice, is noted to be very injurious: applied
for the form unto the Ass, as Aristotle reports, in Methaphoricis.



Such which seem to forecall, beginning in a base manner, and ending small: are
noted to be yrefull, yet soon appeased and pleased: applied for the form
unto the Ox, and unto the comeliness of the voice.

Such which utter the words now big, now low, and vnperfitely: are
indicated to be fearful, applied for the same condition, unto women, and unto
the comeliness of the voice.

The persons which seem to call and speak big, and the voice not changed
into a diverse manner: are applied of the Philosopher for the form, unto our
great Mastie, and unto the semelinesse of the voice.

The creature which is heard to speak softly, without a retching of the
voice, are noted to be gentill, and simple: applied for the form unto the
sheep.

Such which call or utter the words shrillye, are noted to be irefull: applied
for the kind and form unto the Goat: these hitherto out of Aristotle, the
like Albertus, and Conciliatore report, and Hieronimus de Manfredis, a country
man of the Phisiognomers.

The voice uttered big, and distensed in the kind, does indicat a strong
person: forasmuch as the same proceeds, through the plenty of heat. This
gross or big voice, does the Phisiognomer here mean, to be like to the base
Organe pype.

The person which utters a slow, and big sound of the voice, is judged to
be quiet, tractable, gentle, and merry: of these, certain are known to be
very just, and upright creatures, in their dealings, after the mind of the
Phisiognomer.

The voice decerned big, yet the sound of words perceived very corrupt: is
an apparent note of a frantic creature, injurious, and a glutton.

The strength of the voice, ensues the largeness of veins, and multitude of
the spirits, which altogether are caused of heat: as the Philosopher
Aristotle reports.

The persons possessing a big voice, and that heavily or bassely calling: are
indicated to be apt persons, to bear iniuryes and wrongs: applied for the
form, unto the ass.

Such creatures which call or begin big, and end in their words with a
small voice, are denoted to be both yrefull, and pitiful at times: yea soon
pleased, and tractable: applied unto the Ox, for the form of the cry: the
reason of this, is often taught before.

Such a person which has a gross, high, and sounding voice: is reported to be
eloquent, bold, fierce, and valiant in arms, or a warrior.



The voice decerned small and low, does indicate such a creature to be
fearful, and envious. By this low voice, is here meant (says the
Phisiognomer) the small and faint voice: and not the big, in any manner.

Here conceive, that the voice is diverse of sound, forasmuch as the voice is a
sound with an ymagination, by the mouth of the creature, vtterod to
demonstrate any effect. But the sound is any kind, proceeding of the
sounding, which unto the hearing procures a passion. And the speech is a
third kind, having a diversity, unto either of these.

The voice decerned small, soft in the hearing, and in a broken manner: does
witness a womanly fearfulness to consist in that creature, and to be
effeminate.

The voice heard slow, does indicate (after the mind of the Philosopher) such
a person to be sluggishe in actions, rash at times, and impudent.

The voice decerned weak, does argue a straightness of the arteries, and
paucitie of the spirits, which are especially caused by the means of cold.

The voice decerned soft, without retching, does indicate such a person to be
gentle, and tractable: applied unto the sheep, for the similitude of the
voice: even as the others, applied unto Beasts of like condition.

The voice heard gross and high, does indicate a hotenesse of the heart and
lunges, and a largeness of the wesand, that both freely draws and expels
the air or breath, without impediment: for which cause, the voice heard loud,
does denote such a creature to be talkatiue, bold, and contencious.

The Philosopher Aristotle (in de secretis secretorum) utters, that whose
voice appears a mean, between a smalnesse, and bigness: is noted to be a
person sapient, a foreseer, true, and just, and these through the contrary
cause.

Such a person which is decerned quick of speech, especially if he has a
shrill voice, is denoted to be a creature yrefull, obstinate, foolish,
importunate, a liar, and evermore evil conditioned.

But if the voice shall be perceived or decerned gross, or rather big: does
signify such a creature to be yrefull, hasty, of an evil nature and
condition.

The creature which has a sweet and pleasant voice, is judged (of the
Philosopher Aristotle) to be envious, yrefull at times, and marvelous
suspecting.

The delectablenesse of voice, decerned in a proper subject (as the worthy
Palemon) utters, does indicate a dull capacity and foolishness: yet a
stowtnesse of courage, to consist in him.

The quickness and hastiness of words or speech decerned, as the (learned
Albertus) reports, does argue a hot complexion, to consist in that creature.
The like do Phylemon, Loxius, Palemon, and Conciliatore utter, under these
words: that whose voice is heard, gross, and big uttered, is reported to be
yrefull, rash, and hasty in his actions, and supposed to be of an evil
nature: the reason of these (is reported of them to be) through the intemperate
hotnesse.

The person hasty in speech, especially when he has a small voice, is
reported to be wicked, a fool, importunate, a liar, yrefull, and evermore of
evil conditions.

Whose voice shall be decerned pleasant, (as before uttered) is judged envious,
and suspicious: the reason has been opened in another place, for as much as
the same is effeminate. Further the delectablenesse of voice, does denote small
wisdom or simpleness, and veneriall conditions.

The ancient Rasis reports, that the voice decerned big, does indicate the
whotnesse of complexion, but the small voice, does witness the coldness of
complexion in that creature.

The voice perceived rough or horse, like unto the Cranes: does testify an
envious person, and one that retayneth a mischief or grudge, secretly in the
heart: the same person also is by report of the Philosopher Melancholik in
quality.

Whose voice shall be decerned, not fully uttered or spoken with a long breath:
is noted to be a vile person, through the coldness of the heart, and
peradventure with moystnesse applied.

The creature which has a very big voice, is noted to be a servant, unto
his own belly. The reason of this is, for as much as the grave or big voice,
proceeds through the debillitie of virtue, which cannot breath out the
sufficient plenty of air, to move the muscles of the breast: of which insueth
sluggishnesse, that such a person of the same, can neither apply his wit to any
study, nor frame or exercise his body with any corporal or painful labor.

They which utter the voice, in cutting of tha breath: do promise liberally,
but perform little, and such are known to be deceyuers.

They which are decerned to utter the voice (as it were) by a moouement of the
breast, sturdily big: are denoted to be manly, yet unapt to learn, and
stowte of courage: applied for the form, unto the Lion.

They which have a slow, and big voice, are denoted to be quiet, and merry:
such also for the more part are known to be just persons, and gentle
conditioned.

They which are heard to sound the voice shrill like unto birds, are noted to
be prone unto the veneriall act, unstable and vain.

A breathing decerned small and faint in voice, does innuate such a creature to
be sad for the more part, froward and suspicious.

The creature which moves often himself, and speaks with the moving of
hands, is thought uncleanly: yet of a ready wit, and quick vtteraunce, and
sometimes known to be a deceyuer. But he which refrayneth from the moving of
hands when he speaks, is of a perfiter understanding, of a good disposition,
and of a sound counsel.

The person which speaks and sounds the voice through the nosethrilles, is
affirmed to be full of words, a liar, malicious, envious, and ioyeth in the
harms of another: and such a creature does imitate the nature of the Ducke.
This the Phisiognomer observed and noted, in a certain countrieman of his.

Further the voice, heard vehement, and making a noise, as a sound indecently
mixed, does denote an unjust person, violent and bearing hatred in heart. But
the voice decerned slow, does indicate a sluggishe person in actions and
sometimes hasty. And whose voice in the middle, appears a mean, as between
the* smalnesse and grosenesse, is accounted sapient, a foreseer, true and just.

The condition and judgment of laughter. The. xxx. chapter.
THe mind, after the opinion of the Philosopher, is much delighted with
laughter: yet the overmuch laughter, is named of most men, a laughter out of
course, and argues besides a small understanding and simple wit.



Of which, the common Proverb ryfe, and often divulgated of the wise is, that
in the mouth of a fool, much laughter consists: the like reports Catullus,
that singular Poet, in this Sentence.

The laughter light moved,
not framed in place:
Bewrayth a fools folly,
in iesture and grace.
Here conceive, that through the Milte formed big: such a creature is
procured to laugh much: and otherwise is it, when in the contrary manner, as
some report. And ye learned Isidore (in. xi. ethymolagiarum) utters, that the
Mylt to be so named of the supplying of ye same: which properly lies on the
contrary part of the liver, to the end the same should not consist or remain
empty. The Gaul is known to be an apt receptacle and bladder in the
creature, which by due work of nature sends or receaueth into it the
choler. The Mylt also some suppose to be the procurer and moouer of laughter,
seeing by it we are especially caused to laughe. By the Gaul (if we may credit
I^ydore) are all creatures moved unto ire: by the heart, to conceive deeply
matters: by the liver, of the quality moved unto love: through which four
elements, every living creature (says he) is sustained.

So that the persons which sufficiently laughe, are denoted (after the
agreement of writers) to be beninge and gentle, quiet, beloved (for their
courteous behavior) of all persons, yet lightly endamaged or harmed, although
such are smally careful for any: and these besides are of an apparaunt
comlynesse (says the Phisiognomer) applied unto the Sanguine, and Iouiall
persons.



The creature which reasonably laugheth, is argued to be given to mirth, and
one of a good quality, and that ioyeth much in the veneriall act: especially,
if the eyes appear smyling.

The overmuch laughter exercised (as Aristotle utters unto king Alexander)
remoueth reverence, and hastes old age in that creature: for troth, with
such willingly (says the Phisiognomer) is no society or fellowship to be used:
in that these lack wit, and are nothing at all secret: yet these (after some
writers) are reported to be serviceable, and painful in their doings.

Such persons which are seen sildome to laugh, are indicated to be of a deep
understanding, and known faithful as certain report: and this of the
Phisiognomer observed, and noted in sundry honest and virtuous persons: which
he knew to be searchers, of deep and hid secrets. The cause evidently
appears, and is known to be a deep thinking and reatch, which consists in
the creature, that remoueth the laughter. Of which, such a creature that much
and often laugheth (as above uttered) bethinketh or museth on no serious and
deep matter, nor makes any solemn, or witty discourse with himself.

Certain of the ancient report, that the creature which is hardly procured to
laugh, is affirmed to be witty, a foreseer of matters unto himself,
nyggardly: and very studious in the Art, which he daily exercises: yet
such a creature (says the Phisiognomer) is prone to be a surmyser, and
yrefull.

The person which is heard to laugh loud or a high, with a certain noise
decerned in the laughter, is indicated, by the report of some writers, to be
inuericundious: and rash in actions.

Such a creature, that (without cause procured) laugheth, and in his laughing,
seems often to coughe, or gape, or to draw the head awry: is indicated to be
variable of purpose and mind, envious, lightly or soon credyting, and
conuertible either unto the good or evil, as Loxius, and Phylemon report.

The learned Conciliatore in his Rubricke of of Phisiognomie utters, that the
creature coughing when he laugheth, or is at the instaunt encumbred with the
hardness and shortness of breath: is judged to be inuericundious, fierce, and
a Tyrant: as the like, the Phisiognomer Cocles observed and noted, in a
certain Prince of Lumbardie.



Certain of the worthy Phisiognomers report, that whose cheeks are discerned
often is smyle, is denoted to be of an evil mind, of a perverse cogitation,
and a liar: and such persons generally, or for the more part, are malicious,
and dissemblers: so that these are not friendly to be trusted, but rather to be
doubted, if we may credit the Phisiognomer: when the like especially is
matched, and joined with other accydences of the mind: and that their eye lids
appear wrinckled together, with the eye brows joined, or in a clowdie form
gathered: such are then shedders of blood, murderers, robbers, or thieves by
Sea, and land: as the Phisiognomer often observed and noted in many, which
were the like.

The creature that smyleth unto himself when he talks: is indicated to be
foolish, and of a simple understanding, as the like the Phisiognomer observed
in a certain Italian: and such are reported to abound, in the Melancholic
quality.

The cheeks decerned wrything in the laughter, as they were so procured in the
derision of an other: do witness such a person to be arrogant, deceytfull,
covetous, a liar, yrefull, and a betrayer or vtterer of secrets.

The person that lightly laugheth (says Michael Scotus) is denoted to be
simple of understanding, unstable, vain, lightly credyting, of a dull wit,
gross in feeding, and seruicable, yet in factes or actions not secret.

The creature that sildome laugheth, and seems soon to have done: is argued
after the mind of Michael Scotus, to be stable, wary, nyggardly: yet of a
good understanding, secret, faithful, and glorious in his actions.

The condition and judgment of the^ breath. The. xxxi. chaprer.


THe much breath, does argue the abundance of the spirits, and econuerso:
whose cause proceeds two ways, the one through the smalnesse of the lunges:
and the other, through the default and straightness of the breast. Of which,
the creature much breathing, is of great strength, and courage: by reason of
the heat resolving the moisture, especially that dewie moisture, after the
mind of the Phisiognomer.

The breath sent forth in due course and order, that is, between (the great
and small, appearing) a mean: does indicate* the quietness of heart, and a
man in mind well pleased, as the Philosopher reports.

That person which sigheth without cause, and fetches the sighs deep and
long: does witness the Melancholy to come, and that mighty to persevere in
that creature.

The breath appearing cut between, being after an order, which in the end
through straightness of the breast comes forth with a heat, and sighing:
does argue such a creature to be encombred with thought, and the disquietnesse
of mind: And the same to be mixed to some evil, if the head especially shake
withal.

That person which with the sighing, draws the eyes awrie, is judged (after
the mind of most writers) that he then bewayleth the matter come unto mind:
devising with himself in what manner he may aptliest bring about, and compass
or atchieue the same.

The creature which breaths with a certain noise, through the larger opening
of the nosethrils: does then indicate cruelty, brutishe furiousness and
violence to consist in him: which of Aristotle, is applied to the passion.

The breath passing forth troubled and thick, as if the same were after a
course of running, or through some strong accidents: does then denote such a
person to be violent, unadvised, hasty, and yrefull.



When the breath shall be decerned short, and thick, and through a much
cutting off, stopped between: such a creature (of the Philosopher Aristotle)
is judged fearful, weak of courage and strength.

That person which (with the sighe and countenance) seems as he were bereft,
with a certain godliness and pittifulnesse: such a one (says the
Phisiognomer) is judged to be then taken, and wrapped, with the furious passion
of love.

The singular Philosopher Aristotle utters, unto the mighty king Alexander,
that when says he, you shall see a person much and long together beholding:
yea and earnestly looking on your face: and that when you again behold him so
looking, is of the same abashed, and therewith blusheth, and gives especially
(at that instaunt) a sighe against his will, and that tears appear standing
in his eyes: such a person undoubtedly loves and fears you. But if you see
the contrary unto this, then judge that creature to regard you little: and to
be one, that is both envious, and disdainefull.

The breath decerned loud, cut between, and the sighe appearing the like,
does witness sorrow, and heaviness, for some losses happened to that creature.

Hipocrates, Galen, and certain other Physicians report, that the breath
perceived passing forth cold, by the mouth and nosethrilles, in a sharp
sickness: does innuate death, shortly after to ensue.

The Philosopher Ptholomeus Paruus utters, that he which often weepeth for no
cause reasonable, shall always be poor and needy.

The breath (by the report of Michael Scotus) coming out so soft, that the
same can scant be heard, does denote such a person to be greatly encombred with
thought: which condition of thought, the eyes in a manner will declare.



The breath which is decerned sometimes still, and within a good while after,
is drawn (and fetched in) ouerfast: does argue such a creature (as that Scotus
writes) to be then occupied with a present great heaviness of the mind.

The head if it shakes, as he sigheth (according to the mind of Scotus) then
for the weight of the matter evil handled, and evil spoken of, it argues him
to be sorry.

If he does the like, with the eyes intentive or steddie looking, such a person
bethinketh him rather of the euilles, than repents him: as Michael Scotus
writes.

The breath heard light, breathing out by little and little, without noise:
does denote (after the mind of Scotus) such a person to be of an upright mind.

The person which is heard to breath loud, and smileth withal: is judged (of
Michael Scotus) to be furious and a drunkarde.

Such a person decerned breathing, troubled, and thick, as though he had
lately run, is denoted to be wilful, foolehardie, yrefull, and of a wicked
mind, desiring all things what he sees, and talking all things that he
hears.

He which breaths on high, and that the breath seems to pass through the
Nosethrilles thick and quick: does argue such a creature (after the mind of
Scotus) to be fearful, and sorrowful. Such also are noted to be effeminate,
when as the other notes fortify the same.

The breath so coming forth, as if the subject were encombred with the
hardness of fetching breath, such a creature is reported (of Michaell Scotus)
to be simple, of a perverse mind, full of words, and desirous of all things
that he sees.

The form and judgment of the chinne. The. xxxii. Chapter.


THe chinne decerned very long, does argue the abundance of matter, in that by
reason of the overmuch hotenesse, the same is lengthned out: of which such are
known to be yrefull, cruel, and hasty: yet these sometimes are found to be
full of words, and sometimes boasters of themselves, as both Palemon, and
Constantine write.

Such which have the chinne formed small and short, are persons especially to
be eschewed: for besides the other conditions consisting in them, such are
discourteous, yea rather rigorous, full of wyles and envious: for these (of
Palemon) aptly applied unto the Serpent.

Here conceive, that Phisiognomie, and Paulmestrie, are more manifested of
experience, than by reason: yet somewhat may be uttered, of the principaller
members: which express the greatness, and smalnesse of matter, from the
beginning of generation.

If the chinne shapeth or be formed into a round manner, does indicate
effeminate conditions, and a feeble courage: in that this is, a feminine note:
as utters the ancient Pythagoras. For the man's chinne (after nature) ought
to be formed, in a square manner, and not round.

If the under chinne be seen so fat, that the same retcheth down to the
throat, does indicate most great luxury, to consist in that creature: if a
pit or hole, be especially decerned in either cheek.

The chinne formed of a decent or comely bigness, does denote such a person to
be prone unto the veneriall act: yet judge him, to be much bound unto God, for
the gifts lent him. Here conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that the chinne
ought to be formed neither to round, nor over sharp: but in a mean manner
unto a squarenesse.



The chinne decerned over long, does innuate a most wicked creature, very
talkatiue, and a whisperer, yea his mind altogether occupied with deceytes: as
the like, the skillful Phisiognomer observed and noted, in a certain French
man, which was very malicious, a great deceyuer, and exceeding covetous (as all
of that nation) bewray themselves to be: especially prone, unto frauds, and
great deceytes.

The chinne at the lower end, seen so divided, that the same expresses a
double form, in such manner, as this be not to much or to deep dented, in
the middle: does then argue (as certain report) deceytfull conditions, to
consist in that creature. But this known to be a note of Venus in that place,
(after the mind of the Phisiognomer Cocles) and such a person like formed,
shall purchase with men, great favor, and grace. As the like Cocles
experienced, in many subjects, which were known to be lascivious, and that
haunted the company of harlots: yea these with the Cynedes, had sundry times
doing, and suffering. There be some which have a pit formed on breadth, and by
an equal line stretching, as on length, that more coroborateth the
Phisiognomers sentence.

The chinne formed so crooking up, that the lips seem as they were standing
in a valley: does denote the rudeness of wit, unfaithfulness, wicked
conditions, and sometimes such are known to be thieves: unless old age
causes the same, through the loss, and lack of many teeth.

The singular Aristotle in tertio de Animalibus utters: that such which have
the chinne divided, do less wax balde, and shed lesser or fewer hears, than
other creatures.

The chinne formed sharp, and thin or slender, through an emptiness or
lacking of flesh: does indicate a bold, and stowte or courageous person, and
disdainful.

The chinne decerned large and big, through the much quantity of flesh:
does witness (after the mind of M. Scotus) such a creature to be quiet, of a
mean capacity, dull of wit: yet faithful, secret, and conuertible, either
unto the good or evil.



The chinne formed sharp, and sufficiently full of flesh: does denote (as
Michael Scotus reports) such a person to be of a good understanding, lofty
minded, and one that feeds sufficientlye, and bold in actions.

The chinne formed, as the same were parted in two, by a certain valley, or
denting in: does argue (as Michael Scotus utters) that person, to be of a
gross wit, vain, lightly crediting, a great surmiser: yet congruently
serviceable to another, quiet, and secret (for the more part) in his doyngs.

The chinne decerned sharp, and thin in the quantity of flesh: does (after
Michael Scotus) denote, such a creature to be bold and courageous, a quareller
sometimes, and fighter, yrefull, disdainefull, weak in strength, and contented
(after a manner to serve, for the relief of living.

The chinne seen crooking up, with a hollownesse in the knitting of the Jaws,
and lean of flesh, that the same appears, as it were formed sharp: does
witness (after the mind of Scotus) such a person to be wicked, envious, of a
simple wit, a niggarde, deceytfull, soon angry, yrefull, a surmiser, bold,
proud, a threatner, a betrayer, and a thief, these hitherto Michal Scotus.

The condition, and judgment of the Beard. The. xxxiij. Chapter.


THe bearde in man (after the agreement of the ancient writers) begins to
appear in the nether Iawe, which so ascends toward the Temples, through
the heat and moisture, carried unto the same, from the forepart of the head,
drawn from the genitours: which draw to them especially, the sperme from those
places: whose note is, by reason the spermaticall veins do descend unto the
same place: as the like appears in them, which overmuch exercise coeating,
whose faces by the means, are after mightily crazed and altered. As touching
the woman's testicles, in that these are but weak, for the same cause are they
known not to be bearded. And such women which are found to have these hoter
than the common sort, have also somewhat of the reflexed matter, from the same
place: whence the Sperme most chiefly comes. This reflexed heat (says the
wise Conciliatore) draws with it the moisture, of which in them are engendered
the thin and small hears of the Bearde: and this especially verified in
them, which use often and very much coeating. For which cause the Sanguine
bodies, that have a thin Beard, and mean of length: are indicated to be
creatures, which often and greatly desire to coeate, through the dominion of
the heat and moisture, consisting in them.

The bearde in man, after the mind of the Philosopher, begins to spring out
and appear, after.xiiij. years of age: these by little and little, appearing
from day to day: and then begins the hears to appear and grow on the
23u3rp s2cilp, of both the kinds.

Here conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that such hears do proceed and
appear through the superfluousnesse of meats, and the fumosities of them,
which daily ascend on high unto the parts of the Jaws: much like to the
smoke of an Oven heated, that passes so long through the thincks of the same,
until those passages, through the heat are wholly stopped, that no more smoke
can after pass through them. Even the like, do the fumosities of man issue
forth, into the manner of hears: which are properly named the hears of the
Bearde.

The color of the Beard, does sometimes express the qualities and quantityes
of the humors: yet hitherto has not the same been heard of, that any man saw,
a flaxen white bearde: for as much as the flegmaticke humor, is not found so
mighty, as to engender hears of the like color, through the depriving and
lack of natural heat, to ^leuate the sufficient matter unto the engendring of
the like colored hears.

Here perhaps some will argue and affirm (says the Phisiognomer) that there
is sundry times seen women bearded, yet these are not found of a flegmaticke
quality, but rather the same does happen in that the humors are so subtle,
that of nature such are procured to be hot. For out of these creatures do
hears spring, yea they sometimes appear on their Jaws: but properly these
appear about the mouth, where the more heat does abound: and such a woman
(seen the like) is named of all men bearded: here conceive (says Cocles) that
the like woman found, is judged to be very luxurious through her hot, and
moist quality: of which the like creature seen, is not only noted strong of
nature, but to be of a stowte courage, and manly in her factes.



The persite woman, is known to be sufficiently naked of hears, especially
about ye mouth: such a creature after Phisiognomie, is reported and judged to
be of a good quality: that is to say, bashefull, fearful, honest, weak of
courage, gentle of behavior, and obedient.

Here (says the Phisiognomer) does a solemn doubt arise, and the same is, why
men are seen bearded, and not women for the more part: which doubt seems to
be put forth, by the learned Gulielmus Nurice: to which Cocles answers in
this manner, that the same may be gathered to proceed, of the efficient, the
material, and final cause: for as much as these properly serve unto an
ornament, and comely bewtifying of the woman: and in every kind, the Males
are seen comelyer bewtisted with the same, than the Females. Which condition
of the hears, properly serves unto a defense of the jaws in man, that the
woman (for the like defense and necessity) nothing needs: at the least so
much as the man: through which, the sense of feeling, is known to be of
greater force in man. So that the man by this reason, may better endure to go
bareheaded, and naked in other parts, in the bitter cold weather, than the
woman: and suffer greater storms on the body, than she may, without harm to
ensue. A strenger reason may be rendered and given of the effecient, and
material cause, seeing the Males in general, are known to be whoter than the
Females. For which cause, the fume in men, that is the matter precuring the
hears, is found both more, and mightier, than in women: which seeing the same
is known not able to be consumed: for that cause (God and nature together)
ordained two apt places in man, for the passages of them: as the one by the
head, and other fitly by the chinne and jaws: which form the beard of man.
Which manner fumes consisting in the woman, for as much as they appear not to
be so many and mighty, as well known they are, to rest in the man: for this
cause, are these properly and naturallye sent forth, by the head. And a note
of the like effect, we sundry* times know and see by women found of a hot
and moist complexion, that appear bearded: we see contrariwise, that in the
cold and dry men these (for the more part) have very little or no beardes. By
which reason we gather (says the Phisiognomer) that the seemly beard, waxes
not in the gelded person: for as much as those parts have then lost the
benefit of their hotter quality, through which, these should engender the
hot humors and fumes, that properly are the matter of the hears in them. And
by a like reason, of the former words it appears: that the thickness of the
beard, and great hearinesse in general, is an euidente note and judgment of
the substantial heat and moisture, and of natural strength consisting in
that creature.

Here may this argument also be propowned, that seeing children are known to be
hot and moist, why they wax not bearded as men: to which doubt the
Phisiognomer thus answers, that the smokie superfluousnesse, which is the
especial matter of the hears, that issues forth of the head, and other
parts of the body does in them pass, and serve to their increase, and
nourishment: the like words in a manner, appear before uttered by the singular
Constantine.

Conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that how much the plenty and force of heat
consists, so much the more store and quantity of hears succeeds in that
creature. For which cause, a man must carefully beware of those persons, which
overmuch abound in the most great store, and plenty of hears on the body:
when the complextion of such, is especially found adust.

The Phisiognomer Cocles wylleth a man to beware of those persons, which have a
red beard: in that the same colored bearde, indyeateth a heap and an
abundance of adustion, and a mighty hotenesse to consist in these creatures:
through which, such are known to be luxurious, deceauers, and liars: and in
them (by report of the Physiognomer) do the principal heap of vices rest:
unless that grace and godly education, seem otherwise to contrary the
abouesayde.

The bearde decerned comely, and well fashioned: does innuate such a creature
to be of a good nature, of reasonable conditions, congruent to all things, and
manered after his bringing up. Contrariwise judge of them, which have the beard
not seemly formed, or evil fashioned in the length: as appear thin the
gelded persons, which after these are depryued of their genytours, be then
greatly changed, from the nature of men, into the condition of women: as
reports Aristotle, in libro de Animalibus.

The singular Phisiognomer Cocles, observed and noted in sundry subjects,
which having long and seemly beardes: came after certain years unto a
frensinesse, and some of them to be starcke foolish.

The Phisiognomer also reports, that he observed and knew sundry creatures,
which possessing and having very long beardes, fell from their estate, and
were oppressed with myseries, and these in his time: yea he knew and
understood of certain noble persons, which were expelled their proper
country, and of these especially in the precincts of Italy. The like judgment
(says the Phisiognomer) may in a manner be uttered, of the beard decerned soon
hoarie: as before was taught, in the chapter of the hears in general: for as
much as their nature then is known, to draw near unto the woman's.

Of which, the Phisiognomer Cocles wills and warns the Princes, and noble
persons with him, to beware and take heed of such persons wearing very thick
and long beardes: in that their faces then can not bewray or open the passions
of the mind, nor the changing or altering of colors, can perfitly be
decerned in these: so that their deceytes, and colored pretenses, may be
covered and lie hid by that means. Yet do I not disalowe the wearing of long
and thick beards altogether, but that the same may be lawdablie, and very
well be worn, without any such crime to be found, and lying hid
therevnder. For well known it is, that sundry Realms allow, and customablye
wear long beardes, as the Medians, the Grecians, the Germans, and sundry
other Countries, through the general influences of the heavens, which procure
or cause new conditions, and alterations of apparayle: as the Phisiognomer
like observed and noted, of the force and effect of the great conjunction, that
happened of the upper Planets Saturn and Jupiter in his time: which thus met
together in the year of our Lord. 1484. and in the last degree of that sign
Scorpio: whose mighty effect in general continued, unto the year of our
redemption. 1504. and to the tenth day of June. To these, that fearful
Planet Mars, which bare a swaye with them, in these, twenty years together;
denoted (as he reports) lamentable commotions, bloody baftailes, the
euersion of kingdoms, hasty tumultes of the people, new kings elected,
conspiracies attempted, dissemblings intended, wicked treasons procured,
pitiful burnings exercised, grievous spoils forced, the wasting of countries
attempted, with other grievous and lamentable matters, long to report. etc.
says the Phisiognomer.

The form and judgment of the throat. The. xxxiiii. chapter.


THe throat decerned clear and white, whether the same be lean or fat: does
innuate such a person to be vaineglorious, fearful, envious, lascivious,
prone to lying, congruently wary, and circumspect in that he does: yet very
yrefull, and long hating, if we may credit Michael Scotus.

The throat seen lean and thin, in which the veins appear: does argue
(after the mind of Michael Scotus) such a person to have a hard fortune, to
be fearful, sluggishe, a gross feeder, lightly crediting, weak of courage,
and conuertible either to the good or evil.

The throat decerned rough, does denote an unconstant person, a trifler, full
of words, and one which presumtiously talks: applied for the form to the
birds.

If the canell bone of the throat, with the sinnewes, be seen eminent, and
that the same be lightly moving: does indicate such a creature, not only
rash of his tongue, but occupied in hawtie cogitations. And when this person
has well bibbed, and filled himself with Wine, does then mourn, and is also
suspicious, prone to ire, and of himself by property, a sad dronkard.

The canell bone of the throat seen eminent or bearing out, does indicate a
sluggish person, injurious, and slow in his actions, after the mind of the
Phisiognomer.

The canell bone of the throat well fashioned, and comely in sight: does
innuate such a person to be strong, stowte of courage, nimble in actions, and
endued (by report of the Phisiognomer) with wisdom.

The condition and judgment of the neck. The. xxxv. Chapter.
Conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that the neck is sometimes taken and used
for the whole, conjoined to the head, in the forepart, and like in the hinder
part. But this sometimes used and taken for the hinder part, in the diameter or
space, where the cares are situated: and this part of him is divided into two
parts. So that the part nearer to the head, is named the nape or hinder part
of the neck: that is, the top of the n^cke behind, where the beginning of
the sinews is placed. Yea the nape or hinder part of the neck, is used or
taken with some practicioners, for the whole neck, as hereafter a like matter
shall be alleged and used of the Phisiognomers.

But the Phisiognomers in their judgments, do distinguish the neck, and nape
in the hinder part: for in the fore part, they take and use the weaande, the
throat bole, and whole throat unto the root of the conjoined, according to the
mind of the Philosopher. The like words utters Isidore, in libro. 11. cap.
1. This named the neck, in that the same is formed stiff, and round as a
pillar, to bear up the head: whose forepart (of him) named, aptly the throat:
and the hinder part not without good reason, the neck.

This singular Isidore reports, that such a person having the neck formed
big, not by reason of the fleshinesse, but through cause of the bigness of
bones, and the sinews: is denoted strong of body, applied for the same, unto
the male kind, and according to the conditions of the spirit: in that the male
after the kind, is known to have a big and lively neck: the same neither
short nor formed to long: which (by agreement of the most Phisiognomers)
indicateth a hot quality, and boldness to consist in that creature.

The second note seems to be, that such having the neck formed long and
slender, are judged to be feminine in conditions and weak of courage. The
neck decerned big and lively, as above uttered: does denote the strength of
the Brain: and by the consequent, a hotenesse of the heart: as all men are
like known, in their kind.

The neck seen long and slender, does signify the contrary, unto the
abouesayde: that is, the weakness of body, and to be faint hearted.



Such having the neck formed big, through a fleshinesse, and not by reason
of the bigness of the sinews, and bones (and as Rasis adds) found hard and
strong: are known to be yrefull, applied for the same unto the apparent
congruencie, of the yrefull Bulls provoked or styrred to ire, which then have
such a form and condition of the neck: and as Rasis adds, such also are
known to be rash, and hasty in their deeds.

The neck decerned sufficient big, not by reason of the fleshinesse, but
through cause of the sinews, and bones, and sufficient long seen: are
reported to be bold, and stowte of courage: applied for the form, unto the
stowte Lion. This especially is verified, when the head, and neck, is orderly
proportioned, in such manner, that the same be of a mean bigness, as the
learned Conciliatore, and Constantine write.

The form of the head, if the same shall be of a mean bigness, and the neck
formed somewhat big: does indicate a goodness of the quality, and
disposition.

If the head shall be decerned small, and the neck seen big, does denote
the abundaunce of matter, and the superfluousnesse of the same: the lack also
of the virtue performing, in the due proportion. Such a head (as certain
report) is many times grieved with much pain, and the Cephalicke passion.

The neck decerned very long, and slender (as above uttered) is judged
fearful, applied for the form unto the Heart: in that the Heart is known to
be a beast very fearful, and has a very long neck, and small formed, in the
respect of his body, and greatness.

Yet the neck formed slender, and long, and that he bears the same upright
in his going, does indicate not so much fearfulness to consist in that
creature, as above reported of the Heart.

The neck seen very short, does innuate such a person to be a deceiuer, and
very crafty, applied for the form unto the Woolfe. And this note here taken
of the apparent manner seen, both in men and beasts: in that a person, minding
subtlety to set upon an other, whether the same be his emmie or otherwise
attempting upon pleasure: does then wylily draw and shrincke in the neck, for
the more shortning of the same, that he may not so soon be espied in the
stealing upon: as by a like we daily see in the Catte, when the (with the neck
shruncke in) steals by little, and little, on the Mouse.

Certain report, that the neck formed long, signifies the feet to be long:
and the neck seen slender, does indicate the feet to be slender.

The neck formed behind hollow, and depressed or deep in: does denote a
weakness of the sinews, and sicknesses to ensue, according to the knitting
of it in that creature.

The neck formed very fleshie, does witness such a creature to be a liar, and
using filthy excess: and a mean neck seen, does indicate the goodness of
nature, to consist in that creature.

The nape of the neck, next unto the head behind, if the same be found
hearie: does innuate such a person to be strong, and stowte of courage: in that
this note appears to be a hotenesse, consisting in that person.

The neck formed long, and having a meanness in the proportion: does indicate
malice, and indignation to consist in that person. And certain report, that
such a creature to be a fool, weak of strength, fearful, and full of words.

The neck decerned very big, with a certain length, yet the same not seen
very fleshie: does denote a strong person, stowte of courage, a boaster, and
proud: as Conciliatore reports, in his Rubricke of Phisiognomie.



The neck formed stiff and strong, does argue such a creature to be yrefull,
hasty, and unapt to learn. The good disposition also of the mind, and
humanity: they say negatiuely to concur, unto such an operation.

The neck with apparent sinews, and evil formed, does witness (by the
report of the Phisiognomer) a foolish person, and unapt to learn.

The neck decerned so louse, that the same seems to lean unto the one side:
does innuate such a creature to harm those, that are not able to resist,
wilful, and deceytfull: as the learned Conciliatore reports.

Such that about the joint of the neck above, are seen over fleshie, be
those which have the knot bearing out, and the neck hardly moving: and be also
without feeling, to exercise the same orderly: yea such are known to be dull,
and unapt to exercise good works: yet these in the evil or wicked, actions
and to do injuries, very prone and forward: as before in another place, the
Phisiognomer observed. And certain Apostates and Princes, this Cocles saw and
noted, that moved their necks, never unto the right, nor left side, without
the moving of the whole body together: and such were known to be double
tongued, dissemblers, and very wicked. But such which have the contrary to
this, shall you judge (says he) to be of a contrary disposition, that is,
honest conditioned, and gentle of behavior.

The neck formed long, with a largeness in the positure: does denote such a
person to be yrefull, and unapt to learn: applied for the form unto the
grunting Sow.

The neck decerned big and fieshie, with a certain shortness: does argue
such a person to be a fool, and a very great feeder.

When a certain bearing out shall be between the knytting of the shoulder
points, and beginning of the neck, that the growing out of the knottes be
sharp: does inoicate such a creature (for the more part) to be proud, and
arregant: as the Phisiognomer Cocles observed and noted many the like.

The neck declyning or leaning unto one side, does innuate such a creature, to
be of a dull capacity, and unapt to learn.

The neck bearing to much upright, does argue that creature, not only to be
unapt to learn, but high minded, and self willed: and one that will not be
admonished, of nothing he does.

The neck decerned stiff, and as the same were immovable: does like declare
such a person, to be unapt to learn, and indiscreet in his doings, by which
note (for ye more part) such are known to be fools.

The difference between the moving, and not moving of the neck, is easily
decerned: so that the neck appearing fast or stiff, or quick moving, does
witness the more foolishness to consist in that creature: but if the same
appear stiff, and in a manner fixed: does demonstrate, dull capacity, and the
unaptness to learn.

That you may not much err, the Phisiognomer does here discover and open, that
there be some (which minding to hyde this note) in them the rather to beguile
the iudger: do use customably and oftentimes in the day to rub, and chafe
well their necks with a warm lynnen cloth: whereby these may move and turn
the head hither and thither, somewhat the easier in covering by such means
their foolishness. As the like note the Phisiognomer observed in a certain
Citizen of Bononia, in Lumbardie, which creature besides as he talked, many
times smyled to himself. So that by this appears, that the stiff turning of
the neck: is a note, of the proper foolishness to consist in that creature:
by the report of the Physiognomer.



The nape of the neck from the joint unto the head decerned rough: does denote
such a person to be very rude conditioned, and luxurious. But the white neck
seen rough, does signify a Belluine understanding, and rude wit: as
Conciliatore reports, in his Rubric of Phisiognomy.

The neck bending upward toward the head, does demonstrate such a creature to
be arrogant, stubburne in actions, and void of honesty: as the learned
Conciliatore, in his Phisiognomie utters.

When you shall decerne a looseness of the neck, with a certain gathering of
the lips unto a laughter, and that the eyes appear out of order in the
rolling, with a certain lightness of countenance showed, in the sitting or
standing of the creature: and a trembling voice to rest in him, does not only
indicate an effeminate mind: but evil conditions to consist in him, after the
mind of the Phisiognomer.

The neck decerned bending toward the breast: does innuate such a person to be
much encombred with cares, and thoughts: yea this creature sometimes occupied
with niggardship, and sometimes moved (with that evil vice) of malignity.

The neck also is varied (says the Phisiognomer) according to the knitting of
the other members in man.

The neck seen bowing downewarde, as the learned Conciliatore (in his
Phisiognomie) writes, does indicate a foolish person, a niggarde, froward at
times: and known he is to be neither simple, nor of an upright mind.

The neck decerned leaning unto the right side, does denote such a person to be
wyttie, of seemly manners and conditions, and circumspect in the actions that
he attempteth or goes about. But the neck seen leaning unto the left side,
does argue such a creature to be currishe or churlishe, rash in his actions,
and foolish: as the learned Conciliatore reports, in his Rubric of
Physiognomie.

The neck formed strong, and very big, whether the same be of length, and
that this hardlye turns: does innuate such a person to be a greedy proller,
and gatherer of goods together, howsoever the same be.

The neck decerned crooking (after the breadth of the body) as either from the
right, or the left side: does denote such a creature to be full of words,
deceytfull, wily, and unfaithful: as the same, the Phisiognomer Cocles
observed in many subjects. For which cause, this Cocles warns a man,
especially to eschew the fellowship and company of such, which of nature are
wrte necked: and have a drawing in, or narrowness to be decerned between the
shoulder points: in that these are known to be wicked persons, envious,
fraudulent, and hypocrytes: as the same, the Phisiognomer Cocles observed, in
sundry of the obseruant brothers in his time, and in many Melancholicke
persons.

The neck formed in a mean manner, both in the bigness, and length: does
demonstrate such a person to be strong of nature, apt to learn, and of a
singular wit: but these oftentimes are known to have a subtle or crafty
wit, and to be deceytfull.

The condition and judgment of the shoulder points. The. xxxvi. chapter.


HEre conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that such persons having the shoulder
points sufficiently distant from the knottinesse or spondile of the neck,
which first appears above ye shoulders, where the shoulder points or neck
are continuated, and not to near joined to it: are of a good nature, and
having ripe or good senses: and by the consequent of a good understanding. The
Philosopher in Methaphoricis, utters a reason of this, saying: that the
shoulder points being sufficiently soluble, that is, sufficiently distant
from the spondile or knottinesse: in such manner, that the space between them,
be equal: do denote that such indiuiduates, readily receive, that is, easily
the sensitive motion. For these have the note, or sensitive power easily
mooueable, that is, lightly reducible from the power, unto the act of
perceiving. But such which about the spondiles of the neck, appear hidden:
are noted to be persons lacking wit: forasmuch as these hardlye (being
soluble) which about the knottinesse are decerned weak, to receive the motion
of the senses.

The shoulder points decerned sufficiently distaunt a sunder, do denote such
a creature to be liberal after nature, applied for the same, unto the decent
apparancie and form: for that lyberalitie, answers and agrees to such a
form: and the like formed, are the shoulder points of the Lion, by the report
of the Phisiognomer.

The shoulder points seen near joining together, do contrariwise signify
niggardship, and vncurtesie to rest in that person.

The shoulder points appearing sufficiently distaunt a sunder, and decently
spaced from the knotte, or joint of the neck: do argue such a person to be of
a simple perceiuerance and understanding, and by the consequent known to be a
dullard: as the learned Aristotle writes.



The shoulder points (after the mind of the Philosopher) well brawned with an
eminency or bearing out of the flesh, and these strong formed, are applied
after nature, unto the Male kind. For as much as the nature of the muscle is
to possess the engendered hotenesse strong, and of the reason of the heat is
this procured, to increase the form of the members, according to every
Dametre.

The shoulder points decerned big, and large in form: do indicate a
hotnesse to consist in that creature. The strength of every person consists
in the sinews and bones: for which cause when the muscles are sufficiently
formed fleshie, then must needs ensue a mighty strength, to consist both in
the sinews and bones: of which, the spirit conjoined in such an habitude or
body, may well exercise, and attempt or do strong actions, if need requires.

Of which, Rasis reports, that the shoulder points decerned large, do
indicate a strong person, of an honest mind, of good conditions, and perfect
understanding. The reason of this appears, in that through the breadth of the
shoulder points, the muscles are indicated to be large, and strong: which
proceed from a strong beginning, that is in the brain, where the beginning
consists of the sinews, and the seat of the spirits. So that of
necessity, this must needs ensue, that the form of the head to be capable
unto the retayning and possessing the goodness of senses: as the Phisiognomer
utters, of his skill and practice known.

The muscles formed weak, and ill compowned of strength, that the shoulder
points appear in a manner flat, and peradventure matched or covered with a
softness of flesh: do argue a phlegmatic quality, of the contrary nature to
rest in that creature: as before uttered in the proper place: and if these
appear and be without a softness, they import the like quality, after the
mind of the Phisiognomer.



Of which Rasis utters, that the shoulder points formed thin: do indicate
the smalnesse of wit and understanding. The Phisiognomer Cocles reports, that
he knew and saw sundry women in his time, which drew by Art, and through
their bestiall indumentes, the shoulder points so near together, that they
formed in a manner the like, unto O^ ventris, in the part behind: and they
garnished or bewtified these, with Cosmeticall waters. This Cocles also noted
sundry Italians, and fond French men, which he aptly names (by that byworde)
Hermaphroditi: that used and exercised the like practice, with their shoulder
points. A matter which seems in my opinion incredible to be exercised of any
faithful christian, but the Phisiognomer seems truly to utter, what he saw
and knewein sundry places.



The bearing of the heads of the shoulder points very far out: do denote
foolishness to consist in that creature: which manner, Aristotle reports unto
king Alexander: to be a note of rygorousnesse, and unfaithfulness to dwell in
that person.



The Phisiognomer Cocles utters of experience known, ye he sildom saw any
person, being crook backed, which were of a good nature: but that these having
the like bearing out, or bunche on the shoulders, were rather traiterous, and
very wicked in their actions. And such (says the Phisiognomer) were known in
his time, to be the founders of all wicked deceites, yea wily under myners and
gropers of the people, and had a deep retching wit, and wily fetches, in
wicked actions. So that it seems impossible after nature, that such deformed
persons should possess in them laudable actions: for as much as the spirit
connexed in such an habitude, does yield a retrograde form and property:
which (says the the Phisiognomer) is known for the more part to be
Melancholic. For which cause, a man ought carefully to beware and take heed,
of fellowshipping or keeping company with such unfortunate persons, for the
above said reason, and work of nature. For these (says the Phisiognomer) are
the like to be eschewed, as a man of skill would refuse and shun the company
of a person lacking any principal member of the body. And the like Aristotle
(in secretis secretorum) utters, that a man ought diligently to beware, and
take heed of an unfortunate person, lacking any special member, as he would
of his proper animie dangerous.

The proverb like warns us to beware, of the creatures marked: and in an
other place, of the persons marked in any member, that a man trust not them.
The reason is, for that the spirits like ensue unto the form of the body, so
that out of an evil shaped body, can no lawdable actions proceed or be
caused, as before uttered: and this of him uttered Phisiognomically.

The Philosopher also utters, that the great number of children living, is
cause many times of the ill hap of parents. For these lacking provision, for
their natural sustenaunce, are caused to work mischiefs not tolerable by
law. For the Phisiognomer learned, and saw sundry times that diverse fathers of
many children, not able to provide sustenaunce for them, were constrained
through great need to steal, through which practice exercised, their children
like endeavored, for the help of their parents need, and confessed a like
matter at the place of execution. So that the Philosopher gives or shows
this, not as an enforced precept, but rather persuades, that in the cause of a
necessity, the same to be procured as a rule in misery: which to the beholder
may like appear. And the Mother Philosopher Asculanus utters, a sum of the
matter before taught.

Ben se voria plicar li cinqui rami,
Metendo el primo fra le do piu apresso,
Dicendo hor toi poi che tanto mami,
Poi laltre cinque del sinistro tronco,
Voltare in verso gliochij de si stesso,
Chi may si fida in rosso guercio e cionco.
By which he concludes, that no trust is to be had, in those women and men,
being red of color, and gogle eyed, or one eyed, and bunch backed also: the
reason is alleged in the same book, where he reports these words.

Quando tu vidi quisti zoppi e glombi
Impio fo el segno de la part,
Et anche quisti cum li flexi lombi,
Defecto corporal fa lalma ladra,
In pegiorando dicon le lor carte
Sonno superbi, e de la mala quadra.
The Philosopher Aristotle, in Methaphoricis utters, that the shoulder
points not in due measure formed, are noted to be crafty and deceytfull:
applied unto the passion, and feminine kind. But the shoulder points well
proportioned in due measure, do indicate a faithful, just, and strong person:
yet the relation of the commensuration, must be reduced unto the good motion,
and good necessity, that is, unto the good complexion, which is caused of the
good birth, and good forming of the nutrytiue or formatiue virtue in that
creature. So that this is to be reduced, neither unto the Masculyne, nor
feminine kind: but rather to be applied unto the good or evil quality of the
body.

The shoulder points well formed, both in the length and breadth: do denote a
good disposition, and nature, to consist in that creature: after the mind of
the learned Conciliatore.

The shoulder points decerned thin, in the composition of nature: do
signify such a person to be a nyggarde, covetous and fearful in attemptes or
enterprises.

The shoulder points formed (of nature) unequal, do like indicate the
unequal actions, and that such a creature, to be of a dull capacity.

The shoulder points seen thin, and lean of flesh: do witness (as
Michael Scotus reports) a weak person, feeble of courage, fearful, not
well bearing or enduring earnest labor, lightly credyting, quiet of behavior,
and conuertible either unto the good, or evil.

The shoulder points formed large, and big through the flesh: do signify
(as writes Michael Scotus) a strong person, and faithful, yet a nyggarde, of
a gross wit, and feeding, simple, well enduring painful labor, feeding
sufficiently, and willingly, and desiring quietness.

The shoulder points appearing bonded inward, do innuate (after the mind of
Scotus) such a person to be wary, sluggishe, and after a manner ingenious,
secret, and an under groper of men.

The shoulder points decerned flat lying, in a manner to the body: do
signify (as affirms Michael Scotus) a simple person, a nyggard, laborious,
modest both in his talk, and feeding, and quiet of behavior: yet credyting
lightly, and conuertible either unto the good or evil.

The shoulder points decerned unequal, that the one be bigger, or larger than
the other: do denote a sluggishe person, of a gross wit, of a dull
capacity and understanding, simple, gross in feeding, yea a nyggard,
deceytfull, a betrayer, bold, and hardly credyting: if we may credit Scotus
in these.

The shoulder points seen far bearing out, do witness such a person (as
affirms Michael Scotus) to be of an open life in his conditions: that is to
say, vain, simple, vnstable^, a liar, envious, bold, unshame fast, and a
brawler.

The judgment of the Arms. The. xxxvij. chapter.


THe Arms so long, that the hands reach unto the knees, do denote the
subtilnesse of wit, arrogancy, and the desire to rule. Aristotle reports,
that these notes seem to signify boldness, honesty, with a liberality.

The like long arms some suppose, that the mighty king Alexander had. Nor it
is unlike to that, which the son of Zachary affirms, that in some to argue
arrogancy, and in other some a desire to rule, and govern, and both a
boldness and stowte courage.

The self same reports Albertus in de Animalibus, and in compendio suae
Theologiae: and like Hierommus de Manfredis, and the learned Rasis. For that
lengthning out, and longnesse of the arms, proceeds of the great heat of
the heart, with a moisture proportioned: which is the cause of the lengthning
out: as may well be comprehended by the former words of the Phisiognomer.

When such a length or longnesse, is extended unto the thighs or hammes: does
innuate wicked conditions, and such to joy in others harms: in that those
persons undoubtedly, are marvelous envious. And some affirm (that this note)
does argue fearfulness, to be a lover of discord, and ignorant.

Such which with a greedy desire to meat do bring the mouth to the hands,
being especially caused through the shortness of the arms, and evil form
of the hands not orderly wrought: are judged to be wicked, and envious: for
that envy is the daughter of coldness, and drine^e, the Planet Saturn
ingendring her.

The arms thin or slender, if they shall be weak, do witness a rude
person, and unapt to learn.

The arms big, through the bones, sinews, and flesh: do indicate a strong
nature: and if the veins appear, do then declare a hot quality.

When the arms are big, with soft flesh: do then demonstrate a womanly
nature.



The Phisiognomers report, that the arms very hearie: do denote such a
person, to be luxurious.

Aristotle unto king Alexander writes, that when such a person (whiles he
talks) moves the hands to and fro: is judged envious, a deceyuer, and one
pleasant in words.

Such a person which refrayneth moving of the hands, whiles he talks: is
argued to be of a perfect understanding, well disposed, of a singular wit,
and ready counsel, very commendable: the reason does the Phisiognomer utter
in the chapter of the paces.

The perfect length of every person (after the mind of Albertus, in compendio
suae Theologiae) in accounting from the top of the forehead, and beginning of
the creast of the head, unto the s^le of the foot: is noted to be so much
(these being of sownde limbs and composition) as is the space decerned,
between the two ends of the middle fingers, the arms right retched out.

The arms so long, that being stretched out, reach to the knees, which
seldom so happens, do then denote such a person to be liberal, bold, high
minded, of a greedy desire, weak of body, simple of wit, foolish, and
vain glorious, as writes Michael Scotus.

The arms over short, in respect of the stature of the body: do signify a
contentious person, unthankful, bold, envious, proud, foolish, and a
niggard, as affirms Scotus.

The arms big, through the bones, sinews, and much flesh: do signify a
person sufficient strong, proud, of a light cause presumptuous, envious,
desirous of bewtifull things, and lightly crediting: as writes Michaell Scotus.

The arms fat and brawned, do signify a person vain glorious, coveting
pleasant things, and more foolish than witty, in the doing of things: as
witnesses Michael Scotus.

The arms very hearie, whether they be lean or fat, and soft of flesh: do
argue a leacherous person; of a weak capacity, weak of body, very
suspicious, and craftilye malicious, as writes Michael Scotus.

The arms very naked of hear, do denote that person to be of a weak
capacity, long angry, lightly crediting, vain, lascivious, a liar, lightly
deceyuing, wary in the evil, and but weak of body: as affirms Scotus.

The form and judgment of the hands. The. xxxviii. chaprer.
THe regytyue nature of the whole body, formed the hand, with the paulme
long, and the fingers in seemly length, through the goodness of the matter
regulated, as the like in many creatures appears: in such manner, that the
same is sufficiently prepared and formed unto the doing of all works, that is,
to be wrought: and in expressing the mighty force of the members, and
singularity of the wit, the iestes and other skilles in every creature. This
also formed of nature as a strong helper, to retche and take unto it all such
things which are needful: so that this necessarily and aptlye serves, both
to take and do.

Isy door learnedly utters, that this part is named the hand, for that the
same is the officer and presenter unto the whole body: and is the same which
presents and ministers meat unto the mouth: which thus ministered: is after
carried into all the parts of the body.

This Author names the paulme, to be the hand with the fingers stretched
out, and the hand seemly drawn together, to be the fiste of the creature.

Those branches of both the hands, are properly named the fingers, which in
number, are known to be ten, and decently matched or joined together: For
these we see (says the Phisiognomer) that they both have a perfect number, and
a most decent order in their standing.

The proper names of these, and their offices, shall here briefly be touched:
as first the same (so named the Thombe) in that this among the others, renders
or gives a virtue and power: the second aptly named the showing or pointing
finger, and the saluting: for that with the same, we in a manner salute all
persons, and express with it most matters. The third properly named the
infame, or middle finger, being the longest, which is much occupied about the
low, and clensing place. The fourth artly named the ring finger, for that on
the same, the wedding ring (for the more part) is worn. The fifth rightly named
the ear finger, for that with the same we daily empty and cleanse the ears:
as to most men known, and exercysed the like at this day.

The learned Formica writes, and of skill known, that it behooves a man to
learn and know first the quantity of the hand, after the quality,
substance, and condition of the same: for as much as the accydent notes yield
and give to every skillful person a great perseueraunce and understanding, to
know and pronounce what these tend unto: as reports Aristotle, in primo de
Anima.

The bigness and shortness of the fingers, do argue the paucitie or
smalnesse of matter, and a flegmaticke quality: and that nature could not
dispose and guide: of which the spirits then be like to that nature. And of
this such are noted foolish: and of the same mind, is both Rasis, and
Conciliatore and, Ptholomie the Philosopher.

Formica writes, that very necessary is it to know, that the bigness of the
hand does sometimes proceed of great labor: and for that cause, such which
labor much, have big hands. Yet these sometimes, are big of nature: and
then caused through the bigness of the bones, and sinews. Such a person
whether the same be man or woman, is naturally strong. The same sometimes
proceeds, through the grossness of flesh: and then such are drunkardes,
lecherous, and (naturally) procured vile persons.

If any has the hands big, and fingers (about the ends of the nails)
sharp: do denote such a person to be deceytfull, and covetous.

Forasmuch as the Phisiognomer has expressed, in this hand herevnder placed,
the most lines known: and given names to them in the Latin tongue, with
letters added to each, for a better conceyuing, and knowing of them at any
time. I, of this occasion thought good, whereby (this diligent travail of the
Author, might not appear frustrate unto our native Country men) as to
english all the lines, there seen: and placed them in the form of a brief
Table, with the letters of the Alphabet annexed to each line, that they may
readier be found and known in the said hand, lively figured to the eye.

A vitae linea, signifies the life line. B Soror vitalis seu Martia: is the
sister of the life line on the mont of the Thombe.



C Cerebri linea, represents the head line. D Soror Cerebralis, is the same
stretching nere, in the paulme of the hand. E Veneris and genitalium linea: is
the same named of some the Table line, or the line of generation, and strength
of the body. F Saturnia: appears to be a sister line coming from the wrest,
and retching in many hands, unto the Mont of the middle finger. This also of
some, named the line of felicity. G Iecoraria, is the liver line coming from
the life line, which retching up in ye hollow of the hand, performs the
Triangle in most hands. H Via lactea: is a line many times found on the Mont
of the hand, retching unto the Mont of the ear finger, named of some, the
tail of the Dragon. I Cingulum Veneris: is a line, which beginning between
the ring and ear finger, is extended between the middle and forefinger, after
the form of a half circle. K Carpus vel restricta: represents the wrest of
the hand, which seperateth it self, from the arm. L Hypothenar: represents
the breast of the hand: applied (for the nere effects) unto the Moon. M
Solaris linea, Via solis: is that line, which coming from the Mensall or Table
line, reaches unto the root of the Ring finger, straight, deep, and whole.
The accidental lines, which either increase, or diminishe the significations
of the principal lines: with all other lines, and notes, that happen in the
hand, shall shortly be uttered in the great work of Paulmestrie to come forth.

Of which is to be noted (after the mind of the Phisiognomer) that the fore
finger, middle finger, ring finger, and ear finger, have three joints a
piece, which (if in every joint) happen but one line, such a person shall
suddenly die: as Auctours write. But if there shall be two lines equallye
distant, then is it a good note: for that these signify an honest and
faithful person.

If in the middle joint of each finger, shall be only one line, and in the
other two joints, two lines: do denote, that such a person shall leese one of
his eyes. These hitherto Formica.

Ptholomie the Philosopher writes, that the hands big, and thick skinned:
do denote a person, not contented in mind.

The learned Rasis utters, that the hands nymble, and slender: do
demonstrate a singular wit, a good understanding, and the subtilnesse of
humors.

The hands slender and very long: do argue tyranny, and foolishness, in
that person.

The Philosopher Ptholomie affirms, that the hands of diverse colors: do
demonstrate such a person to be leacherous, and cruel: and the like do the
slender fingers (more then is decent) denote foolishness.

The skillful Formica reports, and the same a truth: that such a person,
which has the fingers ends broad: is judged faithful, and a good companion.

Such a person, which has the Table in the hand large, and the fingers
slender and long, is judged to be subtle in a natural faculty, and apt or
given to play on instruments.

Such a creature which has the table in the hand narrow, and the fingers
big: is aptlye disposed and given, to write well: and shall die of an
impostume.

Such a person which has the hands not ouerbigge, nor over small, but well
proportioned to the body: do denote that creature to be well contented and
quieted, in all his accidences.

If any has the hands small, the same creature is reported to be of a womanly
nature, in his deeds: insatiable, and hateful after the kind: as now loving,
and now hating, so that seldom there is any assured trust to be had in him.

If any woman has manly hands, such a creature has a big midriffe, and
big belly port intumescent: and such a one may lightly conceive, yet bring
forth no perfect child.

If any has big hands, and fat: do argue such a person to be, of a dull
capacity and wit. Such a woman having the like hands, does earnestly desire
the laerenev act.

If any has the hands slender, is denoted to be a parson nymble, and ready
in his doings: and that he much delights, in woman's companies.

If any has hollow fingers, and these evil fashioned, and not well joining
together: is judged to be a person prone to poverty, and unconstant in his
words: so that he performs little, in his deeds: as the same the
Phisiognemer noted in one (named Seraphinus de Pisis) a Physician.

Such a creature, which has the fingers, not standing close together, or not
straight out lying: does signify a miserable life, and poverty to succeed.
The reason of this is, through the evil proportion, which forms not there a
good understanding: but an evil, and inordinate.

The fingers formed little, do denote such a person to be a dullarde,
enuions, and a fool: after the agreement of Authors.

The learned Morbeth (the Cardinal) in his paulmestrie writes: that the
fingers long, and slender, and well proportioned together: do argue an apt and
ready wit, especially in handie crafts: yet do these demonstrate, an evil
government, through which ensues, that such are miserable and poor. Vt in
politicis patet.

If the fingers shall be much or wide standing a sunder, do denote poverty,
and misery to ensue to that person: as the same the Phisiognomer often noted,
in such persons, which begged from door to door.

Certain report, that the fingers very short, and little, do denote such a
person to be strong, and witty: which reason seems not to the Phisiognomer,
simply to be allowed.

The hands big, if the fingers be ouershort, do argue such a person, to be
an ouerthwarter, deceitful, and a thief: after the agreement of writers.

The hands crooked and slender, do denote such a person, to be a gluttenous
feeder, and full of words.

Certain report, that the fingers evil proportioned, as big, and sinall,
with the paulme of the hands crooked: do indicate an envious person, a
wretch, covetous, and a fool. The reason of this is, forasmuch as the
grossness does indicate much quantity of the matter, and a little of the
natural heat, not mighty to stretche out: through which the creature is
denoted, to be an earthly dry person, and rude, by reason of the overmuch
dryness. And he is judged to be a fool, through the lack of natural heat,
and moisture proportionable: and by the consequent, the same argues him to be
covetous, through the crooking of the hands.

Morbeth in his Paulmestrie utters, that the woman having small hands, and
big fingers at the ends: is judged prone to luxury, and of a dull capacity.

A certain Author of a small Paulmestrie reports, that the woman, which
has a short paulme of the hand, in respect of the body: shall be grieved
with the hard delivery of child: and this only caused, through the
straytnesse of her 23u3rp 2clip: which length is aunswerable to that length,
which is on the back of the middle finger, nigh the first joint, coming by
the Paulme, even unto Rascetta, or the wrest.

Or thus playner, the length of this 2cilp, is aunswerable to the just space,
which is from the root behind the middle finger: unto the wreaste of the
hand: and this do4bl2d, is the just measure of r3h 2toof, vt dicunt and recte.

A certain writer (whose name the Physiognomer knew not) reports, that the
hands short, bunching out, and slender, do denote such a person to be a
scoffer, and a glutteneus feeder. The cause of which matter is, the end of the
sinews, which (through a dryness) is drawn together, and bowed inward, and
thereof crooked or bunched out. Of which men crooked at the ends of parts,
through the daily exercise about fire, or by a sickness, these well and true
reported: yea these well drink and eat.

When the end of the little finger shall not reach unto the upper joint of
the ring finger: (unless the same be otherwise shortened of some accydent) is
then thought a perfect note of a Bastard: as the same the Phisiognomer has
noted in many, but this warily to be judged.

If the fingers bend at the tops, do denote such a person to be envious,
and conetous: and such are crafty, and false of promise: applied to the (...).
But when these bend inward, then contrary judge.

If the thombe bends toward the fingers, and the fingers like toward the
thombe inclyned, do argue such a person to be covetous, and malicious. And
this disposition of the members proceeds from the spring, unto which it
ensues as before uttered.

The creature which of a custom, uses to hold the hand strait out, and the
fingers (at length) stretched: is judged to be a person fearful, full of
words and vain.

If any uses to hold the hand, most commonly shut together: signifies
such a person to be prefull, and hasty in his wrath.

The fingers small, and slender in a man: do denote him, to be a fool: as
certain of knowledge report.

If the fingers be short and big: do argue such a person to be bold, and
envious: as Formica writes.

When the fingers are well compowned, of a comely form and seemly length: do
indicate honest conditions in that person.

He which in talking month much, clappeth the hands, and has many ^^stures
besides: is noted to be a fair speaker, envious, and a deceyuer.

Certain report, as that ancient Hermes, that the shaking or quiuering of the
hands, in a healthful young man: does demonstrate such a person, to be soon
angry. For this proceeds of a great heat, and moving forward of the
spirits.

If this shaking or quyuering of the hands, shall be very strong, the same is
a note of a corrupt quality: and such a person is lightly angry,
melancholicke, desirous of many and diverse things, and malicious.

The hands hollow in the paulmes, with a goodness and emynencie of the
Montes, and proportion of the lines: is an assured note of long life. But if
contrary to this, you find the hand: then the contrary judge.

The fingers of what form so ever they be, with the joints gross or big,
do indicate misery and infortune, as the Phisiognomer has many times noted.

Here conceive, that by the form of the fingers, a man may like distinguishe
three ages in every creature, as the Phisiognomer before taught and uttered in
the Phisiognomie of the lines seen in the forheade.

In holding the hands upright and close together against the light: mark
where any open place appears, and at that age the infortune of the creature
shall happen. This manner of accounting must begin from the first joint of the
force and middle finger: in proceeding like, unto the ends of the fingers: and
on such wise consider a long, from finger, to finger, where any open place is:
for at that age, where the ^^ace signifies, shall the infortune come: and on
suchwise may the fortune, and infortune of the three ages, be known and
found. If the closing, or shutting together of the fingers be whole, with a
most comely form of ye joints, does denote a singular fortune to that person,
especially if the annexed do answer the like.

The learned Albertus and Conciliatore write, that when the fingers be so full
and round, that lifted up before the eye, a man can not see between them: do
indicate a covetous person, and malicious.

If the fingers stretched out, these bend toward the back of the hand: do
argue such a person to be unjust, subtle, and witty, especially if the
fingers be slender.

If any, whiles he walks, does of a custom, shut the thombe within the
fingers: is noted to be a covetous person, as the like the Phisiognomer
observed in a certain L^^barde.

The fingers long, do like argue the length of the ears, of the liver: and
the bigness of the fingers, do like denote the largeness of the ears of the
liver: But the s^^^lnesse of them, as Albertus reports, does like signify
the: ears of the liver to be little: the self same utter, Auicen, and Galen,
in libro (...).

If any shall have read hands, whether the same be manne or woman: is of
nature noted* Sanguine, and luxurious: as writes the learned Formica, and the
same a truth known.

Ptholomie the Philosopher utters, that the creature which has the upper
joints of the fingers gross or big, and turning backwarde: does denote that
if he shall then be ^iteh, within a periode, and a certain time after, to
become poor: or else by some other infortune, shall be short lived.

The hands crooked in the length, is a note (as some Authors write) of sudden
death: and this in sundry has been noted. For as much as some are found to
have six fingers on one hand, as the two last toward the ear finger: in
like manner lyned, yet in the greatness diverse, the joints and nails seemly
formed, and proportioned through the goodness of matter. And the first person
which I saw and considered, before the presence of M. Julius Vitalis, was a
Jew named Helias: After him many others, whose names for brevity the
Physiognomer omitteth: and this person he beheld, in the City of Bononie.
Thus briefly, the Physiognomer Cocles ends this Chapter of the hand, and
fingers: craving pardon of the reader, if the same be either vnperfitely or
super^^uously handled.

The form and judgment of the nails of the fingers. The. xxxix. Chapter.


THe prince of the later writers, both of Phisiognomie, and Paulmestrie,
affirms, that the nails (and the same a truth) are produced, or do proceed
of the superfluities of the heart: in that the heart is found to be the nobler
member of action: So that by them, is somewhat to be uttered.

He also reports, in differentia. 54. that the nail is a body extensed
thin, produced and caused of the superfluities, and hardened on the fingers
ends, for a special help to them being there situated; and grows on the
fingers ends and toes: as the hears, uttermost of the skin, do occupy on
the body.

And Auicen utters, that the nails both on the fingers and toes, were
ordained in the ends of these members, the better to strengthen: for to take,
and hold things firmly, and to cover the flesh at the ends: which jointly
being well matched, give a more strength. This well appears, in that if any
of the small bones be lacking at the ends of any of the toes, or fingers: then
like do the nails, lack at the ends of those members: as the same may
evidently appear, in any large scarre on the flesh, where after grows no
hears to be seen. The manner also of the original and cause of those nails,
is proportional to the production of the hears, through the grosser
superfluities not so much adust.

The nails plain, white, soft, and thin, reddish, and sufficient clear,
do indicate a singular wit in that person: and this is one of the notes,
which very seldom fails: forasmuch as such nails, do proceed of the best
quality, as Albertus reports: so that the spirits which produce the nails
delated (from the heart) are clear and thin: through whose superfluity, are
the nails engendered.

The nails rough, and hard, do denote such a person to be prone to the
venereall act: as the learned Morbeth reports.

The nails over short, do argue wickedness in that creature. And like the
black, small, and bending nails: do argue imprudencie: compared to the
greedy catching fowls. These also after the mind (of the Physicians) with a
leanness of the fingers: do witness a consumption of the body.

When the nails fall of, without cause: do threaten the leaprie to come, or
even at hand: as the learned Conciliatore utters.

The child borne without nails, or having them but weak: does witness the
mother to have used the daily continuance, or overmuch eating of salt: as
witnesses the Philosopher Aristotle, in septimo de natura animalium. cap. 4.

The nails in the middle deep, gross or big, and thick: do denote a rude
person, and knowing little: especially if the flesh about the fingers ends be
high, and gross.

Ptnolomie the Philosopher reports, that the nails long, do signify
poverty to that person, and to live in bare estate or beggerie, all his lyfs
time. The same is confirmed of Pontius Gallicus.

Certain authors affirm, that whose nails of the fingers, of the left
hand, grow faster than the right: do witness poverty: the like if the
nails be without color.

I much maruayle (says the Phisiognomer) that all the legitimate authors do
affirm: that the white pricks in the nails: to signify happiness, and
friends: which (as it should seem) has many times been observed and noted,
and judged of the Phisiognomer, by the order of the fingers: as thus, the white
pricks seen in the Suns finger, do signify the increase of honor,
worship, offices, and friendship with noble persons. etc. The reason of this
is, forasmuch as these denote a good humor, and benign, presupposing there a
good quality, and understanding: of which a good discretion, and courtesy
ensues: so that such persons through the same, do attain friends and
commended of many. The like pricks found in the little finger: do denote
friendship with the Mercurians: and that Mercury to be well proportioned, and
strong, in that place about. and similia.

But the black pricks seen in the nails, and chiefly in the middle finger,
do argue harms, persecutions, imprisonment, and all kinds of detrimentes,
that may happen to any: as the same the Phisiognomer understood of a certain
friend, which noted the like in many persons. And these he reported to like
succeed, according to the diversity of the fingers: forasmuch as the
infortune, and loss of richesse happened after the positure of them on the
fingers.

But some Autours report, that these do indicate hatred. The reason of this
is, through the excess of the dry Melancholy, which then abounds: and
lack of the natural heat, which fails. So that the black pricks, do
always demonstrate, that the cold Melancholy, and an earthly dryness to
ensue. Yet it seems to me (says the Phisiognomer) that experience may
contradict the same, seeing I have always seen (says he) that the black and
white pricks on the nails to come, and pass away, within a few days: and
that these to be caused, of determinate effects: which otherwise can not
proceed or be caused, but through the Periode and course of the Planets, in
certain years and months: as shall appear in many places of the
Phisiognomie of the Planets, to come forth.

The signification and judgment of feeling, after Phisiognomie. The. xl.
Chapter.
THe Philosopher ( in libro de regimine principum) reports, that ye sense,
which consists in the hand, is the ^actiue or palpatiue virtue, and the
course of them rests in the heat and cold, rough and soft, moisture and
dryth. And it is a virtue contained between two skins, of which, the one is in
the upper face of the body, and the other, in the same which belongs and
cleaves unto the flesh: so that when each of these senses is attained: which
God by his mighty virtue, has ministered to this kind: thin skins so
light as the Spiders web arise, and come from the root of the brain: and
are as a fine scarffe and thin Curtain to this kind: insomuch, that when
the same is presented, which each sense has: and the same comes unto those
skins, which are in that substance of the brain: the passages then of all
the senses are gathered with the ymaginatiue virtue, which represents these
to the cogitatiue virtue, which consists in the middle of the brain: that it
may behold these, and both gather and study in the figures and examples of
them, that it may know in them the nociue and innatiue, and that the same may
be wrought according to measure, which proceeds or comes to it of them. And
as Auerrois (in de sensu and sensato) utters, that the feeling is ^iesh: and
is proper to al instruments of the senses: this considred, that these nothing
possess of all the senses in the act of them, which they properly comprehend,
but the instrument of feeling: which is compowned of the qualityes, which it
comprehends: and for that cause does this not comprehend, but the intensed
matters, through his temperament: and for the same reason, how much the
temperater the flesh shall be found, so much the more does it comprehend the
simple qualities, as heat, cold, dryth, and moisture. For these does man
inioye far above other living creatures, and is of feeling better and
sensibler, which especially is decerned by the hand (as the flesh of the
paulme) and the flesh especially of the fore finger. But the tongue (at the
end of it) has no taste in the act: and for that cause, when the same is
imbybed and filled of certain humors, the taste then is corrupted: and like is
to be conceived of the instruments, of the other senses. The self same
utters Albertus (in libro de anima) where he wills to conceive that the
skin is wouen with sinews very small, and with hearie veins contained
within the same wouen, with which the Liver, and bowelles are wrapped: that
these may defend them from outward harms: and for this, the skin in
beasts, is very thick, and hearie. For that the same has not any protection
or outward defense: but the skin in men is thin. For which cause it is
protected and succored by garments, from wind, cold, and rain. Seeing the
skin compowned of the sinews, is naturally white: for that cause is the
property of the sinews procured, that ye same retcheth out and draws in,
and is white in color: but the redness of blood, passing by them, appears
to the eye. So that whose color of the hand or face is white or read (as
Phylemon utters) and of a good feeling: do denote the faythfulnesse of
mind, constancy, and truth: and this confirmed, if a commensuration or
comeliness of form consist in the other members. These hitherto uttered of
feeling, shall here suffice.

The condition and judgment of the back bone. The. xlj. chapter.
THe back bone great, that is, in the length and breadth, does argue strength
of the creature: and the royal members to be strong, and natural heat
mighty, as before uttered: especially when the ridge or back bone is
musculous, and without a softness of flesh decerned, is for the same applied,
unto the Masculinitie. But if the back bone be found narrow, and compassed
with soft flesh, that person is judged of a feminine action: forasmuch as the
rest is narrow, and the royal members feeble in heat: and their actions are
known weak, and feeble in conditions, yea these have a dead mind or faint
courage, applied unto the feminine kind. Of which Rasis reports, yt the
largeness of the back bone, does argue such a person to be strong, arrogant,
and furious in ire.

The back bone narrow, and covered with soft flesh, does denote such a person
to be effeminate.

The crookedness of the back, does innuate the wickedness of conditions: but
an equality of the back, is then a good note. These hitherto Rasis.

The learned Conciliatore utters, that the back bone large, and well brawned,
and strong of bones, is applied to the man kind: and in the contrary manner to
the woman kind.

The back bone crooked, if the same be covered with soft flesh, and slender in
the gyrting place: does denote such a person, to excel in natural gifts, and
to have very great pleasure in hunting. Yet some affirm, that the
crookedness of the back, to declare the wickedness of conditions.

The thinness of the back, does denote that person to be of a contentious
nature, and spiteful.

The back large and vnextensed, does denote strength, arrogancy, and the
vehemency of a strong ire.

The nether part of the back bone, if the same lies broad to the buttocks,
and be compassed with a soft flesh, does indicate an effeminate person,
compared to the woman. But if the same appears long, and shall end sharp at
the end, does argue wantonness unto the veneriall act, yet with a
temperauncie, and fearfulness. Such also having a great, large, and strong
ioynted back, are reported strong: and econtra. But broad, thin, narrow and
flat, do indicate weakness. These hitherto Conciliatore.

Certain report that the back bone hearie, lean, and very much elevated or
bearing out, from the equality of parts: to denote such a person to be
unshamefast, malicious, rude, of a dull capacity, weak, of small labor and
sluggishe.

Whose back bone is decerned big, and fat, does argue such a person to be
variable, sluggish, and very crafty, or full of deceyte.

The back bone thin, long, and lean, does signify such a person to be
weak, of a light cause fearful, vain, contentious, and very light of
belief.

The back bone from the shoulder points, unto the gyrdlesteede, when it is
short, and sufficient broad: does denote such a person to be hasty in the
veneriall action, as the Phisiognomer oftentimes noted in sundry persons. Here
conceive that the back bone, is meant and reckned from the shoulder points,
unto the gyrdlesteede.

Of which, is to be noted, that if the back bone be large, does then argue the
breast, the ribs, and flanckes to be large, and of necessity it ensues that
the composition of Nucha, and the neck to be strong, with a decent form of the
head. And the inner members have their receptacles great, and the knittings of
the motive sinews, are of a due proportion. Et econtra contrarium denotatur.
By the loins (the ingenious Philosopher Aristotle means) from the
gyrdlesteede, unto the beginning of the buttockes. So that when the same place
has a largeness, does argue strength in that creature: through the plenty of
muscles: and such are delighted in the hunting of beasts: and applied to the
Lion, and Greyhound in the form.

The condition and judgment of the breast, throat, and pappes. The xlij.
chapter.
THe breast is that part, which conteyneth the spiritual members: for that in
it are certain parts containing, and certain contained. The parts
containing are four, that is, the flesh, the brawnie part, the pappes, and
the bones. The parts contained are eight, that is, the heart, the lungs, the
pannycles, the ligaments, the sinews, the veins, the arteries, and Hysophagus.

The Philosopher Aristotle unto king Alexander utters, that the largeness of
the breast, and bigness of the shoulders, and back: do argue such a person to
be honest, bold, of a ready understanding and wyttie.

The worthy Conciliatore reports, yt when the nether part about the
weysande, the shoulders, and breast, shall be evil distinguished and flat:
do signify the rudeness of wit, and foolishness: and that such a person
not to be apt, to attain any special handie craft.

When the weysande beneath, shall be far dystant from the shoulders, and
large: does denote such a person, to be of a feeble courage.

The weysand being a mean, does then argue such a person, to be honest
conditioned, and strong. These hitherto Conciliatore.

Here conceive that the weysande appearing emynent, and large, does denote an
effeminate person, especially if he be double chinned.

The breast large, and well proportioned, with the other parts large, is a most
perfect and true note to be conceived in every creature, forasmuch as this
largeness of the breast, is proper to man.

The breast thin, and weak compowned, does argue a weak courage and will,
after the mind of certain Autours.

The breast thick covered with flesh, does denote such a person to be
ungrateful, as the Physiognomer reports.

Whose breast is mightily bending in, and that the Muscles so proceeding, that
through these are caused (like to an hollownesse) does denote a perverse person
and wicked. When this is very emynent, the heart of such a person is hot, of
a small understanding, and daily weepeth, or sings.

Rasis affirms, that the quality of the heart, if it shall be hot: does
argue the pulse to be quick moving and often, and the breath fast.

Much hear seen on the breast, and thick, and that in the feeling the same
perceived hot: such a quality of the heart, does demonstrate that person to
be bold, sturdie, and very yrefull.

The composition of the body, both in the bigness and smalnesse, is to be
considered: for that the same demonstrateth the quality of the heart.

So that the breast formed big, does argue properly the hotenesse and
bigness of the heart: and this the more confirmed, if (with the same) the
head appears small, or that it be not big: which if it shall so be, a man
needs not to have regard unto any other signs.

In like manner, the brea^^ formed small, and the head appearing seemly, or
but meanly big: does demonstrate by that reason, the smalnesse of the heart,
and coldness of the quality in yt creature.

If the bigness of the breast, appears to answer unto the bigness of the
head: or yt the smalnesse of the breast shall be proportionally formed to the
smalnesse of the head, then ought a man to have regard unto the other notes.

The cold quality of the heart, does procure a weak pulse, and feeble
breath: through which the breast is caused to possess few hears on it, and
those but small: so that the breast by the means, is found cold in the
feeling. The person being of such a quality, is noted fearful, and stuggish.

The quality dry, has a hard pulse, and is therowout the body brawned, and
swartish of color.

The breast also thin of flesh, but the veins apparaunt, and hearie of
body, and the skin both thick and hard.

But the moist complexion, does cause a soft pulse, the breast naked of hears:
the flesh also soft and gentle: and such a person is noted effeminate.

The complexion or quality hot and dry, causes a hard and quick pulse, and
the same often: and engenders much hear both thick and stiff, on the breast,
and on the thighs. The breath also out of the same quality, proceeds both
great and often: and the whole body besides is in the feeling decerned hot,
and brawned, and the veins apparaunt. The person being of this quality, is
noted yrefull and obstynate.

But the quality decerned cold and moist, works the contrary to these
above uttered: these hitherto the words of the ancient Rasis.

To come unto the matter and purpose (says Cocles) that is, when the breast is
found well compowned, and orderly formed, does indicate strength, manlynesse,
boldness, the others like, and aunswering, which properly belong unto the man,
as the Philosopher Aristotle means: and such a habitude ought not to appear
much fleshy, nor so soft in the feeling, as the softness of the woman.

The like words utters, the singular Physician Galen: that the body
appearing not over fat, nor over lean, and contynuing the like: does argue
such a person to live long: yet the body decerned rather lean than fat, is
the more commended, and does live longer: after the agreement of the learned
Physicians.

The veins of fat bodies, are evermore decerned narrow: whereof such
appear to have but a weak and small breath, and little blood consisting in
the special parts of the body. Of which, such growing elder in years, are
reported to be short lived: and to be abreuiated life, through a few, and these
small accydences to ensue.



When any considers a subject, let him first (says the Phisiognomer) mark
the condition of the breast, after the form of the head, and other members of
the body. For if the breast be formed large, and bearing out, and the head
seemly big, with a shortness of the neck, does then indicate the hotnesse
of the heart, so that there appears a nakedness of hears: which after
nature does proceed, through a largeness of the powers consisting in that
creature, that properly can not retain the matter of the hears: or else of
the occasion, that the straightness of the passages be so narrow and close,
that these let the issuing forth of the hears, after the due property and
course of nature.

As touching the lean bodies after nature, these are in a contrary manner
formed to the fat: for as much as their principal members are known to be
open, and able (by the report of the Phisiognomer) to endure but small matters,
and traueyles. But the persons known of a temperate quality, and dyeting
themselves daintilye, or rather after discretion, that these may so wax
fat: are by that means procured, that their veins and arteries are caused
strong, and endure large. Of which, their heat (by that reason) is not so
soon extinguished: as the singular Physician Galen utters. So that such an
habitude with the Phisiognomer, is accounted lawdable, and this generally meant
in all the body.

Here conceive (says Cocles) that the heart in man, is cause of all the
workings, if the principal members are duly formed: of which, the goodness
and malice of mind insueth, according to the positure of diverse parts in the
creature.

The contrary of this is to be judged: when as the neck is long, the breast
large, with a much quantity of hears, as in sundry places before uttered.

The thinness of flesh on the breast, with a due proportion of the other
members: does argue hotnesse of the heart, and by the consequent, a warlike
boldness: as appears in the chollericke. And as the like, by the former
words before may be gathered.

Of which, the authority of Flauius Vegetius witnesses, that the young man
fit to be trained up in the wars, must have a quick, and ready eye, an
upright neck, large breasted, the shoulders brawned, or fast of flesh, the
hands and fingers strong, with longer arms, after the form of the body, a
mean belly, the legs sufficient fleshie, and strong sinewed, and rather
mean, than tall of stature: for that a strong and hardy Soldier, is more to
be preferred, than a tall and big person. And of this diligent heed must be
given, to the proportion of the members.

The form of the pappes is to be considered: which (as it is written) are
compowned of white flesh, having many kernels, and little holes like to a
sponge, through the veins, arteries, and sinews: and of this, they be joined
with the heart, the liver, and the brain, with the generatiue members.

If the pappes of any man seem to hang down, (in a manner) like to the
woman's, and compassedwith soft flesh, do denote effeminacie, and
intemperancie.

The Philosopher Ptholomie reports, that he (which on the left side, of the
breast) has a big fleshie Mole, high out, and round, with one, or many
hears on it, does then promise the increase of riches and honor. This
experienced of Pontius Gallicus, and of the Physiognomer Cocles.

Such women which have big pappes, and short: are denoted sluggishe, and
rammishe of smell, as some affirm.

Such women which have no veins, appearing on the breasts, are unfit to give
suck unto children: For that such a positure does argue a flewmatick, and an
inordinate matter. Such women also are of a rude nature, and beastly: and give
suck with pain, through some grievous accydence.

The pappes of (a mean bigness) not soft, and the veins apparent, and
straight out: do argue a good mylche Nurse: especially if her skin be
swartishe in color.

The pappes small and lean, or slender through dryness: do denote such a
woman, to be weak of body.

When the pappes begin to arise, then do they denote, that (such shortly
after) to be provoked unto the veneriall act.

The pappes sufficient big, and full (after Galen) do argue a perfect
digestion.

The form and judgment of the hollownesse on the breast. The. xliij. chapter.
THe ingenious Philosopher Aristotle does Phisiognomate of the nobleness of
the part of the breast, which commonly is decerned between the breasts. The
same properly named Methafrenon, where frenes and the Midriffe consists: and
this is a pellicle, dividing the region of the natural members, from the
region of the nutritive: which through a like division, is the same named the
Midriffe (as it were parting or dividing in two) and knitte or fastened, to the
back bone and breast, in the compass of the breast, having a circuler form.

This hollow place of the breast, is here meant of the Phisiognomer, where the
hears commonly grow on men, and right against the Midriffe.

The person which has this part of the breast, appearing big, sufficient
fleshy, and brawned: is (of the Philosopher) noted strong according to nature,
and applied of him to the male kind.

The creature which has this part appearing weak, not fleshie, nor brawned:
are denoted feeble, and weak after nature, and applied for the form, unto the
female kind.

Such a person which has this part so bending in, through the meeting there of
the muscles, right against the furcle of the two semicircles meeting at if,
that they cause there a deep hollownesse or pit in the middle of the same:
does denote such a person to be evil conditioned, and not to fellowship
withal, rude, and of a disdainefull nature. But the manner of his disoayning,
he covers and hydeth, for that he is close minded, as touching his malicious
stomach: which he subtly cloaketh, by his dissenibling words.

The Phisiognomer Cocles, noted a certain husbandeman in his time, which had
the Methaphrenon so hollow standing in, that a man might well have hid, the
whole fist in the same: who he diligently noted and knew to be evil
conditioned, especially a wrangler, contentious, and double tongued.

He which has this part appearing eminent, is noted to be very yrefull: in
that the bearing out of this part, proceeds through the ouermuche heat of
the heart, and of the same cause is moved, to be very yrefull, as reports
Galen in libro Tegm. and through this yrefulnesse caused to be forgetful of
himself, vndiserete, and unadvised of that he does: and applied for the nature
and property unto the horse, for that the horse has such a form of the
breast, and is of a vehement fury, as Aristotle utters.

This part consisting a mean, in the hollownesse, that is, the Methaphrenon,
neither to high bearing out, nor to deep formed inward (as the breast plate
of a harness) is a laudable note, after the mind of the Phisiognomer Cocles:
and such a person, says he, is known to be of a temperate quality, and well
conditioned.

The self same utters Conciliatore, and the like taught in the Chapter of
the signification of the breast.

The condition and judgment of the ribs. The* xliiij. chapter.
HEre the Philosopher does skilfully instruct a man to Phisiognomate by the
disposition and form of the ribs, and learnedly utters certain notes of
these.

The first note is, that such creatures which are decerned to be well ribbed,
be accounted (after skill known) to be strong: and applied for the form, unto
the male kind.

But such seen and found weak ribbed, are denoted feeble of strength (after
nature) applied for the form, unto the female kind: which are known (says
the Philosopher) to have but small and seeble ribs, and weak muscles.

The Lion (of all beasts) is the strongest, and perfitest compowned in his
parts: yea he for the proper composition, nearest agreeing unto man's form.
The description of whose form, the learned Aristotle Artly utters, in this
manner.

That he has a mouth sufficient great, the face formed square, and not very
bonie: the upper Iaw equally hanging downewarde, the nose more gross than
small, the eyes hollow standing, and very round, nor to much protensed: but
the meanness moderate, the ouerbrowes sufficient great and broad, the forehead
formed square, and in the middle of it, somewhat hollow denting in, unto the
ouerbrowes, and nose: under the foreheade, the same as a cloud consisting: but
above on the foreheade, near to the nose, having the hears appearing
inclined: the head in a mean manner formed: the neck of a good and seemly
length, and the same gross and innodated: the hears in color yealow, not
plain, nor much crysped: the parts which are cituated next the joints of the
shoulder points, well proportioned and spaced, rather than near conjoined:
the shoulder points appearing strong, and the breast iuuenile: the Methaphrenon
also appearing large, and the back sufficientlye compowned: the hyppes or
haunches appearing not fleshie: the thighs and shanckes strong formed, and
well sinewed: the whole chyne of the back throughout compowned strong: the
whole body (of knowledge) decerned to be well brawned, and sinewed, and not
found very moist: the pace that the Lion treads, is known to be neither
swist, nor very slow: In pace also he walks stately, and moves the
shoulder points, as he treads. Such a condition of the man's body, formed
according to these, is denoted laudable, and to be strong, and such persons
like formed after nature, are known to give freely, and to be liberal, yea
stowte of courage, loving and coveting victory, gentle of behavior, and just
in dealing, loving besides those, with which they associate: these hitherto
Aristotle.

Such persons (says the learned Conciliatore, in his Rubricke of Phisiognomie)
which are strong and well ribbed, be denoted liberal, and free of gifts,
bold, desirous of victory, gentle in behavior, just in actions, and loving
well those, with which they fellowship. And applied for the form, unto the Male
kind: in that the same has great ribs, through the largeness of the
breast, and breadth of the back: which properly proceeds, of the nature of
heat. Forasmuch as the nature of heat (as before uttered) is to increase and
dilate the form of the members.

Such persons which are found weak and small rybbed, are known of experience
to be feeble of strength, and after nature, applied unto the female kind.

Such persons which appear to have the ribs much covered and compassed with
the great quantity of flesh, that these seem swolen or puffed up withal: are
argued to be full of idle words, and foolish in actions: as both Almansore, and
Conciliatore report. And for the like form, aptly applied unto the Ox, and
Frogge, having such condicioned rybbes.

The rybbes of the woman formed narrow, and the flancks like: are especially
caused, through the lack of natural heat in that creature.

The ancient Rasis utters, that the smalnesse, and thinness of the ribs:
does innuate in that creature, the debilitie and feebleness of coeating.

The condition and judgment by the notes decerned, in the quantity of the
space between the neck upward and the Nauill downward, unto the mouth of the
stomach. The. xlv. chapter.
THe Philosopher Aristotle does Phisiognomate, by the quantity of the parts,
which are between the nauill and neck, and the mouth of the stomach: saying
on this wise, that such persons which have the same space larger, which is
from the nauill, unto the bottom and end of the breast: than that consisting
from the end of the breast, unto the neck: are judged gluttenous, and of a dull
perseverance. The reason (why such are reported to be gluttons) is, for that
such have a big belly, and great stomach: and a great stomak (^ayth the
Philosopher) requires much meat or food, by reason of the great quantity,
and not of the quality: of which, these (by an earnest desire) covet, to eat
much meat. And such are known to be of a dull understanding, and
perseucraunce, through their mighty filling of meat, more than needs:
which, of the same, procures weak senses in them.

But such a creature which has the space, consisting from the nauill unto the
breast lesser in distance, than the same which is from ye breast, unto the
neck, has (by the report of the Phisiognomer) a great or large stomach: the
stomach here meant, for ye proper belly: of which this person is known (of
observation) to be weak of body, and short lived. The reason of this is, in
that the bellye, or rather the stomach consists cold, through the smalnesse
of the same: of which, this ventricle or stomach (says the Phisiognomer) does
not orderly and well digest, but rather ingendreth superfluities in it: and of
the same, such are prone unto diseases or sicknesses, and to be short lived.
And the multitude of sicknesses procured in that creature, are occasioned and
caused through the intensed hotnesse, which the same purchases, and by the
means of the bowelles, and other members near placed: that hastily draw from
the stomach, the meat by a force undigested.

The learned Aristotle also utters, that when this space above described,
shall be decerned equal, such a positure and condition of the like, is
commended highly of him: for that this argues, a due proportion of the
members, containing in them an apt, and good digestion in that creature.

But a contrary to these (above uttered) does Aristotle report, that such
persons which have the parts from the Nauill downewarde (as unto the belly)
larger appearing, than the parts which are consisting unto the breast, as unto
that named ( Pomum granatum) are denoted feeble, and weak persons of body:
and of likelyhoode to be short lived, for the reason and cause above reported.

Such persons which have that space larger, consisting from the end of the
breast, unto the neck: than that extended from the Nauill, unto the point or
end of the breast: such (after the mind of the Philosopher Aristotle) are
denoted strong, wyttie, and of a ready understanding.

Gulielmus Nurice in his Phisiognomie reports, that the like words (in a
manner) to be uttered of the singular Aristotle, where he writes, that when the
parts consisting from the nauill downewarde, shall be decerned larger than
these, which are appearing from thence unto the breast: are judged to be weak
of body and short lived.

The condition and judgment of the inner parts, which are consisting from the
nauill upward, unto the beginning of the stomach. The xlvj. chapter.
IF the ( Hypocondria) or inward parts so named, shall be decerned hard in
the feeling, and sufficiently or well compowned with bones: do witness the
Masculynitie: and that such persons to be fierce, cruel, and quarrellers, or
fighters: as the ancient Palemon, Albertus, and the learned Conciliatore
utter. Such Hypocondria (do certain report) that the worthy Plato possessed:
yea the like creatures (as Albertus, and Conciliatore report) are applied unto
the fierce Lion.

But if these parts (named Hypocondria) shall be decerned to be covered with a
soft flesh: these then (says the Phisiognomer Cocles) do denote an
effeminate mind, and womanly courage to dwell or consist in that creature: and
the like affirms Conciliatore, in his Rubric of Physiognomy.

Such which shall have these parts weak boned, and wrinckled, and compassed
with a thinness of flesh, like unto the Hypocondria of the Ape: are of the
Philosopher judged wicked of behavior, and full of shrewde or evil turns:
applied for the like condition and form unto the Ape.

The signification and judgment by the notes of the belly. The. xlvii. chapter.
THe Philosopher Aristotle does here instruct, how a man may Physiognomate by
the habitude of the belly: in that the belly is known to be the same, which
receiving the meat (as Isydore reports) does thoroughly digest it, and
conueyeth the excrementes forth, that be superfluous, for which cause, this of
nature formed, bearing and appearing outward.

Such which are sufficient fat about the bellye, that is, well brawned, and
that the bellye bear not to much outward: are denoted strong after nature,
applied for the form, unto the male kind. And such a condition of it, is
reported to be natural: so that the composition of the belly (after the mind
af Constantine) is formed fleshie after nature, yea hot, and moist: and
this, through the occasion of digestion properly. Of which Rasis utters, that
such creatures which possess big bellies after nature, are noted to be
libydinous, great feeders, and that speedily digest meats.

Such creatures which are decerned in a contrary condition to this, as having
flat bellyes, not sufficient brawned, and these found soft: are denoted and
judged to be weak of body, and for the form, applied unto the apparaunt
congruencie. In that we commonly see (says the Physiognomer) that such
possessing lean bellyes, proceeding of any accydent, as either of to much
fasting, or of a sickness caused, or procured otherwise of any accydentall
cause: are argued to be unapt to learn, and to conceive deep matters, yea
weak of body and courage. And how long soever such continue in the like
passion, and so long they tend or lean unto the womanly conditions and
courage: after the agreement of Aristotle, Albertus, Conciliatore, and others.

The learned Aristotle does also utter, in secretis secretorum, that he which
possesses a big belly: is denoted and judged to be an indiscreet person,
proud, foolish, and often desiring to coeate, for the hotnesse resting in him.

A meaue proportion and form of the bellye decerned, with a narrowness of the
breast, does indicate such a creature to be of a deep understanding, of a good
discretion and wit, of an honest conversation and trusty. For a meanness of
the belly (says the Phisiognomer) is procured of a hotnesse, proportioned in
that creature, of which, lawdable spirits ensue. Where the Philosopher
utters, with a strayghtnesse of the breast: this is here meant to be formed
with a proportion of the same breast: for if this should be compowned with an
overmuch largeness, it would indicate a hotenesse of the heart in that
creature, to hinder understanding. Of the same mind and judgment (by the
report of the Phisiognomer) is the learned Loxius, where he witnesses, that
such a form of the belly is known to be soft. Conciliatore reports that the
bigness of the belly, does denote an overmuch desire unto the veneriall act.
Whose stomach and belly are decerned fleshier, are reported to be strong.

He also affirms, that the belly soft in youth, does witness: that the same
in many to become flat and drawn together in old age, and econtra: of which
this like, does indicate a heaviness in old age. The learned Aristotle
uttered unto the mighty king Alexander, that ye person having a great belly, to
be indiscreet, foolish, proud, and desiring to coeate. A meanness of the
belly decerned (as above taught) with a decent narrowness of the breast:
witnesses a deepenesse of understanding, and ready counsel in that
creature. These hitherto Conciliatore.

The bigness of the bellye, proceeds of the great heat, reuerberating in
the emptiness of the same: especially, unto the region of the genitors. In
that (as it is said) the virtue Moral or intellectiue, is not situated in a
body over hot: and of this, such are procured to be indiscreet, and foolish.
Such also are noted to be great drinkers, gluttonous feeders, and delighted in
sluggishnesse: and gyuing their minds much to luxury. As has been noted in
sundry persons, which led an easy life.

A hearinesse decerned on the belly, does argue such a person to be full of
words: applied for the form, unto the kind of birds: in that it is known,
that the property of such, which are thus hearie on the bellye, to be
talkatiue, and full of words: and this note only conceived and taken, of the
chattering of birds: which through their light spirits, are thus moved to
chatter: and the lesser birds are known much louder to sing: and to have many
more notes, as the Nightingale, and such like, which are so procured and caused
through the subtilnesse of their blood, and lightness of the spirits: in that
these are of an ayreall nature, through which, they are so lightly moved unto
mirth, and diverse desires, which in their many songs, and changing of notes,
endeavor to express. And the Cocks of those kind, more exercise song, than
the Hens do, forasmuch as they are formed hoter, and by the consequent have
subtiller blood, and lighter spirits, than the Hens. And that hearinesse, or
many more feathers appearing on their bellyes, proceeds through the
abundance of the heat vaporatiue, in that the same more abounds in this
place, through the digestion there bearing greater sway: whose note is, that
the flesh of their bellyes is found far sweeter, and more sauerie in taste,
than any part of their bodies besides: so that of the like causes, sundry men
are known to be very hearie on the belly. Of which, to conclude, in that these
possess a subtle blood, and light spirits, through the light motion of
blood, and the spirits. For that cause, are diverse fantasies in those
subjects, lightly procured and conceived in mind, which, of them uttered in
their speech, and talk. So that of these, a certain reason of the cause
appears, why the chattering, and many words in them, do indicate a
hearinesse to consist about their Bellies.

The Phisiognomer knew sundry persons of the like condition, which were very
leacherous, and that much desired to frequent the same. And the like
condicioned creatures (says Cocles) are these known to be, which possess or
have but a short space, between the heart and brain: especially, if such are
found Collericke. Thus by diligent considering the notes, in this Art taught:
may a man attain, unto many other hid secrets of this Art, not here
uttered.

Here note, that Ptholomie the Philosopher, and Pontius Gallicus write, that he
which has one line on the nauill, does signify knowledge, and skill in Arts.
He which has two lines under the nauill, is judged to be a person, which shall
have many wives. If three lines be seen under ye nauil, than does it denote,
yt such a person shall have many children. If four lines there appear, then
do they promise long life, unto that person. And if five lines be there seen,
then do they denote great advancement, or great honor, unto that person. But
if any under the nauill, shall have two unequal lines: is then judged to be a
person so wicked, that there is little trust to be had in him. etc.

The judgment of that 235r(...) 2cil(...) named n2tc2(...). The. xlviij.
Chapter.
HEre the Philosopher does instruct to Phisiognomate by the dispositions of the
Pecten: for the Pecten is the nether Pubes of the man or woman, in which the
hears grow on ye mentula: of this, the Philosopher utters three notes.

He which has the n2tc2(...) 2p1rsh, that is to say, 2p1rsh beneath, and large
above: after the manner of a shield, and well boned, without overmuch
fleshinesse, are noted strong: and such are applied, to the Male kind: after
the mind of the Philosopher.

Such having the n2tc2p, of a contrary condition to that before: as much
fleshie, fat, and well boned: are weak persons: and applied (after
Aristotle) to the female kind.

Such having the n2tc2p over lean, as if the same were so dried up by the
heat of the Sun, are evil conditioned: and applied unto the Ape of like
disposition, as well in mind as in the body: the same reported of Auicen,
libro secundo de Animalibus, and the like uttered of Aristotle, and Albertus.

The learned Conciliatore affirms, that such which have a bonie n2tc2p, and
protensed into a sharpness, are denoted strong persons.

The skillful sr2r2hc2l affirm, that if the breast bone in the mm455 shall be
thin of flesh, and protensed into a sharpness: is then judged to be
l5ftr5h to 2t124c ht355: and that r3h 2353r(...) 2cil(...) also, to be 2^rgl.

Further conceive, that the hammes hearie, with a thickness of hears there
growing: do witness luxury in that person. And when the same is there, with
a thinness of hears: does then through (the littleness or smalnesse of them)
argue the contrary: and signifies also the dominion of coldenesse: as the same
well appears in the place, where further (and more at large) is written of
the nature, and conditions of the hears. etc. And these of the pecten, that I
may not seem to stand long (in the rehersall of matter) shall here suffice.

The judgment by the notes of 2hc 2r^yd and s3clt2st. The. xlix. chapter.
THe reason why Aristotle has not entreated of this part, is for that he wrote
but a brief instruction, in manner as an introduction of the science, which he
comprehended in a few lines, so that an Epytomie only of the same he wrote:
yet Conciliatore somewhat entreated of the same, as I shall utter (says Cocles)
and whatsoever is here added of us, the same by experience was known and
found.

Rasis reports that the gelded person, is evil conditioned, in that he is a
fool, covetous, and presumptuous.

But the person not gelded yet borne without s1l35c3ts2t, or at the least,
having them very small, is then conditioned, much like to the gelded person.

Such a person which never had bearde growing on the chinne: is far worser
conditioned.

Such persons which have the s4l5c3ts2t not a like, are noted great
fornicators: as Ptholomie the Philosopher, and Pontius Gallicus affirm.

But such persons which have them big, are denoted luckie, and fortunate, as
Ptholomie the Philosopher writes.

Such persons which shall have them equal or alike: shall attain unto a
happy fortune: as Conciliatore affirms.

Such persons which have them very big, with the 2l1t3n2g the like: are
denoted foolish, sluggardes, and Asses: I never saw, says the Phisiognomer,
that such having a great 2dy^r, were ever ingenious unto virtues: but rather
that such came, unto a lamentable lamenesse and misery in the end: as
Conciliatore utters.

These seen hanging on htgn2l, do denote liberality, yet weakness to
2t124c: as Ptholomie affirms: and the like Pontius Gallicus.

Aristotle (in lib. de Animalibus) writes, that he which has a very big
2l1t3n2g, through the spirits, not mighty to descend, unto the due place: and
through the coldenesse of them, and through the often and longer 2gn3ln1h of
them: is thereby caused weak to 2t124c.

Aristotle affirms, that the 3l5c3ts2t ought to 23l 2r2n unto the fundament:
and of this, men do not so much desire, to 2t124c in the Summer, as in the
winter time.

If indecently the sinester of the s3lc3ts2t, shall be r2gg^b, than the right:
such a person shall then beget (altogether) women children: in that he is, of a
cold quality: as Conciliatore utters.

Conciliatore in his Rubric of Phisiognomie utters, that the 2l^t^n2g 2gg^b,
does argue such a person to be a dullarde, and a fool. And like the crook
backed, or such which possess a great bunch on the back. And such also short
of body, have (for the more part) a 2gg^b 2l1t3n2g.

Ideo Matronae solent (vt plurimum) famulos similis staturae eligere.

Solent enim fortitudinem secundum alioru^ membrorum conglutinacionem ostendere.

Qui habent mentulam cum venis crassis and apparentibus, sunt calidae Naturae:
and saepe, illis accidit vlceratio virgae, vt notaui (inquit Cocles) and
curaui, cum oleo omphacino, and rosacea aqua, and parum cerusae, and
aliquantulum Camphorae, in forma line amenti, aliter talibus accidunt vlcera
putrida. Cuius rei causa, est imbibitio materiei, quae influit propter
raritatem and latitudinem meatus, quia verenda sunt complexiones calidae and
humidae. Et nimia fatigatione calefit, and excoriatur virga sic complexionata.
Inquit Conciliator.

The learned Aristotle reports, that the 2let3n2g ^uum found exceeding long,
does hinder conception, yea the same perhaps already performed: this may also
through a like occasion, destroy it. And not unlike (says the Phisiognomer)
does this many times happen, that no conception at all is procured: when as the
same is decerned over small, and short in respect of the whole body. The
reason why the over length is not commended nor apt unto conception: is for
that the gignitiue spirits in that creature, are known to be weakened, through
their long journey consisting in the way.

The judgment of the haunches and hippes. The. L. Chapter.
HEre the Philosopher instructs, to Phisiognomate by the dispositions of the
haunches or hippes.

First the hippes bonie, so that they be great and bearing outward, and
sinewed: and that the hippes be big (by reason more) of the bones, and
sinews, than of the overmuch fleshinesse: do then argue such a person, to be
both strong and hardy.

The self same utters Rasis, where he reports, that when the bones of the
hippes shall be bearing outward: do then denote such a person, to be hardy.
Here Rasis means the same, when as the Hippes are well brawned, and bending
to the out part: For then is it a note, of strength in that person. And the
Phisiognomer has noted, that such run light, and swift on the ground, and
are great goers of iourneyes.

Michael Scotus has truly uttered in this, which I much marvel at (says the
Phisiognomer: seeing in all his Phisiognomie he has so mightily erred, not
knowing what he wrote, as a person evil experienced in this Art: although he
durst attempt to utter many matters. But to come to the matter, the hippes
found sufficient fleshie: do signify a strong person, hardy, and no less
proud: as the same well appears, in the Gelding, Faulcon, and Cock.

Michael Scotus utters a second note, that such having the hippes bonie, yet
in such manner that the bones appear not big, but much fleshy, with a
smalnesse of the sinews: do declare the like persons, to be weak of
strength: and applied to the female kind.

Rasis utters, that the hippes having much flesh outward, do argue the
lousenesse of them, and weakness of strength.

Conciliatore reports, that the bones of the hipprs tended and bearing
outward: do denote strength, and a manly courage in that person: unless a
womanly fleshinesse in them, does otherwise happen.

A slenderness or thinness of the hippes, does signify such a person, to be
a lover of women, fearful, and weak of body.

The hippes big, and well brawned, full, and solyde: do argue such a person
to be strong.

The hippes bearing outward, through the overmuch fleshinesse: do denote a
weak person and feeble of courage.

The hippe bones bearing out (after a manner) do argue strength in that person.

Rasis also utters, that when the haunche bones are tended or bear outward:
do demonstrate much strength, and a manly courage, in that person.

The slenderness, or thinness of the haunchbones: does signify such a
person, to be both weak of strength and fearful, and a lover of women.

Aristotle (in libro de secretis secretorum) writes, that the largeness of
the legs and ancles, does signify a strong person. These hitherto of the
hippes, may here suffice.

The judgment of the knees. The. Li. chapter.
HEre the Philosopher Aristotle does Physiognomate, by the dispositions of the
knees: and utters sundry notes, as touching the condition of these: that
such persons having the knees formed slender, are denoted to be fear full: and
applied for the form (as he reports) unto the apparaunt congruencie or
comlynesse of the same: in that the apparaunt manner agreeing by great study,
may be named the apparaunt congruencie: for as much as the same agrees with
the natural manner in causes, and in the name proper.

The Philosopher also uttered unto the mighty king Alexander, that the much
quantity of flesh decerned about the knees, and the same soft: does indicate
the weakness of strength, and feebleness of courage, to consist in that
creature. And this caused through a weakness of the sinews: which by reason
of the moisture, loosing the lygaments of the joints, is like procured. And
such persons (as the Physiognomer reports of experience) through the
weakness or debilitie of the joints, can not so well endure to bear any
weighty burdens, nor do any other lawdable works, in which the force of
strength consists or is required. Such creatures also are known to be so
feeble of body, that they can not long endure to walk on foot, at the least
any reasonable distaunce: yea these besides are known to be effeminate. For
the superapparaunt manner is the same, which happens of purpose, with diligence
and study: as the like these enjoy, which study of a special purpose, to
procure and cause themselves amyable, and gracious to men: or work otherwise,
besides the contrary dispositions: in that the manners or apparancie of such,
are known to be accydentall: but these which are not wrought and caused of a
set purpose, may aptly be reduced unto the mind, even as an action natural.
And on such wise may their notes, of the conditions super apparaunt be
demonstrated: as the like uttered of the manners apparent. And the reductions a
like caused into these, as the same in purpose consists: and as before of the
Phisiognomer (in many places) it has been taught.

Michael Scotus in his Phisiognomie utters, that the knees full of flesh and
fat: do indicate a fearful person, lyberall, vain, and of small labor.

The said Michael Scotus reports, that the knees lean and thin of flesh,
do argue a strong person, bold, well enduring labor, secret, and a good goer
on foot.

The learned Albertus, by the authority of Aristotle utters, that the knees
which in themselves are turned, as they (in a manner) knocked together: are
applied to the femynine property: unless this may otherwise happen, by reason
of the exercise. As the like is to be seen in Bakers, Porters, and such like
persons, which carry heavy burdens: in whom such a note is not natural,
but by accidence: for that cause, this note is ineffectuous.

The learned Conciliatore reports, that the knees appeering louse (as they
were separated) from the rest of the body: do denote such to be weak in
their going. Such has ye Phisiognomer seen and noted to have gone with the
toes, and knees turning toward the siluester part, that is, outward, and
their knees tended unto the domestical part, that is, inward. And such
persons evermore are effeminate, and for the more part Cyneds: as the
Phisiognomer experienced in many subjects, and found the same to be like.
Such also are of a peeuishe nature, that aptly they may be attrybuted to women
for their like. Thus I think, sufficient uttered of the knees.

The judgment of the shankes and legs. The. Lii. chapter.
HEre the Philosopher does Physiognomate by the shankes, and utters three
notes, by the tryple disposition of the shankes conceived. The first note is,
that if the shankes shall be sinewed, brawned strong, and big: not by reason
of the fleshinesse, but rather by reason of the greatness of the bones, and
sinews: do argue such a person (after nature) to be strong: applied after
form to the Male kind.

Aristotle utters a second note, that the shankes slender, and slnewes
strong, do denote a leacherous person, light, and unstable in motion. And this
note here conceived of the birds, having the like legs: which for that
according to life are light and unstable, and have but a little of the earthly
gravity, yet much of the ayreall lightness. Insomuch, that these are
unstable, and not tarying any time in one place.

Conciliatore utters, that the shankes slender, with a weakness of the
sinews: do denote such a person to be fearful: as before uttered, in sundry
places.

A third note, the Philosopher utters: that the shankes over big, by
reason of the overmuch fleshynesse, and not with an equallitie or just
proportion, so that beneath the ancles, these are big and fleshie, as the
women's are: do denote such a person to be weak of strength, gross wytted, of
a dull perseueraunce, unshamefast, and hateful, as writes Rasis. To the same
adds Aristotle, that having the like shankes, are applied to the apparaunt
comeliness of them: which apparauncie is to be understood by the contrary:
in that the apparauncie is a comeliness, to have the contrary disposition and
form in the flesh: as that the same be moderated, or mean proportioned, and
not out of form.

The singular Philosopher Aristotle, unto king Alexander wrote: that the
thinness and slenderness of the legs: does argue a weak person, and
ignorant. But the bigness of the legs, does signify a strong and stowte
person: and this (of the bigness) is here meant when as they be well boned,
strong sinewed and brawned. The legs slender, sinewed, and rough (after
Aristotle) seem to indicate, the earnest desire to the veneriall act.
Forasmuch as their nutrymentall matter is converted into Sperme, and applied
unto birds. The shankes over big and ill fashioned, do denote an odible,
and unshame fast person. Albertus reports that the legs soft, are notes of
an e^^eminate nature.

Antonius Cornazanus, in his book de re militari concludes, that the legs
round filled after length, does argue manlynesse, in a young or fresh
Soldier.

Conceive also, says the Phisiognomer, that the legs very hearie, with much
hear about the Eiu^rp Ecalp, do signify such a person to be very
lybidinous, and applied for the form, to brute beasts.

Such which are hearie up to the hippes, and the like on the parts downewarde,
are noted to be much and often desiring ^o coeate: as utters Aristotle, in
libro de animalibus.

The shankes so fleshie behind, that they bear out (in a manner like) to a
woman with child: do denote a filthy temperament, in that creature: as
writes Conciliatore.

Michael Scotus writes, that the shankes soft of flesh, do denote a semynine
nature in that person.

The shankes big, through the bones, fleshy, and hearie: do signify a
strong person, bold, wary, trusty, of a gross wit, sluggishe and of a
dull capacity, as affirms Michael Scotus.

The legs stender, strong sinewed and rough: do denote a greedy desire,
unto the veneriall act: for that their nour^^hing matter, is converted into
Sperme: and applied to the birds, as writes Michael Scotus.

The legs slender, and not sufficient hearie, do argue a weak person of
strength, fearful, of a good understanding, faithful, serviceable, and
syldome such are leacherous: as affirms Michael Scotus.

The legs evermore naked of hear, do signify a chaste person, weak of
strength, and lightly or soon fearful: as affirms Michael Scotus.

The legs very hearie, do signify a hearie person, about the Eiuirp Ecalp,
leacherous, simple, often vain, unstable, and abounding in evil* humors: as
writes Michael Scotus.

The judgment of the ancles. The. Liii. chapter.
HEre the Philosopher instructs, to Physiognomate by the ancles of the feet:
and utters two considerations of the notes, according to the two dispositions
and forms: which with their relations appear of the words and sayings in the
text. Such strong sinewed, and well brawned about the ancles, are noted strong
after nature, and applied to the Male kind.

Such much fleshie, and weak sinewed about the ancles, are judged weak of
strength, and courage: and applied after nature, to the female kind.

But as touching the second disposition and form, in distinguishing these
better: Rasis utters, that when the ancles shall be big, as through a
fleshinesse: do argue such a person to be a dullarde, and unshamefast.

Conciliatore reports, that such which shall be strong sinewed, and well
brawned about the ancles: are denoted strong, and bold: and contrariwise the
shankes and ancles big, and evil formed: do demonstrate such a person to
be weak, a dullarde, and unshamefast: these hitherto Conciliatore.

The ancles big, through the fleshinesse, and much bearing outward, do
signify a weak person, of small labor, fearful, wary, faithful, and
tractable: as affirms Michael Scotus.

The ancles having very apparaunt sinews, and strong: do demonstrate a
strong person, bold, proud, and stowte: as writes Michael Scotus. These
hitherto of the ancles, shall here suffice.

The form and judgment of the feet. The. Liiij. chapter.
HEre the Philosopher does Phisiognomate, by the condition of the feet: and
deuideth them into four parts. As touching the first disposition, he utters
that such having the feet sufficient big, strong sinewed, and well brawned:
in such manner, that the sinews and muscles appear, and that the greatness of
the feet appears, by reason of the bigness, both of the bones and sinews,
and not by occasion of the much quantity of flesh: do indicate a strong
person, bold and stowte: applied for the form unto the male kind.

The Phisiognomer Cocles utters, (that the bigness of the feet signifiyng
the like above said) ought not to be conditioned, or possess an overmuch
fleshinesse: in yt (according to Rasis) the feet having much flesh, or
appearing very fleshie, and that these are formed fast or hard in the
composition: do innuate such a person to be of a dull understanding, and
slender capacity: applied for the imperfiter understanding, unto the female
kind.

The singular Philosopher Aristotle (in libio de secretis secretorum) utters,
that the feet formed fleshie: do denote such a creature to be foolish,
unadvised, and a moouer or procurer of iniuryes to men.

The feet decerned small and slender in form, do signify such a person to
be strong, and stowte of courage: after the mind of Nuntius Naturae.

The learned Aristotle also reports, that such having the feet formed
contrary unto the first manner, as appearing narrow in the breadth, in which the
joints seem not to appear: are denoted weak of strength, feeble of courage,
and to be effeminate.

The feet (says Cocles) which are decerned slender, and in the form appear
amiable: in such manner that these are found rather more soft, than strong: are
applied according to the passions of the mind, unto the female kind: that is,
such have the natural conditions attributed unto the female kind.

The ancient Rasis utters, that the feet formed small, comely, and fair:
do demonstrate such a creature, to be prone unto the veneriall act, or a
leacherer, myrrie, full of ieastes and sportes: the causes of these
dispositions, are the complexionall qualities consisting in him.

Here conceive (says the Phisiognomer) that the hotenesse and moisture in
every creature, are the special causes, procuring the bigness of the feet.
But the coldenesse is known, to be the consequent cause, occasioning the
smalnesse of feet. Of which according to the diverse form, and condition of
the feet, are the diverse qualities aunswerable caused, and do like ensue: as
a like of this reason, before uttered in many places.

Such which have the toes, and the nails of them crooking, like unto the
Haulkes tallons or claws: are denoted (after the mind of Aristotle) to be
deceyuers, thieves, violent catchers, and filthy talkers. The like judgment
is to be given of the fingers, and nails so crooking. For the Phisiognomer
always observed and knew these, which possessed the nails and fingers thus
proportioned and formed; to be of a Chollericke quality: yet this note I saw
(says he) to be lawdable, in jolly warriors, and right good soldiers, and in
those which by Marses beam seemed to be governed, in their great attemptes.

Certain report (says the Phisiognomer) that Aristotle here means, by the
unshamefast persons, these naturally thieves, violent prollers, and evil
tongued. I affirm (says Cocles) that by the martial thieves, the Philosopher
does mean the worthy souldiars: forasmuch as such which live and apply their
wits and minds in the wars, exercise none other then warlike attempts
(after the manner of the common spoylers, and thieves) in purchasing great
booties and spoils, here and and there, whether these attain it by right or
wrong, after a warrelyke custom, as we daily see. And as further in the
Phisiognomie of the Planet Mars shall be uttered, and in the positure of Mars
in the hand. etc. to come forth.

The toes decerned close joined together, do denote such a person, to have a
natural scowring or flixe of the belly: and such a creature applied for the
form, unto that kind of Quail (which seeks his food by fresh waters) for
his often and much durging.

Rasis reports, that when the heels are seen small in form, do indicate
such a person to be weak of strength, and fearful.

The heels decerned big, and fast of flesh: do denote such a person to be
strong, and bold, as the former Rasis utters.

Albertus and Phylemon report, that the breast of the foot when the same shall
be formed fleshie, and not hollow: in such manner, that treading with the same
on the earth: it seems to lie with an even upper face of the sole on the
ground: does innuate such a person to be crafty, and malicious: for this is a
note of the cold flewme abounding on the form. And this easily receives
forms, in as much as that the same is of a light cause moved of the weak
moouer. And of this is the craftiness in that subject caused.

The Philosopher Aristotle utters, that whose inner part of the sole of the
foot, shall not be decerned hollow, but on such wise filled, that with the
whole foot (in the treading) the same touches the ground: is denoted to be a
creature wily, mutable, and full of deceytes.

When the breast of the foot shall appear hollow, and in a contrary manner
unto the first: does signify by the contrary, of such a condition, the
goodness of understanding, and a good composition well directed, and the
goodness of conditions.

When the hollow of the foot, shall be with a leanness: does portende the
Melancholite, and consumptions, in that creature.

The learned Conciliatore utters, that t^^ feet thick, and short, do
denote such a person, (...) be strong and hardy.

The feet very long, do denote such a person to be deceptfull, and wicked,
as writes Conciliatore.

The feet exceeding mean, both in the thinness, and shortness: do
demonstrate a wicked person.

The soles of the feet, seemly compowned with fast flesh: do denote such a
person to be strong, bold, and a good i^urneyer, or goer on foot.

The feet soft, through the large filling of the skin about: do
demonstrate such a person, to be a deceyuer.

The feet crooked, and having the soles very hollow, and wrinckled: are
persons to be shunned, for that such are crafty, and wicked in their dooinges.

The soles of the feet, even a like: do denote such a person, to be weak of
strength, and a^ evil goer on foot.

The heels slender and soft: do argue such a person to be weak of strength,
and fearful.

The heels big, and fast of flesh: do denote such a person to be strong,
and bold.

The soles of the fete, and heels long, and filled with flesh: do indicate
such a person to be foolish, and peevish: especially i^ the toes be soft, and
large.

Whose compass of the feet is hollew, is ar^ued to be a person cyrcumspect,
witty, and honest.

The feet having a much quantity of flesh, with a hardness compassed: do
denote a peevish understanding, foolishness, and a lover or pre^^u^er of
injuries.

The feet small, fair and tender: do argue such a person, to be a fornicator,
and setting by himself.

Certain Authors report, that having the toes close joining: do either
denote the flux, ^or scowring of the belly, or the stincke of sweat, and
rammish savor of the body, in that person.

The ancient Rasis utters, that when the hands, and feet shall be amiable,
and small: do declare the condition of the whole body, to be weak, and the
heat of the same to be but small.

The worthy Albertus reports, that such women which have long feet: are
aptest, and do lightly conceive with child. These hitherto, sufficiently
uttered, of the feet.

The judgment to be given of the motions and walkings in general. The. Liiii.
chapter.
THe Philosopher ( in*libro regimine principum) vtterereth, that the overmuch
swiftness in treading, does argue a hot quality. Such a person which
treads and goes a very soft pase, ^ of a cold and flegmaticke quality. But
he whi^^ treads and goes a mean pace, is of a temperate quality.



The paces large, and slow: do proceed of a lawdable discourse, and that such
a person shall prosper (for the more part) in his works, and deeds, as the
Phisiognomer observed in his Patron Alexander Bentiuolus, the son of John
Bentiuolus, the second of that name.

The shortness of the paces, does imi^ate the contrary, that is, froward
conditions, and to be evil disposed in his works.

The self same confirmed of Rasis, where he utters that the paces large, and
slow or softly, do denote a friendly person, and the paces quick and short,
to be a hasty person, and very careful in all his business, yet is he
ignorant to bring them about, and to end them.

That famous Albertus reports, that the pace of a man proceeding of the
inclination of nature: does demonstrate of the same, what the qualities of the
mind, and conditions are.

Such which tread by long paces, in their goings: are noted bold of courage,
and strong, after the mind of Albertus.

Such having disordered paces, are denoted to be of an evil disposed mind,
niggards most commonly sad, and disquieted with many cares. Such encombred with
a meruellous sorrow and heaviness, tread with contrary paces from the
former. And if such be crafts men, then are they close minded.

The swiftness of pace, in bearing the body upright, and in a seemly
parsonage: does argue a quick witted person, and subtle: and one which better
begins matters, than ends them.

The creature which moves the eyes quick, and often shuts them together,
and bending wholye the body as he goes: is judged to be very fearful, a
niggarde, crafty and full of deceyte.

If any through the swiftness or fast going, has a troubling of the eyes, the
head stedeilye standing, and breaths fast: such a person is denoted to be
bold, unconstant and very crafty.

Such treading with short paces, and hastening or quick: are argued to be
weak of strength, fearful and niggardes.



When the hands and feet, move together, with the body, in the going (and
that seemly) and softly, they be carried, and move: with a little declyning,
both of the head, and neck, after a seemly manner, is judged (after the mind
of the Phisiognomer) to be a person strong, bold, and valiant of courage,
applied to the Lion: as has been noted, in sundry persons. Such a person the
Phisiognomer noted that worthy Hanniball Bentiuolus, the son of the mighty
John Bentiuolus; his singular benefactour.

A slow pace by nature, does indicate a dullness of wit: except some
mightier notes, contrary the same.

If any has a curious slownesse of pace (that sometimes staying) turns the
head, and looks about him: does bewray such a person, to be high minded.

Such which in the moving and going, have the shoulder points brawned
straight out, and large: are boasters, and full of words: applied, to the
horse.

Such, which move the shoulder points, and that these shall be crooked, are
noted witty persons: applied to the Lion.

Such which turn the feet thwartly (or in a contrary manner) in the going,
that the toes seem to cross, one before the other, and make (the form of a
tryangle in a manner) by that manner of going: and that through their weak
legs also such do stagger, as though these were broken or loose in the
joints, are conditioned to the woman, as certain report: such the Philosopher
in the chapter of the shankes, does affirm to be hateful, and inuericundious.

Whose pase shall be slow in going, does argue such a person to be weak of
strength, and of a dull capacity.

The moving of the Nose, with the moving of the Muscles, and cheek bones in
the going, does denote such a person to be yrefull: and contrary to this in
the going, that the nose turning upward, does like argue such a person, to be
yrefull.

Such which lift up the shoulders, in the going diforderly, or that the one
member be bigger then the other: are windy, and troubled as it were, with a
certain kind of Melancholy. This note is especially verified, when as the
neck is leaning unto one side: as the like the Phisiognomer observed in a
certain Scholar, and country, man of his, and in certain of the Religious.

Such which shrugge to and fro with the body, and rubbing themselves, and if
these properly be eloquent: are noted mighty flatterers, and dissemblers:
applied to the Spaniell: which partlye for fear, and partly for relief at his
masters hands, does so shrugge together, and fleere or sawne on his master. Of
which, these (as I may term them Spaniels) are with dyligent care and heed to
be considered, in that the greater part of them, seeks and attempteth
treasons. Albertus and Conciliatore, do partly affirm this. Of these was one
Seraphinus a Pisis, a perfect Chyrurgian.

Such which go with a leaping or dancing pase, and bearing out the buttock,
and with the countenance borne upright: are noted to be Cyneds and womanly
persons.

Such whose knees bend in the going, do either fall under the thraldom of
service, or else into some great misery.

The reason of this is, in that the debilitie of the sinews, does portende the
weakness of brain, and by the consequent, the imbecilitie of understanding.

Such which tread on the toes, in (such sort) going outward with them, that
the heels seem to make an angle behind: are noted of a womanly nature, yea
and Cyneds: especially if the knees seem to knock together, and bend in the
going.

Such which have an artificial pase, and by measure goes, or that swiftly,
and their eyes move quick, with a smyling countenance: for the passion, are
moved unto every difference of the position.

Such a person which has a chyld^she look, when he beholds any pleasant
thing: these shall you suppose to be given (or at the least prone) to picking
and stealing.

Such a person which has the pase of that foul named a Storke, with the
shoulder points and neck drawn together in the going, and with the like
positure of the eyes: is judged like in conditions to the Storke.

Such which sometimes look to the earth, with a clowdie and fro^^^ing
foreheade, and the upper eye liddes drawn together, and that the eyes
sometimes turn upward, with a bearing upright of the head: are noted to be
wholly occupied in wicked de^ises and thoughts.

Such which with straight, and strong legs, do orderly go: are noted bold,
and impatient: yet is boldness, with a valiantness of courage signified.

Such which with a quicker pase, and more disorderly are hasting in their pase:
are noted rash, and foolish.

Such which tread and go (after the manner of the Heart) with the head and
eyes, using the aforesaid walking in these: are not only judged to be
unstable, but to dye an evil death.

Such which for the more part, go so nycely on the toes, that scarcely any
dur^e is seen on the outsides, of the reast of the shoes: are argued to be of
a womanly nature, and that these to be Cynedes, and such which exercise and
follow the veneriall conditions: especially if the feet be amyable, small, and
with flat heels.

Such which tread with strong, and fast soales of the feet: are noted strong
and manly: unless the body otherwise be weak, and that the knees bend in the
going. These hitherto of the nature and iesture of the pases, and going, shall
here suffice.

The judgment of the hearinesse, in diverse parts of the body. The Lv. chapter.
FOr as much as a great doubt in judging, proceeds through the diversity of
the hearinesse in persons: the Physiognomer thought good, to utter here the
words of the singular Philosopher the worthy Conciliatore, and other learned
in the same.

First Aristotle (in Methaphoricis) writes, that such persons which have
hearie legs, are venerions, applied to the Goat.

Such which be very hearie, about the breast, and belly: are always wavering
of mind, and inconstant: applied to the birds, which have the breast and
belly like hearie, after the kind.

Such which be very naked of hear on the breast, or at (the least) have very
little or few hears to be seen: are iniurecundious, persons applied unto
women.

Such which be not much hearie, in the parts of the body, but in a mean: are
noted honest persons, and of a good nature.

Such which have the brawne of the shoulder points hearie, are noted (as
before) that they never continue stable of mind: applied to the birds.

Such which have the back, or chyne of the back very hearie, are noted
inuericundious and leacherous persons, applied unto beasts.

Such which have the neck behind hearie, are argued to be liberal persons,
and stowte: applied to the Lion.

Such which have a sharp chinne, are persons of an honest mind, and nature:
applied after the form to the Dog.

Such which have the hears of the eye broowes nere joining together: are sad
persons, and covetous: applied unto the similitude of the passion.

Such which have the hears of the eye broowes shed over the nose, and spread
upward unto the temples: are denoted foolish persons: applied for the form to
the Hog.

Such which have the hears upright on the head, are noted fearful, applied
unto the similitude of the passion: in that persons fearing, their hears do
then start up.

Such which have the hears of the head, very crisped: are also fearful, and
applied to the passion.

Such which have stiff, and very crisped hears on the head, are like denoted
fearful.

Such which have the hears of the head crisped, or curled at the ends, are
persons honest condicioned.

Such persons which have a high foreheade, are noted liberal, and stowte:
applied for the form to the Lion.

The head long, with the hears growing down deep on the forehead, and nere
to the nose: do argue such a person, to be liberal: applied unto the decent
comeliness and apparancie of the same.

The worthy Conciliatore utters, that hears growing within the ears: do
denote such a person, to be quieke of hearing, and reasonablye conditioned.

If on the neck behind, and the head, and back, shall be much hear seen,
such (by the agreement of authors) are argued to be strong, bold, and stowte
of courage.

It is also reported, that such having the neck behind hearie: are noted
liberal, applied for the form unto the Lion.

Much quantity of hears consisting on the shoulder points, and neck
behind: do witness p^^^^hnesse, and an obstinate mind: and with this to be
unconstant, applied for the condition to birds.

Such having the breasts very hearie, or but think of hears: are
inuericundius or impudent persons, applied for the kind unto beasts. Such
having the breasts altogether without hears, are applied to women. But such
are applied to men, or named manly, which have their back parts hearie.

Such a person, which shall be only hearie on the breast, is noted a constant
person, and well sticking unto his word and promise: and the Physicians
report, that the same note, to declare a hotenesse of the heart.

The much quantity of hears on the bellye from the nauill downewarde, does
indicate such a person to be luxurious, unstable, and a great feeber by nature:
applied for the form to birds.

Such which have the legs hearie, are vencrious: applied for the similitude
to the Goat.

Such bodies covered (in the parts) with a much quantity and long hears,
are denoted fierre, cruel, and unapt to be taught: these notes are here
conceived of the accidents of the same matter, taken wholly of the outward
appearance.

Now rests only to Phisiognomate by the acts, and doings of the same
subject.

Philemon reports, that the man which has a much quantity of hears, in
most parts of the body: is declining, unto a brutish nature.

He which has a decent quantity of hears, on the back of the hand,
especially about the nether part, and about the th^ni^e, and on the fingers:
is judged to be a person, of a good quality, and honest nature.

The overmuch hearinesse, on the hands: does denote such a person, to be
wavering, and unconstant: applied for the similitude to birds.

Such a hearinesse, if it he scattering, and disorderly: does argue an
v^ordinate quality, and an evil nature.

Uery little or few hears on the hands, to be seen: do denote a weak
body, and a feminin or womanly nature.

The hands quite (without hears) to be seen: is a note of evil conditions,
and to be a presumptuous fool, and an effeminate person. And this the worser,
if he has no beard: for then is he compared, to the gelded person, and his
conditions.

If the hears be decently small, on the back of the hand, toward the
nether side, and upward on the back of the four fingers, and unto the two
first joints, of the fingers, and that they be few in quantity, small, and
of a chaungeable color, do argue a ready wit, subtle, and a deep
understanding.

The judgment of the stature, and quantity of the body The. Lvj. chapter.
INasmuch as unto the whole body briefly belongs to utter ( Pliny and
Solinus report) that the perfect bounds of the length and largeness of the
body, have not as yet been discribed of any: yet do the Physicians witness,
that the natural length of man's body to be seven foot: and that the valiant
Hercules was found to be within this bound. And that the largeness or
breadth of his body, to be like so much: for how much the distaunce is,
between the two ends of the middle fingers (the arms and hands) stretched
out: and so much is the distance between the crown of the head, and sole of
the foot. By this reason also (the old writers) named man, the little world:
in that if a circle were drawn about him, he would then be found as wholye
round. For which cause, if any person does exceed this quantity of length, he
is then noted to be tall and long of stature: but the person which lacks of
this, or is lesser of stature (then this description above) is then noted short
of personage. And whose length and breadth, are not a like, is named ill
shapened of personage. So that the quantity evermore of the parts, or of the
whole body (in respect of a mean) ought to be applied unto the measure of the
whole body.

The Philosopher Aristotle, does Physiognomate by the quantity of the body,
as by the (...), and bigness of the fame: first a^ touching the quantity of
the body very small, he reports, that the small persons in quantity and
stature, are of a ready and quick wit: and prompt in attayning any thing, and
passing both in the conceauing and knowing of matters. And this in as much as
to the quantity of body absolute, and in as much as is by reason of the space,
in which the fame is: to which Gulielmus adding a reason of this matter
reports, that those in which the a^ter^all blood, and both the spirit and
natural heat speedily and forthwith proceed from the heart unto the brain,
and unto the cogitatiue virtues: those are of a sharp and prompt wit, in
taking, and generally in conceauing. And this in as much as by reason of the
space, in which such a motion is: and I here name that an apprehension or
conceauing, and knowledge: and of that known, judgment and discretion: of
which manner and condition, are the persons small or little of quantity. For in
those (as the Physiognomer affirms) the blood, the lively spirit, and
natural heat hastily and swiftly proceed, and are moved from the heart unto
the brain, or unto the cogitatiue virtues: in which such a motion is on the
small, and short space: and even the same is in very small persons, in as much
as by the quantity of the body. Although the Philosopher seems in the first,
to Physiognomate by the smalnesse of the body, in comparing unto the
chollericke complexion, or the hot and dry quality. And the Philosopher
means, that although the smalnesse signifies a sharpness of wit, and the
goodness of perceiving, in as much as is of that quantity: yet by reason of
the comple^ion, may the contrary be. For the small which are of a dry
quality, which he means, using hot and dry meats: and such which abound
in the hotnesse of body: as if he said, the small chollerick in quality, and
in whom a dryness and superfluous hotnesse consists, and that lesser bear
sway, do perform little or nothing, that is, they are always unapt or unable
unto the performing, and perceiving, especially unto the well judging or
decerning. For the motion of the blood and spirits in them is over swift, and
by reason of the smalnesse of the space, and overmuch hotnesse causing them
cursible, that they never can consist in the same, as this in perfitely
perceiving and knowing. In the second, the Philosopher instructs to
Phisiognomate by the greatness of body, in comparing the same unto the cold
complexion and moist or phlegmatic. In the third the Philosopher utters, to
Physiognomate by the smalnesse of body, in comparing the same unto the cold
and moist complexion. And he means, that the small which are of a cold and
moist complexion: are perfect, that is apt unto the performing: although the
blood and spirit in these are moved unto the heart speedily, for the smalnesse
of space: yet nevertheless caused immovable, by reason of the complexion or
coldness, in that moisture restrayne^h, the dryth and heat: and thus of the
short and swift motion of those spirits, by reason of the space: and in a
slow manner, by reason of the moisture of those spirits, shall the motion be
caused commensurated, and both a mean and temperate, apt unto the perfourming:
In the fourth he Phisiognomateth by the greatness of body, by a comparison
unto the hot and dry complexion: in that such are perfect and quick in
conceauing. Although in those the space of motion be great, yet the blood and
spirit in them are very swift mooning, by reason of the great heat: and on
such wise in these, is a temperament of motion caused, and are apt unto the
performing. Here is to be conceived, that although the hot and dry, and
generally the chollerick, are of a difficill or hard conceauing, and of a dull
wit, by reason of the dryth, which hardly receaueth: nevertheless the
chollerick big in body, are more perfect, and apter conceive then the small
in quantity of body. For when these give and apply their wit unto the
conceauing and attayning of any thing, they long retain the same with them:
and although they have the spirit and blood moveable, yet for that the space
of the motion is great, for that cause, before any other thing or matter
occurreth, they first conceive and take, and strongly retain. For a more
dryness than moisture, consists in the hinder part of the brain of this
creature. So that dryness has the property to attain and receive with
difficulty, and when this has received a form, the same purchased, it
retayneth for a long time: which contrary is of the moisture. For the moisture
or moist brain behind does lightly receive a form, and soon loses the
same: in that the forms which are imprinted in the moisture, are not preserved
any long time: but soon vanishe away. And for as much as the chollerick small
in body, do not so long consist in any manner, that any form in their spirit
can be fixed: yet are these nevertheless noted perfect, as is before uttered.
For the learned Aristotle here means, that the more chollerick in body, are
perfect simplye, but this understood in the comparison unto the chollerick
small of body. The Sanguine of complexion, and big in body, are very
perfect: in that they be of a temperate moist quality, and of a good
receiving, and retayning.

In the exceeding, the Philosopher does Physiognomate by the quantity of the
body, between a very small and very big, as understanding of a mean. Of
which such having bodies overmuch exceeding in greatness and height, or
overmuch lacking in the smalnesse of body and stature, are perfect by hap: in
that these sometimes are on such wise, and sometimes in a contrary manner:
according to the same, as they are dyuersly complexioned. So that by the
consequent, such over small, and over big are imperfect, in as much as unto
the extending: which may be on such wise, and otherwise in the over small
form: so that the imperfect is, as every variable contingent or happening: For
that cause in stature and quantity of body a mean: which are nether over
small, nor over big unto sense: are the aptest to perceive and know.

The Phisiognomer further utters that the person which is not of length, and
largeness a like is noted to be one, not in a due form proportioned.

Indagines briefly writing, of the stature of man alleges an example out of
the hystoryes: of one Maximinus Emperor, who for his notable and monstrous
talenesse, was of this found and judged to be of a oull capacity, and foolish*
And of the same arose this proverb, which is ( Climacis Aegiptia, and Caliga
Maximini) And that applied now to men, of a great and huge stature, having
evil propertyes, and conditions, and had in contempt for their rude manners.

Sundry others the like, might here be uttered, which for breuiti^ (says
Indagines) I omit: yet is it well known to all men, that such which be of a
monstrous talenesse, are evermore of a dull capacity, simple witted, and in
manners ru^e: especially if they be lean, and very long of body, with the
neck reaching forward, like to the Storkes neck.

In the Court of Frederick the third, and Charles Emperors did the worthy
Indagines, note certain persons very tall, and marvelous lean: who in
conditions, were known to be very froward, and foolish. And from these
persons, do not such much differ, which go crooked or s^owping.

Here a man might aptly apply, the old proverb, which affirms, that
seldom any sees, the long and tall person witty, nor the short person,
meek and pacient: yet the person short of (...) die, is noted to be of a
ready wit, apt to attain things, and in the end very skillful in many
matters. And this only meant by the quantity of the body, and not of the
quality, in that the same often falls out the contrary.

The person decerned mean of stature, and reasonably fat, and in the other
members and parts decently formed: is noted to be ingenious, and prudent, and
does his business with expedition. These hitherto John Indagines.

Michael Scotus writes, that somewhat may be declared by the stature of man.
First the stature long, and sufficient upright, and rather lean than fat,
does argue that person to be bold, high minded, presumptuous, vain glorious,
to much of a will, long angry, sometimes lying, and in many things malicions.

The stature long, and sufficient fat, does signify a strong person, yet
lightly unfaithful, deceytfull, of a dull wit, self willed, a surmiser,
ungrateful, and circumspect in his doyngs.

The stature very long, lean, and slender, does denote a foolish person, much
self willed, weak to labor, stowe, a great feeder, lightly creediting things
to be compassed, as he wishes them, and often lying.

The stature short, and big, is a note of a flegmaticke quality, and that
such a person to be envious, suspicious, more simple than wise, easilye
persuaded to believe things, long angry, vain, and well contented to serve.

The stature short and slender, and sufficient upright: is a note of a
chollericke quality, and that such a person to be naturally circumspect, of
that he does, ingenious, bold, high minded, vain glorious, of a good memory,
and understanding, secret, and a great surmiser.

The stature which bends naturally forward, and not of age caused: does
denote a wary person to himself, a niggarde, laborious, a gross feeder, long
angry, not lightly creediting, secret, and yet of a dull wit; and ^euere or
eru^ll.

The stature or personage, which bends backward: does signify a foolish
person, of a small understanding, and of an evil memory, vain, a gross
feeder, and easily persuaded, either to the good or evil. These hitherto, out
of Michael Scotus.

A perfect instruction, in the manner of judging.
FIrst consider, that a man may not hastily pronounce judgment, of any one
note alone, but gather and mark diligently the testimonies of all the members:
and if there happen to thee, to appear diverse notes, and that unto diverse
effects: then lean by the council of the Phisiognomer, unto the mightier, and
worthier part. In that the quality of the whole body, consists of the
quality of the parts. So that by one note only, a man may not argue and
judge the affection or natural motion of any person, but by sundry together.
Wherefore when thou will pronounce the happes to come of any person, to be
either greater or lesser: then the same judge, after thou have thoroughly
learned and understood of his nature and conditions. And in marking and
observing this way of judging, thou shall seldom err. As by example. If any
has the notes of a wicked person, and threatened to come unto a miserable end:
yet if such wickedness does then but a little move him, then may it be
coniectured, that such a person has well maystred his wicked affections:
contrary to others, which (for the more part) happen to come unto cruel
torments, or sustain long imprisonment. And an other example, that if any
has the notes of an yrefull person, and that anger does then but little
disquiet him: then is it to be thought and judged, that he has well repressed
and brideled the passions of ire: and eue^ ye like judgment may be given, in
all others. This also mark, for a sure note in this Art, that the good and
seemly form of each member, does denote a good composition and strength of
the body, whether that member be small or big, in respect of the body. And
the forms of the members well proportioned, do denote virtue: but evil
fashioned, do argue an evil conditioned person.

Yet the more open and manifester signs are they, which be caused and appear
in the principallest places, and these named the principallest, that are about
the eyes, the forhead, the head, and the face. But the second and next place
is the same, which is known to be about the shoulders, the breast, the belly,
the legs, and the feet. But the last, is the part which is to be considered
about the belly. But the general difficulty or hardness of these, consists
of the judgment, even as the like does the same both in the Art of Astronomy,
and Physic practice depend. And of this Galen affirms, that the
Physiognomer may err in his judgment, for diverse causes: First, in that to
any one note* a man may not trust: except the same be proper of it self, as is
above declared. Therefore no one note alone may be taken of any special part
of the body: in that by the nature of one particular, does not the nature of
man in general consist. In the second there is error caused, for that to the
alteration of nature and age, they do not sometimes agree, in that there be
notes, which sometimes declare the matter rather past, than to come: like as in
the person of three score years old, which may be hearie: that does then
argue his leacherousnesse to be past, and not present to be affirmed. And
sundry writers affirm, that the notes gathered by the fore part of the body,
are known to be mightier then those conceived of the hinder part, as
witnesses Hypocrates, who wills first to behold and note the face of the
sick. And others also affirm, that those to be the mightier notes, which are
taken of those members, by which the passion is exercised: as the notes which
do utter and declare the ire of the breast, and ribs, which is exercised by
the heart, within those parts placed. Further in that by the shoulders, arms,
legs, and feet, strength is exercised: therefore are the mightier notes for
strength, gathered and taken of them. And thus of the other members, gather and
judge in the like manner. But here for a playner understanding of the Art, and
that you may learn how to judge by the like, shall here be propounded an
example or two, and thus end the work.

First this person (by whom the example is given) shall be imagined to be of a
mean stature, yet rather unto a smalnesse, than unto a bigness of personage,
and that the head to be uniform, and agreeable in proportion unto the body,
the neck big and lively, the hears on the head mean, yet rather thin,
than thick, crisped and not plain, the foreheade of a comely form, with
vigilant eyes, rather more inward standing, than outward situated, and rather
small than big, being of a gray color to the sky: the face rather long than
round, and rather bonie than fleshie, the cheeks not full puffed up, but of a
mean bigness: the ears rather small than big, the nose chollericke or like
unto the Eagles bill: the nosethrilles rather large than narrow, the mouth
rather big than small, the teeth great and thick set: the lips like unto the
Lions, so that the upper lip be somewhat thick, and the nether lip
somewhat big, yet not louse hanging: the chinne long, and rather sharp than
round, and the under chinne not palliolated, the whole body rather bony than
fleshie, the shoulder points comely formed, the breast large with the reast of
the body proportioned: the haunches brawned, with a good fastness, and
bending somewhat outward: the legs round and seemly brawned in the parts,
the feet seemly big and not small, the heels comely formed: and in pace
goes upright, and in a seemly form of length: and whether he be polled or
not polled, it forces not: and that such a person also of property, rather
declyneth unto the good, than unto the evil: and that in all his attempts, he
proceeds with a stoutness of courage.

In this second example, shall be uttered the form of a stowte and furious
person, whose members of the body ought to be thus proportioned: first the
head sharp or round, the nose flat and hollow, the middle part or chest
of the breast bearing outward, so that there be but a small distaunce between
the heart and brain: the neck short, the eyes fiery, and spotted, the
distaunce great (from the place of the stomach) unto the nauill of the belly:
the fatness of the body fast, and not louse: the voice big and loud, with
a quickness of speech: and treading quick, with a swiftness of paces: the
body most hearie, and well bearded: the arms long, with apparaunt veins: the
hands rather big, than small: that if slender, yet not over slender of body,
and that the reast of the members of the body, be well proportioned: and that
he be not long, or tall of stature (for few such be hardy) and not Crane
legged, nor having the Pecocks pace. To conclude, the Phisiognomer does here
give warning unto general Capitaynes of an host of men: that they choose (in
no case) any under capitanes, which possess effeminate members, and be like
conditioned: that is to say, delighted in pleasures and banquettings: in that
such soldiers (for the more part) fighting under their ensign, were known
to be put to the worse, and driven back, unto the great discomfort of the
whole host: which experience Cocles had, and observed in diverse and sundry
battayles, in which, the like Capitaynes (serving for the only desire of their
belly, and covetousness of money) brought their Soldiers unto a like
lamentable end, and miserable destruction. And thus an end, of this work of
Phisiognomie.

A brief rehersall of the notes of all the members, with their significations,
in the form of a table.
Of the head.
FIrst the head big, does denote a dull person, and applied to the Ass. The
head little to be foolish, and applied to the Dog. The head mean of
bigness, does argue a good wit naturally. The head Pineaple sharp, to be
unshamefast, and a boaster. The head short, and very round, to be forgetful
and foolish. The head long in fashion to the Hammer, to be prudent and wary.
And in the forepart of the head, a hollownesse: to be wily, and yrefull.

Of the foreheade.
The foreheade small, to be unapt to learn, unconstant: and applied to the
Sow. The forehead very big, to be slow, and applied to the Ox. The
foreheade round, to be of a dull perseverance, yrefull: and applied to the
Ass. And being somewhat a plain foreheade, to be circumspect: and applied to
the Dog. A square formed foreheade, to be bold: applied to the Lion. The
foreheade smooth and even, to be a flatterer: applied to the fawning Dog. The
forehead big wrinckled, to be sturdie, and bold: applied to the Bull, and
Lion. A low forehead, to be sad: applied to the passion. A long foreheade, to
be a flatterer: applied to the Dog. A high foreheade, to be liberal, applied
to the Lion. An over wrinckled foreheade, to be vnihamefast. And puffed up in
the temples, to be high minded, yrefull, and of a rude wit.

Of the eyes.
The eyes small, to be faint hearted, applied to the Ape. The eyes big, to be
slow, and tractable: applied to the Ox. The eyes hollow standing, to be
envious, and wicked: applied to the Ape. The eyes standing out, to be foolish:
applied to the Ass. The eyes somewhat hollow, to be stowte of courage: applied
to the Lion. The eyes somewhat big, and a little eminent, to be gentle:
applied to the Ox. The eyes very wide open, to be impudent. The corner of the
eyes fleshie, unto the nose joining, to be malicious. The eyes of length, to be
crafty, and a deceyuer. The eyes big, and trembling, to be desirous of
women: applied to the passion. The eyes small and quiuering, to be shame fast,
and yet a lover. How much the bigger eyes, and so much the lesser malice, yet
the more foolishness. The eyes thwart wrything, to be deceytfull, a niggarde,
and yrefull. The eyes big out, to be foolish, fearful, faint hearted, and
unshamefast. The eyes disorderly moving, as one whiles running, and an other
whiles staying: to be rash, disquiet, and troubled in mind, wicked, and a
bryber. The eye liddes quiuering, to be fearful: applied to the passion. The
eyes swiftly moving, with a sharp look, to be fraudulent, unfaithful, and a
thief. The eyes steadfastly looking, to be troubled in mind, and a deceyuer.
The eyes situated as into a length, to be monstrous, a deceiuer, and envious.
Little bags or bladders, swelling out from the eyes, to be great wine
drinckers, applied to the passion. Little bladders swelling out before the
eyes, to be great sleepers: and applied to the passion.

Of the nose.
The end of the nose big, to be desirous of that he sees: applied to the
Ox. The end of the nose big, and turning up, to be without discretion, and
sluggish: applied to the Sow. The end of the nose sharp, to be of a fierce
ire: applied to the Dog. The nose round, being blunt at the end, to be
stowt: applied to the Lion. The nose round, with a sharpness at the end, to
be wavering of mind: applied to the bird. The nose wholly crooked, from the
foreheade downewarde: to be unshamefast, and unstable: applied to the Raven.
The nose crooked like the Eagles bill, to be bold: applied to the Eagle. The
nose flat, to be leacherous, and hasty in wrath. The nosethrils large, to be
yrefull: applied to the passion. The nose stretched long, to the mouth, to be
honest, and bold.

Of the ears.
The ears small, to be a scoffer: applied to the Ape. The ears big, to be a
dullarde: applied to the Ass. The ears hanging, to be a fool: applied to the
Ass. The ears of a mean bigness, to be faithful, and honest conditioned.
The ears over round, to be unapt to learn. The ears long and narrow, to be
envious. The ears standing, very nere to the head, to be a dullarde, and
sluggishe. The ears hearie, to be long lived, and quick of hearing.

Of the face.
The face fleshie, to be slow: applied to the Ox. The face lean to be
careful, and circumspect. The face very fleshie, to be fearful: applied to
the Ass, and Heart. The face big, to be slow: applied to the Ox, and Ass.
A narrow face, to be a niggard. The countenance looking downward, to be an
hypocrite, and wicked. The face hollows without any bearing out: to be
contentious. Like to a drunken countenance, to be lightly druncke: Like to an
yrefull countenance, to be yrefull: and applied to the apparancie. Like to a
shamefast countenance, to be shamefast. The face deformed, and a wrie, to be
evil conditioned. The face long, to be unshamefast. The face of a small cause
sweating, to be crafty, leacherous, and a great feeder. The face very little,
and round, to be foolish. The face long, and lean, to be bold: very
crooked, long, and lean, to be malicious: larger from the foreheade, unto the
jaws, to be a liar. Narrower from the jaws, unto the chinne: to be envious,
and contentious.

Of the lips.
The lips thin, hanging one over the other, to be bold, and hardy,
applied to the Lion. The lips thin, and hard, to be yrefull, and unapt to
learn: applied to the Sow. The lips thin and soft, to be stowte: applied
to the Lion. The lips big, that the upper hangs down over the nether,
to be foolish: applied to the Ass. The upper lip bearing out, that the gummes
be seen: to be a wrangler, and spiteful: applied to the Dog.

Of the chinne.
The chinne sharp, to be faithful: applied to the Dog. The chinne small,
and short, to be envious, and cruel: applied to the Serpent. The chinne in a
manner square, to be honest co^ditioned. The chinne long, and downewarde sharp,
to be a crafty fellow. The chinne round to be effeminate: applied to the
woman. The under chinne hanging low down, to be leacherous. The chinne having
a pit, or divided at the end, to be a wily person, and libidinous.

Of the bearde.
The woman bearded, to be leacherous. The woman having no bearde at all, to be
honest conditioned. The man's bearde over hearie, to be Melancholic, of a
natural cause. The beard seemly formed, to be of a good nature, of a natural
cause. The bearde unseemly fashioned, to be of an evil nature, of the
contrary cause.

The color of the eyes.
The color red above, to be yrefull: applied to the passion: very black to be
fearful: which the property of the color gives: black and yealowish of
color, to be honest conditioned: applied to the comeliness thereof. Gray or
white, to be fearful: which the property of the color gives. A dark
yealow, to be honest conditioned: applied to the Lion. And fiery to be
unshamefast, yet full of mirth. Uariable of color to be fearful: applied to
the passion. And shining bright, to be luxurious, applied to the Cock, and
Raven.

The color of the face.
The color read above, to be shamefast: applied to the passion. The cheeks
red above, to be lovers of wine: applied to the passion. The cheeks and nose
of the livers redness, to be most detested.

The color of the breast.
Of a fiery color, to be yrefull: applied to the passion.

The color of the whole body.
Uerye black of color, to be fearful of courage: applied to the black
Moore. Uerye white to be fearful: applied to the woman. Swartish of color,
to be meanly strong: yealow of color to be honest conditioned: applied to the
Lion: very red or ruddie, to be wily, and ingenious: applied to the Woolfe. A
very pale color (except it be of sickness) to be fearful: applied to the
passion. Of a hunnie color, to be sluggish: of a natural cause. Of a fiery
color, to be long angry, hard to be pleased, and very furious. And pale (not
proceeded of overmuch study) to be vicious, and wicked.

Of the teeth.
The sharp teeth, if they be long, fast, and bearing outward: to be a great
feeder, yrefull, and wicked, applied to the Dog, and Bore. The teeth big
and broad, to be simple witted, vain, of a dull capacity, and lascivious:
applied both to the Ox, and Ass.

Of the voice.
The voice loud and big, to be injurious: applied to the Ass. The beginning
big, and ending small, to be yrefull: applied to such which cry out, and to
the crying of the Ox. The voice small, soft, and broken, to be fearful:
applied to the woman. Big and high, to be very yrefull: applied to the
mastie Dog. A soft voice without reaching, to be gentle: applied to the
sheep. The voice small, and loud, to be yrefull: applied to the Goat.

Of the neck.
The neck big, to be strong: applied to the man. The neck slender, applied
to the woman: big and fleshie, to be yrefull: applied to the Bull. The neck
mean, to be stowte: applied to the Lion: long and small, to be fearful:
applied to the Heart. The neck very short, to be wyly: applied to the Woolfe,
and Catte. Such sufficient strong, about the knot or joint of the neck, are
witty, and of a good capacity. Such there weak, to be dullardes.

Of the breast.
The breast big, and well fashioned, to be strong: applied to the man. The
breast large, and well compact, to be strong: applied to the Lion. Hearie on
the breast, to be unconstant, and bold: applied to Birds. The breast without
hear, to be unshamefast or else fearful: applied to the woman: very fleshie
to be unapt to learn, and sluggishe. The space from the throat bole, unto the
bottom of the breast, larger than from the bottom of the breast unto the
nauill of the belly: to be witty, and of a good capacity. The pappes fat
and hanging down in men: to be weak and effeminate. A big piece of flesh
bearing out on the left side of the breast in the form of (a Leekes head, or
sinewe sprung up) and that there be one, or many hears growing on it: is then
an argument of honor, and riches as Ptholomie writes.

Of the shoulders.
The shoulders fashioned big, to be strong. The shoulders evil fashioned, to
be weak of strength: well compowned, to be liberal: but weak compowned, and
bearing up thin, to be a niggard. The shoulders bearing sharp up, to be
deceytfull. The shoulders broad, to be strong, and of a good capacity. And
narrow, to be a dullarde.

Of the stomach.
Such fat about the stomach, to be strong. Such not fat, to be weak. The
belly bearing out big, to be a great feeder. The belly small formed, to be
of a good capacity. And hearie from the nauill downewarde, to be full of
words: applied to Birds.

Of the back.
The back narrow, to be weak. The back big formed, to be strong. The
back large, to be strong, and high minded. The back crooked, to be a
niggarde, and ill condicioned. And equally formed, or in a mean, to be of a
good nature.

Of the arms.
The arms very long, to be strong, bold, honest, and gentle. The arms short,
to be a procurer of discord, and leacherous. The arms hearie, to be
unconstant, and leacherous: applied to birds.

Of the hands.
The hands short, and very big: to be rude, and a dullarde. The hands fat,
with the fingers like: to be a thief. The hands small, to be unconstant, and
wilye. The paulmes of the hands, unto the wrestes broad, and narrow upward,
to be a ryotter in his first age.

Of the nails of the fingers.
The nails large, smooth, thin, white, reddish^, and clear withal: to be
witty, and of a good capacity. The nails narrow and long, to be cruel, and
fierce. The nails rough, and round, to be prone unto the veneriall act:
applied to the property. The nails very short to be wicked: applied to ye
property. The nails small, and crooked, to be a greedy catcher: applied to the
hawke. The nails very little, to be a crafty beguiler. The white pricks of
the nails, to be wealthy, and to have many friends. The black pricks in
the nails, to be hated: applied to the natural cause.

Of the nails of the toes.
The toes and nails crooked, to be unshamefast: applied to the Birds. The
nails thin, and well colored, to be of a good wit, and honest
condicioned. The toes joining close together, to be fearful: applied to the
Quayle.

Of the nauill.
The space large, from the bottom of the breast, unto the nauill: to be dull of
capacity, and a great feeder: applied to the natural cause. The space equal,
to be witty, and honest conditioned: applied to the natural cause. The
stomach from the nauill unto the breast fleshie, to be wicked after Polemone.
The same space soft, and well compact: to be stowte, and high minded.

Of the ribs.
The person well ribbed, to be strong: applied to the male kind. The ribs
narrow, and weak compowned, to be weak: applied to the female kind. The
ribs filled about (as they were blown up) to be full of words, and
foolish: applied to the Ox, and Frogge.

Of the loins, and Hypocondria.
The person well loyned, to be a lover (of the hunting) of wild beasts:
applied to the Lion, and Dog. The Hypocondria thin and flat, to be
fearful: applied to the Frogge. The Hypocondria fleshie, unapt to be taught.

Of the haunches, and hippes.
The bones of the haunches bearing outward, to be strong: applied to the male
kind. The bones of the haunches slender, to be fearful, and weak, applied to
the woman. The hippes well sinewed, to be strong: applied to the male kind.
The hippes fleshie, to be weak: applied to the woman.

Of the Pecten.
The Pecten very hearie, to be libidinous, yet prosperous: applied to the
natural cause. The Pecten very thin of hear, to be chaste: applied to the
natural cause.

Of the buttockes.
The buttockes sharp, and bonie, to be strong* applied to the male kind. The
buttockes fleshie and fat, to be weak: applied to the woman. The buttockes
dried in flesh, to be evil conditioned: applied to the Ape.

Of the legs.
The legs big sinewed, and brawned, to be strong applied to the male kind.
Small sinewed, to be libidinous: applied to Birds. The legs big and evil
fashioned, to be unshamefast. The cawfes of the legs big, to be an evil
manered person. The cawfes of the legs soft, to be most effeminate. The
legs slender to be dull of capacity: yet this fails often in the learned
students. The cawfes very big bearing out, to be sluggishe, and rude
manered. The cawfes meanly big formed, to be witty, and honest conditioned.

Of the knees.
The knees big, to be an effeminate person: applied unto the excessive
appearaunce of them. The knees very slender, to be fearful: applied unto the
excessive appearance of them. The knees bending forward, to be effeminate:
applied to the woman. The knees fat to be fearful: yet liberal. The knees
lean to be strong, and hardy.

Of the ancles.
The ancles strong sinewed, and brawned, to be strong: applied to the male
kind. The ancles much fleshie, to be weak: applied to the woman. The ancles
broad, to be strong: applied to the natural cause. The parts about the
ancles, over fleshie, to be foolish: applied to the property. The heels very
slender, or thin, to be fearful: applied to the property, and condition of
them.

Of the feet.
The feet strong sinewed, and brawned, to be strong: applied to the male
kind. The feet weak sinewed, and small, to be effeminate: applied to the
woman. The inner parts (of the soles of the feet) not hollow, but so filled
with flesh, that they make no hollownesse at all in the step on the ground,
is noted to be crafty: applied to the natural cause. The feet big and
fleshie, to be foolish: of the natural cause. The feet thick and short, to
be weak, of the natural cause. The feet slender, and short, to be wicked, of
the natuall cause. The feet over long, to be wily, of the natural cause. The
feet fleshie, and hard, to be a dullarde: of the natural cause. The feet
small, and fair formed, to be a fornicator: applied to the* property of the
note. The feet much hearie, to be leacherous, and bold: applied to the
natural cause. The feet naked of hear, to be weak of strength, and
courage: of the natural cause.

Of the hearinesse of the parts.
The legs hearie, to be venerious: applied to the Goat. The breast and belly
very hearie, to be unconstant: applied to the Birds. The shoulders hearie to
be the like unconstant, and applied to the Birds. The back very hearie, to be
cruel: applied to the beasts. The neck behind hearie, to be liberal, and
stowte: applied to the Lion. The hear of the eye brows joined together, to be
a sad person: applied to the passion. The hears of the eye brows growing
down ward toward the nose, and spreading upward unto the temples, to be
foolish: applied to the Sow.

The hear of the head standing straight up, to be fearful: applied to the
passion. The hear of the head very crisped to be fearful: applied to the
Moors. The hears crisped at the ends, to be strong, and bold: applied to
the Lion. The hears turning up, in the upper part of the foreheade: to be
liberal, and stowte: applied to the Lion. The hears of the head plain, to be
simple. Much hear of the head, and thick: to be an evil conditioned person.

Of the going, and moving.
The pace slow and long, to be witty, and strong. The pace slow and short, to
be witty, yet weak. The pace long and quick, to be strong, yet foolish. The
pace short and quick, to be both foolish, and weak of strength. The
shoulders bending forward in going, to be high minded: applied to the Lion.
The person going with the knees and feet turning in, to be weak of strength:
applied to the woman. In the talking, wrything, or shrugging the body, hither
and thither, to be a flatterer: applied to the fawning Dog. Leaning unto the
right side in the going, to be a Cynede: applied to the excessive appearance.
The eyes quick moving, to be greedy and quick catchers: applied to the
Hawke. The eyes quick and often moving, with a ^^eddinesse of the body: to be
witty and of a ready understanding: applied to the condition of the passion.

Of the personage, and stature.
The person very small of personage, to be quick witted, and prompt in
attayning any matter: of the natural cause. Such very big of personage, to
be of a dull capacity, and thereof hardly conceyuing: of the contrary cause:
after Aristotle. Small of personage, and of a hot, and dry quality
chollericke, to be unapt (readilye to conceive) and to judge, or decerne any
matter rightly. Small of personage, and of a cold and moist qualitye: to be
apt to conceive, and readily to decerne, of the contrary cause. Big of
personage, and of a hot, and dry quality, to be witty, and readily to
conceive. Big of personage, and of a cold and moist quality, to be dull of
capacity: of the contrary cause. The personage evil fashioned, and very tall
of stature, to be dull of capacity, and evil conditioned: applied to the
form. The person of a comely personage, and mean of stature, to be witty,
and honest conditioned: applied to the natural cause.

An admonition unto the gentle Reader.
THe same consider and note for a general rule, that the significations and
judgments before uttered in many places of this Book, do chiefly extend,
and are meant rather to happen and come to pass on the brutishe sort: which for
the lack of grace, and being not regenerated by Gods holy spirit, these in
such manner, are moved to follow their sensual will and appetites. For by a
natural frailty, proceeded from our forefather Adam, every creature (after
nature) is drawn, and allured unto the like dispositions, and passions of the
mind. But to be brief, the creatures which are regenerated through the holy
Ghost, do not only endeavor to mortify their fleshlye appetites, but seek
to put away and correct all other inormities, and vices resting in them:
although there still continues a frailty to sin, and offenses daily
committed, even of the wise: which for that we be so intised of the flesh, no
marueyle is it (says the Phisiognomer) that so many ensue, and follow the
like steps of sundry sentences pronounced in this Art, the more is to be
lamented: that these so bestiall, should be thus common amongst us, as we
daily see and know.

Finis.


A brief treatise of the signification of Moles, seen in any part of the
body: written by the Greek Author Melampus.
FIrst, if the man shall have a Mole on the foreheade, does indicate that he
shall possess much wealth, and riches.

The woman having a Mole on the foreheade, does demonstrate that she shall
either govern, or else come unto a high dignity.

If the man shall have a Mole above the ouerbrowe, does argue that he shall
couple and join in marriage, both with an honest, wealthy, and virtuous woman.

The woman having a Mole in the same place, does denote that she shall join in
marriage, both with a rich, fair, and comely person.

If the man shall have a Mole on the over browe, then let such a person
refrain from marriage altogether, or all his life time: for that such a person
(if he marry) shall have five wives, in his life time.

The woman having a Mole, in the like place: to have likewise so many hus^and^s
(as the man wives) in her life time: as Melampus writes.

If the man have a Mole, on the nose somewhat ruddie, and another the like in
the privy place: does indicate, that such a person to be over much given, to
the veneriall act.

The like Mole seen, either on the nose, or eye of the woman, and that she
has the like on her privy place: does signify the same, that is before spoken
of the man.

If the man shall have a Mole, overthwart the nose: does denote that he shall
wander, hither and thither, through Countries and Cities.

A Mole the like standing on the woman's nose, does portende that she shall
traueyle on foot, through sundry Countries, and that she has the like Mole
besides on the privy place.

If a man have a Mole, on the gullet or throat, does demonstrate, that he shall
become very rich.

If the woman have a Mole, on the nether iawe, does indicate that she shall
lead her life, in much sorrow, and pain of the body: because she has that
within the body, which shall hinder her from the teaming, or bearing of
children.

If the man shall have the form of a Mole, on the tongue: does demonstrate
that he shall marry with a rich, and beautiful woman.

If either the man, or woman, shall have a Mole on any of the lips: does
portend, that he, or she, to be a great feeder, and a glutton.

If the man shall have a Mole on the chinne, does argue that he shall be rich,
both in the substance of money, and in possessions.

The woman having a Mole in the same place, does indicate that she shall come
to the like wealth, as the man: and that she has besides, the same like Mole,
right aloft, or against, the mylt.

If a man shall have a Mole in any of the ears, does argue that he shall be
rich, and much reverenced, and spoken of.

If the woman shall have the same, and that in the like place: does denote the
like good hap, and fortune to her: and that besides she has, the like Mole
placed, on the thigh or hammes.

If the man shall have a Mole on the neck, does promise that he shall become
very rich.

If the woman shall have a Mole so placed: does indicate, that the like good
fortune, and wealth, shall ensue unto her.

If the man shall have a Mole, in a manner behind the neck: does demonstrate
that he shall be beheaded, except God (through earnest prayer) prevent the same.

If as well the man, as the woman, shall have a Mole on the loins: does
demonstrate a weak and poor kindred, and to be always needy.

If on the shoulders of the man, shall be seen a Mole: does signify
imprisonment, and sorrows of the mind.

If the man shall have (as is above said) a Mole on the throat, does promise
that he shall marry, both with a rich, and beautiful woman.

If the woman shall have a Mole on the same place, does signify that she shall
also marry, both with a wealthy, and a very fair, or comelye man.

If either in the man's, or woman's hands, shall a Mole appear, does denote
the prosperous good luck, and enjoy of children.

If either the man, or woman, shall have a Mole on the breast, does threaten
that he, or she, shall be much harmed by poverty.

If the man shall have a Mole on the place, right against the heart: does
denote him undoubtedly to be wicked.

If the woman shall have a Mole, on the left breast, then pronounce the like
judgment, as of the man.

If a Mole shall be seen, either on the man's, or woman's belly: does
demonstrate that he, or she, to be a great feeder and glutton.

If a Mole in either the man, or woman shall appear on the place right against
the Spleen: does signify that he, or she, shall be much passionated, and
oftentimes sick.

If either the man, or woman, shall have a Mole on the bottom of the belly,
does argue much debilitie, and to be often sick.

If a Mole in either the man, or woman, shall be seen near to the privy
place, does denote that he, or she, shall be unspeakable desirous, and
vnsaciate in coeating.

If either the man or woman shall have a Mole on the 23u3rp r2bm2m it self,
does portend, that he shall beget men children: and she contrariewise, bear
women children.

If a Mole shall appear on that part (about the 23u3rp r2bm2m) in either the
man, or woman: does denote the great increase of riches, and much wealth.

If the man shall possess a Mole, on the knee, then he shall obtain a comely,
and wealthy wife.

If the woman shall have a Mole, on the right knee: does signify her to be
both honest, and virtuous. But if a Mole appears on the left knee, then such
a woman shall enjoy many children.

If the Man shall have a Mole, on the ancle of the foot: does denote that he
shall take upon him, the woman's part. And the woman having a Mole the like
placed* shall take upon her, the man's part.

If either the man, or woman, shall have a Mole on the foot: does promise the
great good luck, and enjoy, of many children.

To conclude (this is to be learned) that the notes or Moles, seen on ye right
side, either of the man or woman: do evermore denote honesty, and riches: but
on the left side, to be harmed with calamities, and continually poor.

FINIS.
The conclusion to the gentle Reader.
THus after the possibility of my skill, have I performed my book, though
not altogether in so learned an order as I would, to please my Countrymen
withal: for well I know that nothing does more content, and satisfy the
ears of men, than to understand and know strange matters, and the hid
properties and natures consisting in us, which this worthy Art of Phisiognomie
lively sets forth. In the same I have uttered such pleasant matter, as I
think both delectable to read, and necessary to the furtherance of the
singular Art. If to some men I shall seem not fully to have satisfied their
desires herein, according to their expectation, or not have so cunningly
handled the same, as the lively matter it self offers, and is worthy of: in
respect of the great commodity that this laudable Art brings, and causes
in a common weal, being thoroughly known to men. I refer me then wholly to
the learned correction of the wise, beseeching them friendly to give knowledge
unto the Printer, or to me, and being detected of my fault, will willingly
correct and amend the same: for well I wot, that no treatise can always be so
workemanly handled, but that somewhat sometimes may fall out amiss, contrary
to the mind of the writer, and contrary to the expectation of the reader.
Wherefore my petition to thee gentle Reader is, to accept these my traueyles,
with that mind I do offer them to thee, and to take gently, that I give
gladly, in so doing I shall think my pains well bestowed, and shall be
encouraged hereafter to trust more unto thy courtesy.

I may here compare my self with two or three examples, not altogether
impartinent to my purpose. It is written of one Falarus Thebanus, a Captain,
who being in the field with his Army, ready to give battle,
notwithstanding, he was marvelously (at that instaunt) vexed with a sore
disease of the Lunges, yet courageously he set upon his enemies, in the
joining of which battle, he fought himself, and being then stricken on the
breast with a spear, his grief ceased, and was for ever after healed of the
same.

A like example to this, we have of Mamillus Bubulus, King of the Tuskanes, who
having a stripe in the neck, there remained behind a piece of iron, which
through the smalnesse of it, could be by no means got out. He on a time,
ryding on hunting, his horse happened to overthrow him, the fall was so
boystrous, that the little piece of iron flewe out of his mouth, and so was
healed.

As those two, Falarus, and Mamillus, being both diseased men, were contrary
to their expectation healed of their griefs: even so I being weak in skill,
and in knowledge, and therefore doubting my success, yet boldly aduenturing
this my book into print, shall by your gentle accepting of it, contrary to my
desert, be released of my fear. But I fear me, I shall not be so happy, as
either of these were, but rather change that fortune with Cornelius Rufus, who
dreaming he had lost his eye sight, and that one did lead him, in the morning
when he awaked, found himself blind in deed: even so I in doubtful manner
dreaming of Momus, when I least think of him, shall find me encountered of
him: for what fault is there so small, which Momus will not find. If the
learneder sort brought up always, under Minerua, are sometimes touched of him:
much more I who never tasted of the learned Lake, but rather always rudely
taught, among the Smithes of Vulcanus forge, must needs be stung of him.
Seeing therefore I do half persuade my self, that I shall not obtain the
friendly countenance of all men: yet I do not doubt, but the wise, will give
me their good word, and will consider mine intent, as it is in deed, that is,
to please the common sort, for whose only sake, I have taken these pains, and
have published this book: and will not so much regard the ill, or well
handling of the matter, as my good intent. And therefore (gentle reader) once
again I crave at thy hands, the thankful accepting of these rude labors of
mine: and thus the favor of God, be with thee always.

FINIS.
The Books and Treatises of mine sundry times printed.
1 An Epitomie of the whole Art of Phisiognomie, gathered: and imprinted by
John Wayland for me, in the year of man's redemption. 1556.

2 A pleasant Almanacke invented for these three years, as 1560. 1561. and
1562. uttering such necessary matters, as yearly are published, and these in
a most ample manner, with a Table for the rising and setting of the Sun every
day in the year, serving especially for London: and worthy rules (named
extraordinary) for the weather, and other husbandly rules for the common sort,
right profitable. This imprinted twice by Thomas March, dwelling near to Saint
Dunstons Church. Anno. 1560.

3 A pleasant Treatise of the interpretation of dreams, gathered part out of
the learned work of Ponzettus, and part out of the Greek Author Artemidorus,
with many new additions, helping the book: and this imprinted a third time by
Thomas March. Anno. 1567.

4 A brief treatise of Gardening, instructing the apt ordering, preparing, and
sowing of the Garden, with sundry profitable helps and remedies against the
noyous worms, beasts, flies, etc. that commonly annoy Gardens: increased by
me, and imprinted a second time by Thomas March. Anno. 1563.

5 A pleasant Treatise, entitled, natural and artificial conclusions:
imprinted twice by William Copland, in the years. 1567. and 1568.

6 A little Treatise of the interpretation of dreams, fathered on Joseph that
godly person. etc. with a few Probleames added in the beginning of it,
aunswering to the matter: and imprinted by the said Copland, in the year of
our Lord. 1567.

7 A large discourse and History of Gardening, by me a third time increased,
in which is not only uttered a number of pleasant secrets, needefully to be
known in a Garden, but the Physic helps that the herbs serve unto, and
that easy to be prepared, annexed orderly: to which in the end added, a
profitable Treatise of the hunnie Bees, and of the commodity of their hunnie
and wax purchased, with other secrets opened in the same, serving to Physic
and Chirurgerie right profitable to be known: and at the end of this, an
other fruitful treatise added, entitled, certain husbandly conjectures of
the state of every year, in the form of an everlasting Prognostication, with
rules as profitable for Cattaile, as lessions for the benefit of health. etc.
and this imprinted by Thomas March. An. 1568.

8 A fruitful Treatise, entitled the Contemplation of mysteryes, containing
much laudable matter, needful to be known, in this our time unto all ages:
and imprinted by Henry Denham dwelling in Pater noster row. Anno. 1571.

9 A Contemplation of Mankind, containing a large discourse of all the members
and parts after Phisiognomie, from the head to the foot: and a Treatise in
the proper place added, of the judgment of certain lines seen in the
forehead, purchased by earnest traueyle of a skillful Jew: and in sundry
places of this book, has the Phisiognomer learnedly added, many notable and
strange examples, that give a great light, help, and furtherance, unto the
professors, and young students of this Art: with a Treatise of the signification
of Moles, seen in any part of man or woman, written by a Greek Author, named
Melampus: and imprinted by William Seres, Anno. 1571.

The books of mine in a readiness to be imprinted, and resting with the
Printers.
1 A delectable Treatise, entitled the Ieweller of inventions, containing
certain marvelous, and of these profitable, and pleasant practices, gathered
out of certain worthy writers: and this in a readiness with the Printer
Henrye Denham.

2 The second Tome of the worthy Treasures of Euonimus, containing the perfect
ways in drawing many excellent waters for the preservation of health, and the
distilling of Oils out of most Spices, with the attayning of many royal
baulmes, and Oils out of the Brimstone, Uitrioll, and Ambre, very comfortable
to man, the purchasing also of Potable Gold, with the sundry new inventions
of Aqua composita, and other laudable matters to long here to write. For the
better help and furthering of these, the Printer of his part has endeavored
to beautify the book to his great charge, with sundry excellent Furnaces,
and rare forms of bodies, the rather that many Oils and waters, may the
cunninglyer be drawn: and this look for at the hands of Henry Denham,
dwelling in Pater noster row.

3 A profitable book, containing large principles, and fruitful ^^structions,
for the ignorant in the Latin tongue, that be desirous ^o attain the
delectable commodities of Astrology, in deuining universally of most matters:
with many laudable rules of Astronomy, serving for sailors, and to other
worthy purposes. This worthily named, a Methodicall document, into the
singular skilles of the celestial motions: which remains in a readiness,
with the late wife of Edward Sutton.

4 A proper Treatise, entitled the Myrrour of Time, in which many singular
predictions of dearth and plenty for ever, are uttered in a diverse manner, and
a large discourse of the Comets, with their significations at the appearaunce,
and the threatenings general of the Eclipses, both of the Sun and Moon,
happening in any of the twelve signs, with extraordinarye rules for the
weather, not the like hitherto published of none: besides profitable
instructions, for the preservation and health of body. etc. This also
remaining in the hands, of the said wife of the late Sutton.

5 A delectable Treatise, containing many fruitful Probleames or demaundes,
and their Apt aunsweares, as touching sundry physic points about the state
of body: and rules after the manner of Probleames, that utter the cause of the
more death of persons happening in the Equinoctials, and Solsticis, with other
Probleames that utter the causes of strange appearaunces in the air: gathered
by a singular man named Ponzettus, out of the Arabians, Greeks, and ancient
Physicians in Latin. This in a readiness, with the Printer Thomas Marsh.

The Books which remain with me fully ended, and near brought to an end.
1 A paradoxall Compass, containing a large description of all the celestial
Cyrcles of the Sphere: a marvelous order taught in the motions of them, with
the infinite uses that these serve unto, for the knowledge of the true
distaunce of places: besides a larger description of the places situated and
lying near to the North pole, and how temperate and habitable the places are
their found to be: a further description also of places toward the South pole,
how habitable they are: and a large description of the Celestial images,
lying as well on the North, and South side of the Equatour, as of the
Ecclipticke: with the rising and setting, of the fixed Stars. etc. gathered
out of the best and latest writers in our time, and in a manner ready to the
printing.

2 A proper Treatise for the judging of vrynes, containing a playner and easier
Method for young practitioners in Physic, than hitherto has been published
of any: to which for clenly helps, sundry pleasant cautelles added, and
these profitable in judging: which is in a readiness, to the printing.

3 The guide of the Matrone, containing many singular practices for the
skillful midwife, in the bringing a bed of dangerous birthes, and of these
desperate, both with the instrument, and learned medicines: to these the
occasion why so many marvelous forms of monsters, are conceived and borne:
and the remedies for the most diseases happening to women, learnedly taught, and
of singular practice known: besides a lively garnishing of all the parts of
women, from the head to the foot added, in a more skillful manner, than
hitherto has been uttered of any: and these practices purchased of many
jolly Dames, and Countesses of Italy. Such minded to have a private Copy
written out of this worthy work, let them resort unto Master Barkers shop,
or Master Walleyes in Paul's Church yard, and there they shall understand of
the Author, with whom they may common, when the work is fully brought to an
end.

4 Two pleasant Books of Paulmestrie, I have traueyled to set forth into
English: in the first, does the Phisiognomer and Paulmester Cocles, go about
to convince the false principles, and vain reasons of one Anthiocus Cesenatis,
in placing of the Planets in the hand: with other vain arguments very
frivolous, that this skilful Cocles seems to confute, both by his Authorities
alleged, and experiences known: and this handled in Dialogue manner, as
between the master, and the scholar. In the other, has Cocles bestowed
great diligence, in gathering together the opinions of many writers, and
placed many hands lively figured, with his experiences annexed, for a play^er
conceyuing and understanding of the Art: which book, he here seems to name
his great work of Paulmestrie. That if any be minded to have a private Copy
of these two books, let them resort unto master Barkers shop, and there
they shall common with the Author.

5 A pleasant Treatise of Metoposcopie, or a divining and judging on all the
lines seen in the foreheade, written into sundry Aphorisms, for a readier
instruction unto such as be desirous of the skill of this Art, unknown to
many: to which is adjoined. lx. examples lively counterfeyted, according to the
diligent observation of the Author: who appears to be a learned Doctor of
Physic, and singular Mathematicane (as Myzaldus, and others witness of him)
named Thaddaeus Nemicus Hagecius, of Hagek. This in a readiness to the
printing, yet if any be desirous to enjoy a private Copy of this, let them
resort unto master Barkers shop, and there they shall common with the
Translatour, and know his mind for the writing of the Pamphlet.

6 A proper Treatise, entitled the Phisiognomie of the Planets, gathered out
of the best writers, by a singular Chirurgian, destiller, Phisiognomer,
Chiromanticer, and Geomanticer, named Bartholomew Cocles of Bononie: for the
use and commodity of his dear, and especial friend M. Alexander Bentiuolus.
etc. This in a readiness, to the Printing.

The two several Treatises which I promised to set forth, as the one of
Physic, containing special secrets, in the drawing forth of Oils out of the
seven Mettalles, and other simples, for the use of Physic: and the other a
last part of Alexis Piemont, to which I promised besides the skillful
practices, to annexe sundry new inventions, in the drawing of many costly
Oils, and waters: to be applied as well inward for the preservation of
health, as outward for the lively garnishing of parts, with the coloring of
the hears of the head yealow, or flaxen of color. This tranaile, have I
fully accomplished, in the second Tome of the Treasure of Euonimus: and added
many other new inventions, and secrets, that are not to be found in the
Latin Copy: this (as before uttered) in a readiness with the Printer.

6 A proper Treatise, instructing the dangerous times of the ficke, according
to the Moons course throughout the twelve signs: written by the ancient
Physician Hypocrates. To this annexed a pleasant Treatise, intytuled the
agreement of Physic, with Astrology: and this in a readiness, to the
printing.

7 Certain learned secrets of Physic, helping the most diseases that happen
from infancy, unto old age: with many new, and care inventions added, as the
like not exstant. At the end a singular Treatise annexed, for the letting of
blood out of any vein of the body, after the instructions both of Physic
and Astronomy, with the skillful judgment of the blood let out, in the
knowledge of sundry diseases: and other secrets profitable to be known: this
in a readiness to the printing.

8 The manifold and rare practices of the Astrolobie, invented by the learned
Stoflerus, and others, is in a manner ready to the printing: to which in the
end shall be adjoined, the ysagogicall introductions, and rules of the
Ephemerides, gathered out of the best writers: and fields Tables of Domifying,
for the latitude of London, shall be annexed in the proper place of this
Treatise.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by William Seres, dwelling at the West end of Paul's
Church, at the sign of the Hedgehogge.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Anno. 1571.


