THE PREFACE, SHOWING. THE OCCASION OF This following Answer, with somewhat of
the Story of H. B. the principal Argument thereof.
AMONGST the several commendations given unto Charity by Saint Paul, we find
these particulars. Charity vaunteth not it self; is not puffed up; does not
behave it self unseemely; seeks not her own; is not easily provoked:
thinks no evil: Which if they be the certain marks of Charity, as no doubt
they are; we may affirm it of too many in these later days, that whatsoever
Faith they pretend unto, they have little Charity. Such boasters are they of
themselves, so arrogant, so unadvised in all their doings, so greedy either
after lucre or vain applause, so peevish and intemperate in their speech and
writings, and finally so jealous and distrustful of all those who concur not
with them in opinion: That though they had all Faith, so that they could remove
mountains, 1 Cor. 13.23.
which I think they have not; or should they give their bodies to be burned,
as I think they will not; it would profit nothing. Of such, as these it was
that S. Peter tell's us, that they are Presumptuous, selfe-willed, 2. Pet. 2.10.
and are not afraid to speak evil of dignities: of whom S. Jude relates, Jude
16.
that they were murmurers, complainers, walkers after their own lusts, and
that their mouth speaks great swelling words. Would you a further censure of
them? As natural bruit beasts (says the Apostle) made to be taken and
destroyed, 2. Pet. 2.12.
they speak evil of the things they understand not, and shall utterly perish
in their own corruption. These are the mockers of whom the Apostles have
foretold us, Jude 17.18.
that they should come in the last times, and being come; we must accordingly
expect they should play their parts, and do the will of him that sent them:
And so they do. The Church continually traducea, as if she were unsound in her
intentions toward Christ; as if there were a day at hand, in which the Saints
i. e. themselves, must be tried and sifted. The Prelates generally condemned,
their cause un-heard, as factors for the Mystical strumpet in S. John's
Apocalypse, to make men drunken with the Cup of her abominations. And as for
the inferior Clergy, which know no better sacrifice then obedience, and
willingly submit themselves unto the just commands of their Superiors, what
are they but the common marks whereat each furious Malecontent does shoot out
his Arrows, even bitter words. Nor has the supreme Majesty, the Lords
anointed escaped so clear, Jude 15.
but that they also have had part of those hard speeches, which these ungodly
sinners have spoken against them, in Saint Judes language. Antonij epistolae,
Brutique conciones, falsa quidem in Augustum probra, sed multa, cum acerbitate
habent, as he in Tacitus. No times more full of odious Pamphlets, no Pamphlets
more applauded, nor more dearly bought; then such as do most deeply wound
those powers, and dignities, to which the Lord has made us subject. Egregiam
vero laudem, et spolia ampla.

Not to go higher then the Reign of our now dread Sovereign, how have both
Church and State been exercised by those factious Spirits, Layton, and Prynne,
and Bastwick, the Triumviri* with H. Burton the Dictator, what noise and
clamours have they raised; what odious scandalls have they fastened on their
Reverend Mother? what jealousies and fears (that I say no worse) have they
seditiously infused into peoples minds? And thereby turned those weapons on
their Mothers Children, which might have been employed more fitly on the
common Enemy.

But when those of the Triumvirate had received their judgment, Layton and
Prynne in the Star Chamber, and Bastwick in the high Commission, the greatest
comfort of the cause, did seem to be entrusted to Dictator Burton: (...), a
man in whom the Element of fire had the most predominancie, which made that
which is zeal in others, to be in him a zealous fury. The rather since he had
deceived himself in his expectations, and swallowed down those hopes, he could
not digest. That which has heretofore made so many Heretics, occasioned his
first dislike of the holy Hierarchy. When once Aerius lost his hopes of being
made a Bishop, as Saint Austin tells us; De haeres. c. 23.
he set on foot this peevish doctrine, Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla ratione
debere discerni, that by no means there was a difference to be made, between
Priests and Bishops. And that once broached, there followed next, non
celebranda esse jejunia statuta, sed cum quisque voluerit jejunandum? that no
set fasts were to be kept, but every man might fast when he would himself.
This was the very Case of our Grand Dictator. He had been a servant in the
Closet to His Sacred Majesty, then Prince of Wales: and questionless being in
the Ascendent, he thought to Culminate. But when he saw those hopes had failed
him, and that by reason of his violent and factious carriage, he was commanded
to depart the Court, he thought it then high time to Court the people; that he
might get in the hundreds, what he lost in the County. This pincheth him it
seems, to this very day; and he is so ingenious, (which I wonder at) as to let
us know it. For in the Epistle to His Majesty before his Sermon (if at the
least a railing and seditious declamation may be called a Sermon) he styles
himself His Majesty's old and faithful servant: and in the other to His
Majesty before the Apology he bemoanes himself, as an old outcast Courtier,
worn out of all favor and friends there. Hinc illae lachrymae; Hence the
opinion of these quarrels. Here he declares most plainly where his grief does
lie; what made him first fly out, and bend his thoughts, to foster and foment
a faction: Such is the humor of most men, whom the Court casts out; that they
do labor what they can, to outcast the Court.

Being thus entered and engaged, he found it necessary to acquaint himself
with such as were affected like himself, and in their several professions
might best aid and help him: this made him pick out Master Prynne, an utter
Barrister of Lincolns Inn, for his learned Counsel: Layton and Bastwicke,
two that had the name of Doctors, to be Physicians to his person: His Doctors
finding by some Symptoms, which they had observed, that he was very fretfull,
and full of Choler, persuaded with him, either by preaching, or by writing to
vent that humor: which otherwise for want of vent, would soon burn him up:
his learned Counsel standing by, and promising that whatsoever he should
write or say, he would find Law for it. On this encouragement he began to
cast abroad his wilde-fire, endeavoring nothing more than (...) to raise
combustions in the state: and like Erostratus of old, seeing he could grow
famous by no other means, to burn down the Temple. The Pulpit, first erected
only for preaching of the word of God, Cann. 83.
was by him made a Sanctuary, or privileged place, from whence to rail against
the times, to cry down all the orders of holy Church, and to distract the
people with needless controversies, in despite of his Majesty's Declaration,
which he cared not for, or would interpret for his purpose: And had this
happiness withal, that whatsoever he said there, did instantly become Gods
truth; and therefore not to be suppressed by Prince, or Prelate. The Press,
which was devised at first for the advancement and increase of learning; was by
him made a means to disperse his pasquills, that they might fly abroad with
the swifter wing, and poison men's affections, whom he never saw. And howsoever
some of his unlicenced Babels, were guilty of sedition, and tended to incense
the Commons against the King; yet, being dedicated to the Parliament, As
himself relates it, P. 45. he came off bravely, and brought his adversaries to
a nonplus. Fortunate man, one of the sons, no question, of the young white
hen; to whom, both Press and Pulpit prostitute themselves, and yet account
it as an honor that he has abused them. Too fortunate indeed, had it so
been carried. But not long after, this brave man of Arms, that dares
encounter with Goliath, as he boasts himself, received the foil, being first
suspended for his preaching, and afterward imprisoned, and brought into the
High Commission for his printing, as he relates the story. p. 52.

Oh, but by Gods great blessing, and the Kings good Laws he was fetched off
those shelves (where else as he complains, he had suffered shipwreck) by a
Prohibition. P. 53. for that he was beholding to his friend Mast. Prynne who
both advised him to it, and had led the way; and having Layton's valor in
admiration, thought it a far more Noble suffering, to lose one ear or two by
sentence in the Star Chamber, then lend an ear to the censure of the High
Commission, so fared it with his learned Counsel, whose punishment might have
persuaded him to more moderate courses, but that he had a strong desire to fill
up the measure of his iniquities: and having been a stickler in the same cause
with him, conceived it most agreeable to the rule of fellowship, that he must
suffer with him also. Orat. pro M. Marcell.
Tully indeed did so resolve it. Ut qui in eadem causa fuerunt, in eadem item
essent fortuna: and certainly it was very fit that it should be so: nor was it
possible to stay him being once resolved: only he wanted opportunity for the
accomplishment of his designs, which the last Gunpowder day did present unto
him; that day being by him thought most proper for their execution, whom he had
long before condemned, and meant to blow up now without help of Powder. In
that more merciful indeed, than Faux or Catisby; they purposing to blow up the
three estates together; he but at once. The place designed for this dispatch,
that which he had so long abused, the Pulpit; the way of bringing it about,
that which has always served his turn on the like occasions, a seditious
Sermon: wherein he had drawn up together, what ever spirit of malice he had
found dis^^rsed in all or any of those scurrilous and pestilent Pamphlets, which
had bin published to the world since Martins time, of purpose to defame the
Clergy, and inflame the people; his own store being added to it: Nor did he
think it was enough thus to disgorge his stomach, of purpose to excite his
audience against their superiors, and startle them with dreadful fears, as if
hoth tyranny and Popery, were likely in short time to be thrust upon them: that
was an undertaking fit for private persons, whose gifts might be confined to
one place or Parish: For his part, he was now the general Superintendent of
all the Churches, the forlorn hope, the Centinell perdue of the whole
brotherhood: and therefore the most choice and material points of the
Declamation, (like the Enclyclicall Epistles of the elder times) must briefly
be summed up, and scattered all abroad the Kingdom, as News from Ipswich:
Nay, lest one title of his word should fall to ground, the Declamation
presently must become a Libell, Ep. to the King.
and was by him thought fit to have been printed (as soon as spoken) for the
general god (as he assures us) of all his Majesty's loving Subjects throughout
the Kingdom: and printed at the last it was, and with a monstrous impudence
dedicated to his Majesty, and Copies of the same given forth, (as he says
himself) in hope that it might come at last to his Majesty's hands.

Two things there were especially which did embolden him thus to preach and
publish his own personal quarrels, as the truth of God: First an opinion of
some extraordinary calling from above, the same perhaps that Hacket was
possessed with in Queen Elizabeth's reign: This he avoweth in his Epistle to
the King. I heartily thank my Lord Jesus Christ, who has accounted me
faithful, and called me forth to stand in his case, and to witness it before
the World, by publishing my said Sermons in Print, etc. And in that directed to
the true-hearted Nobility, where he speaks more plainly Certainly I am one of
the watchmen of Israel (though the meanest) yet one that has obtained mercy
to be faithful. Nor have I inconsiderately or rashly rushed upon this
business, but have been by a strong hand drawn into it. Yea my Lords, know
assuredly that Christ himself my great Lord and Master, has called me forth,
to be a public witness of this great cause, who will certainly maintain both
it and me, against all the Adversaries of God and the King. The second was a
confidence, that no man durst to question so great a prophet, greater then
which, was never raised up from the dead, to preach to Dives and his brethren.
And this he lets us know in his Apology, p. 7. I never so much as once dreamed
( says he) that impiety and impudency it self, in such a Christian state as
this is, and under such a gracious Prince, durst ever thus publicly have
called me in question, and that upon the open stage, etc. No marvel if so
strange a calling, seconded by so strong a confidence, spurred him bravely on;
and made him lift up both his voice and hand against what ever is called God:
and how know we, but that in some of his spiritual raptures, he might feign
an hope, that his dread name should be as famous in the stories of succeeding
times, as Muntzers, or King John of Leidens. But these imaginations failed him
too, as his Court-hopes did. For contrary to what he dreamt (such filthy
dreamers, S. Jude speaks of) Upon the Third of December next ensuing, a
Pursuivant (as he tells the story) served him with letters missive from the
high Commission, to appear before Doctor Duck at Cheswick, then and there to
take his oath to answer to such Articles as were laid against him. Bold men,
that durst lay hands upon a Prophet of such an extraordinary calling, who if
his power had been according to his spirit, would have commanded fire from
heaven, to have burnt them all, or sent them further off with a noli me
tangere. But caught or not caught, all was one. For though it was no time to
move the Court for a Prohibition, being out of Term, yet he bethought himself
of another way to elude his Judges: and that was by a strange Appeal, being
neither a gravamine, nor a sententia, to decline that Court; and put the cause
immediately into his Majesty's hands, where he might be, he thought, both a
defendant and complainant, as he says himself. p. 1. of the Apology. A fine
invention doubtless, but more sine then fortunate. For on a new Contempt, as
himself informs us, he was suspended by the high-Commissioners, both from his
Benefice and Office, and the suspension published (as he now complains) in his
own Parish Church, to his intolerable disgrace and scandal. Indignum facinus.
Therefore that all the World might knowted and on what suspended, Lo a
necessity (so he says) is laid upon him, as formerly to Preach, now to Print
his Sermon (for Sermon he will have it called, whosoever says nay.) And
printed at the last it was, as before was said, and therewithal was printed
also an Apology for the said Appeal, with several addresses to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, to all the true-hearted Nobility of His Majesty's
most honorable Privy Counsel; and to the Reverend and Learned Judges: the
Copies of them both being spread abroad, for the greater consolation of the
Brethren, (...), here and there dispersed, like Simeon and Levi, brethren in
evil, in the tribes of Israel.

This is the substance of the story, which I have here laid down together by
way of preface, that with less interruption I might ply the Argument presented
to us, both in the Sermon and Apology. For howsoever neither of them be
considerable in regard of the Author, who since his being thrust out of the
Court, has been an open and professed enemy of the Public Government: yet
in relation to the Church and Rulers of it, whom he endeavors to expose to
the common hatred; and next in reference to the people, whom he has labored
to possess with false and sinister conceits of the present state; it has
been thought convenient by authority, that an Answer should be made unto them.
The preservation of Religion is a thing so Sacred, that we cannot prize it to
the height: and therefore they that labor to preserve it, are of all men, the
most to be esteemed and honored. Proximus diis habetur, per quem deorum
majestas vindicatur, as the Historian rightly noted. So that we cannot blame
poor men, if they are startled and affrighted at those scandalous rumors which
are diffused and spread amongst them, to make them think that Religion is in no
small danger: or if they hold a Reverend esteem of those, who seem to them to
have a principal care thereof, and the safety of it. Only they are to be
admonished, not to be too credulous in matters of so high a nature, till they
are thoroughly certified of the truth thereof: that they conceive not ill of
the Church, their mother, upon the light and false reports of every male
contented spirit; or think them Champions of Religion, who are indeed the
bane, and disturbers of it: That Faction in the Church, which Mast. Burton, and
his Copesmates, have so much labored to promote: has since the first
beginning of it accused the Church of England of the self same crimes, whereof
they now pronounce her guilty: nor have they found any new matter wherewithal
to charge her, than that which their forefathers had been hammering on in the
times before them: yet they cry out with no less violence but far more
malice, than their fathers did; and fill the minds of jealous and distrustful
people with doubts and fears of innovations, of and in the worship of God, and
the whole doctrine of Religion; as if the banks were broken down, and Popery
were breaking in a maine upon us; only because they can no longer be permitted
to violate all the orders of Gods Church, here by Law established. The Papists
and these men, how different soever they may seem to be in other matters,
have, as it were by joint consent, agreed in this, to charge this Church with
novelties and innovations: the one especially in the points of Doctrine; the
other principally in matters of exterior order, and the service of God. But as
we say unto the one, that in the reformation of this Church, we introduced no
novelties into the same, but only labored to reduce her to that estate and
quality, wherein she was in her original beauty, and the Primitive times: so
may we say unto the other, that all those Innovations which they have charged
upon the Church in their scandalous Pamphlets, are but a restitution of those
ancient orders, which were established here at that Reformation. This that the
world might see, and see how scandalously and seditiously they traduce the
Church; I was commanded by authority to return an Answer to all the challenges
and charges, in the said two Sermons and Apology of Master Burton. For being it
was the leading Libell, in respect of time, (the principal matters in the
News from Ipswich, being borrowed from Master Burtons Sermon) and that those
many which have followed, are but a repetition of, and a dilating on those
points which are there contained: it was conceived, that be being answered,
the rest would perish of themselves. On this command I set my self unto the
Work; and though I knew no credit could be gotten from such an Adversary, Vbi
and vincere inglorium est, and atteri sordidum; and that there are a sort of
men, who hate to be reformed in the Psalmists Language: yet being so commanded,
I obeyed accordingly, and cannot but account it an especial honor to me, to
be commanded any thing in the Churches service. Besides J could not but be
grieved, to see my dearest Mother traduced so fowly in things whereof I knew
her guiltless; and it had argued in me a great want of Piety, not to have
undertaken her defense herein, being called unto it. From which two great and
grievous crimes, defect of piety, and true affection to the Church our mother;
and disobedience to the commands and orders of the higher powers; no less than
from the Plague and Pestilence, good Lord deliver us. Having thus rendered an
account, both of the reasons why the Sermon and Apology of Master Burton, have
been thought worthy of an Answer; and why, for my part, J have undertaken a
Reply unto him: I must now settle close unto the business, beginning first
with the Apology, so far forth as it justifies his said Appeal; and leaving
those particulars, which he does charge upon the Prelates, to be considered of
more fully in due place and time.

CHAP. I. Containing a particular answer to the several Cavills of H. B. in
defense of his Appeal.
Appeals unto His Majesty, in what case admitted. The high Commissioners,
neither parties in the cause, nor Adversaries to the Person of the Appellant.
The Bishops no usurpers of the Jurisdiction belonging to the King. The Oath of
Supremacy not derogatorie to Episcopal power. Objections against the Oath Ex
Officio, with an answer to them. Other objections against the Proceedings in
the High Commission answered. Of giving forth a Copy of ones Sermon, upon
Oath. Sedition, how it may be punishable in the High Commission. Archbishop
Whitgifts name abused, and his words mis-reported by H. B.
HItherto Mass. Burton, we have laid you open, by the way of an Historical
narration (though all Historical narrations be offensive to you, for the sake
of one) and consequently spoke only of you in the third Person, as hic et ille.
But being now employed in the Examiners Office, I must deal with you, as if
Coram, in the second Person, which I persuade my self will better sort with
your ambition; the second Person (if you remember so much of your Accidens)
being more worthy then the third. And first, I would feign know what moved you
to appeal unto His Majesty at your first conventing, before you had just
grievance, or an unjust sentence. Your conscience sure accused you, and
pronounced you guilty, and told you what you should expect in a legal trial:
and on the other side your presumption flattered you, that being an Old
Courtier, though worn out of favor, you might have some friend there to
promote your suite. Sir you forget it seems, what is related in the conference
at Hampion Court, in the self same case. My L. of London, moved his Mtie. that
then was [K. James of B. memory] that Pulpits might not be made Pasquils (Pray
sir mark this well) wherein every humorous or discontented fellow might traduce
his Superiors. This the King very graciously accepted, exceedingly reproving
that as a lewd custom, threatening, that if he should but hear of such a one in
a Pulpit, He would make him an example: (this is just your case) And that if
any thing were amiss in the Church Officers, not to make the Pulpit a place of
personal reproof, but to let His Majesty hear of it, yet by degrees. First
let complaint be made unto the Ordinary of the place, from him to go to the
Archbishop; from him, to the Lords of the Counsel, and from them, if in all
these places no remedy is found, to his own self: which Caveat His Majesty
put in, for that the Bp. of London had told him, that if he left himself open
to admit of all complaints, neither His Majesty should ever be quiet, nor his
under Officers regarded: seeing that now already, no fault can be censured, but
presently the delinquent threatens a complaint to the King. Here is a long
gradation, and that after censure: but you will venture on the King, per saltem,
not by fair degrees; and that not only before censure, but before any
grievance to be complained of. The King would quickly have his hands full, were
that course allowed of; and we must needs conceive him God, as well by nature,
as resemblance: it being impossible he should have any spare time left, either
to ear, sleep, or refresh his Spirits, or whatsoever other business does
concern this life, or show him mortal.

But we must needs conceive, there was some special reason in it, which might
induce you to cry out, before you were hurt; more then the matter of the
Articles which were read unto you; or your own guilty conscience, which had
precondemned you. Yes sure, for you except against as well the incompetencie of
the Judges, as the illegal manner of proceedings in the high Commission. The
Judges you except against (excepting those honorable Nobles, Judges,
Counselors of state, which are seldom there) as parties in the cause, and
adversaries to your person for the causes sake; p. 6. parties, Apolog. p. 6
because you have traduced them for Innovators, and Adversaries, for the
reasons which hereafter follow. Suppose them parties, and what then? Then by
the Laws of God and nature, as also by the Common, Canon, and Civil Laws,
they are prohibited from being Judges. This is the first Crutch your Appeal
halts with; and this will fail you. For howsoever it be true, in ordinary
course, that no man can be Judge in his own cause, there where the cause
concerns himself in his own particular; yet it is otherwise in a body
aggregate, or a public person. Suppose in time of Parliament, a man should
tax that great assembly with some grievous crime, should the whole body be
disabled from proceeding with him? Or that a man should raise some odious
scandal on my Lords the Judges, should he escape unpunished because there is
none else to judge him? Or that some saucy fellow behaves himself audaciously
and Contra bonos mores, before the Justices on the bench, at their Quarter
Sessions; should not the Bench have power to bind him to his good behavior? Or
that a man within the Liberties of London, should say a fig for my Lord Major,
might not my Lord Major clap him in the Counter? And yet the Parliament, and
the Judges and the Justices, and the Lord Major of London, are as much parties
in these cases; as the Archbishops, Bishops, Chancellors, and the rest of the
High Commission, are by you said, and only said, to be in the other. For that
they are not parties, we shall see anon, when we shall come to clear them of
those imputations, which in a furious zeal you have laid upon them.

That which you next attempt, is to prove them Adversaries, and Adversaries to
your person for the causes sake. Good Sir, what see you in your self, that you
should think such great and eminent men should bear malice to you. Tullie, a
wiser man then you, and a better Orator, as I take it, and in more credit with
the common people (though you grieve to hear it) might have taught you better.
Philip. 2.
Non video nec in vita, nec in gratia, nec in hac mea mediocritate quid
despicere possit Antonius. Was it not you, sweet Sir, that did Protest thus
roundly of my LL. the Bishops, I speak not this, Page 111.
God is my witness, out of any base envy to their Lordly honor and pomp,
which is so far beneath my envy. Poor soul, are those great persons, and their
honors beneath your envy; and is your person a fit mark for theirs? Diogenes;
and your self, two magnanimious Cynicks. You know the story well enough, and can
best apply it. Calco Platonis fastum, Diog. Laert.
sed mafore fastu. Yea, but they are the Adversaries of your person for the
causes sake: Say then the Adversaries of the cause; let your person go, as a
contemptible thing that provokes no Adversary. Yet we will take you with us to
avoid exceptions, and see what proof you have to make them Adversaries to your
person for the causes sake. And first they are your Adversaries, because the
Adversaries of those trueths by you delivered in your Sermon, p. 7. Hold there
a little brother B. As far as you have said the truth, they will all join
with you. Veritas a quocunque est, est a Spiritu Sancto, said St. Ambrose
truly. In that assuredly you shall find no Adversaries. But when you leave to
speak the truth, which is the Office of a Preacher; and fall upon Seditious,
false and factious discourses, to inflame the people, and bring them into ill
opinion, both of their King, and those to whom the government of the Church is
by him entrusted; you are no more a Preacher, but a Prevaricator, a dangerous
Boutefeu, and Incendiarie, as you have been hitherto. That this is true, shall
be most plainly manifested in the Anatomy of your Sermon, (for we will call
it so to please you) where the charge is pressed.

A second reason which you have to prove them your Adversaries, is that they
have usurped such a title of jurisdiction, as cannot consist with that title of
Jurisdiction, which the Law of the Land has annexed to the Crown Imperial, p.
7. If so, they are the Kings Adversaries in the first place, robbing him of the
fairest flower in the Regal diadem: and as the Kings Adversaries, the common
Adversaries of all loyal subjects, no more yours then mine. But how may it
appear unto us, that they have made so great and manifest an usurpation, as
you charge them with? Because, say you, they do continually exercise their
Episcopal jurisdiction, without any Letters Patents of His Majesty, or His
Progenitors, in their own names and rights only, not in His Majesty's Name and
right, etc. Great pity but you should be made the Kings Attorney; you would
bring all the Clergy doubtless in a Praemunire, and make them fine more deeply
for it, then when King Henry the 8th first charged them with it. But this being
objected to them in that sermon also; we shall there meet with it. One thing I
must take with me now, for fear I find it not hereafter. You say the Bishops
exercise their Episcopal jurisdiction, in their own names and rights only, not
in his Majesty's name and right, to the manifest breach of their oaths
aforesaid. Alas poor Prelates, cast away your Rochets, and resign all to
Brother B. Before he had indicted you at the Kings Bench, for usurpation; and
now he files a bill against you in the Star Chamber, as in case of perjurie.
For he assures us, that the Statute, 1. Eliz. c. 1. uniting all manner of
Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical whatsoever, unto the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, enacteth the Oath of Supremacy and Allegiance eo nomine, to that very
end and purpose, that none should presume to exercise any Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction within this Realm, but by virtue of the Kings Letters Patents,
and in the Kings Majesty's name and right Qui nunquam risistis nunc ridete.
Here Is such a piece of learned ignorance, as would make Heraclitus laugh; It
seems you had no conference of late with your learned Counsel; who, had he
seen this passage, might have marred the merriment; For pray you Sir, was the
Oath of Allegiance enacted 1. of Elizabeth? Then certainly my books deceive me,
in which it is reported to have been enacted 3. Jacobi, on the occasion of the
Gunpouder Treason. And for the Oath of Supremacy, made indeed 1. Eliz. was it
enacted eo nomine, to that end and purpose, as you please to tell us? What?
that no Bishop might proceed in exercise of his ordinary Episcopal Authority,
without especial Letters Patents; and in the Queens Majesty's Name and right
only? Find you in all the Statute any mention of Letters Patents, more then in
and for the erection and establishment of the High Commission, for exercise of
that supreme, and highest jurisdiction of right invested in the Crown? as for
the Oath, look it well over once again, if there be any one word which
reflecteth that way, of suing out especial Letters Patents by the Party
sworn, for the discharge of the authority committed to him; or that makes
mention of the Queens name to be used therein. Assuredly, learned sir, that
Oath was framed, to settle the abolishment of all foreign power and
jurisdiction, such as the Popes of Rome had lately practiced in this Kingdom;
and for no other end and purpose. Or if it were enacted, eo nomine, to that end
and purpose, that none should exercise any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within
this Realm, but by virtue of the Kings (or Queens) Letters Patents: then
certainly it must be thought, that all, and every Temporal Judge, Justice,
Major, and other lay and temporal Officer or Minister; all that take wages of
the King in any of His dominions, those that sue out their Livery, or Oustre le
maine; young Scholars in the Universitie, when they take degrees, or finally,
whosoever is required by the Statute to take that Oath; have in them a
capacity of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, but may not exercise the same
without Letters Patents: or else must forthwith take up arms against those
that do. As for that clause which follows after, And in the Kings Majesty's
name and right, that is just like the rest. It was indeed enacted so, in some
certain cases. 1 Edw. 6. c. 2. but was repealed by Parliament, 1. Mar. c. 2.
and stood repealed all the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and therefore could not
be intended in the statute 10. I see Sir, you are as excellent in the Law, as
in the Gospel: and marveile that you have not mooted all this while in some
Inn of Chancery.

Lets on Sir to those other Arguments which you have studied, to prove the High
Commissioners to be your adversaries; and if we follow your account they are
three in number: but stilo novo we shall find but one, and that one worth
nothing. First, they who are adversaries of God and the King, are your
adversaries, p. 9. Secondly, they which are Christ's enemies are your enemies.
And thirdly, they which are the Kings enemies are your enemies. p. 10. This is
as good as handy dandy, pretty sport for Children. I hope you will not divide
Christ from God, and I am sure you cannot divide the King from himself. Let
then your three arguments pass this once for one: and show us how you mean to
prove, that the Bishops are the adversaries of God and the King. That Is made as
clear as all the rest, by arguing a non-concessis pro concessis; by taking it
for granted, because you say it, that they are dangerous innovators, hinderers
of the Gospel, opposers of his Majesty's Laws, Proclamations, and
Declarations against all innovations of religion, etc. What proof you have of
this, more then your own bare Ipse dixit, we shall see hereafter: and when we
see it, we will answer to it as we see occasion. Mean while, I would feign
know how this concerns you, more then others: why any schismaticke or
delinquent may not pretend the self same reasons, to decline the judgment of
that Court, as well as you. Pope Boniface tells us of Saint Peter, that he was
taken in consortium individuae Trinitatis; and doubtless you deride him for
it: yet in effect, you take as much unto your self. Gods cause and yours are
so alike, of such near kin to one another, that they are hard to be
distinguished. Our Savior Christ has no advantage of you, but that he was
the first-begotten, and therefore is your elder brother: As for the King,
according to the Puritan tenet, he is but a Minister of the State, only a
sworn Bailiffe of the Common wealth, and to be called unto account when the
people please: the Saints, i. e. your self and such as you, being kings
indeed, to whom the earth belongs of right, and the fullness of it; and at
whose feet, in case the Presbyterian discipline were once established, all
Kings and Princes of the world must lay down their scepters, Huic disciplinae
omnes orbis Principes and Monarchas fasces suos submittere, and parere necesse
est. As your friend Travers stated it in his book of Discipline. Yes marry
Sir, now I perceive there is somewhat in it, why Gods cause, Christ's, the King,
and yours, are so linked together.

So far we have gone after you, or with you rather, to see how you could
justify your Appeal, as it related to the incompetencie of the Judges: we
must next look upon you whilst you plead your cause, as it reflects upon the
illegality of their proceedings. And this you branch into two parts also, (for
you are excellent at making a division:) the one general which concerns their
usual practice in all other cases; the other particular, in your own case, p.
11. It had been fitter sure you had left out the general, and fallen on the
particular only: for in such things, which are, you say, their usual
practice, what cause have you to make appeal more then other men. And should
all other men take liberty to decline the Court, that would dislike their
course and manner of proceedings: his Majesty might quickly call in the
Commission, as an unnecessary thing, of no use at all. This therefore only was
put in to beget an Odium to that Court, and buzze into the peoples heads (who
if once seasoned with your leaven, are apt to credit it) that the proceedings
there are contrary to pie^y, to law, to charity, and utterly against the
liberty of the Kings good subjects. But being put in, we must do what we can
to raze it out again: and therefore speak, what is it that you are agrieved
at in their usual practice. Your first exception is against the oath ex
officio, in which you say they do transgress in three particulars: first in
regard it is exacted of the delinquent, before a copy of the Articles or Libell
is exhibited unto him; and secondly in that the deponent is not permitted to
have a copy of the Articles, before he does depose unto them, that he may
answer to them by advise of Counsel: both which, you say, are contrary unto
the practice of all the other Courts of Justice. Thirdly, in that the oath
exacted is contrary both unto faith and charity; to faith, in that an oath so
taken must needs be taken for a rash oath, and so against the nine and
thirtieth Article of the Church of England; to charity, in that it makes a man
to accuse his brother, and betray himself, and so against that general
maxim, nemo tenetur prodere seipsum, p. 11. and 12. This is the sum of what
you say, (for that which follows of putting in Additionals to the information,
on the discovery of new matter, was not worth the saying:) and all this is no
more, but quod dictum prius, that which has formerly been alleged, and
already answered, your learned Counsel furnished you with these particulars,
when you were both delinquents in that Court together: and he might do it
easily without much study. They were collected before he was borne, and by
some that had as evil will to the Church as he, and spread abroad amongst that
party in Queen Elizabeth's time: but very learnedly refelled by Dr. Cousin, then
Deane of the Arches, to whom for brevities sake I might well refer you.

Yet since your libell is made public, and dispersed abroad, I will in brief
lay down such answers as are made by him, to your several cavils; adding a
little of mine own, and one thing specially for your satisfaction which he
could not know of. In answer to the first, part 3. c. 15.
he tells you (if you would have learned) that though the Articles or Libell, be
not exhibed inscriptis, before the oath, yet that the general heads are
signified and opened to the party criminal: which was observed, as you
confess, in your particular: For you inform us in the beginning of your
Apology, that the occasion of your Appeal was upon the reading of certain
Articles unto you, by the Register of the Court before Doctor Duck, and by his
appointment who thereupon tendered unto you an oath to answer to the said
Articles. This was as much favor as could be shown you, and more then needed.
The reason why the Articles are not given in scriptis, is chiefly upon
observation, that some of those to whom that favor has been shown, have
used it only as a means to instruct their confederates, for the concealing or
the disguizing of the truth; (a thing of dangerous consequence in punishment of
Schisms, Heresies, and such other things which this Court takes notice of:)
themselves, upon perusal of the Articles, remaining still as obstinate in the
refusal of the oath, as they were before. Nor is it generally contrary to the
practice of the Common Law, as it is pretended; the grand inquest taking an
oath before the Judges, that they shall diligently inquire, and truly present
all offenders against any such point, as shall be given them in charge: and yet
the charge not given till the oath be taken. As to the second, touching the advice of Counsel to draw up the answer, that is universal neither in law nor
practice. For on inditements at the common law upon life and death, there is no
counsel given the party to draw up his answer. And in proceedings in the
Star Chamber, Chancery and Court of requests, however they commence suites
there by bill and answer: yet when they come to interrogatories, the parties
first take oath to answer truly to the points; and then the Interrogatories
are proposed unto them piece by piece, in the Examiners office. Besides that in
such Cases, as principally do concern the high Commission, it has not been
thought sit to admit of Counsel, for drawing up an answer unto the Articles
objected; the better to avoid delays, and that foul palliating of schisms,
and errors, which might thence arise.

As for the first part of the third exception, it is true, that vain and rash
swearing is condemned by the nine and thirtieth Article: but then it rests to
be proved, that taking of an oath to answer to the points proposed, does come
within the compass of rash swearing. For howsoever men are sworn aforehand,
in the proceedings of that Court, to answer truly to the things objected,
when they come to hear them; yet they are never sworn to answer to them
before they hear them. And for the breach of charity, and the old said saw,
part. 3. c. 9.
Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum, it is answered, that the oath is not exacted in
things merely secret, which are left to God (for de occultis ecclesia non
judicat, as the saying is,) but in such cases which are partly manifested, as
by brute or fame, and such like indicia, in which the Church is to be
satisfied. And in this case and such as these the oath is tendered, not to
betray the party whom it does concern, but rather, if it be possible to clear
his innocence; on both sides to bring truth to light, which is a Jewel worth
the finding. Which course is also used in the Star Chamber, where the
defendant is to answer, even in criminal matters, on his corporal oath: and
that not only to the bill preferred against him, but to as many
Interrogatories, and some cross ones too, as the Plaintifes Counsel shall
devise.

Add here, which Doctor Cousin could not know of, the resolution of King James
of blessed memory, at Hampton Court. When the Lord Chancellor, and after him the
Lord Treasurer, had spoke both for the necessity and use of the oath ex
officio, in diverse Courts and cases; his excellent Majesty preventing that old
allegation, Nemo cogitur detegere suam turpitudinem, said that the Civil
proceedings punished only facts, but in Courts Ecclesiastical it was
requisite that fame and scandalls should be looked into. That here was
necessary the oath compurgatorie, and the oath ex officio too; and yet great
moderation should be used, first, in gravioribus criminibus, and secondly, in
such whereof there is a public fame, and thirdly, in distinguishing of
public fame, either caused by the inordinate demeanor of the offender, or
raised by the undiscreet proceeding in trial of the fact. All which just
cautions were observed in this proceeding against you Mass. B. and therefore
your appeal was causeless, as your grievance none.

Now for your own case next, and the^ illegality of proceeding in it, you have
no less then ten exceptions; you might have spunne them out as you do your
uses, to as many more. These we will sum up briefly, that the world may see
them; and afterward reply to such as are considerable, though peradventure we
may touch at all, for your satisfaction. First, you except in reference to the
matter charged upon, which was sedition, and so belonging to the Civil Courts;
and secondly against the manner of proceeding, viz. first, inciting you to a
private house, before one Commissioner alone; secondly, excluding your friends
and neighbors that they might not hear; thirdly, in tendering you an oath in a
matter, which if true concernd your life; fourthly, in calling for a copy of
your Sermon to be delivered upon oath; fifthly, in that you were suspended,
being absent; sixthly, notwithstanding your appeal; seventhly, and the
suspension published in your own parish Church, to your intolerable disgrace
and scandal; eighthly, in taxing you of sedition in the said suspension; and
ninthly, in denying you a Copy of the Articles, and other Acts of Court,
whereby to perfect that appeal to his sacred Majesty. Of all these ten,
there are but two considerable, (the other eight being only added to make up
the tale:) to wit, of the matter charged upon you, which was sedition; and then
the tendering of an oath in the said matter, being a crime, which might if true,
concern you, in point of life. For that you were convented before one
Commissioner alone, at his private house is no rare matter; that his conventing
of you being only to tender you an oath, to make true answer to those Articles
which were read unto you: there being a particular clause in the very
Commission, that any one Commissioner may give the oath to party or witness.
And why you should bring your friends and neighbors with you; or being there,
why should you think to have them present at your examination is beyond my
reach: unless perhaps you were desirous to let them see how valiantly you
durst outface authority. You cannot be so ignorant, having had business in
that Court before, as not to know, that though the party cited do for the most
part take his oath in the open Court, to make true answer, whenever he is
called unto it: Yet the examinations are in private, in some other place. And
so they are also in the Examiners office for the Starrechamber, Chancery, and
Court of Requests, and all Commissions thence awarded: where the Examiner and
the Party, the Commissioners and Deponents are alone in private, remotis
arbitris. The calling for a Copy of your Sermon to be delivered upon oath, is
neither any new matter, or used only in your case: it being Ordinary in the
Universities; and by the Vice-chancellours there done of common course. And it
seems wondrous strange to me, you should deny to give a private Copy of your
Sermon, when it was required of you by authority: and notwithstanding publish
it in Print a little after, being not required. As for the Example of our
Savior, (whose case you parallel with your own upon all occasions) who being
demanded of his doctrine by the High Priest, made answer, that he spoke openly
in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, and said nothing in secret, and therefore
they might ask the question of those that heard him: that makes nothing for
you. And yet from hence you draw a most factious inference, that no Minister
ought to be put so much as to give an answer, much less a Copy of what he
publickely preached in the Church p. 15.16. The case is very different between
Christ and you, though you make it one: he being demanded of his doctrine in
the general, without particulars, either time or place, or any matter charged
upon him; you being questioned for a Sermon preached at such a time, and in
such a place, containing such and such seditious and factious passages, as were
read unto you. Less reason have you to complain of being suspended being
absent, because being warned to be there, you refused to come: or that you were
suspended notwithstanding your appeal, to his sacred Majesty, since your
suspension, as you grant, was grounded on a new contempt, not the first
refusal of the oath. That the suspension should be published in your own
Parish Church, and that therein you should be taxed of sedition; was both just
and necessary. For if you were convented first, because of your seditious
Sermon, and a seditious Sermon Preached to your own Parishioners: good reason
that your censure should be published there, where you committed your offense,
that so the people might beware of the like false teachers. And for denying you
a Copy of the Articles, and other Acts of Court, I see no cause at all why you
should demand them. For having at the first declined the judgment of that
Court, by the refusal of the oath, and your said Appeal; and afterward
contemptuously neglected your appearance on the second summons: what cause had
you to expect any favor from them, or to consult those Acts which you cared
not for; Especially considering you continued still in your disobedience, and
desired the Articles, not to answer to them, but thereby, as you say your self
to perfect your Appeal; or rather, as it may be thought, to scatter them
abroad in imperfect copies, with such false answers to them as you pleased to
make. Your self and such as you, have long used the art, Tacit. in vica
Agricolae.
of getting the first start upon men's affections: non ignari instandum famae,
and prout prima successerint fore vniversa.

But come we now unto the maine of your Appeal, in reference to the illegality
of proceedings in your own particular: for all that has been answered
hitherto, was but the vantage as it were, which you cast in out of your
abundance, to make up the reckoning. It is pretended, that being charged with
sedition, you were not bound to answer to it. And why? Because sedition is no
ecclesiastical offense against the Church, but a civil against the King and
State; and therefore to be tried only in his Majesty's Courts of Civil
Justice, and not before the High Commissioners, who have no cognizance thereof.
Your Enthimeme does halt extremely. For there are many matters punishable in
either jurisdiction, which since you are ignorant, I will name you some. Usury,
contrary to the statute, 21. Iac. c. 17. is punishable at the Common Law, and
it is also punishable in the Court Christian; as in the 109. Canon. The self
same Canon reckons drunkenness and swearing, as punishable by the Ordinary
upon presentment: and yet are punishable by the Civil Magistrate, by virtue of
two several statutes, viz. 4. Iac. 5.21. Iac. and 21. Iac. 20. So for
prohibited, either works or recreations on the Lords day, the parties so
offending are by the Statute 1 Car. c. 1. and 3. Car. c. 1. to be convented and
corrected by the Justices of the Peace: and yet there is a salvo there, for the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to proceed as formerly. All persons that offend
against the Statute 1. Eliz. c. 2. either in depraving the Book of Common
prayer, or else not using it as they ought to do, or using any other form of
prayer ( N. B.) then is there prescribed, etc. are punishable either by
enditement at the Common Law, or by the censures of the Church According as
complaint is first made unto either Court: I could inform you of many such
particulars, were it convenient. So that you see, your proposition is not true,
in that full latitude wherein you propound i^: viz. because sedition is to be
tried in the Courts of civil Justice, therefore in you, and as it was an
offense by you committed, it was not to be censured in the High Commission. For
Sir, I hope you can distinguish between sedition in the field, or in the
Marketplace, and a seditious Sermon (for Sermon I must call it for fear of
angring you) in the Church or Pulpit. Had you behaved your self seditiously in
any other place, no better dealing with you, then by the Constable first, and
so on. But if you preach seditiously, and make the House and Ordinance of God,
only a Pandar to your discontent or your ambition, I hope my Lords the Judges
will not be offended, if your Superiors in the Lord do chastise you for it,
yet this, at last, you make a just gravamen, upon the which you might appeal.
But had you thought indeed, as you say you do, that the Ecclesiastical
Commssioners, could take no cognizance of the crime objected to you: you might
with better hopes have labored for a prohibition, as formerly you did upon
weaker grounds; then run your self so hastily on a new experiment, of making
an Appeal, when you were not grieved. Lastly, you plead, that being the
matter charged upon you, was Sedition, and so if true, your life might have
been called in question; you were not bound to take the oath propounded to
you, and this you ground upon a Passage of Archbishop Whitgift in the
conference at Hampton Court, saying, as you report his words, that in matter of
life, liberty, and scandal, it is not the course of that Court to require any
such oath: wherein you do most shamelessely misreport the words of the said
Archbishop. All that he said, is this, which will help you little, viz. If
any Article did touch the party any way, either for life, liberty, or scandal,
he might refuse to answer, neither was he urged thereunto. He does not say, as
you make him say, that in those cases there recited, it was not the course of
that Court, to require any such oath, but that the party might refuse to answer
to those Articles which did so concern him. It is the custom of the Court to
give an oath unto the party, to answer truly to such Articles as shall be
propounded: and the indulgence of the Court, at the examination, that if the
party will, he may challenge any of them, as not being bound by law to answer to
them; and his refusal, if the law bind him not to answer, is to be allowed.

You might then, subtle Sir, have took the oath; and yet demurred on any such
Article, when you came unto it. And so far we have traced you in your
Apology, wherein is nothing to be found, but poor surmises: which being
proved only by an Aio, might have been answered with a Nego; but that I am
resolved to dissect you thoroughly, and lay you open to the world, which has so
long been seduced by you.

CHAP. II. The Kings authority restrained, and the obedience of the subject
limited within narrow bounds, by H. B. with the removal of those bounds.
The title of the Sermon scanned, and the whole divided. H. B. offended with
the unlimited power of Kings, the bounds by him prescribed to the power of
Kings, both dangerous and doubtful. The power of Kings how amplified by Jews,
Christians, Heathens. What the King cannot do, and what power is not in him,
by Mass. Burtons doctrine. The Positive Laws of the Realm confer no power
upon the King, nor confirm none to him. The whole obedience of the subject
restrained by H. B. to the Laws of the Realm; and grounded on the mutual
stipulation between King and people. The dangerous sequells of that doctrine.
A Pravis ad praecipitia. Paterculus.
We are on the declining hand, out of the Hall into the Kitchen, from an
Apology that was full of weakness, unto a Sermon or rather a Pasquill far
more full of wickedness: yet were we guided either by the Text or Title, we
might persuade our selves there were no such matter, nothing but piety and
zeal, and whatsoever a fair show can promise. But for the Title Sir (I hope
you know your own words in your doughtie dialogue between A. and B.) you know
the proverb, Fronti rara fides, the fowlest causes may have the fairest
pretenses. For whereas you entitle it, for God and the King, you do therein as
Rebels do most commonly in their insurrections: pretend the safety of the
King, and preservation of Religion, when as they do intend to destroy them
both. The civil war in France, raised by the Duke of Burgundy and Berry
against Lewis the eleventh, was christened by the specious name of Le bien
Public, Phil. de Comiues.
for the Commonwealth; but there was nothing less intended then the common
good. And when the Jews cried Templum Domini, Templum Domini, they did but as
you do, abuse the people, and color their ambition, or their malice, choose
you which you will, with a show of zeal. So that your Title may be likened
very fitly, to those Apothecaries boxes which Lactantius speaks of, quorum
tituli remedium habent, lib. 3. cap. 15.
pixides venenum, poisons within, and medecines writ upon the Paper. So for
your Text, we will repeat that too, that men may see the better how you do
abuse it. My son fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change; For their calamity shall arise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both, Prove. 24.21, 22. A Text indeed well chosen but
not well applied. For had you looked upon your self and the Text together, and
followed the direction which is therein given you, you had not so long hunted
after Innovations, as for these many years it is known you have; and so might
possibly have escaped that calamity which is now like to fall upon you. But
it is the nature of your humor, as of some diseases, to turn all things unto
the nourishment of the part that is ill affected: Mean while you make the
Scriptures but a nose of wax, as Pighius once prophanly called it; by wresting
it maliciously to serve your turns; and so confirm the vulgar Papists in
contempt of that, which were it not for you, and such as you, they might more
easily be induced both to hear and reverence. Now for the method of your
Sermon (I mean to call it so no more) though you observe no method in it, but
wander up and down in repetitions and tautologies, as your custom is: I must
thus dispose it. The passages therein, either of scandal or sedition, I shall
reduce especially unto these two heads: those which reflect upon the Kings most
excellent Majesty, and those which strike directly against the Bishops. That
which reflects upon the King, either relates to his authority, or his actions.
That which does strike against the Bishops is to be considered as it is
referred either unto their place, or to their persons, or finally to their
proceedings: and these proceedings are again to be considered, either in
reference to their Courts, and behavior there, or to their government of and
in the Church, and carriage in that weighty office, wherein you charge them
with eight kinds of Innovations, most of the general kinds being sub-divided
into several branches. For a conclusion of the whole, I shall present unto your
self, by way of Corollarie, or resultancie out of all the premises, how far
you are or may prove guilty of sedition, for that Pulpit pasquill of yours: and
so commend you to repentance, and the grace of God. In ripping up whereof, as I
shall keep my self especially to your Pulpit-Pasquill: so if I meet with any
variae lectiones, in your Apology, or Epistles, or the News from Ipswich, or
your addresses to the Lords of the Privy Council, and my Lords the Judges, I
shall use them also either for explication or for application. Such your
extravagancies, as cannot easily be reduced to the former heads, I either shall
pass over, or but touch in transitu. This is the order I shall use.

First for the King, you may remember what I told you was the Puritan tenet,
that Kings are but the Ministers of the Commonwealth, and that they have no
more authority then what is given them by the people. This though you do not
say expressly, and in terminis, yet you come very near it, to a tantamont:
finding great fault with that unlimited power which some give to Kings, and as
also with that absolute obedience which is exacted of the subject. One of your
doctrines is, that all our obedience to Kings and princes and other superiors
must be regulated by our obedience to God. Your reason is, because the King is
Gods Minister and Vicegerent, and commands as from God, so for God, and in
God. Your doctrine and your reason, might become a right honest man. But what is
your use? Your first use is, for reprehension or refutation of those that so
advance man's ordinances and commandments, as though they be contrary to Gods
Law, and the fundamental laws of the State, yet so press men to the
obedience of them as they hold them for no better then rebels, and to deserve
to be hanged drawn and quartered that refuse to obey them, page 77. So page
88. a second sort come here to be reproved, that on the other side separate the
fear of the King from the fear of the Lord: and those are such as attribute
to Kings such an unlimited power, as if he were God Almighty himself; so as
hereby they would seem to ascribe that omnipotency to the King which the Pope
assumes, and his Parasites ascribe to his holiness. So page 89. Thus these men
crying up, and exacting universal absolute obedience to man, they do hereby
cast the fear of God, and so his Throne, down to the ground. Finally you
reckon it amongst the Innovations wherewith you charge the Prelates in point of
doctrine, that they have labored to make a change in the doctrine of obedience
to superiors, setting man so in Gods Throne, that all obedience to man must be
absolute without regard to God and conscience, whose only rule is the word of
God, page 126. In all which passages, however you pretend the word of God, the
fundamental Laws of state, and conscience: yet clearly you express your
disaffection unto the sovereignty of Princes, and in effect leave them no
greater power then every private man shall think fit to give them. Besides
there is a tacit implication also, that the King exercises an unlimited power,
which cannot possibly consist with the subjects conscience, the fundamental
laws of the Kingdom, or the word of God. It had been very well done of you
to have told the people, what were the fundamental laws of State, which were
so carefully to be preserved; within what bounds and limits the authority of
Kings is to be confined, and to have given them a more special knowledge of
the rule of conscience. For dealing thus in generals only, ( Dolosus versatur
in generalibus, you know who said it) you have presented to the people a most
excellent ground, not only to dispute, but to disobey the Kings commands.

Now Sir I pray you what are you, or by what spirit are you guided, that you
should find your self agreeved at unlimited power, which some of better
understanding then your self have given to Kings: or think it any Innovation
in point of doctrine, in case the doctrine of obedience to our superiors be
pressed more home of late then it has been formerly. Surely you have lately
studied Buchannan dejure regni, or the vindiciae writ by Beza under the name of
Iunius Brutus: In Romans cap. 13. Institut. lib. 4. c. ult.
or else perhaps you went no further then Paraeus, where the inferior
Magistrates, or Calvin, where the three estates have an authority to control,
and correct the King. And should the King be limited within those narrow bounds
which you would prescribe him, had you power; he would in little time be like
the ancient Kings of Sparta, in which the Ephori, or the now Duke of Venice, in
which the Senate bear the greatest stroke: himself mean time, being a bare
sound, and an empty name, Stet magni nominis umbra, in the Poets language.
Lucan.
Already you have laid such grounds, by which each private man may not alone
dispute but disobey the Kings commandments. For if the Subject shall conceive
that the Kings command is contrary to Gods word, though indeed it be not; or
to the fundamental laws of state, although he cannot tell which be
fundamental; or if he find no precedent of the like commands in holy
Scripture, which you have made to be the only rule of conscience: in all these
cases it is lawful not to yield obedience. Your self have given us one case
in your Margin, page 77. we will put the other. Your reprehension is of those,
that so advance man's ordinances and commandments, as though they be contrary
to Gods Law, and the fundamental laws of state, yet press men to obedience
to them, your instance is of one which was shrewdly threatened (how true that is
we mean to tell the world hereafter) for refusing to do that which was not
agreeable to the word of God, viz. for refusing to read the book of sports, as
you declare it in the Margin, page 26. whether you refer us. So then the case
is this. The King permits his people honest recreations on the Lords day,
according as had been accustomed, till you and your accomplices had cried it
down: with order to the Bishops to see his declaration published in the
Churches of their several diocesses, respectively. This publication you
conceive to be repugnant to Gods word, (though none but a few factious spirits
ever so conceived it, and that your doctrine of the Sabbath be contrary to all
antiquity and modern Churches:) and therefore by your rule they do very well
that refuse to publish it. It Is true indeed, in things that are directly
contrary to the law of God, and such as carry in them a plain and manifest
impiety; there is no question to be made, but it is better to obey God then
man. Acts 4.
But when the matter chiefly rests either in misapplying, or misunderstanding
the word of God, (a fault too incide^t to ignorant and unstable men, and to
none more then to your disciples and their teachers too) or that the word of
God be made a property like the Pharisees Corban, to justify your disobedience
unto Kings and Princes: your rule is then as false, as your action faulty. So
for your second limitation, that is but little better; and leaves a starting
hole to malicious persons, from whence to work on the affections of the common
people. For put the case, the King in necessary and emergent causes, touching
the safety of his empire, demand the present aid of all his subjects; and any
Tribunitian spirit should inform them, that this demand is contrary unto the
fundamental laws of state: according to your rule, the subject is not bound
to obey the king, nay he might refuse it, although the business does concern
especially his own preservation. But your third limitation, that of
conscience, is the worst of all. For where you make the word of God to be the
only rule of conscience, you do thereby conclude expressly that neither
Ecclesiastical or Civil ordinances do bind the conscience: and therein
overthrow the Apostles doctrine, who would have Every soul be subject to the
higher powers, Romans 13.5.
not for wrath only but for conscience sake. So that in case the king command
us any thing, for which we find not some plain precept or particular warrant
in the word of God; as if the King command all Lecturers to read the service of
the Church in their ^oodes and surplices, before their Lectures; such his
command is plainly against conscience, at least the Lecturers are not bound in
conscience to submit unto it, because there is no special precept for it in
holy Scripture. And certainly this plea of conscience, is the most dangerous
buckler against authority, which in these latter ages has been taken up. So
dangerous that were the plea allowed, and all the judgments of the king in
banco, permitted to be scanned and traversed in this Court of Conscience;
there were a present end of all obedience. Si ubi jubeantur, quaerere singulis
liceat, peunte obsequio, hist. l. ^*
imperium etiam intercidit, as he in Tacitus. If every man had leave to cast in
his scruple, the balance of authority would be soon weighed down.

Yet since you are so much agreived at the unlimited power which some gives to
Kings, will you be pleased to know, that Kings do hold their crowns by no
other Tenure, than Dei gratia: and that what ever power they have, they have
from God, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. Lib. 7. c. 17.
So say the Constitutions ascribed to Clements, (...). So Irenaeus also an
ancient father, Cujus jussu homines nascuntur, ejus jussu reges constituuntur.
And Porphyrie remembers it amongst the Tenets of the Essees a Jewish Sect,
(...), that no man ever did bear rule but by Gods appointment. Holding then
what they have from God, whose deputies they are, and of whose power they are
partakers; how and by whom do you conceive they should be limited? doubtless
you mean to say by the laws of the Land. But then if question be demanded who
first made those laws, you must needs answer also, the kings themselves. So
that in case the kings in some particulars had not prescribed limits unto
themselves, and bound their own hands, as it were to enlarge the peoples:
neither the people, nor any laws by them enacted could have done it. Besides
the law of Monarchy is founded on the Law of nature, not on positive laws:
and positive laws I trow are of no such efficacy, as to annihilate any thing,
which has its being and original, in the law of nature. Hence is it, that all
sovereign Princes in themselves are above the laws, as Princes are considered
in abstracto, and extent of power; and how far that extent will reach, you
may see in the first of Sam. and 8 chap. though in concreto a just Prince will
not break those laws, which he has promised to observe. Princes are debtors
to their subjects, as God to man; In Psalm. 10^.
non aliquid a nobis accipiendo, sed omnia nobis promittendo, as S. Austine
has it. And we may say of them in S. Bernards words* Promissum quidem ex
misericordia, sed ex justitia persolvendum: that they have promised to observe
the laws, was of special grace; and its agreeable to their justice to observe
their promise. Otherwise we may say of kings, as the Apostle of the just; Iusto
lex non est posita, says the Apostle, and Principi lexnon est posita, says
the law of nature. Do you expect more proof than you use to give, Plutarch
affirms it of some kings.(...), Hist. l. 53.
that they did not govern only by the law, but were above it. The like says
Dion of Augustus Caesar, (...), that he was sure and had an absolute
authority, as well upon his laws as upon himself. Besides in case the power
of kings were restrained by law, after the manner, that you would have it; yet
should the king neglect those laws, whereby you apprehend that his power is
limited; how would you help your self by this limited power? I hope you would
not call a Consistory and convent him there; or arm the people to assert
their pretended liberties: though as before I said, the Puritan tenet is, that
you may do both. Your learned Council might have told you out of Bracton, an
ancient Lawyer of this kingdom, omnem esse sub Rege and ipsum sub nullo, sed
tantum sub Deo; And Horace could have told you, that kings are under none but
God. Reges in ipsos imperium est Iovis, as he there has it. You may moreover
please to know, what Gregory of Tours said once to a king of France; Si quis e
nobis, O Rex, justitiae tramites transcendere voluerit, a te corripi potest; si
vero tu excesseris quis te corripiet? etc. If any of us, O king, offend against
the rules of justice, thou have power to punish him, but if thou break those
rules, who has power to do it? We tell you of it, and when you list, you
please to hear us, but when you will not, who shall judge you, but he that
tells us of himself, that he is justice.

This was you see the ancient doctrine, touching the power and right of kings,
not only amongst Jews and Christians but in heathen states: what ever new
opinion of a limited power, you have pleased to raise.

But you go further yet, and tell us of some things the king cannot do, and
that there is a power which the king has not; what is it, say you, that the
king cannot do? Marry you say he cannot institute new rites and ceremonies,
with the advice of his Commissioners Ecclesiastical, or the Metropolitan,
according as some plead from the Act of Parliament before the Communion book,
page 65. Why so? Because, according to your law, this clause of the Act is
limited to Queen Elizabeth, and not extended to her successors of the Crown.
This you affirm indeed, but you bring no proof: only it seems you heard so
from your learned council. You are I see of Calvin's mind, who tells us in his
Commentary on the 7 of Amos, what had been said by Doctor Gardener, after
Bishop of Winchester, and then Ambassador in Germany, touching the headship or
Supremacy of the king his master: and closes up the story with this short
note, inconsiderati homines sunt, qui faciunt eos nimis spirituales, that it
was unadvisedly done, to give kings such authority in spiritual matters. But
sir I hope you may afford the king that power, which you take your selves, or
which your brethren at the least have took before you: who in Queen
Elizabeth's time had their Classical meetings without leave or license, and
therein did ordeine new rites, new Canons, and new forms of service. This you
may do, it seems, though the kings hands are bound that he may not do it.
And there is a power too, as you tell us, that the king neither has nor may give
to others. Not give to others certainly, if he have it not; for nemo dat quod
non habet, as the saying is. But what is this? you first suppose and take for
granted, that the Bishops make foul havocke in the Church of God, and
persecute his faithful servants: and then suppose, which yet you say is not to
be supposed, that they have procured a grant from the king to do all those
things which of late they have done, tending to the utter overthrow of religion
by law established. And on these suppositions you do thus proceed. Yet
whatsoever color, pretext or show they make for this, the king (to speak with
all humble reverence) cannot give that power to others, which he has not
himself. For the power that is in the king is given him by God, and confirmed
by the laws of the kingdom. Now neither God in his law, nor the laws of the
land, do allow the king a power to alter the state of religion, or to oppress
and suppress the faithful ministers of the Gospel, against both law and
conscience. For kings are the ministers of God for the good of his people, as
we showed before. p. 72.73. So you, and it was bravely said, like a valiant
man. The Brethren now may follow after their own inventions, with a full
security: for since you have proclaimed them to be faithful ministers, no
king nor Keisar dares suppress them; or if he should, the laws of God, and
the law of the land to boot, would rise in judgment to condemn him, for
usurpation of a power which they have not given him. But take me with you
brother B^^ and I perhaps may tell you somewhat that is worth your knowledge.
And I will tell you sir if you please to hearken, that whatsoever power is in
the king, is from God alone, and founded on the law of nature. The positive
laws of the land as they confer none on him, so they confirm none to him.
Rather the kings of England have parted with their native royalties for the
peoples good: which being by their own consent, established for a positive
law, are now become the greatest part of the subjects liberties. So that the
liberties, possessions, and estates of the kings liege people, are, if you
will, confirmed by the laws of the land; not the kings authority. As for the
power of kings which is given by God, and founded on the law of nature, how
far it may extend in the true latitude thereof, we have said already: Whether
to alter the state of religion, none but a most seditious spirit, such as yours
would put unto the question: his majesty's piety and zeal, being too well
known to give occasion to such quaeres. Only I needs must tell you, that you
tie up the kings hands too much, in case he may not meddle with a company of
Schismatickes, and refractarie persons to all power and order, only because
you have pronounced them to be faithful ministers of the Gospel. Such
faithful ministers of the Gospel as you and yours, must be suppressed, or
else there never will be peace and unity in the City of God. And yet I see
you have some scripture for it, more than I supposed: kings being, as you tell
us from S. Paul, the ministers of God for the good of their people, and no more
then so? I thought S. Paul had also told us, that the King is a minister of
God, an avenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil: Romans 13.4.
yea more than so too brother B. and it may concern you, viz. if thou do that
which is evil be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain. Aut undequaque
pietatem toll, Cicero Philip. 2.
aut undequaque conserva; Take the whole text along good sir, or take none at
all: and if you take all be afraid, as you are advised, verbum sapienti.

I must go forwards with you yet from the authority of the king, to the
obedience of the subject; which you do press indeed, but on such false
grounds, as in conclusion overthrow the whole frame of government. The absolute
obedience of the subject you have dashed already, and reckon it amongst those
Innovations in point of doctrine, which you have charged upon the Prelates: and
in the place thereof bring in a limited or conditional obedience, of your own
devising; Your first condition or limitation rather, is, viz. that our
subjection unto the king, is to be regulated as by Gods law, the rule of
universal obedience to God and man, so by the good laws of the king. p. 38.
the king as you inform us p. 42. having entered into solemn and sacred
covenant with all his people, to demand of them no other obedience, but what
the good laws of the kingdom prescribe and require: as on the other side, the
people swearing no other obedience to the king than according to his just
laws, page 39. and 40. In which restraint, there are two things to be
observed, first that we are to obey the king no farther than there is law for
it, and secondly no farther than that law seems good; So that in case the king
commands his people any thing for which he has no positive law to warrant his
command; and of this sort are many Proclamations, orders, decrees, injunctions,
set out from time to time by the kings authority, and Prerogative royal, by
brother Burtons rule the people are at liberty to obey or not. And on the other
side, in case the said command be grounded on some positive law which they
like not of, whether it be a Penal statute, or some old Act of Parliament
almost out of use, by the reviving of the which they may be prejudiced in purse
or otherwise: this is no good law in their judgment, and so no more to be
obeyed than if the kings command were founded on no law at all. But your next
limitation is far worse than this, though this bad enough. For in the next
place you have grounded all obedience on the peoples part, upon that mutual
stipulation which the king and his subjects make at his Coronation. Where the
king takes an explicit solemn oath to maintain the ancient laws and
liberties of the kingdom, and so to rule and govern all his people according
to those laws established; consequently and implicitly all the people of the
land do swear fealty, allegiance, subjection and obedience to their king,
and that according to his just laws, page 39. your inference from hence is
this, that if the king so solemnly by sacred oath, ratified again in
Parliament under his royal hand, do bind himself to maintain the laws of
his kingdom, and therein the rights and liberties of his subjects, then how
much are the people bound to yield all subjection and obedience to the king,
according to his just laws, p. 40. So that according to your doctrine, the
people is no longer to obey the king, than the king keeps promise with the
people. Nay of the two the people have the better bargain; the king being
sworn explicitly and solemnly to maintain their liberties; the people only
consequently and implicitly to yield him subjection. Is not this excellent
doctrine think you? or could the most seditious person in a state have thought
upon a shorter cut to bring all to Anarchie; for if the subject please to
misinterpret the kings proceedings, and think though falsely, that he has not
kept his promise with them: they are released ipso facto from all obedience and
subjection, and that by a more easy way, then suing out a dispensation in the
Court of Rome. You tell us, p. 129. of the kings free subjects; and here you
have found out a way to make them so: a way to make the subject free, and the
king a subject; and hard it is to say whether of the two be the greater
Contradiction in adjecto. I have before heard of a free people, and of free
states, but never till of late of a free subject: nor know I anyway to create
free subjects, but by releasing them of all obedience to their Princes. And I
have read too of Eleuthero Cilices, which were those people of Cilicia that
were not under the command of any king: but never read of an Eleuthero
Britannus, nor I hope never shall. I will but ask you one question, and so end
this point. You press the kings oath very much about maintaining of the laws
of the Kingdom, as page 39.40. and 42. before recited, as also, page 72. again
and again, and finally in your address to my LL. the Judges: is it by way of
Commemoration or of Exprobration? if of Commemoration, you forget the Rule;
memorem immemorem facit, qui monet quae memor meminit. But if of Exprobration,
what meant you, when you needed not to tell us, that in a point of Civil
Government, it is a dangerous thing to change a Kingdom settled on good laws
into a tyranny; and presently thereon to add a certain speech of Heraclitus,
Viz. That Citizens ought to fight no less for their Laws, then for their
walls. I only ask the question, take you time to answer it.

CHAP. III. An Answer to the Challenge of H. B. against His Majesty's Actions
and Declarations.
The King accused for breach of promise, touching the Petition of Right; but
falsely. His Majesty's Declaration before the Articles censured by H.B. as
tending to suppress the Truth, and advance the contrary errors. Of the law
of Amnestie. His Majesty's Declaration about Sports condemned and censured. H.
B. falls scandalously foul upon King James, by reason of the like Declaration
by him set forth. H. B. makes the people jealous of the Kings intentions. His
Majesty accused for the restraint of Preaching in infected places, contrary to
his Declarations, and the former practice; and thereunto the increase of the
Plague imputed. His Majesty's Chapel paralleld with Nebuchadnezars golden
Image, and Julian the Apostates Altar. H. B. incourageth disobedient persons,
and makes an odious supposition about setting up Mass in the Kings Chapel.
FRom your restraint and curtailling of the Kings authority, proceed we to
your censure of His Actions and Declarations which we have separated from the
other, because in this we have some intermixture of your invectives against
the Bishops: your scandalous clamours against whom, in reference to their place
and persons, are to follow next. And first we will begin with the Petition of
Right, as having some resemblance to the former point: on which you please to
play the Commentator and spoil a good text with a factious gloss. It pleased
His Majesty, being Petitioned (amongst other things) in Parliament, 1628, that
no Freeman (and not a Free Subject, as you phrase it) should be imprisoned, or
detained without cause showed, and being brought to answer by due course of
Law: to pass His Royal assent to the said Petition. What Comment do you make
thereon? That no man is to be imprisoned, if he offer bail. p. 52. You do
indeed resolve it so, in your own case too; and fall exceeding foul on His
Sacred Majesty, because your Comment or Interpretation could not be allowed
of. Now your case was thus. During that Session, you had printed a seditious
Pamphlet (as all yours are) entitled Babell no Bethel; tending to incense the
Commons against the King: for which, being called before the High Commission,
order was made for your commitment. And when you offered bail, it was refused,
you say, by my Lord of London that then was, affirming that the King had given
express charge, that no bail should be taken for you: That thereupon you
claimed the right and Privilege of a Subject, according to the Petition of
Right, but notwithstanding your said claim, were sent to Prison, and there
kept Twelve days, and after brought into the High Commission. This is the
case, as you relate it. p. 52. and 53. And hereupon, you do refer it unto the
consideration of the sagest, whether that which he fathered on the King, were
not a most dangerous and seditious speech, tending to possess the bystanders,
and consequently all the people of the land with a sinister opinion of the
Kings Justice and Constancy in keeping His solemn Covenant made with His
people, as in that Petition of Right. And you have noted it in the margin, p.
53. for a most impious and disgraceful speech, to bring the people into an
hard conceit of His Majesty, who but a little before had signed the Petition
of Right. This is yet pressed again both in the same, and the next page, as
also in your address unto the Judges: as if the King had violated His solemn
promise made unto the people, and bear down all the rights and liberties of
the Subject mentioned in the said Petition; by suffering, or appointing a
Seditious Phamphletter to be sent to prison, without bail. But tell me Sir I
pray you, for I know not yet, how you could plead the benefit of that Petition;
or how it could advantage you in the smallest measure. It was petitioned, that
no Subject being a Freeman, should be committed to the prison without cause
showed, and being brought to answer in due course of Law. Tell me of all
loves, how does this concern you; or how can you complain of being imprisoned
contrary to His Majesty's answer unto that Petition: the cause of your
commitment being shown unto you; which was that Book of yours formerly
mentioned; and you being brought to answer in the High Commission, according
to due form of Law, as your self inform us. Here was no matter of complaint,
but that you have a mind to traduce His Majesty, as if he had no care of His
Oaths and promises: more of which treacherous Art to amate the people, we
shall see hereafter. Besides Sir, you may please to know, that your case was
not altogether such as those which were complained of in the said Petition,
there being always a great difference made between a man committed on an
Ecclesiastical, and a Civil crime; And I will tell you somewhat which
reflects this way. It appears in the Diarie of the Parliament, 4. H. 4. what
time, the Statute 28. Edw. 3. mentioned in the Petition (which you call) of
right, was in force and practice, how that the Commons exhibited a Petion that
Lollards arrested by the Statute. 2^ H. 4. should be bayled, and that none
should arrest but the Sheriff, and other lawful Officers: and that the King
did answer to it, Le Roys' advisera. This I am bold to let you know; take it as
you please.

Next for His Majesty's Declarations, you deal with Him in them, as in the
Petition, if not somewhat worse. His Majesty finding by good tokens, that some
such wretched instrument as your self, had spread a jealousy amongst the
Commons in that Parliament, that there was no small fear of an Innovation in
Religion: as also, that by the intemperate handling of some unnecessary
questions, a faction might arise both in the Church and Commonwealth: thought
fit to manifest himself in two Declarations. Of these, the first related unto
the Articles of Religion, in this Church established, wherein His Majesty has
commanded that in those curious and unhappy differences, which were then on
foot, no man should put his own sense or Comment to be the meaning of the
Article, but take it in the literal and Grammatical sense: shutting up those
disputes in Gods promises, as they be generally set forth to us in holy
Scriptures; and the general meaning of the Articles according to them. The
second did contain the causes which moved His Majesty to dissolve the
Parliament, Anno 1628. wherein his Majesty protests, that he will never give
way to the authorizing of any thing, whereby any Innnovation may steal or
creep into the Church, but preserve that unity of Doctrine and Discipline
established in the time of Queen Elizabeth. So far his Majesty. And those
his Majesty's Declarations, are by you either peevishly perverted, in defense
of your disobedience; or factiously retorted on his Majesty, as if not
observed; or scandalously interpreted, as if intended principally to the
suppression of Gods truth. I will begin first with that particular mentioned
last, of which you tell us plainly, that Contzen the Jesuit in his Politics
prescribes this rule of silencing Controversies, as an excellent way for the
restoring of their Roman Catholic Religion in the Reformed Churches. p. 114. As
also from the Centuries that the Authors of corruptions and errors do labor
to compose all differences with an (...), or silencing of all Disputes; that by
such counsels the Emperor Anastasius* being a favourer of the Arian heresy,
was moved to bury the principal heads of Controversy in an (...); and
finally, that the Arian Bishops did the like in the Council of Seleucia,
called by Constantius an Arian Emperor, who did therein suppress by perpetual
Amnestie the mention of Homousios and Homoiousios, that so they might coin a
new faith, and utterly extinguish that of the Council of Nice. p 115. This you
ascribe indeed unto the Prelates, as an Art of theirs; but you must needs
intend it of the King, whose Act it was.

Nor do you only misinterpret his Majesty's most pious Act, in an undutifull
and scandalous manner; but you pervert both this and the other also to serve
your turn, and sometimes factiously retort them on His Majesty, as if not
observed. What ever thing you challenge, or except against, that is forthwith
proclaimed to be against his Majesty's Declarations, so solemnly set out and
published for satisfaction of his people: as Viz. in your two Epistles to his
Sacred Majesty; in your Apology p. 6. in your address to the Nobility. p.
23.24. and to the Judges. p. 28.30.31. and in your Pulpit Pasquill p.
51.52.54.64.65.67.72.146. and finally, no less then thrice in the News from
Ipswich. As for example. His Majesty intended by the first, that before the
Articles, to silence those disputes which might nourish faction; and in the
other, to nourish in his Subjects a good opinion of his constancy to the
Religion here established: but you, and such as you, will abuse them both. You
were convented, as you tell us, unto London house, for Preaching on the point
of Predestination, and there it was objected to you, that you had done therein
contrary to his Majesty's Declaration, page 51. which in the Margin there, you
affirm to be A dangerous and false charge laid upon the King. And thereupon
you answered that you never took the Kings Declaration to be by him intended
for the suppressing of any part of Gods truth, nor durst you ever conceive a
thought so dishonorable to the King, as to think him to be an instrument of
suppressing Gods truth. No doubt you had good ground for so quick an answer;
and what was that? His Majesty in his Declaration about the Parliament, had
professed as much. p. 52. Here is the King against the King, one Declaration
against another, both by you abused, both made to serve your turn, as occasion
is. But why do you thus construe his Majesty's words? Because, say you, it was
no part of his Majesty's meaning to prohibit Ministers, to Preach of the saving
Doctrines of Grace and Salvation, without the which, the very Gospel is
destroyed. p. 51. the ministry of the Gospel overthrown, and nothing but
orations of morality to be taught the people. And does the whole ministry of
the Gospel, the saving doctrines of Grace and Salvation, depend alone upon
those difficult and dangerous points of Gods secret counsels? Are all the
Doctrines of the Gospel, matters of mere morality; save those at which Saint
Paul did stand astonished, and cried out, (...), O the depth and height! Cannot
Christ Crucified profit us, rather you and your disciples? unless we must be
taught, that the greatest part of mankind, is cast off for ever, without any
regard had to their sins, and all the promises of the Gospel made unto them
of none effect? Or do you think that Faith, and an honest life will become
unprofitable, unless we vex poor people with the noise of doubtful
disputations, which Saint Paul prohibited. Take heed Sir, I advise you as a
special friend, least that befall you, Romans 14.
which Saint Austin did once complain of, Viz. lest honest, though unlearned
men get heaven, whilst you with all your subtilties are excluded thence.
Surgunt indocti et rapiunt coelum, Confess. ^.8.
et nos cum doctrinis nostris, sine cord, ecce ubi volutamur in carne et
sanguine. But to what purpose do I seek to charm so deaf an Adder? Be the
Kings purposes never so sincere and pious, yet you are bold to quarrel with
his Declaration, and to cry out unto the people, that the Doctrines of Gods
Grace, and man's salvation are hushed, and banished out of City and Country;
and that there is not a Minister, one amongst a thousand, that dare clearly and
plainly according to the word of God, and the Articles of our Church, preach of
these most comfortable doctrines to Gods people, and so soundly and roundly
confute the Arminian heresies (as you call them) repugnant thereunto. p. 116.

But so you will not leave the King, he must hear more yet. His Declaration
about lawful recreations on the Lords day, is the next you quarrel with. In
this you fall more fowly on him then you did before, more then a civil honest
man would, or could probably have done upon his equal; and yet you ground this
too on his Declaration. For thus you say. No wise and honest man can ever
imagine that the king would ever intend to command that which mainly tends to
the dishonor of God and his word, to the violation and annihilation of the holy
Commandment touching the Sabbath, and to the alteration of the doctrine of the
Church of England. How so? Because, say you, this were against all those
solemn Royal protestations of the King, etc. p. 56. Stay here a little I
beseech you. How does this business of the Sabbath touch the Declaration about
dissolving of the Parliament, which is cited by you. Yes, in a very high
degree, because, say you, it is a mighty Innovation in the doctrine of the
Sabbath, which has been ever since the Reformation, and so from the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, constantly universally, and unanimously
maintained in the Church of England, page 57. Qui semel verecundiae limits,
etc. And if you proceed on a little, you will shortly blush at nothing. For the
point in hand: Men of far more credit, then I trow you are, assure us, that
your new doctrine of the Sabbath, was never known in England, until the year,
1596; and being made known then, not before, was neither universally, nor
unanimously received, as you inform as. For had it been a Doctrine constantly
maintained ever since the Reformation, as you falsely say, assuredly Arch- Bp.
Whitgift, had never called in those Books which maintained that argument, as
it is well known he did in his visitation, Anno 1599. nor had Judge Popham done
the like at the Assizes in Saint Edmonds bury, in the year 600. You must tell
likelier tales then this, or all the old wives in your Parish will beshrew you
for it: who cannot but remember with what harmless freedom they used to
behave themselves, that day, in their younger times. You stay not here, but as
before you set the King against himself, one Declaration of the Kings against
another; so next, you set the King against the Parliament: and tell us, that
the profanation of the Sabbath or Lords day, which the Books seems to give
allowance to, as in sundry sports here specified, is contrary unto the Statute
1. Caroli, in which all unlawful Exercises and Pastimes are prohibited upon
that day; and therefore dancing, leaping, and the rest, which the Book alowes
of p. 57. For this you are beholding to your learned Counsel, the first that
ever so interpreted that Statute: and thereby set the Statute and the
Declaration at an endless odds. But herein you go far beyond him, for he
only quarrelled with the living, who had power to right themselves: You lay a
scandal on the dead, who are now laid to sleep in the bed of peace: and tell
us of that Prince of blessed memory, King James, that the said Book for
Sports, was procured, compiled, and published in the time of his progress into
Scotland, when he was more then ordinarily merrily disposed. p. 58. When he was
more then ordinarily merrily disposed? Good Sir, your meaning. Dare you
conceive a base and disloyal thought, and not speak it out, for all that
Parrhesia which you so commend against Kings and Princes: p. 26. Leave you so
fair a face with so foul a scarre: and make that peereles Prince, whom you
and yours did blast with daily Libells when he was alive; the object of your
Puritanicall, I and uncharitable scoffs now he is deceased. Unworthy wretch,
whose greatest and most pure devotions, had never so much heaven in it, as his
greatest mirth. I could pursue you further, were you worth my labor, or rather,
if to Apologize for so great a Prince, non esset injuria virtutum, as he in
Tacitus, were not too great an injury to his eminent virtues; and therefore I
shall leave your disloyal speeches of the King deceased, to take a further view
of those disloyal passages, which do so nearly concern the King, our now
Royal Sovereign. For lest the people should continue in their duty to him,
being the thing you fear above all things else; you labor what you can to
take them off: at lest to terrify his Majesty with a fear to lose them. For
you assure us on your word, because you would have it so. p. 64. that pressing
of that Declaration with such cursed rigor (as you call it) both without and
against all Law, and all example, and that also in the Kings name, is very
dangerous, to breed in peoples minds, as not being well acquainted with His
Majesty's either dispositions or protestations (still you bring in that) I know
not what strange scruples or fears, causing them to stagger in their good
opinion of his Majesty. And in the Apology, giving distaste to call your
Majesty's loyal subject who hereupon grow jealous of some dangerous plot. p.
6. You would feign have it so, else you would not say it. Quod minus miseri
volunt, hoc facile credunt. But hereof, and how you encourage men to stand it
out, we have more to come.

A man would think that you had said enough against your Sovereign, charging
him with so frequent violating of his protestations, and taxing in such
impudent manner his Declaration about sports, as tending mainly to the
dishonor of God, the profanation of the Sabbath, the annihilation of the
fourth Commandment, and the alteration of the doctrine of the Church of
England. Yet that which follows next is of far worse nature; no less a
crime, then pulling down of preaching, and setting up Idolatry: pretty
Peccadillo's. For Preaching first, it pleased his sacred Majesty out of a
tender care of his peoples safety, to ordain a fast, by his Royal
Proclamation to provide, that in infected parishes there should be no Sermon,
the better to avoid the further spreading of the Sickness, which in a general
confluxe of people, as in some Churches, to some Preachers, might be soon
occasioned. This his most royal care you except against as an Innovation
contrary to his Majesty's public Declarations, p. 146. and in the News from
Ipswich, you tell us also that it is a means to inhibit preaching, and
consequently to bring Gods wrath upon us to the uttermost. p. 147. You call it
scornfully a mock-fast, p. 148. a mockfast, and a dumb-fast distasteful to all
sorts of people, in the Ipswich news: and in plain language tell the King,
that this restraint, with other innovations which you have charged upon the
Prelates, do fill the peoples minds with jealousies and fears of an universal
alteration of religion, p. 147. What peoples minds are filled so I beseech you
sir, but those whom you and such as you have so possessed? I trow you have not
had the people to confession lately, that you should know their minds and
fears so well, as you seem to do. But know, or not know, that is no matter;
the King is bound to take it upon your word; especially considering that the
restraint of preaching in dangerous and infected places, and on the day of
fast, when men come empty to the Church, and so are far more apt to take
infection then at other times; is such an Innovation, as certainly the like was
never heard of in the holy Scripture, or any of the former ages; and withal so
directly contrary unto his Majesty's solemn Protestations made unto his
people. Here Is a great cry indeed, but a little wool. For how may we be sure,
that the holy Scripture and all former ages have prescribed preaching as a
necessary part of a public fast, yea as the very life and soul of a fast, as
you please to phrase it, both in your Pulpit Pasquill, p. 144. and the news
from Ipswich. That so it was in holy Scripture, you cite good store, as viz. 2 Chronicles. 6.28.29.30. Chap. 7.17.14. Numb. 25.6. to 10. Joel. 1. and 2. Zeph.
2.1.2.3. all in the margin of the News book. Of all which texts, if there be
one that speaks of preaching, let the indifferent Reader judge. The Scripture
being silent in it, how shall we know it was the custom in all former ages?
For that you tell us, in the same margin of the News book, that so it was 1.
Iacobi and Caroli. Most fairly proved. I never knew till now, but that the
world was older then I see it is. Men talk of certain thousands that the world
has lasted: but we must come to you for a new Chronology. The world, my
masters, and all former ages, (which comes both to one) contain but 34 years
full, not a minute more. An excellent Antiquarie. No marvel if his Majesty be
taxed with innovations, changing, as he has done, the doctrine of the Sabbath,
first set on foor Anno 1596, and the right way of celebrating a public fast,
for which you have no precedent before the year 1603. Nor can I blame the
people, if they fear an alteration of religion, when once they see such
dreadful Innovations break in upon them; and all his Majesty's solemn
protestations so soon forgotten and neglected. Yet let me tell you sir, that
fast and pray was the old rule, which both Scriptures and the Church have
commended to us; as in the texts by you remembered, and that delivered by Saint
Paul 1. Cor. 7.5. Oration jejunium sanctificat, jejunium orationem roborat, was
the Fathers Maxim. I never read of Fast and preach, till you made the Canon;
at least till you first brought it hither, if you made it not. And yet because
of this, and such like terrible Innovations as this, you fly out extremely.
First unto Gods most secret Counsels, affirming most unchristianly, and
withal most shamelesly, that this restraint of preaching (in infected places)
was the occasion that the plague increased, double to any week since the
Sickness began p. 144. that it brought with it a double increase of the
plague, p. 50. an extraordinary increase the very first week of the fast,
together with most hideous storms, etc. p. 148. Sir, you forget that which was
taught you by the Prophet, Abscondita, Domino Deo nostro; that secret things
belong to God: and we may ask this question of you out of holy Scripture,
What man has known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor?
Surely, until you usurped that honor by reason of that extraordinary calling
which you so much brag of, no man ever did. Yet since you are so curious in the
search of causes, and will needs tell us what occasioned so great a sickness;
look in the last words of the second homily of Obedience, and you will find
that nothing draws down greater plagues from almighty God, then murmuring and
rebellion against Gods Anointed. Next you fall foul upon his Majesty, and
tell him plainly in effect, but cunningly as you imagine, that if he look not
better to his Protestations, the beauty of his royal name will be blasted in
the Annals delivered to posterity, and that in them it will be said, This King
had no regard to sacred vows, and solemn protestations. I see what Chronicles
we shall have when you come to write them, Caesarum contumeliis referta; Tacit.
Annal.
there is no question of it.

From pulling down of Preaching, proceed we next to setting up Idolatry;
which how you charge the King withal, must next be showed. You tell us, that
the Prelates to justify themselves in those Innovations, which you unjustly
lay upon them, do plead the whole equipage, furniture, and fashion of the Kings
Chapel, as a pattern for all Churches: in which there is an Altar, and bowing
toward it; Crucifixes, Jmages, and other guises. And why should Subjects be
wiser then their King? p. 165. To this you answer, that the worship and service
of God and of Christ (you will needs separate Christ from God do I what I can)
is not be regulated by humane examples, but by the divine rule of the
Scriptures. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men. p. 165. Well said! the service in the Kings Chapel, and
that which is conform unto it, is a ^aine worship in the first place: And what
follows next. The three Children would not bow to the Kings goodly golden
Image. The old Christians would not so much as offer incense in the presence of
Julian the Emperor at his Altar, nor at his command, though he propounded
golden rewards to the doers, and fiery punishment to the denyers. p. 166. This
is plain enough. Here Is the Kings Chapel and the furniture thereof compared
to Nebuchadnezars golden Image, and Julians Altar: by consequence the King
resembled ^o those wicked tyrants. I now perceive what 'twas you meant, when
you extolled so highly that Parrhesia, which you conceive so necessary in a
child of God; p. 26.27. instancing there, as here, in the three Children, Who
feared neither the Kings big looks, nor furious threats; and Maris Bishop of
Chalcedon, who coming before Julian the Apostata, called him Atheist,
Apostata, and a desertor of the faith: As in Elias, when he retorted King Ahabs
words upon him, and the stout answer which Elisha made to the King of Israel:
adding for close of all, that it were endless to recite examples in this kind,
except to convince the cowardice of these times. You would have every man, it
seems, as bold a Bravo as your self; to bid defiance to the King, at least to
stand it out against all authority. For, for the proof of that brave Parrhesia,
which you so extol, you instance chiefly in such opposition: as was made to
Kings, and therefore all your uses must be construed to reflect that way: now
your fourth use is this. This makes for exceeding consolation to the Church of
God, especially in declining times of Apostacy, (in these days of
lukewarmnesse and Apostacy, in the proposal of your uses, p. 128.) and when
the truth is openly persecuted and oppressed, and idolatry and superstition
obtruded in stead thereof: when notwithstanding we see many Ministers of Jesus
Christ, to stand stoutly to their tacklings, and rather then they will betray
any part of Gods truth, and a good conscience, they will part with their
ministry, liberty, livelihood, and life too, if need were. This is that
which keeps Christ's cause in life. This gives Gods people cause of rejoicing,
that they see their Captains to keep their ground, and not to fly the field,
or forsake their colors, or basely yield themselves to the enemy, etc. p. 31.
They are your own words, one of the pious uses which you make of your so
celebrated Parrhesia, that freedom and liberty of speech against Kings and
Princes, or whatsoever is called God, which you so specially commend unto your
disciples. Well then, here is superstition and idolatry, but is there not a
fear of the Mass also. Sure it seems there is. For thus you close your
answer, touching the equipage (as you call it) of the Kings chapel, the
fashion, and furniture thereof. Lastly suppose, (which we trust never to see,
and which our hearts abhor once to imagine) Mass were set up in the Kings
Chapel; is this a good argument why it should be admitted in all the Churches
throughout the Realm of England? p. 166 Why how now zealous sir; what?
Suppositions, Ifs and Ands, in such an odious intimation as setting up of Mass
in the Kings Chapel? I will not tell you any thing of my opinion in this
place, but keep it till I meet you at the half turn in the close of all.
Only I needs must tell you here, you might have dealt more courteously with
your Sovereign and Patron, as you style him, had you the least part of that
piety which you pretend to: seeing so manifestly that (in Seneca's words,
Jllius vigilia omnium domos, illius labor omnium otia, illius industria omnium
delicias, illius occupatio omnium vacationem tueatur. The Kings great care to
keep his people in wealth, peace, and godliness, if considered rightly, might
make the vilest of us all, to serve, honor, and humbly obey him, according to
Gods holy word and Ordinance. But you, and such as you, have a special
privilege: which I much muse you did not plead, when you were questioned
publickely for your misdemeanors.

CHAP. IV. A plain discovery of H. B. quarrels against the Bishops, in
reference to their calling, and their Persons.
H. B. displeased that the Bishops do challenge their Episcopal authority
from our Savior. The challenge of Episcopal power from Christ and his
Apostles, neither new nor strange, as H. B. pretednds. Of the Episcopal
succession in the Church of England. Episcopal succession, how esteemed and
valued amongst the Ancients. The derivation of Episcopal descent from the
Church of Rome, no prejudice unto the Hierarchy, or Church, as H. B. makes it.
The Bishops anciently called Reverend Fathers. The scandalous and scornful
attributes given by H. B. to the Bishops in the general, and to some of the
chief of them in particular. A brief reply to all his cavills against the
chief of those particulars. H. B. makes his address to all sorts of people to
join together with the King, to destroy the Bishops; and is content to run an
hazard of his own life, so it may be done. The ruin of the Bishops, made by H.
B. the only present means to remove the Plague. A general answer to these
slanderous and Seditious passages.
LEt us now look upon your dealing with my LL. the Bishops, how you handle
them, their place, their persons, their proceedings: who being the principal
object of your malice, must not expect more civil usage, then the King their
Master, Epistle De^^^^t. to the king.
especially considering in cold blood how they have provoked you, by calling
you forth upon the stage. However use them as you please, you have one good
shelter. For if your style seem sharper then usual, we are to blame, if we
impute it not to your zeal and fidelity for God and the King, being you are to
encounter those who be adversaries to both: Begin then zealous sir, we stand
ready for you. First then, you quarrel with the calling, and stomach it
exceedingly, that some of them should say in the High Commission, being put
unto it by your Brother Bastwick, that they had their Episcopal authority from
Christ, and if they could not prove it, they would cast away their Rochets. And
so, say you, they might their Capps too, for any such proof they can bring for
it. p. 68. What more? It Is plain that they usurp, profess and practice such
a jurisdiction, as is not annexed to the Imperial Crown of England, but with
the Pope and Prelates of Italy, they claim from Christ. Ibid. Well then, what
hurt of this! Thus you see our Prelates have no other claim for their
Hierarchy, then the Popes of Rome have and do make, which all our Divines
since the Reformation, till yesterday, have disclaimed, and our Prelates cannot
otherwise assume, but by making themselves they very limbs of the Pope, and so
our Church a member of that Synagogue of Rome. And this you say, because it is
affirmed by Dr. Pocklington, that we are able lineally to set down the
succession of our Bishops from Saint Peter to Saint Gregory, and from to our
first Archbishop Saint Austin, our English Apostle, downwards to his Grace that
now sits in the chair, etc. p. 69. Thus also in the News from ^pswich, you
are much offended with the Prelates, that they will needs be Lord Bishops, jure
divino, by the holy Ghosts own institution, and shame not to style themselves
the Godly Holy Fathers of our Church, and Pillars of our faith, when as their
fruits and actions manifest them to be naught else but Step-fathers and
Catter-pillers, the very pests and plagues of both. And not long after, you
bestow a gentle touch on Dr. Pocklington, calling the Prelates, as your use is,
the true-bred sons of the Roman Antichrist, from whom D. Pocklington boasts
they are lineally descended. But whatsoever be the claim from Christ, or his
Apostles, or the Church of Rome; you have found out a fitter Author of the holy
Hierarchy; even the spirit that bears rule in the air, the devil. Who does
not only haunt the Palaces of Prelates (perhaps he went sometimes upon your
occasions) but has infused such a poison into the chair of this Hierarchy,
as that man, who sits in it, had need to be strongly fortified with
Preservatives and Antidotes of true Real Grace, (not nominall and titular)
that is able to overcom the infection of it. p. 106. This is the sum of what
you say, or repeat rather with a nil dictum quod; and this is hardly worth the
saying by so great a Rabbin, the answer being made before the objection, yet
since you say it, something must be said about it, and so (...).

Your first exception is, that the Episcopal authority is claimed from
Christ; and that some of the Bishops said in the High Commission, that if they
could not prove it they would cast away their Rochets. This is no more then
what had formerly been said in the conference at Hampton Court; when on
occasion of Saint Hieromes saying, that a Bishop was not divinae ordinationis:
the Bishop of London (Dr. Bancroft) interposed, that unless he could prove
his ordination lawful out of the Scriptures, he would not be a Bishop four
hours. You see then this is no new saying devised but yesterday, and contrary
to what has been the judgment of all our Divines since the reformation, as
you please to tell us. The learned works of Bishop Bilson, entitled The
Perpetual government of Christ's Church, and those of Dr. Adrian Saravia
against your Patriarch Theodore Beza, de diversis ministerii gradibus; with
many others of those times: show manifestly that you are an impudent Impostor,
and care not what you say, so you make a noise. And yet I cry you mercy, I may
mistake you; not knowing exactly what you mean by your Our Divines: For if by
your Divines, you mean the Genevian Doctors, Calvin and Beza, Viret and
Farellus, Bucan, Vrsinus, and those others of foreign Churches, whom you
esteem the only Orthodox professors: you may affirm it very safely, that
the derivation of Episcopal authority from our Savior Christ, is utterly
disclaimed by your Divines. Calvin had never else invented the Presbytery, nor
with such violence obtruded it on all the reformed Churches: neither had Beza
divided Episcopatum, into Divinum, humanum, and Satanicum, as you know he does.
But if by our Divines, you mean those worthies of the Church, who have stood
up in maintenance of the holy Hierarchy against the clamours and contentions
of the Puritan faction; or such as are conformable unto the Articles and orders
of the Church of England: you do most shamelessely traduce them, as your
custom is, and make them Patrons of that Tenet, which they most opposed. For
tell me of a truth, who is it, which of our Divines, that holds Episcopal
authority to be derived from any other fountain then that of Christ and his
Apostles? and that conceive their ordination is not de jure divino, grounded
and founded on the Scriptures, and thence deduced by necessary evident and
undeniable illation? if any such there be, he is one of yours, Travers, and
Cartwright, and the rest of your Predecessors; men never owned for hers by the
Church of England. Of whom we may affirm, what the historian says of the
Athenians, Paterculus.
when besieged by Sylla, animos extra moenia, corpora necessitati servientes
intra muros habuerunt. Geneva had their hearts, we their bodies only. I hope
you do not here expect that I should show you what precedencie or superiority
our Savior gave the twelve Apostles, before and over all the Seaventie: or how
the Apostles in their own persons exercised authority over other Pastors; or
how they settled several Bishops in convenient places, as Timothy in Ephesus
and Titus in Crete, with power of ordination, Tit. 1.5. and power of
Ecclesiastical censure, 1 Timothy 5.19. or finally what successors they left
behind them, in those particular Sees where they most resided. This were but
actum agere, to sing our old songs over, as you use to do: and therefore I
refer you to the writings of those worthies before remembered, our Divines
indeed. Nor had I said thus much, but to let you see, that neither the claim
is new, devised but yesterday; nor by all our Divines disclaimed since the
reformation: both which with shame enough you are bold to say.

The next thing that offends you, and you clamor of, is that they claim a
visible and perpetual succession, down from S. Peter to Pope Gregory, from
him by Austin the Monk, first Arch Bishop of Canterbury, unto his Grace now
being, and Sic de coeteris. For by this means, you say, they make themselves
the very limbs of the Pope, the true-bred sons of the Roman Antichrist: and
consequently our Church a member of that Romish Synagogue. Who would have
thought but this had pleased you. For if the Bishops be the sons of the
Roman Antichrist, and the Church a member of the Romish Synagogue; then are you
acquitted: and all your clamours, raylings, and opposition, as well against the
one, as the other, may be fairly justified. But let your inference alone till
another time, what is it that you quarrel in the ground thereof. Is it that
Saint Peter was at Rome, or was Bishop there, (whether for 25. years as
Eusebius tell's us, we will not dispute) you may remember it is granted, or
rather not denied by Calvin. HOwever his mind served him to have made a
question of it; yet, propter Scriptorum consensum non pugno, Institut. l. 4.
Sect. 15.
the evidence was so strong he could not deny it. Is it that Gregory Pope of
Rome, surnamed Magnus, after a long descent succeeded him? The Tables of
succession in the Church of Rome make that clear enough: Lib. 3. cap. 3.
and Irenaeus brings down the succession till his own time; during which
time, the lineall succession in that Church, by reason of the many persecutions
under which it suffered, might be made most questionable. That Gregory sent
this Austin into England to convert the Saxons, and made him (having before
been consecrated by the Archbishop of Arles) the first Archbishop of the
English; is generally delivered by all our writers, from Venerable Bede to
these present times; as by those also which have writ the life of the said Pope
Gregory. Finally that my Lord the Archbishop that now is, is lineally
descended, in a most fair and constant tenor of succession you shall easily
find, if you consult the learned labors of Mr. Francis Mason, de ministerio,
Ang^icano. The Papists would extremely thank you, and think you borne into
the world for their special comfort, could you but tell them how to disprove
that lineall succession of our Prelates, which is there laid down. A thing by
them much studied, but conatu irrito: and never cast upon our Prelates, as a
stain or scandal, that they could prove their Pedigree from the holy
Apostles, till you found it out. Whatever you conceive hereof, you cannot
choose but know, that the succession of the Prelates in the purest times, was
used as an especial argument against those Sects and heresies which were then
on foot. And since you challenge Dr. Pocklington, for the succession of the
Bishops in the Church of England, I will send you to him for three instances,
which might have satisfied you in that point, if you will be satisfied: the
first from Irenaeus, l. 3. cap. 3, 4, 5. the second from Tertullian, de
praescript. cap. 11. and the last from S. Austin, contra Petil. l. 2. c. 51. In
all of which it is apparent, (and see them you must needs, being the occasion
of his instance in the Church of England) that the succession of the Bishops in
their several Churches, ita ut primus sit aliquis ex Apostolis, beginning
their descent from some one or other of the holy Apostles, has been a
special means to confound those heretics, which took up arms against the
Church, as some men do now.

Now for your instance, you plead, that if this rule of succession hold, our
Bishops are the true-bred sons of the Roman Antichrist; and tell me then I
pray you Sir, whose son are you, that had your ordination, and received your
Ministry from those Bishops which were so descended, you must needs be a limb
of the Pope also; like it as you list: But never fear it Sir, there is no such
danger as you dream of, either that any Priest or Prelate in the Church of
England, should therefore be a son of the Roman Antichrist; or that the
Church should be a member of that Romish Synagogue: because we claim by and
from them, a visible succession of and in the sacred Hierarchy. We may
receive our orders from them and challenge a succession by them, from the
blessed Apostles; and yet not be partakers with them in their corruptions.
When Hezekiah purged the temple, and set all things right, which had been
formerly amiss in the Jewish Church: think you that the Highpriests which
followed after, thought it a shame to fetch their Pedigree from Aaron? Or do
you find it was objected against them that did, that because some of those
from and by whom they claimed it, had misbehaved themselves in so great an
office, and possibly advanced Idolatry in that tottering state, therefore all
those that followed them and descended from them, were also guilty of the same
crimes? Or to come nearer to your self, think you your ministry the worse,
because you did receive it from the hands of them, whom you accuse for true
borne sons of the Roman Antichrist: and that your brethren in New England
will not think themselves the purest and most perfect Church in the Christian
world, although they once were members of that here established which they have
forsaken. It Was not the purpose of those holy men in King Edwards time to make
a new Church, but reform the old; and only to pare off those superfluities,
which had in tract of time been added to Gods public service. In which
regard, they kept on foot the Priesthood and Episcopate, which they had
received; with many of those rites and ceremonies to which they were before
accustomed: not taking either new orders, or bringing in new fashions, never
known before. If you have any other pedigree, as perhaps you have, from
Wiclif, Hus, the Albigenses, and the rest which you use to boast of; keep it
to your self. Non tali auxilio, the Church of England has no need of so
poor a shift. Nor did she ever think it fit, further to separate herself
from the Church of Rome either in doctrine or ceremony, then that Church had
departed from herself, (when she was in her flourishing and best estate) and
from Christ her head. And so King James resolved it at Hampton Court. That
which remains touching the poison which the spirit hatt rules in the air,
has infused into the chair of the Hierarchae; and your distinction between
nominall and real grace, for which I make no question but you do hug your
self in private: is not worth the answering. I shall produce your raylings, as
I go along, but not confute them: as knowing little credit to begotten by
contending with you, and far less by scolding. But where you seem to be
offended with the Bishops, that they should style themselves the Godly holy
Fathers of the Church: I hope you know the title is not new nor first used by
them. All ages, and all languages have so entitled them. The Gretians everused
to style them, (...); the Latins, Reverendos in Christo Patres; the English
our Reverend fathers in God: all of them as of common course, you cannot but
know it. As for that patch which follows after, viz. the Pillars of our faith;
and your conceit upon them both, of Caterpillars and stepfathers; those you may
hear amongst the scoffs, reviling, and reproachful terms, which with a
prodigal hand and a venomous pen, you cast upon them, every where, in your
several Pasquills; to which now I hasten.

To begin therefore where we left, for fathers you have made them Step-fathers;
for Pillars, Caterpillars; their houses haunted, and their Episcopal chaires
poisoned by that spirit, that bear's rule in the air. These we have told you
of before go on then. They are the limbs of the beast, even of Antichrist,
taking his very courses to bear and beat down the hearing of the Word of
God, whereby men might be saved, p. 12. Their fear is more toward an Altar
of their own invention, toward an image or crucifixe, toward the sound and
syllables of Jesus, than toward the Lord Christ. Page 15. Miscreants, 28. the
trains and wiles of his [the dragons] dog-like, flattering tail, page 30. New
Babel-builders, 32. blind watchmen, dumb dogs, plagues of souls, false
prophets, ravening wolves, thieves and robbers of souls: which honorary
attributes you bestow upon them from the Magdeburgians, page 48. Either for
shame mend your manners, or never more imprison any man, for denying that title
of succession, which you so belly by your unapostolicall practice. page 49. If
the Prelates had any regard either to the honor of God, and of his word, or to
the settled peace of the kingdom, as they have but little, as appears too
palpably by their practices in disturbing and disordering all, page 63. The
Prelates actions tend to corrupt the kings good peoples hearts, by casting into
them fears and jealousies, and sinister opinions toward the king, as if he
were the prime cause of all those grievances, which in his name they do
oppress the kings good subjects withal, page 74. These factors for
Antichrist, practice to divide kings from their subjects, and subjects from
their kings, that so between both they may fairly erect Antichrists throne
again, page 75. Antichristian mushromes, page 83. They cannot be in quiet till
res novas moliendo, they may set up Popery again in her full equipage. 95.
tooth and nail for setting up of Popery again, 66. trampling under their
feet Christ's kingdom, that they may set up Antichrists throne again, p. 99.
According to that spirit of Rome which breaths in them, by which they are so
strongly biassed to wheel about to their Roman Mistress, page 108. the
Prelates confederate with the Priests and Jesuits, for rearing up of that
religion. page 140. by letting in a foreign enemy, which these their
practices and proceedings pretend and tend unto. page 75. The Prelates make the
mother Cathedralls (the adopted daughters of Rome) their concubines whereon to
beget a new bastard generation of sacrificing idolatrous Massepriests
throughout the land, p. 163. Nothing can now stay them, but either they will
break all in pieces or their own neck, p. 164. All this sir in your
Pulpit-pasquill. So also in your Apology, Iesuited Polypragmaticks, and sons
of Belial: and in the news from Ipswich, Luciferian Lord Bishops, Execrable
traitors, devouring wolves, with many other odious names not fit to be used by
Christians. Finally in your Pulpit libell, you seriously profess that you are
ashamed that ever it should be said, you have lived a minister under such a
Prelacie, p. 49. Great pity sir, you had not lived a little in king Edgars
time, amongst whose Laws it was ordained, that that man's tongue should be cut
out which did speak any slanderous or infamous words, tending to the reproach
of others.

Hitherto for the generals. And there are some particulars, on which you spend
your malice more than all the rest; you descant trimmely, as you think, in the
News from Ipswich, on my Lord of Canterbury, with your Arch-pietie,
Arch-charitie, if Beelzebub himself had been Archbishop, Arch-Agent for the
devil, and such like to those. A most triumphant Arch indeed to adorn your
victories. His costly and magnificent enterteinment of the king at Oxford, you
cry out against in your said Pulpit libell, for a scurrilous interlude, made in
disgrace of that which is the greatest beauty of our religion, to wit true
piety, and learning* and will him in this shrift to confess, how unseemely it
was for him, that pretends to succeed the Apostles, p. 49. You tax a
certain speech of his as most audacious and presumptuous, setting his proud
foot on the kings laws, as once the Pope did on the Emperors neck p. 54. in
marg. and tell him that the best Apology he can make, is that his tongue did
run before his wit, and that in the flames of his passion he had sacrificed
his best reason and loyalty. p. 55. You tell us also that the republishing of
the book [for sports] with some addition, was the first remarkable thing which
was done presently after the Lord of Cant. did take possession of his
Grace-shippe, page 59. that with his right hand he is able to sweep down the
third part of the stars in heaven, p. 121. Having a Papal infallibility of
spirit, whereby as by a divine oracle, all questions in religion are finally
determined page 132. However in your general charges, I left you to run
riot, and disperse your follies, according as you would your self: yet now you
are fallen on a particular, and a particular as eminent in virtue as he is in
place; you may perhaps expect a particular answer. And lest your expectation
should be frustrate, I will see you satisfied. First for your language such it
is, as one may thence conjecture easily what foul heart it comes from. They
that have pure hearts cannot possibly have so impure a mouth: for (...), out of
the abundance of the heart it is that the mouth speaks. And though your
railing accusation does deserve no other answer, than the Lord rebuke thee:
yet I must tell you now, being thus put to it, that you are much mistaken in
the man you drive at. And you had come more near unto him, and the truth it
self, had you bestowed that character on him, which Possidonius gives you of
S. Austin, viz. Profactibus and studiis favens erat, and exultans bononum
omnium, In vit. Augustini. c.8.
indisciplinationem pie and sancte tolenans fratrum, ingemiscens que de
iniquitatibus malorum, sive eorum qui intra ecclesia^, sive eorum qui extra
ecclesiam constituti sunt, dominicis lucris semper gaudens, and damnis moerens,
which may thus be Englished; He was a favorer of learning a friend of goodness
and good men, and suffered with great both patience and piety, the
inconformable averseness of his brethren from the public discipline, and
grieved at the iniquity of ill men, whether they were within the pale of the
Church, or without the same; as one that always was affected with the
successes of Gods Church, according as it gained, or lost, as it thrived or
faded. This character if your malice will not suffer you to apply unto him,
give me leave to do it; and disproove any of it if you can. And I will add
withal, though you grieve to hear it, that both for the sincerity of his
conversation, as a private man, and for the piety of his endeavors as a
public person, you would be shrewdly troubled to find his equal in this
Church, since the first reformation of religion in K. Edwards time. And for a
witness hereunto I dare call your self; who making all the search you could
into him, and that with a malicious eye, which commonly is wont to spy the
smallest error; you have not yet detected him of any personal default as a
private man. And as for those particular charges which you lay unto him, as a
public person, they are so poor (more than the clamor that they make) that
they are hardly worth the answering* Next for your charges, which that you may
the better see, I mean to take them all as they lie in order, and speak as
briefly to them, as you would desire. First for the enterteinment, of his
Majesty at the universitie, tell me I pray you of all loves, how would you
have contrived it better, had you been master of the Ceremonies for that place
and time? Would you have had a sermon? Why the king had one. Would you have
fitted him with Academicall exercises? there was as little want of that:
Orations in the fields, the Church, the Colleges, the Convocation, and the
Library. Would you have left out plays? When did you ever know an Academicall
enterteinment of the king without them. Would you have had the plays in
Latin? Consider that the Queen was a principal guest, and they were
commanded to be in English. But sir conceal your grief no longer. I know what
it is that troubles you, and makes you call it scurrillous interlude, and say
that it was made in disgrace of piety. All that offends you is, that
Melancholico, a Puritan passion in one of the commedies, was in conclusion
married to Concupiscentia; In case you do not like the wedding, why did you
not come thither to forbid the banes. The Spartans used to show their drunken
slaves unto their children, the better to deter them from so base a vice. And
how know you but that the representing of that humor on the open stage, may
let men see the follies of it, and so weane them from it. But however the
person you so grossly abuse, could not possibly have leisure, farther than in
the general to command all things should be without offense, which he most
carefully did. That which you next except against, is the audatious and
presumptuous speech that you so much talk of. And what was that? Assuredly no
more, than that his Grace, then Bishop of London threatened your learned
Counsel Mr. Prinne, to lay him by the heels for his too much sauciness. Not
as you say, (and would have simple folk believe you) for bringing a
Prohibition from the Courts of law; but for his insolent and irreverent
behavior intendring it unto the Court of the high Commission. Your self Mass.
Burton are not called in question, for your preaching; but for your factious
and seditious preaching: nor was he threatened because he tendered to the Court
a Prohibition, but because he tendered it in such a malapert and ungracious
manner. This makes a difference in the case. Had he behaved himself contra
bonos mores, before an Ordinary Justice, he must have either found out suerties
for his good behavior; or been committed for his fault; no remedy. And will
you not allow the Court of High Commission, or any Prelate in the same, as much
if not a little more authority, then a common Justice? Perhaps you think,
because Mass. Prinne is of a factious Tribunitian spirit; he must be
Sancrosanct and uncontrolable as the Tribunes were. When you can prove his
calling to so high a place; you may do well to challenge the prerogatives
belonging to it. In the mean time suffer him to be taken up and censured as
he has deserved. Next for his Majesty's declaration about lawful sports, you
have no reason to charge that on my Lord Archbishop, as if it were a matter of
his procuring: or if it were, to reckon it amongst his faults.

His sacred Majesty treading in the steps of his royal Father, thought fit to
suffer his good Subjects to enjoy that innocent freedom, which before they
did; in using moderate and lawful recreations on the Sunday, after the divine
and public Offices of the Church were ended, both for morning and evening*
and of the which, they had been more deprived in these latter days, then
before they were. And it was more then time, perhaps, that somewhat should be
done to repress your follies: who under a pretense of hindering recreations
upon that day, had in some parts, put down all feasts of dedications, of the
Churches commonly called Wakes, which they which did it, did without all
authority. A pious and a Princely Act, however you and such as you, traduce it
every day in your scandalous pamphlets. Nor does it more belong to a Christian
King, to keep the holy days by the Church established, whereof that is one,
from being profaned by labor, and unlawful pleasures; then to preserve them,
quantum in ipsis est, at lest, from being overcome with Iudaisme or
superstition. And you might see how some out of your principles came to have as
much if not more of them Jew, then the Christian in them, about the time when
the declaration came forth. All that my Lord the Archbishop had to do therein,
was to commit the publication of it to his suffragan Bishops according to his
Maties. just will and pleasure: and if that be the thing you except against,
your quarrel is not at his Act, but his obedience. Last of all, where you say,
that with his right hand he is able to sweep down the third part of the
stars in heaven; and that he has a Papal infallibility of spirit, by which
as by a Divine Oracle all questions in religion are finally determined: that
only is put in because you have a mind to charge on him those innovations, as
you call them, that you complain of in the Church. What innovations you have
noted we shall see hereafter; when they will prove to be no other then a sick
man's dream. I only tell you now, that in all the Hierarchy, you could not
possibly have pitched on one less liable and obnoxious to the accusation. For
being vir antiquae fidei, and antiquissimi moris, take them both together: you
may be sure he neither will nor can do any thing that tends to innovation
either in faith or discipline. In case your self and such as you, would suffer
him in quiet, to restore this Church to its ancient luster; and bring it unto
that estate in which it was in Queen Elizabeth's first time, before your
predecessors in the faction had turned all decency and order out of the
public service of Almighty God: I dare presume he would not trouble you nor
them, by bringing in new ordinances of his own devising. But this if he
endeavor, as he ought to do, you charge him presently for an innovator: not
that he innovates any thing in the ancient forms of worship in this Church
established, but that he labors to suppress those innovations, which you and
those of your descent have introduced into the same. But one may see by that
which follows, that it is malice to his person, and no regard unto the Church,
that makes you pick out him to bear so great a share in these impudent
clamours. For where his grace had took great care for inhibiting the sale of
books tending to Socinianisme; and had therefore received thanks from the
pen of a Jesuit, as your self informs us: that his most pious care is by
you calumniated, for prohibiting of such books, as exalt the sole authority of
Scripture for the only rule of faith, p. 153. I see Socinus and his followers
are beholding to you for your good opinion: and so you may cry down the
Prelates, you care not how you do advance the reputation of such desperate
heretics. But it is now with him, and the other Prelates, as heretofore it
was with the Primitive Christians. Tanti non est bonum, quanti est odium
Christianorum, as Tertullian has it.

Nor stay you here. Other particulars there are which you have a fling at. You
tell us of my Lord of Ely, whose books you are not fit to carry, that if he
undertake an answer unto your doughty dialogue between A. and B. Surely he
will sacrifice all the remainder of his reason (if any be left in him) upon it.
Why so? For you are sure he can never answer it, except with railing and
perverting, wherein lies his principal faculty, (your own you mean) in
fighting against the truth, etc. p. 127. Of my Lord Bishop of Chichester you
give this Item, that it were strange if such a mystery of iniquity (as you
there complain of) should be found in any but a Prelate, and in this one by
name, for a tried champion of Rome, and so devout a votary to his Queen of
Heaven, p. 126. My Lord of Norwich is entitled in the News from Ipswich, by
the name of little Pope Regulus, most exceeding prettily. And finally you tell
us of those Bishops that attend the Court whom you include un^er the name of
Amasiahs; as did your learned Counsel in his Histrio-Mastix: that there is not
any thing more common in their mouths then declamations against the good
Ministers of the land, the Kings most loyal, dutiful, faithful, obedient,
peaceable subjects; whom they accuse, you say, as factious, seditious, and
turbulent persons, dissaffected to present government, enemies of the Kings
prerogative, and what not. p. 48.49. So you, but were it any thing material, I
could tell you otherwise, and make it manifest both to you and all the world,
that those whom you traduce most foully, and against whom your stomach rises
in so vile a manner; are such who both for their endeavors for this Churches
honor, fidelity unto the service of the King, and full abilities in learning,
have had no equals in this Church, since the Reformation. This could I do, if
I conceived it proper to this place and time; and that I did not call to mind
what Velleius taught me, viz. Vivorum ut magna admiratio, ita censura est
difficilis.

Nor do you only breath out malice, but you threaten ruin, you conjure all
the kingdom to rise up against them, and magnify those disobedient spirits,
which hitherto have stood it out in defiance of them: and seem content, in
case their lives might run an hazard, to foregoe your own. For likening them
unto the builders of the Tower of Babel, p. 32. you do thus proceed. But as
then so now, the Lord is able by an uncouth way, which they never dreamed of,
to confound them and their work, to their eternal infamy. Even so O Lord. p.
33. And more then so, you tell us also by what means it shall come to pass,
viz. that it shall rise, as it were from beneath them, whereas their height
seems to secure them from all danger, as trampling all things under feet,
etc. yet by that which seems to them most contemptible, shall they fall from
that which is below them, shall their calamity arise, p. 97. However to make
all things sure, you stir both heaven and earth against them. You let the
nobility to understand, that if we sit down thus and hide us under the
hatches, whilst the Romish Pirates do surprise us and cut our throats, etc.
What Volumes will be sufficient to chronicle to posterity, the baseness of
degenerous English spirits, become so unchristianized, as to set up antichrist
above Christ and his anointed, and to suffer our selves to be cheated and
nose-wiped, of our religion, laws, liberties, and all our glories, and that by
a sort of bold Romish mountebankes and juglers, p. 20. What then advise you to
be done? that in the name of Christ they rouse up their noble and christian
zeal, and magnanimous courage for the truth, and now stick close to God and
the King, in helping the Lord and his anointed against the mighty. p. 23. In
your address unto the Judges, you conjure them thus. For Gods sake therefore,
since his Majesty has committed unto you the sword of Justice, draw it forth to
defend the laws against such innovators, who (as much as in them lies) divide
between the King and the people. p. 31. In that from Ipswich, you and your
brethren in that, made it call out upon the nation generally, saying, O
England, England, if ever thou will be free from Pests, and Judgments, take
notice of these thy Antichristian prelates desperate practices, innovations,
and Popish designs, to bewail, oppose, redress them, with all thy force and
power. Then those of the better sort, O all you English Courtiers, Nobles, and
others, who have any love or spark of religion, piety, zeal, any tenderness
of his Majesty's honor or care for the Churches, Peoples, or the Kingdoms
safety, yet remaining within your generous breasts, put to your helping hands
and prayers to rescue our religion and faithful Ministers now suspended, from
the jaws of these devouring wolves, and tyrannizing Lordly Prelates, etc. All
sorts of people thus implored to promote the cause, you labor to persuade the
King, in your Epistle Dedicatory, before the Pasquill, how deeply he is
engaged to close with God and his good subjects, against all these innovators,
and disturbers of the peace, and distracters of the unity of his kingdom,
especially considering whose Vicegerent he is, and before whose woeful
Tribunal he must give a strict account, how he has managed so weighty a
charge; in the Epistle to your Apology. Finally in your Pasquill, p. 141. You
tell us how it does concern our gracious Sovereign, our Nobles and
Magistrates of the land, to strengthen their hands with judgment and justice,
to cut of these workers of iniquity, and to root them out of the confines and
limits of the Kingdom, etc. applying so to them a passage in the book of
prayers, for the Gunpowder day, intended by the Church against all such as are
so treacherously affected, as those traitors were.

Here is enough, a man would think, to effect the business; yet this is not
all. For should there come a Parliament, you would adventure your own life, to
make sure work on it. Assuring us, that if it were a law in England, as once
amongst the Locrians, that whosoever would propound a new law, should come with
an halter about his neck, that if it pleased not the Senate, the hangman was
ready to do his office; and that if opportunity served, you would come with an
halter about your neck with this proposition, that it would please the great
Senate of this land to take into their sad consideration, whether upon such
woeful experience, it were not both more honorable to the King, and more safe
for his kingdom etc. That the Lordly prelacy were turned into such a godly
government, as might suite better with Gods word, and Christ's sweet yoke. p.
109.110. Nay so transcendent is your malice, that you propose a speedy
execution of them as the only remedy to divert Gods judgments, for thus you
state the question in the news from Ipswich. Is, it not then high time for his
Majesty to hang up such Arch traitors to our faith, Church, Religion, and such
true-bred sons of the Roman Antichrist? And anon after more expressly.
Certainly till his Majesty shall see these purgations rectified, superstition
and idolatry removed, etc. and hang up some of these Romish Prelates and
inquisitors before the Lord, as the Gibeonites once did the seven sons of
Saul, we can never hope to abate any of Gods Plagues, etc. And to the same
effect, in your address to the nobility, All the world feel in what a
distracted state things do stand, what a cloud of divine displeasure hangs over
us, how ill we thrive in our affairs, etc. Certainly if such be suffered to
go on thus as they do, God must needs destroy us. p. 24. Finally, that you
may seem to show some compassion on them, before the executioner do his
office, you thus invite them to repentance. Certainly hell enlarges her self
for you, and your damnation sleeps not, if you speedily repent not, p. 81. Of
your Pulpit-libell. Hanging, and hell, and all too little to appease your
malice: which is advanced so high, that no chastizement of their persons, but
an utter abolition of the calling, will in fine content you. You may remember
what you preached once at a fast in London. Where pleading for reformation
under Joshua's removal of the accursed thing, you told the people, Bishop of
Elys Epistle Ded. before his treatise of the Sabbath.
that the maine thing to be removed was that damnable Hierarchy of Bishops who
made no matter of sincking Church and State, so they might swim in honors
and worldly wealth. This is the thing you aim at, and so greatly long for:
which to effect, you care not what strange course you run, so you may effect
it. Scelus omne nefasque hac mercede placent. Lucan lib. 1


Thus have I briefly summed together those most uncharitable and unchristian
passages, which every where occur, dispersed and scattered in your Pamphlets.
And having summed them up, dare make a challenge unto all the world, to show me
if they can, such a railing Rabsakeh, so sanguinarian a spirit, so
pestilentiall a disease in a Christian Church. All the marre-Prelates, and
make-bates of the former times, with those which have succeeded since, though
Masters in this art of mischief, come so short of this, that I persuade my
self you do condemn them in you heart, as poor spirited fellows, in whom
there is too much of that Christian prudence which you so deride. p. 28. But I
forget my first intent, which was to muster up your raylings, and produce them
only; but not to quit you with the like: though should I use you in your
kind, and lay the whip on the fools back, it were a very easy error, and
such as possibly might receive a fair construction. Nam cujus temperantiae
fuerit de Antonio querentem, Tullie. Phil. 2.
abstinere maledictis. To speak of such a thing as you, and not fly out a
little, were a kind of dullness. Yet I shall hold my hand a while, until we
meet again at the half turn, where possibly I may be bold to tell you more
of my opinion. Mean time, I hope you do not think, that all this barking at
the Moon, will make her either hide her head, or chang her course: or that by
all this noise and clamor you can attract, the Nobles, Judges, Courtiers, or
any other to take part with you; and follow those most desperate counsels which
you lay before them. The world is grown too well acquainted with these
dotages, to be moved much at them. Nor could my Lords the Bishops but expect
before hand, what censures would be passed upon them by such tongues as yours;
if once they went about to suppress your follies, and to reduce the Church to
that decent order, from which your self and your accomplices have so strangely
wandered: Howsoever their great care deserve better recompense; yet was it very
proper you should do your kind: and they may count it for an honor, that
such a one as your self, has declaimed against them. Reg^um est cum been
feceris male audire. Lib. 4.14.
And it is very well observed by our incomparable Hooker, to be the lot of all
that deal in public affairs whether of Church or Commonwealth, that what
men list to surmise of their doings, be it good or ill, they must before hand
patiently arm their minds to endure. Besides being placed on high, as a
watchtower, they know full well how many an envious eye will be cast upon them:
especially amongst such men as brother B. to whom great eminences are far
more dreadful then great vices, and a good name as dangerous as a bad.
Sinistra erga eminentes interpretatio, Tacit. in vi^a Agricol.
nec minus periculum ex magna fama, quam ex mala. And herein they may comfort
and rejoice their hearts, that whatsoever sinister and malicious censures are
now passed upon them; yet there will one day come a time, in which all hearts
shall be open, all desires made known, and when no counsels shall be hid: and
then the Lord shall make it known, who were indeed on his side, and who
against him. In the mean time, suspense of censure and exercise of charity,
were far more sit and seemly for a Christian man; then the pursuit of those
uncharitable and most impious courses, whereby you go about to bring the
Church of God and the Rulers of it, into discredit and contempt. I know
assuredly, how gloriously soever you conceive of your own dear self, that
you are no (...), no searcher of the heart, nor no discerner of the spirits.
And therefore I am bold to tell you what I have learned from Venerable Bede,
viz. ut ea facta, quae dubium est quo animo fiant, in meliorem partem
interpretemur, that all men's actions, whereof we know not the intent, should be
interpreted to the better. How much the rather should this rule be in use
amongst us in points of counsel: the hearts of Kings (for he has had his
share in the declamation) being unsearchable in themselves, and unseene to us;
the resolutions of the Church, grounded on just and weighty reasons, being to
be obeyed, and not disputed, much less rashly censured. This counsel, if it
come too late to you, may yet come soon enough to others; and to them I leave
it.

CHAP. V. An Answer to the quarrels of H. B. against the Bishops, in reference
to their Jurisdiction, and Episcopal government.
H.B. endites the Bishops in a Praemunire for exercising such a jurisdiction, as
is not warrantable by the Laws. The Bishops not in danger of any Statute made
by King Henry the eight. The true intention of the Statute, 1. Eliz. c. 1. The
Court of High Commission in the same established. The Statute 1. Ed. 6. c. 2.
on what ground enacted: repealed by Qu. Mary, and so still continues. The use
of excommunication taken away by that statute of King Edward. A final answer
to the cavills about the exercise of Episcopal jurisdiction. Why H. B. and the
Brethren do seem to plead so hard for the Kings supremacy; the Bishops
challenged for oppressing the Kings liege people; the Judges, for not sending
out their Prohibitions to retain them. H. B. the only Clergy man that stands
for Prohibitions. King James his order in that case. The quality of their
offense, who are suspended by their ordinaries, for not publishing the book for
sports. The Bishops charged with persecuting Gods faithful Ministers, and how
deservedly.
HAving made known your good affections, unto the calling and the persons; we
must now see what you have to say against the proceedings of the Bishops, in
their place and calling. For sure you would not have it thought, that you have
lifted up your voice so like a Trumpet, to startle and awaken the drowzie
world; and that there was no cause to provoke you to it. No, there was cause
enough you say, such as no pure and pious soul could endure with patience;
their whole behavior both in the consistory and the Church being so
unwarrantable. For in their consistory they usurp a power peculiar to the
supreme majesty, and grievously oppress the subject against law and
conscience: and ^n the Church, they have endeavored to erect a throne for
Antichrist, obtruded on it many a dangerous innovation, and furiously
persecuted the Lords faithful servants for not submitting thereun^o. Therefore
no wonder to be made, if being called forth by Christ, who has found you
faithful, Epist. Dedicat.
to stand in his cause, and witness it unto the world; you persecute the
Prelacie with fire and halter, and charge them with those usurpations,
oppressions, innovations and persecutions, which you have brought in readiness
to make good against them; hoping in very little time to see their honor in
the dust, and the whole government of the Church committed to the holy Elders,
whereof you are chief. In case you cannot prove what you undertake, you are
contented to submit to the old Law amongst the Locrians, and let the
Executioner do his office. I take you at your word, and expect your evidence:
first that the Prelates have usurped a power peculiar to his sacred Majesty,
which is the first part of your charge. How prove you that. Marry say you,
because of sundry statutes, as in King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth,
and Queen Elizabeth's time, which do annex all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
unto the Crown of England; so as no Prelate or other person has any power to
visit Ecclesiastical persons, etc. but he must have it immediately from the
King, and confirmed by Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, page
68. So far the tenor of the Law, if you tell us true; or rather if your
learned Counsel rightly informed Dr. Bastwicke in it, from whose mouth you
took it. Now for the practice of our Prelates, you tell us that they neither
have at any time, nor never sought to have any the Kings Letters patents under
the great Seal of England, for their keeping Courts and Visitations. But do
all in their own names, and under their own Seals, contrary to the Law in
that behalf, page 69. There be your Major and your Minor. The conclusion
follows. So as being a power not derived from the King, as the immediate
fountain of it, it proves to be at least a branch of that foreign power
altogether excluded in the Statute, 1. Eliz. c. 1. And it is flatly against the
oath of supremacy in the same statute which all Prelates take, wherein they
profess and promise faith and true allegiance to the Queens highness, her
heirs and lawful successors, and to their power to defend all jurisdictions,
privileges, etc. granted to the Queens highness, her heirs, etc. p. 70.71.
In fine you bring them all in a praemunire, and leave them to the learned in the
law: of which if you were one, or that your learned Counsel might sit Judge, to
decide the controversy; Lord have mercy upon them.

For answer hereunto we would feign know of you, where it is said, what Law,
what Statute so resolves it, that no Prelate or other person has any power to
visit Ecclesiastical persons, etc. but he must have it immediately from the
King and confirmed by Letters patents under the great Seal of England. None of
the Acts of Parliament made by King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth or
Queen Elizabeth, speak one word that way. The act of the Submission of the
Clergy, 25. Hen. 8. cap. 19. on which your fond conceit is grounded, if it
has any ground at all, says not as you would have it say, the Clergy shall
not put in ure, etc. any constitutions, of what sort soever, without the Kings
royal assent, and authority in that behalf: but that without the Kings royal
assent and authority in that behalf first had, they should not enact or put in
ure any new Canons, by them made in their Convocations, as they had done
formerly. This law observed still by the Clergy to this very day, not meeting
in their Convocation, until they are assembled by his Majesty's writ, directed
to the Archbishop of either Province; nor when assembled, treating of or making
any Canons, without the Kings leave first obtained; nor putting any of them in
execution, before they are confirmed by his sacred Majesty under the broad
Seal of England. Is there no difference gentle brother, between enacting new
Canons at their own discretion; and executing those which custom and long
continuance of time have confirmed and ratified. If you should be so simple as
so to think (as I have no great confidence either in your law or wisdom) you
may be pleased to understand, that by the very self same statute, All Canons
which be not contrariant nor repugnant to the Laws, statutes and customs of
the Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings prerogative Royal, shall be
now still executed and used as they were before the making of that act, till
the said Canons should be viewed by the 32. Commissioners in the same
appointed, which not being done, as yet, (although the said Commission was
revived by Parliament 3, 4. to Edw. 6. c. 11.) all the old Canons quallified as
before is said, are still in force. So that for exercise of any Episcopal
jurisdiction, founded upon the said old Canons, or any of the new which have
been since confirmed by the King or his predecessors: there is no necessity of
special Letters Patents under the broad Seal of England, as you feign would
have it. There was another Statute of King Henry the eight concerning the Kings
highness to be the supreme head of the Church of England, and to have
authority to reform all errors, heresies and abuses in the same. But
whatsoever power was therein declared, as due and proper to the King, is not
now material: the whole act being repealed A. 1. and 2. Ph. and M. c. 8. and
not restored in the reviver of Qu. Eliz. 1. Eliz. c. 1. in which you instance
in your Margin. [Nor can you find much comfort by that Statute, 1. Eliz c. 1.
wherein you instance, if you consider it, and the intention of the same, as you
ought to do. You may conjecture by the title of it, what the meaning is; For
it is entitled, An act restoring to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction over
the state Ecclesiastical and spiritual, and abolishing all foreign power
repugnant to the same. The preamble unto the act makes it yet more plain.
Where it is said that in the time of King Henry the eight, diverse good Laws,
and Statutes were made and established, as well for the utter extinguishment and
putting away of all usurped and foreign powers and authorities out of this
Realm, etc. as also for the restoring and uniting to the imperial Crown
thereof the ancient jurisdictions, authorities, superiorities and preheminences
to the same of right belonging and apperteining: by means whereof the subjects
were disburdened of diverse great and intolerable charges and exactions before
that time unlawfully taken and exacted by such foreign power and authority, as
before that was usurped. Which makes it manifest that there was no intent in
the Queen or Parliament, to alter any thing in the ordinary power Episcopal,
which was then and had long before been here established: but to extinguish
that usurped and foreign power, which had before been challenged by the Sea of
Rome, and was so burdensome unto the subject. The body of the Act is most
plain of all. For presently on the abolishment of all foreign power and
jurisdiction, spiritual and Ecclesiastical, heretofore used within this
Realm, there follows a declaration of all such jurisdictions, etc. as by any
spiritual or Ecclesiastical power and authority has heretofore or may
lawfully be exercised or used for the visitation of the Ecclesiastical state
and persons, and for reformation, order and correction of the same, and of all
manner errors, heresies, schisms, etc. to be for ever united and annexed to
the imperial crown of this Realm. Then in the next words follows the
establishment of the High Commission: it being then and there enacted that the
Queens highness, her heirs and successors, shall have full power and
authority by virtue of the said act, by letters Patents under the great Seal
of England, to assign, name and authorize, etc. such person or persons being
natural borne subjects to her highness, her heirs and successors, as her
Majesty shall think meet to exercise, use, occupy and execute under her
highness, her heirs and successors, all manner of Jurisdictions,
privileges, and preheminences within these her Realms of England, etc. and to
visit, reform, order, redress, correct and amend all such errors, heresies,
schisms, abuses, offenses; contempts and enormities whatsoever, which by any
manner Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, authority or jurisdiction, can or
may be lawfully reformed, etc. Plainly in all this act there is nothing
contrary to that ordinary jurisdiction, which is and has been claimed and
exercised by Episcopal authority, in the Church of England: nothing at all
which does concern the purchasing or procuring of Letters Patents, for their
keeping Courts, and Visitations; as you seduced by your learned Counsel,
bear the world in hand. My reason is, because whatever jurisdiction was here
declared to be annexed unto the crown, is called a restoring of the ancient
jurisdiction unto the same: and certainly, the ordinary Episcopal power, of
ordination, excommunication, and such like Ecclesiastical censures, were never
in the crown in fact, nor of right could be: and therefore could not be
restored. And secondly because whatever power is here declared to be in the
Queen, her heirs and uccessours; she is enabled to transfer upon such
Commissioners, as she or they shall authorize under the great Seal of
England, for execution of the same. Now we know well that there is no authority
in the high Commission (which is established on this clause) derogating from
the ordinary Episcopal power; and therefore there was none supposed in the act
it self, to be invested in the Queen: the said Episcopal authority remaining
as it did, and standing on the self same grounds as it had done formerly.
Which said, the last part of the Argument touching the oath of supremacy,
taken and to be taken by every Bishop, that is already answered in the
Premises: the said oath being only framed, for the abolishment of all
foreign and extraordinary power; not for the altering of the ordinary and
domestical jurisdiction, if I so may call it, in this Church established.

I hope the Prelates are now out of danger of the Praemunire, which you
threatened them; though you not out of danger of the Locrian law: And if K.
Edward the 6. help you not, I know no remedy, but that according to your own
conditions, the executioner may be sent for to do his office. Now for K.
Edward the 6. the case stood thus. King Edward being a Minor about nine years
old, at his first coming to the crown; there was much heaving at the Church,
by some great men which were about him, who purposed to enrich themselves with
the spoils thereof. For the effecting of which purpose it was thought
expedient, to lessen the authority of those Bishops which were then in place;
and make all those that were to come, the more obnoxious to the Court; upon
this ground there passed a statute 10 of this King consisting of two principal
branches: whereof the first took off all manner of elections, and writs of
Conge d'peslier, formerly in use; the other did if not take off, yet very much
abate the edge of Ecclesiastical censures. In the first branch it was enacted,
that from thenceforth no writ of Conge d' peslier be granted, nor election of
any Archbishop or Bishop, by Deane and Chapter made; but that the king may by
his letters Patents at all times, when any Arch-bishopricke or Bishopric is
void, confer the same on any whom the king shall think meet. The second
clause concerned the manner of proceeding from that time to be used in
spiritual courts, viz. that all summons, Citations, and other process
Ecclesiastical in all suites and causes of instance, and all causes of
correction, and all causes of bastardie, or bigamie, or de jure patronatus,
Probates of Testaments and Commissions of administrations of persons deceased,
etc. be made with in the name and with the style of the king, as it is in writs
Original or Judicial at the Common Law, etc. As also that no manner of person
or persons who has the exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction use other
seal of jurisdiction but wherein his majesty's Arms be engraven, etc. on
penalty of running in his Majesty's displeasure and indignation, and suffering
imprisonment at his will and pleasure. The reason of this order is thus
delivered in the Preamble. To the second branch, viz. because that all
authority of jurisdiction spiritual and temporal is derived and deducted
from the kings Majesty, as supreme head of these Churches, and Realms of
England and Ireland, etc. and that all Courts Ecclesiastical within the said
two realms, be kept by no other power or authority, either foreign, or
within the Realm, but by the authority of the kings most excellent Majesty.
Which Act, with every branch and clause thereof was afterward repealed, 1 of
Queen Marie, cap. 2. and has stood so repealed to this very time. For
howsoever you pretend, and all your fellow libellers insist upon it, that the
said statute was revived in the first year of K. James of blessed memory, and
therefore that you are yet safe from the Locrian law: yet this pretense will
little help you. That their assertion or pretenses, if examined rightly will
prove to be a very poor surmise; invented only by such boutefeus as you and
your Accomplices, to draw the Prelates into obloquy with the common people, and
make your Proselytes believe that they usurp a power peculiar to his sacred
Majesty, it being positively delivered by my Lords the Judges, with an
unanimous consent, and so declared by my Lords chief Justices in the
Star Chamber, the 14 of May now last past, that the said Act of Repeal 1 of
Queen Mary, does still stand in force, as unto that particular statute by you
so much pressed; your desperate clamours unto the contrary notwithstanding. Nor
does there want good reason why the said Statute of K. Edward was at first
repealed, or why the said Repeal should be still in force. For being it was
enacted in that Statute that from thenceforth all Ecclesiastical process
should be made in the kings name and style, not only in all suites or causes
of instance, bastardy, bigamie, Probates of Testaments, etc. which have much in
them of a civil, or a mixed nature at the lest; but in all causes of correction
also: it came to pass that excommunication, and other censures of the Church,
which are spiritual merely, and in no sort civil, were thereby either quite
abolished, or of none effect. And it continued so all King Edwards reign, to
the no small increase of vice, because it nourished a presumption of impunitie
in the vicious person. This Father Latimer complains of in his sermon
preached before that King at Westminster, Anno 1550. thus. Lechery is used
throughout England, and such Lechery as is used in none other place of the
world. And yet it is made a matter of sport, a matter of nothing, a laughing
matter and a trifle not to be passed on, nor reformed, etc. Well I trust it
will one day be amended, etc. And here I will make a suite to your highness,
to restore unto the Church the discipline of Christ, in excommunicating such as
be notable offenders; nor never devise any other way, For no man is able to
devise any better way, than that God has done; with excommunication to put
them from the congregation till they be confounded. Therefore restore Christ's
discipline for excommunication. And that shall be a mean both to pacify Gods
wrath and indignation, and also that less abomination shall be used, than in
times past has been, and is at this day. I speak this of a Conscience, and I
mean to move it of a will to your Grace and your Realm. Bring into the Church
of England open discipline of Excommunication, that open sins may be stricken
withal. So far Father Latimer. What think you sir of this? See you not
reason for it now, why your said Statute was repealed, and why the said
repeal, should continue still. Put all that has been said together, and I
can see no hopes you have to escape the penalty of the Law by your self
proposed; but that you cry peccavi, and repent your follies.

So far in answer to your Cavils, (for Arguments I cannot call them) I have
been bold to justify the proceedings of the Bishops, in their Courts
Episcopal: wherein there is not any thing that they usurp upon the King, or
that authority which is inseparably annexed to the Regal diadem. For
granting that all authority of jurisdiction spiritual is derived from the
King, as supreme head of the Church of England (although that title by that
name, be not now assumed in the style Imperial) and that all Courts
Ecclesiastical within this Realm be kept by no other authority, either
foreign or within this Realm, but by authority of the kings most excellent
majesty; as is averred in the said Preamble of King Edwards statute: yet this
if rightly understood, would never hurt the Bishops, or advantage you. But my
reason is, because that whenever the king grants out his Conge d' peslier for
the election of a Bishop, and afterward does pass his royal assent to the
said election, and send his Mandate to the Metropolitan for consecration of the
party which is so elected: he does withal confer upon him, a power to
exercise that jurisdiction, which by his consecration, done by the kings
especial Mandate, he has atteined to. And this may also serve for answer to
your other cavil; but that Bishops may not hold their courts or visitations
without letters Patents from the king. For were there such a law, (as there is
no such) yet were the Prelates safe enough from your Praemunire: because the
Royal assent to the election, and Mandat for the consecration, passing by
broad seal, as the custom is; enable them once consecrated to exercise what
ever jurisdiction is by the Canon incident to Episcopal power. No need of
special letters Parents for every Act of jurisdiction, as you idly dream. No
more than if a man being made a Justice of the Peace under the broad seal of
England, and having took his oath as the law requires; should need for every
special Act some special warrant; or any other kind of warrant than what was
given him in the general, when first made a Justice. And yet I trow the King
is the immediate fountain also of all temporal power; and no man dare execute
authority, but from and by him. Touching his Majesty's supremacy, more than in
answer to your clamours, I shall say nothing at this present as neither of
this place nor purpose. It is an Argument of great weight; fit rather for a
special treatise, than an occasional replication. Only I will be bold to tell
you, that if the kings supremacy were not more truly and sincerely, (without
any color or dissimulation) as the Canon has it, defended by my Lords the
Bishops, than by such as you: it would be at a loss ere long, and settled on
the vestrie wherein you preside. For wot you what King James replied on the
like occasion. When Dr. Reynolds in the Conference at Hampton Court, came in
unseasonably once or twice with the Kings Supremacy. Dr. Reynolds quoth the
King, you have often spoken for my supremacy: and it is well. But know you any
here, or any elsewhere, who like of the present Government Ecclesiastical,
that find fault or dislike with my supremacy! And (shortly after) putting his
hand unto his hat, his Matie said, My Lords the Bishops I may thank you, that
these men do thus plead for my Supremacy. They think they cannot make their
party good against you, but by appealing unto it, as if you or some that adhere
unto you, were not well affected toward it. But if once you were out and they
in place, I know what would become of my supremacy. No Bishop, no King, as
before I said. How like you this Mass. Burton, is not this your case? Mutato
nomine de ie fabula narratur. You plead indeed for the Kings supremacy; but
intend your own.

The next great crime you have to charge upon the Bishops, is that they do
oppress the kings Liege people, against law and conscience. How so. Because,
as you inform us, Prohibitions are not got so easily from the Courts of
Justice, as they have been formerly: and being gotten, find not such
entertainment and obedience* as before they did. This you conceive to be their
fault: and charge them that by stopping the ordinary course of law, the Kings
people are cut off from the benefit of the Kings good laws: so as it is become
very geason and a rare matter to obtain a Prohibition against their illegal
practices, in vexing and oppressing the kings good subjects. Nay, they are
grown so formidable of late, (as if they were some new generation of Giants)
that the very motion of a Prohibition against a Prelate, or their proceedings
in the high Commission, makes the Courts of Justice startle; so as good causes
are lost, and Innocents condemned because none dare plead and judge their
cause according to the Kings Laws, whereby we ought all to be governed, p.
69.70. My Masters of the Law, and my Lords the Judges, will conne you little
thanks for so soul a slander, greater then which cannot be laid on the
profession, or the Courts of Justice. What none dare plead, nor none dare
judge according to the Laws? So you say indeed. And more then so, in your
address unto the Judges. What meane's, say you, that difficulty of obtaining
prohibitions now adays, whereby the Kings innocent Subjects (you are an
innocent indeed, God help you) should be relieved against their unjust
molestations and oppressions in the Ecclesiastical Courts, and high Commission?
What means that consternation of spirit among Lawyers, that few or none can
be found to plead a cause be it never so just, against an oppressing Prelate,
and are either menaced or imprisoned if they do. p. 29. Hoc est quod palles?
Is this the thing that so offends you, that prohibitions are restrained, or not
sent out so frequently from the Courts of Law, as of late they were, to the
diminishing if not annulling the authority of the Court Christian? I trow you
are the only Clergie-man that complains of this. Or if there be more such,
they be such as you, who only make a property of the civil Courts, by them to
escape their censures in the Ecclesiastical. Were you so innocent, as you would
have us think, you rather should rejoice for the Churches sake, that
Prohibitions fly not out so thick, as they have done formely, to the great
oppression of the Clergy in their suites and businesses, especially in those
which did concern the Patrimony of the Church, their tithes. And if my Lords
the Judges, are with more difficulty moved, to send abroad their Prohibitions,
then were their predecessors in the place before them; it is a pregnant
evidence of their great love to justice: Nor can it but be counted an honor to
them to leave every Court to that which is proper to it, and for the which it
was established. And God forbid the Church should ask or do any thing that
should incroach upon them, or invade any of their rights. What does this greeve
your conscience also? Good Sir consider with your self, what mischiefs
Clergymen were put to, when they could scarce commence a suite, but
prohibitione cautio est; a Prohibition was sent out, to stop the course of his
proceedings, or if he had a sentence to reverse that also. Or if you will not
trouble your self in thinking of it, will you be pleased to hear what our
late Sovereign King James has observed therein. If (says he) Prohibitions
should rashly, and headily be granted, then no man is the more secure of his
own, though he has gotten a sentence with him: for as good have no law or
sentence, as to have no execution thereof. A poor Minister with much labor and
expense, having exhausted his poor means, and being forced to forbear his
study, and to become non-resident from his flock, obtaines a sentence; and
then when he looks to enjoy the fruits thereof, he is defrauded of all by a
Prohibition: And so he is tortured like Tantalus, who when he has his Apple at
his mouth, and that he is gaping to receive it, then must it be pulled from him
by a Prohibition, and he not suffered to taste thereof. So far the Royal
Advocate has pleaded the poor Clergies cause. And did he nothing as a Judge?
Yes, he declared it to be his Office, to make every Court contain himself
within his own limits; and thereupon admonished all other Courts, that they
should be careful, every of them, to contain themselves within the bounds of
their own jurisdictions; the Courts of Common law, that they should not be so
forward and prodigal in multiplying their Prohibitions.

But you will say perhaps, that your exception lies against the stopping of
the course of Prohibitions, not so much, if at all, in real, as in personal
actions: and that you are offended only, because by this means the Kings
Innocent Subjects, are not relieved (as you and Mr. Prynne once were) from the
unjust oppressions of the Courts Ecclesiastical, and High Commission. Why,
what is the matter? There is, you tell us, a great persecution in the Church,
and many a faithful godly Minister, has been of late suspended from his
ministry, and outed of his benefice, by the Prelates, in the Courts aforesaid:
no remedy being to be had, as in former times from the Common Law. For as the
common rumor goes (at least you make a rumor of it) the course of Justice is
stopped in these cases, there being none dares open his mouth to plead a cause
against the Prelates. So you in your address to my Lords the Judges. p. 29.
For an example of the which, as well the persecution, as the want of Remedy,
you instance in the Ministers of Surrey, who are suspended of their ministry,
and outed of their means and freeholds against all law and conscience: yet are
so disheartened and overawed that they dare not contend in law against their
Prelate, [the Lord Bishop of Winton] for fear of further vexations, and are
out of hope of any fair hearing in an ordinary legal way. p. 70. of your
Pasquill. What want of remedy can you or they complain of, if they have not
sought it: or rather if their conscience tell them, and those with whom they
have advised, advertise them, that in such cases as this is, the Judges cannot
by the law, award a Prohibition, if they should desire it. Do you conceive the
case aright? If not, I will take leave to tell you; His Majesty having
published his Declaration about lawful pastimes on the Sunday, gives order to
his Bishops that publication thereof be made in all their several diocesses,
respectively. The Bishops hereupon appoint the Incumbent of every Church, to
read the book unto the people; that so the people might the better take notice
of it: and finding opposition to the said appointment; made by some refractory
persons, of your own condition, press them to the performance of it by virtue
of that Canonical obedience, which by their several oaths they were bound to
yield unto their Ordinaries: But seeing nothing but contempt, and contempt upon
contempt, after much patience and long-suffering, and expectation of
conformity to their said appointment, some of the most pervers amongst them,
have in some places, been suspended, as well a benificio as officio, for an
example to the rest. No man deprived, or outed, as you say, of his means and
livelihood, that I hear of yet? This is the Case. Which being merely
Ecclesiastical, as unto the ground, being a contempt of and against their
Ordinary; and merely Ecclesiastical, as unto the Censure, which was
suspension: I cannot see what remedy you can find for them amongst the
Lawyers, but that which every man might give them, good and wholesome Counsel.
And call you this a persecution? when a few refractarie persons are justly
punished in a legal way, for their disobedience? For howsoever they and you
pretend, that the Command was contrary to the Law of God, and could not be
performed with a safe conscience; yet this was only a pretense: their reading
of the book (had the Contents thereof displeased them) being no more an
Argument of their approbation of any thing therein contained; then when a
Common Crier reads a Proclamation, which perhaps he likes not* It must be
therefore some Association had and made amongst them, to stand it out unto the
last; and put some baffle or affront on that authority which had imposed it.

Such also is the persecution doubtless, which you so complain of in the two
whole Counties of Norfolk, and Suffolk, where in a very short space, (as you
say) there has been the foulest havoc of Ministers, and their flocks, etc.
as ever our eyes have seen: there being already, as you tell us, 60 Ministers
suspended, and between 60. and 80. more having had time given them till
Christ-tide (take head of Christmasse by all means, by which time, as you say,
they must either bid their good conscience farewell, or else their precious
Ministry, and necessary means. In all Queen Mary's time, no such havoc
made, in so short a time, o^ the faithful Ministers of God, in any part of,
yea, or in the whole land. p. 65. The same is also told us in the News from
Ipswich. Nay, more then so, you tell us how one or two godly Ministers (some of
your Associates) were threatened by Docter Corbet, Chancellor of that diocese,
with Pistolling and hanging, and I know not what; because they had refused to
read His Majesty's Declaration about lawful sports. In this you do as
shamefully belie the Chancellor, as you have done the Bishop in all the rest:
of whose proceedings in that diocese, I will present you with a short account,
that you may see how grossly you abuse the world. And first, you may be pleased
to know, that the Clergy of that Diocese, comprehending all that are in
spiritual dignity or office, and all Parsons, Vicars, Curates and
Schoolmasters (taking in the Lecturers with all) amount unto the number of
1500. or thereabouts. So that in case there had been 60. of that Fifteen
hundred suspended by the Bishop, as you say there were; had this been such a
terrible persecution, as you give it out for? But yet it is not so as you tell
us neither. For at the beginning of November, when you Preached that Pasquil,
of the Fifteen hundred, there were not twice fifteen, and that is not half
your number involved in any Ecclesiastical censure of what sort soever; and
not above sixteen suspended. Sixty and sixteen are alike in sound; but very
different in the number: and of those sixteen, eight were then absolved for a
time of further trial to be taken of them; and two did voluntarily resign
their places; so that you have but six suspended absolutely, and persisting so.
Now of the residue, there was one deprived, after notorious inconformitie for
12. years together, and final obstinacy after sundry several monitions:
eight excommunicated for not appearing at the Court, and four inhibited from
preaching; of the which four, one by his education, was a Draper, another was
a Weaver, and the third was a Tailor. Where are the 60. now, that you so cry
out of? I have the rather given you this in the particulars, (which were
collected faithfully unto my hands, out of the Registerie of that Diocese)
that you, and other men may see, your false and unjust clamours: the rather,
because it was related to me by a friend of mine in Glocestershire, that it
went current there amongst your Brethren, that your said 60. were suspended for
no other cause, then for repeating the doxologie at the end of the Lords
Prayer. So for your other number between 60. and 80. suspended upon day till
Christmasse (or Christide as you please to phrase it) upon examination of the
Registers, there appear but eight; and those not all suspended neither: two
being Excommunicated for not appearing. Eighty and Eight do come as near in
sound, as Sixty and Sixteen before: but differ more a great deal in the
Calculation. And so much for the grand persecution in the Diocese of Norwich.
How do you find it pray you, in other places? Why more or less say you over
all the Kingdom. For you complain as truly, but more generally, p. 27. that
many Godly Ministers in these days, are most unjustly, illegally, yea, and
incanonically also, in a most barbarous and furious manner, suspended,
excommunicated, outed of their livings, and deprived of all livelihood and
means to maintain themselves. How just soever the cause be on the Prelates
part, and that there be no other means to bring things to right, there where
the Orders of the Church are so out of order, then by the exemplary punishment
of the most pervers, to settle and reduce the rest: yet persecution it must be,
if you please to call it so. Such Innocent people, as your self, that run
point-blanck against the Orders of the Church, cannot be censured and proceeded
with in a legal way; but instantly you cry out, a Persecution. But thus did
your Forefathers in Queen Elizabeth's time: et nil mirum est si patrizent
filij.

CHAP. VI. The four first Innovations charged by H. B. upon the Bishops, most
clearly proved to be no Innovations.
Eight Innovations charged upon the Bishops by H. B. King James his order to
young Students in Divinity made an Innovation in point of doctrine: the reason
of the said order; and that it was agreeable to the old Canons of this Church.
Another Order of King James, seconded by his Majesty now being, with several
Books of private men made an Innovation of the Bishops. No difference between
the Church of Rome and England in Fundamentalls. Private opinions of some men,
made Innovations in point of doctrine. The Pope not Antichrist, for any thing
resolved by the Church of England. The doctrine of Obedience and of the
Sabbath, not altered, but revived, explained, and reduced to what it was of
old. No Innovation made in point of discipline. A general view of Innovations
charged upon the Bishops in point of worship. Bowing at the Name of Jesus,
praying toward the East, and adoration toward the Altar, no new Inventions;
not standing up at the holy Gospel. Crosse-worship falsely charged upon the
Bishops. No Innovation made by the Bishops in the civil government. The
dignity and authority of the High Commission.
AS is the persecution, such are the Innovations also, which you have charged
upon the Bishops, both yours and so both false alike. Yet such a neat contriver
are you, that you have made those Innovations which you dream of, the cause of
all that persecution which you so cry out of. For in your Pasquil, it is told
us, that we may see or hear at the least, of o^d heaving and shoving to erect
Altar-worship and Jesu-worship, and other inventions of men, and all, as is too
plain, to set up Popery again; and for not yielding to these things ministers
are suspended, excommunicated, etc. page 25, And page 64. you ground the
persecution (as you call it) in the Diocese of Norwich, upon the violent and
impetuous obtruding of new Rites and Ceremonies. moneys. You call upon the
Bishops by the name of Jesuitical novell Doctors, to blush and be ashamed, and
tell them that they do suspend, excommunicate and persecute with all fury Gods
faithful ministers, and all because they will not, they may not, they dare not
obey their wicked commands, which are repugnant to the laws both of God and
man. p. 81. If this be true, if those that be thus dealt with be Gods
faithful ministers, and the commands imposed upon them so wicked as you say
they are, contrary to the laws both of God and man: and tending so notoriously
to set up Popery again: you have the better end of the staff, and will
prevail at last, no question. Mean while you have good cause, as you please
to tell us, to comfort your self, and bless the name of God, in that he has
not left himself without witness, but has raised up many zealous and
courageous champions of his truth, I mean faithful ministers of his word, who
choose rather to lose all they have, then to submit and prostitute themselves to
the wicked, unjust, and base commands of usurping and Antichristian mushromes:
their very not yiedling in this battle being a present victory. p. 83 But on
the other side, if the commands of the Superior be just and pious, agreeable to
the orders of the Church, and all pure antiquity: then are your godly faithful
ministers no better then factious and schismatic persons: and you your own
dear self a seditious Boutefeiu, so to encourage and applaud them for standing
out against authority. This we shall see the better, by looking on those
Innovations, which as you say, The Prelates of later days have haled in by
head and shoulders, being besides and against the law of the land, and much
more the law of God. p. 111. These you reduce to these eight heads, viz. 1.
Innovation in doctrine. 2. in discipline, 3. in the worship of God, 4. in the
Civil government, 5. in the altering of books, 6. in the means of knowledge,
7. in the rule of faith, and 8. in the Rule of manners. It is a merry world,
meanwhile, when you and such as you, the Innovators and Novatians of the
present times, complain of other men for that very fault, of which your selves
are only guilty. Quis tulerit Gracchos?

But to go with you point per point, what Innovations have you to complain of
in point of doctrine? Marry, say you, There was an order procured from King
James of famous memory to the Universities, that young Students should not
read our modern learned writers, as Calvin; Beza, and others of the reformed
Churches, but the Fathers and Schoolmen. p. 111. Quid hoc ad Ithycli boves?
What have the Bishops now alive to do with any act of King James his time: or
how can this direction of that learned Prince be brought within the compass
of Innovations in point of doctrine? Directions to young Students how to order
and dispose their studies, are no points of doctrine: nor do I find it in the
Articles of the Church of England, that Calvin or Beza are (...) be preferred
before Saint Austin or Aquinas. But do you know the reason of the said
direction? or if you do not, will you learn? Then I will tell you. There was
one Knight a young Divine that preached about that time at Saint Peter's in
Oxford, and in his Sermon fell upon a dangerous point (though such perhaps as
you like well of) viz. that the inferior Magistrate had a lawful power to
order and correct the King if he did amiss: using this speech of Trajans unto
the Captain of his Guard, Accipe hunc gladium, quem pro me si been imperavero
distringes; sin minus contra me. For this being called in question, both in the
University and before the King, he laid the fault of all upon some late
Divines of foreign Churches, who had misguided him in that point: especially
on Paraeus, who in his Comment on the Romans had so stated it, and in the which
he found that saying of the Emperor Trajan. On this confession Paraeus Comment
on that Epistle was publicly and solemnly burnt at Oxford, Cambridge, and
Saint Paul's Cross London: And shortly after came out that order of King James,
prohibiting young ungrounded Students to begin their studies in Divinity with
such books as those, in whom there were such dangerous positions, tending so
manifestly to Anarchy and disobedience: but that they should begin with the
holy Scriptures, so descendendo to the Fathers, and the School men, and by
degrees to those Divines you so much magnify. Wh^^ hurt in this good sir, but
that it seems, you are possessed with your old fear, that by this means the
Kings may come to have an unlimited power: and absolute obedience will be
pressed more thoroughly on the subjects conscience. Besides, you cannot but well
know that generally those divines of foreign Churches are contrary in the
point of discipline, unto the Hierarchy and rites of the Church of England:
which some implicitly, and some explicitly, have opposed and quarrelled.
Which as it is the only reason why you would have them studied in the first
place, that so young students might be seasoned with your Puritan principles:
so might it be another motive, why by the Kings direction they should come in
last; that Students finding in the Fathers, Councels, and Ecclesiastical
historians, what was the true and ancient kind of government in the Church of
Christ, might judge the better of the modernes when they came to read them.
Nor was this any new direction: neither it being ordered by the Canons of the
year 1571. Cap. de Concionatoribus, that nothing should be preached unto the
people, but what was consonant unto the doctrine of the old and new Testament,
quodque ex illa ipsa doctrina Catholici Patres and veteres Episcopi
collegerint, and had been thence collected by the Orthodox Fathers, and
ancient Bishops.

As for your dealing with the Fathers, of whom you say as Virgil said of
Ennius, that they which read them must margaritas e Coeno legere, gather
pearls out of the mud; p. 112. that is but a taste of your good manners. Nor
would you slight them so, I take it, but that the most of them were Bishops.
But whatsoever you think of them, a wiser man then you has told us, qui omnem
Patribus adimit authoritatem, nullam relinquet sibi.

Your second Innovation in point of doctrine, is so like the first; that one
would swear they were of one man's observation: and that is the procuring of
another order in King James his na^^ inhibiting young Ministers to preach of
the doctrines of election and reprobation, and that none but Bishops and Deanes
should handle those points? Good Sir what hurt in this? Are those deep
mysteries of Gods secret Counsels, fit argument for young unexperienced
Preachers, wherein, calores juveniles excercere, to try their manhood, and
give the first assay of their abilities? or call you this an Innovacion in
point of doctrine, when as for ought you have to say, the doctrine in those
points continued, as before it did: only the handling of the same was limited
and restrained to graver heads. The like complaint you make of his Majesty's
Declaration before the Articles, by means whereof you say, the doctrins of the
Gospel must be for ever hushed and laid asleep. p. 114. what Sir, are all
the doctrines of the Gospel hushed and laid asleep, because you are inhibited
to preach of predestination and that not absolutely neither, but that you may
not wrest the Article in that point, as you were accustomed. This was the
Devils plea to Eve, and from him you learnt it; that God had said to our first
father, he should not eat of every or any tree in the Garden of Eden; whereas
he was restrained only from the tree of knowledge of good and evil. But
hereof we have spoke already, and refer you thither. Hitherto also you
reduce the publishing of certain books, most of the which were either
answered, or called in: and therefore you have little reason to except against
them. My Lord of Chichesters appeal, was, as you say, called (...) by our
gracious Sovereign: and had not other men free leave to print and publish a
discourse in answer to it? The Historical narration you disliked, and that
was called in too, to please you. If Doctor Jacksons books, were as you falsely
tell us, to maintain Arminianisme; I doubt not but you have in keeping, a
book invisible to any but to such as you, said to be writ by Doctor Twisse,
as much against his person, as against his argument. For Doctor Cosens Private
Devotions, that still lies heavy on your komacke, as not yet digested: though
both your self and your learned Counsel disgorged your selves upon him in a
furious manner. Brownes prayer before his Sermon if you are agrieved at, you
may find the very clause verbatim in King Edwards first liturgy, Anno 1549.
which in that very act of Parliament, wherein the second was confirmed, is
said to be a very Godly order, agreeable to the word of God, and the Primitive
Church. As for Franciscus a S. clara, being the book is writ in latin; and
printed in the parts beyond sea; how can you charge the Bishops with it: for
that it has been printed in London, and presented to the King by a Prelate,
you dare not certainly affirm; but speak it only upon heere-say. p. 117. Or
were it so, yet being written in the latin, it is meet for Scholars, and
such as understand that language: not as your pamphlets are, proposed unto the
common people, either to misinforme them, or to inflame them. As for the book
entitled the Female glory, you find not in it, that I see by your
collections, any thing positively or dogmatically delivered, contrary unto any
point of doctrine established and received in the Church of England. Some
swelling language there is in it, and some Apostrophes, I perceive by you, to
the virgin Marie; which if you take for Invocations, you mistake his meaning:
who tells us plainly, as you cite him, p. 125. that the more we ascribe unto
her, setting Invocation apart, the more gracious we appear in our Saviors
sight. No Innovation hitherto in point of Doctrine.

From books set out by private men, proceed we to the opinions of some
certain Quidams, which you are displeased with: and were it so, as you report
it, yet the opinions of some private men, prove not in my poor Logic an
Innovation in the Doctrine by the Church delivered, though contrary unto the
Doctrine so delivered. To make an Innovation in point of Doctrine, there must
be an unanimous and general concurrence of minds and men, to set on foot the
new, and desert the old: not the particular fancy of one private man. And yet
I think, you will not find me out that particular man, that has defended any
thing contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and passed uncensured.
Yes that you can, you say, for certain. For a great Prelate in the High
Commission Court, said openly at the censure of Dr. Bastwick, that we and the
Church of Rome, differ not in fundamentalibus, but circa fundamentalia: as also
that the same had been affirmed by one Choune. p. 122. Suppose this true, and
how comes this to be an Innovation in the Doctrine of the Church of England.
Has the Church any where determined, that we, and those of Rome do differ in
the Fundamentalls: if not, why do you make this saying an Innovation in the
Churches Doctrine. The Church indeed has told us in the Nineteenth Article,
that the Church of Rome has erred, not only in their living and manner of
Ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith: it has not told us that that Church
has erred in Fundamentalls. The learned Junius could have told you that the
Church of Rome is a true Church, quoad essentiam, according to the essence of a
Church; lib. de Eccl. cap. 7. and Dr. Whitakers, that there were many things in
the Church of Rome (Baptism, the Ministry, and the Scriptures) quae ad veram
ecclesiam pertinent, which properly appertain to a true Church? An argument
that neither of them thought that Church had erred in Fundamentalls. And
certainly, if that confession of Saint Peter, Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God, Matthew. 16. be that Rock, on which the Church of Christ is founded;
as all our Protestant Divines affirm it is: the Church of Rome, does hold as
fast on that foundation, as you, or any Zealot of your acquaintance; and has
done more against the Heretics of this Age, in maintenance of the Divinity of
our Lord and Savior, then you, or any one of your Divines, be he who he will.
But for the Church of Rome, that it is a true Church, and that we do not
differ from them in fundamentalls, you may see further in a little book called
the Reconciler (do not you remember it, and the occasion of it too?) writ by
the Bishop of Exeter, now being: and therein the opinion of some Bishops, to
the self same purpose, and of some others also, learned men, whose judgment
you prefer in other things more then any Bishops. Had you but thoroughly
studied the Reconciler, as you should have done, you had not made this
quarrel, perhaps none at all.

As for the other opinions of more private men, that have offended you, you go
on, and say, that Justifi^ation by works was maintained in Cambridge, at the
Commencement, not long ago; and that Shelfords book will prove Justification
by Charity: as also, that the said Shelford, in that book, maintains that
the Pope is not Antichrist, contrary, as you say, to the resolved Doctrines of
our Church, in our Homilies, and elsewhere. p. 122. and 123. In answer to the
first of which, I hope you do not think in earnest, that whatsoever point is
ventilated, and discussed in the Public Schools, is presently conceived to be
a Doctrine of the Church: or that there has been nothing handled in those
disputations, but what is agreeable thereto. Many things there, both are, and
may be handled and propounded problematically, and argued Pro and Con, as the
custom is; as well for the discovery of the truth, as the true issue of the
question between the parties. And if you please to cast your eye upon those
questions, which have been heretofore disputed at those solemn times: how
many will you find amongst them, and those of your own special friends, in
which the Church has not determined: or not determined so, as they have then
and there been stated, and yet no clamor raised about it. Nor do you truly
relate the business neither; Thesis not being so proposed, as you inform us:
Viz. That we are Justified by Works; but only that good Works are
effectually necessary to Salvation: so that the principal part of our
justification, was by the Doctor, then and there, ascribed to faith; works
only coming in, as effectual means to our salvation. For Shelfords Book,
what ever is in that maintained, should as little trouble you, if he ascribe a
special eminency unto Charity, in some certain things; it is no more then
what was taught him by Saint Paul, who does prefer it, as you cannot choose
but know, before Faith and Hope. Nor does he attribute our justification
thereunto in any other sense, then what was taught him by Saint James. And here
I purposed to have left you with these opinions of particular and private men,
but that you tell us by the way, that by the Doctrine of our Church, in the
Homilies and elsewhere, it is resolved that the Pope is Antichrist. Your
elsewhere I am sure is no where, and that which you allege from the book of
Homilies, is as good as nothing. The Second Homily for Whitsunday, concludes
with a Prayer, that by the mighty power of the holy Ghost, the comfortable
Doctrine of Christ may be truly preached, truly received, and truly followed
in all places, to the beating down of sin, death, the Pope, the Devil, and
all the Kingdom of Antichrist. Can you conclude from hence, that by the Doctrine
of the Church, the Pope is Antichrist? the Devil as soon. For they are put
there as distinct things, the Pope, the Devil, and the kingdom of Antichrist:
and being put down as distinct, you have no reason to conclude that it is
resolved by that Homily, that the Pope is Antichrist. Nor does the 6 Homily
of Rebellion, say the Pope is Antichrist. Though it says somewhat of the
Babylonicall beast of Rome. The whole clause is this. In King John's time the
Bishop of Rome understanding the brute blindness, ignorance of Gods word, and
superstition of Englishmen, and how much they were inclined to worship the
Babylonicall beast of Rome, and to fear all his threatenings and causeless
curses, he abused them thus, etc. Where certainly, the Babylonicall beast of
Rome is not the same with the Bishop or Pope of Rome; but rather the abused
power of that then prevalent and predominant See. Or were it that the Pope is
meant, yet not being spoken positively and dogmatically, that the Pope is, and
is to be believed to be the Babylonicall beast of Rome; it is no more to be
accounted for a doctrine of the Church of England, then that it was plain
Simony in the Prelates then to pay unto the Bishop of Rome great sums of money
for their Bulls, and conformations, as is there affirmed, I have yet one thing
more to say unto you in this point. Saint John has given it for a rule, that
every spirit that confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is
not of God, but is that Spirit of Antichrist whereof you have heard etc. So
that unless you can make good as I think you cannot, that the Pope of Rome
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, you have no reason to
conclude that he is that Antichrist.

Hitherto we have followed you to find an innovation in point of doctrine; and
are yet to seek: and if we find it not in the next two instances both we
and you have lost our labor. There you say somewhat doubtless, and charge the
Bishop with two dangerous innovations; one in the doctrine of obedience to
superiors, the other in the doctrine of the Sabbath or Lord's Day. These we
have met withal already, and therefore shall say little here. Only I would
feign learn, for I know not yet, where that conditional obedience which you
only like of, is delivered to us by the Church; where there is any thing laid
down, for a public doctrine, against that absolute obedience, which you so
dislike, and reckon the enforcing of it, amongst the Innovations made in point
of doctrine! your brethren in the Conference at Hampton Court, put in a
scruple, how far an ordinance of the Church was to bind them, without
impeaching of their Christian liberty: where at the King being much moved,
answered, that it smelled very ranckely of Anabaptisme; adding, I charge you
never to speak more to that point, (how far you are bound to obey?) when the
Church has ordained it. What think you Sir. Here is an absolute obedience
preached to the Churches Ordinances. I hope you cannot tender less unto the
Orders of the King. As for that other Innovation which you tell us of, about
the doctrine of the Sabbath; there is indeed a mighty alteration in it, I could
wish there were not: but it was made by you and yours, who little more then 40.
years agone, first broached these Sabbath-speculations in the Church of
England; which now you press upon her for her ancient doctrine. This has
been shown at large elsewhere, and therefore I will say nothing now. But
where you say, that for the maintenance of that change which you lay upon them,
their novell Doctors, have strained the veins of their conscience no less
then of their brains. p. 126. I am bold to tell you, that at the best you are
a most uncharitable man, to judge the hearts of those, whose face you know not.
For my part, I can speak for one, and take almighty God to witness that in
the part committed to me, I have dealt with all ingenuitie and sincerity: and
make this protestation before God and man, that if in all the scriptures,
Fathers, Counsels, modern writers, or whatsoever monument of the Church, I
met within so long a search, I had found any thing in favor of that doctrine,
which you so approve; I would not have concealed it, to the suppression of a
truth, for all the world. How ever you accuse me, yet my conscience does not.
Delectat tamen conscientia quod estanimae pabulum, incredibili jucunditate
perfusum, in Lactantius language.

Your Innovations in the points of Doctrine being blown to nothing, let us see
next what is it that you have to say for the change of discipline; the second
Innovation which you charge upon my Lords the Bishops. And here you say, that
where of old the censures of the Church were to be inflicted upon disordered
and vicious persons, as drunkards adulterers, heretics, Apostata's,
false-teachers and the like: now the sharp edge thereof is turned mainely
against Gods people and Ministers, even for their virtue and piety, and
because they will not conform to their impious orders p. 127. That Bishops
sometimes turn the edge of their authority, on those who you entitle Gods
ministers, and people, is as true, as necessary: but that they turn it on
them even for their piety and virtue, is both false and scandalous. Just so a
Brother of yours, whom I spare to name, preached once at Oxford, that good and
honest men were purposely excluded from preferments there, ob hoc ipsum quod
pij, quod boni, only because they were inclined to piety and virtue. But Sir,
those godly folk you speak of, are Godly only in your eye, and in such as
yours: and if the edge of authority be turned upon them, it is because they
have too much of your spirit in them. The censures of the Church proceed no
otherwise now then of old they did. Look in the ancient Canons, and you shall
see with what severitie the Church of old did punish Schismatics and
Separatists: and tell me if the Church now does not deal more mercifully with
you, then of old it did. And where you seem to intimate, that now the censures
of the Church are not inflicted as of old, upon disordered and vicious persons:
that is but your wonted art to traduce the Bishops and make them odious to your
followers. For look unto the Articles for the Metropolitan visitation, of my
Lord of Canterbury Anno 1635. and for the visitation of my Lord of Norwich,
Anno 1636. both which I am sure you have perused, or any of the rest which you
meet next with. Look on them well, and tell me truly, if you can, whether
there be not special order for the presenting of all those vicious and
disordered persons, of the kinds you mention: you could not choose but know
this, having seen the Articles: and therefore do belie them against your
conscience. And so I leave you and this point of the Churches discipline: which
if it be not changed is no fault of yours, who have endeavored nothing more
then to introduce a total alteration of it.

The third general Innovation which you make complaint of, is in the worship
of God, which (as you tell us) they go about to turn inside outward, placing
the true worship which is in Spirit and truth, in a Will worship of man's
devising. p. 128. Particularly, in bowing to the name of Jesus, to the
Communion table or rather Altar, praying with their faces toward the East,
standing at the reading of the Gospel. As also reading their second service at
the Altar, and the like. p. 129. You tell us also of their teaching,
practicing, and preaching new forms of worship, secundum usum Sarum, and
setting them up again in Churches, as Altar-worship, Iesu-worship,
Image Worship, Crosse-worship, and the like: and make it a plain evidence that
they have no fear of God in them. p. 15^ As also, what an old heaving and
shoving there is, to erect Altar-worship and Iesu-worship, and other inventions
of men; and that the end thereof is to set up Popery again. p. 25. The like
you tell us also, p. 32. and make those rites you instance in, a degree to
Popery. Rome, say you, was not built in one day. And Rome being about to be
rebuilt in this Land cannot be done all at once, but it must be by degrees;
although the builders do every day get ground, and the building goes on a
maine with incredible celority. Finally, that I press you with no more
particulars, you lay it home unto them, that all their actions tend to bring in
the Mass* p. 105. And thus you marshall the degrees. If, say you, our new
refounders of Popery would set up the Masse-god in our Churches, they cannot
effect it all at once. They must first down with Tables, and up with Altars.
For that cause all seats must down at the end of the Chancell, that the Altar
may stand close to the wall, because, as their Oracle says (Arch-Prelate of
Canterbury, in the Margin) none must sit above God Almighty. And if Ministers
be so stiff as not to yield to this Innovation, at least the table must be
railed about that none touch it, as being more sacred then Pulpit, Pewe, or
Font. Then some Adoration as lowly bowing, must be given to it. Then the second
service, as dainties must be said there, as being more holy then the Readers
Pewe. What then? Surely a Priest is not far off. But where is the sacrifice?
Stay a while, that service comes at last, and all these are preparations to it,
tending to usher in the great God of the Host, so soon as it is well baked,
and the peoples stomachs fitted to digest so hard a bit. I have laid down
this place at large, because it makes a full discovery of your malicious
thoughts and imaginations: as also of your full intent to amate the people, and
make them apt to any desperate attempt, which you may put them to when occasion
serves. But these your wicked and uncharitable surmises will soon come to
naught. For if it be made evident, that those particular Innovations
wherewithal you charge them, are either falsely charged upon them, or no
Innovations: then I presume, that any charitable Reader, will find that your
surmises proceeded only from envy, hatred, malice, and all uncharitablenes,
from which deliver us good Lord.

That which you instance first in, is bowing to the name of Jesus: and where
find you that? Who presses you, or any else to bow unto the name of Jesus,
suppose it written on a wall, or where else you will? That, if it be an
Innovation, is no man's but yours. The Church injoyneth us no such matter. For
bowing at the name of Jesus, that's no Innovation, made by the Prelates of these
times: but enjoined in the Canon of the year 1603, and there no otherwise
enjoined then it was before. For so the Canon has appointed, Can. 18.
that when in the time of divine service the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due
and lowly reverence shall be done by all persons present, as it has been
accustomed. Can. 8. No Innovation then good Sr. if so long since ordained by
Canon; and an old custom too before it. A custom certainly as old as the
Reformation. For it is said expressly in the Queens Injunctions, that
whenever the name of Jesus, shall be in any Lesson, Sermon, or otherwise in
the Church pronounced, that due reverence be made of all persons young and old,
with lowness of courtesy, and uncovering of heads of the men-kinde, as
thereunto does necessarily belong, and has been accustomed. It Is almost
fourscore years ago, since that Injunction; yet then it was an ancient
custom: and more then custom too, conceived a necessary duty. I could inform
you what is said by B. Jewel in this point, did I conceiv't fit, to add unto
the public order of the Church, the testimony of a private though a learned
man. Yet if you please to look, you shall see his judgment, in his reply to
Harding. Art. 8. Sect. 1. So that you see, that Iesu-worship, as you call it,
is no Innovation: or if it be, it is as old at least in the Church of England
at the reformation. Higher we need not go for your satisfaction, in this or
any other of these Innovations by you objected: such men as you are not
regarding what has been done in the most pure and perfect times of the
Chrstian Church; but what was here observed and practiced since the
reformation, as before was said. Otherwise we could give you sufficient
evidence of this and all the other ancient usages, by you termed Innovations,
in the Church of Christ, out of the Fathers, Counsels, and other uncorrupted
Momuments of true antiquity.

Your second instance is of bowing to the Communion table, or Altar rather, as
you please to correct your self: and praying with the face toward the East.
Here you have to it, as before; but there is no such thing done, as to it.
Toward it if you will, not to it, When you say Grace before the table, or said
your prayers in the last conventicle you were at, at the bords end: I hope you
prayed not to the table, nor said Grace to it. Neither do they bow to the
Altar, or Communion table, call it which you please, which bow toward it. It
was an ancient custom in the primitive times, as Tertullian notes in his
Apologeticke, ad orientis regronem precari, to turn themselves unto the East
when they said their prayers; and has continued so till this very time: most
of our Churches, except some of late, being built accordingly. The Fathers tell
you of it more then once or twice: but what care you or such as you for the
holy Fathers. Had Calvin said as much, or Beza, then it had been somewhat. The
Fathers had their spots or naevi, and he that reads them must margaritas e
coeno legere, as you told us lately. Well Sir, upon this general custom of
praying toward the East came in that adoratio versus Altar, you complain of,
though not Altaris, as you charge it. When men first entered into the house of
God, they used some lowly reverence to express or intimate that the place they
stood upon was holy ground: and because me^ diduse to pray with their faces
toward the East where the Altar stood, they made their reverence that way
also. Why should that offend you? Old people use it still, both men and women;
though now it be interpreted as a courtesy made unto the Minister. If bowing
toward the Communion table or before it be offensive to you, at the
administration of the Sacrament: I would feign know upon what reasons, or why
you stomach it, that men should use their greatest reverence in so great an
action? Think it you fit, the Priest should take into his hands the holy
mysteries, without lowly reverence, or that it is an Innovation so to do? Then
go to school to B. Jewel, and let him teach you. Harding makes mention of
some gestures, which at that time the people used: as viz. standing up at the
Gospel, and at the preface of the Mass, bowing themselves down and adoring
at the Sacrament; kneeling at other times, as when mercy and p^rdon is humbly
asked. What says the Bishop unto this? Art. 3.^ 26
he allows them all kneeling says he, bowing (i. e. that kind of bowing
which Harding speaks of) and standing up, and other like are commendable
gestures and tokens of devotion, so long as the people understands what they
mean, and applies them unto God. If you look higher into the use and
practice of the primitive times, you cannot miss a (...) an honor to the
Altar; in Ignaltus; a (...), a respect shown unto the holy table in Dionysius
de Heir. cap. 2. as also an adgeniculationem aris Dei, a kneeling down before
Altars in Tertullians time; besides what you may find in St. Chrysostomes
Liturgy to the self same purpose. No Innovation therefore, as you would have
it, to bow before or toward the Communion table; or to pray with our faces
toward the East, whatsoever you tell us.

On then good Sir, to the rest that follow, and first of standing up at the
Gospel, and reading the second service at the Altar: what are they Innovations
also? For standing up at the Gospel, it was enjoined expressly in the first
Liturgy of K. Edward 6. and practiced also, though not prescribed, under that
now in use amongst us. Bp. Jewel, as you see allows it, with whom you are not
worthy to be named in the same day. And for the practice of it, take this of
Hooker. Lib. 5.29.
Because the Gospells which are weekly read, do all historically declare
something, which our Lord Jesus Christ himself either spoke, did, or suffered
in his own person, it has been the custom of Christian men, then
especially, in token of the greater reverence to stand, to utter certain words
of acclamation, and at the name of Jesus to bow. Which harme'esse ceremonies,
as he tells us, there was not any man constrained to use; nor was it necessary:
all sorts of people using them without constraint, till you and your forefather
Cartwright made a scruple of it. The first original hereof is by antiquity
referred to Pope Anastasius who lived in the 5. Centurie: therefore no
Innovation surely. As little Innovation is there, in reading the second service
at the Altar or Communion table. The Rubricke of the Church appoints, that it
shall be so. Compare the last Rubricke before the Comunion, with the first
after it: and you will sooner find your self an Innovator in so saying, then
any of the Bishops in so doing. Nor was it only so appointed, and not done
accordingly. For learned Hooker tells us in the place last cited, that some
parts of the divine service of the Church are such, that being they serve to
singular good purpose, even when there is no communion administered;
nevertheless, being devised at the first for that purpose, are at the table of
the Lord for that cause also commonly read? No Innovation hitherto Mas.
Burton, but what comes after. You make a noise of Image Worship and
Crosse-worship; I know no such matter: no such enjoined, that I am sure of, nor
no such practiced that I can heareof. If any such thing be, tell me who, and
when, or I shall take you always for a very false brother, that make no
conscience what you say, or whom you slander. I hope you do not mean by
Crosse-worship, the signing young children when they are baptized with the
sign of the Cross: or if you do, I trow you cannot take it for an
Innovation. Nor need you fear Idolatry in that Christian usage, as some
clamoured once. The 30. Canon has so fully removed that fear, that they that
fear it now, must be more then madmen. Thuanus, one more wise then you, is of
another mind by much: conceiving that the cautious and restrictions in that
Canon used, Lib. 131.
have in a manner more abolished then confirmed the true and proper use of that
ancient ceremony. For speaking of the Synod in London An. 1603. and of the
Canons then agreed on, he says as follows. Crucis ceremonia in Baptismate
retinetur, et explicatur, sed ita et tot adhibitis cautionibus, ut sacrosancti
signi reverentia omnis aboleri potius, quaem confirmari videatur. No
Innovations all this while, but such as you have falsely charged upon the
Bishops, of Image Worship, and Crosse-worship: and therefore all your fears of
setting up the Masse-God, as you call it, are all come to naught.

Hitherto we have found no novelty, nothing that tends to Innovation in the
worship of God: but a reviver and continuance only of the ancient usages which
have been practiced in this Church since the reformation, and were commended
to it from the purest ages. And here we would have left this charge, but that
you tell us p. 158. that all those rites and ceremonies which are to be used in
our Church are by an Act of Parliament prefixed to the Communion book
restrained to those only which are expressed in the same book. Either you are
a very unlucky Lawyer, or a very bad Churchman. For tell me I beseech you,
where do you find in all that statute, that there shall be no other rites and
ceremonies used in the Church then are expressed in the book of Common prayer?
That all those ceremonies which are expressed in the said book shall be
observed; the statute does indeed inform you: but that none other shall be
added, that you find not there. The contrary you may find there, if you
please to look. Statute 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
For it is said expressly that the Queens Majesty may by the advice of her
Commissioners Ecclesiastical or Metropolitan ordain and publish such further
ceremonies or rites as may be most for the advancement of Gods glory, the
edifying of his Church, and the due reverence of Christ's holy mysteries and
Sacraments. This you restrain unto the person of the Queen affirming p. 66.
that it is not to be extended to her successors in the Crown. How truly this
is said, has been shown elsewhere. And were it so in point of Law, yet a
good Church man as you are could not choose but know, that in the Articles of
the Church it is acknowledged and agreed on, that the Church has power to
decree Rites or ceremonies. Art. 20. and more then so, that every particular or
national Church, has authority to ordain, change, and abolish ceremonies or
Rites of the Church ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be
done to edifying. Art. 34. These Articles you have subscribed to more then once
or twice, and therefore cannot choose but know, that other ceremonies may be
used in the Church, then those which are expressed in the Common prayer book.
Nor were these Articles confirmed only in the Convocation, the power and
authority of the which you regard but little: but were confirmed, and
subscription to the same exacted by Act of Parliament, as your unlearned
Counsel can at large inform you. Its true, some such as you have quarreled
with the 20. Article, as if that clause of giving power unto the Church, to
decree rites or ceremonies, and authority in controversies of faith, were not
coequall with the Article, but thrust in of late: and for that cause, by some
undue and sinister practice, the book of Articles was lately printed in the
Latin tongue, and that clause left out. But in the ancient Copies published in
the year 1563. the Article is entire and whole, according as it is in all
those books of Articles to which you severally subscribed. Nor says that
Article any more, as to the matter of ordaining ceremonies, then what is
afterward affirmed in the 34. Article, as before was said: nor more then what
has positively been affirmed by your own Divines, as you please to style
them. Calvin whose judgment in this point you neither may nor can decline, has
said as much upon these words of the Apostle, Let all things be done decently
and in order. Non potest haberi, quod Paulus hic exigit nisi additis
constitutionibus tanquam vinculis quibusdam, ordo ipse et decorum servetur.
That which St. Paul requires, cannot be done, says he without rules and
Canons, by which as by some certain bonds, both order and decorum may be kept
together. Paraus yet more plainly, and unto the purpose; Facit ecclesiae
potestatem de decoro et ordine ecclesiastico libere disponendi, et leges
ferendi. So that you see the Church has power to decree rites and ceremonies
in things that appertain to order, decency, and uniformity in Gods public
service: and which is more, a power of making laws and Canons to enforce
conformity unto the same, in the opinion of your own Doctors. And if it please
his Majesty with the advice of his Commissioners or Metropolitan, to ordain
new ceremonies, or if the Church think fit to add further rites, to those
which are received already: I know no remedy either in Law or conscience, but
that you must submit unto them. Which said we will proceed to those other
Innovations, which you have falsely charged upon the Prelates.

The fourth change is, you tell us, in the civil government, which they labor
to reduce and transfer to ecclesiastical, while they seek to trample on the
laws of the land, and step between the King and his people, (the Prelates
power overswaying the subjects right) in the free use and benefit of the Laws,
page 129. You make the like outcry to my LL. the Judges, saying. Do not your
wisdoms see a new generation of Innovators risen up in this Land, Art. 3. s 26
who usurping and practicing a Papal and Antichristian power and jurisdiction,
exempted from the Kings Laws etc. do thereby begin to overtop the Royal
throne, and trample the Laws, liberties and just rights of the Kings Subjects
under their feet. p. 29. Quid dignum tanto? What is the ground of all this
noise. Naught else it seems, but that the high Commissioners think that Court
of too high a nature, to be affronted by such fellows as your Learned
Counsels, of which you tell us. p. 129. and that my LL. the Judges, out of
their honorable love to Justice, are not so easily moved to send their writs
of prohibition to that Court, as some of their Predecessors were before them.
And is there not good reason think you? For if (as Dr. Apology. part 3 cap.
15. p. 226.
Cousin pleades the case) his Majesty's supreme Royal authority and power
ecclesiastical granted by Commission to others be as highly vested in his
Crown as is his Temporal: then will it be probably gathered, both of them
being in their several kinds supreme and the exercise of them committed over
to others under the great Seal; that the one of them is not to be abridged,
restrained, or controuled by the other. And you may also know, if you please to
know it, how that it was affirmed once by K. James of blessed memory, in his
speech at Whitehall before both houses of Parliament An. 1609. That the high
Commission was of so high a nature, that from thence there was no appellation
to any other Court. Both Courts being thus supreme in their several kinds,
and neither of them being to be abridged, restrained and controuled by the
other, as long as the Judges in the high Commission keep themselves (within
their bounds) to causes of ecclesiastical cognizance: what reason have you of
complaint, in case you cannot get a Prohibition, as before you did. Most likely
that my LL. the Judges are grown more difficult in that kind, as for diverse
other reasons, so most especially because they see the Judges in that other
Court so carful, as not to meddle in any thing which may entrench upon the
Courts of common Law or the subjects liberty.

Call you me this an overtopping of the Royal throne, a trampling of the
Laws, liberties, and just rights of his Majesty's subjects under their feet?
Cannot so insolent a wretch as you be denied a Prohibition from the Courts of
Law, or may not Mr. Prynne be threatened for his sawey and irreverent carriage
by the high Commission: but presently you must raise an outcry, ac si Anniball
ad portas, as if the liberty of the subjects was endangered in the free use
and benefit of the Laws, as you please to phrase it? yet this amongst the rest
you have made a cause of your seditious libelling against Church and State; as
if the one were like to devour the other; and all were in a way to ruin, but
for such Zelots as your self, the careful watchmen of the times. But good Sir
be assured there is no such danger. For as the reducing of the civil
government so ecclesiastical, which you so much fear, there must be other
means to do it, then by a difficulty of obtaining Prohibitions from the
Common Law. And it is never more likely to be effected, then when your self
sit chief in your longed* for Consistory, with your Lay Elders round about you.

Then Kings and Queens and whatsoever is called God, must cast themselves
before your foote-stoole, as you your selves have told us in your public
writings: And as for business, the Lawyers, v. Hooker in the Preface to his
Eccl: Polity.
howsoever you count them now, will have too little to maintain them. For this
is reckoned by your Brethren, amongst the excellencies of your discipline, both
for the wealth of the Realm, and quiet of the subjects, that thy Church is to
censure those who are apparentle troublesome and contentious, and without
reasonable cause (which you mean to judge of) upon a mere will and stomach
do vex and molest their brother and trouble the Country. Where will your
Civil government be then? and who shall send out Prohibitions, when that comes
to pass.

CHAP. VII. The four last Innovations charged upon the Bishops, examined
severally and confuted.
The Alterations said to be in the Common Prayer Book, Father of thine Elect
and of their seed, left out; and why? Of bowing in the name of Jesus. The
alterations said to be in the book of Prayer for the fifth of November.
Prayers intended first against Recusants as well appliable to the Puritans, as
some Laws and Statutes. The religion of and in the Church of Rome, whether it
may be said to be Rebellion; and how the Prelates are challenged in that
respect. The Arguments produced by H. B. to prove that the Religion of the Chapter
of Rome is rebellion, are either false; or may be turned upon himself. Of
alterations in the Fast-booke. The Letany of K. Edward altered, because it gave
offense and scandal, The Prelates falsely charged with attributing Popish merit
unto Fasting, of putting down Lectures, cutting short of Sermons, the prayer
before the Sermon, and Catechizing. No innovations either in the role of faith,
or manners.
to those which were affected to the Chapter of Rome. Some prayers omitted in the
Fast-booke; and the reason why: The Lady Eliz: and her Children, why left out
in the present Collect.
IN nova fert animus. Your mind is still upon your Metamorphosis; more changes
yet, and the next head of changes is altering the forme^s of prayer:
particularly the book of Common prayer, that for the fifth of November, and
lastly that for the fast, set forth by his Majesty's appointment, An. 1636. And
first, you say, in the Communion book set forth by Parliament, and commanded
to be read without any alteration, and none other, they have altered sundry
things p. 130. Ho there. Who told you that the Common-prayer-booke was set
forth by Parliament? Think you the Knights and Burgesses of the house of
Commons, were busied in those times, in making or in mending Prayer-bookes? The
Statute 2. and 3. Edw. 6. c. 1. will tell you that the Common prayer book was
set forth (in that very word) by the Archbp. of Cant. and certain of the most
learned and discreet Bishops, and other learned men of this Realm: and being
so set forth, was by authority of Parliament confirmed and ratified, as it
related to the Subject. Which course was after taken, in the review of the said
book, both in the fifth and sixth of King Edward the sixth, and in the first of
Queen Elizabeth. Being set forth then by the Clergy, it was, as you inform
us, commanded to be read without any alteration: that was indeed done by
authority of Parliament. Do you observe that ordinance, do not you alter it,
and chop and change it every day; at lest if you vouchsafe to read it, as
perhaps you do not. And if it must be read without any alteration, and none
other; why do you quarrel at the reading of the second Service at the
Communion Table before and after Sermon, being there so ordered? or use another
form of prayer then is there appointed? Remember what you tell us here, for
you and I must talk about it in the next general change. Mean time what are
the sundry things which you say are altered in the book set forth by
Parliament. You tell us but of two, and you talk of sundry. How shall I credit
you hereafter, if you palter thus in the beginning. But for those two, what are
they I beseech you? Marry you say, that in the Collect for the Queen and the
Royal Progeny, they have put out Father of thine elect and of their seed, as
it were, excluding the King, Queen, and Seed Royal, out of the number of
Gods elect, p. 130. This you have told us of in your Epistle to the King, and
in your Apology, and the News from Ipswich. The Queen is more beholding to
you, then I thought she had been; you take such special care for her
Election. But Sir, a word before we part. Who told you that this Collect was
set forth with the book allowed by Parliament? I trow King Edward the sixth,
and Queen Elizabeth had no royal progeny: so that this Collect could not be
then in Esse when the book was made.

The first time it was made and used, was at the happy entrance of King James
on this Realm of England; neither set forth nor ratified by any Parliament
that has been since. Now King James had at his first coming hither, a royal
seed; but when his Majesty the King, came unto the crown, he was then
unmarried; and after he was married, had not children presently you know well
enough. Would you have had the collect pass as it did before; Father of thine
elect and of their seed, when as the king, whom you must needs mean by Elect
in that place and prayer, had no seed at all? I hope you see your folly now,
your most zealous folly; which made you in the News from Ipswich, on the
recital of this supposed alteration to cry out, O intolerable impiety,
affront, and horred treason; Most bravely clamoured. The other alteration which
you charge them with, is, that in all the common prayer books printed since
the year 1619. in the Epistle for the Sunday before Easter, they have turned
in the Name of Jesus, to at the name of Jesus: to countenance, as you say,
their forced bowing to the name of Jesus; (you are still for to it.) Such
change there is indeed, but yet no alteration from the book or text; The
Bishops Bible, as they call it, out of the which the Epistles and Gospells were
first taken reads at the name: and so does Bishop Jewel too, citing this
very text in the place and passage noted to you in the last Chapter. And if you
look into the Bible of the last translation, you find that it is therein
also, at the name of Jesus: so that you have no reason to repine at this, which
is a restitution only of the proper reading, and no change at all.

The second book which they have altered, as you say, is that appointed to be
read on the fifth day of November, published by authority of Parliament, p.
131. set forth by act of Parliament, p. 41. in the Margent ordered by
Parliament, in the second p. of your apology, ordered, set forth and
published, all by Parliament, and yet the Parliament did nothing in it. All
that was done by Parliament was that the day of that deliverance was appointed
for a kind of holy day, wherein the people were to meet together to set forth
Gods glory: and it was there enacted also, that upon every such day, that very
statute of the institution, should be read publicly to the Congregation. Of
any form of prayer, set forth, or afterward to be set forth, ne gry, I am
sure, in all that statute. The book was after made and published by the Kings
authority without the trouble of a Parliament. However being set out, and
published, though not by Parliament, you cannot but be grieved at the
alterations. Well what are they. First you complain, that whereas in the
former book there was this passage, Root out that Babilonish and
Antichristian sect which say of Jerusalem, etc. in the Edition A. 1635. it is
set down thus, Root out that Babilonish and antichristian Sect of them which
say of Jerusalem, etc. Here Is of them added more then was. And this you think
does make a great and fearful difference. For whereas in the Original it was
plainly meant, that all Jesuits, Seminary Priests and their confederates are
that Babilonish and Antichristian sect, which say of Jerusalem, etc. this
latter book either restraines it to some few that are of that mind, or else
mentally transferres it on those Puritans that cry down with Babylon, that is,
Popery, which these men call Jerusalem, and the true Catholic Religion, p.
130, 131. It seems you have a guilty conscience, you would not start so much
at this else. Quid prodest non habere conscium, habenti conscientiam, said the
Father rightly. That Babylonish Sect which say, and that Babylonish Sect of
them which say make's so little difference: that were you not guilty to your
self, of many ill wishes against Jerusalem, you would not have so stomacked
at the alteration. And being that it is confessed by you, their Oracle, that
the Puritans do cry down with our Jerusalem, by them called Popery: they
come within the compass of the prayer, take which form you list, either that
Babilonish Sect, or that Babilonish Sect of them. Nor is it strange that so it
should be. For howsoever the Jesuits, Priests and their confederates were at
first intended: yet if the Puritans follow them in their designs of blowing up
the Church and State, and bringing all into a lawless and licentious Anarchie;
the prayer will reach them too, there is no question of it. The Statute, 1.
Eliz. c. 2. Confirmatorie of the Common prayer book, has ordained several
penalties for such as shall deprave the said book of Common prayer, or
obstinately refuse to use it, or use any other form of prayer then that there
appointed: as also a particular mulct of 12d, toties quoties upon every man
that does absent himself from Church on Sundaies and holy days. This was
intended at the first against Recusants there being then no Puritans in rerum
natura. And may not therefore all the penalties therein contained, be justly
laid upon the Puritans, if they offend in any of the kinds before remembered?
The like may also be affirmed of the High Commission, established hereby at the
first, for the correction and reduction of the Papists, being then the only
opposite party to the Church: and yet you know, the High Commissioners may
take a Puritan to task, if they find him faulty.

That which you next complain of, is that whereas in the old book, the prayer
went thus, Cut off these workers of iniquity, whose Religion is rebellion,
whose faith is faction: it is now altered into this, who turn Religion into
rebellion, and Faith into faction. Hereupon you infer, that these Innovators
would not have the Popish Religion to be termed rebellion, and their Faith
faction, as the ancient Copy plainly shows it to be: but turn it off from
the Religion to some persons, which turn Religion into rebellion, and Faith
into faction, so as by this turning they plainly imply, that the Religion of
Papists is the true Religion, and no rebellion, and their Faith the true faith,
and no faction, p. 131. You make another use of it in your Apology, and tell
us that it tends to justify and extenuate notorious treasons and traitors,
and to usher in Popery, Superstition and Idolatry, p. 3. Here is a change
indeed, you say right in that; but that which you infer thereon, is both
false and sc^ndalous. For taking it for granted, that they by whose authority
the said clause was altered, thought it not fit to call the Religion of the
Church of Rome rebellion, or the Faith therein professed, faction: must it
needs follow thereupon, that by so doing they imply, that that religion is the
true religion, and that faith the true faith. There Is a non sequitur with a
witness. There is a kind of religion amongst the Turks. Because I cannot say
that their religion is rebellion; do I imply so plainly (as you say they do)
that therefore their religion is the true religion. And there is a faith too
questionless among the several Sects of Christians in the Eastern,
Muscovite, and African Churches. Because I think not fit to say of any of
them, that their faith is faction must I conclude astringently, therefore the
faith professed by each particular Sect, is the true faith. You might well tax me
should I say the one; and I may laugh at you for concluding the other. Adeo
argumenta ex falso petita, inepto habent exitus, as Lactantius has it. Your
use is yet more scandalous, then your inference false. For how does this tend
to justify and extenuate notorious treasons and Traitors. The treasons and the
traitors stand as before they did, unless the stain be laid more deep upon
them then before it was. Before the imputation seemed to rest on the faith it
self: which being a general accusation concerned no more the guilty, then it
did the innocent. But here it rests where it ought, upon the persons of the
Traitors, who are not hereby justified, or their crime extenuated: but they
themselves condemned, and the treason aggravated in an higher manner. That
which comes after of ushering in Popery, Superstition and Idolatry, is but
your ordinary flourish, one of your general calumnies; and needs not a
particular answer.

O but say you, and undertake to make it good, the very religion is rebellion,
and the faith is faction: and therefore there was somewhat in the chang which
deserved that censure. That their religion is rebellion, you prove two ways.
First because the Jesuits and Seminary priests refuse to take the oath of
Supremacy, which is enjoined to all Papists, 3. Iac. c. 4. You must needs
show your law, you have such store of it. For speak man, was the oath of
Supreamacie enacted 3. Iacobi. Then am I out again, for my books tell me it
was 1 Elizabethae. In your Apology you place the oath of alleigance 1.
Elizabethae, and here to make your ignorance the more remarkable, you place
the oath of Supremacy 3. Iac. Cujus contrarium verum est. The oath of
alleigeance it is you mean. And sure you will not say, all Seminary Priests and
Laypapists refuse the oath of alleigeance; considering that of each sort, some
have written very learnedly in defense thereof: therefore according to your way
of disputation, the religion of all Papists is not rebellion, and consequently
their faith not faction. The second proof you offer, is, that by Doctor John
White and Dr. Cracanthorp it is affirmed that the Church of Rome teaches
disloyalty and rebellion against kings; that Popish Authors do exalt the
Popes power over kings; that some of the^ have said that Christian kings are
dogs, which must be ready at the Shepherds hand, or else the Shepherd must
remove them from their office. p. 134.135. This argument is full as faulty as
the other was; and will conclude as much against your self and the Puritan
faction, as any Papist of them all. The Citizens of Geneva expelled their Bp.
as the Calvinians in Emden, did their Earl; being their immediate Lords and
Princes. Instit. l. 4. c. ult.
Calvin has taught us that the three estates In Romans 13.
Paraeus that the inferior Magistrate, and De Iure regui.
Buchanan that the people may correct and control the Prince; and in some
cases too depose him. And you Mass. Burton have condemned that absolute
obedience unto Kings and Princes which is due to them from their subjects; and
that unlimited power which is ascribed unto them, because theirs of right.
Therefore we may from hence conclude, or else your argument is worth nothing,
that out of doubt the Puritan religion is rebellion, and their faith faction.
As for your general challenge, p. 191. viz. What one Protestant can they bring
that ever committed treason against his king, or lifted up an hand against his
sacred person: I leave it to the Papists to make answer to it, to whom your
challenge is proposed. But I could tell you in your ear, (which I would to God
were otherwise) of more than one or two twice told and twice told to that,
Protestants of that sort which you most labor to defend, and make to be the
only right ones. Had you distinguished as you ought, between the doctrines of
that Church, and the particular either words or actions of particular men: you
had not made so rash a venture, and lost more by it than you got. So then the
religion of the Church of Rome not being in it self rebellion, though somewhat
which has there been taught may possibly have been applied to rebellious
purposes; there is a little fear that their faith is faction: and so the
alteration not so grievous as you feign would have it. What further reason
there was in it you shall see anon.

The third book, altered as you say, is that set sorth by the king for the
public fast, in the first year of his reign: and which his Majesty by his
proclamation commanded to be reprinted and published, and so read in the
Church every Wednesday. What find you altered there? In the first Collect, as
you tell us, is left out this remarkable pious sentence entirely, viz. Thou
have delivered us from superstition and idolatry, wherein we were utterly
drowned, and have brought us into the most clear and comfortable light of thy
blessed word, etc. And then you ad; Lo here these men would not have Popery
called Superstition and Idolatry, nor would they have the Word of God so
commended, as that clear and comfortable light, which teaches us all duties
both to God and man. p. 142. This is the last of all these changes, which tend,
as you inform us, to bring in Popery; and therefore I will tell you here, what
I conceive to be the reason of those alterations which you so complain of. You
cannot choose but know, (because I think you have it in your Pamphlet against D
Cosens) that in the Letanie of King Edward 6. there was this clause, viz. From
the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, from all
false doctrine etc. Good Lord deliver us. This was conceived to be, as indeed
it was, a very great scandal and offense to all those in the Realm of
England, which were affected to the Church of Rome: and therefore in the
Liturgy of Queen Elizabeth, it was quite left out. Had you been then alive,
you might perhaps have quarrelled it, and taxed those learned men that did it,
of Popery, Innovation, and I know not what: and then conclude it that they
would have the people think that there was neither tyranny in the Pope, nor
any detestable enormitie in the Church of Rome. But as that then was done with
a good intent, and no man quarrelled for it that I can hear of: why should you
think worse of the changes now or quarrel that authority which gave order
for it, before you knew by whose authority it was so done, conceive you not
that those, who in this Kingdom, are affected to the Church of Rome; are not
as apt to take offense now, as they were before; or that there is not now as
much consideration to be had of those which are that way affected, as was in
any part of the said Queens time? the matter being of no greater moment than
this is, how great soever you pretend it.

Most of our faults before have been of Commission; but these that follow,
most of them are omission^ only. First you except against the leaving out of
the whole prayer, It had been best for us, etc. And this was done with an
Alas, because therein was commended the profitable use of continual preaching
the Word of God, p. 142. The News from Ipswich calls it, the most effectual
prayer of all, because it magnifies continual often preaching, etc. and call's
our powerful Preachers Gods servants. Say you me so? Then let us look upon
the Prayer, where I persuade my self there is no such matter. All that
reflects that way is this. It had been also well, if at thy dreadful threats
out of thy holy word, continually pronounced unto us by thy servants our
Preachers, we had of fear; as corrigible servants, turned from our
wickedness. This all, and in all this where do you find one word that
magnifies continual preaching, or that takes any notice of your powerful
Preachers, quorum pars ego magna, as you boast your self. Cannot the dreadful
threats of Gods holy word, be any other way pronounced, and pronounced
continually by Gods servant, then by the way of Sermons only, or if by sermons
only, by no other Preachers than those whom you style powerful preachers, by a
name distinct? I trow the reading of Gods Word in the congregation, presents
unto the people more dreadful threats, then what you lay before them in a
sermon; and will sink as deep: Therefore assuredly there was some other
reason for it, then that you dream of. and think you that it might not be,
(there being prayers enough without it) because in the whole Tenor of it, it
sounds rather like a complaint or a narration, then a prayer? Two other
prayers you find omitted, the one for the Navy, and the other for seasonable
weather: as if a form of prayer fitted for a particular time and purpose, must
be still observed; when there is no such cause to use it, as at first to make
it. The Navy then went out against a great and puissant Monarch, to set upon
him on his own coasts, many leagues from home: the honor and the fortune of
the kingdom being laid at stake. Now it keeps only on our own coasts,
without an enemy to bid battle or to cope withal: and rather is set forth
to prevent a danger, then to remove it being come. The cases being different,
must we needs use the Prayers which were then set forth? What think you of
this clause, Lord turn our enemies sword into their own bosom; Would that be
proper at this time, when as his Majesty is at peace with all his neighbors?
Had you not longed to pick a quarrel; I find not any thing in this, that
might provoke you: nor could you possibly have pitched on any thing, that had
less become you. For are not you the man that spoke so much against long
prayers, as we shall see anon in your next general head of Innovations;
because thereby the preacher is enforced to cut short his sermon? and do you
here complain that the Prayers are shortened, that so you may have liberty to
preach the longer? I see it were a very difficult thing to please you, should a
man endeavor it. That which comes next, is that the Prayer for the Lady
Elizabeth and her Children, is left out in the present fast-booke, which were
expressed in the former p. 143 and that as the Newes-booke says, while they
are now royally entertained at Court. My Lord the Prince Elector cannot but
take this very ill, that you should make his royal entertainment here a mask
to cover your seditious and malevolent projects. For you know well enough, that
not alone in this new fast-booke, set forth since his arrival here, but long
before his coming hither, that excellent Lady and her children, had not by
name, been specified in the Common prayer book. Why did you not dislike that
omission there, as well as leaving out the Father of thine Elect? Or will you
have a reason for it, why it was laid aside in both; if you will promise to be
satisfied by reason, I will give you one, and such a one as may suffice any one
but you. In the first fast-booke, his Majesty our Sovereign Lord had not any
children, to be remembered in our prayers: and the remainder of the royal
seed, was in that most illustrious Lady and her Princely issue. That case now
is altered. His Majesty Gods name be praised has many children, as well male,
as female; none of the which are specified by name, particularly, but the
Prince alone: the rest together with the Lady Elizabeth and her Princely issue,
being all comprehended in the name of the Royal Progene. The Lady Elizabeth
and her children, finding no more neglect in this, then the Kings own most
Royal issue, will give you little thanks for so vain a cavil.

More anger yet. You charge the Bishops next, that they cry up with fasting,
and down with preaching. For crying up fasting, you produce this instance,
that in the order for the East, these words are left out of the new book, viz.
To avoid the inconvenience that may grow by fasting; some esteeming it a
meritorious work; others a good work, and of it self acceptable to God
without due regard of (...) etc. p. 142. Hereupon you conclude, tha^ (...)
esteem fasting a meritorious work; and acceptable unto God, without due
regard of the end. Ibid. I have had patience all this while. But patientia
^^sa. I must now tell you in plain terms, in all my life, (and I have seen
the world a little) I never met with such an impostor. For good Sir, take the
passage as it lies together, and how can you have conscience so to delude your
audience; whose souls you say you tender as you do your own. The Order then
is this, Number. 6. Admonition is here lastly to be given, that on the fasting day
there be but one Sermon at morning Prayer, and the same not above an hour
long, and but one at evening Prayer of the same length, to avoid the
inconvenience that may grow by the abuse of Fasting: some esteeming it a
meritorious work: others a good work, and of it self acceptable to God
without due regard of the end: others presuming factiously to enter into
public fasts without the consent of authority, and others keeping the people
together with over much weariness, and tediousness, a whole day together:
which in this time of contagion is very dangerous, in so thick and close
assemblies of the multitudes. This is the place at large, so pricked and
commade, as I find it in the said old book. Deal honestly, if you can in any
thing, in this. These words, To avoid the inconvenience which may grow by the
abuse of fasting; Are they the beginning of a new period, as you lay them
down? or what do they relate unto, unto the merit of a fast? No Sir, but to
the former words touching the number and the length of Sermons, wherein, some
men (your self for one) had placed so much sanctity; that public fasts so
solemnized were by some thought (no doubt) meritorious works; by others many
times kept without due authority: by others so spunne out with Sermons of four
hours a piece, that with much weariness and tediousness it took up the day;
no care at all being taken to avoid contagion, which in such close and thick
assemblies is exceeding dangerous. This is the plain Analysis of that passage,
in the said first book. Assuredly, what ever other cause there was, there is
no reason to suspect that it related anything to the point of merit. These
times are so fallen out with fasting. (Unless it be a Fast of their own
appointment) that you have little cause to fear lest any man should place a
part of merit in it. Non celebranda esse jejunia Statuta. To cry down all set
times of fasting, which was the heresy of Aerius in the former times, is
reckoned a chief point of orthodox doctrine, in the present times. No merit
placed in fasts, ordinary or extraordinary, that I can hear of, unless
perhaps you place some merit in your long Sermons on those fasts, as before is
said, And dare you then affirm as in the newes-booke, that this place and
passage, was purposely left out to gratify the Papists, or to place any popish
merit in the present fast? if any body may be said to be gratified in it, it is
you and yours, whose absurd course and carriage had in the former book been
described so lively. But you are still the same. Primus ad extremum similis
sibi. You and the Black Moors skin will wash white together. This is, I hope
enough to satisfy you, touching the crying up of fasting: and for the crying
down of preaching on the days of fast, that has been spoken of already. How
far it is suppressed at all other times, you mean to tell us in the next of
your general heads; and we expect to hear what you have to say.

On then. Your sixth general innovation is in the means of salvation, in which
there are particulars very many which you charge them with. As viz. in
suppressing lectures, cutting short preaching, forbidding any prayer before the
Sermon but that barren form of words in the Canon; using no prayer at all
after the Sermon, but reading a second or third service at the Altar. Having no
sermon in the afternoon; catechizing only for half an hour, and that by
question and answer only; and finally limiting all Sermons in great Cities and
the universities to one hour, so as the people cannot enjoy the benefit of
more then one Sermon a day, p. 150. These are the severalties contained in that
general head; and they relate either to preaching or to praying; or indeed
altogether unto preaching, and unto praying no further then as subservient
thereunto. First for suppressing Lectures, why do you reckon that for an
innovation, when as the very name of Lecturers, and Lectures, are in themselves
a new and late invention? borrowed by Travers and the rest toward the latter
end of Queen Elizabeth's time, from the new fashions of Geneva. We in the
Church of England know no other names, but Bishops and Curats; and Curats are
again divided into Parsons and Vicars, and those which do officiate for and
under them, now in the use of speech called Curats as by a proper and distinct
name. Your Lecturer has no place in the prayers of the Church of England, nor
none amongst the terms of Law. But being Geneva had it so; a Doctor superadded
to the ordinary Pastor, whose office only was to teach, not to administer the
sacraments or execute any other ministry to the Priest belonging: it must
needs be disposed so here, that by degrees, insensibly we might be brought
more near that Church. There is a story of the Bats or Reremice, that when the
birds came to demand tribute of them, showing them their breasts they said they
were beasts: and when the beasts came to them and craved the like, showing them
their wings, they said they were birds. Your Lecturers, in the same occasion,
are like these Reremice. When subsidies were granted for his Majesty's use, if
any thing was demanded of them by the Clergy, they had no benefice, no title,
and so passed for Lay: and on the like demand made by the Laity, they only
showed their gowns, and that made them Clergy. Being then in themselves but a
new invention, and such as tended to bring in the greatest innovation in this
Church, that possibly could be projected how could you reckon the suppressing
of them an innovation? Now for these Lecturers, we may distinguish them into
Weekes-day Lecturers, and Lord's Day Lecturers, As Weeke-day Lecturers, you
complain how they are suppressed by that restriction in his Majesty's
Proclamation about the fast: and tell us, that the Prelates do extend the
letter of the Proclamation, that if but one house in a Parish be infected, the
pestilence thus continuing and the fast not ceasing, all wednesday sermons in
the whole City must be suppressed. p. 147, If so, as so it is not, (you know
well enough) what reason had you of complaint. Are there not holidayes so many,
that you and yours do reckon them as a burden, both to Church and State?
Observe the holy days as you ought with prayers and Preaching: and see what
loss the Church would have, or any of the people find, for want of Wednesday
or any other weeke-day Lectures. As Lord's Day Lecturers we shall meet them in
the afternoon, wherein all sermons are put down, if you tell us true.

Next follows cutting short of Preaching. How comes that to pass? For that we
must needs seek elsewhere, for here you tell us not. Look therefore in your
17. p. and there we have it. There you find fault with them that are all for
outward formalities (you being for none at all your self) in that they place
all the service of God in reading long-prayers, and thereby excluding preaching
as unnecessary: and p. 158. commanding of long Matins instead of Preaching;
which as they are performed, in Cathedral Churches, you call profanely Long
Babylonish service, p. 160. This is the block you stumble at, that whereas
formerly you used to mangle and cut short the service, that you might bring all
piety and the whole worship of God, to your extemporary prayers and sermons:
now you are brought again to the ancient usage, of reading the whole prayers,
as you ought to do. And call you this an innovation? Are not you he that told
us that the Communion-booke set forth by Parliament, is commanded to be read
without any alteration, and none others, p. 130. And if you read it not as it
is commanded, make you alteration think you? Do you not find it also in the
14. Canon, that. All Ministers shall observe the Orders, rites, and ceremonies
prescribed in the Book of Common Prayer, as well in reading the holy
Scriptures, and saying of Prayers, as in administration of the Sacraments,
without diminishing in regard of preaching or any other respect, (how like you
that Sir) or adding any thing to the matter or form thereof. The very self
same answer we must also make to another of your cavils, about the using of no
prayer at all, after the Sermon, but reading a second or third service at the
Altar. For being it is so appointed in the book of Common Prayer, that on the
holidaies if there be no Communion, shall be said all that is appointed at the
Communion, until the end of the Homily, concluding with the Prayer for the
whole state of Christ's Church, etc. The innovation is on your part, who have
offended all this while, not only against the Canon, but the Act of
Parliament, by bringing in new forms of your own devising. As for forbidding
any prayer before the Sermon, but that barren form of words in the Canon, (for
being in the Canon you can give it no better Epithet;) if any such forbidding
be, its but agreeable unto the Canon, which has determined of it long ago:
and so no innovation of these present times. Nor was that Canon any new
invention neither, when it first was made: but only a repetition and
confirmation of what had formerly been ordered both in King Edward the sixth,
the Queens injunctions according to the rule and practice of the former times;
the Preachers then using no form of prayers before their Sermons, but that of
bidding, moving, or exhorting, which is now required in the Canon; as may be
plainly seen in Bishop Latimers Sermons, Bishop Jewels, Bishop Andrews, and
diverse others. Your afternoon Sermons on the Sondaies, if performed by
Lecturers, are but a part of that new fashion which before we spoke off: and
having no foundation in the Church at all, it cannot be an Innovation to lay
them by. And if the Curate of the place, or whosoever has the Cure of Souls;
bestow his time in Catechizing, as he is appointed, that in effect is but to
change one kind of Preaching for another. So that if he that has the Cure,
does carefully discharge his office, and perform his duty: you have no reason
to complain for want of having Sermons in the after noone. I know it is the
custom of you and yours, to take up Sermons more by tale then weight: and so
you have your number, you think all is right. But as in feeding of the body,
one temperate meal digested presently and concocted thoroughly, adde's more
unto the strength of nature, then all that plentiful variety of delicates
which gluttony has yet invented: So do they profit best in all heavenly
wisdom (...), not who hear many Sermons, but which hear good ones. For
limiting the Catechizing unto half an hour, that is ordered by the Canon also:
and it is ordered by the Canon, that Children shall be taught no other
Catechism, then that set forth in the book of Common prayer. Not that the
Curate, is to examine them by question and answer only, without expounding
any of the principles of religion, which is that you quarrel: but to examine
and instruct them, as the Canon has it. Yet so that under the pretense hereof,
nor you nor any such as you, may assume that liberty, as to turn simple
Catechizing for the instruction of the youth and ignorant persons of the
Parish; into a Catechism Lecture of some two hours long, not differing from
your mornings sermons, but in name alone. If in great Cities and the
Viniversities, Sermons are limited to the same time of the day, or as your own
phrase is, to one hour only; assuredly it is neither new, nor strange. The
Sermon appointed for the morning being a part of the second service, is to be
read or spoken in all Churches, at the time appointed by the Church. Nothing in
this de novo, that I can hear of. In Oxford it was always so, since I first
knew it; the Sermon for the University and Town being expressly at the same
time. Nor need you be offended at it, if by that means the people in those
places cannot hear above one sermon in a day: it being not many but good
sermons, not much but profitable hearing, which you should labor to commend
unto them; but that you would be some body for your often preaching. Our
Savior tells us of some men, that thought they should be heard by much
speaking; and you are one of them that teach the people that they shall be
saved by much hearing.

Your two last innovations I shall join together; the one being in the rule of
Faith, which is now made, you say, to be the dictates of the Church, to wit,
the Prelates, p. 151. the other in the rule of manners, which must not be any
more the word of Christ, but the example of the Prelates lives, and dictates of
their writings only. p. 156. In this you have most shamefully abused your
self, and all them that heard you. The rule of faith is still the same, even
the holy Scriptures: nor can you name a man who has changed this rule, or made
the dictates of the Church, to wit the Prelates, the rule of faith. The
application of this rule, that is the exposition of the Script. you must
acknowledge to be in the Churches power, or else you are no son to the Church of
Eng. For in the Articles of the Church, to which you have subscribed more the^
once or twice, it is said expressly that the Church has authority in
controversies of faith, and that it is vwitnes and a keeper of holy writ: As
also that it has authority to expound the scriptur, co^ditioned that it so
expound one place, that it be not repugnant to another. And for the judgment of
prelates, I know not how you can excuse your self before God almighty, for not
submitting thereunto; having called God to witness, that you would so do. For
when you took the order of holy Priesthood, it was demanded of you in the
Congregation, whether you would reverently obey your Ordinary, and other chief
Ministers, unto whom the government and charge is committed over you, following
with a glad mind and will their godly admonitions, and submitting your self to
their godly judgments: and you made answer, that you would, the Lord being
your helper. Either then you must first co^vince their judgments of some
plain ungodlines, or else your not submitting to them, must be a plain
colluding both with God and man. Reeve, whom you jeere at so, both in your
Pasquil; p. 152. and in your dialogue between A. and B. says no more then
this: and if you say not this, you have not lied unto men only, but unto God*
Nor is this any other doctrine, then what was held for current in Ignatius his
time* (...), etc. Let the Priests (says he) submit themselves unto the Bishop;
Deacons, unto the Priests, the people to the Priests and Deacons. And then he
adds, (...) My soul for theirs that faithfully observe this order. So he. And
had you kept this order, you had not so engaged your self in these factious
brabbles, wherewith you have disturbed both your self and others. Touching the
rule of manners, that any has affirmed or written, that it must be according
to the Prelates lives and dictates, you produce no proof. Only you say, and
say it only, that they do countenance, allow, and by Episcopal authority
dispense with an heathenish kind of life, especially in most sacred times, as
the Lords day. This is no proof I hope, but an ipse dixit, or a petitio
Principii take it at the best; although it be an argument you are used most
to. And I must answer you to this in the words of Tullie, Quid minus est, non
dico Oratoris sed hominis, quam id objicere Adversario, quod si ille verbo
negarit, ulterius progredi non passis. Till you bring better proofs for your
innovations, your self must be reputed for the Innovator: and all the
mischief which you have imagined against other men, will fall upon your own
pate, and deservedly too.

Hitherto you have acted the false Accuser, and have done it excellently well,
none better. In the next place you come to play the Disputant; and that you do
us wretchedly, none worse. For first you say, that it is pleaded by our
changers, (as you please to call them) that they bring in no changes, but
revive those things which ancient Canons have allowed and prescribed; as
standing up at the Gloria Patri, and at the reading of the Gospel, bowing at
the name of Jesus, and to the high Altar; removing the communion table to stand
Altarwise; placing of Images in Churches, erecting Crucifixes over the Altars,
commanding of long Mattins instead of preaching and the like. This said, you
answer hereunto, that we in this land, are not to be ruled by the Popes
Canons, or the Canon Law, but by the law of God and the King. And that there
are no other rites and ceremonies to be used in our Church, then those that are
allowed by the Act of Parliament, prefixed to the communion book, and are
expressed in the same book. But Sir, you may be pleased to know, that the
commanding of long prayers is warranted by that Act of Parliament, which you so
insist on; the prayers being made no longer, then that Act commands: and that
our bowing at the name of Jesus is enjoined by the 18. Canon, which being
authorized by his Majesty, is the law of the King, and being grounded on the
second of the Philipians, is the law of God. Our standing at the Gospel, and
praying with our faces toward the East, have been still retained by our
Church, not out of any special Canon, but ex vi Catholice consuetudinis, by
virtue of the constant and continual custom of the church of God. The placing
of the holy Table Altar-wise, and standing at the Gloria Patri, have generally
been observed in Cathedral Churches, since the Reformation: it being granted
by a good friend of yours, the Author of the holy Table, that in some
Cathedral Churches, where the steps were not transposed in tertio of the
Queen, and the wall on the backeside of the Altar untaken down; the table
might stand, as it did before, along the wall. For bowing to the high Altar, I
know no such matter, either in practice or in precept: for bowing toward it,
we have the practice of antiquity but no present precept. Your friend and
fidus Achates, the good minister of Lincolnshire, could have told you this,
that although the Canon does not enjoyne it, yet reason, piety, and the
constant practice of antiquity does: that Churchmen do it in Saint
Chrysostomes Liturgy; and the Laymen are commanded to do it in Saint
Chrysostomes Homily: and finally if there be any proud Dames, quae defer
nesciant mentium religioni, quod deferunt voluptati as Saint Ambrose speaks,
that practice all manner of courtesies for maskes and dances, but none by any
means for Christ, at their approach to the holy Table: he declares them
Schismatickes, bequeathing them unto Donatus, with a protest, that he will
never write them in his Calendar for the Children of this Church. For Images,
in Churches, and Crucifixes over the Altars, find you, of all loves, that the
Church has any where commanded them, or any of the Prelates in their
visitatio^s, given order for their setting up? if not, why do you charge it on
her, and bring not any proof at all that she has imposed it. So that your
answer being thus come to nothing, the objection by you brought on the Churches
part, remains unanswearable. Viz. that the Prelates of the Church have brought
in no changes, but only have revived those things which the ancient Canons
have allowed and prescribed; the Law of God, the King, and the Act of
Parliament, either inabling them to do so, or not gainsaying it.

Secondly you object on the Prelates part, that they bring in no Innovations,
no new rites, but what has been in use ever since the Reformation, and that in
the most eminent places even the Mother Churches of the land; so as all that
they go about is to reduce inferior Churches to an unity and conformity to
their Mother-Churches; that bringing all to unity, they may take of that
reproach which the Adversaries cast upon us in this kind. This is their Plea
indeed, you say wondrous honestly. Would you could hold long in so good a
vein, and not fly out unto your wonted arts of Scandal and false clamours
upon noe occasion. For having pleaded thus, you make an answer presently, that
the Cathedrals are the old high places not yet removed; the ancient dens of
those old foxes; the nests and Nurceries of superstition and Idolatry, wherein
the old Beldame of Rome has nuzzled up her brood of Popelings, and so
preserved her VSVM SARVM, to this very day. p. 159. and finally that the
Prelates make these mother Cathedralls (being Romes adopted daughters) their
Concubines, whereon to beget a new bastard generation of sacrificing Idolatrous
Mass Priests throughout the land. p. 163. But Sir, consider in cold blood,
that this is not to answer, but to rail down Arguments. His sacred Majesty,
in his resolution of the case about Saint Gregory's Church, near the
Cathedral of Saint Paul, did determine positively, that all Parochial
Churches ought to be guided by the Pattern of the mother Church upon the which
they do depend: and yet he did declare his dislike of all Innovations and
receding fromantient constitutions grounded upon just and warrantable reasons;
Which makes it manifest that he conceived not this conformity with the mother
Churches, to com within the compass of an Innovation. But wherefore tell we
you, of his Majesty's pleasure, which are not pleased with any thing that his
Majesty does, except it may be wrested to advance your purposes. The Minister
of Lincolnshire, and any thing from him, will be far more welcome; and
something you shall have from him to confute your follies* who can do more
with you, I am sure, then the world besides. Now he, good man, the better to
pull down the authority of his Majesty's chapel, Holy Table p 183
has told you somewhat of the authority of the Mother Churches. What Is that?
Marry says he, In the name of God let the same offices be said in all the
Provinces, as are said in the Metropoliticall Church; as well forth ord^r of
the service, the Psalmody, the Canon, as the use and custom of the
ministration: and this he tells us was the old rule of the ancient Fathers* For
this he cites good store of Evidence in his margin, (as his custom is) and
then concludes, that it is a current direction in all Authors; where you may
see that by the rule of the old Fathers, and your friends to boot, whatever is
the use and custom of the Ministration in the Metropoliticall Church; the same
is universally to be received throughout the provinces. And thereupon we may
conclude, that by the old rule of the Ancient Fathers, by the direction of all
authors, and the authority of your good friend the minister of Lincolnshire; in
case the things that you complain of, have bin and are retained in the
ministration by the Mother Churches; they ought to be retained also in
Parochial Churches; especially if it be so ordered by the higher powers, the
Bshops and Pastors of the same. Your scandalous and opprobrious speeches, we
regard not here, in attributing to the Mother Churches those most odious names
of high places, dens of foxes; nurseries of superstition; and stiling the
conformable ministers of this Church, a generation of Idolatrous sacrificing
Massepriests. You know what he in Tacitus replied on the like occasion, Tu
linguae ego aurium Dominus sum. And you may rail on if you please, for any
answer we shall give you, but neglect and patience. Only I will be bold to
tell you, that were it not for those Cathedralls, (howsoever you vilify and
miscall them) we had not only before this time, been at a loss amongst
ourselves, in the whole form and order of divine service, here established:
but possibly might have had far more Recusants in this kingdom then now we
have. Which if you take to be a Paradox, as no doubt you will, you may remember
that it was affirmed by Marquess Rhosny Ambassador here for King Henry the
fourth of France, having observed the majesty of our divine service in
Cathedrals, that if the same had bin observed by the Protestants in France,
there had not been so many Papists left in it, as there were at that time. For
your particular instances in the Cathedral Churches of Durham, Bristol, Saint
Paul's, and Wulpher Hampton 161. (though, I trow, Wulpherhampton be no
Cathedral but that you have a mind to match your friend the Minister, for his
Cathedral Church at D^ver) the most that you except against, are things of
ornament: which you are grieved to see you more rich and costly then they have
been formerly. Judas and you alike offended at any cost, that is bestowed upon
our Savior, either on his body, or about his Temples: both of you thinking
all is lost, that is so disposed of; and that it would do better in the common
bagg, whereof he was, and you perhaps have been the bearers. And so I should
proceed to the third Argument, which you have made in the behalf of these
Innovations, as you call them, drawn from the furniture and fashion of his M^^.
Chapel, and to an answer thereunto. But we have met with them already; partly
in answer to your own wretched and seditious comparison of his Majesty's
Chapel and the Altar there, to Julian the Apostates Altar and Nebuchadnezzars
golden image: and partly in reply to the self same answers, made to the sold
Argument by your friend the Minister, your (...) and true yoake-fellow in this
cause; whither I refer you. So having traced you up and down, from one end
of your Pasquill unto the other: and looked upon those factious and seditious
doctrines which you have preached unto the people: nothing remains but that I
lay before you, and your Audience, a word of Application, and so conclude.

THE CONCLUSION.
Containing an address to H. B. and representing to him the true condition of
his crime, and punishment thereto, belonging, if he should be dealt withal
according to the Law in that behalf. Oldnols case. The Puritanes use to
practice on the people, for the accomplishment of their designs. Scandalum
magnatum, what it is, and how punished. Seditious writings brought within the
compass of Treason; and several persons executed for the same. Many of the
Principal of the faction, hanged up, by a particular Statute in Q. Elizabeth's
time. The power ascribed unto the people by the Puritan doctrine. An
Exhortation to the People, to continue in obedience, to God, the King, and his
public Ministers. No further Answers to be looked for to those pestilent
libells, which every day are cast abroad. The close of all.
IT pleased King James of blessed memory, speech in Star. Chamber.
to leave unto the World at once, both a complaint for, and commendation of the
Church of England. It is a sign (says he) of the latter days drawing on;
even the contempt of the Church, and of the Governors and Teachers thereof,
now in the Church of England: which I say in my conscience, of any Church that
ever I read or knew of, present or past, is most pure, and nearest the
Primitive and Apostolical Church in Doctrine and Discipline, and is sureliest
founded upon the Word of God, of any Church in Christendom. Which commendation
as the Church does still retain; so may it take up the complaint in more
grievous manner: those times being modest then in respect of these; and those
contempts which he complains of, being now grown to such an height, Supra
quod ascendi non possit, that greater cannot be imagined. Wherein, as the
Triumviri, whom at first I spoke of, have well played their parts: so there is
none of any age, nor all together in all ages, which has shown greater malice
unto the Church, and to the Governors and Teachers of it, then you, Mas.
Burton. Not to the Bishops only, and inferior persons, whom either for their
place or calling, you were bound to honor; but to the supreme Governor
thereof, your Sovereign and Patron, as you please, sometimes to call him: your
carriage toward whom, I shall first lay down, according as before delivered;
and after tell you my opinion freely, what I think therein. First, for the
King, you call His royal power in question, and are offended very much that
any one should attribute unto him an unlimited power, as you mean unlimited,
or that the Subject should be taught that his obedience must be absolute, that
being (say you) a way, to cast the fear of God, and so his Throne, down unto
the ground. You tell us of some things the King cannot do, and that there is a
power (in government) which he neither has, nor may transfer upon another.
You had my censure of this before, in the Second Chapter. Yet I will here be
bold to tell you, that as it is a kind of Atheism to dispute pro and con, what
God can do, and what he cannot; though such disputes are raised sometimes by
unquiet wits: so it is a kind of disobedience and disloyalty to question what
a King can do, being Gods Deputy here on earth; especially to determine what
he can, and what he cannot. Then for the obedience of the Subject, you limit it
to positive laws; the King to be no more obeyed then there is special Law or
Statute for it: the Kings Prerogative Royal, being of so small a value with
you, that no man is to prize it, or take notice of it, further then warranted
by Law, and which is worse, you ground this poor obedience, which you please
to yield him, upon that mutual stipulation, which is between the King and
people; and thereby teach the people, that they are no longer to obey the King,
then he keeps promise with the people.

This ground of obedience laid, you next proceed unto the censure of his
Majesty's actions: complaining that in your commitment unto Prison, his
Majesty had not kept his solemn covenant made with his people, touching their
Petition (which you call) of right. That by his Declaration before the
Articles, the Doctrines of Gods Grace and man's salvation have been hushed, and
silenced, and that by silencing those needless controversies, there is a
secret purpose to suppress Gods truth, and to bring in the contrary errors,
as did the Arian Emperors by their law of Amnestia. His Majesty's Declaration
about lawful sports upon the Sunday, you tax, as tending manely to the
dishonor of God, the profanation of the Sabbath, the annihilation of the
fourth Commandment: and charge him that thereby, and by his silencing of those
doctrines before remembered, and restraint of preaching on the Fast-dayes, in
infected places; he has given way to Innovations, contrary to his solemn
promise made unto his people. His Majesty's Chapel Royal and the furniture
thereof, you liken unto Nehu chadnezzars golden Image, and Julians Altar: the
King himself to Nebuchadnezzar, the Apostate Julian, and that Idolatrous King
Ahab: encouraging the people both by particular instances, and a general
exhortation to stand stoutly to it. Finally you lay down a most odious and
disloyal supposition, touching the setting up of Mass in his Majesty's
Chapel, and what is to be done when that comes to pass. And ever and anon
inform him (as if you meant to terrify and affright him with it) how much the
people do begin to stagger in their good opinion of his Majesty; that they
grow jealous of some dangerous plot, that all the people of the Land (by your
commitment to the prison) may be possessed with a sinister opinion of the Kings
justice and constancy in keeping his solemn Covenant made with his people as
in that Petition of right; and if he observe his word no better, it will be
said of him in succeeding Annalls, that he had no regard to sacred vows and
solemn Protestations. Thus having taught the people that all obedience to the
King is founded on a mutual stipulation between him and them; and telling
them, how often, and in how great matters, he has broke the Covenant made
between them: you have released the people ipso facto of all obedience,
duty, and allegiance to their Sovereign Lord; and thereby made them free
subjects, as you please to call them, so free that it is wholly in their
pleasure whither they will obey, or not.

Thus have I briefly laid together your carraige and behavior toward our
Lord the King: 3 Edw. l. 33
wherein expressly contrary to the Statute of Westminster, that no man tell
or publish any false news or tales, whereby discord or occasion of discord or
slander may grow between the King and his people or the nobles; you have as
much as in you was, made a breach between them. For though (the Lord be
praised) no such discord be; yet is your crime no less then if it were: the
law forbidding such false tales, not only by the which discord or slander does
arise, but by which it might. Oldnoll, a yeoman of the Guard, was on this very
Statute endicted in Queen Mary's time, pour parrols horrible, and slanderous
parrols del Roigno, for horrible and slanderous words against her Highness,
unde scandalum in regno inter dominam Reginam and Magnates vel populum suum
^riri poterit. etc. And howsoever no dissension did arise on the said false
tales, yet seeing there was occasion given, he was proceeded with, and
punished, according to that Statute, as you may find in Justice. Dier. p. 155.
So far the laws provide to prevent all discord, and the occasions of the
same: but for preventing of sedition, and seditious either words or writings,
they are more severe: of which how far you have been guilty, we shall see
annon. Mean time you may take notice, if at lest you will, that it has been
the ancient practice of those men, whose stepps you follow, to put into the
peoples minds seditious humors, thereby to make themselves of power against
the Magistrates: and sometimes also to terrify and affright the Prince or
supreme Magistrate with the fear of uproares, the better to accomplish what
they had projected. This was the device of Flacius Illyricus the father of the
stiff or rigid Lutherans in high Germany: whom as you follow in his doctrines,
deprovidentia, Praedestinatione, Gratia, Libero arbitrio, Adiaphoris, and such
heads as those; so do you also follow him, in his fiery nature, and seditious
Principles. One of which was, Principes potius metu seditionum terrendos, quam
vel minimum pacis causa indulgendum, Necessaria Respon^io p. 83.
that Princes should be rather terrified with the fear of tumults, then any
thing should be yielded to for quietness sake. The other was, ut plebs
opiniones suas populari seditione tueretur, that the common people ought to
take up arms against the magistrate, Cont. Bellar. de Peccat. origi.
in maintenance of those opinions which they were possessed of. Which as
Paraeus tells us, has been the practice ever since of all his followers;
whereof you are chief. And for your odious supposition, of setting up of Mass
in the Kings Chapel, let me tell you this. That it is Criminal, Hist. of K.
H. 7. by the Vis. S. Alb.
if not Capital, to use Ifs and Ands, and suppositions in matters of so high a
nature; and such as in some cases has been judged high Treason. Sir William
Stanley, a man as of especial merit, so in especial favor with King Henry the
seventh, found it no jesting matter to use Ifs and Ands, in things which do so
nearly concern a King. For saying only, that if he thought the young man
(Perkin Warbeck) to be the undoubted son of King Edward the fourth he never
would bear arms against him he was condemned of treason, and executed for the
same: the Judges thinking it unsafe to admit ifs and ands in such dangerous
points.

So for your dealing with the Bishops, you labor to expose them as much as in
you is, to the public hatred; and to stir up the people to effect their
ruin. Not to repeat those scandalous and odious names, which passim, almost
in every page you have cast upon them, to bring them into discredit and
contempt with the common people: you have accused them of invading his
Majesty's supreme authority, and left them, as you think, in a Praemunire; the
better to incense his Majesty against them also. whom having exasperated, as
you hope, against them, you call upon him in plain terms to hang them up, as
once the Gibeonites did the 7. sons of Saul; at least to join with God and
his good subjects, Courtiers, Nobles, Judges, Magistrates, and the rest
together, to cut them off, and root them out. Which if he will not do, you
tell him roundly that for his own part, he will make a very sorry account to
almighty God, for the great charge committed to him; and then, that God for
his part, will rather add unto, then decrease our Plagues; till he has
utterly destroyed us. But fearing lest this should not edify with so wise a
Prince, you practice next upon the people. And knowing that there is nothing,
which they prize so highly, as the defense of their religion and lawful
liberties; you lay about you lustilie, to let them see how much they are in
danger of loosing both. For this cause you accuse the Prelates almost every
where for bringing in of Popery, tooth and nail for Popery, confederating
with Priests and Jesuits, for rearing up of that religion; and setting up
again the the throne of Antichrist: and all their actions you interpret to
tend that way. Next you cry out, how much the people are oppressed contrary
to their rights and liberties, affirming that the Bishops do not only over
top the royal throne, but that they trample the laws, liberties, and just
rights of the Kings subjects under their feet; and cut the people off, from
the free use and benefit of the Kings good laws. Which said, and pressed in
every place with all spite and rancour, you call upon the nobles to rowze up
their noble Christian zeal and magnanimous courage; upon the judges, to draw
forth their sword of justice; upon the Courtiers, nobles, others, if they have
any spark of piety, now to put their helping hands in so great a need; and
lest all these should fail, you call upon the nation generally to take notice
of their Antichristian practices and to redress them withal their force and
power. What do you think of this Alarm, this Ad arma ad arma, this calling
of all sorts of people to combine together, to rouse their spirits, draw their
swords, put to their hands, muster upp all their force and power: do you not
think this comes within the compass of sedition? have not you done your best
(or your worst rather) to raise an insurrection in the state, under pretense of
looking to the safety of religion, and the Subjects rights? I will not judge
your conscience, I leave that to God. But if one may collect your meaning by
your words and writings; or if your words and writings may be censured, not
only according to the effect which they have produced but which they might:
you are but in a sorry taking. And because possibly when you find your
danger, you will the better find your error, and so prepare your self for a
sincere and sound repentance; I will a little lay it open. Make you what use
there of, you shall think most fit.

And first, supposing, that these your factious and false clamours, are only
such as might occasion discord between my LL. the Bishops and the Commons;
where had you been then? there passed a Statute (still in force) 2. Ric. 2.
cap. 5. for punishment of Counterfeiters of false news, and of horrible and
false messages (mistaken in the English books for the French Mensonges, i. e.
^^es) of Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other No^^es and great men of the
Realm, etc. of things which by the said Prelates, Lords, etc. were never
spoken, (...), or thought, (pray mark this well) in great slander of the said
Prelates, etc. whereby debates and discords might arise (not does, but might
arise) betwixt the said Lords and Commons, which God forbid, and whereof great
peril and mischief might come to all the Realm, and quick subversion and
destruction of the said Realm, if due remedy be not provided. And for the
remedy provided, which in this statute was according to that of Westminster the
first before remembered; that in the 12. of this King Richard, cap. 11. is left
to the discretion of his Majesty's Council. So that what ever punishment His
Majesty's most honorable Privy Council may inflict upon you, you have justly
merited, in taking so much pains to so bad a purpose, as to set discord and
debate between the Prelates and the people. But where you have gone further to
excite the people; what say I, people? nay, the Lords, Judges, Courtiers, all
the Nation generally, to draw their powers and force together: I see no reason
why you should be so angry with the High Commissioners for laying sedition to
your charge; or if that please you better, a seditious Sermon. And being a
seditious Sermon then, and a seditious Pamphlet now, dispersed up and down
throughout the kingdom, especially amongst those, whom you, and such as you
have seasoned with a disaffection to the present government: What have not you
for your part done, to put all into open tumult? I do not mean to charge it
on you, Glanvil^ l 14
but I will tell you how it was resolved in former times, by Bracton, and
Glanvill, two great Lawyers in those days; viz. Siquis machinatus fuerit, vel
aliquid fecerit in morte^ D. regis, vel ad seditione^ regis, vel exercitus sui,
vel co^senserit, co^siliumve dederit, etc licet id quod in voluntate habuit non
produxerit ad effectum, tenetur tamen criminis laesae Majestatis. Bracton l. 2.
Construe me this, and you will find your self in a pretty pickle. And I will
tell you also two particular cases, which you may find with little pains, in
our common Chronicles. Stews A^n.
The first of one John Bennet, Wooll-man, who had in London scattered schedules
full of sedition, and for that was drawn, hanged, and beheaded in the fourth
year of Henry the Fifth, The other of Thomas Bagnall, Jo. Holling h. p. p. 778.
Scot, Jo. Heath, and Jo. Kennington, who being all Sanctuary men, of Saint
Martins le Grand, were taken out of the said Sanctuary for forging of seditious
Bills, to the slander of the King, and some of his Counsel, (will you mark
this well?) for the which three of them were condemned and executed, and the
fourth upon his plea returned to Sanctuary, in the ninth year of King Henry
the Seventh. I instance only in these two, because both ancient; both of them
happening before the Statute 23. Eliz. (...) which being restrained unto the
natural life of the said Queen, is not now in force; and which, as long as it
continued, was a strong bridle in the mouths of your forefathers in the
Faction, to hold them in, from publishing and printing such seditious
Pamphlets. The common Chronicles will tell you, how that most excellent Lady
dealt with those, who had offended her in that kind, wherein you excel:
Tha^ker and Capping, Barrow, Greenwood, Studly, Billot and Bowlar, Penry and
Vdall, zealous Puritans all, being all condemned to death; and the more part
executed. And you may please to know for your further comfort, that in King
James his time, May the third, Anno 1619. one John Williams, a Barrister of the
middle Temple, was arraigned at the Kings Bench, for a seditious book by him
then but lately written, and secretly dispersed abroad never printed (as yo^urs
are) or which he was condemned, and executed at Charing cross, some two days
after. And it was afterward resolved at the first censure of Mass. Prynne, in
the Star Chamber, by the Lord Chief Justice that then was, that had he
been put over to his Tribunal, he had been forfeit to the gallows. All
which being represented to you, I close up my address in the words of Tullie,
Miror te, quorum act a imitere, eorum exitus non perhorrescere. So God bless
the man.

And yet I must not leave you so. As I have raised one use for your
reprehension; so give me leave to raise one more for the instruction of
others, those most especially whom you have seduced. My use shall be, that they
continue steadfast in their full obedience to God; the King, Gods deputy; the
Prelates of the Church being Gods Ministers, and the Kings: and that they do
not suffer themselves to be carried up and down with every blast of doctrine,
by the subtletie of those who only labor to deceive them. I know it is a fine
persuasion to make the common people think that they have more then private
interest in the things of God, and in the government of States: nothing more
plausible nor welcome to some sort of men, such whom you either make or call
free Subjects. This Buchanans device, to put the sword into the hands and
managing of the people; Deiure Reg.
in that his most seditious maxim, Populo jus est imperium eui velit deferat.
And such the doctrine of Cleselius, one of your brethren in the cause, a
furious Contra-Remonstrant of Roterdam, who laid it for a doctrine before his
audience, Marca. Resp. pars 2. p. 50.
that if the Magistrates and Ministers did not do their parts to preserve
Religion, then the people must, licet ad sanguinem usque pro ea pugnarent, what
blood soever should be spent in pursuit thereof. Such grounds were also laid
in Queen Elizabeth's time, by those who then were held as you think your
self, the Grand supporters of the cause: men like to Theudas in the Acts, who
thought themselves, as you do now, to be some great Prophets, and drew much
people after them, so many that they threatened to petition to the Queens
highness, with no fewer then 100000. hands. But what became of these jolly
fellows. They perished, and as many as followed after them, and redacti sunt
ad nihilum, and are brought to nothing: nothing remaining of them now, but the
name and infamy. Nor can I promis better to those who pursue their courses; and
either furiously run, or else permit themselves to be drawn along into
those rash counsels: which as they are begun in disobedience, and
prosecuted equally with pride and malice; so can we not expect that they should
have a better end, then calamitous ruin. And therefore I shall earnestly
beseech and exhort all those, who have been practiced with by this kind of
spirits, (if such at least may cast their eyes on any thing which is not made
to feed their humor) that they would seriously endeavor the Churches peace,
and conscionably submit themselves to their superiors in the Lord: not
following with too hasty feet those Ignes fatui, who only lead them on to
dangerous precipices, and dreadful down-falls. The greatest virtue of a
Subject is his free obedience; not grudgingly or of necessity, or for fear of
punishment: whether it be unto the King, as unto the chief; or unto Governors
as unto them which are sent by him, 1. Pet. 2.13.14.
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.
Suspicion, as it is in Kings, the sickness of a tyrant (and so his Majesty
King James conceived it) so is it in a Subject, the disease and sickness of a
mischievous brain, apt upon every light surmise, to entertain undutifull and
pernicious counsels. The safest man is he, that thinks no evil, and
entertaines not rashly those unjust reports, which are devised and spread
abroad by malicious wits, of purpose to defame their betters: that they
themselves might gain applause, and be cried up, and honored, yea tantum non
adored by poor ignorant men, who do not understand aright what their Projects
aim at.

Lastly, I must inform both you and them, that howsoever it was thought not to
be unfit, that at this present time an Answer should be made unto all your
quarrels, that so the people whom you have seduced might see the error of
their courses: yet neither you nor they must expect the like on all, or any of
those factious provocations which every day are offered to the public
government. Things that are once established by a constant law, are not at all
to be disputed, but much less declamed against: or if they be, will find
more shelter from the laws, then from their Advocates. These scandalous and
seditious pamphlets are now grown so rife, that every day (as if we lived in
the wild of Afric) does produce new Monsters: there being more of them
divulged at this present time, then any former age can speak of; more of these
factious spirits quam muscarum olim cum caletur maxim, then there are
Scarabees and Gad-flies in the heat of Summer. And should the State think fit,
that every libell of yours, and such men as you, should have a solemn Answer
to it: you would advance your heads too high, and think you had done something
more then ordinary, which should necessitate the state to set out Apologies.
That, as it would encourage you to pursue your courses; so would it suddenly
dissolve the whole frame of government; which is as much endangered by such
disputations, as by disobedience. And yet I would not have you think, that you
are like to find those days whereof Tacitus speaks, ubi and sentire quae
velis, Hist, l. ^.
and quae sentias loqui liceat; in which you may be bold to opine what you
list, and speak what ever you conceive: much less to scatter and disperse in
public what ever you dare speak in private. Princes have other ways to right
themselves, and those which are in authority under them, then by the pen: and
such as will fall heavier, if you pull them on you. Kings and the governors of
states, as they participate of Gods power and patience, so do they imitate him
in their justice also; and in their manner of proceeding against obstinate
persons. God is provoked every day, so Kings: God did sometimes expostulate
with his faulty people, and so do Kings: God sometimes did employ his Prophets
to satisfy the clamours and distrusts of unquiet men; and thus Kings do also.
But when the people grew rebellious, and stif-necked, and would not hear the
Charmers voice, charm he never so wisely; God would no longer trouble
himself in seeking to reclaim them from their peevish folly: but let them
feel the rod and the smart thereof, till the mere sense of punishment had
weaned them from it. So howsoever it be true, convitia spreta exolescunt, that
scandalous pamphlets, such as yours, and those which if not yours, are now
spread abroad, have many times with much both moderation, and wisdom, been
slighted and neglected by the greatest persons: yet if the humor be
predominant, and the vein malignant, it has been found at other times as
necessary, that the tongue which speaks proud words be cut off for ever. Nor
would I have you so far abuse your self, as to conceit that none of these
seditious Pasquils, which are now cast into the world, do concern the King.
For as Saint Paul has told us, that whosoever does resist the power, resists
the ordinance of God, Romans 13
because there is no power but it is from God: So whosoever does traduce and
defame those men, which are in chief authority under the King, do defame the
King, because they have their dignities and authorities from and under him. And
thus it was affirmed in Vdals case, Sutel^sses Answ p. 3.
one of your Fathers in the faction, being arraigned upon the Statute 23 Eliz.
cap. 2. For when it was pretended for him, that he defamed not the Queen which
the law provided for, but the Bishops only: it was resolved that they who
spoke against her Majesty's supreme government in cases Ecclesiastical, her
laws, proceedings, and all those Ecclesiastical officers, which rule under
her, did defame the Queeene. Your case being just the same with Vdalls, nor
you, nor any such as you have reason to persuade your selves, but that your
scandalous Pasquills do as nearly concern the King, as those did the Queen;
or that you shall be answered always, edictis melioribus, with pen and paper.
If Authority has stooped so low, this once, to give way that your seditious
pamphlets should come under an examination, and that an Answer should be made
to all the scandalous matters in the same contained, I would not have you
think it was for any other cause, but that your Proselytes may perceive what
false guides they follow, and all the world may see how much you have abused
the King and his Ministers, with your scandalous clamours. Which done, and all
those cavills answered, which you have been so long providing; it is expected
at their hands; that they rest satisfied in and of the Churches purposes, in
every of the things objected; and look not after fresh Replies upon the like
occasions. And so I leave both you and them with those words of Solomon, which
you have so perverted to your wretched ends: My son fear thou the Lord and
the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change: for their calamity
shall arise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
For Saltem p. 3. l. 9. r. Saltum. p. 17. l. 2. for of. r. that of. il. l. 12.
dele And. p. 28. l. 25. for ab r. at that. p. 33. l. 24. for sure r. free. p.
37. l. 27. for and r. what. p. 52. l. 10. for I. audr. i. e. p. 53. l. 23. for
by. r. and by. p. 70. l. 26. for Instance, r. inference. p. 78. l. 16. d. next
for your charges. p. 86. l. 1. del. in. p. 90. l. 20. for a. r. on a. p. 96. l.
25. for. to. r. of. p. 104. l. 3. for will, r. good will. ib. l. 31. dele. But.
p. 105. l. 9. dele. But. p. 107. l. 3. for cautio r. cautum. p. 115. l. 22.
dele. momes. p. 119. l. 12. for Ithicly r. Iphycly. p. 122. l. 29. for a
discourse, r. their discourses. p. 123 l. 23. for meet, r. meat. p. 127. l.
1. r. the Thesis. p. 142. l. 5. for coequall. r. co^evall, p. 144. l. 20. for
For as the, r. And as for the. p. 146. l. 1. for Count, r. court. l. 11. for
your, r. the. p. 149. l. 2. for change r. charge. p. 153. l. 4. for hereby, r.
verily. p. 157. l. 6. for a r. as.


