FOUR LETTERS, and certain Sonnets: Especially touching Robert Green, and
other parties, by him abused: But incidently of diverse excellent persons, and
some matters of note. To all courteous minds, that will voutchsafe the reading.

IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA NVLLA



LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf, 1592.

The particular Contents.
A Preface to Courteous minds. A Letter to M. Emmanuell Demetrius: with a
Sonnet annexed. A Letter to M. Christopher Bird. A Letter to every favorable,
or indifferent Reader. An other Letter, to The-same: extorted after the rest.
Greenes Memorial: or certain Funeral Sonnets. Two Latin Epitaphes: the one
of M. Green: the other of M. John Haruey. A Sonnet of M. Spencer to M. Doctor
Haruey.
To all courteous minds, that will voutchsafe the readinge.
MAy I crave pardon at this instant, as well for enditinge, that is unworthy to
be published, as for publishing, that was unworthy to be endi^ed: I will
hereafter take precise order, either never to importune you more, or to
solicit you for more especial cause. I was first exceeding loath to pen,
that is written: albcit in mine own enforced defense, (for I make no
difference between my decrest friends, and my self:) and am now much loather
to diuulge, that is imprinted: albeit against those, whose own Pamflets are
readier to condemn them, then my Letters forward to accuse them. Vile acts
would in some respects, rather be concealed, then recorded: as the darkness
of the Night better sits the nature of some unlucky birds, then the
brightness of the day: and Herostiatus in a villainous bravery, affectinge a
most-notorious, and monstrous Fame, was in the censure of the wisest
Judgments, rather to be overwhelmed in the deepest pit of Oblivion, then to
enjoy any relic, or shadow of his own desperate glory. But Green (although
pitifully blasted, and how woefully faded?) still flourishes in the memory of
some green wits, wedded to the wantonness of their own fancy, and inamored
upon every newfangled toy: and Pierce Pennylesse (although the Devils Orator
by profession, and his Dammes Poet by practice) in such a flush of notable good
fellows, cannot possibly want many to read him: enough to excuse him: a few
to commend him: soome to believe him; or to credit any, that tickeleth the
right vein, and feeds the riotous humor of their licentious vanity. To stop
the beginning, is no bad purpose: where the end may prove pernicious, or
perilous. Venom is venom, and will infect: when the Dragons Head spitteth
poison, what mischief may lurk in the Dragons Tail? If any distress be
miserable, diffamation is intolerable: especially to minds, that would rather
deserve just commendation, then be any way blemished with unjust slander. They
that use to speak well of other: and endeavor to do w^ll themselves: (the
defectes of dishability are not to be imputed to endeavor) would be sorry to
hear amiss, without cause of complaint, or suspicion: and he that like a
Lacedemonian, or Roman, accounts Infamy worse then death, would be loath to
emproue his courage, or to employ his patience, in digestinge the pestilent
Bane of his life. That is done, cannot de facto be undone: but I appeal to
Wisdom, how discreetely; and to Justice, how deservedly it is done: and
request the one, to do us reason, in shame of Impudency: and beseech the other
to do us right, in reproach of Calumny. It was my intention, so to demean my
self in the whole, and so to temper my style in every part: that I might
neither seem blinde^ with affection, nor enraged with passion: nor partial to
friend, nor prejudicial to enemy: nor injurious to the worst, nor offensive to
any: but mildly and calmely show, how discredit reboundeth upon the autors: as
dust flies back into the wags Eyes, that will needs be puffing it up. Which if
I have altogether attained, without the least oversight of distempered phrase,
I am the gladder: if failed in some few incident terms, (what Tongue, or Pen
may not slipp in heat of discourse?) I hope, a little will not greatly break
the square, either of my good meaning with humanity, or of your good
acceptance with indifferency. Favor, is a courteous Reader, and a gracious
Patron: and no man loves favor, where it is to be loved; or honors it,
where it is to be honored, more affectionatly, then I: yet here I neither
desire favor toward louingest friend: nor wish disfavor toward spitefullest
foe: but only request reason toward both: and so briefly recommend both to
your foresaid Indifferency: as to an equal balance of upright Judgment.

London: this 16. of September. Your thankful dettour G. H.

The First Letter.
To the worshipful, my very good friend M. Emmanuell Demetrius, at his house by
the Church in Limestreete in London.
MAster Demetrius, I earnestly commend this bearer M. Doctor Haruey, my good
friend, unto you: being a very excellent general Scholar. Who is desirous of
your acquaintance and friendship, especially for the sight of some of your
antiquities and monuments: and also for some conference touching the state of
foreign countries: as your leisure may conveniently serve. You shall assuredly
find the Gentleman very honest, and thankful: and me ready to reacq uite your
courtesy and favor to him so shown, in that I possibly may. And so with the
remembrance of my hartyrecommendations, with like thanks for your two letters
of foreign news, received the last week: I commit you to the Protection of
the Almighty.

Walden this 29. of August 1592. Your loving friend Christopher Bird.
In steed of other nouels, I send you my opinion, in a plain, but true
Sonnet, upon the famous new work, entitled, A Quippe for an vpstart Courtier;
or forsooth, A quaint Dispute between Veluet-breechcs, and Cloth-breeches: as
fantastical and fond a Dialogue, as I have seen: and for some particulars,
one of the most licentious, and intolerable Inuectiues, that ever I read.
Wherein the leawd fellow, and impudent rayler, in an odious and desperate
mood, without any other cause, or reason; amongst sundry other persons
notoriously deffamed, most spitefully and villanously abuses an ancient
neighbor of mine, one M. Haruey, a right honest man of good reckoninge; and
one that above twenty years since bare the chi^fest office in Walden with good
credit: and has mainetained four sons in Cambridge and else where with
great charges: all sufficiently able to aunsweare for themselves: and three,
(in spite of some few Greenes) universally well reputed in both Universities,
and through the whole Re^lme. Whereof one returning sick from Norwich to Li
me, in July l^st, was p^st sense of any such malicious injury, before the
public^tion of that vile Pamphlet. Liuor post fata quiescat: and been a
singulis audiant, qui omnibus volunt been.

A due Commendation of the Quipping Author.
GREEN the Connycatcher, of this Dream the Author,
For his dainty devise, deserves the hauter.
A rakehell: A makeshift: A scribbling soole:
A famous bayard in City, and School.
Now sick, as a Dog: and ever brainesick:
Where such a rauing, and desperate Dick?
Sir reverence, A scuruy Master of Art,
Aunsweared enough with a Doctors fart.
He scorns other Aunsweare: and Envy salutes
With sho* test vowels, and with longest mutes.
For farther tri all, himself he referres
To proof, and sound judgment, that seldom erres.
Now good Robin-good-fellow, and gentle Greenesleeues.
Give him leave to be quiet, that none aggreeues.
Miserrima Fortuna, quae caret inimico.


The Second Letter.
To my loving friend, Master Christopher Bird of Walden.
Master Bird, in the absence of M. Demetrius, I delivered your letter unto his
wife, whom I found very courteous. My next business was to enquire after the
famous Author: who was reported to lie dangerously sick in a shoemakers house
near Dow-gate: not of the plague, or the pockes, as a Gentleman said, but of
a surfett of pickle herringe and rennish wine, or as some suppose* of an
exceeding fe^re. For in his extremest want, he offered ten, or rather*then
fail twenty shillinges to the printer (a huge some with him at that instant) to
leave out the matter of the three brothers: with confession of his great fear
to be called Coram for those forged imputations. A conscious mind, and
undaunted heart, seldom dwell together: he was not the first, that bewrayed,
and punished his own guiltines, with blushing for shame, or trembling for
dread, or drouping for woe. Many can heap misery enough upon their own
heads: and need no more penalty, but, their own contrition, and the Censure
of other. I would not wish a sworn enemy to be more basely valued, or more
vilely reputed, then the common voice of the city esteems him, that sought
Fame by diffamation of other, but has utterly discredited himself: and is
notoriously grown a very proverb of Infamy, and contempt. I little delight in
the rehearsal of such paltrye: but who like Elderton for Ballating: Green for
pamphletting: both, for goodfellowship, and bad conditions? Railing was the
Ypocras of the drunken rimester: and Quipping the Marchepane of the mad
libeller. They escape fair, that go scot-free in such saucy reckoninges: I
have known some, read of many, and heard of more, that wantonly quipped other,
and soundly nipped themselves. The hoattest blood of choler may be cooled: and
as the fiercest fury of wildfire, so the fiercest wildfire of Fury, consumes
it self. Howbeit a common mischief would be prevented: and it generally
concerns all, and particularly behooves every one, to look about him, when
he hears the belles ringing backward, and sees the fire running forward: and
beholds even Death in person, shooting his peremptory boltes. You understand
me without a Gloss: and here is matter enough for a new civil war, or shall I
say for a new Troyan siedge, if this poor Letter should fortune to come in
print. I deal directly: and will plainly tell you my fancy, if Titius continue
to vpbraid Caius with every thing, and nothing. I neither name
Martin-mar-prelate: nor shame Papp with a hatchet: nor mention any other, but
Elderton, and Green: two notorious mates, and the very ringleaders of the
riming, and scribbling crew. But Titius, or rather Zoilus in his spiteful
vain, will so long flurt at Homer: and Thersites in his peevish mood, so long
fling at Agamemnon; that they will become extremely odious and intolerable to
all good Learning, and civil Government: and in attempting to pull down, or
disgrace other without order, must needs finally overthrow themselves without
relief. Orators have challenged a special Liberty: and Poets claimed an
absolute License: but no Liberty without bounds: nor any License without
limitation. Inuectiues by favor have been too bold: and Satyrs by usurpation
too-presumptuous: I ouerpasse Archilochus, Aristophanes, Lucian, Julian,
Aretine, and that whole venomous and viperous brood, of old and new Raylers:
even Tully, and Horace otherwhiles ouer-reched: and I must needs say, Mother
Hubbard in heat of choler, forgetting the pure sanguine of her sweet Feary
Queen, wilfully ouer-shott her malcontented self: as elsewhere I have
specified at larg, with the good leave of unspotted friendshipp. Examples in
some ages do exceeding-much hurt. Salust, and Clodius learned of Tully, to
frame artificial Declamations, and patheticall Inuectiues against Tully
himself, and other worthy members of that most-florishing State: if mother
Hubbard in the vain of Chawcer, happen to tell one Canicular tale; father
Elderton, and his son Green, in the vain of Skeleton, or Scoggin, will
counterfeitan hundred dogged Fables, Libles, Calumnies, Slanders, Lies for ^he
whetstone, what not, and most currishly snarle, and bite where they should most
kindly fawn, and lick. Every private excess is dangerous: but such public
enormities, incredibly pernicious, and insuportable: and who can tell, what
huge outrages might amount of such quarrellous, and tumultuous causes? Honor
is precious: worship of value: Fame inualuable: they perillously threaten the
Commonwealth, that goeabout to violate the inviolable parts thereof. Many will
sooner loose their lives, then the least Iott of their reputation. Lord, what
mortal feudes, what furious combats, what cruel bloodshed, what horrible
slaughterdome have been committed, for the point of Honor, and some few
Courtly ceremonies? Though meaner persons do not so highly ouerprise their
credit; yet who takes not discourtesie unkindly, or slander displeasingly?
For mine own part, I am to make an use, of my adversaries abuse: and will
endeavor to reform any default, where of I may justly, or probably be
empeached. Some Emulation hoth already done me good: both for supply of great
imperfections: and for increase of small perfections. I have, and who has not,
found it better, to be tickled and stinged of a busy ennemy: then to be coyed,
and lulled of an idle friend. Plutarch is gravely wise: and Macchiauell subtly
politic: but in either of them, what sounder, or finer piece of cunning, then
to reap commodity by him, that seeks my displeasure: and to play upon the
advantage of his detection of my infirmities? Other cauilling, or mote-spying
Malice confounds it self: and I continue my accustomed simplicity, to
answer vanity with silence: though peradventure not without danger of
inuiting a new injury, by intertaining an old. Patience has trained me to
pocket-vp more heinous indignities: and even to digest an age of Iron. They
that can do little, must be contented to suffer much. My betters need not
take it grievously, to be taunted, or reproched in that book, where Saint
Peter, and Christ himself are Lucianically and scoffingly alleged: the one
for begging, the other for granting A foolish boon; (pretended ever since the
fatal destiny of the gentle craft.) Some men will have their fwinge, and their
bugges-woordes, though it be against all Gods-forbid: and what Cesars might, or
Catoes integrity, or what Saints devotion can stop such mouths? yet neither
themselves the better: nor other the worse: that depend not on their
allowance, but rely on their own justification: and desire to confute their
impudency not with words, but with deeds. Howbeit I am not to prejudice my
Brother alive: or to smoother the wrong, offered to my Brother deceased: or to
tolerate the least diffamation of my good Father* whom no illwiller could
ever touch with any dishonesty, or discredit in any sort. Nothing more dear,
or inestimable, then a man's good name: and albeit I contemn such pelting
injuries, vainly devised against my self, yet am I not to neglecte so
intolerable a wrong, so notoriously pubished against them. There is law for
desperatest out-lawes: and order for most disorderly fellows. They that cannot
govern themselves, must be ruled by other; and pay for their folly. Whiles I
was thus, or to like effect, resolving with my self, and discoursing with
some special friends: not only writing unto you" I was suddenly certified,
that the king of the paper stage (so the Gentleman termed Green) had played
his last part, and was gone to Tarleton: whereof I protest, I was nothing glad,
as was expected, but unfeignedly sorry: as well because I could have wished, he
had taken his leave with a more charitable farewell: as also because I was
deprived of that remedy in Law, that I intended against him, in the behalf of
my Father, whose honest reputation I was in many duties to tender. Yet to some
conceited wit, that could take delight to discover knaueries, or were a fit
person to augment the history of Conny-catchers: O Lord, what a pregnant
occasion were here presented, to display leaud vanity in his lively coullours,
and to decipher the very mysteries of that base Art? Petty Cooseners are not
worth the naming: he they say, was the Monarch of Crosbiters, and the very
Emperor of shifters. I was altogether unacquainted with the man, and never once
saluted him by name: but who in London has not heard of his dissolute, and
licentious living; his fond disguisinge of a Master of Art with ruffianly
hair, unseemly apparel, and more unseemly Company: his vaineglorious and
Thrasonicall brauinge: his piperly Extemporizing, and Tarletonizing; his apishe
counterfeiting of every ridiculous, and absurd toy: his fine coosening of
Iuglers, and finer iugling with cooseners: his villainous cogging, and
foisting; his monstrous swearinge, and horrible forswearing; his impious
profaning of sacred Textes: his other scandalous, and blasphemous rauinge; his
riotous, and outrageous surfeitinge: his continual shifting of lodginges: his
plausible musteringe, and banquettinge of roysterly acquaintance at his first
coming; his beggarly departing in every hostisses debt; his infamous
resorting to the Banckeside, Shorditch, Southwarke, and other filthy hauntes:
his obscure lurkinge in basest corners: his pawning of his sword, cloak, and
what not, when money came short; his impudent pamphletting, fantastical
interluding, and desperate libelling, when other coosening shifts failed: his
imployinge of Ball, (surnamed, cuttinge Ball) till he was intercepted at
Tiborne, to leauy a crew of his trustiest companions, to guarde him in danger
of Arrestes: his keeping of the foresaid Balls sister, a sorry ragged queen, of
whom he had his base son, Infortunatus Green: his forsaking of his own
wife, too honest for such a husband: particulars are infinite* his contemning
of Superiors, deriding of other, and defying of all good order? Compar^ base
fellows, and noble men together: and what in a manner wanted he of the
ruffianly, and variable nature of Catiline, or Antony, but the honorable
fortunes of Catiline, and Antony? They that have seen much more, then I have
heard; (for so I am credibly infourmed) can relate strange, and almost
incredible Comedies of his monstrous disposition: wherewith I am not to infect
the Air, or defile this paper. There be enough, and enough such Histories,
both dead, and living: though youth be not corrupted, or age accloyed with his
Legendary. Truly I have been ashamed, to hear some ascertayned reports of
his most woeful, and rascal estate: how the wretched fellow, or shall I say
the Prince of beggars, laid all to gage for some few shillinges: and was
attended by lice: and would pitifully beg a penny-pott of Malmesie: and could
not get any of his old acquaintance to comfort, or visit him in his
extremity, but Mistress Appleby, and the mother of Infortunatus. Alas, even his
fellow-writer, a proper young man, if advised in time, that was a principal
guest at that fatal banquet of pickle herring, (I spare his name, and in some
respects wish him well) came never more at him: but either would not, or
happily could not perform the duty of an affectionate, and faithful friend.
The poor Cordwainers wife was his only nurse: and the mother of Infortunatus
his sole companion: but when Mistrisse Appleby came, as much to expostulate
injuries with her, as to visit him. God help good fellows, when they cannot
help themselves. Slender relief in the predicamente of priuations, and fained
habites. Miserable man, that must pearish: or be succored by counterfeite, or
impotente supplies. I once bemoned the decayed and blasted estate of M.
Gascoigne: who wanted not some commendable parts of conceit, and endeavor: but
unhappy M. Gascoigne, how Lordly happy, in comparison of most-vnhappy M.
Green? He never enuyed me so much, as I pitied him from my heart: especially
when his hostisse Isam, with tears in her eyes, and sighs from a deeper
fountain, (for she loved him derely) told me of his lamentable begging of a
penny-pott of Malmesy: and sir reverence how lowsy he, and the mother of
Infortunatus were (I would her Surgeon found her no worse, then lowsy:) and how
he was feign poor soul, to borrow her husbands shirte, whiles his own was a
washing: and how his dublet. and hose, and sword were sold for three
shillinges: and beside the charges of his winding sheet, which was four
shillinges; and the charges of his burial yesterday in the New-churchyard
near Bedlam, which was six shillinges, and four pence; how deeply he was
indebted to her poor husband: as appeered by his own bond of ten pounds:
which the good woman kindly showed me: and beseeched me to read the writting
beneath: which was a letter to his abandoned wife, in the behalf of his gentle
host: not so short as persuasible in the beginning, and pitiful in the ending.

Doll, I charge thee by the love of our youth, and by my souls rest, that thou
will see this man paid: for if he, and his wife had not succored me, I had
died in the streets.

Robert Green.


Oh what notable matter were here for a green head, or Lucianicall conceit:
that would take pleasure in the pain of such sorry distressed creatures? whose
afflicted case, to every charitable, or compassionate mind cannot but seem
most commiserable, if not for their own cause, yet for Gods sake: who
deserves infinitely of them, whom he acquitteth, not according to judgment,
but according to mercy. I rather hope of the dead, as I wish to the living,
that Grace might finally abound, where wickedness did ouerflow: and that
Christ in his divine goodness should miraculously forgive the man, that in
his devilish badnesse blasphemously reviled God. The dead bite not: and I am
none of those, that bite the dead. When I begin to conflict with Ghostes, then
look for my Confutation of his fine Quippe, or quaint Dispute, whom his
sweet hostisse for a tender farewell, crowned with a Garlande of Bays: to
show, that a tenth Muse honored him more being dead; then all the nine
honored him alive. I know not, whether Skeleton, Elderton, or some like
flourishing Poet were so enterred: it was his own request, and his Nurses
devotion: and happily some of his favorites may imitate the example. One that
wished him a better lodging, then in a poor Iourneymans house, and a better
grave, then in that Churchyard in Bedlam, has performed a little piece of a
greater duty to a Laureat Poet.

Here lies the man, whom mistrisse Isam crowned with bays;
She, she, that ioyde to hear, her Nightingales sweet lays.
Which an other no sooner read, but he immediately subscribed: as speaking to
the ignorant passenger.

Here Bedlam is: and here a Poet garish,
Gaily bedecked, like forehorse of the parish.
Other Epitaphes, and funeral devotions I am promised by some, that deeply
affect inspired Bardes, and the adopted sons of the Muses: but you may
imagine, I have small superfluity of leisure, to entend such business: and yet
nothing of friend, or foe, can be unwelcome unto me, that sauoureth of Wit,
or rellisheth of Humanity, or tastes of any good. In the mean, as ever before
for a general Defense, so still for a special Apology, I refer my self to
every indifferent Judgment: and presume they will conceive well, that perceive
no ill. Charity recommendeth Favor to superiors; Amity to equals: and
good will to all; that either reverence Divinity, or regard Humanity. Friends
have Affection; and the wiser sort Reason, to value men, not by others report,
but by their own desert, or probable hope: which I would willingly nourish, as
I honestly may* till it shall please God to afford some convenient occasion of
more actual proof. And as for Envy, or hatred to any party: I did ever
abhor them both: and I imagine there is not any, that either more resolutely
disdayneth the one, or, more peremptorily detesteth the other: as perhaps may
yer long visibly appear: if some other requisites concur with my intention,
or fall-out aunsweareable to my expectation. Promise is debt: and I h^dd rather
perform, then promise any thing: but a mind, desirous to pleasure friends,
to reconcile foes, to displease few, to displeasure none. They that have
little else, to win or continue credit, had need have Humanity, in supply
of other defectes. Let the world deal with simple men, as it pleases: I
loath to be odious to any: and would be loath to be tedious to you. The next
week, you may happily have a letter of such French occurrences, and other
intelligences, as the credible relation of inquisitiue friends, or employed
strangers shall acquaint me withal. That most valorous, and brave king
wants no honorable praises, or zealous prayers. Redoubted Parma was never so
matched: and in so many worthy histories, as well new, as old; how few
comparable either for Virtue, or Fortune? The Spanyard, politic enough, and
not ouer-rashly audatious, will be advised, before he entangle himself with
mo^e wars attonce: knowing how the brave Earl of Essex, worthy sir John
Norrice, and their valiant knights, have fought for the honor of England; and
for the right of France, of the Low countries, and of Portugal. Thrice happy
France; though how unhappy France, that have such a Sovereign Head, such
resolute Hearts, and such invincible Hands to fight for thee: that will either
recover thee most mightily, or die for thee most honorably. Were I of
sufficient discourse, to record the valiauntest, and memorablest acts of the
world; I would count it a felicity, to have the opportunity of so egregious, and
heroical an argument: not pleasurably devised in counterfaite names, but
admirably represented to the eye of France, and the ear of the world, in the
persons of royal, and most puissaunt knights: how singularly worthy of most
glorious, and immortal fame? Gallant wits, and brave pens may honorably
bethink themselves: and even ambitiouslye frame their style to a noble
emulation of Liuy, Homer, and the diuinest spirits of all ages: I return to my
private business. Good master Bird, commend me to my good friends: and
fare you heartily well.

London this 5. of September. Your ever assured: Gabriell Haruey.

The Third Letter.
To every Reader, favorably, or indifferently affected.
ALbeit for these twelve, or thirteen years, no man has been more loath, or
more scrupulous, then my self, to vnderlie the censure of every curious
conceit, or rigorous judgment, that pretends a deep insight in the
perfections of wits and styles, insomuch that even Actions of Silence and
Patience have been commenced against me: and although I still dwell in the same
opinion, that nothing would be committed to a public view, that is not exactly
labored both for matter and manner: and that imports not some notable use, to
one, or other effecuall purpose: Yet partly the vehemente importunity of some
affectionate friends, and partly mine own tender regard of my fathers, and my
brothers good reputation, have so forcibly ouer-ruled me, that I have finally
condescended to their passionate motion: and in an extraordinary case, have
respectively yielded my consent to an extraordinary course. Which I would
impartially commend to the reasonable allowance of every indiferent peruser
that carries Courtesy in his Tongue, or honesty in his Heart. For mine own
injury, the more I consider, the less I estimate the same: as one born to
suffer, and made to contemn injuries. He that in his youth flattered not
himself with the exceeding commendations of some greatest schollets in the
world: cannot at these years, either be discouraged with misreporte, or
daunted with misfortune. A premeditate, and resolute mind lightly shakes off
the heauiest crosses of malice, and easily passes over a thousand grieuances
with a smile. Some have learned of Reason, some of Philosophy, some of History,
some of Divinity, some of Experience, some of all, to endure patiently,
whatsoever befalls, and even to make the cruellest pain pleasant, as some
make the swetest pleasure painful. I had rather name Titius, or Sempronius,
then my self: But the urgent entreaty of friends, and your eager expectation
have suddenly obtained that, which no personal empeachment, or real
enforcement could in many years extort. Howbeit I shall hardly content them, to
satisfy you: that am neither to offend any, but in case of not oriety: nor to
defend my self, but in case of necessity, or honesty. If any have charged
me, or do charge me with insufficiency, I confess: perfection is no common
gift: if with ignorance, I grant: many seem, few are learned: if with
simplicity, I yield: wondrous wits are rare birds: if with ill-lucke, I deny
not: good luck is not every man's lotte: yet who ever heard me complain of
ill-lucke, or once say, Fortune my Foe? But in the plainness of my nature, and
simplicity of my Art, I can easily defy the proudest, that dares call my
credit in question: or accuse me of any dishonest, or scandelous part, either
in deed, or in word. Many things are made offensive in the handling, that are
tolerable enough in their own nature: or fie on an odious circumstaunce,
where the substance it self might be more gracious. Letters may be privately
written, that would not be publicly diuulged: I was then young in years,
fresh in courage, green in experience, and as the manner is, somewhat
ouerweeninge in conceit: and for variety of study, and some deeper
intelligence in the affairs of the world, otherwhiles reading inuectiues, and
Satyrs, artificially amplifyed in the most exaggerate and hyperbolicall kind,
I could hardlye refrain from discoueringe some little part of my reading: I
had curiously labored some exact, and exquisite points of study and
practice, and greatly misliked the preposterous and untoward courses of diverse
good wits, ill directed; there wanted not some sharp undeserved discourtesies
to exasperate my mind: shall I touch the ulcer? it is no such mysterye, but it
may be revealed: I was supposed not unmeet for the Oratorship of the
university, which in that spring of mine age, for my Exercise, and credit I
earnestly affected: but mine own modest petition, my friends diligent labor,
our high Chauncelors most-honourable and extraordinarye commendation, were all
peltingly defeated, by a slye practice of the old Fox: whose acts, and
monumentes shall never dye: some like accidents of dislike, for breuity I
ouerslip: young blood is hot: youth hasty: ingenuity open: abuse impatiente:
choler stomachous: temptations busy: the Inuectiue vain, a sturring, and
tickeling vain: the Satyricall humor, a puffinge, and swellinge humor:
Conceit penneth, leisure peruseth, and Curtesy commends many needless
discourses: Idleness, the greatest Author and variablest Reader in the world:
some familiar friends pricked me forward: and I, neither fearing danger, nor
suspecting ill measure, (poor credulity sone beguiled) was not unwilling to
content them, to delight a few other and to avenge, or satisfy my self, after
the manner of shrewes, that cannot otherwise ease their cursed hearts, but by
their own tongues, and their neighbors ears. Signor Immerito (for that name
will be remembered) was then, and is still my affectionate friend, one that
could very well abide Gascoignes Steel glass, and that stood equally
iudifferent to either part of the state Demostratiue: many communications, and
writings may secretly pass between such, even for an exercise of speech, and
style that are not otherwise convenient to be disclosed: it was the sinister
hap of those unfortunate Letters, to fall into the left hands of malicious
enemies, or indiscreet friends: who adventured to imprint in earnest, that was
scribled in jest, (for the moody fit was soon over:) and requited their
private pleasure with my public displeasure: oh my inestimable, and infinite
displeasure. When there was no remedy, but melancholy patience: and the
sharpest part of those unlucky Letters had been over read at the Council
Table: I was advised by certain honorable, and diverse worship full persons,
to interpreate my intention in more express terms: and thereupon discoursed
every particularitie, by way of Articles or Positions, in a large Apology of
my duetiful; and entier affection to that flourishing University, my dear
Mother: which Apology, with not so few as forty such Academicall Exercises, and
sundry other politic Discourses, I have hitherto suppressed, as unworthy the
view of the busy world, or the entertainment of precious Time: but
peraduenturethese extraordinary prouocations may work extraordinarily in me;
and though not in passion, yet in conceit stir me up, to publish many
Traictes, and Discourses, that in certain considerations I meant ever to
conceal, and to Dedicate unto none, but unto obscure Darkness, or famous
Vulcane. It were pity, but wondrous wits (give enemies their due) should
become more woonderous by comparison, conference makes excellent things
appear more admirablie: and I am so far from being a Saturnist by nature, or a
Stoic by discipline, that I can easily frame a certain pleasurable delight
unto my self, by ministering some matter unto them, that now are feign to make
some thing of nothing: and wittily to play with their own shadows. It goes
somewhat hard in my harsh Legend, when the father of Music must be mocked,
not Tubulcain, as he mistearmeth him, but Tuball, whom Genesis voutsafeth
honorable mention: and the Hexameter verse flouted* whereof neither Homer in
Greek, nor Virgill in Latin, (how valorous Autors?) nor Alexander in conquest
nor Augustus in majesty, (how puissaunt Princes?) were ashamed: but accounted
it the only gallant trompet of brave, and Heroical Acts: and I wis, the
English is nothing too-good to imitat the Greek, or Latin, or other eloquent
Languages, that honor the Hexameter, as the sovereign of verses, and the high
Controwler of Rimes. If I never deserve any better remembrance, let me
rather be Epitaphed, The Inuentour of the English Hexameter: whom learned M.
Stanihurst imitated in his Virgill; and excellent Sir Phillip Sidney disdained
not to follow in his Arcadia, and elsewhere: then be chronicled, The green
master of the Black Art: or the founder of ugly oaths: or the father of
misbegotten Infortunatus: or the Scriuener of Crosbiters: or as one of his own
sectaries termed him the Patriarch of shifters. Happy man I, if these two be my
hainousest crimes, and deadliest sins, To be the Inuentour of the English
Hexameter, and to be orderly clapped in the Fleet for the foresaid Letters:
where he that saw me, saw me at Constantinople. Indeed Sir James Croft
(whom I never touched with the least tittle of detractions) was cunningly
incensed, and reincensed against me: but at last pacified by the voluntary
mediation of my honorable favorers, M. Secretary Wilson, and Sir Walter
Mildmay: unrequested by any line of my hand, or any word of my mouth. Neither
did I otherwise solicit, or entreat Sir James, till I had assured notice of
his better satisfaction: when I writ unto him, as became me, in respective,
and ductifull sort: not for fear of any danger, but for love of houourable
favor. Which Letters, albeit not so ceremoniouslie pleasing, as effectually
contenting, the wise knight not only received courteously, but accepted
favorably, and commended honorably: and for my self, earnestly affirmed, I
was first wronged by other, and then mistaken by him: but now found another
man, then I was supposed. As for my old Controwler, Doctor Perne (for he
indeed was the man, that otherwhiles flattered me exceedingly, otherwhiles
ouerthwarted me crosly, always played fast, and loose with me) he was old
enough, to aunsweare for himself, and should not be defended by him. Only he
wished me to proceed louinglywith the University, howsoever I dealt with that
Doctor. And that was all the Fleeting, that ever I felt: saving that an other
company of special good fellows, (whereof he was none of the meanest, that
bravely threatened to coniure-vpp one, which should massacre Martins wit, or
should be lambackd himself with ten years provision) would needs forsooth
very courtly persuade the Earl of Oxforde, that some thing in those Letters,
and namely the Mirror of Tuscanismo, was palpably intended against him: whose
noble Lordeship I protest, I never meante to dishonor with the least
prejudicial word of my Tongue, or pen: but ever kept a mindful reckoning of
many bounden duties toward The-same: sincein the prime of his galla^test youth,
he bestowed Angels upon me in Christ's College in Cambridge, and otherwise
voutsafed me many gracious favors at the affectionate commendation of my
Cosen, M. Thomas Smith, the son of Sir Thomas, shortly after Colonel of the
Ardes in Ireland. But the noble Earl, not disposed to trouble his Iouiall mind
with such Saturnine paltery, still continued, like his magnificent self: and
that Fleeting also proved, like the other: a silly bullbeare, a sorry puff of
wind, a thing of nothing. But a strong imagination pierces deeply: and the
Paper Fleet will not be so answered. Jesus, what would such notable fellows
write, or rather would they not write, if they could probably say, or
fantastically surmize by me, as I can evidently prove by them? But I seek not
the condemnation of the dead, or the disgrace of the living: but the good
amendment of the one, by the naughty example of the other. And for mine own
farther justification in the premises, or otherwise: I had rather my larger
writings and other actions should plead for me, then this, or any slighte
Letter: wherein I am not to infourme pregnant conceits, that may imagine more
by a little: or to address any piece of mine own history, though wiser men in
case of unworthy reproach, have not made nice to undertake their own defense,
and even to labor their own commendation. The plausible Examples of Tully,
Cato, Marius, Scipio, diverse such virtuous Romans, and sundry excellent
Greeks, are famously known: but not greatly fit for every man's imitation.
Were other of my disposition, small time should be lost in auenging, or
debating verbal injuries, especially to my self: who can very well suffer
poor spite, to shoot at me, and to hitte himself: and sometime smile at the
silly fly, that will needs martyr it self in my candle. But me thinks, the
wildest head, and desperatest mind should consider: they that speak il must
not look to hear well: the world is not given to pocket up infamies: who
cannot returne-home a Quippe, or requite one libell with an other? nothing more
common in books, or more ready in mouths, then the Inuectiue vain, and the
whole Art of railing: some scholars have choice of nimble pens, and smooth
tongues at commandment: and there was a time, when paraduenture I could
speak with them, that talked we me. Though the case be altered: and I now,
none of the hastiest to strive for those bucklers: yet a general, a special, a
glowing, a piercing indignity may rekindle some little sparks of courage, and
affection will be affection, though not in proper revenge, yet the common
duty. I am not to dispute the nature of Force* or the force of nature, who
knows not, how violently force provoke force: or how mightily nature
works in compatible natures? But how far public obiectio^s, or famous
imputations require public aunswers: or how insufficient the formallest
Judicial remedy in any one Court, may seem, in case of a printed
diffamation, that with the wings of Malice in some, of Envy in more, and of
Leuity in most, flies through the Realm, and over the Sea: be it
indifferently decided by every discreet judgment, or reasonable
consideration. Especially when the guilty part is deceased: and the injury not
the less, but the more notorious. The best is, the persons abused, are not
altogether unknown, they have not so evil a neighbor, that ever read, or
heard those opprobrious villainies, (it is too-mild a name, for my brother
Richardes most abominable Legend, who frames himself to live as chastely, as
the lewd writer affected to live beastly) but has presently broken out into
some such earnest, or more passionate speeches* o pestilent knavery, who ever
heard such arrant forgeries, and rank lies? A mad world, where such shameful
stuff is bought, and sold: and where such roisterly Varlets may be suffered
to play upon whom they lust, and how they lust. Is this Green with the
running Head, and the scribbling Hand, that never linnes putting-forth new,
newer, and newest books of the maker? If his other books be as wholesome
geere, as this, no marvel, though the gay-man conceive trimly of himself,
and statelye scorn all beside. Green, vile Green, would thou wearest half so
honest, as the worst of the four, whom thou vpbraidest: or half so learned,
as the vnlearnedst of the three. Thank other for thy borrowed* and filched
plumes of some little Italianated bravery: and what remains, but flat
Impudency, and gross Detraction: the proper ornaments of thy sweet
utterance? I allege not mine own inventions, (who cannot forget the two
Athenian Temples of Impudency, and Calumny, when I remember him:) I could
nominate the Gentlemen, and substantial Yeoman, Gentlemen's fellows, that
uttered much more by his life, and can hardly for bear him since his death:
and who of acquaintance with him, or them, whom he depraueth, could either
partiallie excuse the one, or reasonably accuse the other? Their lives
effectually speak for themselves: and he that lived not, to see nine and
twenty years, died not, till the University of Cambridge had bestowed upon
him a grace to be a Doctor of his faculty, and till he was reputed in
Northfolke, where he practiced physic, a proper toward man, and as skillful a
Physician for his age, as ever came there: how well beloved of the chiefest
Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen in that Shire, themselves testify. That is gone to
Heaven, cannot be recovered on Earth: it is our comfort, that he lived in good
credit, and died in good mind. I must ever remember some of his notable
sayings (for in deed so they were): and can never forget that sweet voice of
the dying Cignet: o frater, Christus est optimus Medicus, and meus solus
Medicus. Vale Gal^ne, valete humanae Arts: nihil diuinum in terris, praeter
animum aspirantem ad coelos. That best and his only Physician knows, what
spiritual physic I commended unto him, when I beheld in his meager and
ghastly countenance, that I cannot rehearse without some fit of compassion. We
must in order follow him, that should in nature have gone before him, and I
know not by what destiny, he followed him first, that foled him last. How he
departed, his ghostly mother Isam, can truliest, and will fauourabliest report:
how he lived, London remembers. Oh, what a lively picture of Vanity? but oh
what a deadly Image of misery? And oh what a terrible Caveat for such and
such? I am not to extenuate or prejudice his wit, which could not any way be
great, though some way not the least of our vulgar writers and mani-waies very
ungracious: but who ever esteemed him either wise, or learned, or honest or
anyway credible? how many Gentlemen, and other say of him? Let the paltry
fellow go: Lord, what a lewd Companion was he? What an egregious makeshift,
Where should Conny-catchers have gotten such a Secretary: How shall cosenage do
for a new Register: or Phantasticallitye for a new Author, They wrong him much
with their Epitaphes, and other solemn devises, that entitle him not at the
least, The second Toy of London; the Stale of Poules, the Ape of Euphues, the
Vice of the Stage, the mocker of the simple world: the flowter of his friends,
the Foe of himself: and so forth. What durst not he utter with his tongue:
or diuulge with his Pen: or countenance with his face? Or whom cared he
for, but a careless crewe of his own associates? Peruse his famous books: and
in steed of, Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci (that forsooth was
his professed Poesy) Lo a wild head, full of mad brain and a thousand
crochets: a Scholar, a Discourser, a Courtier, a ruffian, a Gamester, a Lover,
a Soldier, a Trauailer, Merchaunt, a Broker, an Artificer, a Botcher, a
Petti-fogger, a Player, a Coosener, a Rayler, a beggar, an Omnigatherum, a Gay
nothing: a Stoarehouse of bald and baggage stuff, vnwoorth the aunswering, or
reading: a Triuiall, and triobular Author for knaves, and fools: an Image of
Idleness: an Epitome of fantasticalitie: a Mirror of Vanity: Vanitas
Vanitatum, and omnia vanitas. Alas, that any should say, as I have heard
diverse affirm: His wit was nothing, but a minte of knauerie: himself a
deviser of iugling feats: a forger of covetous practices: an Inuentour of
monstrous oaths: a derider of all religions: a contemner of God, and man: a
desperate Lucianist: an abominable Aretinist: an Arch-Athiest: and he
arch-deserued to be well hanged seven years ago. Twenty, and twenty such
familiar speeches I over pass: and bury the whole Legendary of his Life, and
Death, in the Sepulcher of eternal Silence. I will not condemn, or censure
his works, which I never did so much as superficially overrun, but as some
few of the^ occursiuly presented themselves in Stationers shops, and some
other houses of my acquaintance. But I pray God, they have not done more harm
by corruption of manners, then good by quickening of wit: and I would, some
Buyers had either more Reason to discern, or less Appetite to desire such
Nouels. The world is full enough of fooleries: though the humor be not feasted
with such luxurious, and riotous Pamphlets. How unlike Tullies sweet Offices:
or I socrates pithy instuctio^s: or Plutarches wholesome Morrals: or the
dilicate Dialogues of Xenophon, and Plato: or the sage Tragedies of Sophocles,
and Euripides or the fine Comedies of the dainetiest Atticke wits: or other
excellent monumentes of antiquity, never sufficiently perused? yet the one as
stale, as oldest fashions: and what more freshly current for a while, then the
other? Even Guicciardines silver History, and Ariostos golden Cantoes, grow
out of request and the Countess of Pe^brookes Arcadia is not green enough for
queasie stomachs, but they must have Greenes Arcadia: and I believe, most
eagerly longed for Greenes Faerie Queen. O strange fancies* o monstrous
newfanglednesse. The wittier sort tastes, and flies* at the Dog from Nilus:
other wantons find Experience the mistress of fools: and need no other penance
but their own repentance. The very Time confuteth Vanity: and the very
place requires sobriety. No public security without private moderation: and
the more bonds of government, the more indefeasible assurance. Due
Circumspection may do much good: and an abundant Cautele can do little hurt.
Youth is youth: and age corruptible: better an hundred Ouides were banished,
then the state of Augustus endangered, or a sovereign Empire infected.
Especially in a tumultuous age, and in a world of war: wherein not Bacchus,
but Mars: not Venus, but Mercury, not Riot, but Valor, not Phansy, but Policy
must strike the stroke. Gallant Gentlemen, be-thinke your selves of the old
Roman Discipline, and the new Spanish industry: and I am not to trouble you
with any other accusation of them, that condemn them selves, and need no
other shame, or punishment, but their own works. Only I request some busy
pens to stay their wisdoms: and either to publish a iustifyable truth, or
to conceal their bad disposition. Woe to that study, that mispendeth precious
Time, and consumes it self, in needless, and bootlesse quarrels. Comparisons,
they say, are odious: but Inuectiues more odious: and what so abominable, as
forged and suborned calumnies? One, or two miserable examples may stand for an
hundred: I will not aggrauate or discourse particulars: A pitiful case, that
such lusty beginninges should have such sorry ends: and who can tell, what
dowty yoonker may next gnash with his teeth? Terrible Creatures, and the cursed
Cow, have sometime short horns. The wildest Colte is soon tamed: and be like
neither Death, nor Shame, nor Misery are afraid of them, that vaunt
themselves, Like unto Death, and Will Summer, in sparing none. God help, and
Charity pity the^, that have neither hability to help, nor wit to pity
themselves: but will needs try a conclusion between their heads, and the next
wall. I have heard of Giants in conceit, and Pigmeis in performance: young
Phaetons, young Icary, young Choroebi, and I shall say young Babingtons, and
how many millions of green youths, have in ouermounting, most ruefully
dismounted, and left behind them full-lamentable Histories? For the very
mention of some direful Tragedies, were horrible, and what so wretched, as
headlong enterprises: or so hideous, as the desperate attempt of
Impossibilities? Philostratus in his Icones, pleasurably reports, according
to to the tradition of Greek Poets, how on a time, A resolute band of dowty
Pigmies, triumphantly marched to in uade Hercules a sleep. Woe to such brave
adventures. Aesops Toade, A proud aspiring Creature, shamefullie ouermatched
her swelling, and bursten self. Great, and small things may in some proportion
be compared together: and behold as miserable a spectacle, in their kind.
Flourishing M. Green is most-wofully faded, and whilst I am bemoaning his
ouer-pittious decay; and discoursing the usual success of such rank wits.
Lo all on the sudden, his sworn brother, M. Pierce Penni-lesse, (still more
paltery, but what remedy? we are already over shoes and must now go through)
Lo his inwardest companion, that tasted of the fatal herringe, cruelly
pinched with want, vexed with discredit, tormented with other men's felicity,
and overwhelmed with his own misery; in a raving, and frantic mood, most
desperately exhibiteth his supplication to the Devil. A strange title, an od
wit, and a mad hooreson, I warrant him: doubtless it will prove some dainty
devise, quiently contrived by way of humble Supplication To the high, and
mighty Prince of Darkness: not Dunsically botched-vp, but right-formally
co^ueied, according to the style, and tenor of Tarletons president, his famous
play of the seven Deadly sins: which most-dealy, but most lively play, I
might have seen in London: and was very gently invited thereunto at Oxford,
by Tarleton himself, of whom I merrily demanding, which of the seven, was
his own deadly sin, he bluntly answered after this manner; By God, the
sin of other Gentlemen, Lechery. Oh but that, M. Tarleton, is not your part
upon the stage, you are too-blame, that dissemble with the world and have one
part for your friends pleasure, an other for your own. I am somewhat of Doctor
Pernes religion, quoth he: and abruptly took his leave. Surely it must needs
be current in matter, and autentical in form, that had first such a learned
president: and is now pleasantly interlaced with diverse new-founde phrases of
the Tavern: and patheticallie intermixed with sundry doleful pageantes of his
own ruinous, and beggarly experience. For the poor Tennement of his Purse,
(quoth himself, gramercy good Tarlelon) has been the Devils Dancing school,
a nie time this half year, and I pray God, (quoth another) the poor
Tennement of his Heart, has not also been the Devils Fencing School, twice
as long. Particulars, and Circumstances are tedious, especially in sorrowful,
and forlorn causes, the sum of sums is. He tossed his imagination a thousand
ways, and I believe, searched every corner of his Grammer-schoole wit, (for
his margin is as deeply learned, as Fauste precor gelida) to see if he
could find any means to relieve his estate, but all his thoughts, and
marginal notes, consorted to his conclusion. That the world was uncharitable,
and he ordained to be miserable. It were cruelty, to ad affliction to
affliction: what flintly Heart would not sigh or rather melt, to hear the
bewailefull moan of that sobbing, and groaning Muse, the daughter of
most-pregnant, but most-wretched Niobe?

Why is it damnation, to despair, and die,
When Life is my true happiness disease?
And a little after: Divines, and dying men may talk of Hell:
But in my Heart, her several torments dwell.
And so forth most-hideouslie.

For the Text is much more doleful, then the Gloss: and who would not be
moved with more pitiful compunction, to hear the lamentable Farewell.

England adieu, the soil that brought me forth:
Adieu unkind, where Skill is nothing worth:
Then to read that profound Quotation, He^ mihi, quam paucos haec mea dicta
mouent?
Which was thought Patheticall out of cry. Forgive him God, although he curse
his Birth,
Since Misery has dawnted all his Mirth.


Now good sweet Muse, I beseech thee by thy delicate wit, and by all the
queintest Inventions of thy deuiseful brain, cast not thy drearie self
headlong into the horrible Gulf of Desperation: but being a Creature of so
singular, and wonderful hope, as thy inspired courage diuinelie suggesteth,
and still reare-vp mountains of highest Hope: and either gallantly advance
thy virtuous self, maugre Fortune: (what impossible to aspiring industry?) or
mightily enchant some magnificent Mecoenas, (for thou can do it) to honor
himself in honoring thee; and to bliss the eyes of the gazing world, with
beholding those Miracles, which some round liberality, and thy super-thankfull
mind, would hugelie enable thee to work. Let it never be said, that the
Minion of the Muses, should forfake himself, or abandon them, whose very
shadows he adoreth. A brave Heart, in extremest distress, never languisheth:
no such affrig hting Death, or gnashing Hell, as the devouring Abyss of
despair. Yet better a man without money, then money without a man: Pennilesse
is not his purse but his mind: not his revenue, but his resolution: A man is a
man though he have but a hose upon his head: for every curse, there is a
blessing, for every malady, a remedy, for every winter, a summer: for every
night a day, a dog has a day.

Nocte pluit tota: redeunt spectacula mane.
Right magnanimity never droupeth, sweet Music requickeneth the heauiest
spirits of dumpish Melancholy: fine Poetry abhors the loathsome, and ugly
shape of forlorn pensiuenes: what gentle mind detesteth not cursed, and
damnable desperation? All abject dolefulnes, is woefully base, and baselie
woeful. The die, the ball, the sponge, the sieve, the wheel of Fortune,
Fortune hirselfe, a trifle, a jest, a toy in Philosophy, and divine resolution.
Be a Musician, and Poet unto thy self, that art both, and a Ringleader of both,
unto other, be a Man, be a Gentleman, be a Philosopher, be a Divine, be thy
resolute self; not the Slave of Fortune, that for every fleabiting cries
out-alas and for a few hungry meals, like a Greek Parasite, misuseth the
Tragedy of Hecuba: but the friend of Virtue, that is richest in poverty, freest
in bondage, brauest in ieopardie, cheerefullest in calamity, be rather wise,
and unfortunate, with the silver Swanne, then fortunate and unwise, with the
golden Ass: remember thine own marginal Emblem, Fortuna fauet fatuis. Oh,
solace thy miraculous self, and cheer the Muses in cheering thy dainty
soul, sweetly drunken with their delitious Helicon, and the restoratiue
Nectar of the Gods. What can I say more? That cordial liquor, and that heavenly
restoratiue, be thy sovereign comfort: and scorn the baseness of every
crased, or fainting thought, that may argue a degenerate mind. And so much
briefly touching thy dear self: who me I hope never to find so pathetically
distressed, or so Tragically disguised again. Now a word, or two concerning
him, who in charity kisseth thy hand, and in pity wishes thee better luck.
May it please gentle Pierce, in the divine fury of his ravished spirit, to be
graciously good unto his poor friends, who would be somewhat loath, to be
silly sheep for the wolf, or other sheepe-biter: I dare undertake, the abused
Author of the Astrologicall discourse, (every page thereof, under correction of
inspired and supernatural conceits, discovers more Art, and Judgment, the^
the whole Supplication of the Parturient Mountain) notwithstanding the
notorious Diabolical discourse of the said Pierce, a man better acquainted
with the Devils of Hell, then with the Stars of Heaven: shall unfeignedly pray
for him: and only pray him to report the known truth, of his approved
learning, and living, without favor. Otherwise, it were not greatly amiss, a
little to consider, that he, which in the ruff of his freshest ioility, was
feign to cry, M. Churchyard, a mercy in printe, may be orderly driven to cry
more peccauies, then one. I would think the Counter, M Churchyard, his
bostisse Penia, and such other sensible Lessons, might sufficiently have
taught him, that Pennilesse is not Lawless: and that a Poets, or Painters
License, is a poor security, to privilege debt, or diffamacion. I would wish
the burned child not to forget the hot Element: and would advise ouer-weening
youths, to remember themselves, and the good ancient oracle of sage Apollo
There is a certain thing, called Modesty, if they could light upon it: and by
my young Masters leave, some pretty smacke of discretion would relish well.
The Athenians were noted for lavish amplifieng* the Cretensians for crafty
lying, the Thessalians for subtle cogging: the Carthaginians for deceitful
perfidie: Hanniball, Fabius, Agathocles, Iphicrates, Ulysses, and a thousand
such, for counterfeit policy, but all their forgeries were seasoned with the
salt of probability, and only used at occasions of advantage: and although
the Grecians generally were ouer-lightheaded, and vaine-spoken, yet their
leuitie sauored of elegant wittiness, and the flying bird carried meat in
the mouth. Even Lucians true Tales are spiced with conceit: and neither his,
nor Apuleius Ass, is altogether an Ass. It is a piece of cunning in the most
fabulous Legends, to interlace some credible narratio^s, and very probable
occurrences, to countenance and authorize the excessive licentiousness of the
rest. Unreasonable fictions palpably bewray their odious grosnesse: and he
that will be a famous deviser in folio, must be content with the reward of a
notable Lier, not to be credited, when he auoweth a truth. The pleasant man
talks of a Batchelers hoode, turned over his ears, for abusing of Aristotle:
and imagines goodly matters of casting the Heavens water: of an atomizing the
skies intrailes: of the universal adultery of Planets* of the bawd of those
celestial bodies* how Saturn, and Jupiter proved honester men, then all the
world took the^ for^o brave Tarlton thou were he, when all is done, had not
Aretine been Aretine, when he was, undoubtedly thou had been Aretine,
gramercy capricious, and transcendent wit, the only high Pole Artique* and
deep Mineral of an incomparable style. Yet Tarltons lests not sufficient: but
Roscius must have his Stale, to make him more admirable* al were nothing,
unless Eldertons ale-crammed nose, had been consumed to nothing, in
beare-baiting him, with whole bundels of ballats: that forsooth is not so good
a gentleman, (for every heir of a Nash is a good gentleman at the least as the
heard of Thomas Nash, the master butler of Pembrooke Hal whose grave
countenance, like Cato able to make him run out of his wits for fear, if
he look sternely upon him, and I wot not what, and what trumperie else, as
childish, and garish stuff, as ever came in print, yet what pack of vanity is
not in print, I will not cry, Absurd, Absurd: as he madly exclaimeth,
Monstrous, Monstrous: But who in that University can deny, but M. Haruey read
the public Philosophy Lecture with special good liking, and many will say
with singular comme^dation, when this mighty lashing Gentleman (now well read
in the late exploites of Untruss, and for Tarletons amplifications A perfe A)
was not so much as idoneus auditor ciuilis scientia. What he is improued
since, excepting his good old Flores Poetarum, and Tarletons surmounting
Rhetorique, with a little Euphuisme, and Greenesse enough, which were all
prettily stale, before he put hand ^o pen. I report me to the fauourablest
opinion of those that know his Prefaces, Rimes, and the very Timpanye of his
Tarltonizing wit, his Supplication to the Devil, oh that is the Devil and al.
I am so far from doting upon mine own, or my Brothers Writings, in any
matter of moment, that I use to censure them with a more curious and rigorous
judgment, then I examine any thing else, wherein my ear is so loath to
flatter me, and my conceit so afraid to cosen me, that my mind ever remains
unsatisfied, and nothing hitherto could fulfill my desire, insatiably covetous
to do better. But as those perfunctorie Discourses are, (which were more
hastily, then speedily published without my priuity) let the best of them go
for wast paper, and serve the basest shops, if the worst of them importe not
more public, or private use, then his gayestflower, that may thank Green,
and Tarlton for his Garland. Were my brother, not my brother, but some familiar
acquaintance, I might in Truth, and should in Reason, make other comparisons,
with applause enough: (for what indifferency sees not the difference? or what
so silly, as he could make Pierce, with voice, or pen? notwithstanding those
Miracles of the white raven in the clouds): But the University, the City,
the whole Realm, all good Learning, and civil Government, be their Judge, and
my mouth especially in this Martinish and Counter-martinish age: wherein the
Spirit of Contradiction reigns, and every one superaboundeth in his own
humor, even to the annihilating of any other, without rhyme, or reason. Some
would be Mutes, if they might be suffered to be, as were meetest for them,
and only to dwell in the excellent monuments of divine wits, whose sweet
company they cannot enjoy enough, but what is to be done, when vowels are
coursed, and Mutes haunted, and that heavenly conference hellishlie disturbed,
God, or good Order, circumcise the Tongues, and Pens, that slander without
^ause, and rail without effect, even in the superlatiue degree of rauing.
Aretine, and the Devils Orator might very-well be spared in Christian, or
Piliticke Comonwealthes: which cannot want contagion enough, though they be
not poysened with the venomous potions of Inckhorne witches. Fine pleasant wit
was ever commendable: and judicial accusation lawful: but fie on gross
scurility, and impudent calumny: that will rather go to Hell in jest, then to
heaven in earnest, and seek not to reform any vice, to backebite, and deprave
every person, that feeds not their humorous fancy, A vile mind: and what a
pestelenter villainy? but some odd wits forsooth, will needs be accounted
terrible Bull Beggars, and the only Killcowes of their age: for how should
they otherwise keep the simple world in awe: or scare multitudes of plain
folk, like idiot crows, and innocent dooues? All the Inuectiue, and
Satyricall Spirits, are their Familiars: scoffing, and girding is their daily
bread: other profess other faculties: they profess the Art of railing:
Noble, Reverend, or whatsoever, al pesants, and clownes: gowty Devils, and
buckram Giants: Midasses, and golden Asses: Cormorants, and Drones, Dunces, and
hypocritical hot spurs Earth-wormes, and Pinchefart Penny-fathers: that
feed not their hungry purses, and eager stomachs: they have terms, quoth a
marvelous doer, steeped in Aqua Fortis, and Gunnepouder, that shall rattle
through the skies, and make Earthquakes in such pesauntes ears, as shall dare
to send them away with a flea in their ear: (how might a man purchase the
sight of those puissant, and hideous terms?) they can lash poor slaves, and
spurgall Asses mightily, they can tell parlous Tales of Bears and Foxes, as
shrewdlye as mother Hubbard, for her life: they will dominiere in Tauernes, and
Stationers shops, to die for it: they will be as egregiouslly famous, as ever
was Herastratus, or Pausanias, or Kett, or Scoggin: Agrippa, and Rabelays but
Ciphers to them: they have it only in them. Would Christ, they had more
discretion in them, and less rancour against other, that never wished them the
least evil, but still beseech GOD to increase the best, and to pardon the
worst in them. The Quippe knows his reward, and the Supplication to the
Devil, expressly dedicated to the Prince of Darkness, I comitte to the
censure of Wisdom, and Justice, with favor: only requesting that mighty
Bombarder of terms, to spare quiet men that mean him no harm, and to keep
the huge maine; shot of his rattling Babies for Buckrame Giants. Alas,-what
should I touch their parents, or twit the^ by their other friends: Let it be
one of their iolities to offer, and one of our simplicities to suffer that
injury: which neither impaireth the reputation of the Father: nor abaseth the
credit of the Sons: nor argues any thing, but the impudente
despightfulnesse of the Libeller. Few Sons have felinger cause to love, or
reverence, or defend their Fathers, then my self: but his dealing is such,
where he tradeth: and his living such where he conuerseth, that he may easily
shame himself, which goeth-about to shame him, or us in him. I will not
trouble you with the rehearsal of his inheritance, which I could have wished
more then it was, yet was it more, by the favor of that terrible Thundersmith
of terms, the^ the inheritances of both their Fathers together. Put case, I
have inquired, what special cause the Pennilesse Gentleman has, to brag of
his birth: which gives the woeful poueretto good leave, even with his
Stentors voice, and in his rattling terms to revive the pitiful history of
Don Lazarello de Thoemes: to contend with cold, to converse with scarcity: to
be laid-open to poverty: to accuse Fortune: to rail on his patrons, to bite
his pen, to rend his papers, to rage in all points, like a mad man, to
totment himself in that agony a long time, to be miserable, to be vacuus
viator: to have opus and vsus knocking at his door twenty times a week, when
he is not within: to seek his dinner in poules with Duke humfrey: to lick
dishes, to be a beggar.

To ban the Air, wherein he breathes A wretch:
to be the Diuelsdistressed Orator, to proclaim his own desolate and abject
estat, in these and such other most-base, and shameful complaints, scarcely
beseeming the rascallest siser in an University, or the beggarliest mendicant
friar in a country.

Forgive him God, although he curse his birth.
I, but who so excessiuely thankful to his other friends? One kind friend,
more worth then two vnfreendlie kinsemen. Affection will relieve, where nature
fails: he must needs abound in devoted and bountiful friends, that shows
himself so meritoriously friendly, and so unspeakably grateful.

O friends, no friends, that then vngentlie frown,
When changing fortune casts us headlong down
I had nigh-hand ouer-skipped the learned allegation in the margin, solemnly
avouched with a very-patheticall Pol, Polme occidistis Amici. All which, and
most of the Premises, I had altogether omitted, but that the two unmeet
Companions, a Lords heart, and a beggars purse must somewhat remember
themselves, or be a little, as it were pulled by the ragged sleeue. Young
scholars can tell how Ulysses handeled ^rus, and old Truants have not
altogether forgotten, howesawsie the Harpies were, till they were interteined
accordingly. But what though the decayed Gentleman, so commends his own
woorshipfull birth, and trusty friends? Many noble Houses have seen their own
ruins: and sometime the brothers of the Prodigal Son, will not stick to
curse, where they should reverently bless. The Table-fellow of Duke Humfrey,
and Tantalus, might learn of him to curse Jupiter, and to ban not only the
four Elements, but also the seven Planets, and even the twelve houses of
Heaven. And what though the other sorry Magnifico, as very a Bisonian, as he
for his life, would swear in a bravery, his Father was of four and twenty
religions: and himself a Divine from his mothers womb: an Image of both
Churches, and both Synagogues too: a natural Perne artificially emproued: the
thrise-and thrise-learned son, of his four and twenty times-learned father?
So Green would flourish. Every man is to answer for his own defaultes: my
trespass is not my fathers, nor my fathers mine: A Gibeline may have a Guelph
to his son, as Barthol says: and has never a Saint had a Reprobate to his
father? are all worthy minds, the issues of noble houses: or all base minds,
the ofsprings of rascal stocks? Were it not a felicity, to be the woorst of a
thousand, that being descended of meanest parentage, have proved, as
Histories testify, and the world daily confirms? Or might not Green, and his
Accomplices, have been much better, then they were, or are, although their
Parents had been much worse, then they were, or are? What faith the afflicted
Suppliant himself?

Ah woorthlesse wit, to train me to this woe:
Ill thrive the Folly, that bewitched me so.
Have we not a number of excellent industrious men and valorous knights, not
greatly beholding unto Fortune for their progeny?

Malo pater tibi sit Thersites, who knows not that only Art of Heraldry?

Quamte Thersitae similem producat Achilles. The Argument of Nobility, is a
gallant, and plausible argument: but what Commonplace so brave, and
honorable, as the Commonplace of virtue? Can any thing be obscure, where
desert is famous: or any thing famous, where desert is obscure? Gramercy sweet
margin, for that notable Poesy: Meritis expendite causam: in earnest, a
singular Rule of infallible judgment: and I imagine, himself deserves
something, that specially alleges Deserte. It is long, since I declaimed
upon any Theme: but who would not plead Virtues cause, in whatsoever
subject? or what honest Eloquence is not furnished with Catilinaries, and
Phillippiques against Vice? Not the Father, and the Son, but Virtue, and
Vice, the efficientes of Honor, and Dishonor. He only base, he only simple,
he only contemptible, that has Vice to his father, and Ignorance to his
mother: the only Parents of rascality. And may I not truly affirm, that not
only Osorius, or Patritius gallantly prove, but all wise Autors seriously
approve, and even Virtue, and Skill themselves, with their own sovereign
mouth, honorably profess? No right son, and heir apparent of theirs, either
unnoble in himself, or obscure in the world: or despised in the highest, or
unregarded of the lowest* or dishonorable in his Life, or inglorious after his
Death. I speak not for any person, but for the matter: and cannot either
condignely praise the valorous seed of the one: or sufficiently bliss the
fruitful womb of the other. And what so ungentle in Nature, or so unnoble in
Fortune, as their Contraries: how barbarously opposed against that divine race,
and heavenly generation: that cannot stir, unaccompanied with Envy, and a
world of moates? Yet neither the unhappiest creature utterly deuoide of all
graces: (I praise something in Elderton, and Green:) nor the excellentest
personage thoroughly accomplished with all perfections: (ah, that Sir Humfrey
Gilbert, and Sir Phillip Sidney, hadd been as cautelous, as aduenturous:) nor
they, that object, nor we, that answer, nor any, but a few singular men, the
Miracles of the world; either for wit wondrous, or for Art exquisite, or for
action admirable, or for integrity notable. I*wis, we little need, to be
charged with our fathers offenses: it is enough for one, yea for the best one,
to carry the burden of his own transgressions, and errors. Errors are
infinite: and follies how universally rife, even of the wisest sort? Oh that
virtues were as like the stars of heaven, or the birds of the Air, as vices
are like the sands of the Sea, and the Beasts of the Earth: he that seeith
least, seeith much amiss: the fine Discouerer, and curious Intelligencer, go
invisible, and stratagematically discry many hidden priuities of public, and
private misgouernment: there is an eye, that pierces into the secretest
sins, and most-inscrutable thoughts of profoundest Hypocrisy: in whose pure
sight nothing is justifiable, but by pardon. Divinity flies high: and wadeth
deep: But even in Humanity, and in the view of the world, who lives
inculpable? or who is not obnoxious to some criminal, or civil actions? or,

Where should I find, that I seek, A person clear as a Crystal?
Where man God to man? where one not Diu'l to an other?
Where that Zeal divine, whose heavenly Sunshin acheerith
The dreryest drouping: and fellist rancor alayeth?
Where thossame mealting bowels of tender agreement,
That mildly conquer most-rowgh, and hideous outrage?
Where Moses meeknes? where David's sweetness Olimpique?
Where that same gentle kindness, that bounty renowned,
That gracious favor, that whilom bewtifi'd Honor:
That Love advanced: that abandoned odious Hatred:
That Sirenized Furies: that rocks Adamantine
Mollifid: arreared Pillars of Glory triumphant?
And so forth: for the verse is not unknown: and runs in one of those
vnsatyricall Satyrs, which M. Spencer long since embraced with an ouerloouing
Sonnet: A token of his Affection, not a Testimony of his* Judgment. What
should I labor a needless point? or what should I weary you with
tediousness, that may much-better bestow your vacant hours? Enough, to any is
enough: to some, overmuch. God knows, and who knows not, how sensually
corrupt some good fellows were, and are, that so sharply, and bitterly noted,
and do note, so many imaginatiue corruptions in other. Would God, they had been
as quietly disposed, as their parents: or as advisedly stayed, as some of
their friends, that wished them a milder course; and some of our pens might
have been employed to better use, then this idle business, or rather busy
idleness. Whereof I desire no other fruit, but some little contentation of
friends, and some reasonable mittigation of ill-willers: unto whose good I am
diligently to address, and even affectionately to dedicate any my endeavor. If
in some terms I have used a little plain dealing, albeit not without
respect, (but every one seeith not into an others considerations: and diverse
Circumstances alter the case) I crave pardon for the least oversight: and will
be as ready to commend any little good, even in an adversary: as I was
unwilling. but enforced to touch soome palpable badd: which I would wish
amended, where it may be redressed: and quite forgotten, where it ought to be
buried. My meaning was not, to displeasure, or discredit any: but only to
satisfy the pleasure, and mainetaine the credit of those, unto whom I owe
many duties, as well in special consideration, as in natural affection. Had I
not been more depely stinged in them, then in my self: who have made Comedies
of such Tragedies; and with pleasure given such hoatspurres leave, to run
themselves out of breath: what folio of folly might not for me have passed
untouched? or who for me, might not have flourished, or lashed in Poules Church
yard, Cum gratia and Priuilegio? It were good, that they, which have a
dexterity in writing trimly upon every matter, white, or black: should also
have a felicity in speaking well upon every person, that deserves not ill:
especially such as can say something, and think more. The terriblest terms
may be repayed-home with advantage: I have known the raylingest Sophister in
an University, set non plus: and have seen the mad-braynest Roister-doister
in a country, dashte out of countenance. There is Logic enough, to
aunsweare Carters Logic: and play enough, to tame Horse-play. Wronged men
are seldom toungetied: the patientest Creature wants not blood in his heart,
or incke in his pen: and although his blood be not wildfire, yet it is blood;
that will not be cooled with a Card, or daunted with bugs-wordes: and although
his incke, be not pitch, or poison, yet it is incke; that will neither blushe
for shame, nor wax pale for fear; but will hold his own, when perhaps gayer
coullours shall loose their coullor; and Aqua fortis valiantly eat his own
heart. Good sweet Masters quiet your selves: or think not much, to bear a
little for company, that are so forward to load other without mercy. No man
loather then my self, to contend with desperate Malecontentes: or to
overthwart obstinate Humoristes: or to encounter Incke-horne Adventures: nor to
quarrel with any sort of wrangling Companions: (skoldinge is the language of
shrewes: and raylinge the style of Rakehells:) or so much as to call busy
heads, by their usual, and proper names: (the things are paltry: and the very
names savor of rascallity:) but there is a time, when such douty warriors
must be appeased; and such wise men answered according to their wisdom.
Howbeit, in favor of a private, and public quietness, I will thank the
honest fellows the more, the less occasion they give me, to interrupt better
exercises: to trouble the world with triflinge discourses upon peltinge
matters: to disease themselves: to pleasure none, but the printer, and idle
creatures, the only busy readers of such Nouellets. I would gladly be
specially beholdinge unto them for this courtesy: and dare undertake it shall
redounde more to their credit, to approve their desire of reconciliation, by
silence: then to continue the opinion of their rooted despite, by sturring
more coals. I hope this wind has not shaken any such corn, but
fellow-schollers, (as Doctor Caius would say) and now forsooth fellow-writers,
may be made friends, with a cup of white wine, and some little familliar
conference, in calm and civil terms. I offer them my hand: and request
their: which I will accept thanckfully: and kiss louinglye: and ever commend
the good Nature, that would; and the better Gouernemente, that could master
Affection with Reason, and sweeten gall with Humanity. For it is not my
energeticall persuasion, but their own patheticall motion, that must do it:
as the enchanting Muse of Orpheus redeemed the ghastly ghost of his own
Euridice out of Hell. Such an Experimente of profounde, and divine Art, as I
would compassionately recommend to every amiable mind, disguised with
hellishe passion: the foulest deformity of any fair wit. Otherwise, if it
stand more with their credit, to be reputed wilful, then wise: or if a
perverse, and froward resolution, be the better policy: they are freemen: and
have incke at will, and paper at commandment: and a number of greedy Ears,
that egerly long, and as it were dance attendaunce, to hear those dreadful
invincible terms, steeped in Aqua fortis, and Gunpowder. The intoxicate sprite
of the grisly Euridice (I speak to a Poet: and cannot more mildly term that
infernal Fury) may eftsoons return to her accursed lodginge, and in steed
of heavenly Orpheus, embrace the hellish Orator of the Black Prince: whom I
will not any way make worse, but would wish infinitely better, then he has made
himself. For I thancke God, Iam neither so profanely uncharitable, as to send
him to the Sancebell, to trusse-vp his life with a trice: nor so abiectly
timorous, as for extreme fearefulnes to wish, with a professed devotion: So be
it: Pray Pen, Incke, and Paper on their knees, that they may not be troubled
with him any more. Good Lord, what fantastical panges are these? who ever
endighted in such a style, but one divine Aretine in Italy, and two heavenly
Tarletons in England: the sole platformers of odd Elocution, and only
singularities of the plain world? Two of them, that so wantonly played with
the highest and deepest subjects of spiritual contemplation: Heaven, and
Hell, Paradise, and Purgatory: know their local repose: and seriously admonish
the third, to be advised, how he lavish in such dalliance. No variety, or
infinity so infinite, as Invention: which has a huge world, and a maine Ocean
of scope, to disport, and raunge it self, though it arreare not vain
Hyperboles of the reverend mysteries of God. Good sweet Orator, be a divine
Poet indeed: and use heavenly Eloquence indeed: and employ thy golden talent
with amounting vsance indeed: and with heroical Cantoes honor right Virtue,
and brave valor indeed: as noble Sir Philip Sidney, and gentle Master
Spencer have done, with immortal Fame: and I will bestow more complements of
rare amplifications upon thee, then ever any bestowed upon them: or this
Tongue ever affoorded: or any Aretinish mountain of huge exaggerations can
bring-foorth. Right artificiality, (whereat I once aimed to the uttermost power
of my slender capacity,) is not mad-brained, or ridiculous, or absurd, or
blasphemous, or monstrous: but deepe-conceited, but pleasurable, but delicate,
but exquisite, but gracious, but admirable: not according to the fantastical
mould of Aretine, or Rabelays, but according to the fine model of Orpheus,
Homer, Pindarus, and the excellentest wits of Greece, and of the Land, that
flowed with milk, and honey. For what Festival Hymns, so divinely dainty, as
the sweet Psalms of King David, royally translated by Buchanan? or what sage
Gnomes, so profoundly pithy, as the wise Proverbs of King Solomon; notably
also translated: but how few Buchanans? Such lively springes of streaming
Eloquence: and such right-Olympicall hills of amountinge wit: I cordially
recommend to the dear Lovers of the Muses: and namely to the professed Sons
of the-same; Edmond Spencer, Richard Stanihurst, Abraham France, Thomas Watson,
Samuel Daniell, Thomas Nash, and the rest: whom I affectionately thancke for
their studious endeavors, commendably employed in enriching, and polishing
their native Tongue, never so furnished, or embellished, as of-late. For I dare
not name the Honorabler Sons, and Nobler Daughters of the sweetest, and
diuinest Muses, that ever sang in English or other language: for fear of
suspicion of that, which I abhor: and their own most delectable, and
delicious Exercises, (the fine handy-worke of excellent Nature, and excellenter
Art combined) speak incomparably more, then I am able briefly to insinuate.
Gentle minds, and flourishing wits, were infinitely toblame, if they should
not also for curious imitation, propose unto themselves such fair Types of
refined, and engraced Eloquence. The right Noouice of pregnante, and aspiring
conceit, will not ouer-skippe any precious gemme of Invention, or any beautiful
flower of Elocution, that may richly adorn, or gallantly bedecke the trim
garland of his budding style. I speak generally to every springing wit: but
more specially to a few: and at this instante singularly to one: whom* I salute
with a hundred blessings: and entreat with as many prayers, to love them, that
love all good wits: and hate none, but the Devil, and his incarnate Impes,
notoriously professed. I protest, it was not thy person, that I any-way
disliked: but thy rash, and desperate proceeding against thy well-willers:
which in some had been insufferable: in an youth, was more excusable: in a
reformed youth is pardonable: and rather matter of concordance, then of
aggrieuance. I persuade my self, rather to hope the best, then to fear the
worst: and ever wish unto other, as I would wish other, to wish unto me. It is
my earnest desire, to begin, and end such frivolous altercations at once: and
were it not more for other, then for my self, assuredly I would be the first,
that should cancel this impertinent Pamflet: and throw the other two Letters,
with the Sonnets annexed, into the fire. Let them have their swinge, that
affect to be terribly singular: I desire not to be a black Swanne: or to leave
behind me any Period in the style of the Devils Orator: or any verse in the
vain of his Dammes Poet: but rather covet to be nothing in printe, then any
thing in the stamp of needelesse, or fruitless Contention. As I am
ouer-ruled at this present, and as it stands now: I am not to be mine own
Judge, or Advocate: but am content to be sentenced by every courteous, or
indifferente peruser, that regards honesty in persons, or truth in
testimonies, or reason in causes. Or seeing some matters of Fame are called in
question: I am not only willing, but desirous to vnderlye the verdicte, even
of Fame her-selfe; and to submit our whole credites, to the voice of the
people, as to the voice of Equity, and the Oracle of God: to whose gracious
favors he recommendeth your Courtesy, that neither flattereth the best: nor
slaundereth the woorst: nor wilfully wrongeth any: but professes duty to his
superiors: humanity to his equals: favor to his inferiors: reason to all:
And by the same Rule, owes you amends for the premises: not spedily
dispatched, but hastily bungled-vp, as you see.

London: this 8. and 9. of September. The friend of his friends, and foe of none.

The Fourth Letter.
To the same favorable, or indifferent Reader.
HOnest Gentlemen (for unto such I especially write) give me leave in this
slender Pamflet, only to fulfill the importune requests of a few: with your
small delighte, and mine own less contentmente: and pardon me, though I no
way affect to feed the dainty humor of curious conceits, carried with an
insatiable expectation of I wot not what imagined perfection: which may easily
display it self, where it is, but cannot possibly appear, where it is not. I
presume, I cannot less satisfy any, then I have satisfied my self: who
having wedded my self to private study, and devoted my mind to public
quietness, took this troublesome pen in hand, with such an alacrity of
courage, as the sorry Bear goes to the stake: and now rejoice in that, which
with more have, then speed is dispatched; as AEsops Heart, with more affection,
then reason, gloried in his Horns, till he found his fugitive legs, his
surer friends. For in many cases, I take it a better Policy, to use the flying
Leg, then the cumbersome Horn: and at this instant, I should much more have
pleased my self, if I had still practiced my former resolution, to scorn the
stinginge of a pieuish waspe: or the biting of an eluish gnat: or the quipp of
a mad companion: and rather to pocket-vp a pelting injury, then to entangle my
self with trifling business: or any-way to accrue to the most-contemptible
fellowship of the scribblinge crew, that annoyeth this Age, and never more
accloyed the world. Alas, he is pitifully bestead, that in an Age of Policy,
and in a world of Industry, (wherein the greatest matters of Government, and
Valor, seem small to aspiring capacities) is constrained to make woeful
Green, and beggarly Pierce Pennylesse, (as it were a Grasshopper, and a
Cricket, two pretty musicians, but silly creatures) the argument of his style:
and enforced to encounter them, who only in vanity are something: in effect,
nothing: in account, less then nothing: howsoever the Grasshopper enraged,
would be no less then a green Dragon: and the Cricket male-contented, not so
little as a Black Bellwether: but the only Unicorn of the Muses. Some in my
case, would perhaps be content for their own credit, to have them notoriously
so reputed: and in cunning, would per adventure not stick, to strain at a
Gnatt, as it were at a Camel: but plain dealing uses no such Rhethorick: they
that have Eyes, can see: and they that have Ears, can hear, as sensibly as I:
and I must in reason leave them, as in proof I find them: either mere
Paper-bugs, and Inckehorne-pads: or a great deal worse: so far, as the
Ringleaders of leaud Licentiousnes, are more pestilent, then the Platformers of
vain Fantasticallity: or the poison of corrupted minds, is more pernicious,
then the venom of disguised wits. Any slightness, curious enough: and any
cost, too-much, upon such an argument: a subject of loss to the writer; of
gain to none: but duty must obey: and courtesy yield: and it is the luck of
some pelting Comedies, to busy the Stage, as well as some grauer Tragedies.
Were nothing else discoursiuely inserted, (as some little else occasionally
presented it self) what paper more currently fit for the basest mechanical
uses, then that, which contains the vile misdemeanors, and Truth will say,
the abominable villainies of such base shifting companions: good for nothing,
in the opinion of good minds, but to castaway themselves, to spoil their
adherentes, to pray upon their favorers, to dishonor their Patrons, to
infecte the Air, where they breath. Might Pierce be entreated, to quallifye
his distempered vein; and to reclaim his unbridled self: as some bold
Gawins, upon milder consideration have been glad to do: (good Pierce be good
to thy good friends: and gentle to thy gentle self:) I assuredly would be the
first, that should wrapp-vp such memorials, not in a sheet of wast-paper, but
in the winding-sheete of Oblivion: and will not stick, to embalme the dead
corpse of a professed ennemy, to sweeten the living spirit of a wished friend:
howsoever extremely mean, or famously obscure. The gracious Law of Amnesty,
a sovereign Law: but the divine Law of Charity, the Law of Laws. Who cannot
contemn the insolentest arrogance? but who must not condescend to any
reasonable accord? He that was never dismayed with any necessary distress,
yet ever escheweth all unnecessary trouble: and he that least fears the
sword of unjust Calumny, yet most dreadeth the scabbard of just Infamy: and
would gladly avoid the lightest suspicion of that, which he abhors. Though
the painted sheath be, as it is, (for it needs no other Painter, to pourtray
it self) yet never child so delighted in his rattling baby; as some old Lads
of the Castle, have sported themselves with their rappinge babble. It is the
proper weapon of their profession: they have used it at-large, and will use it
at pleasure, howsoever the patient heal himself at their cost. It were a
work of importance, to aunsweare that weapon: I long since gave them over in
the plain field: and am now become a suter to their towardest scholars, to
remember the glorious conquest of their witty Masters. I would willingly
please, or not displease, as I may: but no Life, without self-contentment: no
performance of any action without Resolution. The least may think upon Fabius
Maximus: who with an honorable obstinacy pursued the course of his own
platform, notwithstanding a thousand empeachments: and although slowly, with
much murmuringe, yet effectually, with more reputation, achieved his politic
purpose: like an expert Pilot, that in a hideous tempest regards not the
foolish shrickinges, or vain outcries of disorderly passengers, but
bestirreth himself, and directs his mariners, according to the wise rules
of orderly Navigations. Awauering and fleeting mind, seldom, or never
accomplisheth any negotiation of value. It is none of the least comfortes in
distress, that Patience is an excellent quality: and Constancy the
honourablest virtue in the world. I am not to dilate, where a sentence is a
discourse, and a word more then enough. It has been my desire, to conform
my intentions to my quality, and my exercises to my intentions: but as they
are, it shall go very-hard, before I begin to abandon hope: or relente to
frivolous motions: or forget my self, and my friends, to remember my ennemies:
who are best remembered, when they are most forgotten. Some are cunning: and can
imaginatiuely cast beyond the Moon: but he is a simple Temporiser, that would
attempt to raise a fantastical, or putatiue opinion in an active world: and
who so kindly cooseneth himself, as he that seeks a cloak, to cover his own
sluggish Idleness, or vnweeldy insufficiency? Let them affect mystical
commendation, that profess occult Philosophy: and let them crosbite
themselves, that can find no other Conny-catchers, to play that part. It was a
principal Maxim in Socrates discipline, That every one should contend to be
indeed, whatsouer he would covet to seem in appearance: some that have often
recommended that Maxim unto other, and often called it the sovereign Rule of
sound, and honorable proceeding; were never forwarder to allow his precept in
discourse, then ready to follow his example in practice. There be other
enough, to make a gallant show: and some trim fellows, will not stick to
maintain a brave Paradoxe, that the opinion, and semblaunce of things,
neither ever was, nor is now, inferior to the very things themselves: but in
preferment and reputation many times superior. I am not here to argue the
case: Fortune is a favorable Lady to some forward adventurers: they may easily
swim, that are holden up by the chinne: such, and such have lived in
estimation, and purchased lands: but what did they ever effectuate of any
worth: or wherein appeared there sufficiency, to discharg any weighty function, or
to perform any notable act? A reed is a sorry staff: and Fortune as
changeable, as the Moon: no counterfeit, or pretended commendation endures
long: only desert holdeth-out infallibly, when many a goodly gentleman
be^hreweth himself: I must not stand upon particularities: no Education to the
Trainement of Cyrus: nor any proceeding, to the emploiment of Caesar. Pregnant
Rules auail much: but visible Examples amount incredibly: Experience, the only
life of perfection, and only perfection of life. Whatsoever occasion causes
me to be mistaken, as overmuch addicted to Theory, without respect of action:
(for that is one of the especiallest points, which I am importuned to resolve:)
I never made account of any study, meditation, conference, or Exercise, that
imports not effectual use, and that aymeth not altogether at action: as the
singular mark, whereat every Art, and every virtue is to level. I love
Method: but honor Practice: must I show the difference? Either Art is
obscure, or the quickest capacity dull: and needs Method, as it were the
bright Moon, to illuminate the darkesome night: but Practice is the bright
Sun, that shines in the day, and the sovereign Planet, that governs the
world: as elsewhere I have copiously declared. To excel, there is no way but
one: to marry studious Art to diligent Exercise: but where they must be
unmarried, or divorced, give me rather Exercise without Art, then Art without
Exercise. Perfect use works masteries: and disgraceth unexperienced Art.
Examples are infinite: and daily display themselves. A world without a Sun: a
Boddy without a Soul: Nature without Art: Art without Exercise: sorry
creatures. Singular practice the only singular, and admirable woorkeman of the
world. Must I dispatch the rest, that is exacted? It is no fit place: and the
least little will seem too-much. As in other things, so in Arts, formality
does well: but materiality works the feat. Were Artists as skillfull, as
Arts are powerful, wonders might be achieved by Art emprooued: but they
that understand little, write much: and they that know much, write little. The
vain Peacocke, with his gay coullours, and the prattling Parrat with his
ignorant discourses, (I am not to offend any, but the Peacocke, and the Parrat)
have garishly disguised the worthiest Arts, and deeply discredited the
profoundest Artistes, to the pitiful defacement of the one, and the shameful
prejudice of the other. Rodolph Agricola, Philip Melancthon, Ludouike Viues,
Peter Ramus, and diverse excellent scholars, have earnestly complaned of Arts
corrupted, and notably reformed many absurdities: but still corruption
ingendreth one vermin or other: and still that precious Trainement is
miserably abused, which should be the fountain of skill, the root of virtue,
the seminary of government, the foundation of all private, and public good.
The Methodist, and Discouser might be more material: the Theorist, and
Practitioner more formal: all four more effectual: or how comes it to
pass, that much more is proof ssed, but much less performed, then in former
ages? especially in the Mathematikes, and in natural Magic: which being
cunningly and extensiuely employed (after the manner of Archimedes, Archytas,
Apollonius Regiomontanus, Bacon, Cardan, and such like industrious
Philosophers, the Secretaries of Art, and Nature,) might wonderfully bestead
the Commonwealth: with many puissant engines, and other commodious devises, for
war, and peace. In actual Experimentes, and Polymechany, nothing
too-profound: a superficial slightness, may seem fine for sheets, but
proves good for nothing: as in other business, so in learning, as good
never a whit, according to the Proverb, as never the better: one perfect
Mechanician worth ten imperfect Philosophers: an ignorant man less shameth
himself, less beguileth his friend, less disableth the Commonwealth, then a
putatiue Artiste: a whole natural wit more serviceable, and more sufficient,
then a Demi-scholler: who presuming on that, which he has not, abateth the
force of that, which he has. He must not dream of perfection, that emproueth
not the perfectest Art, with most perfect industry. A snatch, and away, with
Neoptolemus, and the common sort of students, may please a little, but
profits nothing. It is the Body, not the shadow, that dispatcheth the
business. The flower delights today, and fades tomorrow: the fruit
edifieth, and endures: the visard, the painted sheath, and such terrible
braueries, can best report their own entertainment: the peacock, and the
parrat have good leave to prancke up themselves, and leisure enough to
revive, and repolish their expired works. What can last always, quoth the
neat Tailor, when his sine seames began to crack their credit at the first
drawing-on. I appeal to Poules Churchyard, whether lines be like unto seames:
and whether the Deft writer be as sure a workman, as the neat Tailor. There
may be a fault in the Reader, as well as in the weauer: but every manne content
himself, to bear the burden of his own faults: and good sweet Autors
infourme your selves, before you undertake to instruct other. Excellent
effects must slow from the spring of excellent causes: and nothing notable
without notable Endeavor. The Print is abused, that abuses: and earnestly
beseeches flourishing writers, not to trouble the Press, but in case of
urgent occasion, or important use. Or if you conceive extraordinarily of your
own pregnancy: and will needs employ your youthful Tallent: remember, that
corruptions in manners, and absurdities in Art, have too-lately ouerflowed the
banckes of all good Modestly, and discretion. He that has but half an Eye,
can see no less: and he that has but half a Tongue, may say more: I only
note by the way, that hinders many a gallant wit in the way: and without
empeachment to any, wish all rather to be excellent, with Socrates, then to
seem famous, with the Philosopher of the Court. My meaning is not, to teach,
but to touch: and albeit I have cursorily spoken something for my self, and
something as it were against other; yet the one little, and the other less,
are both uttered with a mind, that will rather excuse other, then my self; and
rather accuse my self, then other: wheresoever I find the least reason for
them, or the least cause against my self: and if in any thing I am any thing,
it is in nothing so much, as in a zealous desire, to see Learning flourish:
Virtue prosper: the good proceed from better to better: the bad amend: the
Body cherrish the members: the Members tender the body: all generally maintain
Concord with all: every one particularly nurrish accord with every one. Howbeit
at this instant I must crave license, to stand upon such terms, not as I
would most willingly choose, but as the present occasion forcibly suggesteth.
No man loather, to minister the least, or to take the greatest occasion of
public contention, or private coffeehouse: choler is as soon inflamed, as
flax; and small sparkles of dissension, have kindled horrible fires of
faction: there be wrangling, and quarreling hoatspurres enough, though I be
none: Ignis fatuus never so spritishly busy: never so many threatening Comets:
never such a terrible sky of Blasing, and falling stars: never such lusty
stirring of lively coals, and dead cinders: every Martin Junior, and Puny
Pierce, a monarch in the kingdom of his own humor: every pert, and crancke
wit, in one odd vein, or other, the only man of the University, of the City,
of the Realm, for a flourish or two: who but he, in the flush of his
ouerweening conceit? give him his peremptory white rod in his hand, and
God-night all distinction of persons, and all difference of estates: his Pen is
his mace, his lance, his two-edged sword, his scepter, his Hercules club: and
will bear a predominant sway, in despite of vaineglorious Titles, and
ambitious Degrces. Lords must take heed, how they Lord-it in his presencc:
but he forsooth may play the Lord Great-Maister, cum gratia: and a saucy
Sophister take upon him, like a mighty Tyrant, cum Priuilegio. God help, when
Ignorance, and want of Experience, usurping the chair of scrupulous, and
rigorous Judgment, will in a fantastical Imagination, or percase in a
melancholy mood, presume farther, by infinite degrees, then the learnedest men
in a civil Commonwealth, or the sagest counselors in a Princes Court. Our
new-new writers, the Loadstones of the Press, are wonderfully beholdinge to
the Ass; in a manner the only Author, which they allege: the world was ever
full enough of fools, but never so full of Asses in print: the very Elephant, a
great Ass: the Camel, a huge Ass: the Bear, a monstrous Ass: the Horse, an
absurd Ass: the Fox himself, a little Ass, or for variety, an Ape: who not
an Ass, or an Ape in good plain English, that chances to come in the wise
Asse-makers, and mighty Ape-dubbers way? they are fine men, and have many
sweet phrases: it is my simplicity, that I am so slenderly acquainted with
that dainty style; the only new fashion of current Eloquence in Esse: far
surpassing the stale vein of Demosthenes, or Tully: Jewel, or Harding:
Whitgift, or Cartwright: Sidney, or Spencer. But I could wish, Ignorance would
favor it self: and it were not amiss, that want of Experience should be
content to be a little modest, or somewhat quiet: and both enforce les occasion
to be termed, as they will needs notoriously proclaim themselves: as it were,
with a public Oh-is, or a general Nouerint vniuersi per praesentes. For if
any thing indeed, be a right Ass in print, it is the one: and if any thing
indeed, be a right Calse in print, it is the other: Ignorance, the famousest
Ass; and want of Experience, the notablest Calfe in the world: Yet the one,
the terrible controwler: the other the singuller Refourmer of the world: both,
the busiest adventurers, and dowteest doers in a world. They trouble many much:
some exceedingly: themselves most: me little: who can very well leave them to
the iollity of their own swinge: or only pray them to stay the nimble course
of their forward wisdoms, till they have soberly read, and heard a little,
and a little more: (for I wis something rests unconsidered:) and till they
have effectually seen, and tried a great-deale, and a great-deale more: (for
much remains vnaprooued:) I love not to solicit them greatly, that love to
importune all other excessiuely: that little I have done, I have done
compelled, and would wish undone, rather then any storm of Dcbate, or the
least fit of Malice should ensue thereof: let them glory in Pen-scolding, and
Paper-brabling, that list: I must not, I cannot, I will not: I hate to intend
such arrant paltry, not for fear, but for contempt, not for lasinesse, but for
weightier business: good honest youths spare an old Truante, meeter now to
play the Dumme Dog, with some auncientes, then the bauling Cur, or the hissing
Snake, with you springals: a thousand Examples pierce deep, and ouer-sensibly
teach me the miserable inconvenience of such mischief, and the miserable
mischief of such inconvenience: better a pecke of troubles, then a load of
agonies: no plague to irksome vengeance: no joy, or treasure to in dustrious
imploiment: no felicity, to a commodious intercourse of sweet study, sweeter
conversation, and sweetest action: that wants, must be supplied, as
sufficient as it may: extraordinary incombrances little need: Time is
precious, and would not be prodigally wasted in wast* paper, or contemptuously
thrust out by the shoulders: my first Letter, was in a manner voluntary: my
second, in sort necessary: this, wholly superfluous, but violently extorted
after the rest: all wearysome unto me; but this most tedious: and any thing
more, would seem intolerable: Especially in the Inuectiue vein: the little
Fury of this Age, and great Incendiary of the world: whose unmeasurable outrage
I would rather mittigate with twenty Insinuatiue, and persuasiue Orations, then
any-way aggrauate with one Offensive, or defensive Letter. Some Comicall Iars
may be endured: but no act so joyful, as the Plaudite: and whatsoever the
beginning happens to be, I would always wish a pleasant, or amicable end:
the scope whereat I as dilligently aim, as any, that most religiously
affects unity. Only my determination is, rather to be a Sheep in Wolfes
printe, then to suffer my self, or my dearest friends, to be made Sheep in
the wolfes walk: and only my request is, that every discreet, and courteous
mind, will as considerately weigh the cause, as censoriously note the effect.
I hope, there neither is, nor shall be any default committed, but may in
convenient time be redressed with some reasonable amends: until which time,
I am not to dedicate any thing unto any personage of name; but a mind,
affectionately desirous to honor the worthiest: to reverence the wisest: to
commend the learnedest: to embrace the best: to appease the worst: to injury
none: to render every one, the uttermost of his desert, or other quality. Which
mind I entierly recommend unto you all: and you all unto God: whom I beseech,
to accomplish that, which I cannot effect: and even to work a miracle upon
the dease.

London: this 11. and 12. of September. Your affectionate friend, G. H.

GREENES MEMORIAL, OR certain Funeral Sonnets.
To the foresaid Master Emmanuell Demetrius, Master Christopher Bird, and all
gentle wits, that will voursafe the reading.
SONNET I.
His Repentance, that meant to call Green to his aunsweare.
ALas that I so hastily should come,
To terrify the man with fatal dread,
That deemed quiet Pens, or dead, or dum,
And stoutly knocked poor Silence on the head.
Enough can say: dead is the Dog of spite:
I, that for pity praised him alive,
And smiled to hear him gnar, and see him bite,
Am not with sorry carcasses to strive.
The worst I list of Famous him report:
Poules has the Only Pregnant Author lost:
Aihme, quoth Wit in lamentable sort,
What worthy wight shall now command the roast?
Fame heard the plaint: and pointed at A man,
As green as Green, and white as whitest Swanne.
SONNET II.
His misfortun, in being spitefully iniuried by some, whom he partially
commended.
Unlucky I, unhappiest on Earth,
That fondly doting upon dainty wits,
And deeply ravished with their luring fitts,
Of gentle favors find so hard a Dearth.
Is it my Fate, or Fault, that such fine men
Should their Commender so unkindly bite?
That looues to love, in spite of rankest Spite,
And hates to hate, with Heart, or Tongue, or Pen.
Sweet Writers, as ye covet to be sweet,
Nor me, nor other, nor your selves abuse:
Humanity does courteously peruse
Each act of friend, or foe, with favor meet.
Foul Devil, and fouler Malice cease to rave:
For every fault I twenty pardons crave.
SONNET III.
His admonition to Greenes Companions.
THe flourishing, and gaily-springing wight,
That vainly me prouok'd with vile reproach,
Has done his worst, and has no more to broche:
Maugre the Devil of villainous despite.
I cannot rail, what-euer cause to rail:
For Charity I lovingly embrace,
That me for Envy odiously deface:
But in their highest rage extremely fail.
I can do him no harm, that is in Heaven:
I can do him no good that is in Hell:
I wish the best to his Suruiuours fell,
Deeply acquainted with his Six: and Seven.
O be not like to Death, that spares none:
Your greenest Flower, and Peacockes tail is gone.
SONNET IIII.
The miserable end of wilful desperatnesse.
THe jolly Fly dispatched his silly self:
What Stories quaint of many a douty Fly,
That read a Lecture to the ventrous Elfe?
Yet he will have his lusty swing, to die.
Currage, and sturring wit in time do well:
But that same obstinate Desperation,
A furious fiend of selfe-deuouring Hell,
Rushing with terrible Commination,
(What storm so hideous, as Rages spell?)
Concludes with horrible Lamentation:
Each blessed tongue accurse malediction,
The ugly mouth of ruthful confusion.
Nothing so doulcely sweet, or kindly dear,
As sugredlippes, and Hearts delicious cheer.
SONNET V.
The learned should lovingly affect the learned.
I Am not to instruct, where I may learn:
But where I may persuasiuely exhort,
Nor ouer-dissolute, nor ouer*sterne,
A courteous Honesty I would extort.
Good loathes to damage, or vpbraid the good:
Gentle how loouely to the gentle wight?
Who seeith not, how every blooming budd
Smileth on every flower fairly dyght,
And bids foul illfauordnesse Godnight?
Would Alciats Emblem, or sum scarlet whood.
Could teach the Pregnant sons of shiny Light,
To interbrace each other with delight.
Fine Mercury conducts a dainty band
Of Charites, and Muses, hand in hand.
SONNET VI.
His Palace of pleasure.
I Wott not what these cutting Huffe-snuffes mean:
Of Ale-house-daggers I have little skill:
I borrow not my phrase of knave, or queen,
But am a dettour to the Ciu^ill quill.
It is restoratiue unto my heart,
To hear how gentle Cheek, and Smith conuers'd:
No daintier piece of delic atest, Art,
Then cordial Stories charmingly rehearsed,
That whilom rudest wooddes, and stonesamperc'd.
Who now begins that amiable part?
Haddon farewell: and Ascham thou art stale,
And every sweetenes tastes of bitter bale.
Oh, let me live to interuiew the face
Of fair Humanity, and bounteous Grace.
SONNET VII.
His unfeigned wish.
Never Ulysses, or Aeneas tired,
With toyling travails, and huge afflictions:
As arrant pen, and wretched page bemyr'd
With nasty filth of rancke-maledictions.
I seldom call a snarling Curr, a Curr:
But wish the gnarring dog, as sweet a mouth,
As brauest horse, that feels golden spurr:
Or shrillest Trompe, that sounds North, or South:
Or most enchaunting Sirens voice uncouth.
Selfe-gnawing Hearts, and gnashing Teeth of murr,
How feign would I see Orpheus revived,
Or Suadas hoony-bees in you rehiu'd?
O most-delicious hoony-dewes, infuse
Your daintiest influence into their Muse.
SONNET VIII.
A Continuation of the same wish.
LEt them forgett their cancred peeuishnes:
And say to Choler fell; Thou were our fall:
Had thou not boilde in fretting waywardnes,
We might have laughed at Fortunes tossing Ball.
Choler, content thy malecontented self:
And cleerest Humor of right Sanguine pure,
Neately refined from that felonious Elfe,
With Iouiall graciousnes thy self enure.
If ever silver conduictes were abroche
Of streaming Wit, and flowing Eloquence:
Ye fludds of milk, and hoony reapproche,
And bounteously poure-out your Quintessence.
Gently assemble Delicacies all,
And sweetly nectarize this bitter gall.
SONNET IX.
His reuiuall of a former motion: added at the instance of an especial friend.
Were I as meet, as willing to advise:
I would in amicable terms entreat
Some forward wits to change their headlong guise,
And less in print, and more in mint to sweat.
Pithagoras, and Apollonius sage,
Two woonders of capacity divine;
Trained their followers to temper rage,
And Tongue with curious silence to refine.
There is a Time to speak: a Time to write:
But blessed be the Time, that sees, and hears:
Let Petty Stars suppress their twinkling light:
And glorious Sun advance his beamy peers.
O you of golden mould, that shine like Sun.
Display your heavenly gifts: and I have dun.
SONNET X.
A more particular Declaration of his intention.
YEt let Affection interpret self:
Arcadia brave, and dowty Faery Queen
Cannot be stained by Gibelin, or Guelph,
Or goodliest Legend, that Wits eye has seen.
The dainty Hand of exquisitest Art,
And nimble Head of pregnantest receipt,
Never more finely played their curious part,
Then in those lively Christals of conceit.
Other fair Wits I cordially embrace:
And that sweet Muse of azur Die, admire:
And must in every Sonnet interlace
The earthly Sovereign of heavenly fire.
A fitter place remains to implore,
Of deepest Artists the profoundest lore.
SONNET XI.
His Desire, to honor excellent perfections in the best.
An other addition, inserted at the request of one, that might command.
Black Art auaunt: and Hail thrise-grace-full Grace,
That whitest white on Earth, or Heaven exceedes,
In purity, and souerainety immense.
Or lock my mouth: or school my infant-lippes,
Resplendent lights of Milky Way to sing,
Rare subjects of thy indulgence supreme.
Yet what should I conspicuous Mirrours sing,
That radiantly display their beauteous beams
Of glistring Virtue, and reshining Wit:
The Luminaries great of little world?
Folly impossibillities attempts:
Astonishment such brightness best becummes:
Or lend me Pegasus, thy mounting wings:
And let me hear, how quire of Angels singes.
SONNET XII.
His Court of Honor.
Were fine Castilio, the Heir of Grace:
What gallant port more graciously fine?
As dainty Petrarch was sweet Sirens son:
What witching tune more Orpheously sweet?
Him, him, the Idee high, and deep Abyss
Of noble Excellence I would proclaim.
But what should drowsy Muse of Phantoms dream?
Cast glauncing eye into Queen Pallas Court:
And scorn the dimnes of thy dazeled sight,
Astound with Lord-and Lady-Graces view:
Idees how high, Abysses how profounde
Of valor brave, and admirable worth?
Poor glimmering Gemmes, and twinkling Stars adieu:
Here, here the Sun, and Moon of Honor true.
SONNET XIII.
His intercession to Fame.
Live ever valorous renowned Knights:
Live ever Smith, and Bacon, Peereles men:
Live ever Walsingham, and Hatton wise:
Live ever Mildmayes honorable name.
Ah, that Sir Humfry Gilbert should be dead:
Ah, that Sir Philip Sidney should be dead:
Ah, that Sir William Sackeuill should be dead:
Ah, that Sir Richard Grinuile should be dead:
Ah, that brave Walter Deuoreux should be dead:
Ah, that the Flower of Knighthood should be dead,
Which, maugre deadlyest Deaths, and stonyest Stones,
That coouer worthiest worth, shall never die.
Sweet Fame, adorn thy glorious Triumph new:
Or Virtues all, and Honors all adieu.
SONNET XIIII.
A repetition of the former Petition.
But Virtues all, and Honors all survive:
And Virtues all, and Honors all inflame
Brave minds to platfourme, and redoubted hands
To do such deeds, and such exploites atchieue,
As they, and they courageously performed.
Egregious men, and memorable Knights:
Ay memorable Knights, whiles Sun shall shine,
And teach industrious Worth, to shine like Sun:
To live in motion, and action hot:
To eternize Entelechy divine:
Where Plutarches Lives: where Argonautiques brave:
Where all Heroique woonderments concur.
Oh, Oh, and Oh a thousand thousand times,
That thirsty Ear might hear Archangels rimes.
SONNET XV.
A continuation of the same Petition.
THen would I so my Melody addoulce,
And so attune my Harmony to theirs,
That fellest Fury should confess her self
Enchaunted mightily with charms divine:
And in the sweetest terms of sacred Leagues,
With pure devotion reconcile her rage.
Meane-while I seek, and seek, but cannot find
That Jewel rare of precioussest worth:
Gentle Accord, and sovereign Repose,
The Paradise of Earth, and bliss of Heaven.
Be it in Earth, o Heaven direct my course:
Be it in Heaven alone, o Earth Farewell.
Or welfare Patience, that sweetens sour,
And reares on Hellish Earth an Heavenly Boure.
SONNET XVI.
His professed Disdain, to aunsweare vanity in some, or to envy prosperity in
any.
SOme me have spited with a cruel spite:
But Fount of Mercy so reclense my sin,
As I nor them malign, nor any wight:
But all good minds affect, like dearest kin.
Small cause I have to scorn in any sort:
Yet I extremely scorn to aunsweare some,
That banish Conscience from their report,
And ouerwantonly abuse the dumme.
God keep Low-Countrymen from high Disdain:
Yet I disdain with haughtiest contempt
To envy any persons Fame, or Gain:
Or any crooked practice to attempt.
Jesus, that we should band, like John Oneale,
That tenderly should melt in mutual zeal.
SONNET XVII.
His exhortation to atonement and Love.
O Minds of Heaven, and wits of highest Sphere,
Molten most-tenderly in mutual zeal:
Each one with cordial indulgence forbear,
And Bonds of Love reciproquely enseale.
No rose, no violet, no fragrant spice,
No Nectar, no Ambrosia so sweet:
As gracious Love, that never makes nice,
But every one embraces, as is meet.
Magnes, and many things attractiue are:
But nothing so allectiue under skies,
As that same dainty amiable Star,
That none, but grisly mouth of Hell, defyes.
That Star illuminate celestial Hearts:
And who, but Rancour, feels irksome smarts?
SONNET XVIII.
John Harueys Welcome to Robert Green.
COme fellow Green, come to thy gaping grave:
Bidd Vanity, and Foolery farewell:
Thou ouer-long have played the madbrain'd knave:
And ouer-lowd have rung the bawdy bell.
Vermin to Vermin must repair at last:
No fitter house for busy folk to dwell:
Thy Conny-catching Pageants are past:
Some other must those arrant Stories tell.
These hungry worms think long for their repast:
Come on: I pardon thy offense to me:
It was thy living: be not so aghast:
A Fool, and Physician may agree.
And for my Brothers, never vex thy self:
They are not to disease a buried Elfe.
SONNET XIX.
His Apology of himself, and his brothers.
YEt fie on lies, and fie on false Appeals:
No Minister in England less affectes
Those wanton kisses, that leaud folly steals,
Then He, whom only Ribaldry suspectes.
Were I a fool, (what man plays not the fool?
The world is full of fools, and full of sects:)
Yet was John never spoiled with the tool,
That Richard made: and none, but none infectes.
The third is better known in Court, and School,
Then thy vain Quipp, or my Defense shall be:
Whose Eye, but his, that sitts on Slanders stool,
Did ever him in Fleet, or Prison see?
Loud Mentery small confutation needs:
Auaunt black Beast, that sowes such cursed seeds.
SONNET XX.
His Apology of his good Father.
AH my dear Father, and my Parent sweet,
Whose honesty no neighbor can empeach:
That any Ruffian should in terms unmeet,
To your discredit shamfully outreach.
O rakehell Hand, that scribled him a knave,
Whom never Enemy did so appeach:
Repent thy wicked self, that so did rave,
And cancel that, which Slanders mouth did teach.
Nor every man, nor every trade is brave:
Malt, hairs, and hemp, and sackcloth must be had:
Truth him from odious imputations save:
And many a gallant Gentleman more bad.
Four Sons, him cost a thousand pounds at lest:
Well may he fare: and thou enjoy thy rest.
SONNET XXI.
His charitable hope* and their eternal repose.
LEt memory of gross abuses sleep:
Who ouer-shooteth not in recklesse youth?
Were sins as redd, as reddest scarlet deep,
A penitential Heart preuenteth ruth.
Well-wishing Charity presumes the best:
Nothing impossible to powrefull Truth:
Body to Grave; and Soul to Heaven addressed,
Leave upon Earth, the follies of their youth.
Some Penury bewail: some fear Arrest:
Some Parmaes force: some Spanyardes gold addread:
Some underly the terrible inquest:
Some carry a Ielous: some a climing Head.
We that are dead, released from living woes,
Soundly enjoy a long, and long Repose.
SONNET XXII.
L'enuoy: or an Answer to the Gentleman, that drunk to Chaucer, upon view of
the former Sonnets, and other Cantos, in honor of certain Brave men.
SOme Tales to tell, would I a Chaucer were:
Yet would I not euen-now an Homer be:
Though Spencer me has often Homer termed:
And Monsieur Bodine vowed as much as he.
Envy, and Zoilus, two busy wightes:
No petty shade of Homer can appear,
But he the Devil, and she his Dam display:
And Furies fell annoy sweet Muses cheer.
Nor Martins I, nor Counter-martins squibb:
Enough a do, to clear my simple self:
Momus against Heaven; and Zoilus against Earth,
A Quipp for Gibeline; and whip for Guelph.
Or purge this humor: or woe-worth the State,
That long endures the one, or other mate.
Robertus Grenus, vtriusque Academiae Artium Magister, de Seipso.
ILle Ego, cui risus, rumores, festa, puellae,
Vana libellorum scriptio, vita fuit:
Prodigus vt vidi Ver, AEstatemque furoris,
Autumno, atque Hyemi, cum Cane dico vale.
Ingenij hullam; plumam Artis; fistulam Amandi;
Ecquae non misero plangat auena tono?
Gabriel Harueius, desideratissimae animae Ioannis fratris.
AT Iunioris erat, Seniori pangere carmen
Funebre, ni Fati lex violenta vetet.
Quid frustra exclamem, Frater, fraterrime Frater?
Dulcia cuncta ab^unt: tristia solamanent.
Totus ego Funus, pullato squallidum amictu,
Quamuis caelicolae, flebile dico Vale.
To the right worshipful, my singular good friend, M. Gabriell Haruey, Doctor
of the Laws.
HAruey, the happy above happiest men
I read: that sitting like a Looker-on
Of thisworldes Stage, do note with critique pen
The sharp dislikes of each condition:
And as one careless of suspicion,
Ne fawnest for the favor of the great:
Ne fear foolish reprehension
Of faulty men, which danger to thee threat.
But freely do, of what thee list, entreat,
Like a great Lord of peerless liberty:
Lifting the Good up to high Honors seat,
And the Evil damning cuermore to die.
For Life, and Death is in thy doomefull writing:
So thy renown lives ever by endighting.
Dublin: this xviij. of July: 1586. Your devoted friend, during life, Edmund
Spencer.

FINIS.

