THE HOLY CHOICE. A SERMON PREACHED in the Chapel by GVILDHALL, at the
Solemnity of the Election of the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor of LONDON.

BY THO: ADAMS.

LONDON, Printed by Aug. Matthewes, and John Norton. 1625.

THE HOLY CHOICE.
ACTS 1.24. And they prayed, and said, Thou Lord, which know the hearts of
all men, show whether of these two thou have chosen.


THe business of the day is an Election; an election into one of the most
Noble Offices of the Kingdom; the government of this Honorable City, which
(let not envy hear it) has no parallel under the Sun. The business of my
Text is an Election too; an election into the highest office in the Church, to
be an Apostle and Witness of Jesus Christ. If you please to spare the pattern
in four circumstances; as, 1. This office is spiritual, yours temporal. 2.
This place was void by Apostasy or decession, yours is supplied by succession.
3. This election is by Lots, yours is by Suffrages. 4. This choice was but one
of two, it may be your number exceeds: the rest will sure well enough, and the
same God that was in the one, be also present in the other, by the assistance
of his holy spirit.

The argument of the Text is a prayer to God for his direction in their choice:
yea indeed, that he would choose a man for them: including a strong reason of
such a request, because he does know the hearts of all men.

They begin with prayer; this was the usual manner in the Church of God. So
Moses prayed for the choice of his Successor. Number. 27.16.
Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh set a man over the
Congregation. Christ sent not his Apostles to that holy work, John 17.27.
without a prayer; Sanctify them through thy truth. Acts 6.6.
In the choosing of those seven Deacons, they first prayed, and then laid their
hands upon them. Thus were Kings Inaugurated, with Sacrifice and Prayer. It is
not fit, he that is chosen for God, should be chosen without God. But for
this, Samuel himself may be mistaken, and choose seven wrong, before he hit
upon the right. In this; I cannot but commend your religious care; that
businesses of so great a consequence be always sanctified with a blessing.
Those which in a due proportion, must represent God to the world, ought to be
consecrated to that Majesty which they resemble, by public devotions. Every
important action requires Prayer, much more that which concerns a whole city.
When Samuel came to Bethlehem to annoint David, he calls the whole City to the
Sacrifice. Indeed the Family of Iesse was sanctified in a more special manner:
this business was most theirs, and all Isreal's in them. The fear of God
should take full possession of all our hearts, that are this day assembled: but
those with whom God has more to do then with the rest, should be more holy
then the rest.

The choice of your Wardens and Masters in your several Companies has a
solemn form; and it is the honor of your greatest Feasts, that the first
dish is a Sermon. Charity forbid, that any should think, you admit such a
Custom, rather for conuenience then devotion; as if Preaching were but a
necessary complement to a Solemnity, as Wine and Music. I am persuaded
better things of you: but if there should be any such perverse spirits, that
like the Governor of a people called Aequi, when the Romans came to him, Iussit
eos ad quercum dicere, bade them speak to the Oak, for he had other business:
but they replied, Et haec sacrata quercus audiat foedus a vobis violatum; let
this Oak bear witness, that you have broke the league which you have
couenanted. So when we come to preach to your souls, if you should secretly
bid us speak to the walls; lo even the very walls will be witnesses against
you at the last day. Though Saul be King over Samuel, yet Samuel must teach
Saul how to be King. We may instruct, though we may not rule; yea, we must
instruct them that shall rule. Therefore as we obey your call in coming to
speak, so do you obey Gods command in vouchsafing to hear. Let us apply our
selves to him with devotion, and then he will be graciously present at our
Election.

This Prayer respects two things, Quem, the person whom they entreat. Quid, the
matter for which they entreat


The Person is described by His Omnipotence; Lord. Omniscience, That know
the hearts of men.


Omnipotence; Lord. We acknowledge thy right, thou art fit to be thine own
chuser. Lord, there be many on earth called Lords; but those are Lords of
earth, and those Lords are earth, and those Lords must return to earth. This
Lord is Almighty; raising out of the dust to the honor of Princes, and laying
the honor of Princes in the dust. Lord, of what? nay, not qualified; not Lord
of such a County, Barony, Seigniorie; nor Lord by virtue of Office and
Deputation: but in abstracte, most absolute: His Lordship is universal: Lord
of heaven, the owner of those glorious mansions: Lord of earth, disposer of all
Kingdoms and Principalities: Lord of hell, to lock up the old Dragon and his
crew in the bottomless pit: Lord of Death, to unlock the graves: he keeps
the Key, that shall let all bodies out of their earthy prisons. A potent Lord;
whither shall we go to get out of his Dominion? Psalm. 139.7. etc
To heaven? there we cannot miss him: To hell? there we cannot be without
him: In air, earth, or sea; in light or darkness, we are sure to find him.
Whither then, except to Purgatory? That Terra incognita is not mentioned in his
Lordship: the Pope may keep the key of that himself. But for the rest, he is
too saucy; exalting his universal Lordship, and hedging in the whole Christian
world for his Diocese. Stretching his arm to heaven, in rubricking what
Saints he list: to hell, in freeing what prisoners he list: on earth, in
setting up, or pulling down what Kings he list: but that some have (...)
short his busy fingers.

To the Lord of all they commend the choice of his own servants. Every mortal
Lord has this power in his own Family: how much more that Lord, which makes
Lords? who is so fit to choose, as he that can choose the fit? Who so fit to
choose, as he that can make those fit whom he does choose? It is He alone that
can give power and grace to the elected, therefore not to be left out in the
election. How can the Apostle preach, or the Magistrate govern, without him;
when none of us all can move but in him? It is happy, when we do remit all
doubts to his decision, and resign our selves to his disposition. We must not
be our own Caruers, but let Gods choice be ours. When we know his pleasure,
let us show our obedience. And for you, upon whom this Election falls, remember
how you are bound to honor that Lord of heaven, that has ordained such honor
for you upon earth: that so in all things we may glorify his blessed Name.

Omniscience: it is Gods peculiar, to be the searcher of the heart. The heart
of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked; who can know it?
Iere. 17.9.10.
Who? Ego Dominus, I the Lord search the heart. He has made no window into
it, for man or Angel, to look in: only it has a door, and he keeps the key
himself.

But why the Heart? Here was an Apostle to be chosen: now wisdom, learning,
eloquence, memory, might seem to be more necessary qualities, then the
Heart. No, they are all nothing to an honest Heart. I deny not, but Learning
to divide the Word, Elocution to pronounce it, Wisdom to discern the truth,
Boldness to deliver it, be all parts requireable in a Preacher. But as if all
these were scarce worth mention in respect of the Heart; they say not, Thou
that know which of them has the subtiler wit, or abler memory; but which
has the truer heart: not which is the greater Scholar, but which is the better
man; Thou that know the Heart.

Samuel being sent to annoint a son of Iesse, when Eliab, the eldest came
forth, a man of a goodly presence, fit for his person to succeed Saul; he
thinks with himself, This choice is soon made, sure this is the head upon
which I must spend my holy Oil. The privilege of Nature and of Stature, his
primogeniture and proportion gives it him; This is he. But even the holiest
Prophet, when he speaks without God, runs into error. Signs and
apparances are the guides of our eyes; and these are seldom without a true
falsehood, or an uncertain truth. Saul had a goodly person, but a bad heart:
he was higher then all, many were better then he. It is not hard for the best
Judgment to err in the shape. Philoxemenes, a magnanimous and valiant
Soldier, being invited to Magyas his house to dinner, came in due season, but
found not his Host at home. A servant seeing one so plain in clothes, and
somewhat deformed in body, thought him some sorry fellow, and set him to
cleave wood. Whereat Magyas (being returned) wondering, he received from him
this answer; Expendo paenas deformitatis meae; I pay for my vnhandsomnesse.
All is not valor, that looks big, and goes brave. He that judges by the
inside, checked Samuel for his misconceit; 1 Samuel 16.7.
Look not on his Countenance or Stature, for I have refused him: for the Lord
sees not as man sees. David's countenance was ingenuous and beautiful, but
had it promised so much as Eliabs or Abinadabs, he had not been left in the
field, while his Brethren sat at the table. Iesse could find nothing in David
worthy the competition of honor with his brethren: God could find something
to prefer him before them all. His father thought him fit to keep sheep,
thought his Brethren fit to rule men. God thinks him fit to rule, and his
Brethren to serve; and by his own immediate choice destines him to the Throne.
Here was all the difference; Samuel and Iesse went by the outside, God by the
inside: they saw the composition of the body, he the disposition of the mind.
Israel desires a King of God, and that King was chosen by the Head: God will
choose a King for Israel, and that King is chosen by the Heart. If in our choice
for God, or for our selves, we altogether follow the eye, and suffer our
thoughts to be guided by outward respects, we shall be deceived.

Thou that know the estates of men, who is rich, and fit to support a high
place; and who so poor that the place must support him? I hear some call
Wealth, Substance; but certainly at best, it is but a mere circumstance. It is
like the Planet Mercury; if it be joined with a good Heart, it is useful; if
with a bad and corrupt one, dangerous. But howsoever at the Beam of the
Sanctuary, money makes not the man, yet it often adds some metal to the man;
makes his Justice the bolder, and in less hazard of being vitiated. But
pauperis sapientia plus valet quam diuitis abundantia. Eccles. 9.13.
If the poor man have Wisdom to deliver the City, he is worthy to govern
the City. I yield, that something is due to the State of Authority; Ad
populum Phaleras: So Agrippa came to the Tribunal with great pomp and
attendance. This is requisite to keep awe in the people, that the Magistracy
be not exposed to contempt. But Magistratus, non vestitus, indicat virum: Wise
government, not rich garment, shows an able man. It was not riches, that they
regarded.

Thou that know the Birth or Blood of men? I know, it is a reverend thing to
see an ancient Castle or Palace not in decay; or a fair Tree, sound and
perfect timber. But as foul Birds build their nests in an old forsaken house,
and doated trees are good for nothing but the fire; so the decay of Virtue is
the ruin of Nobility. To speak morally, Active worth is better then Passive;
this last we have from our Ancestors, the first from our selves. Let me rather
see one virtue in a man alive, then all the rest in his pedigree dead. Nature
is regular in the brute Creatures; Eagles do not produce crauens; and it was
a monstrous fable, that Nicippus his Ewe should yeane a Lion. But in man she
fails, and may bring forth the like proportion, not the like disposition.
Children do often resemble their Parents in face and features, not in heart
and qualities. It is the earthly part that follows the seed; wisdom, valor,
virtue, are of another beginning. Honor sits best upon the back of merit: I
had rather be good without Honor, then Honorable without goodness. Cottages
have yielded this as well as Palaces. Agathocles was the son of a Potter,
Bion of an infamous Curtisan. In holy Writ, Gideon was a poor Thrasher, David
a Shepherd; yet both mighty men of valor, both chosen to rule, both special
Saviors of their Country. Far be it from us to condemn all honor of the
first head, when noble deseruings have raised it; though before it could show
nothing but a White Shield. Indeed, it is not the Birth, but the new Birth,
that makes men truly Noble.

Thou that know the wisdom and policy of men? Certainly, this is
requisite to a man of place; without which he is a blind Polyphemus, a strong
arm without an eye. But a man may be wise for himself, not for God, not for
the public good. An Ante is a wise creature for it self, but a shrewd thing
in a Garden. Magistrates, that are great lovers of themselves, are seldom true
lovers of their Country. All their actions be motions, that have recourse to
one Center, that is, themselves. A cunning head without an honest heart, is but
like him that can pack the Cards, yet when he has done, cannot play the
Game, or like a house with many convenient Stairs, Entries, and other
passages, but never a fair room; all the inwards be sluttish and offensive.
It is not then, Thou that know the Wealth, or the Birth, or the Head, but
the Heart; as if in an Election, that were the maine; it is all if the rest be
admitted on the By.

Here then we have three remarkable observations. 1. What kind of Hearts God
will not choose, and we may guess at them. 2. What Hearts he will choose, and
himself describes them. 3. Why he will choose men especially by the Heart.

First what kind of Hearts he will not choose; and of these (among many) I will
mention but three.

1. Cor diuisum, a distracted Heart; part whereof is dedicated to the Lord, and
part to the world. But he that made all, will not be contented with a piece.
Aut Caesar, aut nihil. The service of two Masters, in the obedience of their
contrary commands, is incompetible, sensu composito. Indeed Zacheus did first
serve the world, and not Christ; afterward Christ, and not the world; but never
the world and Christ together. Many divisions followed sin. 1. It divided the
heart from God; Esai. 59.2.
Your sins have soperated between you and your God. 2. It divided heart from
heart. God by Marriage made one of two, sin does often by preuarication make
two of one. It divided the tongue from the heart. So Cain answered God, when
he questioned him about Abel; Am I my Brothers keeper? As if he would say,
Go look. 4. It divided tongue from tongue, at the building of Babell; that
when one called for Brick, his fellow brings him mortar: and when he spoke of
coming down, the other falls a remoouing the ladder. 5. It divided the heart
from it self; They spoke with a double heart. The original is, Psalm. 12.2.
A heart and a heart: one for the Church, another for the Change: one for
Sundays, another for working days: one for the King, an other for the Pope. A
man without a heart, is a wonder: but a man with two hearts, is a monster. It
is said of Judas, There were many hearts in one man: and we read of the
Saints, There was one heart in many men. Dabo illis cor vnum, Acts 4.32.
a special blessing.

Now this division of heart is intolerable in a Magistrate; when he plyes his
own cause under the pretense of another; and cares not who lose, so he be a
gayner. Saint Jerome calls this Cor male locatum; for many have hearts, but
not in their right places. Cor habet in ventre gulosus, lasciuus in libidine,
cupidus in lucris. Naturally, if the heart be removed from the proper sear,
it instantly dies. The eye vnnested from the head, cannot see: the foot
sundered from the body, cannot go: so spiritually, let the heart be vncentred
from Christ, it is dead. Thus the Coward is said to have his heart at his
heel, the timorous has his heart at his mouth, the envious has his heart in
his eyes, the Prodigal has his heart in his hand, the fool has his heart in
his tongue, the covetous locks it up in his chest. He that knows the hearts of
all men, will not choose a divided or misplaced heart.

2. Cor lapideum, a hard or stony heart. This is Ingratum ad beneficia, infidum
ad consilia, inverecundum ad turpia, inhumanum ad bona, temerarium ad omnia. A
Rock, which all the Floods of that infinite Sea of Gods mercies and Judgments
cannot soften. A Stitthy, that is still the harder for beating. It has all the
properties of a stone: it is as cold as a stone, as heavy as a stone, as hard
as a stone, as senseless as a stone. No persuasions can heat it, no
prohibitions can stay it, no instructions can teach it, no compassions can
mollify it. Were it of iron, it might be wrought: were it of lead, it might
be molten, and cast into some better form: were it of earth, it might be
tempered to another fashion: but being stone, nothing remains but that it be
broken. What was Pharaohs greatest plague? was it the murraine of Beasts? was
it the plague of Boyles? was it the destruction of the Fruits? was it the
turning of their Rivers into Blood? was it the striking of their First borne
with death? No, though all these plagues were grievous, yet one was more
grievous then all; Cor durum, his hard heart. He that knows all hearts,
knows how ill this would be in a Magistrate: a heart, which no cries of
Orphans, no tears of Widows, no mourning of the oppressed, can melt into
pity. From such a Heart good Lord deliver us.

3. Cor eupidum, a covetous heart; the desires whereof are never filled. A
handful of corn put to the whole heap, increases it; yea, add water to the
Sea, it has so much the more: but he that loves Silver, Eccles 5.10.
shall never be satisfied with Silver. One desire may be filled, but another
comes. Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia creseit. Natural desires are
finite, as thirst is satisfied with drink, and hunger with meat. But
vnnatuall desires be infinite; as it fares with the body in burning Fevers;
Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae: So it is in the covetous heart, Vt
cum posideat plurimae, plura petaet. Grace can never fill the purse, nor wealth
the heart.

This vice is in all men iniquity, but in a Magistrate Blasphemy: the root
of all evil in every man, the rot of all goodness in a great Man. It leaves
them, like those Idols in the Psalm; neither eyes to see, nor ears to hear;
but only hands to handle. Such men will transgress for handfulls of barley,
and morsells of bread; and a very dram of profit put into the Scole of
Justice, turns it to the wrong side. There is not among all the charms of
Hell, a more damnable spell to inchant a Magistrate, then the love of Money.
This turns Judgment into Wormwood, or at least into vinegar: for if
Injustice do not make it bitter as Wormwood, yet shifts and delays will make
it sour as vinegar. O how sordid and execrable should bribes be to them, and
stink worse in their nostrils then Vespasians tribute of urine! Let them not
only bind their own hands, and the hands of their servants, that may take;
but even bind the hands of them that would offer. He that uses Integrity,
does the former: but he that constantly professes Integrity, does the
latter. It is not enough to avoid the fault, but even the suspicion: It is
some discredit to the Judge, when a Clyent with his bribe comes to be denied:
for if his usual carriage had given him no hope of speeding, he would not
offer. A Servant, that is a favorite or inward, gives suspicion of corruption,
and is commonly thought but a by-way; some posterne or back-dore for a gift to
come in, when the broad fore-gates are shut against it. This makes many aspire
to Offices and great places, not to do good, but to get goods; as some love to
be stirring the fire, if it be but to warm their own fingers. Whatsoever
affairs pass through their hands, they crook them all to their own ends;
and care not what becomes of the public good, so they may advance their own
private: and would set their neighbors house on fire, and it were but to roast
their own eggs. Let them banish Covetousness, with as great a hatred as
Amnon did Thamar; first thrust it out of their hearts, then shut and lock the
door after it: for the covetous heart is none of them that God chooses.

Next let us see what kind of hearts God will choose; and they be furnished
with these virtues fit for a Magistrate.

1. There is Cor sapiens, a wise heart; and this was Salomons suite; An
understanding heart. 1 Kings 3.9.
He saw, he had power enough, but not wisdom enough; and that Royalty
without wisdom, was no better then an eminent dishonor; a very Calfe made of
golden Eare-rings. There is no Trade of life, but a peculiar wisdom belongs
to it; without which all is tedious and unprofitable: how much more to the
highest and busiest vocation, the government of men? An ignorant ruler is like
a blind Pilot; who shall save the vessel from ruin?

2. Cor patiens; a meek heart: what is it to difcerne the cause, and not to
be patient of the proceedings? The first Governor that God set over his
Israel, was Moses; a man of the meekest spirit upon earth. How is he fit to
govern others, that has not learned to govern himself? He that cannot rule
a Boat on the river, is not to be trusted with steering a Vessel on the
Ocean. Nor yet must this patience degenerate into cowardlinesse: Moses that was
so meek in his own cause, in Gods cause was as resolute. So there is also

3. Cor magnanimum, a heart of fortitude and courage. The rulers and squares
that regulate others, are not made of lead or soft wood, such as will bend or
bow. The principal Columns of a house, had need be heart of Oak. A timorous
and flexible Magistrate is not fit for these corrupt times. If either
threatenings can terrify him, or favor melt him, or persuasions swerue him
from Justice, he shall not want temptations. The Brain that must dispell the
fumes, ascending from a corrupt liver, stomach, or spleen, had need be of a
strong constitution. The courageous spirit that resolves to do the will of
heaven, what malignant powers soever would cross it on earth, is the heart
that God chooses.

4. Lastly, there is Cor honestum, an honest heart. Without this, courage will
prove but legal Injustice, policy but mere subtlety, and ability but the
Devils Anuile to forge mischiefs. Private men have many curbes; but men in
authority, if they fear not God, have nothing else to fear. If he be a
simple Dastard, he fears all men: if a headstrong commander, he fears no
man; like that unjust Judge, that feared neither God nor Man. Luke 18.2.
This is the ground of all fidelity to King and Country, Religion. Such was
Constantines Maxim; He cannot be faithful to me, that is unfaithful to
God. As this honorable place of the Kings Lieutena^t-ship has a Sword bearer,
so the Magistrate himself is the Lords Sword Bearer, Romans 13.4.
says Saint Paul. And as he may never draw this Sword in his private
quarrel, so he must not let it be sheathed when Gods cause calls for it. It
is lenity and conniuence that has invited contempt to great places. Did
Justice carry a seuerer hand, they durst not traduce their Rulers in Songs and
Satyrs, the burden whereof will be their own shame. Magistrates are our
civil Fathers: and what deserve they but the curse of Cham, that lay open the
nakedness of their Fathers? When Alexander had conquered Darius, and casually
found his slain body lying naked, he threw his own coat over him, saying, I
will cover the destiny of a King. It is God alone that casts contempt upon
Princes; which that he may not do, let them preserve Cor mundum, a clean
heart, not conscious of ill demerits.

Such a one sits on the Iudgement-Seat, as one that never forgets that he must
appear before the Iudgement-Seate of Christ. So he executes Justice, as
never losing the sense of Mercy: so he shows Mercy, as not offering
violence to Justice. He can at once, punish the offense, and pity the
offender. He remembers his oath, and fears to violate it: to an enemy he is
not cruel, to a friend he will not be partial. And if ever he have but
once cut the skirt of Justice, as David the lap of Saul's garment, his Heart
smites him for it. He minds no other clock on the Bench, but that of his own
Conscience. He will not offend the Just, nor afford a good look to varlets:
nor yet does he so disregard their persons, as to wrong their causes. He will
maintain Piety, but not neglect Equity. In Court, he looks not before him
on the person, nor about him on the beholders, nor behind him for bribes; nay,
he will not touch them in his Closset or Chamber, lest the timber and stones
in the wall should witness against him. So he helps the Church, that the
Commonwealth be no loser: so he looks to the Commonwealth, that the Church
may not be wronged. The lewd fear him, the good praise him, the poor bless
him; he has been a Father to Orphans, a Husband to distressed Widows. Many
prayers are laid up for him in Heaven; and when he dies, they with the
assistance of Angels, shall bear him up to blessedness.

Lastly, let us see why God will choose men by the heart. I deny not, but
wisdom and courage, moderation and patience, are all requisite concurrences:
but the Heart is the Primum Mobile, that sets all the wheels a going, and
improoues them to the right end. When God begins to make a man good, he begins
at the heart: as Nature in forming, so God in reforming, begins there. As the
eye is the first that begins to die, and the last that begins to live: so the
heart is the first that lives, and the last that dies. It is said of the
Spider, that in the morning, before she seeks out for her prey, she mends
her broken web; and in doing that, she always begins in the midst. Before
we pursue the profits and baits of this world, let us first amend our life;
and when we undertake this, let us be sure to begin at the heart. The Heart
is the Fort or Citadell in this little I Will of man; let us fortify that, or all
will be lost. And as naturally, the heart is first in being, so here the Will
(which is meant by the Heart) is chief in commanding. The Centurions servants
did not more carefully obey him, when he said to one Go, and he goes, Math.
8.9.
to another Come, and he comes, to a third, Do this, and he does it: then
all the members observe the Heart; if it say to the eye, See, it sees: to the
ear, Hear, it hearkeneth: to the tongue, Speak, it speaks: to the foot,
Walk, it walks: to the hand, Work, it works. If the Heart lead the way to
God, not a member of the body, not a faculty of the soul, will stay behind.
As when the Sun arises in the morning, Birds rise from their nestes, Beasts
from their dens, and Men from their beds. They all say to the Heart, as the
Israelites did to Ioshuah; All that thou command us, Josh. 1.16.
we will do: and whither soever thou sendest us, we will go: only the Lord
be with thee. Therefore the penitent Publican smote his heart, Luke 18.13.
as if he would call up that, to call up all the rest. It cannot command and
go without.

No part of man can sin without the heart, the heart can sin without all the
rest. The Wolf goes to the flock, purposing to devour a Lamb, and is
prevented by the vigilancie of the Shepherd; yet Lupus exit, Lupus regreditur;
he went forth a Wolf, and comes home a Wolf. The heart intends a sin,
which is never brought into action; yet it sins in that very intention. The
hand cannot offend without the heart, the heart can offend without the hand.
The heart is like a Mill: if the wind or water be violent, the Mill will go
whether the Miller will or not; yet he may choose what kind of grain it shall
grind, wheat or darnell. If the affections be strong and passionate, the heart
will be working: yet the Christian by grace, may keep out lusts, and supply
it with good thoughts.

The Heart is Gods peculiar; the thing he especially cares for: My son, give
me thy heart: and good reason, for I gave my own Sons heart to death for it
Non minus tuum, quia meum; It is not less thine, for being mine: yea, it
cannot be thine comfortably, unless it be mine perfectly. God requires it
principally, but not only: give him that, and all the rest will follow. He
that gives me fire, needs not be requested for light and heat; for they are
inseparable. Non corticis, sed cordis Deus. Ambr.
God does not regard the rind of the lips, but the root of the heart. It was
the Oracles answer, to him that would be instructed which was the best
Sacrifice; Da medium Lunae, Solemn simul, and canis iram: which three characters
make Cor, the Heart. Man's Affection is Gods Hall: man's Memory, his Library:
man's Intellect, his Privy Chamber; but his Closset, Sacrary, or Chapel, is
the Heart. So Saint Augustine glosseth the Pater noster; Quies in coelis, which
art in heaven, that is, in a heavenly Heart.

All outward works an hypocrite may do, only he fails in the Heart: and
because he fails there, he is lost every where. Let the flesh look never so
fair, the good Cater will not buy it, if the liver be spak'd. Who will put
that timber into the building of his house, which is rotten at the heart? Man
judges the heart by the works, God judges the works by the heart. All other
powers of man may be suspended from doing their offices, but only the Will,
that is the Heart. Therefore God will excuse all necessary defects, but only
of the Heart. The blind man cannot serve God with his eyes, he is excused:
the deaf cannot serve God with his ears, he is excused: the dumb cannot
serve God with his tongue, he is excused: the creeple cannot serve God with
his feet, he is excused. But no man is excused for not serving God with his
Heart. Deus non respicit quantum homo valet, sed quantum velit. Saint
Chrysostom seemed to be angry with the Apostle, for saying, Math. 19.27.
Behold, we have left all, and followed thee. What have you left? an angle, a
couple of broken nets, and a weather beaten Fish-boat; a fair deal to
speak of. But at last he corrects himself, I cry you mercy, Saint Peter:
you have forsaken all indeed: for he truly leaves all, that leaves Quod vel
capit mundus, vel cupit: that takes his Heart from the world, and gives it to
Christ.

All other faculties of man apprehend their objects, when they are brought home
to them; only the Will, the Heart goes home to the object. Color must come to
the eye, before it can see it: sound to the ear, before it can hear it: the
object to be apprehended is brought home to the understanding, and past things
are recollected to the memory; before either can do her office. But the heart
goes home to the object. Vbi thesaurus, ibi cor. Not where the heart is, there
will be the treasure: but where the treasure is, there will be the heart.

Blessed are the pure in heart, Math. 5.8.
for they shall see God. Of all, the pure heart is beholding to God, and shall
one day behold God. Therefore Dadid prays, Psalm. 51.10.
Cor mundum crea in me, Deus: Create in me a clean heart, O God. The Lord
rested from the works of his Creation the seventh day; but so dearly he
loves clean hearts, that he restes from creating them no day. As Iehu said to
Iehonadab, Est tibi cor rectum, 2 King. 10.15
Is thy heart right? Then give me thy hand, come up into my chariot. So this
is Gods question, Is thy heart upright? Then give me thy hand, ascend my
triumphant Chariot, the everlasting glory of heaven.

To conclude; because there is such difference of hearts, and such need of a
good one; they put it to Him that knows them all, and knows which is best of
all. For howsoever Nature knows no difference; nor is there any Quorum
praecordia Titan De meliore luto finxit: yet in regard of grace, the sanctified
heart is of purer metal then common ones. A little living stone in Gods
building, is worth a whole Quarrey of the world. One honest heart is better
then a thousand other: the richest Mine, and the coursest mould, have not such
a disproportion of value. Man often fails in his Election, God cannot err.
The choice here was extraordinary, by lots: yours is ordinary by Suffrages;
Gods hand is in both.

Great is the benefit of good Magistrates: that we may sit under our own
Vines, go in and out in peace, eat our bread in saftie, and (which is above
all) lead our lives in honest liberty: for all this we are beholding, under
God to the Magistrate, first the Supreme, then the subordinate. They are Trees,
under whose branches the people build and sing, and bring up their young ones
in religious nourture. That Silence in heaven about half an hour, Revel. 8.
when the golden vialls were filled with sweet odours, and the prayers of the
Saints ascended as pillars of smoke and Incense, is referred by some, to the
peace of the Church under Constantine. It is the King of Mexico's Oath, when
he takes his Crown; Iustitiam se administraturum, effecturum vt Sol cursum
teneat, Nubes pluant, Rivi current, terra producat fructus; that he will
minister Justice, he will make the Sun hold his course, the Clouds to
rain, the Rivers to run, and the Earth to fructify. The meaning is, that
the upright and diligent administration of Justice, will bring all these
blessings of God upon a Country.

If we compare this City with many in foreign parts, how joyfully may we
admire our own happiness! Those murders and massacres, rapes and
constuprations, and other mischiefs, that be there as common as nights, be
rare with us. I will not say that all our people are better then theirs, I dare
say, our Government is better then theirs. Merchants make higher use, and are
more glad of calm Seas, then common passengers. So should Christians more
rejoice in peace, then can the heathen: because they know how to improoue it to
richer ends, the glory of God, and salvation of their own souls. Proceed ye
grave and honorable Senators, in your former approved courses, to the
suppressing of vice and disorders, and to the maintenance of Truth and Peace
among us. It is none of the least renownes of this famous City, the Wisdom
and Equity of the Governors. To repeat the worthy acts done by the Lords
Matters of London, were fitter for a Chronicle; they are too large for a Sermon.

But it is high time to bless you with a Dismission, and to dismiss you with
a Blessing. That Almighty God, that knows the hearts of all, sanctify your
hearts to govern, and ours to obey; that we all seeking to do good one to
another, He may do good unto us all. To this blessed and eternal God, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all glory and praise for ever. Amen.


