MY freeborn Muse no Patronage does beg,
Nor does she seek to temper hand and leg
To please some Great-one: what she here does write,
Not flattry but affection does indite.
W. H.

portrait of King James I IACOBVS DEI GRATIA MAGNA BRITANNIAE FRANCIAE ET
HIBERNIAE REX etc:
Cernere magnanimum REGIS caput osque requiris.
Magnanimum REGIS cernere pictus amas!
Tale caput simul os et pectus tale ministras
Ipse IACOBE, Tibi REX gravis, amplus opas.


THE PLVRISIE OF SORROVV, LET BLOOD IN THE EYE-VEINE: OR, The Muses tears for
the Death of our late Sovereign, JAMES King of England, etc.

By WILL. HODOSON Mag: in Art: Cantab.

LONDON, (...), and are to be sold at the and in Paul's Churchyard. 1^^5.

deathbed scene (...)

Thanks to the Chemist

(...)

(...)



THE PLVRISIE OF SORROVV, LET BLOOD IN THE EYE-VAINE: OR, The Muses tears for
the death of our late Sovereign JAMES, etc.
Love makes a Poet: and the sweetest Strain
Falls like the Dew from a disclouded Brain.
Upon the two-topt Mountain none does sing,
But whom the Paphian Dame does thither bring.
How many a Lad touched but with Cupids Fires,
Mounted above his wonted thoughts, aspires
In a Hand-Language (complementall French)
To court and sport, and dally with his Wench?
Has Love this Power? and cannot Sorrow lend
A voice unto her Sighs? cannot She send
Abroad her Cares in aerie Garments dressed?
And speak the Thoughts that house within her breast.
No: though her ears be open, her eyes do see;
Words to interpret Tears still wanting be.
Plebeian-Greifes they be, that make their tongues
Ambassadors; while Ingentes stupent.
Great-Ones!
When pious Princes die, when Great-men fall
As fast as Fruit in Autumn; when the tall
Cedars of kingdoms shaken are by death;
When the too-enuious Fates do stop the Breath
Of Majesty: how can our I Will but flow,
And circled be with brinish Waves of Woo?
As when the The Master Be.
pretty little Master dies,
That reigns as Sovereign over the Hony-Flies,
The Subjects from the waxen Tents do bear
His tender Corpse imbalm'd in many a Tear:
And when at Hibla (Flora's choice and prime
Garden of Pleasure) in a Bed of thime
They do intomb him; from their watery Eyes
They drop down Tears, and buzz forth Elegies:
Thus are the Sons of Europes chiefest Queen
(Peace-blessed Albions Children) to be seen.
One with a Ground-fixt look does mask his face;
Another, with a solemne-funerall Pace,
Walks to his Kings deceased-royall vrne
And melts to Tears, spying his Marble mourn;
He through the Air does seek to spread his grief,
And weeps his Epicedium in a Breife,
But passage is denied to's funeral song,
Througth' corrall Gates which do iniayle the tongue;
One which has slept upon the Laureat Hill,
And many an Heroes with his nimble quill
Has canonized already, now does think
To lymne his muses saddest Thought with ink,
But his Lamp-smelling Labor's all in vain,
For what Love dictates, grief blot's out again;
When such a black and kingdome-couering Hand,
Like an Egyptian Cloud, orespreads a Land;
When kings are lodged in clay upon their Hearse,
Each Poetaster blubburs forth a verse:
And as the loss is Epidemicall
So should the Mourners be in general,
From the rich Purple-clad, to the meanest Swayne,
Whom but a coat of thatch does house from rain.
Me thinks each river betwixt Rhene and Thames
Meets to condole the death of Royal JAMES;
And tenant streamlings from their humid caves
Are summoned to attend their Lordly waves:
While that the Trident-bearers scaly Train
Down from their pearly Eye-globes tears do rain.
How could I comment many tedious hours
Upon those Texts, those black and dismal showers,
Which from the Cristall casements often do spin,
While Vesta opes her lap to lodge them in.
My thoughts thus gloss on it: Earth and heaven bears
Their parts both in our sorrows and our tears.
Denmark House.
As often as I walk unto * that place,
O how I gaze my Caesar in that face!
O how my ravished soul does reverence
In that same curious work Art's Excellence!
Wonder it is such colors should grace Death,
Pity it is such Beauty should want breath.
And here our humble Muse from Court departs
Unto her Cambridge, the rich Mine of Arts:
And from the Palace unto Pallas bowers
Where springs a lasting April of choice flowers.
When first this learning-Louer came to see
His Gowned Subjects in his Royalty;
(Whose Presence was more glorious to behold,
Than Jove, descending in a Shower of Gold
To Danae,) we, as in open Book,
Might read contentment written in his Look.
So dear our Nurse was to him, that is Desire,
Like to a glasse-house, kept continual Fire
Of love to her, that never age could show
Such an Arts-Maister that did grace her so.
If in his life such Honor he Thee gave,
Let him not pass unto the silent Grave
Without a Monument, upon his Tomb
Fix thou this Epitaph (which from the doom
Of Envy and Oblivion shall be free
And still survive until there cease to be
Sand in the Glass of Time).
PEace on the Sabbath.
Day of Rest to Rest did bring
This, (...).
great Kings, Scholar; and the scholars King.
On the learned and Pious works of King JAMES. Authorem commendat opus.
IF books the children of the Brain be named,
Whose paper-tongues may speak their fathers worth;
Then by no Grecian Bard needs He be famed,
But his own Issue may his praise set forth:
Whose lofty lines have in a curious loome
To his own glory reared an honored tomb.
Yet little Osiars gaze on mighty Woods,
Yet little shrubs sit at the Cedars root,
Yet little Caskets view our richest goods,
Yet little valleys lie atth' Mountains foot.
Then our earth-groueling Muse may well aspire
To read his learned Works, and so admire.
ILLVSTRISSIMO REGI FAELIX FAVSTVMQVE DIADEMA, PRECATVR (...).
GReat King, whose eye speaks common love to all,
In whom our grief has found a burial.
Thou rising Sun of our declining State,
Whose Luster makes thee, England, fortunate:
When as thy Royal Father, Plenus ditrum.
full of Hours,
Yielded to Natures Peace his vital Powers:
Thou the Prime Top-branch of that noble Stem
Were fitly Maturus Regno.
ripened for a Diadem.
Far be it from me dread Soueraign to set forth,
Or in some oily Colors paynt, thy worth:
For what I write, Heaven knows, is all so true
That what seems Flatt, ry, is most true in you.
But most I fear, least that my mudling Muse
(Like an ill Painter that does only use
To Folks of his own Rank to give Delight,
O* draw some rude and vulgar-pleasing sight
With vnskill'd pencill; being never able
To counterfeit ought in Apelles Table)
May wrong her self, while that she dares to sing
In her harsh notes the praises of a king.
Who Will undertake so great a Task, who can;
But a true Poet, but a Buchanan?
Yet where we cannot praise sufficiently,
we will pray; and our united Prayers, on high,
Send up to heau'ns-Starchamber; for to bring
Myriades of blessings on our Royal king.
May lovely Peace her silver Feathers prune
Under thy olive scepter; may she tune
Such Notes, as may be found (among the Peers)
That Harmony, which the wel-ordered Spheres
(If we believe Pythagoras) do keep:
May thy good deeds cast in eternal sleep
Foul-mouthed destruction, and still strike her dumb,
When nigh the Pallace-gates she dare to come:
And (to sum up an lliade in a Shell)
Thy happy reign may future ages tell.
The New Coins.
Gold Fine, 30. s. Amor ciuium Regis Praesidium. 15. s. 10. s. Crown, 20. s.
Florent concordia Regna. 10. s. 15. s. Cultores sui deus protegit. Silver 5. s.
Christo auspice regno. 1. s. 6. d. 2. d. Iustitia thronum firmat. 1. d.

Distichs on the Coins.
Ad mei Coaetaneum, famae spem,
Angliae famam, Serenissimum
Regem Carolum

PArdon, dread Sovereign, that I dare to Print,
And stamp thy praises in a new found Mint:
Nor do I clip, nor counterfeit herein,
If ought's amiss make it a venial sin.
Amor ciuium Regis Praesidium.
Safety attends on Love, this is the Ring
Which weds the Citizens unto the King.
Florent concordia Regna.
COncord's the Iemme, the breath, the every thing;
Which makes our Kingdom flourish, and our King.
Cultores sui Deus Protegit.
HE that glorifies his God in Love,
Shall glorified be, by Him above.
Christo auspice regno.
HE that begins his Reign with Christ on earth,
Shall reign in Heaven at his second birth.
Iustitia Thronum firmat.
THe prop of Thrones is Justice, in her hand
She holds the Ball and Scepter of our Land.
FINIS.

