A DISCOVERSE OF THE GREAT overthrow given by the French King unto the Leaguers
in Poictiers, in February last.

With the names of all such men of account as were slain or taken Prisoners.

Truly translated according to the French Coppie, printed by the Kings Printer
at Tours.

C. B.
SEMPER EADEM printer's device consisting of a phoenix in flames with the motto
Semper eadem and the initials C. B., belonging to Cuthbert Burby, 1592-1607
(McKerrow 297)

LONDON Printed for Cuthbert Burbie, and are to be sold at the middle shop
under Saint Mildreds Church. 1592.

A DISCOVRSE OF all that which happened in Poictiers, of the overthrow of the
Vicont de la Guierche, and all his Army, in February last.
IT was well enough known unto the most part, that the town and Castle of
Guyerche (being a passage over the river of Ceruse) did greatly hinder the
kings friends, and favor his enemies, under the color of the old Lord of the
place, which had obtained of his Majesty in respect of his age, a certain
assurance (having the like of the contrary part, by means of the Vicont his
son, who was chief of Poictiers) to the end he might seem the kings friend,
being indeed altogether a favorer and vpholder of the Spaniards, as his son
was.

And since these troubles it is found that the old Lord would not suffer
passage to be given to the Kings troops, but when the Leaguers had passed by;
he would not (although he did) see them: And so much yet did this contagion
break forth to the harm of many Inhabitants of his Town, who affected the
Vicont, that they which were encountered by the kings troops, (information
being given of their demeanor) they were judged to be of good prize, and
voluntarely paid ransom.

Besides this, the Vicont having intelligence of the sickness of his father, had
seduced many persons to his parttaking, to the end to surprice the place as
soon as occasion might be ministered unto him, but was prevented by the
diligence of Monsieur de Sallerin, chief Governor for his Majesty of the
Town and Castle of Loches. Who having had intelligence of these actions, and
considering likewise the enormitie and danger which this place might be unto
all that Country, and chiefly unto the town of Loches, which was not above
five or six miles distant from them, he judged that it was requisite to
remedy it speedily.

And meaning to ouerslip no time, he sent on the second sunday of this month
of February, the young Prince of Campagnol to surprise the said Town of
Guierche, being assisted with these Captains, Prat, Brunet, Gardellia, de
l'Aage, Beray, Orignac, Cormier, and others of the ordinary followers of the
said Lord of Sallerin, who executed so happily the enterprise, that they took
the said Town on Mondaye, being the third day of February, about seven of the
clock in the morning, by the order and direction which the Lord of Sallerin had
given. In the taking whereof, there was few slain of account, but the Lord de
la Chastiere, who was slain in flight, being chief Commander of the said
Town, and much affectioned unto the Vicont.

This being done, presently the Lord of Campagnoll gave advertisement of this
exploit to the Lord Sallerin Pou, that he might provide for that which might
follow: for that the castle was not yet taken, neither had they wherewith to
force them, and the old Lord of the place had advertised his son the Vicont,
of his mishap, willing him to come to his succors. Which thing gave apparent
testimony of intercourse between the father and the son, and that the show
which the old Lord made, was but to keep his goods, being in his mind and
action altogether enemy to the king.

The Lord of Sallerin understanding of these accidents, and resolving to go
thither in person, as well for that he would not leave his Soldiers and
friends in danger, as also not to leave such a work unfinished, being a thing
of great importance, to the service of the King, and benefit to all the
Country: and having already prepared for that enterprise, there was presently
sent him by Monsieur de Vaure, brother unto Monsieur de Montigici, thirty
light horsemen, and fifty Harquebusiers on horsbacke, being guided by the Lord
of Boys la Vigne, he advertised also Captain Coueselles, Lieutenant to the
Lord of Lessart a Chastillop, to come thither with his Garrison, and the
Captain Houssaye, and Merey, with sixty harguebusies, on horsback.

In the mean time the said Lord of Sallerin sent the Captains S. Anne, S.
Michall, and Chizeaux, being of the regiment of the Lord de Vatau, to the
said Town of Guierche, to serve and aid the said Lord of Campagnoll in these
affairs, and himself used diligence in all other things which he thought
convenient for his purpose.

After he had ordered these things before spoken and rehearsed, he caused two
Culuerins to be prepared in readiness, for to march, as he thought, very
requisite, and sent to Monsieur the Mayor of Tours, praying him to send him
the Captain la Vallade, with threescore harguebusies, for to safeconduct the
two pieces.

And meaning himself to go before, he gave order to receive the said
Captain, Lord Vallade, into Loches, and there to stay until he sent him word
to the contrary, and also to keep the company which he brought, and expect
other forces from him to accompany the said pieces if he had time.

Also, the said Lord sent the same day certain Carts laden with powder, pikes,
shot, and other instruments of war, which might serve for such occasions.

On the next morrow which was Tuesdaye, the said Lord of Sallerin departed from
Loches, with the Lord Bois la Vigne, the Lords; governors of Pretay de
Marernes, Castram la Bigeay, les Moulins, and le Puy Becheron, being all of
them Gentlemen bordering near Loches, and which had the day before vowed to
aid and assiste him: and making in all fifty horse, they came about five of
the clock that evening unto Guierche. Where presently he was certified, that
the Vicont of Guierche was coming thither with two hundred Horsemen, and two
hundred Harguebusiers on horssback, two hundred Spanishe Footmen, and two
hundred Frenchmen, bringing with them one piece of campane ordinance.

Upon which news, the Lord of Sallerin sent to Monsieur d'Abain, Governor
of the high and low Marches, (who was then not far off upon other occasions)
desiring to aid him with his forces, which he presently granted to, and
having the Lord Baron d'Abain his son with him, he went to join in company
with the said Lord Sallerin, in Guierche, with thirty good horse, and an
hundred harguebusiers on horseback, who resolved first to go and see the three
troops of the Regiment of Vatan, which were lodged in the Suburbs, near the
Bridge of Guierche, and to know particularly what want of munition for war
they were in, for their defense, giving them to understand of the resolute
attempt which the night following he meant to make to them of the Castle, by
assaulting of them: Foreseeing that if the Vicont came before he did assault,
it might make the thing more hard unto him.

He also willed the Gentlemen which were within, to deliver up the place,
otherwise he would burn their houses which were near unto Guien, and punish
them rigorously when he had taken the place, whereof he hoped very shortly to
be possessor. To which commandment they in the end consented, for the causes
abouesaid, and yielded the Castle the fifte day of February, three hours
within the evening, which was contrary to the old man's will.

Which Castle the Lord Campagnoll did take possession of with twenty Soldiers
only, which thing fell out happily, for that the Vicont arrived that day
following about three of the clock, with all his troops, meaning indeed to
besiege the Town and Castle, with those which were before besieged.

The Vicont with his forces made an assault unto the Suburbs near adjoining
to the bridge, which was the quarter defended by the three Companies before
named, and forced them to retire, but they recovering the forces, drove him
back again, and forced him to depart, having first had intelligence of the
yielding of the Castle, and resolved to pass the river of the I Will, where he
had a house at commandment, very near the passage.

The day being come, the Lord de Sallerin, with the Lord d'Abain, resolving to
provide for the guard of that place, went with fourscore good horsemen, and
two hundred Harguebusies on horseback, to the intent to do all the honor to
the Vicont, in conducting him to the gates of Poictiers, and to recompense him
(if it might be) by the way, for the great pains he had taken.

Also he followed them even to the Suburbs of the castle of Vieux, being
distaunt from Guierche three leagues, he encountered one of their companies of
Harguebusies, which went to refresh themselves, the which he quickly put to
flight without any great resistance.

And the said Lords, to follow their first resolution, having first discovered
those which did retire. At the last then they pursued them with their light
horsemen, being led by the Lord Baron de Abain, and Bors la Vigne, which sought
all means to know their enemies forces, to take their advantage in the
battle, to which they were so lately bent. But being hindered by the often
skirmiges they had with them, as they followed, and the place where the Vicount
was, unknown unto them, the Lords de Sallerin, and d'Abain, resolved to march
to the right side of the Tower de Oyzay, being a very high place, where they
might best descrie their enemies forces, whereof as yet they were uncertain.

And in the mean time the Lord Preaux, (who as he had heard was his great
friend, and was coming along the River of Vienna, with one hundred and fifty,
or two hundred footmen, and forty horsemen, being as well of the high tower, as
of the garrison) might join with him in the plain near the river by them. The
Lord de Sallerin leaving his company, went to find the L. d'Abain, and Bois la
Vigne, who were gone with 12. or 15. horse, to descrie the order and force of
the enemies, which they did so effectually, as it came to such event as they
looked for, and therefore with all their force marched forth to find out the
L. de Abain, and Preaux; who abode about 100. paces from the^, expecting the
battle, which to begin, they sent 20. horsemen, and 50. hargueb. guided by L.
Sallerin. The L. des Preux advanced forth his footmen, backed with his
caualleri, who went valiantly to assail the infantry of the enemy, lodged by
the enemy for most advantage.

This troop received many canon shot from the castle of the I Will, and the
harguebusiers of the shot of the enemies, and of those which lay in covert, did
execute very brave exploites of arms, the French and Spaniards fighting
valiantly hand to hand: but at last, by the brave resolution of M. de Preux,
the Lords d'Gardeuil, Mesignac, Barredon, de Vaure, la Bruere, and de Cruere,
who with their troops behaved them so valyantlie, that they took the ditches,
gained the mountain and the meadow, and the spaniards half overcome, retired to
their main battle, being pursued very closely. L. Baron d'Abain, and de la
Vigne, having vlerque la Cauallerie, the whole company were put to flight, and
vanquished more by sight of our courage, then by our force, where in the flight
was made a great slaughter of the enemies, who were so lively followed, and
hardly pursued, and seeing the passage on that side of Chauuigni, in the height
of the river, to be kept with the troops of the Lord Abain, and Sallerin, and
that they could not escape the edge of the sword, they cast themselves into the
River, where all that did so, were immediately drowned.

The Vicont himself, hoping of better fortune then the others, had (with many
of the principal Leaguers) put themselves into a great Boat, and assaied to
pass, but the Harguebushers with their shot, made such a bramblement within
their boat, as also, that many of those which were in the water did catch hold
of the boat, thereby to save themselves, so that the strength and weight of
them did oue-turne the boat the vpside down.

A wonderful thing then was it to behold this spectacle, which resembled a
pattern of the deluge, and to hear the horrible cries of men, and horses. The
river being covered with hats, and clokes, and men, and horses, drowned, and
half drowned, which had sunk, and diued up again. Of some their heads
appeared, of others their legs and arms, the most of them armed and booted.

Which dreadful thing does show the just judgment of God upon these
miserable Leaguers, who having made such ruin of good men, received from God
the guerdon of their perjury, and the chastisement which they had merited, and
justly deserved.

The Vicont himself being known, of one of his own friends was taken
prisoner, who took him out of the water, and carried him on a mare unto the
foresaid Chastelleraut.

In this overthrow the sixte of February there were slain and drowned more
then five hundred men. Amongst the which, at the least were fourscore
Gentlemen and Captnes, and by report of the Trumpetter, the pesaunts and women
which came from Poictiers to search the dead, did find, that of eight hundred
men which went from thence, there returned but fifty, the rest being dead, or
taken.

This work of God is admirable, and not to be praised sufficiently, that the
enemies had three for one, and yet we had not one man either slain, or wounded
unto the death: only four or five Soldiers are lightly hurt, and those that
are most dangerously wounded, may be healed in twelve dais, and of ours were
three horse slain.

The night drawing on, and waxing exceeding dark, and the want of Boats was
the cause that they were forced to give over, and could not follow the
victory: on that side the river which we passed before the conflict, so that
the said Lord de Abain and de Sallerin, lodged in the Villages that were near
at hand, and bordering upon Guierche, and the said Lord des Preux returned to
Chattelleraut.

Upon the Friday next following, the said Lord de Preux sent to summon the
castle of the I Will, to which place the Vicount had withdrawn his Cannon, and
the best part of his carriage. Which Castle did immediately yield at the first
summon to captain l'Espinette, and the spoil was sent to Chattelleraut.

On Saturday the eight day of February, in the evening, and on Sundaye
morning, they drew out of the water more then two hundred and fifty drowned
carcasses, and amongst others was the Lord de Bonnes, de Perigueux, Liutenant
to the Vicont, and the Lord de Grandmont his nephewe, de Palustre, Chanboneau,
and diverse others which were not known. And diverse others very sumptuously
apparrelled, and richly armed, which they could not know. Besides, daily
there are found more dead carcases in the said river, as if the spring thereof
should seem unable to be drawn dry, but still to increase.

This overthrow which happened on Thursday, being the sixth day of February,
at four of the clock in the afternoon, or thereaboutes, is one of the most
notablest things that ever happened in those Countries, since these last cruel
wars, which manifests the great mercy of almighty God, in blessing and
preserving the affairs of the most Christian King in these parts: for that
therein was slain, and taken prisoners, the most part of the chief Leaguers
of Poictou, Lymasin, and Perigot.

Whose names, for the better satisfiing of all such as are desirous to be
acquainted with this overthrow, are here set down, as well those which were
slain, as those which were taken prisoners, to the great encouragement of all
the true subjects of that valiant French king: and the dismaying of the sworn
servants of that wicked monster of Rome, and his adherents, whom God at his
good pleasure will overthrow and confound for ever.

THE NAMES OF ALL such as were slain or taken Prisoners. in this Battle.
Slain.
The Vicont of Guyerche. The Lord of Bonne, who was his Lieuetenant in the
government. The Lord of Montaumart, Ensign of the same Company. The Lord of
Bar Sauuagere. The Lord of Ferrandiere of Bournais. The L. Palustre
lieuetenant of the men of Arms of the town. The Lords of Anbus, Brethren. The
Lords of Luuy upon Creuse. The Lord of Bardiere. The Lord Narchais. The L. Puy
de la Barde. The Lord of Mothe Bureau. The Lord of Bouneliere, Lieuetenant to
the Lord of Montagne. The Lord Esplaudian Captain of a Company of
harguebusiers on horseback. Captain Charreu, leader of a Company of fifty
harguebusiers on horseback. Beauuais Captain of one Company of
harguebusiers. Captain Cursay, Captain of the said Vicounts guard. The Lord
Feret, Captain of two hundred Spaniards. The Lord Grandmond, Nephew to Bonnes.
The Lord of Ville Cheze. The Lord of Grand-Meyne, of Angonmois. The Lord of
Estang, brother to Bois Cilles. The Lord Chastillon Souuy. The Lord of Saint
Pardoux. The Lord of Largot. The Lord of Perusse. The Lord of Mougyn. The Lord
of Ardiller. The Lord of Beguaye. Conterie, Master of the voward to the
Duchess of Montpensier. The Lord de Seryer, son to Montinac. The Lord of Fons
Sarmois. The Lord of Michenier. The two Grues of Nyort.
And about one hundred and fifty others Gentlemen and Captains.

THE NAMES OF THOSE that were taken prisoners.
The Lord of Villechize, Lieuetenant of the company of the men of Arms of the
said County. The Lord of Moule, Esquier to the said Vicont. The Lord of
Mere of Angulmois, who had charge of a Regiment, and had the conduct of the
enterprise of Angoulesme against the D of Efrernon. The Lord of Conterie. The
Lord of Fougere. The Lord of Brueil of Ansignie, and the Captain Brueil his
brother, with the said Aungny his son. The Lord of Contour.
Besides, there be many other special men of name, that is not as yet known
where they are become, so as they be surely thought to be drowned.

The Lord of Albiou, Commander of one company of Gentlemen at Arms. The Lord
of Briaudiere. The Lord of Grauouliou. The Lord of Mortaigne son to the Lord
of Ounac. The Lord of Ardiliere. Bonneliere, Lieuetenant to the Lord of
Mortaigne. Captain Chaucarre. Chautagny lieuetenant.
The foresaid Vicounts Father as yet remains in the castle of Guyerche,
until the kings pleasure herein be farther known.

FINIS.

