THE EAGLE AND THE BODY; DESCRIBED IN ONE SERMON PREACHED BEFORE QVEENE
ELIZABETH of precious memory, in Lent. Anno 1601.

By WILLIAM BARLOVV Doctor of Divinity, now Bishop of Lincoln, Newly called
for, and set forth.

JOB. 39. 32. Aquila in arduis ponit nidum suum, vbicunque Cadauer fuerit
statim adest.

LONDON Printed for MATTHEW LAW, and are to be sold at his Shop in Paul's
Churchyard, near unto Saint Austines Gate, at the Sign of the Fox. 1609.



THE EAGLE AND THE BODY.
LVKE 17. 37. He said unto them, Wheresoever the Body is, thither will the
Eagles be gathered together.


WHich words may be handled, either as a Parable IN Scripture, or as a Text OF
Scripture; as it is a Proverb at random applied, the use is manifold and
generally Moral: as it is a text, joined to the Precedents, the doctrine is
comfortable and properly Spiritual. If I intended the first, I might enter
that common place out of Seneca and Solomon, that variety of objects discover
the Diversity of Natures, not only in Beasts led by fancy; as in the same
field the Be sucking the Flower, the Swine turning up the Root, the Bird
knapping the Seed, the Goat cropping the Herb, the Kine plucking the Grass:
To keep the word of this Text, at the same Carcass, the Eagle seizing upon
the whole, the Raven digging at the Eyes, the Glead dragging at the Entrails;
but also in Men ouer-awed by affection, the booty of Profit, or Pleasure, or
Honor alluring Them, as they are severally disposed. So might I, withal,
surview all Places, where the desire of these make the concourse most frequent.
And thus begin with the Court, a full Body, the fatness and marrow whereof,
has fetched many Eagles from all corners; in so much, that Proverb has
begotten Proverb, No fishing to the Sea, No service to the Court: because no
booty so gainefull, no gain so easy, no office so affected, as those of this
Place. Which I speak not out of envy of their desire, but with prayer for a
blessing on the Royal Foundresse, and only to show how it does moralize this
Proverb, That where the BODY is, the EAGLES will RESORT After that, we might
behold the Church in this land; THAT Body sometime plethorical and goodly,
though now (with the Prophet) Esaias 24. 16.
it may truly cry, My leanness, my leanness; so long it has been a Prey to
the Eagles of the Epicene gender, both He Is, and She Is, that it is become (...)
not (...), rather an Anatomy of Bones, then a Body of Substance: a true
speech, but perhaps too bitter, and therefore I leave it, and only present it,
as fulfilling this Adage, That where the BODY is, the EAGLES will FLOCK. And
from thence we might pass, to the Consistories and Courts of both Laws; and
see, how many Eagles have lofted their Ayries for themselves and their young
ones, with the gobbets and morsels plucked and carried from those Bodies; the
Fowls not so greedily preying upon Abraham's divided Genesis 15. 11.
flesh; nor the Flies more busily sucking Eccles. 10. 1
the Apothecaries ointment, then the fatnes of those Bodies (the Gains by
those Pleas) has allured Students and Agents to that profession and practice.
And thus might I go on in this vein of discourse, tartly in the particulars,
and yet pleasingly for the variety; because nothing now a days pleases more,
then that which the Frenchmen call Escriture picquante, Satyricall Inuectiues,
both in Pulpits, and Pamphlets. Nor need I contain my self within the Land,
but might pass the Seas to Rome, the only Body for our malecontented Osprayes
to prey upon, Immunities to warrant sin, Indulgences to remit sin, Jubilees
for liberty, Libels of contumely, Exemptions from loialtie, Pretense of
Conscience, Promises of preferment, Faculties for Treasons and Murders of the
Lords anointed, Facilities to climb heaven, not by Iaakobs ladder (the grace
of Christ) but by merit of Saints, and supererogation of works: that BODY,
these OFFALS have allured many of this NATION, with Noah's Crow, to fly out of
the Ark without any mind of Return at least without any good mind if they
return: which iustifies this Moral of our Savior, Vbi CORPUS, Ibi AQVILAE.
But that sense I leave, and, (which is a Proverb in Philo) I come a Chaldoeo
ad Philosophum, from Vultures to Eagles, from worldlings to Saints, from the
Flesh to the Spirit: and handle it as a Context, depending on the former words:
observing first, in DIXIT, the wisdom and custom of our Savior; who, when
he has preached a doctrine of terror, does presently salve it with a Lenitiue
of comfort: For the Disciples being affrighted with that thundering threat, of
the signs in Heaven, and wars on earth: of Ierusalems ruins, and the
general judgment: and asking what should become of them, in this destruction
of all things at the worlds end, and in this distraction of men's hearts being
at their wits end? He tells them, that while some are at the Mill making
provision for the belly: others in bed at their ease and in security: others
feasting, at their sports and iollitie: others in the field, forraging for
necessity: the affections of his chosen shall rest only upon him; meditating on
his passion, imploring his help, apprehending his mercies, desiring the sight,
and rejoicing in the fruition of his presence: For where the BODY is, thither
will the EAGLES be gathered together. And this is the meaning of our Savior in
these words; which being Four principal, in them we may view, First, the
Booty which is (...), a substantial Body, no imaginary shadow; for Eagles
stoop not to flies, much less to flying shadows; and as Saint Matthew Matt
24. 28.
has it (...) a DEAD Body, for Eagles seize not upon Live men. Secondly,
Eagles not Ravens, the dignity of the Fowls, Birds Royal. Thirdly, (...),
their quality and affection, sharp of sent, and sharp set, espying the prey
a far off, and hasting thereto a maine. Fourthly, Wheresoever, the place
indefinite, which makes the affection infinite; for where there is no certain
place, the eager appetite will search every place. So that the Body is Christ,
and he crucified; the Eagles the Elect, and they sanctified: their flocking,
their affection and that eagerly sharpened; the Place, his Residence and that
unlimited: Of these in their order.

Whereof that I may speak to Gods glory and your instruction, Let us humble
our selves in Prayer etc.

The Question being propounded by a 1. BODY.
learned Deacon to a Reverend Bishop, why, Isidor. Pelusi^t.
in One and the same Chapter our Savior called the word of the Kingdom (the
Gospel preached) by the name of SEED; and Mat. 13. 19.
likewise does in title the children of the kingdom (Gods elect) by the name
also of SEED? It is answered by the same Father, Ver. 38.
briefly and soundly, (...), because the Word effectually received, as it were
by trans-elementation, does change the hearts of men into the nature of it
self; and makes them as holy in affection, as it self is holy by inspiration.
The like question being moved, why our Savior in this place should personally
call himself the BODY, whereas the Church elsewhere is called his Body? an
answer semblable may be truly shaped; it is by reason of that mutual
Coalescence between him and his Elect; they not only being His generation in
whom they live and have their Act. 17. 28.
being, but by spiritual regeneration, being made partakers of the very divine
nature; not 2. Pet. 1. 4.
transitiuely with any diminution in him, (...).
but (...) distributiuely, as the Fire in the forge heateth the iron without
loss to it self (which is the resemblance of S. Basil) Basil.
or as a Scale-ring imprinteth the form upon diverse things, it self remaining
as it was, (which is Philo his comparison) or Philo.
as ten thousand Torches may receive flame from a fountain of fire, and this
no way diminished (which is the Simile by Chrysostom) or as the spirit of
Moses divided between Chrysostom. Number. 11. 16. 17
the seauenty two Elders, himself having never a whit the less, which Origin
Origin.
applies to this purpose; Christ being the very Body and substance of all those
graces and virtues, which in the Saints of God are but accidental qualities:
for in HIM dwells the FVLNES of the Godhead BODILY, and from that FVLNES we
all have received Col. 2. 9. Ioh. 1. 14.
grace for grace. Therefore to this PREY the Elect do fly, and upon this BODY
they feed; both vt corpus carnis, as a Body INCARNATE; and vt Corpus mortis, as
a Body CRVCIFIED; and vt Corpus Gloriae, as in heaven GLORIFIED. From the first
they receive a treble Luc. 10. 22.
virtue. jo. Their Wisdom and Knowledge, for no man knows the Father but
the Son, and HE to whom the Son will reveal him. The great Beau-Clerkes of
Divinity (the Doctors of the Church) by the traditions of antiquity, and the
definitions of Councels, have showed themselves cunning in finding out some
rich and deep veins, and have made both themselves and others very wealthy,
with the Ingots and wedges of this gold, as Plato and Solomon call the
knowledge of arts in all kind: but in THIS Body (that is, in Christ) were the
whole hidden mines, and the heaped treasures themselves of all wisdom and
knowledge. Col. 2. 3.
His enemies confessed it, never man spoke as this man does: And Saint Paul
accounts all Ioh. 7. 46.
his fore-learning and skill (though very accurate) in respect thereof, to be
but loss and doung; and the Oracle from heaven twice, Phil. 3. 8.
First, in the river Jordan, and again on Mat. 3. and. 17.
mount Tab^r inioynes an Audite EVM, as leaving all other, to Hear HIM: For,
if an Angel from Heaven preach any OTHER doctrine Gal. 1. 8.
then HE, Let him be accursed. If some prefer Philosophy, as THAT wisdom to
Clem. Alex.
salvation, we note it for their Heresy. If others match the four Councels
with the Greg. mag.
four Evangelists, we tell them it is Blasphemy. If Rome object Traditions
unwritten, we accuse them of Uncertainty. If any come with Ecce hic, to tell
us that here, or there is Ver. 21. hic.
Christ, we believe him not, but take him to be either larua Christi, a false
Christ, or Mat. 24. 24.
hostis Christi, a mere Antichrist: Secondly, we maintain, that the
multiplied skill of the best humane knowledge, is but a shadow compared to
this BODY; yea the chief divine knowledge to be no other then a shadow
derived from this BODY: And therefore conclude against them all with the
Disciples, Domine ad quem ibimus? Lord Ioh. 6. 68
WHETHER shall we go? THOU have the words of eternal life. And thus the
EAGLES finding in themselves scientiam not sufficientiam (says S. Bernard)
prey upon HIM, 1. Cor. 1. 30.
as he is factus sapientia, made wisdom unto us, and say with Iehosaphat, Cum
ignorauerimus ad te leuamus oculos, when our own skill fails us we have
resort to THEE. 2. From IT they have their true Righteousness; because the
justice which they have by nature, is but iustitia Gentiliu^, not sanctified by
faith; what they have by the law, is iustitia Pharisaeorum, unprofitable,
because Mat. 5. 20.
impossible to be performed* yea, that which they have by grace, is but
iustitia viatorum Phil. 3. 12.
inchoate and imperfect, before it be made up with HIS Obedience imputed; For
of HIM it was said, My righteous servant Esa. 53. 11.
shall justify many. And the precept for that, is, Credit in EVM, Believe on
HIM which Romans 4. 5.
justifies the ungodly.

Where, if the French heretic in Saint Bernard, or the Romanists his Proctors
in Bern. in Epist.
that Plea, shall object, IVSTICIA sit CVIVS est, quid ad te? the
righteousness is Christ's, what is that to thee? answer him with that Father,
Sit etiam CVLPA CVIVS est, quid ad me; the FAVLT was Adams also, what is THAT to
ME? Match them therefore together, traducta culpa, indulta iusticia, as Sin is
mine by propagation, so righteousness is mine by imputation. Peccatum in semine,
iustitia in sanguine; Adam deriueth sin by nature to my condemnation, Christ
bringes life by his obedience to my justification. Yea rather, there is no
match between them; for if by the OFFENSE of one, many be made sinners, much
more by the OBEDIENCE of one shall many be made righteous, says the Apostle:
Romans 5. 19. 1. John 2. 1.
especially if he be THAT One, Jesus the just; Sit efficacior causa, vbi potior
natura; HIS nature was more divine then Adams, HIS power therefore should be
more effectual. For which cause, the Apostle calls it (...) Rom 5. 17.
(...), the SVPER-ABVNDANCE of his grace; and so to IT the Eagles fly, and
hungring after Righteousness, seize upon HIM as he Matthew. 5. 6. Ier. 23. 6.
is Jehovah Iustitia nostra, the Lord OUR righteousness: and say, both with
Saint Bernard, Bern.
de TE Domine suppleo, quod minus habeo in me, that which we want in our
selves, Lord we supply from thee; and with David also, Domine memorabor
iustitiae TVAE SOLIVS, Psalm. 70. 16.
Lord we will make mention of THY righteousness ONLY. Lastly, from it they take
the Sanctity of their lives deportment, for in I^M there was no sin, nor
guile in his Esa. 53. 9. 1. Pet. 2. 22.
mouth, whereas in all other men there is corruption: in the best men there is
defection: yea, even in his Angels, unfaithfulness has been found: the best
men's actions being Job 15. 15.
like Salomons gold-worke, a Lilly upon a 1. Reg. 7. 19.
Pillar, and a Lilly upon a Pillar, rare and few: and therefore Saint Paul
framing patterns to be followed, when he propounds 1. Cor. 11. 1.
himself, be ye Imitatores MEI, his command for imitation has his Sicut of
limitation so FAR as I am of CHRIST. But elsewhere, when he wills them to be
imitatores Ephesians. 5. 1. 2.
DEI, he restraines not that, but walk in love (says he) as Christ loved you:
who is not, as the holiest men [ Sanctus] holy in themselves, but [
Sanctificans] making others holy: so him self says, for their sakes SANCTIFY
I my self, that they also may be SANCTIFIED. Ioh. 17. 19.
Therefore the precept for that is by the Apostle, Videte EVM, Look upon HIM,
Heb. 12. 2.
who neither contracted sin by pollution, nor committed any sin by actual
transgression. So that the Eagles herein resort to him, Ioh. 8. 46.
as he is, (...), that HOLY thing; and as S. Luc. 1. 35.
Peter counsels, frame their holiness, secundum eum, qui vocauit, Sanctum,
according 1. Pet. 1. 15.
to his Sanctity, which, being himself holy, called them so to be. And all
this they receive from THIS Body, as he was Corpus Carnis, in his flesh
conuersing in the world. But yet, says S. Bernard, when I have fed upon him,
calling unto him for Bern.
the first, that is, knowledge and wisdom, with the Prophet David, lighten
thou mine Psalm. 119. 18.
eyes that I may see the wonders of thy law, and SAPIENS sum, and I become
WISE: for the Second, requested him with the same Prophet, not to remember the
Sins of my Psalm. 25. 7.
youth, but record his mercies, and IVSTVS sum, and so I am IVSTIFIED: for the
last, prayed him to guide me in the way of Eternity, Psalm. 139. 24.
and sic SANCTVS sum, and so I become holy: notwithstanding all this, says he,
my wisdom, by his instruction; my righteousness by his imputation; my sanctity
by his example and direction; yet, nisi SANGVIS eius interpellet pro me, saluus
non sum, unless this Corpus prove Cadauer, and this Body of FLESH, had been a
Body of DEATH, saved I could not be: in illa instituit, in hac restituit, says
the same Father Bern.
elsewhere. For vita in SANGVINE, surely, our substance and sustenance is from
his DEATH; as Sampson was fed and refresht by the DEAD Lion. For what can be
so Iud. 14. 9.
strong to work Death, which is not weakened by Christ's DEATH? The wrath Prou.
16. 14.
of a Prince is the Messenger of death, says Solomon; and we were borne filii
irae, the sons of his wrath, by whom Princes reign. Seize we therefore upon
this Body; taste we and see how gracious the Lord is; Psalm. 34. 8. Romans 5. 10.
and there we shall find God and man reconciled by his death.

The wages of sin is death, and in sin the best of us are conceived. Search
therefore Romans 6. 23.
the VVOVNDES of this Body, and behold Psalm. 51, 5.
thy Cure in his gashes; for by his Esa 53. 5.
STRIPES are we healed. Say not with Cain, his indignation is more the^ can be
satisfied; my sins greater then can be remitted: stir Genesis 4. 13
not from this Body, but look into the HOLE of his side pierced, and see his
heart bleeding in compassion of thine infirmities; Heb. 2. 14. 18
and feel his bowels melting at thy repentance. The savor of this DEAD Body
draws all the Eagles unto it, cum exaltatus Ioh. 12. 32.
fuero, etc. When I shall be LIFTED up, I shall draw all men unto me. This is
the Trumpe of our profession, we REACH Christ and 1. Cor. 1. 23.
him CRVCIFIED; the triumph of our consolation, God forbid, we should rejoice
in any Gal. 6. 14.
thing but in the CROSS of Christ; The substance of our Sacraments, we are
Baptized into Romans 6. 3.
his Death; and as the Jews, in their Passover did eat their Lamb, assum,
SLAIN and roasted: so in the Eucharist, we eat this Body, mortuum and passum
DEAD and CRVCIFIED. And thus the Eagles seed on him, as he is factus Redemptio,
made unto 1. Cor. 1. 30.
us Redemption; and say (with S. Bernard) Bern.
quod ex me mihi deest vsurpo mihi ex visceribus Domini, the defects in our
selves, the wounds of our Lord God shall make good. But as the Angels moved
the question, why Luke 24. 5.
seek we the living among the DEAD? he is not here but is RISEN: true, for
at it was impossible that he should be holden of Act. 2. ^4.
Death, so should it have been uncomfortable to us; because, if in this life
only the hope were in Christ, of all men the best men should be 1. Cor. 15. 19.
most miserable. Their state no better then the Israelites deliverance by
Moses, freedom from the Egyptian slavery, but no possession in the land of
Canaan; a redemption from Hell, but no inheritance in the Heavens. And
therefore as Corpus mortis, his crucified Body had an Oportet a necessity
adjoined, thus it must be: so Corpus Gloriae, as Luc. 24. 26.
Saint Paul calls it, his GLORIFIED body had Phil. 3. 2^.
the Expedit, a necessary conuenience so to John 16. 7.
be. By his Body INCARNATE and DEAD, Parauit nos mansioni, he made us fit for
that John 14. 2.
mansion; but by the last, parauit mansionem nobis, he prepared that mansion
for us. August.
Concerning the first, he died says S. August. vt patiamur, to make us patient
if we suffer for him: by the last, he excites our hope, vt potiamur, that we
shall also reign with him. Therefore, though he be placed in the heavens,
without return till the final judgment; yet the Eagles (his Elect) seize
even there upon him by their Prayers, as Romans 8. 34.
their Intercessor; accompting mediation by Saints (as by favorites to the
Prince) Amb. in Romans
with Saint Ambrose, a courtly reverence, no celestial courtesy, no
canonical custom; acknowledging him, with S. John 1. John 2. 1. 2.
to be the ONLY master of requests: the very presenting of his manhood
glorified, unto his Father, being the sole interpellation for us; and no other
Prayers, either prevailing with God or auailing us, but those that are
concluded per Christum Dominum Ioh. 16. 23.
nostrum, by Christ Jesus our Lord. Secondly, they resort by hope; that as he
took upon him our Body, and after that was taken up to the right hand of his
Father: so, 1. Cor. 15. 42.
though our Bodies corrupted prove Esca vermium, and buried, be semen terrae;
yet we hope that he will change our vile Phil. 3. 21.
bodies, and make them like to his GLORIOUS body. And so conclude with S. Paul,
We know that when this domus e luto, this Tabernacle of earth is mouldred away,
we have structura^ in Coelo, a building eternal and everlasting in the
Heavens: and thus much for this BODY. The sum whereof is breefely, that of 2.
Cor. 3. 5.
the Apostle, that of our selves we have no sufficiency, but what we have, it
is of CHRIST. All knowledge without him, but Prudentia carnis, Romans 8. 7.
either ignorance or vanity; al righteousness not his, pollutio panni, stains
and filth, Esa. 64. 6. Pro. 26. 23.
all holiness not from him, scoria obducta, sin gilded, ciuility not
Christianity: any challenge by merit, a presumptuous arrogance, atchieuement of
heaven, an impossibility: All the Sacrifices before him Vmbra praecedens, Heb.
10. 1.
a shadow vshering this Body: all after him Vmbrasequens, resemblances thereof:
remembrances gratulatory, not oblations propitiatory. Briefly, Invocation of
any besides him, a sacrilegious blasphemy. The conclusion, S. Bernards
exclamation, quis Bern.
non post illum, ad illum libenter, atque alacriter currat? What is he that
will not cheerfully fly unto him? qui and ab errore liberat, who rectifieth
our errors in opinion, and cleereth our ignorance by his doctrine* errata
dissimulat, covers the sins of our life with his righteousness: merita
viuendo tradit, makes us virtuous by his example: praemia moriendo conquirit,
sedendo largitur, purchased rewards for us when he suffered, and gives them
unto us now that he is glorified? But the swiftness both of the time, and
these Fowls carries us to the second part, namely, the Eagles. To trace
Pliny or Aelian 2. Eagles.
for the variety of Eagles were a course easy, but a discourse tedious: to
follow the Allegorists in moralizing their qualities, were, as S. Basil says,
to make an Eagle no Basil.
Foul, nor to give the Scripture the true sense: For so might I touch
great-men, who, with Pyrrhus; desire to be called, and show themselves to be
Eagles. Some, trusting to the strength and length of their wings, popularly
beating the air, pleasing themselves with their soaring ambition, Flying so
high out of compass, till finally they fly themselves out of breath. Others,
with the sharpness of their Tallents griping their Tenants with inexorable
oppression in their contracts; and plucking out the very heart of their
Creditors by an execrable defalcation of their debts. Others, which is the
comparison of Theophrastus chucking and crying over the prey which they have
found dead (not slain by themselves) so glorying in their nobility, not
purchased by their virtue, but traduced by birth. But leaving these moralized
EAGLES; the two principal and most proper qualities of these Fowls; are their
LOFTY FLIGHT and their SHARP SIGHT; Job. 39. 32.
which the holy man Job observes (to which place; I doubt not but our Savior
alludeth.) So that, without controversy or violence, the Foul here
resembles the Soul of man: for, as among all the Birds, to the EAGLE is
ascribed maximus honos, and maxima vis; so the Soul within us, is the part
more honorable, but the force thereof most admirable. First, for the lofty
flight, that expresses the mind of every man, as he is a reasonable creature,
much more as he is a regenerate Christian. For the Soul of man, by the
confession even of Aristotle, being (...), an infusion celestial, no natural
traduction; for that cause by Philo, Philo.
called Caeli apospasma, a very arrachment or a cantle pulled from the heavenly
substance, cannot contain it self within this Lump of flesh; therefore, as
the beams of the sun, though they touch the earth, and give life to these
lower creatures, yet are still in the body of the Sun, from whence they are
darted: so the soul, though it dwell and be confined (as that Jew speaks)
either within the filme of the brain, or in the heart of these our bodies, and
conuerseth with the senses; yet haeret origini suae, says Seneca, it still
aspireth upward, Seneca.
and there will have her being, whence she has her beginning. Whereupon the
Philosopher Heraclite, and Clemens Alexandrinus the divine, infer an
excellent position; that anima sicca est sapientissima, that the soul, which,
being in the body, is not surbated with traveling cares, nor surfeitted with
excessive riot, either solid or liquid, is more fit for divine contemplation;
as the dry exhalation is sooner carried into the higher Region, then the moist
vapor. And this meant Plato by his anima alata in his Phaedrus, where he
gives wings to the soul, by which the understanding soareth up ad diuinum
verum, to the chiefest truth, and the will not resting but in diuino bono, in
the chiefest good. Wherefore the Stoikes have placed their Philosophers, ex
superiori loco ad homines, ex aequo ad Deos; higher then men, equally with
their Gods: signifying thereby, that they are, either as Gods among men, or
rather as men living, on earth, the life of Gods; not affrighted with terror;
not houen with aduancements; not dejected with wants; not captiuated to
passions. If then the mind of their contemplating Philosopher, a natural man,
does thus surmount; much more the mind of true Christians (possessed with the
Spirit of God) enlightening the understanding; working upon the will;
sanctifying the affections; by the power whereof, consedere nos fecit (says
the Apostle) Ephe. 2. 6.
he has made us sit in heavenly places: where being mounted super altitudines
terrae (as Esaias speaks) above all the lofty towers Esai. 58. 14.
of the earth; from thence says Chrysostom. Chrysostom.
Cuncta tanquam muscas vident, like true Eagles they ouer-looke all the
allurements of the world, as Gnats and Flies. There he beholds the valley of
Baca, and there he ouerlookes Psalm. 84. 6. Psalm. 68. 15.
the hills of Basan; the lower and higher places of the earth, says Gregory;
in the first he descrieth losses, contumelies, Greg. in moral.
poverty, baseness; and those, even the most worldly minded, will fly over
and tread upon: on the other, the glory of Sovereignty; sublimitie of honors;
blandishment of subjects; confluence of wealth; profit by gain; high in the
view, great in the desire of men, not yet led by the spirit: All which, to this
Eagle Romans 8. 14.
thus lifted up above these hills, and his heart fastened where this BODY is, in
the Psalm. 121. 1.
Joys of Heaven; Lord, says Saint Gregory, Greg.
quam abiecta sint cernitur quae alta vide bantur, how base and mean do they
appear to the judgment reformed, which before appeared lofty in the
imagination corrupted? Then he Job. 28. 1. 2.
accounts the gold of Ophir but Ilia terrae the entrals and garbage of the
earth, no food for Eagles to seize upon: the pleasures of the world, but lilia
terrae, lillies of the field, more delectable in show then durable for
continuance; no stay for Eagles to perch upon: Titles of Honor, but folia
venti, the leaves of vanity; a gnathonicall blast, the breath of the chaps, a
fleshly pair of bellows (as the Philosopher terms them) too weak an air to
carry up an Eagle. Briefly, all the allectiues under the heavens, (...) Nazian.
says Nazian: compared to this one BOOTY, are unto him (as the Apostle
accounts them) Damnum and stercora, loss Phil. 3. 7.
and dounge; as the holy Preacher, fumus Eccle. 5. 15.
aut funus, a vanity or vexation; as Caesarius in Nazianz Nugae and delirium,
a folly and Nazian.
madness; as Chrysostom, a shadow or a dream Chrisostom.
yea, less then them both; with Plato Plate.
(...), nothing and worth nothing: All the possessions and indowments of the
whole world with the Prince of this world (when he sets them out to the best)
this Eagle may account a glory, but the word is (...), that is a glory in
opinion, not so in Luc. 4. 6.
deed. Therefore HE uses the world, as though 1. Cor. 7. 31.
he used it not; and what state soever he has, he is therewith content. Sieve
vir desideriorum, Phil. 4. 11.
as was Job; whether he be a man favored of the Prince; dignified with
honors, magnified for deserts; applauded by the people: yet is he not houen up
with surquedry, nor swells with ambition, if thwarted in suits; or kept low,
either by the malalent of fortune, or malice of Informers or misconceipt of
superiors; yet is he not moved to coffeehouse, much less to rebellion. But
what the Poets feign, of Eagles laying their eggs in Jupiters lap, fabulously;
that does he by David's counsel Esaias. 40. ^lt.
truly; and, with Esaias his Eagle, flying up to Heaven, casts his whole burden
upon the Lord: he trusts not in Princes, Psalm. 55. 22.
their favor is mutable, their bodies are Psalm. 146. 3. 4.
corruptible; not in friends, who, like the waters of Tema, in a moisture they
swell, in a drought they fail: Sacrifices not to his net relies not upon his
means, and policy, which often proves either the Spiders Web, or the
Cockatrice egg, a folly or a Esaias. 59. 5. Iere. 49 16.
destruction: but with Ieremies EAGLE, that builds his neast on high, he
rouzeth himself with the Prophets comfortable question, whom have I in heaven
but THEE, and what is there on earth that I desire in comparison of THEE? And
this is speciale specimen electorum (says Gregory) the special argument
Gregory.
whereby ye may know a right Eagle, the chosen child of God. This being Philo.
proper but to One kind of men, says Philo; who, with Moses, building their
Tent Exodus 33. 7.
without the host, far from the host; with Elias, being stripped of their
cloak (these 2. Reg. 2. 13.
outward and worldly impediments) still having in their eye Mary's object, that
same vnum necessarium, conuerseth with Luc. 10. 42.
God (...) with a mind sequestered from all earthly thoughts: And these are
they, says he, which are so often in Scripture called viri Dei. For there are
viri terrae, men of the earth; such, as with the Giants of the old Testament
will build with the Eagles [Let us build (say they) a Tower] but Genesis 11. 4.
it is, that they may have a name on earth; that by an unlimited joining of
house to house; office to office; honor to honor; they may profess
themselves of that humor in earnest, which Saint Peter fell into by amazement:
Let us build us HERE a Tabernacle: an infallible note, he will not say of a
reprobate, but certainly of a worldman, not yet regenerate: And there are Viri
Coeli, as the Chaldees and natural Philosophers; Philo ^bi supr.
who, in the height of their understanding, could pierce the clouds; discover
the motions of the heavens; the influence of the stars; the proprieties of
times; the impressions in the air; the periods of Empires; yea, metaphysically
inquire into the nature of God himself: and yet come far short of the first,
whom he calls Virum Dei, the man of God; whose mind lift up by the Spirit of
God within him, lives in the earth, as in terra obliuionis, in a Psalm. 88. 12.
land where all things are forgotten, and is as a dead man to the world,
because his life is hid with Christ in God. Therefore, as Col. 3. 3.
Saint Hierom speaks, in his mundanis nolit Hierom.
esse perpetuus, in these worldly things he affects no perpetuity, because the
place is ABOVE, where he purposes his ETERNITY. And this is the first
property of the Eagle, following the Body, even to the very heavens: and the
conclusion for it, is that of the Prophet, Beatus qui ascensiones in cord
disposuit, Blessed Psalm. 84. 5.
is that man who has set his heart to fly UPWARD. The second is the SHARP
SIGHT of the Elect; because the natural man cannot perceive the things that be
of God: For though his understanding (which Nazianz calls Nazian.
(...) the eye and lamp of reason) be piercing sharp, able to enter even the
secrets of nature, yea, to the deepenesse of Satan; yet the farthest Horizon it
can reach, is, (...), says Clement, that which may be made manifest by
demonstration; whereas the spiritual man discerns all the deep things of
God, even that most 1 Cor. 2. 10.
profound mystery of this BODY, God manifested 1. Tim. 3. 16.
in the flesh; and making it the object unto the eyes of Reason and Faith,
shows the different use which they make thereof. First, as it is Corpus
Carnis; that it should be conceived in the womb of a Virgin, without the help
of man; here Reason like Sarah laugheth, the Philosopher stumbleth: Genesis 18.
12.
yea the blessed virgin her self (at first) demurred with a quomodo? how can
this be? Then, as Corpus mortis, that our God should die, and his death give us
life; the Jew storms at the sollie; the Grecians count it a reproach; yea,
Peter himself gave Mat. 16. 22.
it an absit. Then, as Corpus Gloriae, that being dead it should rise again,
even the disciples themselves (not having as yet the Luc. 24. 11.
spirit) took it (...), as a feigned thing. But the Eagles eye, which Philo
calls fidem oculatam, faith illuminated by the holy Ghost, Philo.
in that strange birth acknowledges a divine miracle; in that shameful death,
a glorious victory; in his return from death, an assured hope of glory. And
the reason of that difference is given by Saint Augustine; for August.
that, as the eye if it be either blind or purblind, Matthew. 6. ^3.
cannot perfectly discern the cleerest object: so (says he) animus pollutus,
or turbatus, a mind defiled with sin or troubled with worldly cates, Deum
etiam praesentem videre non potest, cannot see God though he were present with
them. But, as the same Father writes of the Eagle, that being aloft in the
clouds, she can discern Sub frutice Leporem, sub fluctibus piscem, Under the
shrubs a Hare, under the waves a fish: so Faith, being Eagle eyed, can with
Moses in Exodus 3. 2,
a bramble bush see the majesty of God; with Abednego in the fiery Oven see
the presence Dan. 3 25.
of Christ; with Elizeus in the streightest 2. Reg. 6. 17.
siege, an army of Angels to defend him; with Saint Paul in the heap of
afflictions, Romans 8. 18.
behold a weight of glory provided for 2. Cor. 4. 17.
him. And so much for the second property of the Eagle, belonging only to the
Elect; the sum whereof is that of Hilary, Hilar.
Hoc officium fides profitetur, etc. THIS is the proper office of FAITH, to
attain that which neither wit, nor reason can reach unto. The conclusion, that
prayer of the distressed Father, Lord I believe, help thou mine Mar. 9. 24.
unbelief. The third follows, (...), they will flock or be gathered
together; wherein many things are worth observation, if time would suffer.
First in the pr^ae position (...) the joint resort and Communion of Saints,
both in their inward m^n; for howsoever they be, either triumphant in heaven,
or militant on earth; or dispersed in place; or unequal in condition; or aliens
in nation; or differing in some cirucmstance of opinion; yet congregabuntur,
there will be among them a unanimous coalition, as well 1. Ioh. 3. 18. 19.
mutual between themselves, in charitable affection, as also in a concurrent
desire of this one BODY, which is their head, Christ; professing the same
Faith; resting upon the same hope; holding the unity of the same spirit in the
bond of peace: So, for Ephe. 4. 3.
their outward man also, even these bodies which whether consumed by fire; or
suncke in the seas; or devoured of beasts; or rotted in their graves; or
quartered (yea minsed by tyrants; yet congregabuntur, they shall all be
gathered in one place, and be joined with the same Christ, to sit with Apoc.
2. 21.
him in his Throne. Secondly, the verb it self (...), no translation does
fully express it, having more in it then resorting or gathering, bringing with
it a violence of drawing or driving; and that double, either passive from this
BODY, the sight and sent thereof alluring the Eagles; the power, grace, and
merits of Christ attracting the desire of the elect: or active, they enforcing
themselves to fly unto him, notwithstanding all resistances, either outward or
inward; neither height nor depth, nor life nor death, neither Angels of heaven,
nor Devils in hell, nor terror of law, nor torture of conscience, Romans 8. 39.
can separate them from this prey. Thirdly, in the mood and tense, [WILL BE,]
their inclination working with the attractiue of this Body. For Aquilarum haec
praeda Chrysostom.
est, non Graculorum, says Chrysostom, be the Body never so full, and the
Savor never so strong, Popingaies and Parrots have no mind unto it, but the
Eagle presently flies: the will of the Saints co-operateth with the grace of
Christ: of Saints I say, not of men. For in the beginning of our conversion,
and intertainment of our first affections unto good, the will is not agent, for
it is merely passive; but after that the heart of stone is made an heart of
flesh, it works with grace, not by the natural power, but as prepared and
seconded by grace. Which doctrine is grounded upon that distiction of S. Paul,
Gratia IN me and gratia MECVM, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
His grace WITHIN me was not in vain, but I labored more then they all, yet
not I, but the grace of God WITH me: and upon the Spouse her affection, DRAW
me, there is Cant. 1. 3.
the power of grace; We WILL run after thee, there is the will cooperating
therewith; for he draws him that is willing, says Chrysostom. If any resist
the holy Ghost, him he Chrysostom. Act. 7. 5 1. Romans 8. 14.
draws not, for as many as are LED by the spirit are the sons of God, LED
not hailed; because in leading, as there is a force drawing, so is there a
voluntary following: and the spirit is willing, says our Savior, though the
flesh be Mat. 26. 41.
weak. But of thy enough. The sum whereof is, that of the Philosopher,
animus est vbi amat non vbi animat, the Soul is where it loves, not where it
lives: even that of our Savior, where the treasure is, there will the Matthew.
6. 21.
heart be also. The Souls of Gods children, whether conjoined with the body,
affectionately conuersing with God that gave them; for Our conversation is in
HEAVEN: or separated Phil 3. 19.
from the body, actually returning unto God, who first imbreathed them; still
they are with him, either here by affection, Eccle. 12. 7.
or there by fruition. The last word follows, the place [WHERESOEVER.] In my
bed I sought him, says the Spouse, but found him not Cant. 3. 1. 2. 3.
I searched the streets for him whom I so loved, I sought him but got him not;
I met with the watchmen, and inquired of them for my beloved, I asked but they
told me not: In the end, having found him, I took hold on him, and left him
not. This is that which I said in the beginning that where it knows no certain
place, the EGAR APPETITE will search EVERY place. WHERESOEVER he is, his chosen
will Flock unto him, in his word they believe him, in Baptism they indue him,
in the Eucharist they eat him, in the poor they relieve him; in his life they
follow him, in his death they trust in him, in his Temple they glorify him,
on earth they affect him, in Apoe. 14. 4.
heaven they enjoy him. They will follow the Lamb WHERESOEVER he goes. To
him with the Father, etc.

FINIS.

