Troublesome Reign of John King of England, with the discovery of King
Richard Cordelions Base son (vulgarly named, The Bastard Fawconbridge): also
the death of King John at Swinstead Abbey.

As it was (sundry times) publicly acted by the Queens Majesty's Players, in
the honorable City of London.

Imprinted at London for Sampson Clarke, and are to be sold at his shop* on
the backeside of the Royal Exchange. 1591.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
YOu that with friendly grace of smoothed brow
Have entertained the Scythian Ta^burlaine,
And given applause unto an Infidel:
Vouchsafe to welcome (with like courtesy)
A warlike Christian and your Co^ntreyman.
For Christ's true faith endured he many a storm.
And set himself against the Man of Rome.
Until ase treason (by a damned wight)
Di^^ all his former triumphs put to ^ight,
Accept of it (sweet Gentles) in good sort,
And think it was preparde for your di^port.
The troublesome Reign of King John.
Enter K. John, Queen Elinor his mother, William Marshal Earl of Pembrooke,
the Earls of Essex, and of Salisbury Queen Elianor. BArons of England, and my
noble Lords;
Though (...) Fortune have bereft from us
Victorious (...) scourge of Infidels,
And clad this (...) in stole of dismal hieu:
Yet give me leave to joy, and joy you all,
That from this womb has sprung a second hope,
A King that may in rule and virtue both
Succeed his brother in his Emperie.

K. John My gracious mother Queen, and Barons all;
Though far unworthy of so high a place,
As is the Throne of mighty Englands King:
Yet John your Lord, contented vncontent,
Will (as he may) sustain the heavy yoke
Of pressing cares, that hang upon a Crown.
My Lord of Pembrooke and Lord Salsbury,
Admit the Lord Shattilion to our presence;
That we may know what Philip King of France
(By his Ambassadors) requires of us.

Q. Elinor. Da^e lay my hand that Elinor can guess
Whereto this w^ightie Embassade does tend:
(...) of my Nephew Arthur and his claim,
Then say my Son I have not mist my aim.

Enter Chattilion and the two Earls. John My Lord Chattilion, welcome into
England:
How fares our Brother Philip King of France?

Chatt. His Highness at my coming was in health,
And wild me to salute your Majesty,
And say the message he has given in charge.

John And spare not man, we are preparde to hear.

Chattilion Philip by the grace of God most Christian K. of France, having
taken into his guardain and protection Arthur Duke of Britain, son and heir
to Ieffrey thine elder brother, requires in the behalf of the said Arthur,
the Kingdom of England, with the Lordship of Ireland, Poiters, Aniow, Torain,
Main: and I attend thine answer.


John A small request: belike he makes account
That England, Ireland, Poiters, Aniow, Torain, Main,
Are nothing for a King to give at once:
I wonder what he means to leave for me.
Tell Philip, he may keep his Lords at home,
With greater honor than to send them thus
On Embassades that not concern himself,
Or if they did, would yield but small return.

Chatilion Is this thine answer?

John It is, and too good an answer for so proud a message.

Chattilion Then King of England, in my Masters name,
And in Prince Arthur Duke of Britains name,
I do defy chee as an Enemy,
And wish thee to prepare for bloody wars.

Q. Elinor My Lord (that stands upon defiance thus)
Commend me to my Nephew, tell the boy,
That I Queen Elianor (his Grandmother)
Upon my blessing charge him leave his Arms,
Whereto his headstrong Mother pricks him so:
Her pride we know, and know her for a Dame
That will not stick to bring him to his end,
So she may bring her self to rule a Realm.
Next wish him to forsake the King of France,
And come to me and to his Uncle here,
And he shall want for nothing at our hands.

Chattilion. This shall I do, and thus I take my leave.

John Pembrooke, convey him safely to the sea,
But not in have: for as we are aduisde,
We mean to be in France as soon as he,
To fortesie such towns as we possess
In Aniou, Torain and in Normandy.

Ex^^ Enter the Shriue, and whispers the Earl of Sals in the (...) Salisbury.
Please it your Majesty, here is the (...) Northhamptonshire, with certain
persons that of late ^^mitted a riot, and have appealed to your Majesty
besee^^ (...) your Highness for special cause to hear them.


John Will them come near, and while we hear the cause,
Go Salsbury and make provision,
We mean with speed to pass the sea to France.
Say Shrieue, what are these men, what have they done?
Or wheretoo tends the course of this appeal?

Shrieue Please it your Majesty these two brethren unnaturally falling at odds
about their Fathers living have broken your Highness peace, in seeking to right
their own wro^gs without cause of Law, or order of Justice, and unlawfully
assembled themselves in mutinous manner, having committed a riot, appealing
from trial in their Country to your Highness: and here I Thomas Nidigate
Shrieue of Northhamptonshire, do deliver them over to their trial.


John My Lord of Essex, will the offenders to stand forth, and tell the cause
of their quarrel.


Essex Gentlemen, it is the Kings pleasure that you discover your griefs, and
dou^^ not but you shall have justice.


Philip Please it your Majesty, the wrong is mine; yet will I abide all wrongs,
before I once open my mouth to vnrippe the shameful slander of my parents,
the dishonor of myself, and the wicked dealing of my brother in this princely
assembly.


Robert Then by my Prince his leave shall Robert speak,
And tell your Majesty? what right I have
To offer wrong, as he accounts wrong.
My Father (not unknown unto your Grace)
Receiud his spurs of Knighthood in the Field,
At Kingly Richards hands in Palestine,
When as the walls of Acon gave him way:
His name Sir Robert Fauconbridge of Mountbery.
What by succession from his Ancestors,
And warlike service under Englands Arms,
His living did amount too at his death
Two thousand Marks reuenew every year:
And this (my Lord) I challenge for my right,
As lawful heir to Robert Fauconbridge.

Philip If firstborn son be heir indubitate
By certain right of Englands ancient Law,
How should myself make any other doubt,
But I am heir to Robert Fauconbridge?

John Fond Youth, to trouble these our Princely ears
Or make a question in so plain a case:
Speak, is this man thine elder Brother borne?

Robert Please it your Grace with patience for to hear;
I not deny but he mine Elder is,
Mine elder Brother too: yet in such sort,
As he can make no title to the Land.

John A doubtful tale as ever I did hear,
Thy Brother and thine elder, and no heir:
Explain this dark Aenigma.

Robert I grant (my Lord) he is my mothers son,
Base borne, and base begot, no Fauconbridge.
Indeed the world reputes him lawful heir,
My Father in his life did count him so,
And here my Mother stands to prove him so:
But I (my Lord) can prove, and do ^uer^e
Both to my Mothers shame and his reproach,
He is no heir, nor yet legitimate.
Then (gracious Lord) let Fauconbridge enjoy
The living that belongs to Fauconbridge.
And let not him possess another right.

John Prove this, the land is thine by Englands law.

Q. Elianor Ungracious youth, to ^ip thy mothers shame,
The womb from whence thou did thy being take,
All honest ears abhor thy wickedness,
But gold I see does beat down natures law.

Mother. My gracious Lord, and you thrice reverend Dame,
That see the tears distilling from mine eyes,
And scalding sighs blown from a rented heart:
For honor and regard of womanhood,
Let me entreat to be commanded hence.
Let not these ears receive the hissing sound
Of such a viper, who with poisoned words
Does masserate the bowels of my soul.

John Lady, stand up, be patient for a while:
And fellow, say, whose bastard is thy brother.

Philip Not for my self, nor for my mother now:
But for the honor of so brave a Man,
Whom he accuses with adultery:
Here I beseech your Grace upon my knees,
To count him mad, and so dismiss us hence.

Robert Nor mad, nor mazde, but well advised, I
Charge thee before this royal presence here
To be a Bastard to King Richards self,
Son to your Grace, and Brother to your Majesty.
Thus bluntly, and

Elianor Young man thou needst not be ashamed of thy kin,
Nor of thy Sire. But forward with thy proof.

Robert The proof so plain, the argument so strong,
As that your Highness and these noble Lords,
And all (save those that have no eyes to see)
Shall swear him to be Bastard to the King.
First when my Father was Ambassador
In Germany unto the Emperor,
The King lay often at my Fathers house;
And all the Realm suspected what befell:
And at my Fathers back return again
My Mother was delivered as it is sed,
Six weeks before the account my Father made.
But more than this: look but on Philips face,
His features, actions, and his lineaments,
And all this Princely presence shall confess,
He is no other but King Richards Son.
Then gracious Lord, rest he King Richards Son,
And let me rest safe in my Fathers right,
That am his rightful son and only heir.

John Is this thy proof, and all thou have to say?

Robert I have no more, nor need I greater proof.

John First, where thou said in absence of thy Sire
My Brother often lodged in his house:
And what of that? base groom to slander him,
That honored his Ambassador so much,
In absence of the man to cheer the wife?
This will not hold, proceed unto the next.

Q. Elinor Thou say she teemde six weeks before her time.
Why good Sir Squire are you so cunning grown
To make account of women's reckonings:
Spit in your hand and to your other proofs:
Many mischaunces hap in such affairs
To make a woman come before her time.

John And where thou say he looks like the King
In action, feature and proportion:
Therein I hold with thee, for in my life
I never saw so lively counterfeit
Of Richard Cordelion, as in him.

Robert Then good my Lord, be you indifferent Judge,
And let me have my living and my right.

Q Elinor Nay hear you Sir, you run away too fast:
Know you not, Omne simile non est idem?
Or have read in. Hark ye good sir,
T^was thus I warrant, and no otherwise,
She lay with Sir Robert your Father, and thought upon King Richard my Son,
and so your Brother was formed in this fashion.


Robert Madame, you wrong me thus to jest it out,
I crave my right: King John as thou art King.
So be thou just, and let me have my right.

John Why (foolish boy) thy proofs are frivolous,
Nor can thou challenge any thing thereby.
But thou shall see how I will help thy claim,
This is my doom, and this my doom shall stand
Irreuocable, as I am King of England.
For thou know not, we will ask of them that know,
His mother and himself shall end this strife:
And as they say, so shall thy living pass.

Robert My Lord, herein I challenge you of wrong,
To give away my right, and put the doom
Unto themselves. Can there be likelihood
That she will loose?
Or he will give the living from himself?
It may not be my Lord. Why should it be?

John Lords keep him back, and let him hear the doom.
Essex, first ask the Mother thrice who was his Sire?

Essex Lady Margaret Widow of Fauconbridge,
Who was Father to thy Son Philip?

Mother Please it your Majesty, Sir Robert Fauconbridge.

Robert This is right, ask my fellow there if I be a thief.

John Ask Philip whose Son he is.

Essex Philip, who was thy Father?

Philip Man my Lord, and that's a question: and you had not taken some pains
with her before, I should have desired you to ask my Mother.


John Say who was thy Father?

Philip Faith (my Lord) to answer you sure he is my father that was nearest my
mother when I was gotten, and him I think to be Sir Robert Fauconbridge.


John Essex, for fashions sake demand again,
And so an end to this contention.

Robert Was ever man thus wronged as Robert is?

Essex Philip speak I say, who was thy Father?

John Young man how now, what art thou in a trance?

Elianor Philip awake, the man is in a dream.

Philip Philippus atauis a^dite Regibus.
What say thou Philip, sprung of ancient Kings?
Quo me rapit tempestas?
What wind of honor blows this fury forth?
Or whence proeede these fumes of Majesty?
Me thinks I hear a hollow Echo sound,
That Philip is the Son unto a King:
The whistling leaves upon the trembling trees,
Whistle in consort I am Richards Son:
The bubling murmur of the waters fall,
Records Philippus Regius filius:
Birds in their flight make music with their wings,
Filling the air with glory of my birth:
Birds, bubbles, leaves, and mountains, Echo, all
Ring in mine ears, that I am Richards Son.
Fond man, ah whether art thou carried?
How are thy thoughts ywrapt in Honors heaven?
Forgetful what thou art, and whence thou camst.
Thy Fathers land cannot maintain these thoughts,
These thoughts are far unfitting Fauconbridge:
And well they may; for why this monnting mind
Does soar too high to stoop to Fauconbridge.
Why how now? know thou where thou art?
And know thou who expects thine answer here?
Will thou upon a frantic madding vain
Go loose thy land, and say thy self base borne?
No, keep thy land, though Richard were thy Sire,
What ere thou think, say thou art Fauconbridge.

John Speak man, be sudden, who thy Father was.

Philip Please it your Majesty, Sir Robert
Philip, that Fauconbridge cleaues to thy jaws:
It will not out, I cannot for my life
Say I am Son unto a Fauconbridge.
Le^ land and living go, it is honors fire
That makes me swear King Richard was my Sire.
Base to a King adds title of more State,
Than Knights begotten, though legittimate.
Please it your Grace, I am King Richards Son.

Robert Robert revive thy heart, let sorrow die,
His faltring tongue not suffers him to lie.

Mother What headstrong fury does enchaunt my son?

Philip Philip cannot repent for he has done.

John Then Philip blame not me, thy self have lost
By wilfulness, thy living and thy land.
Robert, thou art the heir of Fauconbridge,
God give thee joy, greater than thy desert.

Q Elianor Why how now Philip, give away thine own?

Philip Madame, I am bold to make my self your nephew,
The poorest kinsman that your Highness has:
And with this Proverb gin the world anew,
Help hands, I have no lands, honor is my desire;
Let Philip live to show himself worthy so great a Sire.

Elinor Philip, I think thou knewst thy Grandams mind:
But cheer thee boy, I will not see thee want
As long as Elinor has foot of land;
Henceforth thou shall be taken for my son,
And wait on me and on thine Uncle here,
Who shall give honor to thy noble mind.

John Philip kneel down, that thou may thoroughly know
How much thy resolution pleases us,
Rise up Sir Richard Plantaginet K. Richards Son.

Phil. Grant heavens that Philip once may show himself
Worthy the honor of Plantaginet,
Or basest glory of a Bastards name.

John Now Gentlemen, we will away to France,
To check the pride of Arthur and his mates:
Essex, thou shall be Ruler of my Realm,
And toward the maine charges of my wars,
I Will ceaze the lazy Abbey lubbers lands
Into my hands to pay my men of war.
The Pope and Pop^li^g^ shall not grease themselves
With gold and groates, that are the soldiers due.
Thus forward Lords, let our command be done,
And march we forward mightily to France.
Exeunt. Manet Philip and his Mother.

Philip Madame I ^eseech you deigne me so much leisure as the hearing of a
matter that I long to impart to you.


Mother What Is the matter Philip. I think your suit in secret, tends to some
money matter, which you suppose burns in the bottom of my chest.


Phil. No Madam, it is no such suit as to beg or borrow,
But such a suit, as might some other grant.
I would not now have troubled you withal.

Mother A Gods name let us hear it.

Philip Then Madame thus, your Ladyship sees well,
How that my scandal grows by means of you,
In that report has rumord up and down,
I am a bastard, and no Fauconbridge.
This gross attaint so tilteth in my thoughts,
Maintaining combat to abridge my ease,
That field and town, and company alone,
Whatso I do, or wheresoere I am,
I cannot chase the slander from thy thoughts.
If it be true, resolve me of my Sire,
For pardon Madame, if I think amiss.
Be Philip Philip and no Fauconbridge,
His Father doubtless was as brave a man.
To you on knees as sometime Phaeton,
Mistrusting silly Merop for his Sire,
Strayning a little bashful modesty,
I beg some instance whence I am extraught.

Mother Yet more adoo to haste me to my grave,
And will thou too become a Mothers cross?
Must I accuse myself to close with you?
Slander myself to quiet your affects:
Thou mooust me Philip with this idle talk,
Which I remit, in hope this mood will die.

Philip Nay Lady mother, hear me further yet,
For strong conceit drives duty hence awhile:
Your husband Fauconbridge was Father to that son,
That carries marks of Nature like the Sire,
The son that blotteth you with wedlocks breach,
And holds my right, as lineall in descent
From him whose form was figured in his face.
Can Nature so dissemble in her frame,
To make the one so like as like may be,
And in the other print no character
To challenge any mark of true descent?
My brothers mind is base, and too too dull,
To mount where Philip lodges his affects,
And his external graces that you view
(Though I report it) counterpoise not mine:
His constitution plain debilitie,
Requires the chair, and mine the seat of ste^le.
Nay, what is he, or what am I to him?
When any one that knows how to carpe,
Will scarcely judge us both one Country borne.
This Madame, this, has drove me from myself:
And here by heavens eternal lamps I swear,
As cursed Nero with his mother did,
So I with you, if you resolve me not.

Mother Let mothers tears quench out thy angers fire,
And urge no further what thou do require.

Philip Let sons entreatie sway the (...) now,
Or else she dies: I Will not infringe my vow.

Mother Unhappy task: must I recount my shame,
Blab my misdeedes, or ^y concealing die?
Some power strike me speechless for a time*
Or take from him awhile his hearings use,
Why wish I so, unhappy as I am?
The fault is mine, and he the faulty fruit,
I blush, I faint, oh would I might be mute.

Philip Mother be brief, I long to know my name.

Mother And longing dye to shroud thy Mothers shame.

Philip Come Madame come, you need not be so loath,
The shame is shared equal twixt us both.
Is It not a slacknes in me worthy blame,
To be so old, and cannot write my name.
Good Mother resolve me.

Mother Then Philip hear thy fortune and my grief,
My honors loss by purchase of thy self,
My shame, thy name, and husbands secret wrong,
All maind and staind by youths unruly sway.
And when thou know from whence thou art extraught,
Or if thou knewst what suits, what threats, what fears,
To move by love, or massacre by death.
To yield wi^h love, or end by loves contempt.
The mightines of him that courted me,
Who tempred terror with his wanton talk,
That something may extenuate the guilt.
But let it not advantage me so much:
Vpbraid me rather with the Roman Dame
That shed her blood to wash away her shame.
Why stand I to expostulate the crime
With pro and contra, now the deed is don,
When to conclude two words may tell the tale,
That Philips Father was a Princes Son,
Rich Englands rule, words only terror he,
For honors loss left me with child of thee:
Whose Son thou art, then pardon me the rather,
For fair King Richard was thy noble Father.

Philip Then Robin Fauconbridge I wish thee joy,
My Sire a King, and I a landles Boy.
Gods Lady Mother, the world is in my debt,
There Is something owing to Plantaginet.
I marry Sir, let me alone for game,
I Will act some wonders now I know my name.
By blessed Marie I Will not sell that pride
For Englands weal^h, and all the world beside.
Sit fast the proudest of my Fathers foes,
Away good Mother, there the comfort goes.

Execunt. Enter Philip the French King, and Jews, Limoges, Constance, and her
son Arthur. King Now gin we broach the title of thy claim
Young Arthur in the Albion Territories,
Scaring proud Angiers with a puissant siedge:
Brave Austria, cause of Cordelions death,
Is also come to aid thee in thy wars;
And all our Forces join for Arthurs right.
And, but for causes of great consequence,
Pleading delay till news from England come,
Twice should not Titan hide him in the West,
To cool the fet-locks of his weary teame,
Till I had with an unresisted shock
Controld the manage of proud Angiers walls,
Or made a forfet of my fame to Chance.

Constance May be that John in conscience or in fear
To offer wrong where you impugn the ill,
Will send such calm conditions back to France,
As shall rebate the edge of fearful wars:
If so, forbearance is a deed well done.

Arthur Ah Mother, possession of a Crown is much,
And John as I have heard reported of,
For present vantage would adventure far.
The world can witness in his Brothers time,
He took upon him rule any almost reign:
Then must it follow as a doubtful point,
That he ^eresigne the rule unto his Nephew.
I rather think the menace of the world
Sounds in his ears as threats of no esteem,
And sooner would he scorn Europaes power,
Than loose the smallest title he enioyes;
For questionles he is an Englishman.

Jews Why are the English peereles in compare?
Brave Caualiers as ere that Island bred,
Have liude and did, and darde and done enough,
Yet never gracde their Country for the cause:
England is England, yielding good and bad,
And John of England is as other John's.
Trust me young Arthur, if thou like my reed,
Praise thou the French that help thee in this need.

Lymoges The Englishman has little cause I trow,
To spend good speeches on so proud a foe.
Why Arthur here is his spoil that now is gone,
Who when he liude outroude his Brother John:
But hasty curres that lie so long to catch,
Come halting home, and meet their ouermatch.
But news comes now, here is the Ambassador.

Enter Chattilion. K Philip And in good time, welcome my Lord Chattilion:
What news? will John accord to our command.

Chattilion Be I not brief to tell your Highness all,
He will approach to interrupt my tale:
For one self bottom brought us both to France.
He on his part will try the chance of war,
And if his words infer assured truth,
Will loose himself and all his followers,
Ere yield unto the least of your demands.
The Mother Queen she takes on amain
Against Lady Constance, counting her the cause
That does effect this claim to Albion,
Coniuring Arthur with a Grandames care,
To leave his Mother; willing him submit
His state to John and her protection,
Who (as she says) are studious for his good:
More circumstance the season intercepts:
This is the sum, which briefly I have shown.

K. Phil. This bitter wind must nip some bodies spring,
Sudden and brief, why so, it is harvest weather.
But say Chattilion, what persons of account are with him?

Chattilion Of England Earl Pembrooke and Salsbury,
The only noted men of any name.
Next them a Bastard of the Kings deceast,
A hardy wild head, tough and venturous,
With many other men of high resolve.
Then is there with them Elinor Mother Queen,
And Blanch her Niece daughter to the King of Spain:
These are the prime Birds of this hot adventure.

Enter John and his followers, Queen, Bastard, Earls, etc. K. Philip Me
seems John an ouer-daring spirit
Effect some frenzy in thy rash approach,
Treading my Confines with thy armed Troops.
I rather looked for some submisse reply
Touching the claim thy Nephew Arthur makes
To that which thou unjustly do usurp.

K John For that Chattilion can discharge you all,
I list not plead my Title with my tongue.
Nor came I hither with intent of wrong
To France or thee, or any right of thine;
But in defense and purchase of my right,
The Town of Angiers: which thou do begirt
In the behalf of Lady Constance Son,
Wheretoo nor he nor she can lay just claim.

Constance Yes (false intruder) if that just be just,
And headstrong usurpation put apart,
Arthur my Son, heir to thy elder Brother,
Without ambiguous shadow of descent,
Is Sovereign to the substance thou withholdst.

Q Elinor Misgouernd Gossip, stain to this resort,
Occasion of these undecided iarres,
I say (that know) to check thy vain suppose,
Thy Son has naught to do with that he claymes.
For proof whereof, I can infer a Will,
That barr^s the way he urges by descent.

Constance A Will indeed, a crabbed Woman's will,
Wherein the Devil is an ouerseer,
And proud dame Elnor sole Executresse:
More wills than so, on peril of my soul,
Were never made to hinder Arthurs right.

Arthur But say there was, as sure there can be none,
The law intends such testaments as void,
Where right descent can no way be impeacht.

Q Elinor Peace Arthur peace, thy mother makes thee wings
To soar with peril after Icarus,
And trust me yongling for the Fathers sake,
I pity much the hazard of thy youth.

Constance Beshrew you else how pitiful you are,
Ready to weep to hear him ask his own;
Sorrow betide such Grandames and such grief,
That minister a poison for pure love.
But who so blind, as cannot see this beam,
That you forsooth would keep your cousin down,
For fear his Mother should be used too well?
I there is the griese, confusion catch the brain,
That hammers shifts to stop a Princes reign.

Q. Elianor Impatient, frantike, common slanderer,
Immodest Dame, vnnurtred quarreller,
I tell thee I, not envy to thy Son,
But justice makes me speak as I have don.

K. Philip But here is no proof that shows your son a King.

K. John. What wants, my sword shall more at large set down.

Jews But that may break before the truth be known.

Bastard Then this may hold till all his right be shown.

Lymoges Good wor^s sir sauce, your betters are in place.

Bastard Not you sir doughtie with your Lions case.

Blanch Ah joy betide his soul, to whom that spoil belo^gd
Ah Richard how thy glory hate is wronged.

Lymoges Me (...) pride, and Richards fall,
Should be a president t'affright you all.

Bastard What words are these? how do my sinews shake?
My Fathers foe clad in my Fathers spoil,
A thousand furies kindle with reuendge,
This heart that choler keeps a consistory,
Searing my inwards with a brand of hate:
How does Alecte whisper in mine ears?
Delay not Philip, kill the villain straight,
Disrobe him of the matchles moniment
Thy Fathers triumph ore the Savages,
Base heardgroome, coward, peasant, worse than a threshing slave,
What makst thou with the Trophei of a King?
Shams^ thou not coystrell, loathsome dunghill swad,
To grace thy carcass with an ornament
Too precious for a Monarchs couerture?
Scarce can I temper due obedience
Unto the p^esence of my Sovereign,
From acting outrage on this trunk of hate:
But arm thee traitor, wronger of renown,
For by his soul I swear, my Fathers soul,
Twice will I not review the Mornings rise,
Till I have torn that Trophei from thy back,
And split thy heart, for wearing it so long.
Philip has sworn, and if it be not done,
Let not the world repute me Richards Son.

Lymoges Nay soft sir Bastard, hearts are not split so soon,
Let them rejoice that at the end do win:
And take this lesson at thy foemans hand,
Pawn not thy life, to get thy Fathers skin.

Blanch Well may the world speak of his knightly valor,
That winnes this hide to wear a Ladies favor.

Bastard Ill ^ay I thrive, and nothing brook with me,
If shortly I present it not to thee.

K. Philip Lordings forbear, fortune is coming fast,
That deeds may try what words cannot determine.
And to the purpose for the cause you come.
Me seems you set right in chance of war,
Yielding no other reasons for your claim,
But so and so, because it shall be so.
So wrong shall be subornd by trust of strength:
A Tyrants practice to inuest himself.
Where weak resistance gives wrong the way.
To check the which, in holy lawful Arms,
I in the right of Arthur Geffreys Son,
Am come before this City of Angiers,
To bar all other false supposed claim,
From whence or howsoere the error springs.
And in his quarrel on my Princely word,
I Will fight it out unto the latest man.

John Know King of France, I will not be commanded
By any power or Prince in Christendom,
To yield an instance how I hold mine own,
More than to answer, that mine own is mine.
But will thou see me parley with the Town,
And hear them offer me allegiance,
Fealty and homage, as true liege men ought.

K. Philip Summon them, I will not believe it till I see it, and when I see it
I Will soon change it.
They summon the Town, the Citizens appear upon the walls.

K. John You men of Angiers, and as I take it my loyal Subjects, I have
summoned you to the walls: to dispute on my right, were to think you doubtful
therein, which I am persuaded you are not. In few words, our Brothers Son,
backed with the King of France, have beleagred your Town upon a false
pretended title to the same: in defense whereof I your liege Lord have brought
our power to fence you from the Usurper, to free your intended servitude, and
utterly to supplant the foemen, to my right and your rest. Say then, who who
keep you the Town for?


Citizen For our lawful King.


John I was no less persuaded: then in Gods name open your gates, and let me
enter.


Citizen And it please your Highness we comptroll not your title, neither will
we rashly admit your entrance: if you be lawful King, with all obedience we
keep it to your use, if not King, our rashness to be impeached for yielding,
without more considerate trial: we answer not as men lawles, but to the
behoof of him that proves lawful.


John I shall not come in then?


Citizen No my Lord, till we know more.


K. Philip Then hear me speak in the behalf of Arthur Son of Geffrey elder
Brother to John, his title manifest without contradiction to the Crown and
Kingdom of England, with Angiers and diverse Towns on this side the sea: will
you acknowledge him your liege Lord, who speaks in my word to intertaine you
with all favors as bescemeth a King to his subjects, or a friend to his
wel-willers: or stand to the peril of your contempt, when his title is proved
by the sword.


Citizen We answer as before till you have proved one right, we acknowledge
none right, he that tries himself our Sovereign, to him will we remain firm
subjects, and for him, and in his right we hold our Town as desirous to know
the truth as loath to subscribe before we know? More than this we cannot say
and more than this we dare not do.


K. Philip Then John I def^e thee in the name and behalf of Arthur Plantaginet
thy King and cousin, whose right and patrimony thou detainest, as I doubt not
ere the day end in a set battle make thee confess; whereunto with a zeal to
right I challenge thee.


K. John I accept the challenge, and turn the defiance to thy throat.


Excursions. The Bastard chaseth Lymoges the Austrich Duke, and makes him
leave the Lions skin. Bastard And art thou gone, misfortune haunt thy steps,
And chill cold fear assail thy times of rest.
Morpheus leave here thy silent Eban cave,
Besiedge his thoughts with dismal fantasies.
And ghastly objects of pale threatening Mors.
Affright him every minute with stear^e looks,
Let shadow temper terror in his thoughts,
And let the terror make the coward mad,
And in his madness let him fear pursuit,
And so in frenzy let the peasant die.
Here is the ransom that allayes his rage,
The first freehold that Richard left his son:
With which I shall surprise his living foes,
As Hectors statue did the fainting Greeks. Exit.

Enter the Kings Herolds with Trumpets to the walls of Angiers: they summon the
Town. Eng. Herold John by the grace of God King of England, Lord of Ireland,
Aniou, Toraine, etc. demands once again of you his subjects of Angiers, if
you will quietly surrender up the Town into his hands?


Fr. Herold Philip by the grace of God King of France, demands in the
behalf of Arthur Duke of Britain, if you will surrender up the Town into his
hands, to the use of the said Arthur.


Citizens Herrolds go tell the two victorious Princes, that we the poor
Inhabitants of Angiers, require a parle of their Matesties.


Herolds We go.


Enter the Kings, Queen Elianor, Blaunch, Bastard, Lymoges, Lowes, Castilean,
Pembrooke, Salisbury, Constance, and Arthur Duke of Britain. John Herold, what
answer do the Townsmen send?

Philip Will Angiers yield to Philip King of France,

En. Her. The Townsmen on the walls accept your Grace.

Fr. Her. And crave a parley of your Majesty.

John You Citizens of Angiers, have your eyes
Beheld the slaughter that our English bows
Have made upon the coward frawdfull French?
And have you wisely pondred therewithal
Your gain in ye^lding to the English King?

Philip Their loss in yielding to the English King.
But John, they saw from out their highest Towers
The Cheualiers of France and crossebow shot
Make lanes of slaughtred bodies through thine host,
And are resolude to yield to Arthurs right.

John Why Philip, though thou brauest it fore the walls,
Thy conscience knows that John has won the field.

Philip What ere my conscience knows, thy Army feels
That Philip had the better of the day.

Bastard Philip indeed has got the Lions case,
Which here he holds to Lymoges disgrace.
Base Duke to fly and leave such spoils behind:
But this thou knewst of force to make me stay.
It farde with thee as with the mariner,
Spying the hugie Whale, whose monstrous bulk
Does bear the waves like mountains fore the wind,
That throws out empty vessels, so to stay
His fury, while the ship does sail away.
Philip it is thine: and fore this Princely presence,
Madame I humbly lay it at your feet,
Being the first adventure I atchieud,
And first exployt your Grace did enjoin:
Yet many more I long to be enioynd.

Blaunch Philip I take it, and I thee command
To wear the same as erst thy Father did:
Therewith receive this favor at my hands,
T'incourage thee to follow Richards fame.

Arthur Ye Citizens of Angiers, are ye mute?
Arthur or John, say which shall be your King?

Citizen We care not which, if once we knew the right,
But till we know we will not yield our right.

Bastard Might Philip counsel two so mighty Kings,
As are the Kings of England and of France,
He would advise your Graces to unite
And knit your forces against these Citizens,
Pulling their battered walls about their ears.
The Town once won then strive about the claim,
For they are minded to delude you both.

Citizen Kings, Princes, Lords and Knights assembled here,
The Citizens of Angiers all by me
Entreat your Majesty to hear them speak:
And as you like the motion they shall make,
So to account and follow their advice.

John. Philip. Speak on, we give thee leave.

Citizen Then thus: whereas that young and lusty knight
Incites you on to knit your kingly strengths:
The motion cannot choose but please the good,
And such as love the quiet of the State.
But how my Lords, how should your strengths be kni^?
Not to oppress your subjects and your friends,
And fill the world with brawles and mutinies:
But unto peace your forces should be knit
To live in Princely league and amity:
Do this, the gates of Angiers shall give way
And stand wide open to your hearts content.
To make this peace a lasting bond of love,
Remains one only honorable means,
Which by your pardon I shall here display.
Jews the Dolphin and the heir of France,
A man of noted valor through the world,
Is yet unmarried: let him take to wife
The beauteous daughter of the King of Spain,
Near to K. John, the lovely Lady Blanch,
Begotten on his Sister Elianor.
With her in marriage will her uncle give
Castles and Towers as fitteth such a match.
The Kings thus joined in league of perfect love,
They may so deal with Arthur Duke of Britain,
Who is but young, and yet unmeet to reign,
As he shall stand contented every way.
Thus have I boldly (for the common good)
Delivered what the City gave in charge.
And as upon conditions you agree,
So shall we stand content to yield the Town.

Arthur A proper peace, if such a motion hold;
These Kings bear arms for me, and for my right,
And they shall share my lands to make them friends.

Q. Elianor Son John, follow this motion, as thou love thy mother,
Make league with Philip, yield to any thing:
Jews shall have my Niece, and then be sure
Arthur shall have small succor out of France.

John Brother of France, you hear the Citizens:
Then tell me, how you mean to deal herein.

Constance Why John, what can thou give unto thy Niece,
That have no foot of land, but Arthurs right?

Jews Byr Lady Citizens, I like your choice,
A lovely Damsel is the Lady Blanch,
Worthy the heir of Europe for her pheere.

Constance What Kings, why stand you gazing in a trance?
Why how now Lords? accursed Citizens
To fill and tickle their ambicious ears,
With hope of gain, that springs from Arthurs loss.
Some dismal Plannet at thy birthday raignd,
For now I see the fall of all thy hopes.

K. Philip Lady, and Duke of Britain, know you both,
The King of France respects his honor more,
Than to betray his friends and favorers.
Princess of Spain, could you affect my Son,
If we upon conditions could agree?

Bastard Swounds Madam, take an English Gentleman:
Slave as I was, I thought to have mooude the match.
Grandame you made me half a promise once,
That Lady Blanch should bring me wealth enough,
And make me heir of store of English land.

Q. Elianor Peace Philip, I will look thee out a wife,
We must with policy compound this strife.

Bastard If Jews get her, well, I say no more:
But let the frolic Frenchman take no scorn,
If Philip front him with an English horn.

John Lady, what answer make you to the King of France?
Can you affect the Dolphin for your Lord?

Blanch I thank the King that likes of me so well,
To make me Bride unto so great a Prince:
But give me leave my Lord to pause on this.
Least being too too forward in the cause,
It may be blemish to my modesty.

Q Elinor Son John, and worthy Philip K. of France,
Do you confer awhile about the Dower,
And I will school my modest Niece so well,
That she shall yield as soon as you have done.

Constance I, there is the wretch that broacheth all this ill,
Why fly I not upon the Beldames face,
And with my nails pull forth her hateful eyes.

Arthur Sweet Mother cease these hasty madding fits:
For my sake, let my Grandame have her will.
O would she with her hands pull forth my heart,
I could afford it to appease these broils.
But mother let us wisely wink at all:
Least farther harms ensue our hasty speech.

Philip Brother of England, what dowry will thou give
Unto my Son in marriage with thy Niece?

John First Philip knows her dowry out of Spain
To be so great as may content a King:
But more to mend and amplify the same,
I give in money thirty thousand marks.
For land I leave it to thine own demand.

Philip Then I demand Volquesson, Torain, Main,
Poiters and Aniou, these five Provinces,
Which thou as King of England holdst in France:
Then shall our peace be soon concluded on.

Bastard No less than five such Provinces at once?
John Mother what shall I do? my brother got these lands
With much effusion of our English blood:
And shall I give it all away at once?

Q. Elinor John give it him, so shall thou live in peace,
And keep the residue sanz ieopardie.

Ion Philip bring forth thy Son, here is my Niece,
And here in marriage I do give with her
From me and my Successors English Kings,
Volquesson, Poiters, Aniou, Torain, Main,
And thirty thousand marks of stipend coin.
Now Citizens, how like you of this match?

Citizen We joy to see so sweet a peace begun.

Jews Jews with Blanch shall ever live content.
But now King John, what say you to the Duke?
Father, speak as you may in his behalf.

Philip K. John, be good unto thy Nephewhere,
And give him some what that shall please thee best.

John Arthur, although thou troublest Englands peace:
Yet here I give thee Britain for thine own,
Together with the Earldom of Richmont,
And this rich City of Angiers withal.

Q. Elianor And if thou seek to please thine Uncle John,
Shall see my Son how I will make of thee.

John Now every thing is sor^ed to this end,
Lets in and there prepare the marriage rytes,
Which in S. Mary's Chapel presently
Shall Be performed ere this Presence part.

Exeunt. Ma^ent Constance and Arthur. Arthur Madam good chcere, these drouping
languishme^tes
Add no redress to salve our awkward haps.
If heavens have concluded these events,
To small avail is bitter pensiuenes:
Seasons will change, and so our present grief
May change with them, and all to our relief.

Constance Ah boy, thy years I see are far too green
To look into the bottom of-these cares.
But I, who see the poyse that weighs down
Thy weal, my wish, and all the willing means
Wherewith thy fortune and thy fame should mount.
What joy, what ease, what rest can lodge in me,
With whom all hope and hap does disagree?

Arthur Yet Ladies tears, and cares, and solemn shows,
Rather than helps, heap up more work for woes.

Constance If any Power will hear a widows plaint,
That from a wounded soul implores revenge;
Send fell contagion to infect this Clyme,
This cursed Country, where the traitors breath.
Whose perjury as proud Briareus,
Beleaguers all the Sky with misbeliefe.
He promised Arthur, and he swear it too,
To fence thy right, and check thy foemans pride:
But now black-spotted Periure as he is,
He takes a truce with Elnors damned brat,
And marries Jews to her lovely Niece,
Sharing thy fortune, and thy birth-dayes gift
Between these lovers: ill betide the match.
And as they shoulder thee from out thy own,
And triumph in a widows tearefull cares:
So heavens cross them with a thriftles course.
Is all the blood yspilt on either part,
Closing the cranies of the thirsty earth,
Grown to a louegame and a Bridal feast?
And must thy birthright hid the wedding banes?
Poor helples boy, hopeles and helples too,
To whom misfortune seems no yoke at all.
Thy stay, thy state, thy imminent mishaps
Wounds thy mothers thoughts with feeling care,
Why lookst thou pale? the color flies thy face,
I trouble now the fountain of thy yo^th,
And make it moodie with my doles discourse,
Go in with me, reply not lovely boy,
We must obscure this moan with melody,
Least worser wrack ensue our malecontent.

Exeunt. Enter the King of England the King of France, Arthur, Bastard, Jews,
Lymoges, Co^stance, Blanch, Chattilion, Pembrooke, Salisburie, and Elianor.
John This is the day, the long desired day,
Wherein the Realms of England and of France
Stand highly blessed in a lasting peace.
Thrice happy is the Bridegroom and the Bride,
From whose sweet Bridale such a concord springs,
To make of mortal foes immortal friends.

Constance Ungodly peace made by an others war.

Philip Unhappy peace, that ties thee from revenge.
Rouse thee Plantaginet, live not to see
The butcher of the great Plantiginet.
Kings, Princes, and ye Peers of either Realms,
Pardon my rashness, and forgive the zeal
That caries me in fury to a deed
Of high desert, of honor, and of arms.
A boon O Kings, a boon does Philip beg
Prostrate upon his knee: which knee shall cleave
Unto the superficies of the earth,
Till France and England grant this glorious boon.

John Speak Philip, England graunts thee thy request.

Philip And France confirms what ere is in his power.

Bastard Then Duke sit fast, I level at thy head,
Too base a ransom for my fathers life.
Princes, I crave the Combat with the Duke
That braues it in dishonor of my Sire.
Your words are past nor can you now reuerse
The Princely promise that reuiues my soul,
Whereat me thinks I see his sinnews shake:
This is the boon (dread Lords) which granted once
Or life or death are pleasant to my soul;
Since I shall live and die in Richards right.

Lymoges Base Bastard, misbegotten of a King.
To interrupt these holy nuptial rytes
With brawles and tumults to a Dukes disgrace:
Let it suffice, I scorn to join in fight,
With one so far unequal to my self.

Bastard A fine excuse, Kings if you will be Kings,
Then keep your words, and let us combat it.

John Philip, We cannot force the Duke to fight,
Being a subject unto neither Realm:
But tell me Austria, if an English Duke
Should dare thee thus, would thou accept the challendge?

Lymoges Else let the world account the Austrich Duke
The greatest coward living on the Earth.

John Then cheer thee Philip, John will keep his word,
Kneel down, in sight of Philip King of France
And all these Princely Lords assembled here,
I gird thee with the sword of Normandy,
And of that land I do inuest thee Duke:
So shall thou be in living and in land
Nothing inferior unto Austria.

Lymoges K. John, I tell thee flatly to thy face
Thou wrongst mine honor: and that thou may see
How much I scorn thy new made Duke and thee,
I flatly say, I will not be compeld:
And so farewell Sir Duke of low degree,
I Will find a time to match you for this geere.

Exit. John Stay Philip, let him go the honors thine.

Bastard I cannot live unless his life be mine.

Q. Elianor Thy forwardnes this day has ioyd my soul.
And made me think my Richard lives in th^^.

K. Philip Lordings lets in, and spend the wedding day
In maskes and triumphs, letting quarrels cease.

Enter a Cardynall from Rome. Card. Stay King of France, I charge thee ioyn not
hands With him that stands accursed of God and men.

Know John, that I Pandulph Cardinal of Millaine, and Legate from the Sea of
Rome, demand of thee in the name of our holy Father the Pope Innocent, why
thou do (contrary to the laws of our holy mother the Church, and our holy
father the Pope) disturb the quiet of the Church, and disanull the election of
Stephen Langhton, whom his Holiness has elected Archbishop of Canterbury: this
in his Holiness name I demand of thee?


John And what have thou or the Pope thy master to do to demand of me, how I
employ mine own? Know sir Priest as I honor the Church and holy Churchmen, so
I scorn to be subject to the greatest Prelate in the world. Tell thy Master
so from me, and say, John of England said it, that never an Italian Priest of
them all, shall either have tithe, tole, or poling penie out of England, but as
I am King, so will I reign next under God, supreme head both over spiritual
and temrall: and he that contradicts me in this, I Will make him hoppe headless.


K. Philip What King John, know you what you say, thus to blaspheme against our
holy father the Pope.


John Philip, though thou and all the Princes of Christendom suffer themselves
to be abusde by a Prelates slavery, my mind is not of such base temper. If
the Pope will be King in England, let him win it with the sword, I know no
other title he can allege to mine inheritance.


Card. John, this is thine answer?


John What then?


Card. Then I Pandulph of Padoa, Legate from the Apostolik Sea, do in the name
of S. Peter and his successor our holy Father Pope Innocent, pronounce thee
accursed discharging every of thy subjects of all duty and fealty that they
do owe to thee, and pardon and forgiveness of sin to those or them
whatsoever, which shall carry arms against thee, or murder thee: this I
pronounce, and charge all good men to abhor thee as an excommunicate person.


John So sir, the more the Fox is cursed the better a fares: if God bless me
and my Land, let the Pope and his shauelings curse and spare not.


Card. Furthermore I charge thee Philip King of France, and all the Kings and
Princes of Christendom, to make war upon this miscreant: and whereas thou
have made a league with him, and confirmed it by oath, I do in the name of our
foresaid father the Pope, acquit thee of that oath as unlawful, being made with
an heretic, how say thou Philip, do thou obey?


John Brother of France, what say you to the Cardinal?


Philip I say, I am sorry for your Majesty, requesting you to submit your
self to the Church of Rome.


John And what say you to our league, if I do not submit?

Philip What should I say? I must obey the Pope.

John Obey the Pope, and break your oath to God?

Philip The Legate has absolude me of mine oath:
Then yield to Rome, or I defy thee here.

John Why Philip, I defy the Pope and thee,
False as thou art, and periurde K. of France,
Unworthy man to be accounted King.
Give thou thy sword into a Prelates hands?
Pandulph, where I of Abbots, Monks and Friars
Have taken somewhat to maintain my wars,
Now will I take no more but all they have.
I Will rowze the lazy lubbers from their Cells,
And in despite I Will send them to the Pope.
Mother, come you with me, and for the rest
That will not follow John in this attempt,
Confusion light upon their damned souls.
Come Lords, ^ight for your King that fights for your good?

Philip And are they gone? Pandulph thy self shall see
How France will fight for Rome and Romish rytes.
Nobles, to arms, let him not pass the seas.
Lets take him captive, and in triumph lead
The K. of England to the gates of Rome.
Arthur, (...) thee man, and thou shall see
What Philip K. of France will do for thee.

Blanch And will your Grace upon your wedding day
Forsake your Bride and follow dreadful drums:
Nay, good my Lord, stay you at home with me.

Jews Sweet heart content thee, and we shall agree.

Philip Follow me Lords, Lord Cardynall lead the way,
Drums shall be music to this wedding day.

Exeunt. Excursions. The Bastard pursues Austria, and kills him. Bastard Thus
has K. Richards Son perform his vows.
And offered Austrias blood for sacrifice
Unto his fathers ^uerliuing soul.
Brave Cordelion, now my heart does say,
I have deserude, though not to be thy heir
Yet as I am, thy base begotten son,
A name as pleasing to thy Philips heart,
As to be called the Duke of Normandy.
Lie there a pray to every ravening foul:
And as my Father triumphed in thy spoils,
And trod thine Ensigns underneath his feet,
So do I tread upon thy cursed self,
And leave thy body to the fowls for food.

Exit. Excursions, Arthur, Constance, Jews, having taken Q. Elianor prisoner.
Constance Thus has the God of Kings with conquering arm
Dispearst the foes to true succession.
Proud, and disturber of thy Coun^reyes peace,
Constance does live to came thine insolence,
And on thy head will now avenged be
For all the mischiefs hatched in thy brain.

Q Elinor Contemptuous dame vnreuent Duchess thou,
To brave so great a Queen as Elianor.
Base scolde have thou forgot, that I was wife,
And mother to three mighty English Kings?
I charge thee then, and you forsooth sir Boy,
To set your Grandmother at liberty,
And yield to John your Uncle and your King.

Constance It Is not thy words proud Queen shall carry it.

Elianor Nor yet thy threats proud Dame shall daunt my mind.

Arthur Sweet Granda^e, and good Mother leave these brawles.

Elinor I Will find a time to triumph in thy fall.

Constance My time is now to triumph in thy fall,
And thou shall know that Constance will triumph.

Arthur Good Mother weigh it is Queen Elianor,
Though she be captive, use her like herself.
Sweet Granda^e bear with what my Mother says,
Your Highness shall be used honorably.

Enter a Messenger. Mess. Jews my Lord, Duke Arthur, and the rest,
To arms in have, K. John relyes his men,
And ginnes the fight afresh: and swears withal
To lose his life, or set his Mother free.

Jews Arthur away, it is time to look about.

Elianor Why how ^^^daine, what is your courage coold?

Constance No Elianor, my courage gathers strength,
And hopes to lead both John and thee as slaves:
And in that hope, I hale thee to the field.

Exeunt. Excursions. Elianor is rescued by John, and Arthur is taken prisoner.
Exeunt. Sound victory. Enter John, Elianor, and Arthur Prisoner, Bastard,
Pembrooke, Salisbury, and Hubert de Burgh. John Thus right triumphs, and John
triumphs in right.
thou see, France cannot bolster thee:
Thy Mothers pride has brought thee to this fall.
But if at last, Nephew thou yield thy self
Into the gardance of thine Uncle John,
Thou shall be used as becomes a Prince.

Arthur Uncle, my Grandame taught her Nephew this,
To bear captivity with patience.
Might has preuayld not right, for I am King
Of England, though thou wear the Diadem.

Q. Elianor Son John, soon shall we teach him to forget
These proud presumptions, and to know himself.

John Mother, he never will forget his claim,
I would he liude not to remember it.
But leaving this, we will to England now,
And take some order with our Popelings there,
That swell with pride, and fat of lay men's lands.

Philip* I make thee chief in this affair,
Ransack the Abbeys, Cloisters, Priories,
Convert their coin unto my soldiers use:
And whatsoere he be within my Land,
That goes to Rome for justice and for law,
While he may have his right within the Realm,
Let him be iudgde a traitor to the State,
And suffer as an enemy to England.
Mother, we leave you here beyond the seas,
As Regent of our Provinces in France,
While we to England take a speedy course,
And thank our God that gave us victory.
Hubert de Burgh take Arthur here to thee,
Be he thy prisoner: Hubert keep him safe,
For on his life does hang thy Sovereigns crown,
But in his death consists thy Sovereigns bliss:
Then Hubert, as thou shortly hearst from me,
So use the prisoner I have given in charge.

Hubert Frolic young Prince, though I your keeper be,
Yet shall your keeper live at your command.

Arthur As please my God, so shall become of me.

Q. Elianor My Son to England, I will see thee ship^,
And pray to God to send thee safe ashore.

Bastard Now wars are done, I long to be at home
To diue into the Monks and Abbots bags.
To make some sport among the smooth skin Nuns,
And keep some revel with the fanzen Friars.

John To England Lords, each look unto your charge,
And arm yourselues against the Roman pride.

Exeunt. Enter the K. of France, Jews his son, Cardinal Pundolph Legate,
and Constance. Philip What every man attacht with this mishap?
Why frown you so, why droop ye Lords of France?
Me thinks it differs from a warlike mind
To lowre it for a check or two of chance.
Had Lymoges escapt the bastards spite,
A little sorrow might have serude our loss.
Brave Austria, heaven joys to have thee there.

Card. His soul is safe and free from Purgatory,
Our holy Father has dispenst his sins,
The blessed Saints have heard our orisons,
And all are Mediators for his soul,
And in the right of these most holy wars,
His holiness free pardon does pronounce
To all that follow you against English heretics,
Who stand accursed in our mother Church.

Enter Constance alone. Philip To aggrauate the measure of our grief,
All malcontent comes Constance for her Son.
Be brief good Madame, for your face imports
A tragic ^ale behind that's yet untold.
Her passions stop the organ of her voice,
Deep sorrow throbbeth misbefalne events,
Out with it Lady, that our Act may end
A full Catastrophe of sad laments.

Constable. My tongue is tunde to story forth mishap:
When did I breath to tell a pleasing tale?
Must Constance speak? let tears prevent her talk:
Must I discourse? let Did^ sigh and say,
She weeps again to hear the wrack of Troy:
Two words will serve, and then my tale is done:
El^ors proud brat has robbed me of my Son.

Lewe^ Have patience Madame, this is chance of war:
He may be ransomde, we revenge his wrong.

Constance Beit ^er so soon, I shall not live so long.

Philip Despair not yet, come Constance, go with me,
These clouds will fleet, the day will clear again.

Exeunt. Card. Now Jews, thy fortune buds with happy spring,
Our holy Fathers prayers effects this.
Arthur is safe, let John alone with him,
Thy title next is fairst to Englands Crown:
Now stir thy Father to begin with John,
The Pope says I, and so is Albiox thine.

Jews Thanks my Lord Legate for your good conceit,
It Is best we follow now the game is fair.
My Father wants to work him your good words.

Card. A few will serve to forward him in this,
Those shall not want: but lets about it then.

Exeunt. Enter Philip leading a Friar, charging him to show where the Abbots
gold lay. Philip Come on you fat Franciscans, dally no longer, but show me
where the Abbots treasure lies, or die.


Friar Benedicamus Domini, was ever such an injury.
Sweet S. Withold of thy lenity, defend us from extremity,
And hear us for S. Charity, oppressed with austeritie.
In nomini Domini, make I my homily,
Gentle Gentilitie griene not the Clergy.

Philip Gray gownd good face, conjure ye,
n^r trust me for a groate,
If this waste girdle hang thee not
that girdeth in thy coat.
Now balde and barefoote Bungie birds
when up the gallows climing,
Say Philip he had words enough
to put you down with ryming.

Friar A pardon, Oparce, Saint Fraunces for mercy,
Shall shield thee from nightspells and dreaming of devils,
If thou will forgive me, and never more grieve me,
With fasting and praying, and Hail Marie saying.
From black Purgatory a penance right sorry.
Friar Thomas will warm you,
It shall never harm you.

Philip Come leave off your rabble,
Sirs hang up this lozell.

2. Friar For charity I beg his life,
Saint Frauncis chiefest Friar,
The best in all our Covent Sir,
to keep a Wintersster.
O strangle not the good old man,
my hostess oldest guest,
And I will bring you by and by
unto the Priors chest.

Philip I, say thou so, and if thou will the friar is at liberty,
If not, as I am honest man, I Will hang you both for company.

Friar. Come hither, this is the chest though simple to behold
That wants not a thousand pound in silver and in gold.
Myself will warrant full so much, I know the Abbots store,
I Will pawn my life there is no less to have what ere is more.

Philip I take thy word, the overplus unto thy share shall come,
But if there want of full so much, thy neck shall pay the sum.
Break up the Cofer, Friar.

Friar Oh I am vndun, fair Alice the Nun
Has took up her rest in the Abbots chest,
Sancte benedicite, pardon my simplicity.
Fie Alice, confession will not salve this transgression.

Philip What have we here, a holy Nun? So keep me God in health,
A smooth fact Nun (for ought I know) is all the Abbots wealth.
Is this the No^ries chastity? Beshrewe me but I think
They go as often to Venery, as niggards to their drink.
Why paltrey Friar and Pandar too, ye shameless shaven crown,
Is this the chest that held a hoord, at least a thousand pound?
And is the hoord a holy whore? Well be the hangman nimble,
He Will take the pain to pay you home, and teach you to dissemble.

Nun O spare the Friar Anthony, a better never was
To sing a Dirige solemnly, or read a morning Mass.
If money be the means of this, I know an ancient Nun,
That has a hoord this seven years, did never see the sun;
And that is yours, and what is ours, so favor now be shown,
You shall command as commonly, as if it were your own,

Friar Your honor excepted.

Nun I Thomas, I mean so.

Philip From all save from Friars.

Nun Good Sir, do not think so?
and you Friar Laurence remember your ransom a hundred pound, and a pardon
for your self, and the rest come on. Sir Prophet, you shall with me, to
receive a Prophets reward.


Exeunt. Enter Hubert de Burgh with three men. Hubert My masters. I have showed
you what warrant I have for this attempt; I perceive by your heavy
countenances, you had rather be otherwise employed, and for my own part, I
would the King had made choice of some other executioner: only this is my
comfort, that a King commands, whose precepts neglected or omitted, threatens
torture for the default. Therefore in brief, leave me, and be ready to attend
the adventure: stay within that entry, and when you hear me cry, God save the
King, issue suddenly forth, lay hands on Arthur, set him in this chair,
wherein (once fast bound) leave him with me to finish the rest.


Attendants We go, though loath.

Exeunt. Hubert My Lord, will it please your Honor to take the benefit of the
fair evening?


Enter Arthur to Hubert de Burgh. Arthur Gramttcie Hubert for thy care of me,
In or to whom restraint is newly known,
The joy of walking is small beue^^^,
Yet will I take thy offer with small thanks,
I would not loose the pleasure of the eye.
But tell me courteous keeper if you can,
How long the King will have me tarry here.

Hubert I know not Prince, but as I guess not long.
God send you freedom, and God save the King,
They issue forth.

Arthur Why how now sirs, what, may this outrage mean?
O help me Hubert, gentle keeper help:
God send this sudden mutinous approach
Tend not to reaue a wretched guiltles life.

Hubert So sirs, depart, and leave the rest for me.

Arthur Then Arthur yield, death frowneth in thy face,
What means this? Good Hubert plead the case.

Hubert Patience young Lord, and listen words of woe,
Harmfull and harsh, hells horror to be heard:
A dismal tale fit for a furies tongue.
I faint to tell, deep sorrow is the sound.

Arthur What, must I die?

Hubert No news of death, but tidings of more hate,
A wrathful doom, and most unlucky fate:
Deaths dish were dainty at so fell a feast,
Be deaf, hear not, its hell to tell the rest.

Arthur Alas thou wrongst my youth with words of fear,
It Is hell, it is horror, not for one to hear:
What is it man if it must needs bedon,
Act it, and end it, that the pain were gone.

Hubert I will not chaunt such dolor with my tongue,
Yet must I act the outrage with my hand.
My heart my head, and all my powers beside,
To aid the office have at once divide.
Peruse this letter, lines of treble woe,
Read ore my charge, and pardon when you know.

Hubert these are to command thee, as thou tendrest our quiet in mind and the
estate of our person, that presently upon the receipt of our command, thou put
out the eyes of Arthur Plantaginet.

Arthur Ah monstrous damned man, his very breath infects the elements,
Contagious venyme dwells in his heart,
Effecting means to poison all the world.
Vnreuerent may I be to blame the heavens
Of great injustice, that the miscreant
Lives to oppress the innocents with wrong.
Ah Hubert, makes he thee his instrument
To sound the tromp that causes hell triumph?
Heaven weeps, the Saints do shed celestial tears,
They fear thy fall, and cite thee with remorse,
They knock thy conscience, moving pity there,
Willing to fence thee from the rage of hell:
Hell Hubert, trust me all the plagues of hell
Hangs on performance of this damned deed.
This seal, the warrant of the bodies bliss,
Ensureth Satan chieftaine of thy soul:
Subscribe not Hubert, give not Gods part away.
I speak not only for eyes privilege,
The chief exterior that I would enjoy:
But for thy peril, far beyond my pain,
Thy sweet souls loss, more than my eyes vain lack;
A cause internal, and eternal too.
Advise thee Hubert, for the case is hard,
To loose salvation for a Kings reward.

Hubert My Lord, a subject dwelling in the land
Is tied to execute the Kings command.

Arthur. Yet God commands, whose power reaches further,
That no command should stand in force to murder.

Hubert But (...) me Essence has ordaind a law,
A death for guilt, to keep the world in awe.

Arthur I plead not guilty, treasonles and free.

Hubert But that appeal my Lord concerns not me.

Arthur Why, thou art he that may omit the peril.

Hubert I, if my Sovereign would remit his quarrel.

Arthur His quarrel is unhallowed false and wrong.

Hubert Then be the blame to whom it does belong.

Arthur Why that's to thee if thou as they proceed,
Conclude their judgment with so vile a deed.

Hubert Why then no execution can be lawful,
If Judges doomes must be reputed doubtful.

Arthur Yes where in form of Law in place and time,
The offender is convicted of the crime.

Hubert My Lord, my Lord, this long expostulation,
Heaps up more grief, than promise of redress;
For this I know, and so resolude I end,
That subjects lives on Kings commands depend.
I must not reason why he is your foe,
But do his charge since he commands it so.

Arthur Then do thy charge, and charged be thy soul
With wrongful persecution done this day.
You rolling eyes, whose superficies yet
I do behold with eyes that Nature lent:
Send forth the terror of your Moouers frown,
To wreake my wrong upon the murderers
That rob me of your fair reflecting view:
Let hell to them (as earth they wish to me)
Be dark and direful guerdon for their guylt,
And let the black tormenters of deep Tartary
Vpbraide them with this damned enterprise,
Inflicting change of tortures on their souls.
Delay not Hubert, my orisons are ended,
Begin I pray thee, reaue me of my sight:
But to perform a tragedy indeed,
Conclude the period with a mortal stab.
Constance farewell, tormentor come away,
Make my dispatch the Tirants feasting day.

Hubert I faint, I fear, my conscience bids desist:
Faint did I say, fear was it that I named?
My King commands, that warrant sets me free:
But God forbids, and he commands Kings,
That great Commander counterchecks my charge,
He stays my hand, he makes soft my heart,
Go cursed tools, your office is exempt,
Cheer thee young Lord, thou shall not loo^e an eye,
Though I should purchase it with loss of life.
I Will to the King, and say his willis done,
And of the langor tell him thou art dead,
Go in with me, for Hubert was not borne
To blind those lamps that Nature pollisht so,

Arthur Hubert, if ever Arthur be in state,
Look for amends of this received gift
I took my eysight by thy courtesy,
Thou lenest them me, I will not be ingrate.
But now procrastination may offend
The issue that thy kindness undertakes:
Depart we Hubert to prevent the worst.

Exeunt. Enter King John, Essex, Salisbury, Penbrooke. John Now warlike
followers rests ought undone
That may impeach us of foud oversight?
The French have felt the temper of our swords,
Cold terror keeps possession in their sowles,
Checking their ouerdaring arrogance
For buckling with so great an ouermatch.
The Arche proud titled Priest of Italy,
That calls himself grand Viccar under God
Is busied now with trentall obsequies,
Mass and mouths mind, dirge and I know not what
To ease their sowles in painful purgatory,
That have miscarried in these bloody wars.
Heard you not Lords when first his holiness
Had tidings of our small account of him,
How with a taunt vaunting upon his toes
He vrdge a reason why the English Ass
Disdaingd the blessed ordinance of Rome?
The title (reverently might I infer)
Became the Kings that erst have borne the load,
The slavish weight of that controlling Priest:
Who at his pleasure temperd them like wax
To carry arms on danger of his curse,
Banding their sowles with warrants of his hand.
I grieve to think how Kings in ages past
(Simply devoted to the Sea of Rome)
Have run into a thousand acts of shame.
But now for confirmation of our State,
Since we have proynd the more than needful branch
That did oppress the true wel-growing stock,
It rests we throughout our Territories
Be reproclaimed and invested King.

Pembrook My Liege, that were to busy men with doubts,
Once were you crowned, proclaimd, and with applause
Your ^^tie streets have ecchoed to the ear,
God save the King, God save our Sovereign John.
Pardon my fear, my censure does infer
Your Highness not deposde from Regal State,
Would breed a mutiny in peoples minds,
What it should mean to have you crowned again.

John Pembrooke perform what I have bid thee do,
Thou know not what induces me to this.
Essex go in, and Lordings all be gone
About this task, I will be crowned anon.

Enter the Bastard. Philip, what news, how do the Abbots chests?
Are Friars fatter than the Nuns are fair?
What cheer with Churchmen, had they gold or no?
Tell me how has thy office took effect?

Philip My Lord, I have performd your Highness charge:
The ease bred Abbots and the bare foot Friars,
The Monks the Priors and holy cloystred Nuns,
Are all in health, and were my Lord in wealth,
Till I had tythde and told their holy boords.
I doubt not when your Highness sees my prize,
You may proportion all their former pride.

John Why so, now sorts it Philip as it should:
This small intrusion into Abbey trunkes,
Will make the Popelings excommunicate,
Curse, ban, and breath out damned orisons,
As thick as hailestones fore the springs approach:
But yet as harmles and without effect,
As is the echo of a Cannons crack
Dischargd against the battlements of heaven.
But what news else befell there Philip?

Bastard Strange news my Lord: within your territories,
Nere Pomfret is a Prophet new sprung up,
Whose divination volleys wonders forth;
To him the Commons throng with Country gifts,
He sets a date unto the Beldames death,
Prescribes how long the Virgins state shall last,
Distinguishes the moving of the heavens,
Gives limits unto holy nuptial rytes,
Foretells famine, abounds plenty forth,
Of fate, of fortune, life and death he chats,
With such assurance, scruples put apart,
As if he knew the certain doomes of heaven,
Or kept a Register of all the Destinies.

John Thou telst me meruailes, would thou had brought the man,
We might have questiond him of things to come.

Bastard My Lord, I took a care of had I wist,
And brought the Prophet with me to the Court,
He stays my Lord but at the Presence door:
Pleases your Highness, I will call him in.

John Nay stay awhile, we will have him here anon,
A thing of weight is first to be performd.

Enter the Nobles and crown King John, and then cry God save the King. John
Lordings and friends supporters of our state,
Admire not at this vnaccustomd course,
Nor in your thoughts blame not this deed of yours.
Once ere this time was I invested King,
Your fealty sworn as Li^gmen to our state*
Once since that time ambicious weeds have sprung
To stain the beauty of our garden plot:
But heavens in our conduct rooting thence
The false intruders, breakers of worlds peace,
Have to our joy, made Sunshine chase the storm.
After the which, to try your constancy,
That now I see is worthy of your names,
We craude once more your helps for to inuest us
Into the right that envy sought to wrack.
Once was I not deposde, your former choice;
Now twice been crowned and applauded King:
Your cheered action to install me so,
Infers assured witness of your loves,
And binds me over in a Kingly care
To render love with love, rewards of worth
To balance down requital to the full.
But thanks the while, thanks Lordings to you all:
Ask me and use me, try me and find me yours.

Essex A boon my Lord, at vauntage of your words
We ask to guerdon all our loyalties.

Pembrooke We take the time your Highness bids us ask:
Please it you grant, you make your promise good,
With lesser loss than one superfluous hair
That not remembered falls from your head.

John My wordis past, receive your boon my Lords.
What may it be? Ask it, and it is yours.

Essex We crave my Lord, to please the Commons with
The liberty of Lady Constance Son:
Whose durance darkeneth your Highness right,
As if you kept him prisoner, to the end
Your self were doubtful of the thing you have.
Dismiss him thence, your Highness needs not fear,
Twice by consent you are proclaimd our King.

Pembrooke This if you grant, were all unto your good:
For simple people muse you keep him close.

John Your words have searched the center of my thoughts,
Confirming warrant of your loyalties,
Dismiss your couusell, sway my state,
Let John do nothing but by your consents.
Why how now Philip, what ecstasy is this?
Why casts thou up thy eyes to heaven so?

There the five Moons appear. Bastard See, see my Lord strange apparitions.
Glauncing mine eye to see the Diadem
Placte by the Bishops on your Highness head,
From forth a gloomie cloud, which curtain like
Displaide it self, I suddenly espied
Five Moons reflecting, as you see them now:
Even in the moment that the Crown was placte
Began they appear, holding the course you see.

John What might portend these apparitions,
Unusual signs, forerunners of event,
Presagers of strange terror to the world:
Believe me Lords the object fears me much.
Philip thou toldst me of me of Wizzard late,
Fetch in the man to descant of this show.

Pembrooke The heavens frown upon the sinful earth,
When with prodigious vnaccustomd signs
They spot their superficies with such wonder.

Essex Before the ruins of Jerusalem,
Such Meteors were the Ensigns of his wrath
That hastened to destroy the faultfull Town.

Enter the Bastard with the Prophet. John Is this the man?

Bastard It is my Lord.

John Prophet of Pomfret, for so I hear thou art,
That calculatst of many things to come:
Who by a power repleate with heavenly gift
Can blab the counsel of thy Makers will.
If fam^ be true, or truth be wronged by thee,
Decide in cyphering what these five Moons
Portend this Clyme, if they presage at all.
Breath out thy gift, and if I live to see
Thy divination take a true effect,
I Will honor thee above all earthly men.

Peter The Sky wherein these Moons have residence,
Presents Rome the great Metropolis,
Where sits the Pope in all his holy pomp.
Four of the Moons present four Provinces,
To wit, Spain, Denmark, Germany, and France,
That bear the yoke of proud commanding Rome,
And stand in fear to tempt the Prelates curse.
The smallest Moon that whirles about the rest,
Impatient of the place he holds with them,
Does figure forth this Island Albion,
Who gins to scorn the Sea and State of Rome,
And seeks to shun the Edicts of the Pope:
This shows the heaven, and this I do auerre
Is figured in these apparitions.

John Why then it seems the heavens smile on us,
Giving applause for leaving of the Pope.
But for they chance in our Meridian,
Do they effect no private growing ill
To be inflicted on us in this Clyme?

Peter The Moons effect no more than what I said:
But on some other knowledge that I have
By my prescience, ere Ascension day
Have brought the Sun unto his usual height,
Of Crown, Estate, and Royal dignity,
Thou shall be clean dispoyld and dispossessed.

John False Dreamer, perish with thy witched news,
Villain thou woundst me with thy fallacies:
If it be true, dye for thy tidings price;
If false, for fearing me with vain suppose:
Hence with the Witch, hells damned secretary.
Lock him up sure: for by my faith I swear,
True or not true, the Wizzard shall not live.
Before Ascension day: who should be cause hereof?
Cut off the cause and then the effect will dye.
Tut, tut, my mercy serves to maime my self,
The root does live, from whence these thorns spring up,
I and my promise past for his deliury:
Frown friends, fail faith, the devil go withal,
The brat shall dye, that terrifies me thus.
Pembrooke and Essex I recall my grant,
I will not buy your favors with my fear:
Nay murmur not, my will is law enough,
I love you well, but if I loud you better,
I would not buy it with my discontent.
Enter Hubert. How now, what news with thee.

Hubert According to your Highness strickt command
Young Arthurs eyes are blinded and extinct.

John Why so, then he may feel the crown, but never see it.

Hubert Nor see nor feel, for of the extreme pain,
Within one hour gave he up the Ghost.

John What is he dead?

Hubert He is my Lord.

John Then with him dye my cares.

Essex Now joy betide thy soul.

Pembrooke And heavens revenge thy death.

Essex What have you done my Lord? Was ever heard
A deed of more inhumane consequence?
Your foes will curse, your friends will cry revenge.
Unkindly rage more rough than Northern wind,
To chip the beauty of so sweet a flower.
What hope in us for mercy on a fault,
When kinsman dies without impeach of cause,
As you have done, so come to cheer you with,
The guilt shall never be cast me in my teeth.

Exeunt. John And are you gone? The devil be your guide:
Proud Rebels as you are to brave me so:
Saucie, uncivil, checkers of my will.
Your tongues give edge unto the fatal knife:
That shall have passage through your traitrous throats.
But hushed, breath not buggs words to soon abroad,
Least time prevent the issue of thy reach.
Arthur is dead, I there the corzie grows:
But while he liude, the danger was the more;
His death has freed me from a thousand fears,
But it has purchased me ten times ten thousand foes.
Why all is one, such luck shall haunt his game,
To whom the devil owes an open shame:
His life a foe that leueld at my crown,
His death a frame to pull my building down.
My thoughts harpt still on quiet by his end,
Who living aimed shrowdly at my room:
But to prevent that plea twice was I crowned,
Twice did my subjects swear me fealty,
And in my conscience loud me as their liege,
In whose defense they would have pawnd their lives.
But now they shun me as a Serpents sting,
A tragic Tyrant stern and pitiles,
And not a title follows after John.
But Butcher, bloudsucker and murderer,
What Planet gouernde my nativity,
To bode me sovereign types of high estate,
So interlacte with hellish discontent,
Wherein fell fury has no interest.
Cursed be the Crown chief author of my care,
Nay cursed my will that made the Crown my care:
Cursed be my birthday, cursed ten times the womb
That yielded me alive into the world.
Art thou there villain, Furies haunt thee still,
For killing him whom all the world laments.

Hubert Why here is my Lord your Highness hand and scale,
Charging on lives regard to do the deed.

John Ah dull conceipted peazant know thou not,
It was a damned execrable deed:
Showst me a seal? Oh villain, both our souls
Have sold their freedom to the thrall of hell,
Under the warrant of that cursed seal.
Hence villain, hang thy self, and say in hell
That I am coming for a kingdom there.

Hubert My Lord attend the happy tale I tell,
For heavens health send Satan packing hence
That instigates your Highness to despair.
If Arthurs death be dismal to be heard,
Bandie the news for rumors of untruth:
He lives my Lord the sweetest youth alive,
In health, with eysight, not a hair amiss.
This heart took vigor from this forward hand,
Making it weak to execute your charge.

John What lives he? Then sweet hope come home again,
Chase hence desp^ire, the purueyer for hell.
Hye Hubert, tell these tidings to my Lords
That throb in passions for young Arthurs death:
Hence Hubert, stay not till thou have reueald
The wished news of Arthurs happy health.
I go my self, the ioyfulst man alive
To story out this new supposed crime.

Exeunt. The end of the first part.

