THE THIRD BOOK OF COMMENTARIES UPON THE APOSTLES CREED, Containing the
blasphemous Positions of Jesuits and other later Romanists, concerning the
authority of their Church: Manifestly proving that whosoever yields such
absolute Belief unto it as these men exact, does believe it better then Gods
word, his SON, his PROPHETS, EVANGELISTS, or APOSTLES, or rather truly
beeleeues no part of their writings or any article in this CREED.

Continued by THOMAS IACKSON B. of Divinity and Fellow of CORPUS CHRISTI
College in OXFORD.

1. King. 18. v. 21. How long halt ye between two opinions, if the Lord be
God follow him; but if Baal, follow him. LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM STANSBY,
and are to be sold by John Budge at the great South door of Paul's, and at
Britains Bursse. 1614.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, AND MY HONORABLE LORD, WILLIAM BY DIVINE
PROVIDENCE L. BISHOP OF DVRHAM, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
RIght Reverend Father, the sweet refreshing your Honorable favors did yield
to such of my labors as hitherto enjoy the light, when a sudden uncomfortable
blast had sorely nipt them in the very setting, makes these last gatherings of
that spring seek that comfortable warmth under your benign protection, which
the unconstant frowning season would hardly afford them in their growth.
Besides these and other my personal obligements, that famous and worthy
founder of this Attick Beehiue, of whose sweetness would God I had been as
capable as I have been long partaker, had never allotted any Cell therein for
me or other Countriman of mine, but with particular relation to that seat of
dignity, which he sometimes did, your Lordship now does, and, to the increase
of Gods glory and good of his Church, long may enjoy. Seeing this our great
foster Father is now ignorant of his childrens demeanor, and knows not me; it
shall be my comfort, to have his honorable successors witnesses of my care and
industry to fulfill his godly desire, whose religious soul in his life time
(as his written laws do testify) did detest nothing more then idleness in
the Ministry, specially in his adopted Sons. The matters I here present unto
your Lordships and the worlds view, are sometimes in themselves so harsh and
hard to be concocted, as he that would strive to make them toothsome unto nice
tastes, should put himself to excessive pains; unless his judgment be much
riper, his wit readier, his invention pleasanter, his opportunities better, and
his leisure greater then mine are. But it is one and the same point of
judgment, not to require exact Mathematical proofs in discourses of
morality, or a smooth facile Rhetorical style in Logical or Scholastique
conflicts. And, as by the statutes of that society wherein I live, I am bound
to avoid barbarism: so my particular inclination moves me, in controversies
especially, to approve his choice that said; Fortia mallem quam formosa. If any
professed enemy to the truth we teach, will answer me from point to point, or
attempt (not as their custom now is only in scoffing sort but seriously) to
auert those unsupportable, but deserved imputations, I lay upon the foundation
of his Religion, I shall (I trust) be able to answer him; the better by
continuance of your Lordships wonted favors, whom I still request the
Christian Readers, as many as reap any profit from my pains on my behalf to
remember with such respect as is due to honorable Patrons of religious studies,
or cherishers of painful endeavors in good causes.

From Corpus Christi College, March xxv. 1614. Your Lordships in all
observance, THOMAS IACKSON.

To the indifferent Reader specially to the learned Artists of the two famous
UNIVERSITIES.
CHristian and beloved Reader, I have been detained in this entry, though not
longer then the structure of it required, yet then I my self, or thou perhaps,
could have wished, for speedier dispatch of the maine edifice intended.
Somewhat notwithstanding, to my apprehension, I had observed, whereby Artists
more accurate, but younger Divines then my self (whose furtherance in the like,
throughout all my meditations I still respect) might be directed, for taking
sure hold of their slipperie antagonists in this conflict. And finding my self
every day then other more unapt, more unwilling at least, to be any Actor in
quarrels of this nature, because most desirous to spend my mortal spirits in
opening the pleasant Fountains of immortality; I thought it not altogether
unlawful to dispense with these labors for a while, in hope to prosequute them
more safely and with better success hereafter, by seconding such as had gone
before me with my small strength, for intercepting these despitefull
Philistims, which continually labor to damme up these sacred Wells of life.
Many excellent wits and grave Divines, as well in our English as other reformed
Churches, I knew, had accurately deciphered the special characters of the
Beast, and demonstrated most properties of great Antichrist upon the Pope. But
that the fundamental charter of the Romish Church, or the commission pretended
by Jesuits for the erection of it, should (as the manner was to demolish
lesser religious houses for building others more magnificent) extend to raze
the very first foundations of religion as common to Christians, Jews, and
Turks; that the acknowledgement of such infallibility as they Deifie her with
should be more incompatible with Christianity then any Idolatry of the
Heathen; that such as absolutely believe all her decrees without examination,
truly believe no article of this Creed; with the like principal branches of
Antichristianisme; were points, for ought I knew, rather touched by the way, or
proposed as clear in themselves to the indifferent and ingenuous, that judge of
the Romish Church by the known picture of her misse-shapen limbs, then
prosequuted at large, or with purpose to pull off that artificial painting,
wherewith late Jesuits have so beautified this ugly Monsters face, that the
world bewitched with gazing too much on it cannot but love her other
deformities though in themselves most loathsome. For though the practices
enjoined by her be so vile, as would have caused Rome Heathen to have blushed
at their mention, or her other doctrines so palpably gross, that her own
Sons heretofore have derided them, and as yet spare to speak ought in
particular for their defense: yet to salve all this it must suffice, that the
Church, which cannot err, has now authorized them.

If any think I prejudice the truth of moderate accusations, by laying such
heavy imputations upon this doctrine, as make it incomparably more detestable
then any other, he speaks not inconsequently to his positions, if he hold
the Trent Council was infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost, or that the Pope
in Cathedral resolutions cannot err. But, he which thinks foul impieties
may bring Romish Prelates out of favor with the spirit of truth, and make them
as obnoxious to errors as others are, or can persuade himself, that many
practices and opinions, by that Church already authorized, are in their nature
abominable and impious, must either accord to me or dissent from Reason,
Conscience, and Religion. For these, so he will but vouchsafe his silence or
attention, jointly proclaim aloude, that nothing amiss, either in matter of
doctrine or manners, can be so detestable with out this presumptuous
groundless warrant of absolute infallibility as with it; that albeit a man
would set himself to practice all particulars directly contrary to what God
has commanded or to contradict God and his goodness, yet his iniquity
without this absolute belief of full authority derived from him so to do,
would be but as a body without a soul, in respect of the Romish Churches
impieties, which makes the holy Ghost the principal Author of Gods written
word the abettor of all her fraud, untruths, or villainies. Briefly as it is
not the doing of those materials God commands us to do, but faithful
submission of our wills to his in doing them, which, as S. James instructs us,
makes us true Christians: so is it not the doing or maintayning of what God
forbids or hates, but the doing of it upon absolute submission of our souls
and consciences to other laws then he has left, which makes men live members
of Antichrist, as being animated, informed and moved by the spirit of error.
Now this persuasion of absolute infallibility and universal warrant from the
holy spirit, without condition or restraint, being peculiar to the Romish
Church, admitting it to be as faulty in practices and as obnoxious to errors
as any other, none can be reputed so truly Antichristian as it. For albeit
Mahomet pretended divine revelations, yet his Priests challenge no such
absolute infallibility as does the Pope; they make no second Rocks or
foundations, no ordinary Pastor equivalent to their great Prophet. Whence
although the Turks hold opinions in themselves, or materially considered, more
gross, and maintain some practices not much less villainous then Jesuits
do: yet the grounds or motives of their belief, (which are as the soul or
spirit of Religion) are nothing so pestiferous, nothing so directly opposite to
the holy spirit, as is this Jesuitical rule of faith. Nor do they either
profess such belief in Christ, or acknowledge him for a foundation so elect
and precious, as brings them within the Temple of God, within which unless
Antichrist sit his contrariety unto Christ could not be so essential, so
immediate or direct, as by the rules of sacred Philosophy we are taught it
must be. Yet I know not, whether the indignity of this doctrine is more apt to
affect Divines or Men rightly religious and fearing God, then the sottishness
of their arguments to persuade it, to provoke the just indignation of ingenuous
Artists, which cannot endure, though in matters of indifferency, to captiuate
their understandings to positions deuoide of sense. To require some
probability of reason, civil or natural, is on their part no insolent
demand, for exchange of Christian faith or aduenturing their inassurance of
life eternal in the service of mere forrainers whom they never saw. Yet unto
peremptory resolutions no less dangerous, do Jesuits solicit us, not only
without any tolerable show of probability but quite contrary to Gods
principal laws and our natural notions of good and evil; as by these
labors every Academique may in part perceive, but more fully, if he would
vouchsafe to sift more of their arguments, then in these short transcursiue
disputes I could. Nor would I dissuade any Artist well grounded in Aristotle
from pervsing the most learned works any Romanist has written in this
argument. In most other controversies betwixt us and them it is dangerous, I
must confess, even for well grounded Artists to begin with their writings,
not so in this: for I protest in the sight of God and his holy Angels, that as
far as I can remember the inclinations of my youth, or by them prognosticate
how afterward I might have been affected, I never was, I never should have
been, so thoroughly possessed with such great dislike of Romish
Antichristianisme in this point, by hearing the most famous Preachers in this
Land, or reading all the learned Writers in reformed Churches, as I was by
examining the labors of Bellarmine, Valentian, and others of best nore amongst
them seriously addressed to this purpose; comparing them only with the known
principles of Christianity and such passages of sacred Writ, as every
Christian Artist should be acquainted with. For the principles, whereon I
proceed, I have been only beholden to the Canon of Scriptures; for deducing
of such blasphemous consequences from them, as I charge the Adversary with,
only to that small measure of knowledge in Aristotelian Philosophy wherewith
my God had blessed me, whiles I was bound by local statutes to the study of
Arts, purposely abstaining from other writings, which with their informations
of my understanding might have bred prejudice in my affection. Since that time,
although the years of my Ministry hardly exceed the space of ordinary
apprentiships, yet have I often wished the discussion of these points had been
then imposed upon me by some experienced Divine, that would only have given me
right hold of their assertions. Upon this consideration I would beseech the
flourishing Artists of this famous Academie, whom God has furnished with all
store of munition necessary for this service, not to neglect opportunities
present. Let them defer (if so they please) the fruits of their labors in
other points (though this be the fault of our English) until the Autumn of
their age. But the mark I now propose unto them, being the evident resolution
of Jesuitical positions into those gross and palpable blasphemies whereto
they tend, which they only seek to hide by Sophismes and artificial tricks of
wit, Academicall wits might displume them of these fig tree leaves and
manifest their nakedness to the world, much better in the spring whiles their
skill in arts were fresh and flourishing, whiles the strength and vigor of
their invention would more easily bend this way, then in the Autumn, when
their leaves begin to fade and their sap retire to the root, as their pleasant
grapes grow ripe. Many towardly plants in this nurcerie, now able to match the
stoutest Jesuit living at his own weapon, whilst in his mature age, multo
iam fractus membra labor, more fit to be a Leader, then a combatant in these
encounters, he shall look back on his former labors or calls to mind his
wonted dexterity in School disputes, may take up old Nestors complaint.

Tunc ego debueram capienda ad Pergama mitti;
Tunc poteram magni, si non superare, morari
Hectoris arma meis: sed in illo tempore nullus,
Aut puer Hector erat; nunc me mea deficit aetas.
The school Jesuit in these studies is like the Iuy always green, because
not set to bring forth fruit unto salvation, but rather to choke and strangle
the plants of life. And for such instruments of the Romish Church, as this Land
usually yields, this wrangling faculty is all the skill they care for, or for
the most part make profession of. Yet such is the brittlenesse of the matter
they are to work upon in this controversy, that were all the Priests and
Jesuits harbored within the confines of great Britain at this present day,
but enjoined to write all they could to any purpose in defense of their Mother;
some few Artists of those Universities, which out of their pride they seem to
vilify amongst the ignorant, would, I dare not say make them blush (for sooner
might they make a black-moores face of the same color with his teeth) but as
many of their favorers of this Kingdom, as have not sworn allegiance to the
Church of Rome, and are able to examine an argument, to be ashamed on their
behalf, even to acknowledge, that for ought these Mounte-bankes could say or
write in their defense, the Positions maintained by their Masters, foreign
Jesuits, were indeed idolatrous and blasphemous; howbeit the Church it self,
we must believe, could never be vanquished, because no man can tell where or
in what shape to find it.

Nor need young Artists fear the countenance of antiquity in this point, from
which their enemies supplies are so slender, that would they come to open
trial, and bring only such of the Fathers for their seconds, as lived within
five hundred years of Christ, or before the mixture of Romish Religion with
Heathenisme, not fully effected till a little after that time: the paucitie of
those whose aid they durst solicit, in respect of that great army, which is
as resolute as we against them, would make them instantly either yield
themselves, or forsake the field. Nor have they been hitherto able to address
any answer, but to their shame, to the Worthies of the English Church, whose
labors have made the conquest in this quarrel easy to any of their
successors, that will adventure to follow their steps. Nothing remains but
what best becomes the exercise of young wits; to exceed the sophistical
disputes of Jesuits against the truth, in copiousnesse of irrefragable
demonstrations, that the allegiance they seek to establish unto the Romish
Church is solemn apostasy from Christ; that the belief of it is the very
abstract of sorcerie, the utmost degree of Antichristianisme that can be
expected. These and like points, being fortified by strength of argument, in
the time of your Regencie or farewell to the study of Arts, might be
polished at your better leisure, afterward to be reuised and published at the
appointment of authority. Or if the zeal of Gods glory thus mightily
eclipsed by this foul Idol of the Romish Church do not as yet so fully move
you; yet that indignation which first wrought a desire in me of giving this
onset, should work (me thinks) in every heart, that bears any sparkle of love
unto his native Country. For what indignity is it to think, that whilst our
gracious Sovereign is a most zealous Professor and Defendor of the truth we
teach; so many of his natural subjects our Countrymen and Brethren, should be
won unto the Romish faction, especially by importunate inculcating two
heresies, of all maintained by that Church in themselves most sottishly
improbable; and yet apparently most damnable Idolaters in their consequences,
if erroneous* I mean this concerning their Churches absolute privilege from
all error, and that other of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament, by
transubstantiation. It cannot again but add much to our grief and
indignation, if we call to mind, how, when the chief Governor and public
authority of this Land were for them, subscription was not urged upon such
violent and bloody terms unto any articles of their Religion, as unto that of
real presence. The mystery of which iniquity cannot better be resolved then
into the powerful and deceitful working of Satan, thus delighting to despite
our Lord and Savior by seducing his professed subjects unto the highest and
most desperate kind of rebellion he could imagine, upon the least occasions
and shallowest reasons. For such is their madness in that other point, as has
been showed in this: Not one inconvenience they can object to our opinion, but
may be demonstrated against theirs; not any fruits of godliness they can
pretend but our doctrine more directly brings forth then theirs could, though
we did admit it for true. For to what other purpose such a presence as they
imagine should serve them, save only to countenance those desperate Idolatrous
practices and litourges of Satan, touched by the way in some parts of these
discourses, is inexplicable; as shall be showed more at large (without
depriving that heavenly mystery of any solemnity of devotion due unto it) in
the unfolding of that controversy.

Yours in Christ Jesus. THOMAS IACKSON.

A Table of Scriptures expounded or illustrated by observations in this third
Book of COMMENTARIES.
Out of the old Testament.
Exodus.
4 13 SEnd I pray thee by the hand of him, whom thou should send. Sect. 3.
Chap. 11. Paragraph. 20. 14 13 Fear ye not, stand still, and behold the
salvation of the Lord. sec. 3. c. 6. par. 5. 15 26 If thou will diligently
hearken, O Israel, unto the voice of the Lord thy God, etc. ibid. 17 7 Is the
Lord among us or no? ibid. p. 7. 16 12 I have heard the murmurings of the
children of Israel. ibid. 19 4 Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians,
etc. ibid. p. 7. 20 10 In it thou shall do no manner of work, etc. sec. 3. c.
1. p. 8 24 10 They said the God of Israel. sect. 3. c. 6. par. 5. p. 7 24 9
Then went up Moses and Aaron, sect. 3. c. 11. par. 10 28 30 Also thou shall put
in the breast plate of judgment the Vrim and the Thummim, etc. sect. 3. c. 1.
p. 2. 3.
Leviticus.
10 9 THou shall not drink wine nor strong drink, etc. sect. 3. c. 1. p. 5.
Numbers.
11 16 GAther unto me seventy men of the Elders of Israel. sect. 3. c. 11. p.
9. 12 6 If there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, etc. ibid. par. 10. 23 22
God brought them out of Egypt, their strength is an an Unicorn, etc. ibid.
par. 20. 27 21 And he shall stand before Eleazar the Priest, etc. sect. 3. c. 1.
p. 3.
Deuteronomie.
11 29 WHen the LORD thy GOD therefore has brought thee into the Land,
whither, etc. sect. 3, c. 7, p. 4 4 1, 2 Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto
the ordinances etc. sect. 3, c. 6, p 5 4 ^9 Take heed to thy self, and keep
thy soul diligently, that thou forget not, etc. sec. 3, c. 7, p. 6 5 22 These
words the Lord spoke unto all your multitude, in the Mount, etc. sect. c. 6, p.
7. 5. 28, 29 I have heard the voice of the words of this people, sect. 3, c.
11, p. 18 10 17 The Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, etc. sec.
3, c. 9, p. 6 11 2 Consider this day, for I speak not unto your children, etc.
sect. 3, c. 7, p. 2 11 13 If ye shall hearken therefore to my commandments,
etc. ibid. p. 4. 11 18 Therefore shall you lay up these my words in your hearts
and in your souls, etc. ibid. p. 2. 11 19 And ye shall teach them your
children, etc. ibid. 11 22 For if you keep diligently all these commandments,
etc. ibid. 11 26 Behold I set before you this day a blessing and a curse, etc.
ibid. p. 4. 18 15 The Lord thy GOD will raise up thee a Prophet like unto me,
etc. sect. 3, c. 11, p. 1 18 15, 19 Unto him shall ye hearken according to all
that thou desiredst of the Lord, etc. sec. 3. c. 11, p. 21 18 18 I will raise
them up a Prophet from among their brethren, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 10 18 18
Whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which he shall speak, etc. sec. 3,
c. 11, p. 18 18 19 Whosoever will not hearken, etc. sect. c. 11, p. 16 18 14
The Nations which thou shall possess, hearken unto those that regard the
times. ibid. p. 19. 18 20 But the Prophet that shall presume to speak a word
in my name. ibid. p. 1. 17 8 If there arise a matter to hard for thee in
judgment, etc. sect. c. 2, p. 1 17 19 And it shall be with him, and he shall
read therein all the days of his life, etc. ibid. p. 4 24 10 There arose not a
Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, etc. sect. 3, c. 11, p. 18 27 11, 12,
13, 14, These shall stand upon Mount Gerizim to bless the people, etc. s. 3,
c. 7, p. 4 30 1 Now when all these things shall come upon thee, etc. ibid. p.
11 31 16 That when they went a whooring after the Gods of a strange Land, etc.
sect. 3, c. 9, p. 6 31 10, 11, 12, 13 Every seventh year, when the year of
freedom shall be, etc. sect. 3, c. 7, p. 4
Joshua.
8 33, 34, 35 ANd all Israel, and their Elders, and their Officers stood on
this side the Arc, etc. sect. 3, c. 7, p. 4
Judges.
2 7, 8 THe people had served the Lord all the days of Joshua, etc. sect. 3,
c. 7, p. 6 6 13 The Lord is with thou valiant man, etc. ibid. 6 14 And the Lord
looked upon him, and said, go in this thy might. ibid. p.7 17 15 When Gideon
heard the dream told, etc. ibid. p. 8 6 15 Ah my Lord, whereby shall I save
Israel, etc. ibid. 8 33 But when Gideon was dead, etc. ibid. par. 9
Samuel.
1 23, 9 ANd David having knowledge, that Saul imagined mischief against him,
said to Abiathar the Priest, etc. sect. 3, c. 1, p. 3 1 30, 7, 8 And David said
to Abiathar the Priest Ahimelechs Son, I pray thee bring me the Ephod, etc.
ibid. 1 28, 6 Therefore Saul asked counsel of the Lord, and the Lord answered
him not. ibid. p. 4
Kings.
1 13, 18 ANd he said unto him, I am a Prophet also as thou art, and an Angel
spoke unto me, etc. s. 3, c. 8, p. 6 1 22, 24 When went the spirit of the Lord
from me, etc. sect. 3, c. 9, p. 2 1 18, 36 And when they should offer the
evening sacrifice Elijah the Prophet came and said etc. sect. 3, c. 11, p. 7 1
22, 28 If thou return in peace the Lord has not spoken by me. ibid. 2 4, 27
Let her alone, for her soul is vexed within her, etc. sec. 3, c. 11, p. 11.
Chronicles.
2 21, 20 THus says GOD, why transgress ye the commandment of the Lord?
Surely ye shall not prosper, etc. sect. 3, c. 9, p. 6.
Nehemiah.
1 7 WE have grievously sinned against thee, etc. sect. 3, c. 7, p. 11.
Psalms.
2 7 THou art my Son, this, etc. sect. 3, c. 11, p. 22 50 16 What have thou to
do, to declare mine ordinances, etc. sect. 2, c. 7. p. 12 50 25 To him that
disposes his way aright, will I show the salvation of God, etc. ibid. 78 33,
34 When he slew them they sought him, etc. s. 3, c. 7, p. 3.
Isaiah.
6 1, 2, 3 I Saw also the Lord sitting upon an high Throne, etc. sect. 3, c.
10, p. 5 6 9 Go and say unto this people, ye shall hear indeed but ye shall
not understand, etc. sect. 3. c. 5. p. 3. 11 2 And the Spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, etc. sect. 3. c. 10. p. 5. 28 16 Behold I lay in Sion a chief
corner stone, etc. sect. 2. c. 7 p. 7. 35 5 Then shall the eyes of blind be
lightened. sect. 3. c. 10. p. 5. 40 3 A voice cries in the wilderness, prepare
ye, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 12. 42 1 Behold my servant I will stay upon him,
etc. sect. 3. c. 30. p. 5. 61 1 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, therefore
the Lord has anointed me. sect. 3. c. 10. p. 5 53 8 9 But his generation who
shall declare, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 22. 42 8 9 I am the Lord, this is my
name, and my glory I will not give unto another. sect 3. c. 11 p. 13.
Jeremiah.
18 18 COme and let us imagine some devise against Jeremiah, etc. sect. 3. c 9.
p. 3. 28 6. 7. 8. 9 Even the Prophet Jeremiah said, so be it the Lord so do,
etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 7. 26 8. 9. Now when Jeremiah had made an end of
speaking all that the Lord had commanded him to speak, etc. sect. 3. c. 9. p.
3. 28. 10. 12. This says the Lord, even so will I break the yoke of
Nebuchadnezzars. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 1^ 29 26 The Lord has made thee Priest for
Iehoiada the Priest, etc. sect. 3. c. 9. p. 3. 30 13 14 Their is none to judge
thy cause, or to lay a plaster, etc. sect. 3. c. 7. p. 11. 32 24 Behold the
Mounts, they are come into the City to take it, etc. ibid. 32 42 43, etc. Thus
says the Lord, like as I have brought all this great plague upon this people:
so will I bring upon them all the good I have promised them, etc. ibid.
Ezekiel.
33. 32. 33 ANd lo thou art unto him, as a jesting song of on that has a
pleasant voice. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 7.
Daniel.
2. 44. THis Kingdom shall never be destroyed, or given to another people, etc.
sect. 2. c. 7. p. 20.
Malachi.
2. 12. ANd now O ye Priests this commandment is for you, etc. sect. 3. c.
p. p. 6.
Ecclesiasticus.
23. 45. 24. 25 BEcause Phineas the son of Eleazar had zeal in the fear of
the Lord, etc. sect. 3. c. 2. p. 8.
Maccabees.
1. 2. 36. 37. 38. But the other answered them nothing, neither cast any one
stone at them, etc. se. 3. c. 1. p. 9. 1, 2 41 Whosoever should come to make
battle with us upon the Sabbath day, etc. ibid.
Out of the New testament: Matthew.
7, 26 Whosoever hears these my words and does them not, etc. se. 2. c. 7,
p. 25. 11. 3. 4, etc. Art thou he that should come, or shall we look for
another, etc. sect. c. 10. p. 4. 12. 27 By whom then do your children cast
them out, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 4. 12 28 But if I by the Spirit, etc. ibid.
p. 5. 16. 13. 14, 15, etc. For Jesus when he came unto the Coasts of Cesarea,
etc. sect. c. 7. p. 2. 16 18 Tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram, etc. ibid. p.
1. throughout the whole Chapter. 16 19 I will give unto thee the keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, etc. sect, 3. c. 3. p. 9. 16 22, etc. Master be good to
your self, etc. sect. c. 2. c. 7. p. 21. 16 23 Then he turned back and said
unto Peter, get thee behind me, etc. ibid. p. 8. 18 15 If thy Brother trespass
against thee, dic Ecclesiae. sect. 2. c. 2. p. 5 21, 40, 41. 42, etc. When
therefore the Lord of the Vineyard shall come, etc. sect. 2. c. 7. p. 9. 21. 42.
Read you never in the Scriptures, the stone which the builders, etc. ibid. 23
2. 3. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat, etc. sect. 3. c. 3. p. 1.
23. 29. 30. They builded the tombs of the Prophets, etc. sect. c. 9. p. 4. 23
35. ibid. 26 27 Bibite ex hoc omnes. sect. 2. c. 4. p. 8. 26 57 They took
Jesus and led him to Caiaphas, etc. sect. c. 5. par. 7. 27 25 All the people
answered and said, his blood be upon us, etc. ibid. 27 64 So shall the last
error be worse then the first, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 22. 26 65 66 What
think ye? And they answered and said, he is worthy to die. ibid.
Mark.
6 2 ANd when the Sabbath was come he began to teach in the Synagogue, etc.
sect. 3. c. 10. p. 5. 7 37 He did all things well, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 7.
9. 38. Master we saw one casting out Devils in thy name, etc. sec. 3 c.11. p.
4. 13 21 22 If any man say to you, lo here is Christ, etc. sect. 3. c. 10. p.
7.
Luke.
4 14 ANd Jesus returned by the power of the spirit into Galile, etc. sect. 3.
c. 10. p. 5. 4, 16, 17, etc. And he came to Nazaret where he had been
brought up, etc. ibid. 4. 18. 16 The spirit of the Lord is upon me because he
has anonted me, etc. ibid. 4 23 Then he said unto them, Ye will surely say
unto me this Proverb, etc. ibid. 4 29 30 And rose up and thrust her out of the
City, etc. ibid. 4 34 I know who thou art, even the holy one of God. sect. 1.
2. c. 7. p. 12. 6 9 Whether is it lawful on the Sabboath days to do good,
etc. sect. 3. c. 1. p. 8. 11 20. But if I by the finger of God cast out Devils,
etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 5. 10 16 He that hears you, hears me, etc. sect.
3. c. 1. p. 13. 16 31 If they hear not Moses, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 21. 22
32 I have prayed for thee thy faith should not fail, etc. sec. 2. c. 2. p. 1.
etc. 6. par. 1. 2. etc. 22 33 Lord I am ready to go with thee into prison.
ibid. 22 66 As Soon as it was day the Elders of the people, etc. sec: 3. c. 5.
p. 7. 24 25 Fools and slow of heart in not believing. sect. 3. c. 12. p, 1. 24
27 He began at Moses, etc. ibid. p. 2. 24 32 Their hearts did burn, etc.
ibid.
John.
1 18 NO man has seen God at any time, se. 3. c. 11. p. 10 1 20 21 Art thou
the Christ? Art thou Eliah, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 20. 1 25 Why baptizest thou
then, if thou be not the Christ, etc. ibid. 1 29 Behold the Lamb of God that
takes away, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 12. 1 31 And I knew him not; but because
he should be declared unto Israel. sect c. 11. p. 20. 1 33 And I knew him not,
but he that sent me to baptize with water, etc. sect. 3. c. 10. p. 5. 1 49
Nathaniel answered, and said unto him, Rabbi thou art the son of God, etc.
sect. 3. c. 11. p. 14. 1 50 Because I said unto thee I saw thee under the fig
Tree, etc. ibid, 2 22 As Soon as he was risen from the dead, his Disciples
remembered, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 16. 2 24 25. But Jesus did not commit
himself unto them, etc. sect. 3. c. 8. p. 3. 3 5 Except that a man be borne
of water and of the Spirit, etc. sect. 4. c. 11. p. 13. 4 3 Every spirit which
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, etc. sect. 2. c. 7. p.
13. 4 25 When he is come, he will tell us all things, sect. 3. c. 11. p. 15.
4 29 Come and see a man that has told me all things, etc. ibid. 4 42 And
they said unto the woman, now we believe, not because of thy saiyngs, etc.
ibid. 5 22 For the Father judges no man, etc. sect. 3. c. 10. p. 1. 5 43 44 I
am in my Fathers name and ye receive me not, etc. sect. 3. c. 8. p. 3, 5 46
For had ye believed Moses, you would have believed me, etc. sect. c. 10. p. 3.
6 5 And the bread that I will give is my flesh, etc. sect. 2. c. 4. p. 12. 10.
6 51 If any man eat of this bread he shall live for ever. ibid. p. 11. 10. 6
51 I am the living bread that came down from Heaven, ibid. p. 12. 6 53 Unless
ye eat the flesh of the son of man, etc. ibid, p. 10. 6 54 Whosoever eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood, etc; ibid. 6 56 Whosoever eats my flesh, and
drinks my blood dwells in me, etc, ibid. 6 58 He that eats this bred shall
live for ever, ibid. 6 14 This is of a truth the Prophet that should come, etc,
s. 3. c. 8. p. 3. 6 30 What sign show thou then, that we may see and
believe, etc. sect. 3. c. 10. p. 7. 5 68 Thou have the words of eternal life,
ibid. 7 18 He that speaks of himself seeks his own glory, sect. 3. c.
14. p. 2. 7 31 Many of the people believed in him, etc, sect 3. c. 10. p. 7.
10, 40, 41, 42, And went again beyond Jordan, into the place where John etc.
sect. 3. c. 11. p. 12. 11 50 It is expedient for us that one die, etc, sect, 3.
c. 5. p. 5. 12 28 Father glorify thy name, etc. sect. 3. c. 11. p. 16. 12 30
This voice came not because of me, etc, ibid. 12 32 If I were lift up from the
Earth, etc, ibid. p. 17. 12 44 He that believes in me believes not in me,
but in him, etc, ibid. p. 16. 12 48 And receives not my words has one that
judges him, etc, ibid. 12, 49, 50, For I have not spoken of my self, etc,
ibid. 14 29 Now I have spoken unto you before it come, ibid. 15 14 Ye are my
friends if ye do whatsoever I command, etc, sect. 3. c. 6 p. 3. 16 4 These
things have I told you, that when the hour shall come, etc, sect, 3. c. 11,
p. 16. 16 30 Now know we that thou know all things, etc. ibid. p. 15. 21 15
Feed my lambs. sec. 2. c. 6. p. 7. 21 18 Verily verily I say unto thee when
thou which wast young, etc. ibid, p. 8, 21 16 Feed my sheep ibid. p. 8.
Acts.
2 15 Ye men of Judea, and ye all, etc. sect. 2, chap. 6, p. 6. 3 12 To the
13 verse of the 4 chap. ibid. 3 23 For it shall be that every person which
shall not hear that Prophet, etc. sect. 3, chap. 12, p. 22. Et sect. 3, c. 11,
p. 1 3 26 Unto you has God raised up his Son, etc. sect. 3, chap. 11, p. 21
10 34 I perceive of truth that God is not an accepter of persons. sect. 3, c.
9, p. 6 13 27 For the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and their Rulers, because they
knew him not, etc. sec. 3, c. 11, p. 21 13 33 Thou art my Son this day, etc.
ibid. p. 22 13 46 Then Paul and Barnabas spoke boldly and said, It was
necessary that the word of God, etc. sect. 2, c. 6, p. 6 17 2 And Paul as his
manner was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath days disputed, etc. sect. 3,
c. 14, p. 1 17 11 They received the word with all readiness, etc. ibid. 26 22
I obtained help of God, and continued unto this day, etc. ibid. p. 4 26 26 For
these things were not done in a corner, etc. sect. 3, c. 11, p 22
Romans.
7 18 TO will is present with me, etc. sect. 3, c. 3, p. 5 10 9 If thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, etc. sect. 2, c. 7, p. 7, 8 10 11
Whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed, etc. ibid.
Corinthians.
1, c. 2, 15 But he that is spiritual discerns all things, etc. sect. 3, c.
14, p. 4 1, c. 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 Who is Paul then? And who is Apollos? but the
Ministers by whom, etc. sect. 2, c. 4, p. 15 1, c. 3. 11 For other foundation
can no man lay. sect. 2, c. 7, p. 7 1, c. 4. 1, 2 Let a man so think of us as
of disposers of the secrets, etc. sect. c. 4, p 14 1, c. 7. 10. Unto the
married command not I but the Lord, etc. sect. 3, c. 9, p. 6 1, c. 11. 26, 27,
28, 29 As often as ye shall eat this bread, etc. sect. 2, c. 4, p. 15 1, c.
11. 34 Other things will I set in order when I come, etc. ibid. 2, c. 8. 13 If
meat offend my Brother, I will eat none, etc. sect. 2, c. 4, p. 21
Galatians.
1 8 THough We or an Angel from heaven preach etc. sect. 3, c. 7, p. 7. 2 7*
When they said the Gospel over the circumcision was committed, etc. sect. 2,
c. 6. p. 4
Ephesians.
2 20 WE are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles, etc. sect. 2, c. 7, p.
15 5, 32 This is a great secret, but I speak concerning Christ, etc. sect. 2,
c. 4, p. 14
Colossians.
3 20 CHildren obey your parents in all things, etc. Sect. 3, c. 1, p. 16
Thessalonians.
2, c. 8. 11 THerefore GOD shall send them strong, etc. sect. 4, c. 7 2, c. 2.
4 He sits as God in the Temple, etc. sect. 2, c. 7, p. 22.
Hebrews.
3 1, 2, 3, 4 COnsider the Apostle and high Priest of our profession, etc.
sect. 3. chap. 6, p. 2 9 22 Without shedding of blood is no remission, etc.
sect. 2, c. 4, p. 18 10 28 He that despises Moses Law, dies without mercy
under two or three witnesses, etc. sect. 3, c. 11, p. 18 11 12 Therefore sprang
their Even of one, etc. sect. 3, chap. 12, p. 22.
Peter.
1, c. 5. 1, 2, 3 THe elders which are amongst you I beseech, which am also an
Elder, etc. sect. 12, c. 6, p. 10 2, c. 1. 17 He received of God the Father
honor and glory, etc. sect. 3, c. 11, p. 16 2, c. 1. 14 Seeing I know that the
time is at hand that I must lay down, etc. sect. 3, c. 13, p. 1 2, c. 1. 16
When he opened unto them the power and coming of Christ, etc: ibid. p. 2 2, c.
1. 19 We have also a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye do well
that ye take heed, ibid.
John.
1, c. 4. v. 3 EVery spirit which confesses not that Jesus Christ. sect. 2, c.
7, p. 13.
Revelation.
1 3 BLessed is he that reads, and they that hear the word, etc. sec. 2, c,
8, p, 4, 13, 4, 5, 6, 7, The beast which had his power from the Dragon, etc.
sect. 3. c. 12. p. 4.
A Table of the several Sections and Chapters in the Book following.
SECTION. I.
COntaining the Assertions of the Romish Church, whence her threefold
blasphemy springs, page 1. In the marginall note, parag. 10. for Petrum a
voto, read Petrum a Soto. In the marginall note, para. 13. for propter leges,
read praeter leges. Margin, parag. 13. propriae virtutis suae, read propria.
SECTION. II.
The first branch of Romish blasphemy, in preferring humane authority before
Divine, Page 10.
CHAP. I.
Bellarmines reply to the maine objection, jointly urged by all Reformed
Churches against the Romish: the Equivocation which he sought in the Objection
apparently found in his Reply, page 10.
CHAP. II.
Inferring, the general conclusion proposed in the Title of this Section, from
Bellarmines resolution of faith, page 15. In the marginall note, parag. 9. for
for the same grounds, read from the same grounds. Marg. parag. 1. dele si.
CHAP. III.
Containing a further Resolution of the Romish faith, necessarily inferring the
authority of the Roman Church, to be of greater authority then Gods word
absolutely, not only in respect of us, page 24.
CHAP. IIII.
That in obeying the Romish Churches Decrees, we do not obey Gods word as well
as them, but them alone in contempt of Gods principal Laws, page 28. In the
marginall note, parag. 13. putamus, read non putamus.
CHAP. V.
Propounding what possibly can be said on our adversaries behalf for avoiding
the force of the former Arguments: showing withal the special points that lie
upon them to prove, as principally, whether their belief of the Churches
authority can be resolved into any divine testimony, page 46.
CHAP. VI.
That neither our Saviors Prayers, for the not failing of Peter's faith, Luke
22. 32. nor his commending his sheep unto his feeding, John 21. 15. prove any
Supremacy in Peter over the Church, from which the authority of the Pope can,
with probability, be derived, p. 49.
CHAP. VII.
That Christ, not S. Peter is the Rock, spoken of Matthew. 16. 18. that the
Jesuits Exposition of that place, demonstrateth the Pope to be the great
Antichrist, page 64. In the marginall note, parag. 24. for That Romish faith is
that faith, read that Romish faith is not that faith. In the marginall note,
parag. 31. for a paralile, read a parallel. In the marginall note, parag. 3.
for Plinius, read Pintus. Parag. 22. for melang, read felang.
CHAP. VIII.
That the Romanists belief of the Churches in fallible authority, cannot be
resolved into any testimony better then humane, whence the maine conclusion
immediately follows. [That the Romanist in obeying the Church-decrees without
examination of them by Gods word, prefer man's Laws before Gods.] page 89.
CHAP. IX.
In what sense the Jesuits may truly deny they believe the words of man
better then the words of God: In what sense again our Writers truly charge
them with this blasphemy, page 99.
SECTION. III. CHAP. I.
What restraint, precepts for obedience unto the Priests of the Law, though
seeming most universal for their form, did necessarily admit: How universal
Propositions of Scriptures are to be limited, page 105. In the marginall note,
parag. 3. for suscitaturus, read sciscitaturus.
CHAP. II.
The authority of the Sanhedrim not so universal or absolute amongst the Jews
as the Papists make it, but was to be limited by the former Rules, page 119.
In the marginall note, parag. 2. for sarcedotem, read sacerdotem. Margin,
parag. 11. for Canala, read Cabala.
CHAP. III.
That our Saviors iniunction of obedience to the Scribes and Pharisees, though
most universal for the form, is to be limited by the former rules, that
without open blasphemy it cannot be extended to countenance the Romish cause:
that by it we may limit other places brought by them for the Popes transcendent
universal authority, page 128. In the marginall note, parag. 11. quae ad
populi salutem fuit, read vt quae ad populi salutem sint.
CHAP. IIII.
What it would disadvantage the Romish Church to deny the infallibility of
the Synagogue, page 139. Mar. par. 3. inueniebant, read inueniebantur. negat
read negatur.
CHAP. V.
That justly it may be presumed the Jewish Church, never had any absolute
infallibitie in proposing or determining Articles of faith, because in our
Saviors time it did so grievously err in the fundamental point of salvation,
page 142. Mar. par. 2. darmauit, read damnauit. sunt enim, read sicut enim
CHAP. VI.
That Moses had no such absolute authority, as is now ascribed unto the Pope:
That the manner of his attaining to such as he had, excludes all besides our
Savior from just challenge of the like, page 151.
CHAP. VII.
That the Churches authority was no part of the rule of faith unto the people
after Moses death, That by experiments answerable unto the precepts and
predictions, the faithful without relying upon the Priests infallible
proposalls, were as certain, both of the divine truth, and true meaning of the
law, as their forefathers had been that lived with Moses and saw his miracles,
page 159.
CHAP. VIII.
That the society or visible company of Prophets had no such absolute
authority as the Romish Church usurps, page 169.
CHAP. IX.
That the Church representative amongst the Jews was for the most part, the
most corrupt judge of matters belonging to God: and the reason why it was so,
page 178.
CHAP. X.
That the Sovereignty given by Jesuits to the Pope is greater then our
Saviors was, page 186.
CHAP. XI.
Confirming the truth delivered in the former Chapter from the very Law given
by Moses for discerning the great Prophet, further exemplifying the use and
force of miracles for begetting faith: The manner of trying prophesies: Of the
similitude betwixt Christ and Moses, p. 197 In the marginall note par. 19. for
for sorcerie, read from sorcerie.
CHAP. XII.
That the method used by the great Prophet himself after his resurrection for
planting faith, was such as we teach: The excess of Antichrists exaltation
above Christ: The Diametrall opposition betwixt the spirit of God, and the
spirit of the Papacy, page 221.
CHAP. XIII.
That the authority attributed to the present Pope, and the Romish rule of
faith were altogether unknown unto Saint Peter: the opposition betwixt S.
Peter's and his pretended successors doctrine, page 226.
CHAP. XIIII.
That S. Paul submitted his doctrine to examination by the words before
written. That his doctrine, disposition and practice, were quite contrary to
the Romanists in this argument, page 232.
CHAP. XV.
A brief taste of our adversaries blasphemous and Atheistical assertions in
this argument from some instances of two of their greatest Doctors, Bellarmine
and Valentian: That if faith cannot be perfect without the solemn
testification of that Church, the raritie of such testifications will cause
infidelity, page 239.
SECTION, IIII.
Containing the third branch of Romish blasphemy or the last degree of great
Antichrists exaltation, utterly overthrowing the whole foundation of Christian
Religion, preposterously inuerting both Law and Gospel to Gods dishonor, and
advancement of Satan's Kingdom, page 245.
CHAP. I.
The Jesuits unwillingness to acknowledge the Churches proposal for the true
cause of his faith: of differences and agreements about the final resolution
of faith either amongst the adversaries themselves, or betwixt us and them, p.
245.
CHAP. II.
That the Churches proposal is the true, immediate, and prime cause of all
absolute belief any Romanist can have, concerning any determinate divine
revelation, p. 249.
CHAP. III.
Discovering either the gross ignorance, or notorious craft of the Jesuit in
denying his faith, is finally resolved into the Churches veracitie or
infallibility: that possibly it cannot be resolved into any branch of the
first truth, page 256. Mar. par. 3. faith, read the Romanists faith.
CHAP. IIII.
What manner of causall-dependance Romish belief has on the Church: that the
Romanist truly and properly believes the Church only, not God or his Word, page
268.
CHAP. V.
Declaring how the first maine ground of Romish faith leads directly unto
Atheism: the second unto preposterous Heathenisme or Idolatry, page 277. Mar.
par. 12. efferunt, read afferunt.
CHAP. VI.
Proving the last assertion, or generally the imputations laid upon the
Papacy, by that authority the Jesuits expressly give unto the Pope in matters
of particular fact, as in the Canonizing of Saints, page 294.
CHAP. VII.
What danger by this blasphemous doctrine may accrue to Christian States; that
of all heresies, blasphemies, or idolatries which have been since the world
began, or can be imagined till Christ come to judgment: this Apostasy of the
Jesuits, is the most abominable and contumelious against the blessed
Trinity, page 300.
THE TRIPLICITIE OF ROMISH BLASPHEMY OR THE THREE DEGREES OF ANTICHRISTS
EXALTATION Against all that is called GOD.
THE THIRD BOOK.
SECT. I.
Containing the assertions of the Romish Church, whence her threefold
blasphemy springs.
Having, in the former dispute clearly acquitted, as well Gods word from
breeding, as our Church from nursing contentions, schisms, and heresies, we
may in this, by course of common equity, more freely accuse their injurious
calumniators. And because our purpose is not, to charge them with forgerie of
any particular, though grossest heresies, or blasphemies, though most hideous,
but for erecting an entire frame, capacio^s of all villainies imaginable; far
surpassing the hugest mathematical form humane fancy could have conceived of
such matters, but only from inspection of this real and material pattern,
which by degrees insensible has grown up with the mystery of iniquity, as
the bark does with the tree; such inconsiderate passionate speeches, as heat
of contention in personal quarrels has exstracted from some one, or few of
their private Writers, shall not be produced to give evidence against the
Church their Mother, whose trial shall be as far as may be, by her Peers;
either by her own public determinations, in this controversy, or joint
consent of her authorized best approved Advocates, in opening the title, or
unfolding the contents of that prerogative, which they challenge for her.

2 Our accusations are grounded upon their Positions before set down, Lib 2
Sect. 1. c. 3
when we explicated the differences betwixt us. The position in brief, is
this; That the infallible authority of the present Church, is the most sure,
most safe, undoubted rule in all doubts, or controversies of faith, or in all
points concerning the Oracles of God: by which we may certainly know, both;
without which we cannot possibly know, either, which are the Oracles of God,
which not, or what is the true sense and meaning of such as are received for
his Oracles, whether written or unwritten:

3 The extent of divine Oracles, or number of Canonical books has been (as
our Adversaries pretend) very questionable amongst the ancient: They
acknowledges S. Hierom as the Oracle of Antiquity, and yet directly contradict
him in this decree concerning the number of Canonical books.
though such of the Fathers, as, for their skill in antiquity, were in all
impartial judgments most competent Judges in this cause, were altogether for
us against the Romanists, and such as were for their opinion, were but for it
upon an error, as thinking the Jews had acknowledged all those books of the
old Testament for Canonical Scripture, which the Churches wherein they lived,
received for such, or that the Christian Church did acknowledge all for
Canonical, which they allowed to be publicly read. Safe it was (our
adversaries cannot deny) for the Ancient, to dissent one from an other, in
this question, or to suspend their assent, till new probabilities might sway
them one way or other. No reasons have been produced since, sufficient to move
any ingenious mind unto more peremptory resolutions, yet does the Council of
Trent bind all to an absolute acknowledgement of those Books for Canonical,
which, by their own confession were rejected by S. Hierome, and other Fathers.
Si quis autem libros ipsos integros cum omnibus suis partibus (provt in
Ecclesia Catholica legi consu^uerunt, and inveteri vulgata Latina editione
habentur) pro sacris, and canonicis no sasceperit; and traditiones praedictas,
sciens and prudens contempserit: and thema sit. Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. decret. de
Canonicis Scripturis.
If any shall not receive the whole Books with all their parts (usually read
in the Church, and as they are extent in the old vulgar) for sacred and
Canonical, let him be accu^sed. So are all, by the same decree, that will not
acknowledge such unwritten traditions, as the Romish Church pretends to have
come from Christ and his Apostles for divine, and of authority equal with the
written word.

4 So generally is this opinion received, so fully believed, in that Church;
That many of her Sons, even whilst they write against us, forgetting with
whom they have to deal, take it as granted: That the Scriptures cannot be
known to be Gods word, but by the infallible authority of the present Church.
And from this supposition, as from a truth sufficiently known, (though never
proved) they labor, in the next place, to infer: That, without submission of
our faith to the Churches public spirit, we cannot infallibly distinguish the
orthodoxall, or divine sense of Gods Oracles, (whether written or unwritten)
from heretical or humane.

5 Should we admit unwritten Traditions, and the Church withal as absolute
Judge to determine which were Apostolical, The decree of the Tr^t council
authorizing the latin vulgar editio^.
which not: little would it boot us to question with them about their meaning.
For when the point should come to trial, we might be sure to have the very
words framed to whatsoever sense should be most favorable for justifying
Romish practices. And even of Gods written Oracles, whose words or characters
(as he in his wisdom has provided) cannot now be altered by an Index
Expurgatorius, at their pleasure: That such a sense as shall be most
serviceable for their turn, may (as time shall minister occasion) be more
commodiously gathered; the Trent Fathers, immediately after the former decree
for establishing unwritten Traditions, and amplifying the extent of divine
written Oracles, have in great wisdom authorized Insuper eadem Sacrosancta
Synodus considera^s no^ paru^ vtilitatis accedere posse Ecclesiae Dei, si ex
omnibus latinis editionibus, quae circu^feruntur, sacrorum librorum, quaenam
pro Auth^ntica habenda sit, innotes^at: Statuit, and declarat, vt haec ipsa
vetus and vulgata Editio, quae longo tot saeculorum vsis in ipsa Ecclesia
probata est, in publicis lectionibus, disputationibus, praedicationibus, and
expositionibus, pro authentica habeatur, and vt nemo illam reijcere quovis
praetextu audeat, vel praesumat. Conc. Trident. Sess. 4. Decret. De editione
and vsu sacro^u^ libroru^.
the old and vulgar translation of the whole Canon. Which, though it were not
purposely framed to maintain Popery (as some of our writers, say they, have
as friuolously as maliciously objected) yet certainly, as well the escapes and
errors of those unskillful, or ill-furnished interpretors, as the negligence of
transcribers, or other defects, incident to that work, from the simplicity of
most ancient, the injuries or calamities of ensuing times, were, amongst
others, as the first heads or petty springs of that raging flood of impiety,
which had well nigh drowned the whole Christian world in perdition, by
continually receiving into it channel (once thus wrought) the dregs and filth
of every other error under heaven, with the corrupt remainder of former
heresies, for these thousand years and more. And unto many gross errors in
Romish religion, which this imperfect translation did not first occasion, it
yet affords that countenance, which the pure Fountains of the Greek and
Hebrew do not; but rather would scour and wipe away; were they current in
that Church. Finally, though it yield not nutriment to enlarge or feed, yet it
serves as a cloak to hide or cover, most parts of the great mystery of
iniquity.

6 Yet, besides the favorable construction, that may be made for that
religion, out of the plain and literal sense of this erroneous translation:
the Church will be absolute Judge of all controversies concerning the right
interpretation thereof. So as not what our consciences, upon diligent search
and just examination, shall witness to us, but what the Church shall declare
to them, must be absolutely acknowledged for the true intent and meaning of
Gods word, as it is rendered by the vulgar interpretor: To this purpose is the
very next decree.

7 Praeterea, ad coercenda petulantia ingenia, decernit, vt nemo, suae
prudentiae innixus, in rebus fidei, and morum, ad aedificationem Doctrinae
Christianae pertine^tium, sacram Scripturam ad suos sensus contorquens, contra
eum sensum quem tenuit, and tenet sancta Matter Ecclesia, cuius est iudicare de
vero sensu, and interpretatione Scripturarum sanctarum, aut etiam contra
vnanimem consensam Patrum, ipsam Scripturam sacram interpretari audeat, etiamsi
huiusmodi interpretationes nullo vnquam tempore in lucem edendae forent. Qui
contraueuerint, per Ordinarios declarentur, and poenis a iure statutis
puniantur. Council. Trident. Ibidem.
Moreover, for brideling petulant dispositions, The Trent Counsels decree for
interpretation of Scriptures.
it is decreed; That no man in confidence of his own wisdom or skill, in
matters of faith, and manners, making for the edification of Christian
doctrine, shall dare to interpret Scriptures, wresting them to his own
conceit or sense, against that sense or meaning, which the holy Church our
Mother, to whom it belongs to judge of the true sense and interpretation of
sacred writ, heretofore has held, or now does hold, albeit he never purpose
to publish such interpretations.

8 It is further added in the same place, (because I take it had been
specified a Synod before) that no man shall dare to interpret Scriptures
against the unanimous consent of Fathers. Which I think were impossible for
any man to do; though were it possible, few or none would attempt, besides the
Papists. For, neither can it be known what all of them hold in most places,
where upon are grounded controversies of greatest moment; and in such as we
have best plenty of their interpretations, albeit they do not contentiously
dissent, yet absolutely agree each with other they do not. Even one and the
same Father oftimes thinks, of many interpretations, sundry alike probable:
most of them unwilling, by their peremptory determinations, one way or other,
to prejudice the industrious search of others (though their far inferiors)
for finding out some more commodious, then any they bring; oftentimes
intimating their doubts or imperfect conjectures in such manner; as if they
would purposely encourage their successors to seek out some better resolution
then they could find. Whence it is evident, that we should not always
interpret Scriptures against the joint consent of Fathers, albeit we went
against all the particular interpretations which they have brought; because
they were more desirous to have the truth fully sifted, then their coniecturall
probabilities infallibly believed: Nor were it possible more to contradict most
of them, then by following their interpretations, upon such strict terms, as
the Romanists would bind all men to do, when they seem to make for their
advantage. Not the least surmise or conjecture of any one Father, but, if it
please them, must suffice against the ioinct authority of all the rest. For,
in all the three points above mentioned, they admit the Church (as may appear
from the decrees cited) for a Judge, so absolute, That, no man may embrace any
opinion, upon what grounds or probabilities soever, but with humble submission
to her censure: Whatsoever she shall inioyne, in all, or any of these points,
albeit we have reasons, many and strong, not to hold it, to hold not one,
besides her bare authority; yet must all believe it alone as absolutely, as if
we had the apparent unanimous consent of Fathers; yea of Prophets, Apostles,
or Evangelists, and all good writers in every age.

9 Hence Bellarmines assertion concerning the Churches authority grounded upon
the former decree.
Bellarmine reiects (as dissonant to the former decree) this resolution of In
articul. 155 ex illis quingentis quos Coch^eus colligit ex libris Lutheri; sic
ait: Capite hoc Euangelium, quiae neque Papae neque concilijs, neque vlli
haminu^ commissum est, vt constituat and concludat, quid sit sides. Ideo d^ben
dicere: Papa, tu conclusisti cum concilijs, nunc habeo ego iudicium, an
acceptare qu^am neene. (...) quia non (...) pro me, (...) respondebis pro ^e,
quando del co ^ori. Et falsam doctrinam nemo iudicare potest, nisi spiritualis
homo. Ideo res est insana, quod Concilia concludere and statuere volunt, quid
credendum sit: cum saepe nullus vir sit ibi, qui diuinum spiritum vel modicum
olsecerit. Idem confirmat in assertionibus art. 27. 28. and 29. Bellarm. de
verb. Dei Lib. 3. Cap. 3.
Luther, That albeit the Pope and Council conclude points of faith; yet have
private men a free arbitrament (so far as it concerns themselves) whether
they may safely believe their conclusions, or no. Luther gives two reasons for
his assertion, both most forcible. The one, because the Pope shall not answer
for private men, at the hour of their death: The other, because none are
competent Judges of false Doctrines, but men spiritually minded; when as it
often falls out, that, in their Councels, there cannot be found one man, (much
less a mayor part of men, without which how many soever there were, all were
as none,) that has any the least relish of the Divine Spirit. The like
assertion does the Jesuit condemn in Brentius:

10 It is not lawful (says Similiter Brentius docet in Confessime
Wirte^^^rgica cap. de sacra script erat and coplesias in Pralegr^^^ contra
(...). Primo, (...) licet, inquit, in causa (...) ita inhaerere, vt eam sine
nost^o ipsorum iudicio ampl^ct^mur. Secund^ addit; Ad (...) quemque hominum
priuat^m perti^et de doctrina rel^gionis iud^^are and (...) internoscere. Sed
hoc interest inter priuatum and princip^m, quod vt priuatus priua^^^, (...)
habet de doctrina religionis potestatem iudicandi and decidendi, etc. Nec illud
aduert^t, si (...) sententia vera sit recte (...) and alios Catholicos
Germaniae principes, si etiam mortis suppli^o (...) ad sidem Catholicam:
Bellar. de verb. Dei lib. 1. cap. 3.
Brentius) for any man, in a point of salvation, so to rely upon another
sentence as to embrace it without interposition of his own judgment. The
reason is there intimated; because, every man is to be immediately judged by
his own conscience; and may for avoiding the just censure of condemnation by
it, safely disclaim their opinions, the execution of whose sentence or bodily
punishment, he may not decline; seeing they are (as was observed before)
public and lawful, yet fallible Judges of controversies in Religion. And
Bellarmine bewrayes, either gross ignorance, or great skill in wrangling, when
he exclaimes against this position of Brentius, as absurd and repugnant to it
self [That the supreme Magistrate, or public Judges, may be bound to
command, where the subject or inferior is not bound to obey.] For, So
Bellarmine grants, that Saint (...) did not commit any mortal sin, in
contradicting Pope Stephens decree, whom out of ignorance he oppugned, his
reason is good, because this persuasion remaining in full strength, he had
sinned against his conscience in obeying the Pope. His words are these, Ex v^ta
part^ non videtur mortaliter peccasse, quia non peccauit nisi ex ignorantia,
putauit enim Pontificem perniciose errare; and stante illa opinione, tenebatur
ei non obedire, quia non debebat contra conscientiam agere. Ignorantia autem
Cypriam non videtur fuisse crassa, neque assecta, sed probabilis, and proinde
excusans a mortali peccato. Bellar. Lib. 4. de Roman. Cap. 7.
as well the Prince in commanding, as the people in obeying, must follow
whither their consciences lead them. Both may, and in case they disagree, the
one, or other, cannot but err in the precedent information of their
consciences; and Vide Lib. 2. Sect. 1. Cap. 6. Parag. 11. and Sect. 4. Cap. 7.
Parag. 2. 3.
herein properly does their sin consist, not in doing what erroneous
conscience, upon so strict terms as penalty of eternal death, does
incessantly urge them to.

11 The people, says Canus assertion concerning Churches authority. Nihil
igitur asserunt, qui Ecclesiae authoritatem non absolute sed ex condition
ponunt Si namque ad eum modum res habet and mihi quoque ^ides habenda est
quando pronunciauero secundum scripturas recte intellectas. Id (...) est non
mihi sed scripturae credere. At, absolute, non ex condition populus Domino
credidit and Moisi seruo eius. Absolute etiam Prophetis and Apostolis populi
crediderunt Quale vero esset Prophetis Aposto lisque loquentibus fidem ea
exceptione detrabere, quod perperam Dei verba intellexissent? Canus de Eccles
Cathol. Lib. 4.
Canus, did absolutely (not upon condition) believe God and his servant Moses:
and unless men so believe the Church, they make it of no authority. Nor is it
enough to believe it to be infallible in points of moment, or such as might
overthrow faith, unless it be acknowledged so absolutely inerrable in all, as
it cannot either believe or teach amiss, in any question of faith, for, if in
any (seeing there is one and the same reason of all;) it might as well fail in
receiving some books (indeed not such) for Canonical and Divine. In summa si
Ecclesia posset in fidei quaestione falli, librum quoque diuinum recipere
posset, qui tamen a Deo non fuisset. Cum sit eadem ratio de vno libro, ad de
vnequolibet dogmate. Quare non valeret argumentum, Ecclesia habet Euangelium
Mathaei pro canonico, ergo canonicum est. Quod quoniam impijssime and
absurdissime diceretur; illud nos dicamus potius, recte fideles Ecclesiam
Catholicam eredere, non solum in eo sensu, vt Ecclesiae Catholicae fides
deficiat numquam: sed in eo etiam, vt nihil ipsa credere and docere possit,
quod sit verae fidei contrarium. Canus Ibid. paulo ante. The authority
ascribed to the Pope in his Bull of Confirmation.
Whereupon, it would follow, that this argument would not follow, The Church
acknowledges Saint Matthewes Gospel for Canonical, therefore it is
Canonical. The denial of which consequence is most impious and absurd, in
this man's censure, fully consonant to Valent. before cited, That Scripture
which is commended unto us and expounded by the authority of the Church, is
now even in this respect (because the Church commends it) most authentic.

12 Unto these, and far more gross conclusions all their modern Writers,
for ought I can find, think themselves bound by the former decrees of the
Trent Council. But what if any should dissent from these great Champions in
the interpretation of it? Who should judge betwixt them, or whither were they
to repair for resolution? To the place which God has chosen, to wit to the
Sea Apostolical, or, in other terms, to Rome. So says the Si cui in eis
aliquid obscurius dictum, and statutum fuisse, eamque ob causam interpretatione
aut decisione aliqua egere visum fuerit; ascendat ad locum, quem Dominus
elegat, ad Sedem videlicet Apostolicam, omnium fidelium magistram, cuius
authoritatem etiam ipsa Sancta Synodus tam reuerenter agnouit. Nos enim
difficultates and controuersias, si que ex eis decretis ortae fuerint, nobis
declarandas and decidendas, quemadmodum ipsa quoque sancta Synodus decreuit,
reseruamus, parati sicut ea nobis merito^, confisa est, omnium Prouinciarum
necessitatibus ea ratione quae commodior nobis visa fuerit prouidere. Bull.
Pij. 4. Sup. Confirm. Council. Trid.
Pope that confirmed this Council. As if there were only: a translation of
the Sea, none of the Priesthood, sometimes established in Jerusalem; where all
were to worship. And if Rome have that place in Christendom, which Jerusalem
had in Iewrie: the Pope must be such a Lord to all Christians, as He that
dwelt betwixt the Cherubins was to the Israelites; both their answers of like
authority.

13 But when we repair to Rome, who shall there determine what the Council
meant? the Pope alone, or with his Cardinals? with his Cardinals, if he please;
himself alone, without them, or any other, if he list; all after, as he shall
find himself disposed to use his ordinary or Plenitudinem, que suit Bealo
Petro, dicu^t Doctores ad Papam pertinere, non solu^ quia quod omnibus and
singulis Praelatis in Ecclesia Dei concessum est, id solus Papa potest, sed
etiam quia amplius qua^ illi omnes, and singuli poss^nt ipse vnus potest, eo
exemplo vtentes, q^^dquemadmod^m Deus potuerit statuere leges naturalibus
rebus, vt iuxta^as operaretur: potest tamen idem Deus propter leges nature ex
pro pr^ae virtutis suae agere, quod miraculum vocari solet: sic in Ecclesia
spectat, ad sumum Pontisicem condere leges morales and priscribere ius omn^bus
persoais Ecclesiasticis, and toti Ecclesiae, idem tamen non semper tenetur
seruare, huiusmodi leges, sed potest agere praeter illas. Quando igitur Papa ea
vult obseruare, quae suis legibus continentur, tunc dicitur vti potestate
ordinaria. Quando vero aliquid vult exequi supra id, quod legibus constitutum
est, tunc dicitur pleaitudinem potestatis exercere. Palaeot de sac. Consist.
Consult. partr. quest. 3. art. 1.
plenary power by the former of which (answerable to Gods working with natural
age^ts) he determines of matters by the usual course of laws provided for
that purpose, using the advice or council of his assistants; by the other
(correspondent to Gods working in miracles effected by his own immediate
peculiar power, without the coagencie of any inferior or created cause he may
resolve of himself alone, not consulting his Cardinals, Bishops, or others.
The authority given to the Pope by the Trent Council: Superest aunc vt
principes omnes, quod facit, in Domino moneat ad operam suam ita praestandam,
vt, quae ab ea decreta sunt, ab Haereticis deprauari aut violari non
permittant; sed ab his and omnibus deuote recipiantur and fideliter
obseruentur. Quod si in his recipiendis aliqua difficultas oriatur; aut aliqua
inciderint quae declarationem, quod non credit, aut desinitionem postulant
praeter alia remedia, (...) ^oc Concilio instituta, confidit Sancta Synodus
Beatissimum Romanum Pontificem curaturum, vt vel euocatis ex illis pres^rtim
Prouincijs, vnde difficultas orta fuerit, ijs quos eidem negotio tractando
viderit expedire, vel etiam Concilij generalis celebratione, si necessarium
iudicauerit vel commodiore quacunque ratione ei v^sum fuerit, prouideturum
necessitatibus pro Dei gloria, and Ecclesiae tranquilitate consulatur. Council.
Trid Sess. 25. De recipiandis and obseruandis decretis Concilij. The authority
given to the Pope by the Roman Catechism.
This power and liberty, the Trent Council it self seems to give unto the
Pope, as it were for an vp-shot to all the fools thunderbolts they had let
sly before. And least any man should think this absolute acknowledgement of
the Popes plenarie power, to be a Counsel, rather then a necessary precept;
The Ecclesia vocatur vnatanta hominum multitudo quae tam long lateque disfusa
est, ob eas causar, que ab Apost lo ad Ephesios scriptae sunt. Vnum enim
Dominum: vnam fidem, vnum Baptisma tantum esse praedicat. Vnus est etiam eius
rector and gubernator inuisibilis quidem Christus, quem aeternus Pater dedit
caput super (...) Ecclesiam, quae est corpus eius: visibilis autem is, qui
Romanam Cathedram Petri Apostolorum principis legitimus successor tenat. And
immediately after proposing this question, Quid de Romano Pontifice, visibili
Ecclesiae Christi capite, sentiendum est? Confirms the former blasphemous
doctrine with this shameless lie; Do eo suit illa omnium patrum rati^ and
sententia consentiens, hoc visibile caput ad vnitatem Ecclesiae constita endam
and conseruandam necessarium fuisse. Catech. Roman. part. 1. cap. 10. de nono
art. sieve Eccles. Catnol.
Cathechisme published by the Trent Councels authority, has inserted amongst
the Articles of faith, That the present Pope, is the sole visible head of the
whole Christian Church, though Christ the invisible. The meaning of which (if I
mistake not) is this, That the Pope The institution of Sacraments and certain
other Excellencies as they call them, are by their confession peculiar unto
Christ, not communicable unto his Vicar general
concerning the points above mentioned has as absolute power, in Christ's
absence, as Christ himself should have, were he present, or shall have in that
day of final judgment; wherein if these men's positions be true, he shall
have nothing to do in matters of says, but only to ratisie what the Pope
has defined, who must not be called to any account of his Spiritual, as Kings
and Monarchs must be for their Temporal Stewardships: nor shall it be said to
him, as it must be to some of them, Well done thou good and faithful Servant.
For such men only (by our adversaries Doctrine) do well, as might have done
ill; but the Pope, live as he list, cannot possibly do a miss, in
determining matters of Faith, which are, of all that are, of greatest
difficulty and consequence.

14 When first I read Josephus Acoste, I much wondered, to see a man, otherwise
of an ingenuous spirit, and of parts so excellent, so zealous withal, for the
Popes Supremacy: But now, I perceive, the reason was all private Catechismes
were to be conformed unto that public one, authorized by the Council and
Pope. Amongst other contents of that Article of the Catholic Church (almost
quite omitted in the former Indian Catechismes) Docea^tur ergo. Indi de
Ecclesia tria praecipue. Primum, quid illa sit, congregatio certe hominum
Christum doctrina^que Christi prositentium, non Hispanorum aut barbarorune, aut
nationis and gentis cuiusdam numere and sort desinita, omnia terrarum spatia,
onmes temporum successiones complectens, Hujus vero caput esse Romanae vrbis
Pontisicem, Petri successorem, Christi vicarium plenissima ipsius in terris
autheritate polientem, ^ui caeteri omnes Christiani, etiam Reges and Principes
parcant. Hoc est, Ecclesiam Catbolicam eredere, and vniuersalem. Ios. Acost
lib. 5. cap. 7. de procuranda Indorum salute.
Acostaes advise is, to have this inserted, as an essential part, That the
Pope is head of the Catholic Church; Christ's Vicar on earth, endued with his
plenarie power; to whom all other Christians (Kings and Princes not excepted)
owe obedience.

These allegations may testify our sincerity in proposing the state of the
question, and points of difference betwixt us, gathered not out of one or two,
but the general agreement of best Romish Writers: and whereunto Valentian,
were he alive, would willingly subscribe. For he, as since I have observed, An
vt fidei abiectum per Christi^^am fidem infallibiliter credatur, satis sit,
illud esse reuelatum diuinitus, and explicatum a (...) verbi dei ministro:
(...) mete^ea necesse sit, illud tanquam a Deo re^elatum. and ideo credendam
proponi et ostendi (...) per insallib^tem aliquam et praeem^nentem anti (...)
editio Symboli seu articulerum (...) indicium atque desinitio emnium side,
(...), quae vnquam oriri possunt Valent. Tom. 3 in Aquin Disp. 1. Quaest. 1.
Punct. 7. in Tit. Puncti.
proposes the title of his maine Controversy concerning the Churches
authority, in terms aequiualent to those I used, Lib. 2. Section 1. Cap. 3.
and Lib. 1. Parag. Vlt.

SECT. II.
The first branch of Romish blasphemy in preferring humane authority before
Divine.
AGainst these late recited, The general objection of Reformed Churches
against the former assertions.
and infinite other aequiualent assertions frequent in their public
determinations, and best private Writers; our Writers usually object, If the
Church be judge of Scriptures, her authority must be above the Scriptures; If
the sense of Scripture, without the Church or Popes asseueration or proposal
be not authentic, nor apt to beget most firm belief: then the word of God
must receive strength and authority from the word of man.

Some Romish Writers grant the inference, with this restraint, [In respect of
vs] and yet wipe their mouths with the whore in the Proverb, as if they had
neither committed Idolatry, nor spoken blasphemy. But Bellarmine was too
cunning a Baude, to expose his mothers foul face to public view, without
more artificial painting.

CHAP. I.
Bellarmines Reply to the maine objection, jointly urged by all Reformed
Churches against the Romish: the Equivocation which he sought in the objection
apparently found in his Reply.
1 THE former argument, Respondeo, hoc argumentum, quod ab haereticis plurimi
sit, ^otum in aequiuocatione versari: nam duobus modis potest intelligi
Ecclesiam iudicare de Scripturis Vno modo, quod iudicet, verumne sit an sassum
quod Scripturae docent: Altero modo, quod posito vt fundamento certissimo,
Scripturae verba esse verissima, iudicet quae sit vera little interpretatio. Et
quidem si primo modo Ecclesia iudicaret, vere esset supra Scripturam, sed hoc
non dicimus, quamuis Haeretici calumnientur id nos dicere, qui passim
vociserantur nos subijcere Scripturam pedibus Papae. At secundo modo iudicare
Ecclesiam, vel Pontificem de Scripturis, quod nos asserimus, non est Ecclesiam
esse supra Scripturam sed supra iudicia priuatorum hominum. Non enim iudicat
Ecclesia de veritate Scripturae, sed de intelligentia tua, and mea, et aliorum.
Neque hinc sumit verbum Dei abquod robur, sed intelligientia nostra. Non enim
Scriptura est verior aut certior, quia sic ab Ecclesia exponitur, sed mea
seatentia est verior, quando ab Ecclesia confirmatur. Bellar. de verb.
interpret. Lib. 3. Cap. 10. Raesp. ad 14. Arg.
howsoever much esteemed by such as bring it; yet in Bellarmines judgment, is
very weak, and as he suspects, sick of his own disease. Totum in
aequiuocatione versatur. The aequiuocation he seeks to unfold with this
distinction; The former speeches may admit a double sense. First their meaning
may be, that the Church does judge, whether that, which the Scriptures teach,
be true or false, Or, Secondly, [This sure foundation of faith being first
laid, The words of Scripture are most infallible and true] The Church does
judge which is the true interpretation, or meaning of them. This distinction he
applies thus; The former obiectuns were pertinent, if we held the Pope or
Council to determine of Scriptures, in the former sense; but, taking our right
meaning, they are mere calumnies. For we affirm the Church to judge
Scriptures only in the later: and so to judge them, does not set the Church or
Pope above Scriptures, but above the judgment of private men. Nor does the
Church ( by this assertion) become a Judge of Scriptures truth, but of private
men's understanding. Neither will it hence follow, that the word of God
recetueth strength from the word of man; but private men's knowledge, may and
does receive strength and infallibility, from the Church. Finally, the
Scripture or Word of God ( as Bellarmine thinks) is neither more true or
certain, because it is expounded by the Church; but every man's opinion is
more true and stable, when it is confirmed by the Churches exposition or
decision.

He has said as much as the whole Council of Trent could have said for
themselves. But let us see if this be enough.

2 A private man's opinion (says Bellarmine) is truer, when it is confirmed by
the Church. If we had only an opinion of the truth or sense of Scriptures; the
consent of others, especially men skillful in such matters, would indeed much
confirm us, for all opinions, or uncertain persuasions, receive increase of
strength, from addition of probabilities. But his words are more general, and
concern not only uncertain, but all persuasions, that a faithful man in
this life, can have of Gods Word; at least of those writings, which we and
they acknowledge for such: and the mark he aims at is, That no persuasion, in
divine matters, can be certain, without the Churches confirmation; as he
expressly adds in his Vide Chap. 2. Parag. 7.
answer to the next argument.

3 If the Reader will be attentive he shall easily perceive, that, not our
Writers objections, but Bella^mines answer, is tainted with aequiuocation. For
this speech of his, The Church does judge whether that which the Scriptures
teach be true or false, has a double and doubtful sense.

In what sense (as impertine^t as true) Gods word by Romanists is acknowledged
of greater authority then the Church.
It may be meant either. Of Scriptures taken indefinitly or indeterminately,
for that which God has spoken, whatsoever that be. Of those particular
Scriptures, which we and they acknowledge, or any determinate (written or
unwritten) precepts questionable, whether they were from God or no.


4 If we speak of Scriptures in the former sense, Bellarmines answer is true.
For the Romish Church does not take upon her to judge, whether that which is
supposed, or acknowledged by all, for Gods word, be most true in it proper and
native, but indeterminate sense, seeing this is a Maxim unquestionable (amongst
al such as have any notion of a Dietie,) Whatsoever God has spoken is most
true, in that sense wherein he meant it. But, if we descend to any determinate
speeches; written or unwritten, either acknowledged or supposed for Gods Word,
or such as can but ground any possible question, whether they are Gods Words or
no; the present Romish Church does take upon her, absolutely to judge of all
and every part of them. For this is the very abstract, or abridgement of that
infinite prerogative, which she challenges, all men must infallibly believe
that to be Gods Word which she commends, that not to be his Word which she
disclaimes for such. So as only, the former transcendent, and indeterminate
truth [Whatsoeuer God says is true] is exempt from the Popes unlimited,
transcendent, royal sentence; no other word, or syllable of truth, which we
can imagine, God has or might have spoken since the World began, either by his
own or his sons mouth, by the Ministry of his Angels, Prophets, Apostles or
Evangelists; but is every way absolutely subject to the Popes Monarchichall
censure.

5 And here, let not the Reader mistake it, as any argument of our adversaries
ingenuity, that they will for their own advantage vouchsafe to grant (what no
heathen Idolater did ever deny) Whatsoever God says is true. For, unless this
were granted by all; the Pope could have no possible grounds of pretense, or
claim, to his absolute infallibility, or infinite supremacy over all. And
that which his hirelings seek to build upon the former foundation, is,
Whatsoever the Pope has said, or shall say, ex cathedra, is most true;
because, if we descend to any determinate truths, we must believe that God
has spoken all, and only that, which the Pope has already testified, or,
(when any question arises shall testify he has spoken. In fine, the present
Pope, by their positions, is Gods only living mouth, only alsufficient to
justify, or authentically witness all his words past: all which, without
him, are unto us, as dead. Whence they must of necessity, admit the same
proportion, betwixt the present Popes and Gods acknowledged written word, or
supposed unwritten verity, which in civil matters we make betwixt acredible
man's personal auouchment, or living testimony of what he has seen, heard,
or known by undoubted experience, and another man's heresay report, either of
the matters he spoke of, his speeches themselves, or their true sense and
meaning, after his death. For the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists (to use
Sacrobos. and Valentian both use the like speeches.
their words) are dead, and Christ is absent; so as we can neither be certain,
what they have spoken, or what they meant in their supposed speeches, but per
viuam vocem Ecclesiae, by the living voice of the present visible Church; whose
words are altogether as infallible, as Gods own words, were. And for this
reason, must be acknowledged a most absolute Judge of Gods written and
unwritten words, as well of their Spiritual sense and meaning, as of their
outward frame or visible character. This is the height of their iniquity and
will infer more then our purposed conclusion in this Section, That even of
such places, as are acknowledged by them for Gods Word, we mus not believe any
determinate sense or meaning, but what the Pope shall expressly give or may be
presumed to allow of.

6 This Doctrine, as I would request the Reader to observe, brings the second
and third person in Trinity on the one party, and the Pope on the other, to
as plain and evident competition, for Rule or Sovereignty over professed
Christians faith; as God and Baal were at in Elias time. This there Doctrine,
thus in show grounded upon, indeed and issue most opposite to Scriptures, is
the true Spiritual Inquisition house, whereof that material or bodily one,
The Romish rack of conscience.
is but a Tipe: These following, are the joints or limbs, of that rack of
conscience, whereunto, all such as are, or would be true members of Christ,
but willing withal to hold their Union with the Pope as Visible head of the
Church, are daily and howerly subject.

First, their souls are tied, by surest bonds of faith and nature, unto this
principle [Whatsoeuer God has said is most true:] the Jesuits again, seek
to fasten their faith and conscience, as strongly unto this; God speaks
whatsoever the Pope speaks ex cathedra: This third likewise, must be believed
as an Oracle of God, even by Papists (for the Pope has spoken it ex cathedra)
The Books of Moses, the Prophets, the four Evangelists, are Gods Words,
Whatsoever these have spoken, we contend, all should believe, for Gods own
Word, upon such grounds as Saint Peter did from experience of their
life-working sense, communicate unto them by hearing, reading, meditating, or
practice. But the Pope, upon some controversies arising, propounds a sense of
these writings, or of some part of them, quite contrary to that which brought
the former comfort to our souls; a sense, to all impartial senses,
contradictorie to the places jointly acknowledged for Gods Word. A sense, the
more we think on in sobriety, the more we dislike; a sense, the more
earnestly we pray to God for his Spirits assistance, and other good means for
the right understanding of his Word, and increase of faith, the more still we
distaste and loath. Here, unless we let go some one, or more of the mentioned
holdfasts of faith either the first, [Whatsoeuer God says is true] or the
second [Whatsoeuer the Pope says, Least they might in any doubt go against
their conscience, they are taught to believe that whatsoever the Pope shall
command is good and cannot hurt the conscience. See the Annotation out of
Bellarmine cap. 2.. 2.
God saith] or the third [The Mosaicall, Evangelical, and Apostolical
writings or those particular places, about whose sense the controversy is,
were spoken by God] our souls are put to more violent torture, then Rauilaicks
body was. But the true Papists are wise enough to slip the third or last, so
as it shall not pinch them; and have a trick withal to make the First yield,
what way they please; who are resolved to follow what way soever, it shall
please the Popes authority (whereunto their souls indeed are only tied) to
lead them. But of such as ever had, or hope to have, any taste or relish of Gods
Spirit should resolve absolutely to believe his interpretation of any place of
Scripture, contrary to that life-working sense, which must be in every heart
endued with hope of seeing God: that man's disloialtie toward God and his Holy
Spirit, is as impudent, as if a poor subject should reply unto his Prince,
commanding him in express terms to do thus, or so, I will not believe your
words have any such meaning as they naturally import; but a contrary, such as
one of my fellow servants has already acquainted me withal* whatsoever you
say, I know your meaning is I, should believe him in all things concerning your
will and pleasure: and whatsoever he shall enjoin that will do.

8 th^^ neither the Church can prove the Scriptures, nor the Scriptures the
Churches authority, was proved in the fourth Sectio^ of the former Book; that
such as hold this damnable doctrine, against which we dispute, do not at all
believe God speaking in the Scriptures, shall be euinced in the third Section of
this. The present inconvenience, which now (will they nill they) we are to
wrest from their resolutions of faith, is, that, indeed and conscience, they
either acknowledge no authority in the Church, or Scriptures, or else greater
in the Church, then in Scriptures.

CHAP. II.
Inferring, the general conclusion proposed in the title of this Section from
Bellarmines Resolution of faith.
1 As Well to occasion the learned Readers further consideration of their
ill-grounded and worse builded faith, as for deducing thence the proposed
inconvenience: it wll not be amiss to propose Bellarmines resolution of a
Roman Catholics faith. One especial objection of our Writers, as he frames
it is, That faith (if depending on the Churches judgment) is grounded but upon
the word of man, a weak foundation for such an edifi^e; that the Scripture was
given by the Spirit of God, and must therefore be understood by the same, not
by the Churches Spirit. Hereunto Respondeo verbum Ecclesiae, id est Concilij
vel Pontificis d^centis ex cathedra non esse ^emnino verbum hominis id est
verbum errori obnoxium, sed aliquo modo verbum Dei, id est si prolatum
gubernante and assistence spiritu sancto; imo dico, Haereticos esse qui reuera
nitantur baculo arundineo. Sciendum est enim, propositionem fidei concludi tali
Syllogismo. Quicquid Deus reuelauit in Scripturis, est verum: hoc dens
reuelauit in Scripturis, ergo hoc est verum. Ex propositionibus huius
Syllogismi prima certa est apud omnes, secunda apud Cathelicos est etiam
firmissima: nititur enim testimonio Ecclesiae, Concilij, vel Pontificis, de
quibus habemus in Scripturis apertas promissiones quod errare non possint,
Actorum 15. Visum est spiritui sancto and nobis. Et Luc. 22. Regaui pro te vt
non deficiat fides tua. At apud Haereticos nititur solis coniecturis, vel
iudicio proprij spiritus, qui plerumque videtur bonus, and est malus. Et cum
conclusio sequatur deteriorem partem, sit necessario, vt tota fides
Haereticorum sit coniecturalis and incerta. Bellar. de verb. Dei interpret.
Lib. 3. Cap. 10. Resp. ad 15. a^g. Bellarmines Catholic Syllogism wherein
all conclusions of faith must be gathered.
Bellarmine answers, The word of the Church. i. of the Council, or the Pope
speaking ex Cathedra, is not the bare word of man. He means no word obnoxious
to error, but in some sort the word of God: in as much as it is uttered by the
asistance and government of the Holy Ghost. I add ( says he) that Heretics
are they, which indeed do lean upon a broken reed. For we must know, that a
proposition of faith must be concluded in this or the like Syllogism,
Whatsoever God has revealed in Scripture is true, but God has revealed thus
or that in Scriptures, Ergo this or that is true. The first proposition in this
Syllogism is certain amongst all; the second likewise amongst Catholics is
^ost firm, as being supported by the testimony of the Church, Council, or
Pope: of whose immunitie, from possibility of erring we have express promises
in the Scriptures, as, Act. 15. v. 28.
It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us: Luke 22. v. 32.
I have prayed for thee thy faith should not ^aile. But, amongst Heretics, the
second or minor proposition, is (...) only on conjecture, or judgment of a
private Spirit; which usually seems, but is not good. Whence, seeing the
conclusion must follow the weaker part, it necessarily follows, that all the
faith of Heretics ( such in his language are all that will not rely upon the
Church) is but coniecturall and uncertain.

2 A dreadful imputation, could it be as substanstially proved, as it is
confidently avouched. And the consequence of his resolution (generally held by
all his fellows) is of no less importance, then this; that no man can be
infalliby assured, either of the truth, or true sense of any particular
proposition; in the whole Canon of Scriptures received by us and them, unless
he have the Churches authority for confirmation of both. For, unto us, that
only, which the Church avouches is certain, and infallible; that sense of
it, which the Church gives, only sound; if we speak of any particular or
determinate truths.

3 How certain and infallible assent unto all, or any Scriptures, may be
wrought in men's hearts, without any infallible teacher, already has been,
and hereafter shall be (God willing) in more particular sort exemplified. In
this place, it stood the Jesuit upon, to have given a better solution to the
doubt objected; which he is so far from unloosing, that he rather knits it
faster; as shall appear, if the Reader will first call to mind; That for the
establishing of firm and undoubted assent to any truth proposed, it skils not
how infallible the truth in it self or the proposer be, vnvnlesse unless
they, whose belief or assent is demanded, be as infallibly persuaded of this
infallibility in the truth, or the proposer. In this respect, our adversaries
plead their immunitie from error, as an article necessary to be infallibly
believed, for confirmation of Gods Word, always most infallible (as all grant)
in it self, but not so (as they affirm) to us, until it be avouched by
infallible authority.

4 Herein they concur with us; both with the truth, That if, we believe it
only as probable, that God spoke all those words, which we acknowledge to
be most infallible, because his, our belief notwithstanding is not
infallible, but probable, or coniecturall. For as a man may have bad desires of
things essentially good; so may he have uncertain persuasions of truths in
themselves most certain. It is not therefore the supposed infallibility of
the Church or Pope, howsoever, but infallibly apprehended and believed that
must strengthen our faith, which otherwise (as is pretended) would be but
coniecturall. And by the former principle, (acknowledged as well by them as us)
it necessarily follows, that if we be only probably, not infallibly persuaded,
the Pope or Church cannot err; our assent unto the minor proposition. i. [vnto
any determinate part of Gods Word,] is only probable not infallible. For, by
the Jesuits Doctrine, we cannot be certainly persuaded, that God spoke this,
or that, but by the Churches testimony. The immediate consequence of which two
assertions, compared together, is, we cannot be more certain that God has
spoken this or that, then we are of the Churches infallibility. If then we
be only probably, not infallibly, persuaded, that the Church is infallible:
our belief of the minor proposition (that is of any determinate truth which
men suppose God has spoken) must be only probable, or coniecturall, not
infallible. Consequently to these collections, the learned Papists generally
hold, that the Churches infallibility must be absolutely and infallibly
believed; (as you heard before out of Sect. 1. Parag. 1. and Seq. The first
difficulty in their opinion whence our former co^cl^sion may be deduced.
Canus, Bellarmine, and Valentian) otherwise, as Bellarmine would infer, our
belief of the minor in any Syllogism, wherein a proposition of faith is
concluded, can be but coniecturall.

5 The proposed inconvenience we may derive from this difficulty; How the
Papists themselves can attain to the infallible belief of the Churches
infallible authority? The Church, they think, has a public spirit; and
public spirits they know are infallible; hence they may persuade themselves
the Church is infallible, only upon the same terms, they believe it has a
public spirit, if their belief of this latter be but coniectural; their
assent unto the former can be no better. Seeing then they must of necessity
grant (for this is the principal mark they aim at) that all must infallibly
believe the Church has a public spirit: the difficulty remoues to this
point, how this infallible persuasion is, or may be wrought in them. Either it
must be grounded upon Scriptures, or not: avouched unto them and wrought in
their hearts it must be, either by a public or private spirit. Let us examine
all the parts of this division.

6 First if private men's infallible persuasion of the Churches public, or
authentike spirit, be not grounded upon Scriptures acknowledged by us and them:
the Churches authority without all controversy, is much greater then the
authority of Scriptures; if it, by this assertion, can be any, and the
Churches not all in all. For unto that which men cannot know, whether it be
true or false, they cannot be bound to yield absolute or immediate obedience:
unto that authority, which they absolutely believe as infallible, they are
bound to yield infallible assent, and absolute obedience directly, in it self
and for it self. But by this supposition men cannot know Scriptures infallibly
without the Churches authority, and yet they must infallibly believe the
Churches authority without Scriptures; The Scriptures authority therefore is
either less then the Churches, or none at all.

6 But be it supposed that private men's infallible belief of the Churches
public spirit is grounded upon Scriptures, acknowledged by us and urged by
them to this purpose, as upon these, it seems good to the Holy Ghost and us;
I have prayed for thee thy faith should not fail: The question whereunto we
demand an answer, is whether this infallible belief of the Churches
authority, grounded upon these places, must be wrought in men's hearts by a
private or public spirit. If by a private spirit only Bellarmine believed
the Churches public spirit, or those Scriptures truth, or true meaning,
whereon he grounds it: He and all other Papists (such as he was when he
delivered this Doctrine;) neither Bishops nor Cardinals, are subject to the
same inconveniences, which he has condemned us for, as Heretics. For all
private spirits, by his positions, are obnoxious to error, insufficient to
plant any infallible persuasion in matters of faith; yet such is this article
of the Churches authentic spirit, of which unless men be so persuaded,
infallibly persuaded, they cannot be of the minor proposition in any
Syllogism; wherein a point of faith is concluded: and uncertain of the minor,
they cannot be certain of the conclusion, which, as Bellarmine rightly
observes, always follows the weaker part. The infallible conclusion therefore
of Bellarmines resolution, is; unless private men may have public spirits to
warrant the truth of Scriptures, and the Churches infallibility thereon
grounded; they cannot truly believe any conclusion of faith. It remains then
we inquire; what inconvenience will follow, if they admit private men to be
partakers of public spirits.

7 Diversity of such spirits they acknowledge not. If therefore private men's
infallible assent unto the truth, or true sense of those particular Scriptures
whence they seek to prove their Churches infallibility, must be planted by a
public spirit, planted it must be by the same spirit; which guides, and
guiding makes the Church and Pope authentic and infallible, both in their
proposal of Scriptures and declaration of Scriptures sense. Seeing this spirit
is one and the same, if it can make the Church or Pope infallible in all; why
may it not make all private men (by this supposition partakers of it) alike
infallible, at the least in the right understanding of those places, which
warrant the Churches infallibility or public spirit. For our adversaries, I
hope, will easily grant, that the Churches public and authentic spirit must
be most infallibly believed, because so expressly taught in those Scriptures
cited by Bellarmine to this purpose. If this public or authentic spirit, can
work such infallible apprehension of those places true meaning in private
hearts, why not in all others as necessary for them to know; that is, in all
necessary to salvation? And if thus it do, why are we bound to believe the
Pope, more then the Pope us, we being partakers of a public and infallible
spirit as well as he?

8 Or if they hold it no absurdity to say; we must believe two or three
places, [It seems good to the Holy Ghost and us: Peter feed my sheep;] by a
pub^ique and authentic spirit, teaching us from these to rely upon the Pope
in all other parts of Gods Word, because (as it must be supposed) we have but a
private spirit for their assurance: by this supposition the Popes authority,
in respect of us, must have the same excess of superiority unto Scriptures,
that public spirit has unto a private; or the Pope (who believes all
Scriptures by a public spirit) has unto a private man. This public spirit,
whereof they vau^t, is the same which did inspire the scriptures to Moses, the
Prophets and Apostles; and must (by this position) be the Pope or Churches
immediate age^t for establishing this inviolable league of absolute alleagance
with men's souls unto them, but of none so absolute to their Creator and
Redeemer; and the rest of whose written laws, and eternal decrees, must be
communicated unto them by a private spirit, and subscribed unto with this
condition, If the Pope shall witness them to be his laws, or to have this or
that meaning.

9 Nor can our adversaries dense the truth of this subsequent collection, If it
were possible for the Pope in matters controuersed to teach contrary to Gods
Word: we were bound to follow him; For they Si volunt Pontificem in rebus
alioqui omnino controuersis id est, non satis express in Ecclesia compertis ac
determinatis defi^ire posse vt personam pub^cam, errorem re ipsa contra fidem
errant ipsi in fide grauissi^e. Posset enim imo teneretur tunc Ecclesia
vniuersa Pontificem de re controuersa dicentem ac nondum haeresi manifest
notatum pro Pastore suo agnoscere, atque adeo ipsum omnino audire. Ita fierat
vt si tunc errare possit, Ecclesia etiam vniuersa possit immo teneretur errare.
Valentian Tom. 3. de object. fid. Disp. 1. Quaest. 1. Punct. 7. Paragraph. 4^.
Bellarmine for the same grounds Collects that the Pope cannot err in matters
of manners.
themselves argue thus, If the Pope could err in matters of faith; faith might
perish from the Earth; all Christians bound to err, because bound to obey him.
This proves that our assent to any Scriptures (besides those which teach the
Popes authority) cannot in it self be perfect and absolute, but subject to
this condition [if the Pope be infallible.] And even of those places, which (as
they pretend) witness him to be such, there yet remains a farther
difficulty. These the Pope believes not, because they are confirmed to him by
his predecessor, but directly and immediately, by his public spirit: But may
private men believe them so too? No. For these, especially and the Vide Librum
2. Sect. 4. Cap* 5. Paragraph. 14. Nam fides Catholica docet, omnem virtutem
esse bona^, omne vitium esse malum, si autem Papa erraret praecipiendo vi tia
vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia esse bona, and
virtutes malas, nisi vellet contra conscientiam peccare. Tenetur enim in rebus
dubijs, Ecclesia acquiescere iudicio summi Pontificis, and facere quod ille
praecipit, non facere quod ille prohibet: ac ne sort contra conscientiam agat,
tenetur credere bonum esse quod ille praecipit: malum quod ille prohibet.
Bellarmine Lib. 4. de Roman. Pont. Cap. 5.
Churches infallibility contained in them, are (by all our aduesaries consent)
propositions of faith, in respect of us, need by their doctrine) the proposal
or testimony of the Church, whereon all private men's faith must be immediately
grounded: believing this we shall from it (at least conjoined with Scripture)
believe all other parts of Gods Word necessary to salvation, as well as the
Pope does these former from the testimony of his public spirit. Wherefore
his authority must be unto us altogether as great, as the authority of the
Godhead is unto him; which is far greater unto him, then it is or can be to
any others; for even that which is acknowledged for Gods Word, both by him and
us, must be less authentic unto us then the words of this mortal man;

10 For though we pardon our adversaries their former absurdities, in seeking
to prove the Churches authority by the Scripture, and the Scriptures by the
Churches; though we grant them all they can desire (even what shall appear in
due place to be most false,) That, whiles they believe the Popes particular
injunctions, or decisions, from a presupposal of his universal transcendent
authority, they do not only believe him, or his words, but those parts of
Gods Word, upon which they seem to ground his infallibility: yet our former
argument holds still most firm; because that absolute assent, which private
men must give unto these supposed grounds of their Religion, before other
portions of Scripture, is not grounded upon any preheminencie incident to these
words as they are Gods, as if they were more his then the rest, in some such
peculiar sort, as the Ten Commandments are in respect of other Mosaicall
Laws; nor from any internal propriety flowing from the words themselves, as
if their secret character did unto faithful minds, bewray them to be more
Divine then others; nor from any precedent consequent, or comitant
circumstance, probably arguing that sense, the Romish Church gives of them, to
be of it self more perspicuous or credible, then the natural meaning of most
other Scriptures, all inspired by one and the same spirit, all, for their
form, of equal authority and perspicuitie. All the prerogative then, which
these passages can have before others, must be from the matter contained in
them; and that, by our adversaries position, is the Churches infallibility.
Wherefore, not because they are Gods word, or were given by his Spirit, in more
extraordinary sort then others; but because they have more affinity with the
Roman Lord, in late years exalted above all that is called God, Father, Son,
or Holy Ghost: these places above cited, must be more authentikely believed,
then all the words of God besides. As I have read of pictures, though not more
artificial in themselves, yet held in greater estimation amongst the Heathen,
and freer from contemptuous censure then any other of the same Painters doing,
only because they represented their great God Jupiter.

11 Another difficulty, whereunto we demand an answer is, whether whiles they
assent, as they profess, not only to the infallibility taught (as they
suppose) in the fore cited places, but also unto the infallibilite of
Scriptures which teach it: they acknowledge two distinct assents, or but one.
If but one, let them show us how possibly the Church can be said to confirm
the Scriptures: if two, let them assign the several properties of either;
whether is more strong; whether must be to the other as Peter to his brethren;
or if neither of them can confirm the other, let them declare how the one can
be imagined as a mean or condition of believing the other.

12 An Heretics belief of the minor proposition in the former Syllogism
(says Bellarmine) is but weak: A Romanists belief of the same most strong.
Let this be the Minor, Peter feed my sheep, or Peter I have prayed for thee
that thy faith should not fail: what reason can be imagined, why a Romanists
belief of these propositions should be so strong, and ours so weak? The one
has the Churches authority to confirm his faith, the other has not. What is
it then to have the Churches authority, only to know her decrees concerning
those portions of Scriptures? If this were all, we know the Romish Churches
decrees as well as the Romanists: but it is nothing to know them, if we do not
acknowledge them. To have Churches authority then is, to believe it as
infallible: and for this reason is a Roman Catholics belief of any portion
of Scripture, more certain and strong, because he has the testimony of the
Church, which he believes to be most infallible: and believing it most
infallibly he must of necessity believe, that to be Scripture, that in every
place, to be the meaning of the Holy Ghost, which this Church commends unto him
for such. Let the most learned of our adversaries here resolve the doubt
proposed; whether there be two distinct assents, in the belief of the
forementioned propositions: one unto the truth of the proposition it self, and
another unto the Churches infallibility. It is evident by Bellarmines opinion,
that all the certainty a Roman Catholic has above a Sectarie is, from the
Churches infallibilite. For the proposition it self he can believe no better
then an Heretic may, unless he better believe the Church, i. he beleues the
Churches exposition of it, or the Churches infallibility concerning it, better
then the proposition it self in it self and for it self. And so it is
evident that the Churches authority is greater, because it must be better
believed.

13 Suppose then one of our Church, which believes these propositions to be the
word of God, should turn of Roman Catholic, his former belief is by this
means become more strong and certain. This granted, the next question is,
what should be the object of this his strong belief; the propositions
believed: Peter feed my sheep, I have prayed for thee: or any other part of
Gods written word; or the Churches authority; not the propositions themselves,
but only by accident, in as much as the Church confirms them to him. For
suppose the same man should estsoones, either altogether revolt from the
Church, or doubt of her authority, his belief of the former propositions
becomes hereby as weak as it was before: which plainly cuinceth, that his
belief of the Church and this proposition, were two distinct beleefes, and
that this strong belief was fastened unto the Churches authority, not unto
the proposition it self immediately, but only by accident, in as much as the
Church which he believes so firmly, did teach it; for his belief, if
fastened upon the proposition it self, after doubt moved of the Churches
authority, would have continued the same, but now (by Bellarmines assertion)
as soon as he begins to disclaim his belief of the Churches infallibility,
his former strong belief of the supposed proposition begins to fail, and of
this failing no other reason, then already is, can be assigned. The reason
was, because the true, direct, and proper object of his strong belief was the
Churches authority, on which the belief of the proposition did entirely
depend, as the conclusion does upon the premises, or rather as every
particular does on the universal, whereunto it is essentially subordinate.

CHAP. III.
Containing a further Resolution of Romish faith, necessarily inferring the
authority of the Romish Church, to be of greater authority then Gods Word
absolutely, not only in respect of us.
IF we rack the former syllogism a little farther, and stretch it out in
every joint to it full length: we may quickly make it confess our proposed
conclusion and somewhat more. The Syllogism was thus, Whatsoever God has
spoken is most true. But God has spoken, and caused to be written all those
words contained in the Canon of Scriptures, acknowledged by opposite religions
of these times. Therefore these words are most true. The certainty of the
Minor depends, as our adversaries will have it, upon the present Romish
Churches infallibility, which has commended unto us these Books for Gods
Word. Be it then granted, for disputations sake, that we cannot know any part
of Gods Word, much less the just bounds, extent or limits of all his words
supposed to be revealed for our good, but by the Romish Church: The Spiritual
sense, or true meaning of all, most, or many parts of these determinate
Volumes, and visible Characters, as yet is vndeterminate, and uncertain;
whereas all points of belief must be grounded on the determinate and certain
sense of some part of Gods Word revealed; for our adversaries acknowledge all
points of faith should be resolved into the first truth. Hence, if we descend
to any particular or determinate conclusion of faith, it must be gathered in
his Syllogism, Whatsoever the Church teaches concerning the determinate and
true sense of Scriptures, whereon points of Faith are grounded, is most true.
But the Church teaches thus and thus, (for example her own authority is
infallibly taught by the Holy Ghost in these words, Peter feed my sheep,
Peter I have prayed for thee that thy faith should not fail) go: this sense
and meaning of these words is most true. And as true as it is, must the sense
likewise of every proposition, or part of Scripture by this Church expounded or
declared, be accounted.

2 The Mayor proposition of this Syllogism, is as undoubted amongst the Roman
Catholics, as the mayor of the former was unto all Christians: but as yet,
the minor; The Church does give this or that sense of this or that determinate
place, may be as uncertain indeed, as they would make our belief unto the
minor proposition in the general Syllogism, before it be confirmed by the
Churches authority. For how can we be certain that the Church does teach all
those particulars which the Jesuits propose unto us? we have Books indeed,
which go under the name of the Trent Counsel, but how shall we know that
this Counsel was lawfully assembled, that some Canons have not been foisted
in by private Spirits, that the Council left not some unwritten tradition for
explicating their decrees, after another fashion then the Jesuits do? who
shall assure us in these or like doubts? The present Church? All of us cannot
repair to Rome: such as can, when they come thither, cannot be sure to hear
the true Church speak ex Cathedra. If the Pope send his Writs to assure us,
what Critcicke so cunning as to assure us, whether they be authentike or
counterfeite? Finally, for all that can be imagined in this case, only the
Mayor of the Catholic syllogism, indefinitely taken, is certain; and
consequently no particular or definite conclusion of faith, can be certain to
a Romanist, because there are no possible means of ascertaining the Minor,
[What the true Church does infallibly define] unto his Conscience.

3 Or if they will hold such conclusions, Wherein the Papists make the Popes
authority greater then Gods.
as are ordinarily gathered from the Trent Council, or the Popes decisions, as
infallible points of faith: they make their authority to be far greater then
the infallibility of Gods written word; yea more infallible then the Deity.
This Collection they would deny, unless it followed from their own
premises; These for example, That a conclusion of faith cannot be gathered,
unless the minor (God did say this or that determinately) be first made
certain. But from the Pope or Churches infallibility, conclusions of faith
may be gathered, albeit the minor be not certain de fide. For who can make a
Jesuits report of the Popes Decrees, or an Historical relation of the Trent
Council, certain de fide, as certain as an Article of faith: And yet the
Doctrine of the Trent Council, and Popes Decrees, must be held de fide, upon
pain of damnation, albeit men take them only from a Priests mouth, or upon a
Jesuits faith and credit.

4 This is the madness of that Antichristian Synagogue, that acknowledges
Gods Word for most infallible, and the Scriptures, which we have, for his
word, if it self be infallible. For it tells us, they are such: yet will not
have collections, or conclusions with equal probabillitie deduced thence, so
firmly believed by private men, as the collections or conclusions, which are
gathered from the Churches infallibility. An implicit faith of particulars,
grounded upon the Churches general infallibility, so men steadfastly believe
it, may suffice. But implicit faith of particulars, grounded only upon our
general belief of Gods infallibility, providence, or written word, suffices
not. This proves the authority of the Church, to be above the authority of
Scriptures, or the Deity, absolutely considered, not only in respect of us,
[that is all besides the Pope and his Cardinals.] For that is of more
authority absolutely, not only in respect of us, which upon equal notice or
knowledge, is to be better believed, more esteemed, or obeyed; but such is the
authority of the Church in respect of the divine authority; such is the
authority of the Popes Decrees in respect of Gods Word. For the Minor
proposition in both the former Syllogismes being alike uncertain; the
conclusion must be more certain in that Syllogism, whose mayor relies upon
the Popes infallibility then in the other; whose Mayor was grounded upon the
infallibility of the Deity.

5 Briefly, to collect the sum of all; The authority of the Church is
greater then the authority of Scriptures, both in respect of faith, and
Christian obedience. In respect of faith; because we are bound to believe the
Churches decisions, read or explicated unto us, ( by the Popes messenger though
a Sir John Lack-lattin) without any appeal: but no part of Scripture,
acknowledged by us and them, we may believe, without appeal, or submission of
our interpretation to the Church, albeit the true sense and meaning of it seem
never so plain, unto private consciences in whom Gods Spirit works faith. The
same argument is most firm and evident, in respect of obedience;

6 That authority over us is always greatest, unto which we are to yield
most immediate, most strict and absolute obedience: but by the Romish Churches
Doctrine; we are to yield supreme, and most absolute obedience, to the
Church; more supreme, and absolute then unto Gods word: therefore the
authority of the Church is greater over us. The Mayor is out of controversy,
seeing greatness of authority is always measured by the manner of obedience
due unto it. The Minor is as evident from the former reason; Our obedience is
more absolute and strict unto that authority, from which in no case we may
appeal, then unto that from which we may in many safely appeal: but, by the
Romish Churches doctrine, there lies always an appeal from that sense and
meaning of Scriptures, which Gods spirit and our own conscience gives us, unto
the Churches authority; none, from the Churches authority or meaning unto the
Scriptures, or our own consciences.

7 Our Savior Christ, bids us, I^h. 5. 7.
search the Scriptures; Saint Paul, try all, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
retain that which is good; Saint John, try the Spirits, whether they be of
God or no: Ioh. 1. Epist. 4.
Suppose a Minister of our Church should charge a Romanist, upon his allegiance
to our Savior Christ, and that obedience which he owes unto Gods Word, to
search Scriptures, try spirits, and examine Doctrines for the ratifying of his
faith; he will not acknowledge this to be a Commandment of Scripture, or at
least, not to be understood in such asense, as may bind him to this practice.
What follows? if our Clergy charge him to admit it, he appeals unto the
Church: And, as in Schools, simus and nasus simus is al one, so in their
language is the Church and the Church of Rome. This Church tells him, he may not
take upon him to try of what spirit, the Pope is, not examine his
determinations, decisions, or interpretations of any Scripture; by other known
places of Scripture, or the analogy of faith acknowledged by all. Unto this
decree or sentence of the Church, (although he have it but at the second hand,
or after it have passed through as many Priests and Jesuits mouths, as are
Post Towns from London to Edinburgh, he yeeldes absolute obedience, without
acknowledgement of farther appeal, either unto Scriptures, or other authority
whatsoever; further manifestation of Gods will he expects none. Let all the
reformed Churches in the World, or all the Christian World besides, exhort,
threaten, or adjure him, as he tenders the good of his own soul, as he will
answer his Redeemer in that dreadful day of final judgment, to examine the
Church or Popes decrees, by Gods written Laws: his answer is, he may not, he
cannot do it, without open disobedience to the Church, which to disobey is
damnation of soul and body. But O fools and slow of heart to believe, and
obey from the heart, that doctrine whereunto ye were delivered. Know ye not,
that to whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey, his servants ye
are to whom ye obey, whether it be the man of sin unto death, or obedience
unto righteousness? Ofall Mankind are only Roman Catholics, not bought
with a price, that they may thus alienate their souls from Christ, and become
servants of men; that they may consecrate themselves, by solemn vow, to the
perpetual slavery of most wicked and sinful men, even monsters of Mankind.

CHAP. IIII.
That in obeying the Romish Churches decrees, we do not obey Gods Word as
well as them, but them alone in contempt of Gods principal Laws.
1 But the simple (I know) are borne in hand, by the more subtle ort of this
generation, That thus obeying sinful men they obey Christ, who has enjoined
them this obedience unto such; That thus believing that sense of Scripture,
which the Church their mother tenders unto them, they do not believe her
better then Scriptures, because these two beleefes are not opposite but
subordinate; that they prefer not her decrees before Christ's written Laws,
but her interpretation of them, before all private expositions. This is the
only City of refuge left them, wherein, prosecuted by the former arguments,
they can hope for any succor; but most of whose gates already have been,
all shortly shall be shut upon them. The gross impiety of the Romish Church,
in binding men to believe negatiues; without any tolerable exposition of those
Scriptures, which seem to contradict her decrees, in matters damnable to
adventure upon without evidence of truth on her part.


2 That they neither believe nor obey Gods Word whilst they absolutely believe
and obey the Church without appeal, is evident, in that this Church usually
binds men, not unto positive points of Religion gathered so much as from any
pretended sense of Scripture expounded by it, but to believe bare negatiues;
as, that this or that place of Scripture, either brought by their adversaries,
or conceived by such amongst themselves, as desire the knowledge of truth and
right information of conscience, have no such meaning as the Spirit of God, not
flesh and blood, (as far as they can judge of their own thoughts,) has
revealed unto them.

3 But the Spirit may deceive private men; or, at least, they may deceive
themselves, in their trial of Spirits. They may indeed, and so may men in
public place, more grievously err in peremptory judging private men,
because obnoxious to error in the general, erroneous in this particular,
wherein they ground their opinions upon Gods Word, plentiful to euince it (at
least) very probable reasons they bring many and strong, whereunto no
reasonable answer is brought by their adversaries, whose usual course, is, to
press them only with the Churches authority; which appears to be of far
greater weight then Gods word, unto all such as yield obedience to her negative
decrees, without any evidence or probability, either of Scripture or natural
reason, to set against that sense and meaning of Gods Laws whereunto strength
of arguments vnrefuted, and probable pledges of Gods Spirit vndisproued have
long tied their souls. Do we obey God, or believe his word, whilst we yield
obedience to the Church in such Commandments, as to our consciences upon
impartial examination seem condemned, ere made by the very fundamental Laws
of Religion, and all this oftimes without any show or pretense of Scripture, to
warrant us, that we do not disobey God in obeying them?

4 But does the Romish exact absolute obedience in such points, as, if it were
possible they could be false, may endanger the very foundation of true
Religion, without evident demonstration, that their daily practice neither does
nor can endanger it? Yes. For what can more concern the maine foundation,
which Christians, Jews, and Mahumetans most firmly hold, then those precepts,
in number many, all plainly and peremptorily forbiding us to worship any Gods
but One, or any thing in the Heaven or Earth but him only. The Romanists
themselves grant, The fearful dangers whereunto men's souls are exposed by the
Trent Councels decree for worshipping the consecrated host, For to adventure
on such practizes with any scruple or doubt, is damnable, because contrary to
the Doctrine of says. And yet to enforce a belief upon our selves, that
Christ is their present, without warrant of Scripture is more damnable; for
this were to affect ignorance for cloaking Idolatry. V de lib. 2. Sect. 1.
cap. 7.
that, cultu latriae God alone is to be adored, that so to adore any other is
Idolatry; and Idolatry (by their confession) a most grievous sin. O how
much better were it for them to hold it none; or Gods Word forbidding it of no
authority, then so lightly to adventure the hourly practice of it (in
contempt of such fearful threatenings, as they themselves out of Gods Laws
pronounce against it,) upon such broken disioincted surmises, as are the best
they can pretend for their warrant.

5 To believe Christ's flesh and blood should be there present, where it cannot
be seen, or felt, yea where we see and feel another body as perfectly as we
can do ought, is, to reason, without warrant of Scripture, but a senseless
blind belief. But grant his body and blood were in the Sacrament rightly
administered, yet that out of the Sacrament, either should be in the
consecrated host, whilst carried from Town to Town for solemn show more
then for Sacramental use, is to reason ruled by Scripture (to say no worse)
more improbable. Now to worship that as God, which to our unerring senses is a
Creature, upon such blind supposals, that Christ's body, by one miracle may be
there; by another unseen is worse then Idolatry committed upon delusion of
sense. So to adore a wayfer, only a wayfer in all appearance; without strict
examination, nay without infallible evidence of Scriptures urged for the real
presence; is more abominable, then to worship every appearance of an Angel
of light, without trial what spirit it were, Satan or some other, that so
appeared. And if we consider the old Serpents usual slight to insinuate
himself into every place, wherein inveterate custom or corrupt affection, may
suggest some likelihood of a divine presence unto dreaming fancies, (as he did
delude the old World in Oracles and Idols:) the probability is far greater,
his invisible substance, (by nature not incompatible with any corporeal
quantity) should be annexed to the supposed host, then Christ's real body,
incapable for any thing we know of ioinct existence in the same place with any
other; howsoever, most disproportionable to such base effects as must proceed
from the substance contained under the visible shape of bread, such as no
accident could either breed, or support.

6 This is a point (as is elsewhere observed) wherein Satan seems to triumph
over the modern Papists, more then over all the Heathens of the old World,
whose senses only he deluded, or bewitched their reason, but quite inuerts
all use of these men's sense, faith and reason, making them believe Christ's
body to be present in the Sacrament, after a supposed miraculous manner, quite
contrary to the known nature of bodies, and yet more preposterously contrary
to the very end and essence of miracles. For what miracles were ever wrought to
other purpose, then to convince the imperfect collections of humane reason by
evidence of sense, God using this inferior or brutish part (thus astonished by
his presence) to confute the curious folly of the superior or divine faculty
of the soul, as he did sometimes the dumb Ass to rebuke the iniquity of
the Prophet her Master. But so preposterously does Satan ride the modern
Papists that he is brought to believe a multitude of miracles; against the
evidence of sense, or reason, contrary to the rule of faith; all offered up in
sacrifice unto the Prince of darkness; that he having, put out the eyes of
sense, reason, and spirit at once, may ever after lead them what way he list.
And as unhappy wagges, or lewd companions, may persuade blind men to beg an
Alms, as if some great personage did, when as a troop of more needy beggars
then themselves, pass by; so is it much to be dreadded, least the Devil
persuade the blinded besotted Papist that Christ is present where he himself
lies hid; that he may with heart and soul offer up those prayers and duties
unto him which belong properly unto God; and worship in such manner before the
boxes whereinto he has secretly conuaid himself, as the Israelites did before
the arc of the Covenant.

7 De adorand. lib. 3. disp. 1. c. 5.
Vasquez thinks we may without offense adore that body wherein the Devil
lurkes, so we direct not our worship unto him, but to the inanimate Creature,
as representing the Creator. Suppose this might be granted upon some rare
accident, or extraordinary manifestation of Gods power in some particular
place, in case, men were ignorant, or had no just presumptions of any malignant
spirits presence therein: Yet were it damnable Idolatry daily to practice the
like especially where great probability were of diabolical imposture, which
the solemn worship of any Creature without express warrant of Scripture, will
inuit. Yet sense does witness that Christ is not, no Scripture does warrant
us, that he or any other living Creature, unless perhaps The known
experiments of such Creatures arising from corruption of their consecrated
host: have enforced the Schoolmen to invent new miracles how they should come
there. Some think per creationem nouae materiae prima, others that the
quantity of the late deceased consecrated host Supplet locum materi^e primae,
which is the greatest miracle in the Sacrament, as Pererius thinks vide Pere.
dispu. 16. in 6 tom. Jobannis and S^ares Met. disp. 20.
worms, or such as spring of putrefaction, is present in their processions.
Notwithstanding all the express Commandments of God brought by us against
their practice: the Si quis dixerit, in sancto Eucharistiae Sacramento Christum
vnigenitum Dei filium non esse cultulatriae, etiam externo, ad orandum: alque
ideo nec festiua peculiari celebritate venerandum, neque in proc^ssionibus,
secuudum laudabilem, and vniuersalem Ecclesiae sanctae ritum, and consuetudinem
solemniter circumgestandum, vel non public, vt adoretur populo proponendum,
and eius adoratores esse Idololatras; anathema sit. Council. Trid. Sess. 13.
Can. 6.
Trent Council accurseth all that deny Christ's real presence in procession,
or condemn the proposal of that consecrated substance to be publicly adored
as God; not so much as intimating any tolerable exposition of that
Commandment, which forbids us to have any Gods but one.

8 The impious decree of the Trent Council for communicating in one kind,
against the express Commandment of Christ, the practice of his Apostles, and
the Primitive Church.
To omit many more; another instance suitable to the former and our present
purpose, we have in the decree of communicating under one kind. Our Savior at
his institution of this Sacrament, gave the cup as well as the bread, and with
the cup alone this express iniunction Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drink all of this,
albeit none of his Disciples were consicients or such as did consecrate. S.
Paul recites the same institution in like words and continued the practice in
such Churches as he planted. The Session 21. 20.
Trent Council acknowledges that the use of the cup was not infrequent, or
unusual in the Primitive Church; indeed altogether usual, and the want of it
for many hundred years after Christ, unknown. The only instance, that can
from Antiquity be pretended, to prove it lawful, and which in all
likeli-hood did partly occasion it, argues the Ancients use of it in solemn
assemblies, to have been held as necessary. For even in cases of greatest
necessity, when the cup could not be carried to parties sick, or otherwise
detained from public Communions; they had the consecrated bread dipped in it.
And Erant autem sub Arriana secta viuentes: and quia consuetudo eorum est vt ad
Altarium venientes, de alio calice Reges communicent and de alio populus minor,
venenum in calice illo posuit, de quo matter communicatura erat. Quo illa
hausto, protinus mortua est, non enim dubium est tale maleficium esse de part
Diaboli. Quid contra misere Haeretici respondebunt, vt in sancta eorum locum
habeat minacus? Nos vero Trinitatem in vna aequalitate pariter and omnipotentia
consilentes etiamsi mortiferum bibamus, in nomine patris and filij and spiritus
sancti very and incorruptibilis Dei, nihil nos nocebit. Greg. Turon Hist. Lib.
3. Number. 31.
Gregory of Towers relates the poisoning of King Clouis sister (Queen to
Theodoricke) by her own daughter, in the Chalice, so, as he intimates withal,
the ordinary use of the cup at that time, as well amongst French Catholics as
Italian Arrians. Only this was the difference; The Arrians did not, as the
Catholics, drink of the same cup with their Princes.

9 It may be, fear, conceived upon this or like example, least the Priests
should, in a more proper sense prove conficients, not of Christ's, but of Lay
Princes bodies; made them, afterward, more willing to forbear the Cup; and
the people, either in manners would not, or otherwise could not, be advanced
above them at this Heavenly banquet. Turonensis reason against these
Heretics, I think, did hold no longer then his life; few Princes afterward
durst have adventured to try the truth of his conclusion [Whether poison
drunk in the Sacrament administered by the supposed true Church would have
wrought. For, unless my memory fail me, Ecclesiastike Princes, Popes
themselves, have been as surely poisoned, in Catholic Chalies; as the
forementioned Queen was in the Arrian cup.

10 But what occasions soever, either moved the laity of themselves to
embrace, or the Clergy to enjoin this Communion under one kind; the Council.
Trid. Sess. 21. Cap. 1. Itaque sancta ipsa Synodus a Spiritu sancto, qui
spiritus est sapientiae, and intellectus, spiritus consily and pietatis edocta,
atque ipsius Ecclesiae iudicium and consuetudinem secuta declarat ac docet,
nullo diuino praecept Laicos and Clericos non consicientes obligari ad
Eucharistiae sacramentum sub vtraque spec^e sumendum; neque vllo pacto, salua
side, dubitari posse, quin illis alterius speciei communio ad salutem
sufficiat. Nam etsi Christus Dominus in vltima caena venerabile hoc
Sacramentum, in panis and vini speciebus instituit, and Apostolis tradidit: non
tamen illa institutio, and traditio ^o tendunt, vt omnes Christi sideles
statuto Domini ad vtramque speciem accipiendam as^ringa^tur. Sed neque ex
sermon illo ap^d Johan. 6. recte colligitur, vtriusque speciei Communionem a
Domino praeceptam esse, vtrumque iuxta varias sanctorum Patrum, and Doctorum
interpretationes intelligatur. Namque qui dixit, Nisi manducaueritis carnem
filij hominis, and biberitis eius sanguinem non habebitis vitam in vobis: dixit
queque; Siquis manducauerit ex hoc pane, viuet in aeternum. Et qui dixit, Qui
manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum surguinem habet vitam aeternam: dixit
etiam: Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est etc. mundi vita. Et denique qui dixit,
Qui manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet, and ego in
illo: dixit nihilominus: Qui manducat hunc panem viuet in aeternum.
Trent Council specifies none, and yet accurseth all that will not believe the
Church had just causes so to do. Without any sure warrant of Scripture to
persuade it, they bind all likewise to believe this bare negative, [That
neither our Saviors words, at his institution of the Sacrament, nor any other
place of Scripture, enjoin the use of the cup as necessary, by way of precept
or commandment:] Nor does Christ's words, in the sixth of John, howsoever we
understand them, according to the diverse interpretations of Fathers, (either
of Sacramental or Spiritual eating) enforce any such necessity. Will you
hear their reasons for this bold assertion. He that said, unless ye eat the
flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, you have no life in you; said
also, And in the second Canon of the same Session, it is expressed sub paena
Anathematis. Si quis dixerit, Sancta Ecclesiam Catholicam non justice causis and
rationibus adductam fuisse, vt laicos atque etiam Clericos non consicientes,
sub panis tantummodo specie communicaret, aut in co errasse; anathema sit.
If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. And he that said,
whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life; said also,
the bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
World; He that said, whosoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in
me and I in him: has said withal, he that eats this bread shall live for
ever.

11 Gods precepts must be very peremptory, and conceived in formal terms,
ere any sufficient authority to enjoin obedience, in what subject soever,
will be acknowledged in them by these men, that dare thus deny a necessity of
communicating Christ in both kinds, imposed upon all in these words; Verily,
verily I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink
his^ blood, you have no life in you; only because it is said in the words
going before, If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. Of how much
better insight in Scriptures, then these graund seers of Rome, would blind
Homer, had he lived in their time, have proved? For he never denied his fained
Gods their Nectar, because Ambrosia was an immortal meat, And would he, or
any man not more blind in heart and mind then he was of bodily sense,
collect, against Christ's express words, that his blood, the true heavenly
Nectar, was not necessary, because his flesh does strengthen to eternal life,
especially if he considered their captious interpollation, against whom in
that place he disputes, which caused him not to express his mind so fully
there, as elsewhere he had done albeit afterward he ingeminates the
necessity of drinking his blood, as well as eating his flesh in such precise
and formal terms; as if he had even then bethought himself, that such
Antichristian Spirits as these Trent Fathes, might happily dare to elude his
most sacred precept, by such Satanicall glosses, as in that decree they have
done.

12 He had told the Jews (as much as was pertinent to their objection) that he
was the living bread, which came down from Heaven: much better then Manna,
which their Fathers had eaten. Bread he called himself in opposition unto
Manna, not restrayning this to his body or flesh only; albeit what he meant
by bread, he expounds partly by his flesh, And the bread which I will give is
my flesh, which I will give for the life of the World; Besides that bread in
the Hebrew Dialect contains all sorts of food, the manner of giving this An
brosia was such, as did afford Heavenly visible Nectar too. For whilst he
gave his flesh upon the cross, he powered out his blood withal. But the Jews
catch at this speech, ere he had expounded his full meaning, How can this man
give us flesh to eat? Then Jesus said unto them, verily, verily I say unto
you, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye
have no life in you. Which words, considered with the former circumstances,
Ista distinction ( says Bellarmine) tam frequens carnis, and sanguinis, and
^ibi ac potus aperte indicat Christum loqui de communicatione sui sub speciebus
panis and vi^i talioqui enim quorsum ista distinctio, toties praesertim
repet^ta? Spiritualis enim perceptio Christi per sidem non eget ista distinone
cum vno modo siat: idem enim est manducare, and b^bere in sumptione per solam
sidem. Bellar. Lib. 5. de Sacrament. Euch. Cap. 5. in haec verba Johan.
to any man's capacity not infatuation, import thus much; Do ye murmur that I
should profer you my flesh? verily I say unto you, and ye may believe me,
Unless ye drink my blood, as well as eat my flesh, ye have no life in you.
For so he adds, my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed;
that is, both are as necessary to eternal, as meat and drink to corporal
life.

13 For these and many like reasons, necessarily arising from the text; some,
as well of their greatest Scholars, as best interpretors, deny the former
places to be meant of Sacramental eating, otherwise, unable to conceive any
possibility, either of avoiding the inconveniences urged by us, or of
defending their infallible Church from error in this decree. Yet says the
Council, howsoever they be understood, according to the diverse
interpretations of Fathers, they infer no such necessity. No? not if most
Fathers, as Maldonate contends, did hold them to be directly meant of
Sacramental eating? Why then did Iansenius and Hesselius renounce the Fathers
in this? surely to defend their mother, whose credit they have much better
saved, upon supposition that these words are meant only of spiritual
manducation, then Maldonate, otherwise acute, but most peruersely sottish, in
his Apology for this decree, has done. And yet, to speak the truth, the same
inconvenience will follow as necessarily, Now if we assume, But the Romish
Church will not suffer Christians to receive CHRIST'S body and blood sub (...)
panis and vini, the conclusion is inevitable, therefore the Romish Church
directly contradicts Christ and as much as in her lies depriues the Laity of
eternal life. Our Savior in the sixth of John speaks indefinitly both of
Sacramental and Spiritual eating, not peculiarly of either*
though not so perspicuously at first sight, albeit we grant them to be meant
of spiritual eating primarily. Vide Bezae annotationes in verse. 63. cap. 6.
Iohannis.
For * in that they are meant primarily of spiritual they cannot but be meant
of Sacramental eating also, seeing these two (as elsewhere I have observed) are
not opposite, but subordinate. Whence if we grant that Christ's blood, as well as
his flesh, must be communicated to us by faith, or spiritual manducation; the
consequence will be [Therefore the cup, as well as the bread, must be
administered in the Sacrament;] Quoniam res ipsa, id est corporis and sanguinis
Christi spiritualis manducatio and potus ibi lucule^ter traditur, ad quam
postea Euangelistae ad sinem histor ae suae declarant Christum adiunxisse
symbola externa panis and vini, idcirco nos caput illud a Sacrame^to
Eucharistiae putamus esse alienum. Peter Martyr Lib. co^tra Gardinerum page 1.
ad solutionem 32. obiecti.
because Christ says in the institution, that the cup is his blood, and the
bread his body or flesh: that is, the one is the sure pledge, o^ instrument;
whereby his flesh; the other whereby his blood, which we must spiritually
eat, (as well in the Sacrament as out of it,) must be communicated unto us.
For, as the ancient Fathers have observed, our Savior Christ did in his
institution exhibit that unto us sensibly which before he had promised as
invisible, so that the precept of eating Christ's body, and drinking his blood
sacramentally does bind all capable of this Sacrament as strictly, as that
other of eating his body and drinking his blood Spiritually: seeing this
latter is the seal and assurance of the other. And as our adversaries
acknowledge an absolute necessity of pre^pt, for eating Christ Sacramentally
and Spiritually, though that precept concern not infants: so in all reason
they should grant an equal necessity of precept, for eating his flesh and
blood distinctly in the Sacrament, though this be not necessary to all men,
at all times, if without negligence or contempt they cannot be partakers of
both. For impossibility, upon what occasion soever, not caused through their
one default, exempts them from that general precept of eating Christ under
both kinds; as want of years, or discretion, does children from any
iniunction, divine, or humane of communicating so much as in one kind. For
notwithstanding the former precept, [except ye eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you,] as peremptory as any can
be for communicating, as well sacramentally as spiritually, in both kinds; it
were vncharitble to mistrust Gods mercy toward such poor souls, as long
for the cup of salvation, which no man gives them; yea which the Romish Church
has by decree, as peremptory as she could make, denied to all the Laity
without exception, to all the Clergy except such, as may by a peculiar right
challenge his blood as their own, by way of exchange, because they have made
him a body which he had not before.

14 Yet is it a small thing with this great whore, The strange interpretation
of Saint Paul words whereby the Trent Council deluded by Satan seeks to
delude the Christian World.
to deprive the Christian World of the Lords, unless she urge it, instead
thereof, to pledge her in the cup of Devils, full of the wine of fornication,
colored with her adulterate Scriptures authorized no doubt for such purposes.
Where our Apostle Saint Paul says, that he, and his fellow Ministers were
stewards of the mysteries of God; the vulgar Roman edition renders the Greek,
(...) by the Latin dispensatores and (...) (rightly rendered in this place)
elsewhere (upon carelessness, rather then any intention of harm, as I am
persuaded) by the Latin Ephe. 5. verse 32.
sacramentum. Whether upon set purpose of some more learned in that Council,
presuming to gull the simple and illitterate by their cunning, as Chemnitius
probably thinks; or whether the mystery of iniquity (as is more probable)
wrought unawares in the brains of the ignorant, The improper use of which word
in that place made Matrimony a Sacrament amongst the Papists, yet Bellarmine
defends the translation. Idem est Mysterium, Graecis and Latinis Sacramentum,
Graeci^ enim cum de Sacramentis aegunt semper (...) vocant. Bellar. Lib. 2. de
verbo Dei Cap. 14. Parag. Septimus. So oftentimes we call an Ass a beast, but
to translate bestia by the English Ass, would argue either rudeness or
negligence in the translator, or the approuer, partiality in the Apologizer.
which were the mayor part, and, as some have related, did ouersway the learned
incapable of such impudency as should give countenance to this ignominious
decree; partly from the equivocation of the Latin dispensatores, partly from
the synominall signification which the vulgar has made of mysterium, and
sacramentum, the beetle-heads have hammered out an interpretation of Saint
Paul's words before cited, so scurrilously contrary to his meaning, that the
black Dog, which is said to have appeared unto Cardinal Crescentius (might
he have spoken in the Council) could scarce have uttered it without blushing.
For the Apostle meant such dispensatores or Stewards, as our Savior speaks of
in the four and twentieth of Saint Matthew; such as should give their fellow
servants their inst portions without purloyning; such as daily expected their
Masters return, to call them unto a strict account of their stewardship. For so
it is expressly added, 1. Cor. Cap. 4. Verse. 2.
Moreover, (or as much as belongs unto our office) it is required of Stewards,
that they be all sound faithful.

Not to dispute of the Churches authority in disposing of Sacraments, nor to
exagitate the impiety of this decree, be the one for the present supposed as
great, the other as little as they list to make it; only this I would demand
of any that is so himself; whether he can imagine any men, sober, or in their
right minds, would not as soon have urged that text, The fool has said in
his heart there is no God, for establishing Atheism, or Saint Peter's check
unto Simon Magus, to prove Simonie lawful; as derive the Churches authority,
for detayning the least part of the word of life, much less the cup of
salvation, from these words, Let a man so think of us as of the Ministers of
Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. What secrets? of the Gospel,
before hid, but now to be published to all the World; of which the same Apostle
elsewhere had said, Anccessitie is laid upon me, and we unto me, if I preach
it not. Of the use, or necessity of the Lords cup, not a word in this place,
not a syllable, for the Lord had sent him, not to administer this Sacrament,
but to preach the Gospel: of which the Doctrine of the Lords Supper was a part
indeed; but where expressly and directly he delivers that, does he intimate
by any circumstance, that either it had been, was, or might be otherwise
administered, then according to the pattern prescribed by our Savior at the
first institution? Rather his often repetition of these coniunctiues, This
bread and this cup, eating and drinking, the body and blood, etc. Argue, he
never thought the one should be received without the other; that this
prohibition of the cup was a particular branch of the Mystery of iniquity,
not to break out till latter ages, hid from his eyes that had seen the
Mystery it self begin to work. As often 1. Cor. 11. verse. 26. 27. 28. 29.
as ye shall eat this bread (says the Apostle) and drink this cup, ye show
the Lords death till he come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and
drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and
blood of the Lord. Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of
this bread and drink of this cup. For he that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks his own damnation, because he discerns not the Lords
body. Praeterea declarat, hanc potestatem perpetuo in Ecclesia fuisse, vt in
Sacramentorum dispensatione, salua illorum substantia ea statueret, vel
mutaret, quae suscipientium vtilitati seu ipsorum Sacramentorum venerationi,
pro rerum, temporum, and locorum varietate magis expedire iudicaret. Id autem
Apostolus non obscure visus est insinuasse, cum ait: Sic nos existimet homo, vt
ministros Christi and dispensatores mysteriorum Dei, atque ipsum quidem hac
potestate vsum esse satis cons^at cum in multis alijs tum in hoc ipso
Sacramento, cum ordinatis nonnullis circa eius vsum. 1. Corinthians. 11. verse. 34.
Caetera (inquit) cum venero, disponam, Council. Trident. Sess. 2. Cap. 2.
Yet unto the Trent Council Saint Paul in the former place, where he had no
such occasion, as not speaking one word either of the Doctrine, necessity, or
use of the Sacraments seems to intimate, and that not obscurely, the Churches
authority in dispensing them as the Trent Fathers have done. What then might
every Minister of Christ, every distributer of Gods secrets, have used the
like authority, before the Church representative did; at least, by tacit
consent, approve the practice? This place doubtless proves, either altogether
nothing, or thus much, for the Apostles words are indefinite, for their
litterall sense, equally appliable to every faithful Minister, or private
dispenser of such secrets; not appropriate to the entire public body
Ecclesiastique, or the capital or Cardinal parts thereof. Of the
Corinthians, to whom he wrote, one said, I am Paul's, another I am Apollos, the
third I am of Cephas; all boasting in the personal excellencies of their first
Parents in Christ, as the Papists now do in Saint Peter's and his successors
Catholic Primacie. To assuage these carnal humors in his children, their
Father that great Doctor of the Gentiles, seeks more in this, then in any
other place of all his Epistles, to debase himself, and diminish others high
esteem either of his own worth, or of his calling 1. Cor. 3. verse. 5. 6. 7.
8. 9.
Who is Paul then? and who is Apollos, but the Ministers by whom ye believed;
and as the Lord gave to every man? I have planted, Apollos watered, but God
gave the increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he
that waters, but God that gives the increase, And he that planteth, and he
that waters are one, and every man shall receive his wages according to his
labor. For we together are Gods laborers: ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods
building. And after a serious incitement of master builders to fidelity, with
the like admonition to Gods husbandry, or building, not to rejoice in men, he
concludes as he had begun, Let every man esteem us (such as I have said)
Ministers of Christ and disposers of the mysteries of God. Of whom were they so
to esteem? Of Saint Paul himself, and every faithful Minister. Does he then
intimate here any such prerogative above the meanest of his brethren, as the
Romish Clergy usurps over the whole Christian World? any authority to
prohibit, either the dispensors of Gods mysteries from administering, or men so
carnally minded as were these to whom he wrote from communicating Christ's blood
as well as his body? So the Trent Fathers think; and, as if for their wilful
denial of the Lords cup unto the people, the Lord had given them the cup of
giddiness, to cast them into a Babilonish slumber whilst they consulted about
this decree; and their Scribes through retchlessenesse had written, what their
rauing Masters in their sickly or drunken dreams, had uttered: we find, in
the same Decree, another place of Saint Paul immediately annexed, though as
disproportionable to the former (as it is placed in their discourse) as a man's
head to an horses neck, both as unsuitable to their intended conclusion, as a
super addition of finnes or feathers would be, to such a monstrous
Hippocentaurique combination. The place is Saint Paul's conclusion of that
discourse concerning the Sacrament, 1. Corinthians. 11. verse. 34.
Other things will I set in order when I come.

16 Granting (what is not necessary) he spoke of ordering matters concerning
this Sacrament: to receive the wine, as well as the bread, was no part of their
present disorder, whose misbehauiour at the Lords Table did minister mere just
occasions to Saint Paul, then long beardes did to the Council of Constance, to
deny the use of the cup, might Christ's blood and body, which he had jointly
rendered to all, be upon any occasion justly severed by man in the
administration of his last Will and Testament. Whatsoever the number or
quality of the guests be; the great Lords Table must be always so furnished
as it was at the first institution; for he has no respect of persons. If a
rich stately Prelate come in with a gold ring in goodly vestiments, and a poor
honest Layicke in vileraiments, he says not to him in Pontificiall roabes,
come sit you here at my mess, where you may drink of my wine as well as eat
of my bread: nor to the poor Layicke, stand thou there a part, or sit down
here under my footstool, where thou may be partaker of the crummes which
fall from my table, though not of my cup, which must be kept for thy betters.
High and low, rich and poor, all were redeemed with one price, all at this
offering equal, all alike free to taste of every dish, so they come with wedding
garments, without which even the best must be cast out, as unworthy to taste of
any part, if not of all. That part, which the Counsels of Constance and Trent,
upon pretenses of reverence to the LORDS Supper, have detained from Modern
Christians, the Corinthians had received unworthily; yet was not the Cup, for
this reason, held superfluous by Saint Paul who only sought to repress the
abuse, as knowing the use of it to be most necessary. The matters then he
meant to order, when he came, was, to set out this Heavenly banquet with
greater decency and solemnity, not to abridge them, of any substantial or
material part thereof.

17 Nor do the Trent Fathers, if we may trust them upon their Cited in the
precedent annotation: Parag. 15.
words. For they (desirous as it seems to make the whole Christian World as
sottish, as themselves were impious) would make men believe, they could iuggle
away the Cup, and never touch the very substance of the Sacrament; as if the
wine were not as substantial a part of the Lords Supper, as was his blood of
his body, or humanity. An integrall or material part they cannot deny it to
be; and such if it be, there Apology is as shameless, as if a man should
let out most of another blood, cut of his arm, or leg, or maime him in some
principal part, and plead for himself, I did not meddle with his substance,
meaning (as the Council I take it here does) his essence, seeing he is yet as
truly a reasonable Creature, as before.

18 But to debar them of that refuge, That the Cup is an essential and
substantial part of the Eucharist.
it may be they sought or their followers may yet hope to find in the
equivocation of this word, substance, importing as much sometimes as a
material, or integral, sometimes as an essential part. If the cup be an
essential and substantial part of this Sacrament, the Council by their own
confession did souly err, in prohibiting Communion under both kinds: If no
such part it be, they might by their own rule have altogether denied the use
of it so much as to the sacrificer, or consicient: but so the very use and
end, on which the essence of the Sacrament, (as of all other matters of moral
practice) immediately depends, and by whose expiration instantly must determine,
should utterly have perished. The end and use of this sacred institution, as
our Savior expressly teaches, and the Council grants, was to represent the
testators death, yea so to represent it, as we migh be partakers of his body
and blood, not spiritually only, but withal, (as the Trent Fathers contend)
sacramentally. Admitting then all they can pretend against the necessity of
the Cup [That whole Christ were in the bread alone;] yet this will not
preserve the true and fruitful use of the Sacrament, nor salve that deadly
wound, the essence of it must perforce receive from frustration of the end,
necessarily ensuing the cups absence. For this Sacrament was ordained, as to
represent, so to exhibit Christ's body, unto all faithful Communicants not as
entire, and whole; his blood, not as it was enclosed in the veins: but the
one, as torn and rent, the other, as shed and powered out upon the cross.
This is my blood of the new Testament, (says our Savior) which is shed for
many, (for all that receive it faithfully) for the remission of sins. His
blood then, as shed and powered out, is as the loadstarre of penitent and
contrite hearts, whereon the eyes of their faith, that seek remission of
sins in this Sacrament, must be fastened: for (as the Heb. 9. 22.
Apostle says) without sheding of blood is no remission. This was the
complement of that inestimable all-sufficient Sacrifice, that which represents
his precious blood thus powered out, the principal part of this Sacrament,
as well in respect of representing his death, as in applying remission of sins
thereby in general purchased, and by this Sacramental Type sealed to every
one in particular; especially if the Trent Councels Doctrine be true, that
Christ's very blood, which was shed upon the cross, is really present in the
Chalice, and might be as immediately sprinkled at least upon the lips or doors
of every faithful receivers heart, as the blood, of the Paschal Lamb was
upon the doore-posts of the Israelites. Thus, as Satan the Father of lies, so
false opinion, suggested by him, draw men with pleasure into those evils, for
whose practice in the end they become their chief accusers. That opinion which
first brought in neglect of the Chalice, and, as the Trent Council presumed,
would have warranted them in making this decree, does most condemn them: for
the measure of their iniquity, could not have been so fully accomplished,
unless they had held a transubstantiation of the wine into Christ's blood.

19 What part of Scripture, can we presume they will spare, that dare thus
countermand the most principal of all Gods Commandments? what reckoning may
we think, they make of our Savior Christ, that adventure thus shamefully to
disanull and cancel his last will and testament, defrauding almost the whole
Christian World, of half their Lord and Masters royal allowance, partly
without any show of Scriptures, either to restrain, or otherwise interpret
these Sovereign precepts; partly upon such idle and frivolous allegations, as
may further witness their slight estimate of Gods Word, save only so far,
as it may be wrested to serve their turns.

20 But grant the places there alleged by the Council, That the Tre^t Fathers
had preferred their own authority above the Scriptures, albeit the Scriptures
they allege for this decree, were as probable as these we bring against it.
did so mitigate either the form of the institution, or the peremptory manner
of our Saviors speeches in the sixth of John, as to make it disputable in
impartial judgments, whether they did plainly inioyne any necessity of
communicating under both kinds: the former decree notwithstanding would
manifestly infer an usurpation of Sovereignty ^uer Gods word, quite
contrary to the general Analogy of faith, reason, and conscience; by all
which, in cases doubtful, and, for the speculatiue form of truth, disputable
with eqall probability, affirmatively or negatiuely; we are taught to frame
our choice, when we come to practice, according to the difference of the
matter, or of consequences, which may ensue, more dreadful one way, then the
other, always to prefer either a greater good before a less, or a less
evil before a greater, though both equally probable. Suppose then these two
contradictorie propositions, [The denial of the cup is a mutilation of Christ's
last will and testament: the denial of the cup is no mutilation of Christ's
last will, and Testament,] were, for their speculatiue probabilities, in just
examination, equipendent; yet the doctrine of faith delivered in Scripture,
reason and conscience, without contradiction, instruct us, that to alter,
abrogate, or mutilate the son of Gods last will and testament, is a most
grievous, most horrible, most dreadful sin; but to permit the use of the
Chalice, has no suspicion of any the least evil in it. Had the Trent Fathers
thus done, they had done no worse then our Savior, then his Apostles, then the
Primitive Church, (by Sess. 2^. Cap. 2.
their own confession) did. This excess of evil, without all hope of any the
least compensatiue good to follow upon the denial, should have swaied them to
that practice, which was infinitely more safe, as not accompanied with any
possibility or show of danger; although the speculatiue probability of any
divine precept necessarily inioyning the use of the cup, had been none. Thus
peremptorily to adventure upon consequences so fearful, whereto no contrary
fear could in reason impell, nor hopes any way comparable allure them; thus
imperiously to deprive the whole Christian World of a good, in their valuation,
(testified by their humble supplications and frequent embassages to that
Council) so inestimable, without any other good possible to redound unto the
deniers, save only usurpation of Lordly Dominion over Christ's heritage;
plainly euinceth, that the Church is of far greater authority with them,
then GOD: Word, either written in the Sacred Canon, or their hearts; then all
his Laws, either ingrafted by nature, or positive, and Supernatural. For,

21 Admit this Church representative had been fully persuaded in conscience
rightly examined, and immediately ruled by Scripture, that the former decree did
not prejudice the institution, use, or end of this Sacrament; yet most
Christians earnest desire of the Cup, so publicly testified, could not
suffer them to sleep in ignorance of that great scandal, the denial of it
needs must give to most inferior particular Churches. Wherefore the rule of
charity, that moved the Father of the Gentiles to that serious protestation.
2. Cor. 8. ve. 13. Mat. 26. ver. 27. Sacrosancta oecumenica and generalis
Tridentina Synodus, in spiritu sancto legitime congregata, praesidentibus in ea
eisdem Apostolicae sedis legatis, cum de tremendo, and sanctissimo Eucharistiae
sacramento varia diuersis in locis. errorum mo^stra nequissimi damonis artibus
circumferantur, ab quae in nonnullis prouintijs multi a Catholicae Ecclesiae
^ide atque obedientia uideantur discessisse: Censuit ea, quae ad communionem
sub vtraque specie, and par^ulorum pertinent, hoc loco exponenda esse; qua
propter cunctis Christi fidelibus interdicit, ne posthac de ijs aliter vel
credere vel docere, vel praedicare audeant quam est his decretis explicatum
atque definitum, Council. Trid. Sess. 21. in Proaemio.
If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the World stands,
that I may not offend my brother: should in all equity, divine, or humane,
have wrought these Prelates hearts to like profession, If want of their
spiritual drink offend so many Congregations, and such a multitude of our
brethren, we will rather not use our lawful authority acknowledged by all,
then vs^rp any that may be offensive or suspicious unto others, though
apparently just unto our selves: for they could not be more fully persuaded,
this decree was just then Saint Paul was that all meats were lawful to him.

22 But may we think these Prelates had no scruple of conscience, whether the
very form of this decree were not against our Saviors express command, 2.
Cor. 8. ve. 13. Mat. 26. ver. 27. Sacrosancta oecumenica and generalis
Tridentina Synodus, in spiritu sancto legitime congregata, praesidentibus in ea
eisdem Apostolicae sedis legatis, cum de tremendo, and sanctissimo Eucharistiae
sacramento varia diuersis in locis. errorum mo^stra nequissimi damonis artibus
circumferantur, ab quae in nonnullis prouintijs multi a Catholicae Ecclesiae
^ide atque obedientia uideantur discessisse: Censuit ea, quae ad communionem
sub vtraque specie, and par^ulorum pertinent, hoc loco exponenda esse; qua
propter cunctis Christi fidelibus interdicit, ne posthac de ijs aliter vel
credere vel docere, vel praedicare audeant quam est his decretis explicatum
atque definitum, Council. Trid. Sess. 21. in Proaemio.
bibite ex hoc omnes, drink ye all of this: For mine own part, whiles I call
to mind, what else where I have observed, that the Jews were never so
peremptory in their despitefull censures of our Saviors doctrine, nor so
outragiously bent against his person, as when their hearts were touched in part
with his miracles, or in some degree illuminated with the truth he taught: The
Councels extraordinary forwardness to terrify all controuenaries of this
decree, makes me suspect they were toe conscious of their own shallow
pretended proofs to elude Gods word, whose light and perspicuitie in this
point had exasperated their hardened hearts, and weake-sighted faith, to be so
outrageous, in the very beginning of that session, as if they had meant to
sti^fle their consciences, and choke the truth, lest these happily might
cross their proceedings, or control their purposes, if this cause should
once have come to sober and deliberate debatement, For, as thieves oftentimes
seek to avoid apprehension by crying loudest, turn the thief; so these
wolves hoped well to smother their guilt, and prevent all notice taking of
their impiety by their grievous exclamations against others monstrous impious
opinions in this point interdicting all upon penalty of the causes following,
ere they had determined ought to teach, preach, or believe otherwise then they
meant to determine.

23 Yet, Cum sacrosancta Synodus superiori sessione duos articulos, al^^^
propositos; and tu^ nondum discussos, videlicet; an rations, quibus Sancta
Catholica Ecclesia adducta fuit, vt communicaret laicos, atque etiam non
celebrantes Sacerdotes, sub vna panis specie, ita sint retinende, vt nulla
ratione calicis vsus cuiqua^ sit permi^^edus: Et, An, si honestis and
christianae charitati consentaneis rationibus concedendus alicui vel nationi
vel regno calicis vsus videatur, sub aliquibus conditionibus concedendus sit,
and quaenam illae sint, in aliud tempus, oblata sibi occasion, examinandas,
atque desiniendas reseruauerit; nunc, eorum, pro quibus petitur, saluti optime
consultum volens, decreuit, intergrum negotium ad sanctissimum Dominum nostrum
esse reserendum, pro vt praesenti decreto referti, qui pro sua s^^ulari
prudentia id efficiat, quod vtile reipublicae Christianae and salutare
petentibus vsum cal^cis sore iudicauerit. Council. Trident. vicessima secunda
Sessione in decreto super petit: de concessione Calicis.
though the Council accurse all that hold communication under both kinds as
a necessary Doctrine, it does not absolutely inhibit all use of the Chalice,
but leaves it free unto their Lord the Pope to grant it, upon what Conditions
he please, either unto private men, or whole Nations, upon what conditions
then, may we presume, will it please his Holiness for to grant it? upon any
better then Satan tendered all the Kingdoms of the Earth unto our Savior? for
this fained servant of Christ, a true Gehazi, repining at his Lord and Masters
simplicity, that could refuse so fair a profer, made after Satan in all
have, saying, in his heart, I will surely take somewhat of him, though my
Master spared him; and, pretending, a message in his name, to whom all power
was given in Heaven and in earth, has got an interest in the chief Kingdoms
of the World disposing such as he can best spare, or worst manage, to any
potent Prince, that will fall down and worship him and his copartner the
Prince of darkness; who, of late years, have almost shared the whole World
betwixt them; the one ruling over infidels, the other over professed
Christians. And seeing the Pope (because his pomp and dignity must be
maintained by Worldly wealth and revenues) dares not part with the propriety
of so many Kingdoms at once, as Satan (who only looks for honor) proffered;
he has found out a trick to supply his wants, for purchasing like honor and
worship, by his office of keeping Saint Peter's keys, if earthly Provinces or
Dominions fail him, Gods Word, his sons blood and body, all, shall be set
to sale, at this price, Fall down and worship him. For no man, we may rest
assured, no Nation or Kingdom, whom he can hinder, shall ever taste of the
Lords Cup, unless they will first acknowledge lawful authority in him, to
grant, deny, or dispose of it, at his pleasure; which is an homage wherewith
the Devil is more delighted, then if we did acknowledge him Supreme Lord of
all the Kingdoms of the Earth: for that were as much less prejudicial to
Christ's prerogative royal, as a damage in possession or goods would be to a
personal disgrace, or some foul maime or deformity wrought upon a Princes
body.

CHAP. V.
Propounding what possibly can be said on our adversaries behalf for avoiding
the force of the former arguments: and showing withal the special points that
lie upon them to prove, as principally, whether their belief of the Churches
authority can be resolved into any divine testimony.
1 Unto all the difficulties hitherto proposed, I can rather wish some learned
Priest or Jesuit would, then hope any such ever will directly answer point by
point. For the Readers better satisfaction I will first briefly set down, what
possibly can be said on their behalf, and, after a disclosure of their last
secret refuge, draw forth thence the dead and putrified carcass of Romish
faith; which unto the ignorant and superstitious, that cannot uncover the holes
and clefts wherein these impostors upon every search are wont to hide it, may
yet seem to live and breath; as the fable went of Saint John the Evangelists
body, after many years reposall in the grave; or as the blinded Jews to this
day brag, the scepter of Judah yet flourishes, beyond Babylon in Media, or
some unknown part of India, whither no European is likely to resort for a
disprouall of his relation.

2 Unto the demonstratiue evidences as well of their error in expounding
Scriptures pretended for, as of other Scriptures rightly alleged by us against
their former or like decrees, they will be ready to oppose what Bellarmine
has * done, Cap. 10.
That the Church must judge of Scriptures evidence, and private errors in
expounding it, not private men of the Churches expositions. Unto the objected
dreadful consequences of their decrees, (could these possibly be erroneous)
they would regest disobedience to the Church; that to disobey it is to disobey
God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, a sin as hanious as mangling of Christ's
last will and Testament, as Idolatry. On the contrary, to obey the Church
even in her negative decrees and naked decisions, unguarded with any pretense of
Scripture, (much more where this loving Mother, for the education of her
children will vouchsafe, what she need not, to allege some clause or sentence
of Holy writ,) we obey not the Church only but Gods Word also, though not in
those particular places, which in our judgments either contradict the former,
or like decrees, or else make nothing at all for them; yet in textes produced
for the Churches transcendent general authority. As he that adores the
consecrated host in procession, because his holy Mother commands him so to
do, or accou^ts want of Christ's blood no loss, because denied him by her
authority; although unto private spirits he may seem to contradict that Law,
Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Luke 4. 8.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: does yet
sincerely obey the Holy Ghost, and rightly observe the true sense and meaning
of these his dictates, Peter I have prayed for thee, that faith should not
fail, Peter feed my sheep, Thou art Peter, and upon this rock will I build my
Church. From these places once firmly believing the Church possibly cannot
err, he must not question, whether the practices by it enjoined contradict
the former laws both being delivered by the holy spirit, who can not
contradict himelfe. This I take it, is the sum of all, the most learned of
our adversaries can or would reply unto the former difficulties.

Not to draw faster, but rather remitting the Vide Lib. 2. Sect. 4. Cap. 5.
former bonds, wherein they have inextricably entangled themselves, by their
circular progress in their resolution of faith; admit their late doctrine lest
any possibility of knowing Scriptures, acknowledged by both to be Gods word,
or of distinguishing humane testimonies (written or unwritten) from divine: The
present question we may draw (with their free consent) unto this issue; whether
their belief of the Churches infallible authority, undoubtedly established, as
they pretend, in the fore cited places, can be truly resolved into any branch
of the first truth, or into humane testimonies only. If into the latter only,
the case is clear, that absolutely obeying the Romish Church, in the former or
like decrees, (which her authority set aside) to all or most men's consciences
would seem to contradict Gods principal laws; we believe, and in believing
obey men more then God; humane authorities, laws, or testimonies more then
divine.

4 The strength or feebleness of Roman faith will best appear, if we try
it in any one of these joints Whether by Divine testimony it can be proved,
that Saint Peter had such an universal, infallibe, absolute authority, as
these men attribute unto the Pope: Whether by like infallible testimony it can
be proved, the Popes from time to time, without exception were Peter's
undoubted successors, heirs apparent to all the preheminencies, or
prerogatives he inioyed: Whether either the sovereignty or universality of
their authority, supposed probable in it self, or to themselves; or
particular injunctions derived from it can be so fully notified to all
Christians, as they need not question, whether in yielding obedience to such
decrees, of like consequences as were the former, they do not grievously
disobey Gods Word. For though the Popes themselves might know this truth by
Divine revelation, or otherwise, their internal assurance, unless generally
communicable by divine testimonies, could be no warrant unto others, for
undertaking matters of fearful consequences, whereof they doubt, not only out
of secret instinct or grudging of their consciences, but from an apprehension
of opposition betwixt the very forms of laws papal, Peter was no the Church.
Math. 18. v. 15.
and divine.

5. First, it is improbable, that he to whom our Savior said; If thy brother
trespass against thee, di^ Ecclesiae, was the Bell. lib. ^ de P^nt. Rom 5^.
cap. 12. Qu^e d^cuntu^ Petro vt vni ex fidelibus ^erte omnibus, fidel^bus dicta
intell^guntur: vt Mat. 18. Si peccauerit (...). etc. By this reason then the
Pope must appeal to the Church; who then are meant by the church? Respondemus (
says Bellarmin else where) illud di^ Ecclesiae, significare de^er ad publicum
Ecclesiae iuditium. i. ad eos qui publicam personam in Ecclesia gerunt. Bellar.
lib. 1. de Pontif. Rom c. 6. So that if any man offend the Pope, the cause must
come to be decided, by himself, as a public person.
Church unto which all must, from which none may appeal: Or, if Peter, the
Pope if he will be Peter's successor must, in causes of controversy appeal
unto the Church. How is he then, as our adversaries contend, the Church, or
such a part of it, unto whom all, even Peter himself (were he alive) must
appeal? Must others appeal to him, as Judge, in his own cause? or he unto
himself alone? Not as alone, but (so a late Papist, to my remembrance,
answers Gerson) as accompanied with his fellow Consul, his Chair, which is
to him, as Caesar was to Julius: and so shall Gods word be to both; as Bibulus
was to Julius Caesar, a mere pretense, or bare name of authority, nothing
else. Yet if that word avouch, that neither S. Peter's, or his successors faith,
could ever fail in determining, controversies, we contradict it, not the Popes
decisions only, if we do not in all doubtful doctrines fully rely upon them.

CHAP. VI.
That neither our Saviors prayers, for the not failing of Peter's faith: Luke
22, ver. 32. nor his commending his sheep unto his feeding: Ioh. 21. ver. 15
prove any supremacy in Peter over the Church, from which the authority of the
Pope cannot, with probability, be derived.
1. IS it then probable, Our Saviors prayers for S. Peter did not bestow upon
him any oecumeniall Sovereign authority, absolutely infallible in such sense
as the Romanist, would make the Popes.
our Sauiors prayers, for Saint Peter did collate any authority upon him,
either oecumenicall for extent, or sovereign for others dependence on it; or
absolutely, and perpetually infallible for time, without integrity of life, or
other condition: besides such cathedral consultation, as is required in the
Pope to support it? Rather the proper effect they aimed at, was an
extraordinary assistance in the practice of such points, as already had been,
or afterward should be revealed unto him. Our Savior while he uttered them,
did clearly foresee all his followers should be sifted by Satan, he that
professed greatest love and resolution more then all the rest, in such
fearful sort, that without this promised supportance, his faith had utterly
failed: which though afterward it proved much stronger, by this shaking, yet
whether stronger then was any of his fellows, is uncertain, most unfit to be
disputed: Howsoever, no circumstance in that place prognosticates, or aboods
such extraordinary future strength, rather all suppose for the present, a
peculiar necessity of his Masters prayers for him, as foreseeing his tripping
(to use the mildest censure) would be so dangerous, as the memorial of his
recovery, might be a perpetual encouragement to all back sliders, against
distrust of Gods mercies. No man so sit to raise up such as are fallen, The
admirable use of Peter's fall foreseen by the all-seeing wisdom of God.
or wallow in the filth of sin, as he that has firmly apprehended grace
from above (or rather is so apprehended by it) and yet can withal, out of a
sincere and humble acknowledgement of his relapses, stoop lower then others in
spiritual graces his inferiors, and as it were let himself into the pit of
despair, wherein sinners lie linking their present frailty in his own
forepassed infirmities. It much disagrees with my temper, ever to exaggerate
the sins of Gods Saints; yea, I think the denial of Christ was less
sinful in Saint Peter, then the like would be in many others, that have
received less grace, because the temptation was above measure Not in respect
of danger represented (which was but death) but of extraordinary license at
that time granted to the power of darkness.
extraordinary permitted (no doubt) to this end, that he might be a more
faithful comforter of his brethren; whose faith was feeble, crazed, or
decayed. He that hopes with fruit to reprehend, or exhort men much daunted, or
ashamed at the fowlenesse of their offenses, must as far as truth will suffer
him, acknowledge himself to be a sharer in his own reproves; to have been
sometimes tainted with the original of their present grief: for so the
parties grieved will be less jealous, and conceit the medicine better. Thus
the royal host, in the Poet, cheeres up his Princely guest, amated at the
mention of his infamous ancestors; Ne perge queri casusque Statius lib. 1. Theb.
priorum
Annumerare tibi: Nostro quoque sanguine multum
Errauit pietas, nec culpa nepotibus obstet.
Tu modo dissimilis rebus mereare secundis
Excusare tuas. --
Did Parents shame their children stain, sweet Prince thy case were mine:
For Piety, sometimes, her course did alter from our line,
The blemish though did not descend. Let virtue be thy guide;
So shall thy same, thy Parents faults, though foul and monstrous hide.


2. By these, and like circumstances, may our Sauiors words, [But I have prayed
for thee that thy faith fail not: Therefore when thou art converted strengthen
thy brethren] be construed most appositely to his meaning. What was it then
Peter was to strengthen in others? Petrus non errauit circa fide^, sed tantum
aliquid ignorauit, cum audiuit: Vade Satana, and a charitate excidit non a
fide, quando Christum negauit. Quod in tractatu de Ecclesia suo loc^ docebimus.
Bellar. lib. 1. de Romans Pontif. In those books of, his de Ecclesia, the Reader
shall find the place alleged totidem verbis. Bellarmine as most of his
fellows, deny that Peter was the Churches foundation as yet: but their
readiness to defend the indeficiencie of his faith in this denial, argues,
they must of necessity hold, that the Popes faith does never fail, albeit he
usually manifested as great want of christian charity and resolution, as Peter
did in that denial; or, as great ignorance in divine mysteries as Peter's was,
when our Savior said unto him: go behind me Satan, upon Peter's affection at
that time is the Romish faith, as appears in the latter end of this chapter.
That which had been defective in himself. Was that his charity, his faith, or
both? We read (says Bellarmine) Peter's charity did fail, that his faith did
fail we never read. In vain then does Bellarmine, in vain do all his
fellows labor, to prove our Savior should in these words ratify a
perpetually indeficient purity of Roman faith? for Peter was to repair in
others what had been impaired in himself; to prevent, if it were possible, the
like fall in such as did, or to themselves did seem to stand; to convert,
restore and strengthen such, as in like, or worse sort had denied their
Redeemer. With much greater probability, might the Romanists seek to establish
a perpetual indeficient Christian charity in Peter's successors, had Peter's
love, or charity only failed. But the bad lives and manners of the Roman
Clergy, would give too manifest evidence against them in this attempt: In this
respect have these stout challengers taken upon them the defense, of a never
failing faith, because not so easily confuted. For, it is a matter very hard (I
must confess) to prove, that faith can never fail, which may deny Christ, so
formally and constantly as Peter's did, without defect. The best is, that by
their own confession this place can prove, the acts or exercises of Roman
faith to be no better, then S. Peter's was in this denial of Christ. His
offense, they grant, was foul, but his faith without defect. So may Popes be
monstrously luxurious in their lives, but always infallible in their Doctrine.
Reader, consult with thine own heart, and give sentence (as in the sight of
God) of the whole frame of their Religion, by the foundation; and of the
foundation (such as they willingly acknowledge faith to be of all true Religion
and every Christian virtue) by Bellarmines testimony. If Peter became (as
they pretend) the fundamental rock, by confessing: that Religion doubtless,
which has no better ground of infallibility, then Peter's faith not secured
from a threefold denial of Christ, our Confession, was first planted by the
Spirit of error, and of Antichrist.

3 Not to dispute any longer, what it was, but who they were Saint Peter was to
strengthen: all without exceptions. This justly may seem impossible, seeing
the exercise of his Ministry could not extend to all Nations, much less unto
all ages. Yet these words bequeath no hereditarie royal jurisdiction over all
persons, but rather inioyne personal acts of penetencie unto Saint Peter, for
his former personal offense. He had found extraordinary mercy at his Lord
and Masters hands; and was to communicate the like unto his fellow servants
more guilty of his offense. Christ, after his faith had failed did convert and
strengthen him against the like temptation; and he, converted, was commanded to
convert and strengthen others. Whom? Not such as by conversion might become his
brethren, or rather his children in Christ; but rather such, as were hewn out
of the same roke, and could truly call Abraham their father, Sira their Mother,
ioinct professors with him of Moses Law and the Prophets, more then his
brethren and associates, in denying him, of whom Moses and all the Prophets
bare testimony.

4 To subtract all matter of calumniation from men, too much disposed to cavil
without any probable cause, or just occasion: notwithstanding his threefold
denial of Christ, I deny not a triple or quadruple prerogative in Peter, in
respect of Christ's other Apostles; yet consisting, not in any authority more
infallible in it self, or more sovereign for superiority, over such as were
to depend upon him as a chief messenger of the Lord of Hosts, but in an
extraordinary efficacy of his ordinary Apostle-ship. In what respect then
was his ordinary Ministry or Apostles-ship, so extraordinarily powerful? In
respect of the universal Church throughout all ages, of the Jewish Synagogue,
for the time being only. S. Paul confutes the former as evidently as he
plainly avouches the later, Gal. 2. v. 7. 8. 9
When they saw the Gospel over the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as
the Gospel over the circumcision was unto Peter ( For he that was mighty by
Peter in the Apostle-ship over the circumcision, was also mighty by me toward
the Gentiles) James and Cephas and John, which were counted to be pillars,
knew of the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and to Barnabas the
right hands of fellowship, that we should preach unto the Gentiles and they
unto the circumcision.

5 Here the less in speech I amplify, S. Peter's extraordinary power and
efficacy in converting the circumcision.
the more in heart and mind I tacitly admire the unspeakable power and wisdom
of our God, that by the extraordinary offenses, or infirmities of one or two,
cause firmly establish the faith of all his Saints. Albeit he used the
Ministry of every other Apostle, in reconciling the world unto himself: yet
Paul and Peter were as the two principal intermediate elements, proportioned
and qualified of purpose, for the more apt connecting this mixed inferior Globe
with the Heavenly Sphere, the sons of men with the son of God; the one by
symbolizing with the Jew, the other with the Gentile in his sin, both with
Christ in true wisdom, in all good gifts and graces of the spirit. Saint
Paul's offenses against God manifested in the flesh, have the same proportion
to Saint Peter's, that the ignorance, infidelity or idolatry of the Gentiles
had with the Jews delinquencie, or Apostacy from the God of their Fathers.
Saint Paul had not known our Savior in the flesh, ignorant of his wisdom in
teaching, or power in working, and in his ignorant zeal unto Moses and the
Law, did persecute his followers and disciples after his resurrection; hereby
made a ^itter Symbol for reconciling the Gentiles unto God, whom they had not
known, usually misled in a blind devotion to their dumb Idols and traditions
of their elders, to hate and persecute the Jews, the only professors of true
Religion, the only servants till that time of the everliving God. Saint Peter
had long conuersed with our Savior, heard him teach as never man taught, seen
him do what no man else could ever do, his eyes had beheld the brightness of
his excellent glory, and, out of his apprehension of his Deity he had
professed more then ordinary love, Luke 22. 33.
Lord I am ready to go with thee into Prison, and to death: yet when he comes
unto his trial, flartly denies that ever he knew him; hereby more fitly
qualified for recovering the backsliding Apostaticall Jews, who had known the
Lord, and all the wonders which he had wrought for Israel: they had professed
such love and loyalty to him, as no people could do no more unto their Gods;
posterity still retaining the protestations of their Religious fathers; All
this is come upon us, yet do we not forget thee, neither deal we falsely
concerning thy covenant. Our hearts not not turned back: neither our steps
gone out of thy paths. Surely for thy sake are we slain continually, and are
counted as Sheep for the slaughter: Yet when he came in the similitude of man
to exact obedience and a leageance at their hands, they will not know him;
but, as Samuel had foretold, cast him off from reigning over them, and openly
protest against him; We have no King but Caesar.

6 Answerable to this observation is the success of their Apostleship,
registered by the Evangelist. We never read so many Jews, at once so thoroughly
converted by our Savior, or so seriously affected with his Doctrine in his
life time, as with that memorable Act. 2. ver 15. unto the end of the chapter.
Vid. Acts 3. ver. 12. to the 13. verse of the 4. chapter.
sermon of Saint Peter. The manner, of his reiterated appellations, Ye men of
Judea, and ye all that inhabit Jerusalem, ye men of Israel, Vide Act. 3. verse.
25.
Men and Brethren; of mentioning Gods promises made to them, and to their
children; of his reply; his earnest beseeching and exhorting them, that had
appealed ioinctly to him, and the other Apostles: argue, these were the
brethren, he in particular was enjoined to convert, confirm and strengthen.
And like a skilful Surgeon, that knew by his own recovery how to prick their
consciences, without giving them a deadly wound, he presses them in the last
place, with crucifying the Lord of glory. The mention whereof had been enough
in another judgment, to have moved them to despair: but this comforter knew
by experience, that to be thoroughly touched in heart, as he had been, for such
foul offenses past, was the readiest way to that true repentance, which he
found, and such repentance the surest holdfast of lively faith. But he that was
thus powerful in the circumcision, became a stone of offense unto the Gentiles,
with whom he had to deal at Antioch. For by his tripping in an uncouth way,
(as being out of his natural element) he made them stumble, justly reproved,
for his amphibious conversation with men of tempers so contrary, by Saint
Paul; under whose hand the edification of the Gentiles did better prosper. Yet
he nothing so powerful in converting the Jews, Saint Paul's extraordinary
power and efficacy in winning the Gentiles unto Christ.
though his zeal toward them was no less then Saint Peter's was; his
endeavors, to sow the seed of life in their hearts, as great but with small
hope of seeing any fruit of his labors. But it will be worth the Readers
pains, I am persuaded, to observe; that albeit he press the Jews at Antioch
with the very same arguments, (but more forcibly and artificially framed)
wherewith Saint Peter had converted so many, yet is enforced to make a
contrary conclusion. Peter concludes in hope prognosticating success, Amend
your lives, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gifts of the Holy Ghost; For
the promise is made unto you and to your children. And the same day were added
to the Church about three thousand souls. See the like success of his
preaching. Acts 4. verse 4.
Saint Paul, for conclusion, takes his farewell of them, as no part of his
peculiar charge; only tells them it was his, and his fellow Barnabas duty,
to admonish them. Then Paul and Barnabas spoke boldly, and said, It was
necessary that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you: but
seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting
life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles. For so has the Lord commanded us; saying
I have made thee a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be the salvation
unto the end of the World. And when the Gentiles heard it, they were glad, and
glorified the word of the Lord: and as many, as were ordained unto eternal
life, believed. Thus the Word of the Lord was published thoughout the whole
Country: But the Jews stirred certain devout and honorable women, and the
chief men of the City and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and
expelled them out of their Co^sts.

7 Thus it is as true of graces, as natures ordination, (...): the power and
efficacy of Christ's chief Apostles, is restrained unto their proper and
limited Sphere; God always blessing those endeavors best, that are employed
within the precincts of that peculiar charge whereto he apoints us. By that
which has been said it may appear, that Saint Peter's and Saint Paul's
prerogatives, how great soever, were both personal, to expire with themselves;
although a title of supremacy over the Gentiles might be pretended, with much
greater probability from S. Paul then from S. Peter, whose peculiar charge was
the Jew; as may be yet further manifested by the place most urged for his, his
and Successors oecumenicall jurisdiction, bequeathed, as the Romanists suppose,
in these words, Who were the sheep Peter was principally appointed to feed,
and what authority he had over them.
Peter feed my la^bes, Peter feed my sheep, etc.

8 But the natural circumstances of that place compared with the late
exposition of the former, deads all their blows, thence intended against us,
ere they can rightly frame themselves to fetch them. A little before these
words were uttered, desirous to approve his excessive love to our Savior,
and manifest more then an ordinrie desire of his company (that had appeared
unknown unto him, but from John's notification) girt his coat about him, and
cast himself into the Sea, whiles the other Disciples (not above two hundred
Cubits from Land) came by ship to meet him. After a short dinner passed, as the
text seems to insinuate, in silence; Jesus said unto them, come and dine and
none of the Disciples durst ask him who art thou? seeing they knew he was the
Lord. Ioh. 11. 12
at least not entertained with such variety of discourse, as might either
interrupt some private intimation made to Peter of future conference, or put
the former occasion of this following exhortation out of the other Apostles
memory: our Savior enioynes Simon the son of Iona, to feed his Lambs,
again and again to feed his Sheep. He see him then like a loving Soldier,
desirous, by his aduenturous approach unto him, to recover his formerr
reputation, much impaired by denying him. Whether our Savior check or cherish
this desires I question not; much less determine. His speeches, with the
former circumstances, import thus much, Thou have made profession of more then
ordinary love unto me of readiness to lay down thy life for my sake, though
all others, even these thy fellows, should forsake me; willing I see thee, by
thy present hazard of it, to make thy former words good. But would thou
have me yet to show thee a more excellent way? I have told thee it long
since thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren, SIMON the Son of IONA, if
thou desire to prove thy self a CEPHAS, or testify the sincerittie of thy
faith and love, which by the powers of darkness were of late so grievously
shaken, feed my Lambs, feed my sheep: yea, seeing thou thrice deniedst the
Shepherd of thy soul, I say unto thee the third time, feed my sheep. Let
the memory of thy forepassed threefolde sin, also let this same my present
threefolde admonition, excite thee unto triple diligence in thy charge; to show
such pity and compassion, as I have showed to thee, unto that lost and
scattered Flock, which have denied me, or consented to my crucifying. Let thy
faithful performance of what I request thee at my farewell, be the first
testimony of thy love to me, to be lastly testified by the loss of thy life,
which thou did promise me when I gave mine for my sheep, but shall not pay
until thou have fulfilled this my request; John 21. v. 18.
Verily verily I say unto thee, when thou wast young, thou girdest thy self,
and walkedst whither thou would Thus much it seems Peter did prophecy
unaware. John 13. v. 37. but failed in application of the time. So our Savior
says Thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow me afterward: as
well in death as in life after death.
but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thine hands and another
shall gird thee and lead thee whither thou woulddest not.

9 But here Bellarmine, always exceeding witty, either to elude Scriptures,
whose natural meaning is evidently against him, or to collect a gulling sense
from such, as nothing at all make for him, would infer that the possessiue,
Deinde aliam rationem eamque insignem nobis suppeditat pronomen illud, Meas.
Nam cum absque vlla restrictione addatur ad nomen, ^ues pronomen, Meas
Manifest significatur eas omnes Petro commendari, ad quas extenditur pronomen,
Meas; certum est autem illud, Meas extendi ad omnes simpliciter. Nec enim vllus
est in Ecclesia, qui se Christi ouem esse non glorietur: igitur omnes omnino
Christianos nullo excepto, Petro Dominus commendauit. Bellar. de Romans Pont.
Lib. 1. Cap. 16.
My necessarily referres Peter's charge, or jurisdiction, unto all the flock
that called Christ their Lord, owner. For seeing after his resurrection there
was but one Fold; for this great Shepherd to say; My sheep, could not
distinguish one sort from another; and therefore none to be exempted from
Peter's oversight. But the Flock though one in respect of the owner, which had
purchased all with one price, did consist of sheep much different in breeding,
and retaining their several marks; some were of the circumcision, others of
the uncircumcision; the former had been our Saviors peculiar charge in his
life time, ( for he was not sent but unto the lost-sheep of Israel;) these he
might with note of distinction, call My sheep. As if a Shepherd, raised to
better fortunes, should purchase a great many more sheep, then he was wont to
look to himself and refer both sorts to several keepers, though both to
Fold together in the evening, he might Signanter say to the one, look well to
my sheep: though both Flocks were his by right of possession; but only the
one his, by a peculiar relation of former charge or over sight. And thus, as we
have said before, the Jews were committed peculiarly to Saint Peter's care.
Albeit, consonantly to the former exposition of both places alleged, our
Savior by My sheep, might only intimate his tender care over his flock,
without distinction; that Peter might more carefully feed as many as he could
personally look to, seeing the proof of his love to his Lord and Master, and
of his fidelity which had failed, did consist herein. As for Bellarmines other
collections, that our Savior, by mentioning his sheep, should mean Prelates
or Superiors; by his little sheep (so their vulgar distinguishes,) inferior
pastors; Vide Bellar. de Romans Pont lib. 1. cap. 16.
by his lambs, mere Layickes, such as have Fathers but no children in Christ:
they only prove that in this light of the Gospel, there is a generation of
men professing Christianity, yet as apt as grossly to transform Christ's
Spiritual love, as the Heathen did his fathers glory, into the similitude of
their carnal corrupt affections.

10 If it may stand with Christian sobriety, so precisely to determine of
particular differences implied in these words; it is most likely our Savior
meant to include all sorts of people, according to the different care their
diverse estates required: some were to be tenderly handled and cherished like
lambs; others to be looked unto like elder sheep, and to be fed with stronger
meat, but with less personal or assiduous attendance. There is no one kind
of argument persuades me more, the Romish Church is led by the Spirit of
error, then whiles I observe, how they still approve themselves to be Peter's
successors in denying Christ, and going the wrong way unto the truth of the
Gospel; always like ungracious children, seeking to enter upon the
inheritance bequeathed, without performance of what the Testator principally
required. Our Savior requested Peter in these terms, Feed my sheep (not
thine;) intimating, he should approve himself a faithful Shepherd, one that
was to give strict account unto the owner, of whatsoever befell the flock:
these men by commission pretended from Saint Peter, would make themselves great
sheep-masters, to kill and eat at their pleasures. That to feed, is all one,
as to rule and govern, as they would have it, is a conceit of men only
minding their bellies, or seeking to be fed by others spoils. That feeding or
pastorship is always accompanied with rule and authority, none that ever
tasted any Spiritual food will deny. That Peter was a Pastor and a Feeder, an
extraordarie Pastor, a principal Feeder, and therefore of preheminent rule and
authority over his flock; we acknowledge: but no pre-eminence in him above
his fellows, which was not grounded upon his eminent care, and more then
ordinary fidelity in feeding it; not with Lordly injunctions sealed with
Anathemaes, but with sincerity of life and soundness of Doctrine. There was
no difference betwixt the tenure of his and others estates, as if he had been
Lord by inheritance, not obnoxious to any forfeiture by misdemeanour; and
others but lease holders (during term of good life and manners) of the
privileges they inioyed to return by excheate, or for want of succession unto
Peter's successors. That penitential exercise of feeding Christ's sheep, in such
strict terms so often enjoined; rather argues, that should have been
interpreted unfaithfulness or disloyalty in him, which would have been
accounted only neglect or want of diligence in others. And the ingenuous
Reader may if it please him, easily observe, that of all Apostolical writings
now extant, none have either less intimation of any preheminencie or
supremacy, or more lively characters of their authors unfeigned humility, and
lowly submission of himself unto the meanest of his fellow Ministers, then
Saint Peter's: as if by them he would have testified his perpetual mindfulnesse
of that former offense, and strict charge of fidelity in feeding Christ's
flock thereupon enjoined. 1. Pet. 5. v. 1. 2. 3.
The Elders (says he) which are among you, I beseech, which am, what? the
chief Apostle, an Ecclesiastique Monarch, Christ's Vicar general, an Elder of
Elders? no but also an Elder (...), and a witness of the sufferings of Christ*
and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed; Feed the flock of
God, which depends upon you, caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly;
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; not as though ye were Lords over
Gods heritage, but that ye may be examples to the flock. Yet for any to
arrogate such infallibility, or challenge such authority, as he had without
perseverance in the like fidelity and sincerity, as Peter requested upon the
strictest terms of love unto his Lord and Master, in all likelihood would and
did use in feeding his flock; is such a mock of Christ and this his blessed
Saint, as none but the brood of Antichrist could ever have hatched, yet
inferior to that, which accompanies the third pretended ground of Romish
faith, Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram, Thou art Peter and upon this Peter
(as they would have it) will I build my Church.

CHAP. VII.
That Christ, not Saint Peter is the rock spoken of Matthew 16. verse 18. that
the Jesuits exposition of that place demonstrateth the Pope to be the great
Antichrist.
1 WHy the Latin interpreter following the Greek, should vary the Gender,
reading Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram; not, Tu es Petra, or super hanc
Petram: although the tongue wherein they suppose Saint Matthew wrote, had but
one and the same word, Cepha, Bellarmine and Dubitabit autem aliquis, cur si
non Mattheus Matthaei tamen Graecus interpres illam nominum and generis
distinctionem adhibuerit. Respondeo in promptu rationem esse, quia quamuis
graece petra and (...) genere masculino (...) faeminino dicatur, tamen Petrus,
quia vir erat, no^ Petra faeminino, sed Petrus masculino nomine vocandus erat.
Secundo autem loco, vbide aedificij fundamento agebatur non Petrum sed Petram
dixit, quamuis idem vtrumque nomen significaret, quia in eiusmodi aedificij
nomen Petra, faemininu^ magis est vsitatu^, (...) enim et At^icum et rarum est.
Maldonat in 16. Matthaei. Vide Bellar. de Romans Pont. Lib. 1. Cap. 10. What the
name of Cephas does import in Saint Peter.
Maldonate give these two reasons. First seeing Saint Peter was a man, his name
was to be expressed in the Greek and Latin by a word of the Masculine
gender. Secondly, albeit the Greek Masculine (...) be sometimes used for a
rock; yet very seldom, or in the Atticke Dialect only, if at all, when it is
taken for a fundamental rock fit to erect edifices upon. Thus professed
Commentators oftimes find out many witty reasons of like alterations in
words, which the Authors never dreamed of. But granting (what these two
learned Romanists only, suppose, none can prove) S. Matthew had written in the
Syriake tongue: neither of the two reasons alleged for the Greek or Latin
interpreters variation of the Gender, can have any place in Saint John, who
wrote in Greek, but not in the Atticke Dialect, and yet purposely instructing
us what the Syriake word Cepha, which our Savior gave as a Surname to S. Peter
at his first calling meant, says it is by interpretation (...) Petrus not
Petra; though this feminine might have been used without offense in the
interpretation of his name, so he had not been usually called thereby, or
being so usually called, it might have grown into a masculine; for why should
Petra seem a more effeminate name in Saint Peter, then Zabarella or Carafa, in
their Cardinals, or Aquauiua, in the General of the Jesuits? If Jesus himself
had given the governor of the society, enstiled by his own name, this
surname in the abstract, Aquauiua: what would men think it did portend? John.
4. v. 13.
that he should be that well of water, which springs into everlasting life?
or rather that he had been so denominate from some relation to such water,
that Claudius Aquiuiua was as much as Claudius de Aquauiua? It is most likely
then, that as well Saint John when he interpretes Cepha (...), as the Greek
Translator of Saint Matthew, in saying, Tu es Petrus, not Petra; did seek to
prevent that sinister sense, which posterity might c^ll out of the ambiguous
Syriake Cepha, sometimes signifying the rock it self, otherwhiles implying no
more then a denomination from it. Nor was it Saint Austines, ignorance of the
Hebrew and Syriacke, as Existimauit Augustinus Petram, super quam aedificatur
Ecclesia, non esse Petrum, quia credidit Cepham non significare petram, sed
aliquid a Petra deriuatu^, vt si diceremus, Petrenam, aut Petr^ium, quo^odo
Christianus (...) significat Chr^stum, sed ^l^quid a Christo deriua^^m, quia
igitur Ecclesia sup^r Petram non super aliquem Petrinum, vel Petr^m
aedificanda^ est, ideo existimauit Augustinus per illam Petram intelligi non
Petrum, sed Christum: de Romans Po^^, l. 1. c. 10.
Bellarmine objects; but rather his perfect knowledge of Christ, as the only
rock of salvation, which made him think that (...) in Greek should imply no
more then (...), one belonging to that sure foundation whereon the Church is
built. Would God Bellarmine could plead ignorance in these tongues for his
excuse; even he that has no acquaintance with the Syriacke, but by the
affinity of it with the Hebrew, or with neither but from the common analogy
betwixt them, and modern tongues destitute of such variety of formations or
cases, as are facile and plentiful in the Greek and Latin, cannot be ignorant
that abstracts or substantives whilst given as names to men, are usually
equivalent to the concrete or adjective, whereby they are oftimes expressed in
Latin, as in our English we attribute the substantive or abstract name of
Countries unto Earls, or of Towns unto Barons; whom our sovereign Lord when
he speaks in Latin, would call Essexius, in English lie calls Essex: so Roger
Mortimer with us, is Rogerus de mari mortuo with latin Writers. Even in the
latin it self, wherein in the distinction between abstracts and concretes,
or substantives and adjectives, is obuious and apparent: the fundamental
abstract or substantive is given oftimes by way of cognomination, to express
some relation between it, and the party denominated from it, in value no more
then the adjective or denomination in the oblique case; so Scipio taken
properly, or in it direct and primary signification, is a walking staff,
baculum, but attributed to Cornelius (the first of that honorable family
called Scipiones) implies no more then one that had been instar Baculi, Non
aliter dicti Scipiones, nisi quod Cornelius qui patrem luminibus carente^ pro
baculo regebat, Scipio cognominatus, nome^ ex cogn^mine posteris ded it.
Macrob. Satur. lib. 1. cap. 6.
or Scipionis, instead of a rod or walking staff to his blind decrepite
father: so Vide Macrobium loco citato.
Scropha thereto attributed in the abstract unto another family in Rome,
imports not their ancestors had been swine, or their mother a sow, but only
some particular relation to that creature. The like we may say of Asinae
cognomentum Cornelijs datum est, quoniam princeps Corneliae gentis empto fundo,
seu filia data marito cu^ sponsores ab eo solenniter poscerentur asiua^ cum
pecuniae onere produxit in forum, quasi pro sponsoribus praesens pignus.
Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 6. Why Peter was called Cephas.
Asina and Bestia, names of other Roman families. And if I mistake not, that
famous professor which hight Victoria in the abstract, was but Franciscus ^
victoria, de victoria, or victorius. In like sort, although it were true that
Cepha in the Syriacke did only signify a rock or fundamental stone; yet
seeing all grant that Christ was truly and principally such, the same name
given unto Simon the son of Iona, must imply no more then a denominatiue
reference unto the rock, so as if he had been called in latin Simon Petra,
or in English Simon Rock, this could imply no more then Simon de Petra or
Petreus, Simon a rock, or of the rock.

2 But whatsoever the Syriacke Cephas, or the Greek (...) in the place cited
do import: it will be demanded, why our Savior bestowed this name on Simon
the son of Ione, at his first coming to him? The particular references
betwixt him and the rock it self, or chief stone, might be so many, as might
convince him of curiosity, perhaps of folly, that would peremptorily or
precisely determine, what one should give occasion to this denomination: Most
probable it is, that he who knew what was in man, did at the first sight of
Simon, see in him, or mean to bestow upon him some extraordinary aptness to
apprehend the words of eternal life, or to discry the gate of the Lord whereby
the righteous were to enter, or (which is equivalent) Christ to be the chief
corner stone spoken of by the Psalmist: Herein I willingly assent to
Bellarmine, that Saint Peter was the first that distinctly did apprehend, or at
least, by confession, open the great mystery of Christianity and foundation of
true religion, God incarnate in our flesh. Thus much the circumstances of that
place seem to infer; For Jesus, Math 16. v. 13. 14. 15. etc.
when he came unto the coasts of Caesarea, he asked his Disciples whom do men
say that I (commonly known by the name of the son of man) am; and they said,
some say, John Baptist, some, Elias, and others Jeremiah; all to this effect,
that he was some one of the Prophets, John 1. v. 49.
or as Nathanael in his confession meant) such a son of God, as they had been.
These were in the way, but came not near the maine foundation, which Peter
first vncouers, for when our Sauious demands; But whom say ye (whom I must
appoint, as chief builders, and principal parts of that spiritual temple,
which is toward) that I am; Then Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the
Christ the son of the living God. And from his first discovery of this rock,
or chief corner stone, he might well be denominated a rock or stone, as
Maximus was named Messala from a town in Sicily so called, which he had
taken, or, as we might denominate some famous mariner, from some notable place
which be should first discover. To this effect does our Savior reply unto
Saint Peter; Blessed art thou Simon the son of Iona, for not flesh and blood,
not the chief builders amongst the people, but he that laid this precious
stone in Sion has uncovered the same to thee, And seeing thou have said, what
should be said and thought of me, I only say of thee, thou had not thy name
for naught; rightly wast thou called a Rock, or stone, that have so plainly
opened the way unto that very rock, whereon I mean to build my Church. Had
our Savior meant Peter had been that Rock, or were his words to be
interpreted, as in effect the Papists do; He had said, (...), Tu es Petra
illa super quam, etc. But seeing he adds no Emphasis to Peter's name, but unto
petra, these words [(...)] are but an actual expression, or more definite
specification, of what had been potentially included in the indeterminate
transitiue (...) reuelabit; for where our English reads flesh and blood has
not revealed it unto thee, the original is verbatim, has not revealed to
thee, to wit, that rock whereupon I will build my Church, the direct current
then of our Saviors speech is thus; Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonah,
for not flesh and blood, but my father which is in heaven, has revealed that
Rock to thee, whereupon I will build my Church, against which the gates of
hell shall never prevail, whereof thou (according to the omen of thy name long
since given by me) shall be the first living stone, by whom all others shall be
squared, ere admitted into this spiritual aedifice.

3 That our Savior did not expressly mention any other rock or stone before
he said to Simon, Thou art Peter, does nothing prejudice this exposition. It
sufficed that God and the Rock of salvation: Pronome^ hanc non potest referri
ad Christum, Petram, sed ad Petram, Petram debet enim referri ad aliquod
proximum, non ad remo^um, proxime ante dictum fuerat non Christo sed Petra, tu
es Cephas id est Petra, dei^de licet Christus dici p^sset, Petra, tamen hoc in
loco non est vocatus petra a Petro confitente, sed Christus filius Dei viui
debet autem referri, Hanc cum qui nominatus est Petra, non ad cum qui non est
appellatus hoc nomine, Bellar. lib. 1. de Romans Pont. cap. 10. Vide Deuteronomy. 32. Ps
18. ^s. 19. vlt. Tu vero considera verborum Prophetae amplitudinem, poterat^d
cere, Mi^tam vobis Messiam se^ voluit tam insigne beneficium verbis insignibus
and Metaphoricis explicare. Est autem transtatio sumpta ab ^icantibus, quae
verborum amplitudine minuit rei magnificentiam and maiestatem. Plinius in 28.
Isa^e. ver. 16. See the latter Annotation out of Bellarmine, a^ the 25.. of
this Chapter, and Mal^onat. in Matthei 21. ver 42.
Messiah, the chief corner stone, the Christ, were then known, and yet are
held as aequiualent, even amongst the learned Papists, that the Disciples to
whom he then spoke, did no less perfectly know, more ready to acknowledge as
much, as our adversaries yet do, that not Peter, but his and their master
only, was to be the chief corner stone in that Temple, they had often heard
he should, and now he tells them he was to build. The present Dialogue would
abundantly instruct them, that not the son of man himself, howsoever
considered, but in such sort as his heavenly father had revealed him to Saint
Peter, truly apprehended as God and Man, was a foundation competent for so
incomparable a structure; such as before this time had gone the farthest; such
as thought he had been Moses, (who had no peer among the Prophets, greater
then whom it was scarce expected any son of mortal man should be) had not
come unto ground firm enough to build their own, and all men's faith upon, To
them the gate of the Lord* by which the righteous were to enter, was not fully
opened, they came not to a distinct, direct, and perfect view of this chief
corner stone: for this reason they could not be accounted (...), stones
actually wrought, and so well sitting this precious foundation, as others might
be framed by their pattern, and them jointly fastened to it. This was Peter's
prerogative, unto whom the keys are first given (as unto the first of all the
faithful that had passed this gate and power by them, to admit as many as
were, to exclude all that were not fashionable to this Rock and corner stone.

4. Seeing then neither the Apostles then thought, nor can any man yet
conceive, that Peter could be an extraordinary stone or second foundation in
the aedifice, there spoken of, but must withal admit Christ to be the chief
corner stone, or surest fundame^tal rock: I would appeal to my adversary in
his sober mood; to any not actually drunken with the Babylonish cup, unto
whether foundation, unto what stone, the principal or less principal, these
words [and upon this Rock will I build my Church] must be referred? We must
judge of the foundation by the aedifice, and of the aedifice by the attribute.
Now, as there is no one title wherein the spirit does more delight to express
the strength and praises of the living God, then this of Rock: so was there
never any more puissant effect attributed to any Rock, then the eternal
stability of this aedifice. What Saint Paul says of the foundation, I may
truly say of the aedifice and the attribute. Another aedifice more strong then
this Church, can no man build; no attribute can be imagined more glorious then
this: That the gate of hell shall never prevail, or (as Omnes quos ^egi
praeter Hilarium existimant sensum esse sore, vt diaboli potentia Ecclesiam
quidem exerceat, vunquam vero apprimat. Sed non solent portae vincere sed
resistere, itaque non potu^t offendendendi vis per portas significari sensus
igitur, nisi fallor, est fore, vt Ecclesia super Petram a Christo fundatae
omnem diaboli potentiam expugnet; ita vt nulla art, nullis viribus possit
resistere. Hoc enim multo maius est, and verbis magis consentaneum: Portas enim
inferi non praeualituras aduersus Ecclesiam phrasis Hebraica est (...) non
poterunt ad versus illam, id est non poterunt illi resistere*
Maldonate more fully expresses the majesty of the Hebraisme) shall not be
able to stand against it or confront it. To ascribe the supportance of such a
structure to the strength of Peter's faith, not as it was in him only, but as
it is perpetually propagated to his successors, is, to impeach him of
disloyalty, and rob Christ of his greatest glory. For, Vid. Maldonatum in
versum 42. cap. 21. Math. and Bellar. lib. v. de Pont. Romans cap. 17.
even such as plead, for this prerogative in Peter's successors, confess, that
this they give to Peter is our Saviors most usual style; we may with the
Prophet demand, Who is the Psalm. 18. v. 31. v. 46.
Rock besides our God? Psalm. 19. v. 14.
The Lord is the Rock of our salvation: (of such salvation as the gates of
Hell cannot oppugn) the same he is the Lord our Rock and our Redeemer.

5. The former interpretation will yet further approve it self, to be most
consonant to the general analogy of faith, most native to the place before
alleged, and in respect of Romish glosses, such, as is the Church of Christ
unto the gates of Hell, or the Arc of old unto Dagon; if we observe (what is
most frequently, and perspicuously taught in other Scriptures, pertinent to the
maine point in controversy): First, that the immediate subject of Peter's
confession [Goa incarnate or dwelling (as S. Paul speaks) bodily in Christ] is
presupposed, by all sacred writers, as the great mystery of man's redemption,
the fundamental Rock of salvation. Secondly, that all, and only they, which in
sincerity of heart conceive, and with steadfast perseverance, retain this
confession which Peter made, are true and lively parts of that aedifice, which
the Son of the living God here promised to erect.

6. The Reader, I know, in this fruitful age of learned expositors may find
variety of Comments, but none that can more fully satisfy him, then Saint
Peter's own paraphrase upon our Saviors promise to him, if we compare it with
other Scriptures, in sense and meaning equivalent; That Christ was the only
Rock whereupon this Saint himself, as a living member of the Church, was
built, is apparent: because, intending to make his flock, lively parts of the
same aedifice, he tells them they come not to himself, as to a second Rock, but
unto the Lord, as unto a living stone, disallowed of men, yet chosen of God and
precious: As if he had said; Not flesh and blood, not the wisest of men, but
only our heavenly Father did first reveal him unto me for such, and in the
words following (as if he had purposely intended to certify us) that the name
of Peter did descend to him from this affinity with this elect and precious
stone (not because he was a Rock or fundamental stone himself) he adds, and
ye as lively stones be made a spiritual house, a lively Priesthood (Priests
as living, and altars as stones) to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable
to God, by Jesus Christ. Though they were not all to have the title or name of
Peter's (for so there could be no distinction) yet so they would believe and
confess as he did, that Christ was the living stone, they were to have the
realty or substance, to be stones of that spiritual house, against which the
gates of hell should not be able to prevail.

7. And seeing he now endeavored to fasten them unto Christ, as unto the only
sure Rock of their redemption; it could not be so available to tell them in
our Saviors own words, that becoming such a spiritual house, and continuing
in offering up sacrifices acceptable unto God, the gates of hell should not
prevail against them. Until this Day Star had more fully shined in their
hearts, he knew it for the better method to kindle the same hope in them, by
the Prophets light, which in time would break forth clearer of it self: for
that glorious promise of our Savior differed from the prophetical prediction,
which S. Peter gives them for their assurance, but as the light which goes
before, does from the brightness following the Suns rising: What Christ had
told him, was in effect contained before in that Isa. 28. v. 16. Vide Forerium
in hunc locum.
scripture: Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner stone, elect and precious,
and he that believes therein shall not be The word in the Original signifies
to make haste, and therefore any kind of haste according to the difference of
the matter, or object; in this place aequiualent to the latin proripiat, a
word signifying haste, but haste caused by shame or fear of men's presence from
which the party ashamed seeks with co^fused speed to hide himself. Et cum
damare^ quo nunc se proripit ille? Tityre coge pecus tu post carecta latebas.
This is true of faith, which the Apostle says of love. 1. Ioh. 4. v. 17.
Herein is love perfect in us, that we should have boldness in the day of
judgment: for as he is, even so are we in this world. Vid. Luc. 21. v. 25. 26.
of the confused state of the wicked.
ashamed? Why not ashamed? because his hope should be most sure; and Hope (as
the Apostle says) makes not ashamed: he meant, It supporteth against all
shame or terror, the world, flesh, or diuill can oppose against us. They may
threaten but not so deiect us, as to cause us, either through fear of disgrace
or other danger, skulke, or run from men's presence, as a learned Hebrician
expresses the Hebrew word rendered by the vulgar, non festinabit, he shall not
hasten; or to express the full value of both these Apostles speeches, by the
last and most potent object of shame; believing in Christ, we shall not be
found naked in that last day, nor wish the Mountains for a covering to our
shame; but enabled by sure hope to stand before the Son of man: for, not
ashamed of him before men in this life, he will not be ashamed of us in that
day. Then shall that victory of this spiritual house over the impotent
assaults of Hell gates be manifested. Thus by Saint Peter's own exposition, The
Son of the living God, whom he confessed was that living Stone, from whose
strength this spiritual house, whereof he and his flock were (...) lively
stones becomes so strong. To make either Saint Peter or his successors joint,
though secondary, supporters of this glorious work, were to divide our faith
betwixt Christ and them: For it only stands by faith and confidence immediately
fastened upon the foundation or supporters. If then we may not so fasten our
faith either upon Peter, or his successors, we can receive no other strength
from them, then we do from Christ's other Apostles, and that is only from
their Ministerial function, in squaring and fastening us unto this living
stone. To this purpose, says Saint Paul, Other foundation can no man lay, then
that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Whosoever was himself builded on
him, albeit he never heard of Saint Peter, albeit the doctrines he heaped upon
this foundation were but hay and stubble, or matter alike apt to take fire; yet
the flame wherein these idle speculations of his brain were to perish, should
but singe his clothes not devour his substance; because by faith united unto
that living stone, which without any other intermediate sconce, or fence, does
quench the flames of hell, and keep them from scorching any, even the last and
uppermost that shall be built upon him, unto the worlds end. For the same
Apostles rule is universal both in respect of time and persons. Romans 10. v. 9.
If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine heart, that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved.

8. But did Saint Paul by special revelation utter this, as a mystery
altogether unknown before unto the faithful? Rather by participation of the
same spirit, which spoke in the Prophet, he only unfolds the Oracle late
expounded, I must confess without distinct apprehension of so good warrant
them, as is now suggested; For the Apostle to prove his former assertion,
urges that place of the Prophet, Romans 10. v. 11.
Whosoever belieues in him shall not be ashamed; So then with Saint Paul it is
all one, to believe in Christ raised from the dead, or in the corner stone,
rejected of men, allowed of God. And it seems the declaration made unto Saint
Peter, that Christ whom he confessed (howsoever a Rock to fall upon to both
the houses of Israel) was the sure foundation of the fathfull, which the
Prophet foretold should be laid in Sion, made his ignorance, (to say no worse)
in dissuading his master from suffering such disgrace and ignominy of the
Elders, high Priests and Scribes, more inexcusable, because it had been so
plainly foretold, that the corner stone was to be basely esteemed of them,
ere advanced of God. Hence our Savior reproues him so sharply Math. 16. 23.
Then he turned back and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art
an offense unto me, because thou understand not the things that are of God,
but the things that are of men: As if he had said, shall this Rock become a
stumbling stone unto thee also, unto whom it was first revealed? What I now
told thee, the Prophet long since foretold; Psalm. 118. v. 23
It was the Lords doing, and should have been marvelous (not offensive) in
thy sight. Have thou never read how the builders must first refuse that stone
which the Lord will afterward appoint chief in the corners? From remembrance
of this check Saint Peter it may be, whiles he paraphrased upon this place,
used not the Psalmists but our Saviors words, Ye come (says he) as unto a
living stone, disallowed not by the builders, but of men, chosen not of the
Lord, but of God, howsoever elsewhere he more fully paralels these two, (as
Saint Paul had done) [Christ crucified and raised again.] [the stone cast
aside, and constituted as h^ad of the corner] Acts 4. v. 10.
Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name
of Jesus Christ of Nazaret, whom ye have crucified, whom God raised again
from the dead, even by him does this man stand here before you whole: This is
the stone cast aside of you builders, which is become the head of the corner;
neither is there salvation in any other: for among men there is given none
other name under heaven whereby we must be saved. Then is there no other,
whose name imported as much as a Rock or stone, to support men against all
commotions, the powers of hell could raise against them.

9 So our Savior takes [the husbandmen killing of the Lord of the Vineyeards
sonne] and [the builders rejecting the head stone of the corner] as equivalent;
Math. 21.
First, he demands, Ver. 40.
When therefore the Lord of the Vineyard shall come, what will he do to
those husbandmen ( that had slain his son) Ver. 41.
they reply, he will cruelly destroy those wicked men, and will let out his
Vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall deliver him the fruits in their
seasons: And this judgment they had given against themselves, he ratifies by
the like express sentence, which the Lord already had past upon them; Ver. 42.
etc.
Read ye never in the Scriptures, the stone which the builders refused, the
same is made the head of the corner? (This was the Lords doing, and it is
marvelous in our eyes. Therefore say I unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be
taken from you, and shall be given to a nation which shall bring forth the
fruits thereof:) and whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken, but on
whomsoener it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

10 This may suffice for proof, that Saint Peter's confessing the son of man
to be the Christ, the son of the living God, was all one with our Saviors
declaration, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, etc. because Christ and
the living stone which God had promised to found in Sion, are unto sacred
Writers, and all participants of that spirit, by which they wrote the self
same. Nor is there any thing more usual with the holy Ghost, then to refer
like speeches of our Savior unto places of Scripture more different in words
then the two former alleged; albeit there be no such identity of persons,
time and place, or continuation of di^course, to manifest their mutual
coherence, but only equiualency of their inward meaning; This Method the holy
Spirit uses the rather, I think, because he would accustom us ^o
investigate his sense and meaning, not so much by the like form, or character
of words, as by the analogy of faith. For, as the Apostle says, the letter
kills, because it usually leads such as rely upon it to strange and
unwholesome senses; as the identity of our Saviors and Saint Peter's name in the
Syriacke, or their vicinity in the Greek and Latin, made the Rock of
salvation become a Rock of fence unto the Romanist, who by his stumbling at
the word (...), 1. Pet. 2. 7. 8.
falls upon the stone laid in Sion, and shall be broken, yea for this
disobedience to this eternal word, and seeking to lay another foundation then
what was laid already; that stone shall fall upon him and grind him (at least
his doctrine) to powder, as will more fully appear, if we compare their
exposition of that donatiue, they suppose he did bestow upon Saint Peter, with
that Disciples doctrine whom he loved.

11 As we have showed from Saint Peter and Saint Paul, and the general
analogy of faith, that Simon the son of Jonah had his name of Cephas or
(...), from his affinity with the Rock of salvation, or chief corner stone,
he being as the first wrought stone in that aedifice: so does Saint John
(whose doctrine pregna^tly confirms our former exposition of these words, Thou
art Peter. etc.) make that very confession which Peter uttered, as the surest
square or line, the perfect Index whereby to try and examine all other stones,
whether fitting or rightly proportioned to this everlasting structure. 1. John
4 v. 1. Vide Tyram in hunc locum.
Dearly beloved (says he) believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they are of God, for many false Prophets are gone out into the world.
How should they know true Prophets from false, such as were true, were of God,
such as were false, of Antichrist; how should they know such as were of God,
from such as were of Antichrist? Hereby shall ye know the spirit of God;
every spirit* that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the ^lesh, is of God.

12 But is every spirit of God that can frame an orthodoxall conceit of this
great mystery, and outwardly confess what they inwardly assent unto, as
undoubtedly true? So should the wicked spirits be of God: for a spirit of an
unclean Devil openly said as much in effect, as Peter did; what he knew by
arguments more sure then most Popes do, I know who thou art, even the holy one
of God, yea many came out of the possessed crying, what Peter afterward
confessed, Thou art the Christ the son of God. The mystery it seems they had
conceived aright, because our Savior gives them the like injunctions his
Disciples had upon Peter's confession, the one he rebuked, and would not suffer
to say, the other, he charged they should tell no man, that he was Jesus the
Christ, because this Rock was not as yet to be plainly manifested to the
world, Although it is most probable, he would not have the unclean spirits at
any time to be proclamers of this mystery: for unto the Psalm. 50. v. 16
wicked said God, What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that thou
should take my covenant in thy mouth, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and
have cast my words behind thee? etc. If unclean spirits may not be permitted
to promulge this or like divine mysteries, by the mouths of men, whose bodily
members they so possess, as to cause them utter they know not what; may we
without exception safely admit all their cathedral decisions, whose souls and
minds they have wholly transformed into the similitude of their uncleanness,
for heavenly oracles, for embassages of salvation immediately sent from God for
foundations of faith and manners? Psalm. 50. v. 25.
Christ by the same Psalmist has said, To him that disposes his way aright,
will I show the salvation of God.

13 But to proceed by our Apostles former rule; from which, and others of his
fully No man has seen God at anytime, If we love one another, God dwells in
us, and his love is perfect in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and
he in us: because he has given us of his spirit. And we have seen and do
testify, that the Father sent the son to be the Savior of the world.
Whosoever confesses that Jesus is the son of God, in him dwells God, and
he in God. Vide cap. 2. ver. 16. Johan.
parallel thereunto, it is evident, that for a just trial of a spirit speaking
by God, there must be both a platform of doctrine rightly proportioned to the
former foundation [Christ come in the flesh] and a correspondent edification,
not of verbal or school consequences, but of real and material works,
proceeding from lively faith and inward sanctititie, so testifying the
habitation of Christ the living stone in the confessors heart, as Christ's own
works and doctrine did the Godheads bodily dwelling in him, the Apostle adds,
Every spirit which confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is
not of God (that is) is opposite unto the spirit of God, but this is the spirit
of Antichrist, of whom ye have heard, how that he should come, and now already
he is in the world. A spirit of Antichrist then is manifested, by a
contrariety in the form of doctrine, or by an hostility between the very
foundations, which he and the spirit of God endeavor to lay; so as the
edification of the one does in the issue, menace the demolition of the other.
And as this opposition unto Gods spirit is greater or less, so does it argue
the party in whom it is to participate, more or less of the spirit of
Antichrist. In both these respects of opposition or hostility in the
foundation, or in the issue or consequences of all heretical temples or
congregations, that hitherto have been, or can be imagined as possibly
future, the structure of the Romish Church, does most fully answer to the Idea
or platform of that edifice, which the Apostle has foretold great Antichrist
should erect.

14 For demonstrating which conclusion, we only suppose, what every one must
grant, In what sense the Papist deny Christ to be come in the flesh.
that if the spirit of unclean devils, he whose coming is by the power of
Satan, in guile and deceit, may without prejudice to his grand hostility
against Christ, in formal terms confess the great mystery of salvation.
[Christ manifested in the flesh:] for seeing he must be (...) opposite unto
Christ, not by way of negation or contradiction, but by a positive contrariety
or hostility; Christian Religion and Antichristianisme, must as all other
contraries agree in some one kind or matter; and the kind or matter in matters
of Religion, must be the object. If we here only set aside an agreement with
true professors in that general transcendent object, that Christ is the son
of the living God, the very first principle of Romish Religion, eue^ the
specifical difference which makes it Romish, is as contrary with the first
Element of true orthodoxall christian Religion, as fire to water, heat to
cold. For, if to confess Christ come in the flesh, put to death, and raised
again, be (as is proved) all one, as to acknowledge him the chief corner
stone rejected of men, but advanced by God: if this be the maine foundation of
Christianity, so all-sufficient, that without it, no other must be laid. How
were it possible more to deny this truth in effect or consequence, more to
oppugn the whole edifice of our faith, then by planting another Rock, another
foundation, without communication wherewith, none can be supported by the
former, against the gates of hell.

15 But perhaps we mistake, o^ malign the Romanist, in charging him with
shufling in another foundation besides Christ, in that sense the Apostle denies
any other 1. Cor. 3. v. 11
foundation can be laid: We rather by too much pressing them with that axiom
of his, make him contradict himself; for elsewhere he says Ephesians. 2. 20.
We are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.

I will not here dispute whether Saint Paul in that place mean, Nor does that
place Reu. 21. ver. 14. prove any more then that by the Apostles ministry the
Church was erected.
we are built upon the persons: of the Prophets and Apostles, they being
placed nearer the rock, or maine foundation it self, then we, or rather upon
the maine foundation, which both the Prophets and the Apostles jointly had
laid, besides which no other can be laid, Christ crucified and glorifiea: For
he is both the foundation which wholly supporteth, and the corner stone which
only ocupleth the whole building; in which he is the highest and the lowest,
first laid in humility for the disobedient to fall upon, but now exalted unto
greatest glory to fall upon them. And as the Apostle calls his own scarres, the
marks of Christ, because inflicted for Christ's sake; so may he call Christ
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, because the only end whereto both
Prophetical and Apostolical laws were directed, was to lay this sure
foundation. But granting what they take for granted. The Apostle did mean, we
were builded upon the Prophets and Apostles, as upon a second foundation, or
first row of stones; next in order unto the rock, so they make Peter a rock
or foundation only in this sense? If they do not, he could not be the Rock
on which the Church is built. If they do, let them give us the right hand of
fellowshippe; for we accuse them, not for making him such a foundation as the
other Apostles were, but suchas, it is evident, they were not, yea such indeed,
and substance as Christ only is, and should be acknowledged by all the
faithful. For in what sense is Christ said to be the foundation? Because he
is the head of his Church, both for supporting and directing it. Was not Peter
such in respect even of his fellow Apostles? Dicuntur fundamenta omnes Apostoli
ratione gubernationis. Omnes enim suerunt capita, rectores, and pastores
Ecclesiae vniuersae, sed non eodem modo quo Petrus, Illi enim habuerunt summam,
atque amplissi nam potestatem vt Apostoli, seu legati, Petrus autem vt Pastor
ordinarius. Deinde ita habuerunt plenitudinem potestatis, vt tame Peteus esset
caput eorum, and ab illo penderent non e contrario. Bellar. lib. 1, de Romans
Pont. c. 12.
Bellarmine can assign no difference betwixt them but in these very terms.
All of them he confesses had occumenicall jurisdiction, but not in such sort
as Peter had, all were infallible, because Apostles and Ambassadors, but not
after the same manner he was: yea Peter was their head, on whom they did depend;
so did not he on them. This makes Peter the corner stone that cupleth the
building. Which doubtless was Christ's peculiar whilst he lived on earth, not
communicated unto Peter as they acknowledge, until his resurrection or
ascension. That they tell us then, they make but one primary foundation, and
therefore none such as Christ is, as if they should say, they admit no more
such Popes as Pius primus was, because there has never been, nor ever shall
be any Pope Pius the First but he: for to make Peter such a Primate, is to
make him a foundation or head of the same rank and order, that Christ was
(only his inferior, as successor in time) or (to use their words) a
foundation in Christ's place, So Bellarmine Cephas Syriace significat ^etra^ vt
nos supra docuimus and Hieronymus test ^tue in cap. 2. Epistolae ad Galat.
Grae^d autent significat caput vt lib. 2. con^ra Pa^menianum annotaui^ Optatus.
de demum vnum est ex celeberinis Christi nominibus. Nihil enim frequentius in
Scripturis Christ^s appellitur quam Petra. Christus ergo cum solo Petro suum
ipsius nomen communicans, and nomea illud quo ipse significutur, vt (...) and
caput Ecclesiae vniuersae, quid aliud indicare voluit, quam se faccre Petrum
fundamentum and caput Ecclesiae (...), Ibidem cap. 17.
expressly avouches, where proving Peter's Supremacy or Lordship from his name,
he thus inferres, Peter only was known by Christ's own name of Cephas or
Rock, whereby he is called as often as by any other whatsoever, yea this is
the peculiar attribute, in which he is set out unto us as the foundation and
head of the Church: therefore Christ communicating this unto Peter, would have
it signified unto the world that he meant to make Peter the foundation and
head of the Church in his own place. Why does Christ cease to be the
foundation in becoming the head stone in the corner? or do they to avoid open
suspicion of Antichristianisme acknowledge him come in the flesh, but gone
again to make room for Peter and his successors? Certainly, were the Apostle
to gather the meaning of Bellarmines speeches, his inference would be thus;
Heb. 8. v. 13.
In that he says, a new head is come in his place, he abrogates the formers
authority, as he was Ambassador between God and man: nor is it now as the
Testament given by Moses was in the Prophets time ready to expire, but already
expired by actual succession of another, unto whom Christ the first visible
head (or foundation) did at his advancement to higher dignity, seal the same
commission he had from his father, for transacting all affairs concerning the
state of his visible Church.

18 But does the space between heaven and earth more exceed Romes distance
from the utmost ends of the world, then he to whom all power was given in
heaven and earth, does the present Pope in amplitude of spiritual
jurisdiction? Whence is it else that Christ regiment cannot so fully and
immediately extend it self unto his Church militant, wheresoever scattered
upon the face of the earth, as the Popes may to the East or West Indies, from
either of which he cannot receive certain information, how his instruction
sent thither, succed with his flock under a years space at the least. Every
Pope in his time is a rock, a The difference between Christ and the Pope much
less (by the Papists opininion) then between the Pope and other Bishops.
foundation, an head in Christ's absence from the earth. Might not every one of
them in like sort admit a Pope, a Vicar general, an absolute fellow Monarch,
from whom in these remote countries, there should be no more appeals to Rome,
then are from Rome to Christ's throne of Majesty: If we speak not of that
Majesty which he there enioyes, but of that authority which he sometimes had,
N^s non negamus, imo defendimus contra negantes, verbu^ Dei ministratum per
Apostolos and Prophetas esse primum fundamentum nostrae fid^i. Ideo enim
credimus quidquid credimus, quia Deum ^d per Apostoles, and Prophetas
reuelauit, sed addimus praeter hoc fundamentum primum, requiri aliud
fundame^tum secundarium, id est, Ecclesiae testificationem. Neque enim seimus
certo quid Deus reuelauerit, inisi ex testimo monio Ecclesiae, and propterea
sicut legimus, Christum esse lapidem fundamentalem, and fundamentum primum
Ecclesiae, ita legimus Matthew. 16. de Petro, super hanc Petram aedis^abo
Ecclesiam meam. Itaque sides nostra adheret Christo, primae veritati reueclanti
mysteria, and fundamento primario, adhaeret etiam Petro, id est, Pontifici
praeponenti and explicanti haec mysteria, vt fundamento secundario. Bellar. de
Verbi Dei, Interpret. cap. 10. Respons. ad 13.
or we can imagine he could have in regiment of his Church, were he now
visibly present in the flesh: it is that Saint Peter, and his successors may by
our adversaries doctrine, be more properly instiled compeeres to Christ, then
the best man living besides unto the worst of them. For it must be thought
that Christ in his absence ratifies all their decrees without exception, as we
may not question them more then we might Christ's own, were he visibly
resident in his Church, yet was the authority of Christ's other Apostles so
mightily ouertopped by Peter's Supremacy, that they could not be infallible or
occumenicall without his approbation? If they were, Peter was not such an head
to them, as his Successors are to theirs, even to all Bishops or inferior
Ministers throughout the world. If they were not, the Pope, if he will be
Peter's Successor, should make Bishops or Cardinals, at least eleven,
occumenicall Pastors of authority infallible, though with such dependancy on
his plenarie power, as Christ's other Apostes had on Peter's. Or let them resolve
us in other fundamental difficulties, which their doctrine ministers.

19. Of all Peter's prerogatives those most urged by the Romanists, as alike
appertaining to his successors, are most personal.
Christ said, thou art Peter; that is, say they, a Rock, an head, a foundation
in my place. Unto whom was this said? to one of the twelve expressed by name,
Simon the son of Iona: To whom likewise (singularised by the same express
terms of individual difference, and like restraint of present circumstances
or occurrences) it was said, feed my lambs, feed my sheep. If any of Christ's
speeches, (as the Vide Bellar. lib. 2. de Romano Pontif. cap. 12. Parag.
vltitimo, and the annotation,. 21.
Popes advocates grant many) were personally directed to Saint Peter,
questionless these two. By what analogy of faith, or rule of Grammar can they
then extend these, to every Pope in his generation; or if any such there have
been, or yet may be, unto whom the foeminiue title of Petra, by right of sex,
may better agree then unto Simon Bar-Iona. Yet might the name or title
infallible draw the supreme dignity after it, they are much-ouerseene in not
giving the name of Peter to every Pope. Christ they confess, is come in the
flesh, and was in person made head, and foundation of the Church, and at his
departure left Peter in his steed: Peter, the Scriptures tell us, was to follow
Christ; but (as they pretend) left Pope Linus in his place, so has every Pope
his successor since that time. Yet these latter mightily fail in not
nominating others, whiles they themselves are living and visible stones; as
Christ without question did Saint Peter, whiles conversant with the faithful
in the flesh, and Peter Linus in his lifetime.

20. But howsoever, they must of necessity either make Peter Linus, and their
The Pap^sts either admit many foundations, or build all the Apostles, beside S.
Peter, upon their modern Popes.
successors but one joint permanent foundation, and so the Popes should not be
builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and the Apostles, but rather
Christ's other Apostles upon them; upon whom, likewise, all the faithful, since
the Apostles time, should be immediately built: Or, if they do not make Peter
and the Popes one joint inseperable foundation, they must admit as many
several foundations as Popes, so as the everlasting Rock whereon the Church
is built, could not be truly said one and the same, but by a perpetual
equiualency of alteration or succession: as we say corruptible elements, fire,
or water, or candles, remain one and the same; because as one part consumes,
another, as good, comes in the place. This glorious aedifice (as has been
observed) stands only by faith, or firm adherence to the foundation: and by
the Adversaries own confession, to disclaim the authority of the present
Romish Church, or Pope in points of faith, is an heresy or Apostasy, of the
same nature, as if a man had renounced Peter for his supreme head, and this
all one, as if he had cut himself of from being a member of Christ. Wherefore,
in respect of us that are now to be edified, the authority of this present Pope
is equiuale ^t to Christ's: our adherence to the one, in points of faith and
manners must be such, as it should have been to the other, had we lived in the
days of his visible conversation in the world.

Finally, v. cap. 8.. 13.
CHRIST, Saint Peter, and his successors, in regiment of the Church militant
here on earth, differ, by the Roman account, no otherwise then Romulus, Numa,
Ancus, etc. Romulus was first Founder of that kingdom, but least other of
kings of the same rank and order he was: only his dignity after his departure
was acknowledged greater in another world; because, as his people were made to
believe be ascended alive into heaven, as a God. Much better might the Romanist
derive his Psewdocatholique Roman faith, from The Papists conceive of Christ
but as of another Romulus.
Romulus the first builder of that great City, that sometimes rulea over the
Kings of the earth; then from Christ, who did erect a kingdom indeed, but not
of this world; wherein none was to succeed him, because he remains,
Yeasterday, to day, the same for ever: Whence the Daniel 2. v. 44.
Prophet says, this kingdom shall never be destroyed or given to another
people, but shall break and destroy all former kingdoms, and it self stand
for ever. For any, especially of that nation whose former kings had put this
immortal King to death concerning the flesh, to enstile themselves Rocks, and
foundation of this everlasting Empire, or absolute spiritual Monarchies in
this place; does evidently show, they are the feet of that image, most of
which has been, as shall be broken to pieces, by that stone cut without hands
out of the Mountain, until it become like the chafe of the summer flowers,
carried away with the wind, and no place be found for them; or, as the 2.
These. 2. cap. 8. ver.
Apostle interprets the Prophet, the Lord shall consume them with the spirit of
his mouth, and shall abolish them with the brightness of his coming.

21. Would the Jesuit then know, wherein he, and his Latian Lord God must take
after Saint Peter? Me thinks their formal acknowledgement of that general
principle; Christ manifested in the flesh, The Pope successor unto the check,
not to the promise given by Christ to Saint Peter.
and made the headstone in the corner, compared with their late mentioned
Apostasy, in seeking to lay another foundation; was lively resembled, if not
mystically prefigured, by Saint Peter faith, (immediately after his glorious
confession) eclipsed by interposition of such earthly conceits, as perpetually
darken their minds. For, upon our Saviors declaration, what bodily calamity,
what ignominy and reproach should at Jerusalem, shortly after, befall the Rock
it self; whereupon that Church, against which he had now said, the gates of
hell should never prevail, was founded: Peter (as Saint Matthew says) took
his Master aside, and friendly checks him, as if he had forgotten his former
promise, Math. 16. v. 22. etc.
Master be good to your self, this shall not be unto you. As if he had said,
if the gates of hell shall not prevail against your Church, or us your poor
Disciples; I hope you are able to privilege your own person from such
disgrace, and scorn, as none but they can intend against you. So carnally did
this great Apostle upon ignorance, conceit Christ's spiritual promise, as the
papacy, upon habitual or affected error, does to this present day. For one
principal argument, most usual in the mouths and pens of that great Heads
chief disciples, to prove the Romish the only Church, unto which that glorious
promise was made, or, at least, has been perpetually performed, is, because no
temporal or secular power has ever been able, (though many wicked
Potentates, Kings, and Emperors (such titles they give to all their enemies)
have attempted, either to deface her external pomp, state, and splendour, or
so to use the Popes or Cardinals, or other of her principal and dearest
children, as the Jews did our Savior Christ and his Disciples. They are of
the world, and therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them.
But could they, unto any child of God, more plainly prove themselves heirs to
that check, given by our Savior to Saint Peter, Bellarm^ne apphes all that is
spoken in Peter's comme^ dacions, vnto-his successors, whom he will not have
sharers in his reproves. Ea quae dicuntui Petro in triphci sunt differe^tia,
quaed im enim dicuntur ei pro se tantum, quaedam pro se and omnibus
^o^istianis, quaedam pro se and successoribus, id quod euidenter colligitur ex
ratione diuersa, qua ei dicuntur. Nam quae dicuntur ei, vt vni ex fidelibus
certe omnibus fidelibus dicta intelliguntur Vt Mat. 18. Si peccauerit inte
^rater t^us, etc. Quae dicuntur ei ratione aliqua propria personae ipsius, ei
soli dicuntur, vt vade post me Satana. Et Term ne^abis, ista enim dicuntur ei
ratione propri^ imbe cillitatis, et ignorantiae. Quadam dicuntur ei ratione
officij pastoralis quae proinde dicta intelliguntur omnibus sucessoribus, vt
pas^e oues meas et Bellar lib. 2. cap. 12.. vltimo. The Romanist makes the Pope
his God in that he makes him the Rock on which the Church is built. Compare.
Exodus 17. 1. Cor. 10. 4. The Hebr. (...) is taken in the same sense. Psalm. 18.
3. Isa. 31. 9.
Go behind me Satan's, ye are an offense, because ye understand not the things
that are of God, but the things that are of men? Could they more evidently
demonstrate, the Pope to be that man of sin, that must be inducted to the
Church of God by Satan This observation will easily approve it self to any
that will read the book of Deuteronomium, and the Psalms.
(...), the chief adversary or accuser, he himself bearing the name of
adversary, likewise, in his title This observation will easily approve it
self to any that will read the book of Deuteronomium, and the Psalms.
(...) -- a second foundation, in show subordinate, in deed and consequence
quite contrary to that, which the Prophets and Apostles have laid; eternally
privileged, if we may believe his followers, from those spurnings of men,
from which the precious stone of Syon was not exempted.

22. To collect the sum of late Romanists comments, upon their Churches
supposed fundamental Charter; Their confession of Christ come in the flesh,
and made head stone in the corner, though conceived in form of words
orthodoxal enough, proves only this, (but disabundantly to all the world) that
the Pope, their supreme head, sits in the Temple of God, whose circumference
in respect of men, who cannot search other men's hearts, is defined by this
confession. Their attributing the title of Rocks, or fun damentall supportance
of that spiritual house, unto this head, proclaims unto all the world, that
he sits as God in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. For the
Hebrew (...) equivalent to the Syriacke (...) in that sense they take it, (as
affording such impregnable supportance, or fortification against the powers of
hell, world, or flesh,) is oftener by their own This obseuation will easily
approve it self to any that will read the book of Deuteronomium, and the
Psalms.
vulgar latin, rendered Deus, then Petra or Rupes, which it directly signifies;
because, considered with these circumstances or effects, it is rather a
glorious title of the godhead, or deity it self, then a particular attribute,
taken from some divine propriety, communicable to Gods servants in the abstract.

23. Lastly, unto me their common exposition of Christ's speeches unto Saint
Peter, suggest this argument more then demoustratiue, that the Papacy is led by
the spirit of great Antichrist, How Romish Religion denies the virtue and
power of Christ come in the flesh.
in that no doctrine of Devils can more directly contradict, or more shamefully
deny the virtue and power of Christ come in the flesh, nor more peremptorily
disanull, or cancel his promise there made unto his Church, then Jesuitical
comments upon it, do. Christ's promise was a promise of life and saving health,
a full assurance of eternal happiness, to all that should be truly built
upon that Rock which Peter confessed, or which they say, Peter was They make
the tenure of this glorious covenant to be no more but this, that Peter's
successors and such as will build their faith upon them (speaking ex Cathedra)
as upon Rocks invincible; shall be indefectible in points of Christian faith
and manners; howsoever even these Rocks themselves may be, for life and
conversation, as wicked as Annas or Caiphas, or other blinded guides of the
Jewish Sinagogue that crucified our Saniour.

24 Thus by a pretended successiue perpetuity of Peter's faith, they utterly
abolish that lively faith, That Romish faith is that faith by which S. Peter
confessed Christ.
whereby he confessed Christ, which is always included as a necessary condition,
without which none be capable of that glorious promise, but with it all are
made immediate heirs of salvation. Or to speak more plainly, none may expect
the least portion of Peter's blessing without Peter's faith; nor can that be in
any, but such as are borne of God: Every one says Saint JOHN, that is borne
of God over comes the world, and this is the victory that over comes the
world, even our faith. And again, who is he that over comes the world, but
he which belieueth: (what Peter had confessed) that Jesus is the son of God.
And our Savior himself, to whom his father had given power over all flesh,
that he should give eternal life to all, given him by his father; tells us,
that this life eternal must grow from that root of faith which first did
branch in Peter's mouth; but must be so planted as it grew in him, in every heart
endued with sure hope; much more in all such as lay challenge to such
preheminency, or prerogative of faith, or hope, as Peter had; This is life
eternal that they may know thee, (says Christ speaking of his Father) to be
the only very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, so then God
manifested in the flesh, was the Rock of salvation, whereupon the Church is
built: he that rightly knows, and so belieues this truth, has life eternal
dwelling in him.

25 But shall such a faith as may be seuerd from charity? That the Romish
Church is neither that Rock, nor built upon that Rock, against which the
gates of hell cannot prevail, because their faith is vnsou^d. Mat. 4. 23.
shall such a knowledge of Christ as may be in them to whom Christ shall say;
Depart from me I never knew you, I say not, make any so impregnable a Rock,
but so fasten any to that Rock so impregnable, as the gates of hell shall not
be able to dispossess him of eternal life? Whiles we produce the late
cited, or other testimonies alike pregnant to condemn the Pontificians for
denying Justification only by faith, they think themselves fully acquitted
with this solution, that our assurance of salvation relies not upon faith, as
alone, but as it is the foundation of charity, and accompanied with other
christian virtues. We never taught (as shall be showed in that controversy,)
that faith, unless thus attended, could with true confidence plead cur cause
before God, which yet though thus at tended, it only pleades. But here our
adversaries must be contented to take their payment in their own coin: For, if
no man can be justified, or made heir of salvation, it is impossible any
should be a lively stone, or living member, much less a supreme head, or
sure foundation of that spiritual house, always victorious over death and
hell, without a faith so appointed, as in the former case they require, without
a faith as clearly testifying Christ dwelling in men, by works flowing from
it, as their edification upon him by an Orthodoxal form of words. Whosoever is
destitute of a faith thus bearing fruit unto salvation, is so far from being
a Rock or sure foundation for others to build upon, that he himself (if we
may believe our Savior) buildes all h^s hopes upon the sand: Math. 7. 26.
Whosoever hears these my words, and does them not, shall be likened unto a
foolish man, which has builded his house upon the sand, and the rain fell, and
the stoudes came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell,
and the fall thereof was great. Not every one therefore that says unto our
Savior, as Peter did, thou art the Christ the son of the living God, but he
that expresses his faith and hope by works, answerable to Christ's conversation
in the flesh, and his fathers will, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven;
because he only is built upon that Rock, which the floud-gates of hell
cannot undermine or overthrow: For, whosoever (says our Savior) hears of
me these words, and does the same, I will liken him to a wise man which
builded his house on a rock, And the rain fell, and the floudes came, and the
winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it was grounded upon
a Rock.

26 Let the Jesuit either produce any heresy, broached since our Saviors
Incarnation, or frame a conceit of any but Logically possible before his
coming unto judgment, which in outward profession, not disclaiming the former
maine foundation of christianity [God manifested in the flesh] can indeed and
issue more evidently overthrow it, more distinctly contradict either those
fundamental precepts of salvation last cited, or more fully euacuate the often
mentioned promise made unto Saint Peter, then the foundation of Romish
religion, as Romish does; and I will do public penance in sacke-cloth and
ashes, for laying the imputation of Antichristianisme upon it. Our Savior
says, whosoever hears these words and does them not, does build his house
upon the sand: They teach the contradictory as an Article of faith; that the
Pope or a council of Bishops assembled by his appointment, instructed by his
infallability, Praeterea Ecclesia congregata, sieve consilium proprijssime est
Ecclesia Christi, vt etiam aduersarij concedunt: nam Ecclesi a est congregatio
fidelium, ergo quo magis fideles su^t congregati and unity, eo magis proprie
sunt Ecclesia: at stultu est cum aliquid de alio absolute pronunciatur,
excipere id quod proprijssime per illud significatur, ergo cum Christus dicit,
Super hanc Petram aedisicabo Ecclesiam meam, slulte excipitur Ecclesia
vniuersalis congregata, cum ea proprijssime sit Ecclesia, Bellar. lib. 2. de
Con. Auc. cap. 15. Of this Church the Pope is the foundation as he avouches
in the words going before. Quod est in domo fundamentum, est in corpore caput,
and in grege Postor. Vt. n. fundamentu^ non pendet a domo, sed domus a
fundamento, ita ellam caput non pendet a corpore, se^ corpus a capite, and
pastor non pendet a grege, sed grex a pastore. His conclusion is, Papa praest
omnibus loco Christi quibus Christus ipse inuisibiliter praeest, and quibus
etiam praeesset vis^^il^er, si visibiliter adesset: Christus aut cum praeest,
and praeesset inuisibiliter, si adesset visibiliter, non solemn Ecclesus
particularibus sed etiam toti Ecclesue universal, and generalibus concilijs:
igitur etiam Papa priest Ecclesie universally.
confirmed by his plenary power, do always build upon the same Rock as Peter
did; yea that the Pope himself, how wicked soever, is that very Rock
whereupon the Church (that is in their language, the Bishops thus assembled)
is built; the oecumenicall Pastor that must keep them, and by them all Christ's
flock, from going astray; the supreme head, that by his virtue and influence
must sustain every member of Christ's body (here on earth) from falling into
heresy, or approaching the territories of hell, through any kind of error or
infidelity.

27 Our Savior promised in solemn manner, ex Cathedra, the gates of hell
shall never prevail against his Church. What Church? the Catholic. What
Catholic? Visible or Invisible? Triumphant or Militant? Visible and Militant?
What Catholic, visible, militant Church? Either is not the Romish Church
representative, that Church spoken of Mat. 10. or else Christ's promise has
sailed.
The Roman? that consists of diverse members: In it some are Pastors, some are
sheep; whether have better interest in that promise? Pastors. Of Pastors, some
are Prelates, some inferiors; whether are to be preferred before the other?
Prelates doubtless; for of them consists the body of the Church
representative, which is most properly called the Church, and next in reuersion
unto Peter's prerogative. Did the gates of hell then never prevail against the
greatest Romish Prelates? I nominate no particular person; I speak only of
them as the Scripture does of Drunkards, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Dogs,
Enchanters. Many of highst place in that Church have for a long time lived, and
for ought their followers can, or Caput Ecclesiae non potest quidem errare
docendo falsam doctrinem, tamen potest errare male v^uendo, and male etiam
sentiendo, vt pr^uatus humo, atque hoc tantu^ videmus accidisse Adamo: male
enim aliquando vixit, and sort etiam male de Deo sentit, tamen non male
docuit. Bellarminus de Ecclesia militante. lib. 111. cap. 16. Some of their
Popes by their own writers confession have been strangely cut off, in the
very acts of adultery, or other sins by them accounted mortal. Christ's
promise unto S. Peter, but a mere mockery by the Jesuits constructio^.
care to say unto to the contrary, died such as the spirit of God has excluded
from the kingdom of heaven; such as Gods word tells us, hell must swallow up
with open mouth. Are they the Church, and may hell gates prevail against them,
and yet not prevail against the Church?

28 But if a woman, an whorish woman cannot be taken without an excuse, may we
think those effemenate sworn creatures of servitude to that great strumper,
can want an answer? No, this distinction is always at hand. Their Popes and
Cardinals may as err, so go to hell. But how? as private Doctors, not as
oecumenicall Pastors, not as they speak ex Cathedra: so to my remembrance I
have read of a proud Romish Prelate, that reproved for his secular pomp made
answer, he followed these fashions as he was a Duke, not as an Archbishop.
But the reprouers reply has made the Apology (better then which no Jesuit
can make for the Pope) most ridiculous ever since. If this be so, quoth the
shepherd (such was the Pastor God had appointed to rebuke the madness of this
false Prophet) I pray resolve me what shall become of my Lord Duke, if the
Archbishop go to the devil. If many, sometimes Popes, be now in hell (as no
Jesuit I think, will profess any moral hope that all are saved:) What is
become of the Church representiue, which lodged in their brains? Has the number
of glorified Saints been increased by their departure from earth? Were they
ever a whit more happy for being heirs to that glorious promise; Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church? or were their comments upon
that place Orthodoxall? what was the comfort Saint Peter himself could ever
have reaped thence? Only this, though Satan may so sift thee, that thy soul
may go to hell before thy body descend to the grave; yet rest assured of this,
that thy faith which in Cathedral resolutions shall never fail thee in thy
life time, shall suruine in thy successors when thou art dead; but to what
purpose, if notwithstanding this prerogative, all may descend one after another
into hell?

29 Or if their doctrine were true, to what end did Christ come in the flesh?
only to build a Church, which like a lamp or candle may gloriously shine,
whiles there is an interrupted succession of Popes* to propagate the splendour;
but whose glory when that expires, for ought that glorious promise adds unto
it, must be extinguished; as the light goes out when the oil is spent. Better
assurance then every Pope for his time has, Saint Peter by their doctrine had
none from those words of our Savior. For whatsoever power or prerogative was
in them bequeathed to him, does descend by inheritance to his successors. And
would the meanest Jesuit now living have gloried much in a life, graced with
no greater visible Church dignity then S. Peter's was, perpetually exposed to
like danger, without any other solace to support it, save only this, that his
posterity should enjoy the same privileges? But now that the glory and dignity
of the Romish Church is become so great, and the Jesuits portion thereby grown
so fat; they can be well content to sooth up the Pope in his conceit, that
howsoever his person may go to hell (a place it seems not much dreaded,
because unknown) yet hell gates shall never prevail against his faith; which
has brought such large possessions to the Church; both which he may
infallibly entayle to his successors until the worlds end. But (as I said
before) what then shall become of that cathedral faith? shall it augment the
quire of Gods elect, or can they make as many S. Faithes as have been Popes?

30 Herein appears the excess of these days impiety, The Romish Church of
all Idols that are, or have been the most vain and foolish.
in respect of former, that this imaginary Idea of Romish faith should be more
superstitiously adored then any other Idol in the world ever was; Although
that of the Apostle may be more properly said of it then any other, nihil est
in mundo. Other Idols represented either men or beasts, some permanent
creature, or real quality: This is a fancy of a Chimaera, a shape of nothing;
or if by nature and essence ought, it is such a conceit or mental quality as
may be in devils. Existance it has none, but as Eclypses of the sun, by
fittes or courses, when the Pope shall speak ex Cathedra. What shall become of
it, and the colors in the Rainbow, after the day of judgment, are two
questions of like use and consequence: and of these two objects, the one as fit
to direct men's courses by sea or land, as the other to conduct us toward
heaven. The dazzled imaginations of these Idolaters, that can thus conceit this
faith to be spiritual, and eternal by succession, when it cannot save them
in whom it is, are much worse then some foolish heathens dreams of an
immortal fame, that was to accompany their mortal souls, (as they esteemed
them) and argue in these sons of Antichrist, either an incogitancy, or
unbelief of Christ, who lives for ever, come in the flesh, or a secure worldly
hope, he shall never, or not this long time, come to judgment.

31 Saint Peter has fortold, 2 Peter c. 3. v. 4. A Parallile of Atheistical
and Papisticall mockery.
that there shall come in the last days mockers, which will walk after their
lusts, and say, where is the promise of his coming? for since the fathers
died, all things continue alike from the begiuning of the creation. Atheists
and Libertines I know here are literally meant. But as the Prophets usually
prefigure our future bliss by Ierusalems present glory, or other known
felicity, by which perhaps it was represented unto them: So might S. Peter
shadow out unto us the mystery of iniquity, according to that rude draught
which it had in his time. For the substance, native quality, or proportion of
the Atheists, and the modern godless Romanists mockery, that are the same,
only the one is more rude and rough hewn, the other more smoothly varnished
with hypocrisy, and ouerlaied with artificial colors. The blunt Atheist like
a lewd debtor that simply denies his bond, imagines the Lord will never come to
call him to an account. The subtle Romanist like a crafty companion that
acknowledges the debt, but no set day of payment specified, save only
[tomorrow] hopes to drive off God almighty from day to day, putting Christ's
coming as far from him the next three years to come, as it was the last
three past; and so would hold on these hundred thousand years, if the world
should stand so long because Antichrist, who by professed enmity against
Christ, shall give the world three years warning (according to the years of
an hireling) of its dissolution, The Jew and the Jesuit, are alike bewitched,
the one in expecting Messiah already come and crucified by his fathers, the
other in looking for Antichrist already revealed, and adored by him as his God.
(if we may believe this mocker) is not yet revealed: Nor ever shall be to
him, unto whom; since the Patriarchs and Apostles died, continue as they did
from the beginning of the new creation, (man's redemption) without any general
Apostasy or decay of Peter's faith, which remains still as fresh and lively,
as when he first confessed Christ. Not the Jew more sottish, in expecting his
Messiah, then this hypocrite in deferring Antichrists coming. And no marvel,
when that which first caused the Jew so grievously to stumble, and since
retains him in his unbelief, is made the only ground of the Roman
Catholics faith. Hell, by approved experiment of the ones fall, knew well the
same charm would enchant the other: both being equally tainted with a
superstitious heathenish conceit, that their teachers could not err, because
they sit in the seats of such as were infallible in their life times. And
hence it is they are so blind, and see it not, bewitched, and bewitching others
with continual reiterating that magic spell of templum Domini, the Church,
the Church, words whose meaning they understand no more, then simple women do
waggish scholars medicines, or charms for the tooth ach. Their ignorance
though they may put us in mind of another mockery, they make of our Saviors
words.

32 For where he promised hell gates should never prevail against his Church,
meaning against no true Christian soul espoused to him by an indissoluble knot
of faith and everlasting love: these mockers dispossess the Christian world of
this glorious hope, by a double delusion; first persuading it, that the
universal Church militant may encampe in one man's breast, upon whom, though
hell shut her gates, the simple (such as they would make us all) must believe
the Church is safe, because he came not with them as an heretic. For so in
the second place, though our Savior promises in terms as ample and
maiesticall as can be devised, that not Hell gates; that is, no power or force
of hell, shall be able to hold play with that Church, whose safe conduct to
his heavenly kingdom he there undertook, they make the meaning of his
assurance to be but this: No heresy (as if hell gates were furnished with no
other munition) shall ever make breach upon the Roman Consistory, or approach
the Popes seat of dignity. Thus, to support the Popes supremacy, they would
make Christ so to shufle, as if a Prince, (were it possible any Prince could
be so base) should warrant his confederates safe conduct through his
territories, upon as high terms, as his soueraignery or supremacy would
stretch unto, and yet challenged upon the others miscarriage, interpret his
meaning to have been but this; I did warrant him he should not die of poison,
administered by any Physician of mine in my dominions; that no violence should
be offered him by thieves and robbers, or other unruly subjects, I undertook
not.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Romanists belief of the Churches infallible authority cannot be
resolved into any testimony better then humane, whence the (...) conclusion
immediately follows. That the Romanist in obeying the Church-decrees, without
examination of them by Gods word, prefer man's laws before Gods.
1 Seeing it has been manifested as well by ostensiue proof from Scriptures,
as by deduction to inconveniences, most contrary to the analogy, and
prejudicial to the main foundation of faith, that Saint Peter was not the
Church, nor such an head as the Pope does make himself of all the faithful:
the principal point is clear, that the Romanists belief of such a
transcendent, absolute oecumenicall authoriry in the Church, as might warrant
our obedience to the former decrees, cannot be resoluedinto any divine
testimony, or absolute promise of Christ: in neither of which the Pope can have
any interest, but only by right derived from S. Peter.

2 To follow them a little in their school humor, only reckoning the
speculatiue probabilities that can be brought for them, without computation of
their blasphemies, or other dangerous consequences, wherewith their doctrine
heretofore has been, and must be farther charged; let us try what strength
the other ioincts have in themselves, and see in the next place, what proof
they can make their Popes are successors to such preheminences as Peter had.
Albeit even this ioinct, as all the rest of their religion, is quite benumbed,
and utterly deprived of sense, by the deadly blow lately given to the
principal nerve, whence life and motion must be derived to the whole body of
their religion: for if we consider the intensiue perfection of that
pre-eminence, or estimation, which Peter in respect of his fellows had, either
with his Lord, or with his flock: this was founded in a correspondent excess
of his love, his lively faith, and diligent feeding; unto no one of which good
qualities, the Popes profess themselves heirs infallible. Or if we respect
the extent or amplitude of S. Peter's extraordinary soueraignety, it was the
same with David's kingdom, or Christ's own pastoral charge; and reached but
from D^n to Beershebah. At the utmost, it and the circumcision had the same
circumference: Within which, how great soever his authority was, the Pope can
have no pretense to be his successor therein. For the edification of the
people committed to him by our Savior, was to be finished before Ierusalems
destruction; since which time Israel has been perpetually scattered amongst
the nations without a shepherd, to gather them. And when it shall please the
Lord, as it is probable it will, to reduce them to his fold: their Ruler shall
be of their own people, strangers shall have no more dominion over them.

3 Had the Pope derived his right from Saint Thomas, Bartholomew or other
Apostle, which have no writings exta^t, this might have yielded some surmises,
The adversaries (...) in deriuing oecumenicall authority perpetually infallible
from Saint Peter.
not so easy to be disproued, that Romish traditions did contain the sum,
at least of all these Apostles unwritten doctrine: if from Saint Paul the great
Doctor of the Gentiles and first planter of faith amongst the Romans, as much
commended by him as any other of his children in Christ; the improbability had
been much less then now it is in Peter's case, that the Bishop of Rome, if
any should have succeeded him. But when that people began to grow out of love
with the truth, fashioning themselves unto this present world, (the disease
whereof Saint Paul Romans 12. 2.
forewarned them) it was Satan's policy to present unto them, longing after
such a Monarchical state as their heathenish Predecessors had, such shows of
Peter's Supremacy, and residencie at Rome, as by the divine permission had
either crept into some of the Ancients religious cogitations, or else in time
of darkness have been shufled by the predecessors of these cheating mates
late discovered, into their writings, as fit baits to entice them unto this
deriuation of that absolute power from Peter, to their greater condemnation,
and our good. For God no doubt in his providence ordered this their blindness
to illuminate us, as he did the fall of the Jews to confirm the Gentiles in
faith, seeing of all the Apostles Peter's prerogatives (as has been showed)
were most evidently personal, all to determine with himself; unto which
observation his own writings also give testimony. Even a little before he was
to leave the world, where he most manifested his earnest desire of preserving
his flock, sound in faith after his death, he gives no intimation (as shall
be showed more at large hereafter) of any Successor, unto whom they were to
repair. Sect. 3. cap. 13.
His present Epistle he foresaw would be more available to this purpose, then
any tradition from him: 2. Pe. 1. 12. etc.
I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things,
though that ye have knowledge, and be established in the present truth. For I
think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up, S. Peter
knew not his successors should be infallible.
by putting you in remembrance; seeing I know that the time is at hand, that I
must lay down this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed
me. I will endeavor therefore always that ye also may be able to have
remembrauce of these things after my departing.

4 As for peculiar direction of later times, whence perpetual infallibility
must be derived; it cannot be gathered from his writings, that he knew so
much as his brother Paul did. Albeit in this point, these two great pillars of
Christ's Church, more famous then all their fellow Apostles besides for present
efficacy of their personal ministry, come far behind the Disciple whom
Jesus loved; whose written Embassage was in a peculiar sense, to tarry till
Christ's last coming unto judgment, as he himself did unto Christ's first
coming to destroy Jerusalem, and forwarne the nations. Besides the doctrine of
common salvation, necessary for all to know, plentifully set down in this
Disciples Epistle, his Revelations contain infallible directions, peculiar to
every age. And as in some one gift or other, every Apostle almost exceeds his
fellows: There be greater probabilities that S. Ioha should have had
infallible successors then S. Peter.
so if amongst all, any one was to have this prerogative of being the ordinary
Pastor, or to have ordinary successors as Aaron (though inferior to Moses in
personal prerogatives during his life) had after his death: this doubtless was
Saint John; who ascribes that unto the diligent expositors, hearers or Readers
of his books, which the Romanist appropriate to such as rely upon the visible
Churches determinations: never questioning whether it be that Babylon which
Saint John deciphers, or no; Blessed is he (says Saint John) that reads; and
they that hear the words of this prophecy, Revel. 1. ver. 3.
and keep those things which are written therein, for the time is at hand.
Blessed they are that read it with fear and reverence, or so affected as this
Disciple was: for unto such the Lord will by means ordinary, by sober
observation of the event, reveal his secret intent, as he did it unto him by
the extraordinary gift of Prophecy, Reu. 19. 10.
for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy.

5 It is evident the spirit of God intended to show John, and John to show the
faithful, all the Eclipses that should befall the Church until the worlds end.
His prophesies since his death, were so to instruct the world of all principal
events present or to come, as hystories do of matters forepast. Now as he in
our times, wherein God inspires not men with Moses spirit, is accounted the best
Antiquary, that is, most conversant and best seen in the faithful cords of
time; not he that can take upon him to divine as Moses did of the worlds state
in former ages: so since the gift of prophecy ceased, he is to be esteemed
the most infallible teacher, the safest guide to conduct others against the
forces of hell, chiefly heresies or doctrines of Devils, that can best
interpret him, who first descried them, and in his life time forewarned the
Churches of Asia, planted by Saint Paul, and watered by him, of the
abominations that threatened shortly to ouerspread them, and after them the
whole visible Church until these latter times, does the Pope then profess
more skill in Saint John's Revelations then any other? If he do, let him make
proof of his profession by the evidence of his expositions. But from this
Apostle he pretends none at al, and we demand but any tolerable proof of
succession from S. Peter.

6 A supreme oecumenicall head (say the Parasites to the Sea Apostolic) is as
necessary now, as in Saint Peter's time: therefore he must iure diuino have a
Successor. Vide lib. 2. Sect. 4. cap. 4.
But neither does Scripture or Reason admit any such head, as they have molded
in their brains, either then or now. As has been abundantly proved; and
their own instances brought to illustrate the probability of such a device
contradict them. For admit that Christ and earthly Princes stood in like need
of Deputie-Gouernors in their absence: would the King of Spain were he to go
on Pilgrimage unto his Kingdom of Jerusalem, leave but one Deputy over all
the Dominions of Spain and Portugal, the West Indies, Sicilie, Naples, and
Millaine? Or leaving but one, would indue him with such absolute power over all
his Subjects in these Nations, as they imagine Christ does the Pope over every
Christian soul throughout the whole world (what spirit then may we think) did
possess Bellarmine, when he avouched that the church and commonweals are
different in this case? let us hear the difference. The Church Catholic must
be one by communion with one head: so must the Liege people of every Monarch
be one by subordination to one Sovereign, whether resident amongst them, or
far absent. RESPONDEO, non esse eandem rationem Politici and Ecclesiastici
regiminis. Siquidem orbis terrarum non necessario debet esse vnum regnum,
proinde no^ necessario postulat vnum qui omnibus praesit; at Ecclesia tota vnum
est regnum, vna ciuitas, vna domus, and ideo ab vno tota regi debet. Cuius
differentiae, illa est, ratio, quod ad conuersationem Poli^^^orum regno^um non
necessario requiratur, vt omnes Prouinciae seruent easdem leges ciuiles, and
e^sdens vitus. Possunt enim (...), and personarum varietate diuersis vti
legibus, and institutis, and d^irco non requiritur vnus, qui omnes in v^itate
contineat. Ad con^eruationem vero Ecclesiae necesse est, vt omnes conueniant in
eadem fide, ^sdem Sacramentis, ^sdemque praeceptis diuinitus traditis, quod
sane sierinon potest, nisi sint vnus popu^^s, and ab vno in vnitate
contineantur. Bellar. l. r. de Romans Pont. c. 9. sub sinem. He acknowledges it
were convenient the whole world should be governed by one civil Monarch. Were
it possible to create surely one without bloodshed of wrong, it were requisite
he or any in his behalf should resolve us why the whole Church might not as
truly be one people by communion with Christ their head, as the Tartars and
Spaniards by subordination to one Lord, to wit, the King of Spain, suppose he
were Lord of both, and they as far distant each from other as they are.
Why may not Christ then, though absent, be that only supreme head, whence
universally the Church receives unity? or why may not he rule in it, though
dispersed through many Nations, as effectually by his Angels, and ordinary
Ministers of the Gospel, as the Pope does by his Nuncioes, fallible Legates,
or other inferior Prelates?

7 But though reason and Scripture fail them, yet Councels, Histories, and
Traditions, may be mustered to their aid. These are the first Springes of
these many Waters, whereon the great Whore sits. From what history therefore
do they believe the Pope is Peter's successor? from history canonical or
divine? no Secular, Monkish, or Ecclesiastical at the best, upon which the
best faith that can be founded is but humane: and their professed villainy in
putting in and out whatsoever they please, into what writing soever, (Gods word
only excepted) makes it more then doubtful, whether many ancient Writers did
ever intimate any such estimate of the Romish Church, as is now fathered upon
them; or rather, this foul iniquity late revealed, whilst some have been
taken in the manner, has been long time concealed as a mystery of the Romish
state. But they believe not this succession from express written history, but
from Tradition partly. From Tradition, of whom? Of men, what men? Men obnoxious
to error, and parties in this present controversy: yet neither partial, nor
erroneous while they speak ex Cathedra, says the Jesuit. But who shall assure
us what they have spoken ex Cathedra concerning this point? The Councels, What
Councels? Councels assembled by the Pope; Councels of men for the most part, as
ill qualified as carnally minded, and so palpably carried away with faction,
that to attribute any divine authority unto them, were to blaspheme the holy
Spirit. The uncertainty of Popish counsels or traditions.
Councels which the Papists themselves acknowledge not of sufficient
authority, unless they follow the Popes instructions; from whom likewise they
must receive their approbation. The Pope must assure us the Council (which
perhaps elected him, rejecting a Competitor every way more sufficient) does not
err. But that the Pope is lawfully elected; that so elected, he cannot err in
this assertion, who shall assure us? he himself or h^s Predecessors. This
then is the last resolution of our faith, if it rely upon the Church.

8 We must absolutely believe every Pope in his own cause: First, that he
himself is; secondly, that all his Predecessors up to Saint Peter were
infallible. When as many of them, within these few hundred years late past (by
their own followers confession) were such, as whatsoever must derive it
pedigree from them, may justly be suspected to have first descended from the
father of lies; such as not speaking ex Cathedra, were so far from the esteem
of absolute infallibility, that such as knew them best did trust them least in
matters of saecular commodity, and if they were found unfaithful in the wicked
Luke 16. v. 11
Mammon, who will trust them in the true? Not He that is unjust in the least is
unjust also in much, says our Savior in the same place v. 10.
Papists themselves, unless they speak ex Cathedra. Then belike our Savior
did not foresee this exception from his general r^ie: or Judas by this knacke
might have proved himself or any other knave, as faithful a Pastor as S.
Peter.

9 But if a Pope shall teach ex Cathedra, that he is Peter's lawful successor
and therefore of divine infallible authority, in expounding all the former
places, A Popes testimony of himself or his predecessors is authenticke.
we must notwithstanding our Saviors caveat, believe him. Why? Because it
must be supposed he has divine testimony for this assertion. As what, either
divine history, divine tradition, or divine revelation? Divine history thy
disclaim, nor can impudency it self pretend it. It may be he has the
perpetual traditions of his predecessors. But here again we demand what
divine assurance they can bring forth, that every Pope from Saint Peter
downwards, did give express cathedral testimony to this perpetual
succession in like authority. Suppose (what no Jesuit dare avouch, unless he
first consult his superiors, whether he must not of necessity say so, for
maintenance of the Popes dignity) that this assertion had been expressly
conveyed from Saint Peter to the present Pope, without interruption; yet if any
one of them did receive it from his predecessor, having it but as a private
man, or upon his honesty, he might err in delivering it to his successor, so
might the third in believing him. For no belief can be more certain then it
proper object, or immediate ground. If That be fallible, the belief must
needs be uncertain, obnoxious to error, and at the best humane. No better is
the Popes testimony, unless given ex Cathedra: and no better is the ground of
his own belief, of what his Predecessors told him, unless they told it him
so speaking. Wherefore though this present Pope should teach ex Cathedra, viua
voce, that he is Peter's lawful successor; yet unless he can prove that none
of his predecessors did ever neglect so to avouch the same truth, it is evident
that he speaks more then he can possibly know by any divine testimony,
either of history, or unwritten tradition. It is evident again, he binds us
to believe that by divine faith which he cannot possibly know himself, but
only by faith humane. For the only ground of his assertion, is this supposed
perpetual tradition: and this is but humane, unless it be perpetually
delivered ex Cathedra. Popes bind us to believe by divine faith their reports
of matters forepast which they cannot believe by any other faith, but humane
and fallible.
No is there any other means possible under the sun, nay either in heaven or
earth, for to know matters of this nature forepast, but either the testimony
of others, that have gone before us, who either were themselves, or took their
relations upon trust from such as were present, when the things related were
acted, or else by revelation from him who was before all times, and is a
present spectatour, an eye witness of every action.

10 Our knowledge of matters forepast by the former means, (though Popes
themselves be the relators, unless their relation be cathedral) as has been
proved, are but humane and fallible, Things known by immediate revelation from
God are most certain, because the immediate Relator is most infallible. Does
the Pope by this means know, He that will be reputed a Prophet of times
forepast, must show himself a prophet of things to come.
what his Predecessors, or Saint Peter thought concerning this perpetual
succession, or generally all matters concerning this point long since forepast?
He may as easily tell us what any of his successors shall do or say an hundred
years hence. And thus much if this present Pope will undertake, the Christian
people then living, may safely believe, what the Pope then being shall say of
this; or both of their predecessors. But to believe man, as an infallible
prophet of things past, which cannot approve himself a true foreteller of
things to come, were to inuert Gods ordinance, and mock his word. For it has
been a perpetual law of God, that no man should ever be believed more then
man, or by any faith, more then humane, though in matters present, whereof he
might have been an eye witness: unless he showed his participation of the
divine spirit, by infallible praediction of things to come, or euidencie of
miracles fully answering to the prediction of Gods word already written, as
shall be showed at large in the next section.

11 If we put together the first elements of Romish faith, as they have been
sounded apart, they make no such compound, as the simple and ignorant Papists,
(who in policy) are taught to read this lesson, as little children untaught,
will by gessing at the whole in gross, without spelling the parts, believe
they do. First, their prerogatives they give to Peter are blasphemous.
Secondly, their allegations, to prove that their Popes succeed as full heirs
to all Peter's prerogatives, are ridiculous. Whence it must needs follow, that
their faith is but a compost of folly and blasphemy. This pretended perpetuity
of tradition, or suspicious tale of succession from Peter, is the best warrant
they have, the Church does not err in expounding the places alleged for her
infallability, and their belief of their infallibility in such expositions,
the only security their souls can have, that obeying the former decree of
worshipping the consecrate host, of communicating under one kind, they do not
contemptuously disobey Gods principal laws, mangle Christ's last Will and
Testament, vilify his precious body and blood. Seeing then they themselves
confess the places brought by us against their decrees to be divine; and we
have demonstrated that men's belief of that infallible authority in making such
decrees, to be merely humane: the former conclusion is most firm, that
whilst men obey these decrees against that natural sense and meaning, which
the former passages of scripture suggest so plainly to every man's conscience,
that the Churches pretended authority set aside, none would ever question
whether they could admit any restraint, they obey men more then God, humane
laws more then divine, and much better believe the traditions of humane fancy,
of whose forgery for others worldly gain there be strong presumptions, then
the express written testimony of the holy spirit, in the especial points of
their own salvation.

12 Or if unto the testimony of Gods spirit, The present Popes authority is
greater then history, traditions or councels, or ought that can be pretended
for it.
recorded in Scriptures, we add history, tradition, Councels, or former Popes
decrees or whatsoever possibly may be pretended to prove the present Popes
authority, it must still be supposed greater and better known, then all that
can be brought for it or against it, as will appear, if we apply our argument
used before. That authority is always greater which may try all others, and
must be tried by none, but such is the Popes declaration, or determination of
all points in controversy, whether about the canon or sense of Scriptures,
over those which are brought for it, whether about the truth, true meaning or
authority, or vnwritte^ traditions, whether about the lawfulnes of councels, or
their authentic interpretations: in one word, his determinations are
monarchical, and may not be examined, as S. Austen or others of the ancient
fathers writings may by any law written or unwritten. So Aliud est interpretari
legem more doctoris. aluid more iudicis, id explicationem more doctoris,
requiritur e^uditio, ad explicationem more iudicis requiritur authoritas.
Doctor enim non proponit sententiam suam vt necessario sequend^m, sed solum
quatenus ratio suadet: at iudex propon^t vt sequendam necessario. Aliter
accipimus glossas Bartholi and Baldi, aliter declarationem Principis.
Augustinus igitur and ceteri Patres in Commentarijs fungebantur offic^o
Doctorum: at Concilia, and Pontifices funguntur officio iudicij a Deo sibi
co^misso. Bellar. de verbi Dei interpret. lib. 3. cap. 10. respon. ad 16.
Bellarmine suitable to the Trent Council, expressly avouches: The Fathers
were only Doctors or expositors, the Pope is a judge, What then is the
difference between a Judge and an expositor: To explane as a Judge, there is
required authority, to explane as a Doctor, or expositor, only learning is
requisite. For a Doctor does not propose his sentence as necessary to be
followed, but only so far as reason shall council us: but a Judge proposes
his sentence to be followed of necessity. Whereof then will the Pope be
Judge? Of expounding Scriptures: these places of Scripture which make for his
pretended authority. Must his sentence herein of necessity be followed? By
Bellarmine it must, albeit we see no reason for it, either out of Scripture or
nature. It is for Doctors to bring reasons for their expositions; but the Pope
needs not except he will: nor may we exact it of a Judge. So he adds more
expressly, We admit not of Bartolus, or Baldus glosses, as we do of Empecours
declarations. Austine and other Fathers in their Commentaries supply the places
of Teachers, but the Council and Popes exercise the function of Judges,
whereunto God has designed them. But how shall we know that God has committed
all judgment unto them, seeing we have been taught by his word, Ioh. 5. 22.
23.
that he has committed all judgment unto his son, Because all men should
honor the son as they honor the father? We read not of any other to whom
the like authority is given by God, or his son; yet of one, whose very name
shall import the usurpation of like authority, that is, (...), Christ's Vicar
general, unto whom the Son as must be supposed, does deligate the same
judiciary power the Father deligated unto him.

13. But may a Princes declaration in no case be examined by his subjects? Yes,
though in civil matters, it may, so far as it concerns their consciences;
as whether it be consonant to Gods word or no, whether it make more for the
health of their souls, to suffer what it inflicts upon the refusers, or to act
what it commands. To control, contermaund, or hinder the execution of it, by
opposition of violence or contrary civil power, subjects may not. But for any,
but man, to usurp such dominion over his fellow creatures souls, as earthly
Princes have over their subjects goods, lands, or bodies, is more then
Monarchical, more then tyrannical, the very Idea of Antichristianisme. And
what I would commend unto the Reader, as a point of especial consideration,
this assertion of Bellarmine, concerning the Popes absolute authority,
directly proves him, as was avouched Cap. 7.. 18. and 20. Bellarmine to prove
tho Pope is absolutely above the universal Church uses these words, Omnia
nomina, quae in scripturis tribuuntur Christo, vnde constat eum esse supra
Ecclesiam, eadem omnia tribuuntur: Pontif. Bellar. de conciliorum auct. Lib. 2.
cap. 17.
before, to be a supreme head or foundation, of the self same rank and order
with Christ, no way inferior to him in the intensiue perfection, but only in
the extent of absolute sovereignty. For, greater sovereignty cannot be
conceived then this, That no man may examine the truth, or equity of commands,
or consequences immediately derived from it, though immediately concerning their
eternal joy or misery. No Prince did ever deligate such sovereign power to
his Vice gerent, or deputy: nor could he, unless for the time being (at least)
he did utterly relinquish his own supreme authority, or admit a full compere
in his kingdom. Christum caput esse Ecclesiae vniuersae libentisme consitemur,
neque vllum hominem, ac ne angulum quidem illi aequamus; quod esset propr^ duo
capita in Ecclesiae corpore constituere, at quin sub Christo suo capite
Vicarius eius in terris caput vt sic dicam, ministeriale non principale recte
nominetur, negari nullo modo potest; Siquidem vt in republica temporali caput
omnium principale Rex est, sub Rege deinde capita sunt Prouinciaru^, ij qui
dicuntur Proreges and sub Proregibus capita suat vrbium singularum, certi
quidam Praetores, and sub praetoribus quaelibet familia suum habet caput, ipsum
videlicet Patrem familias: Ita quoque in Ecclesia, Dei summum caput omnium
hominum and Angelorum Christus est: sub Christo in terris caout omnium
Christianorum est Pontifex maximus: sub illo Episcopi Parochi capita sunt
Christianae multitudinis. Bellar. de summo Pont. sieve lib. 2. de trans. Imp.
cap. 24. His similitude falls in this that they admit of no appeal from the
Pope to Christ, no examination of his decrees by Gods word: Nor is the Pope by
their doctrine subordinate in such sort unto Christ, as all other Bishops are
to the Pope.
Bellarmines distinctions, of a primary and secondary foundation, of a
ministerial and principal head of the Church, may hence he described to be
but mere stales set to catch guls. Their conceit of the Popes copartnership
with Christ, is much better resembled, and more truly expressed, by the Poets
imaginations of Jupiter, and Augustus Caesar's fraternity, Diuisum imperium cum
Jove Caesar habet: Jove and Caesar are Kings and Gods:
But Jove of heaven; that's the only ods.
That Christ should retain the title of the supreme head over the Church
militant, and the realitie of supremacy over the Church triumphant, over
adversaries are not offended: Because, there is small hope of raising any new
tribute from the Angels, and Saints in heaven, to the Romish churches use; and
as little fear that Christ should take any secular commodity from it, which
aunciently it has enjoyed.

14. But though it were true, that we were absolutely bound to obey an absolute
Monarchy, of whose right none doubts: yet may we examine whether every
Potentate that challenges Monarchical jurisdiction over others, or gives
forth such insolent edicts in civil matters, as the Pope does in spiritual,
do not go beyond his authority in these particulars; albeit his lawful
prerogatives in respect of others, be without controversy many and great, yet
limited both for number and magnitude. For suppose King Henry the eight, after
he had done what he could against the Pope, should still have professed his
good liking of Romish religion, opposing only this to all his Popish Clergy,
that had challenged him of revolt: Am not I defender of the faith. The Pope,
whom I trow you take for no false Prophet, has given me this prerogative
amongst Christian Princes, as expressly, as ever Saint Peter bequeathed him his
supremacy above other Bishops. It is as impossible for me to defend, as for his
Holiness to teach, any other besides the true Catholic faith. Let the
proudest amongst my Prelates examine my expositions of his decrees, and by S.
George, he shall fry a faggot for an heretic, Would this or the like pretense
(though countenanced by royal authority) have been accepted for a just
defense, that this boisterous King had not contradicted the Pope, but the
tatling Monks, or other private expositors of his decrees? would this have
satisfied the Popes agents, until the King and his Holiness had come to
personal conference, for final debatement of the case? yet for Christ's
servants thus to neglect their masters cause, is no sin in the Romanists
judgment, yea an heresy is it not to deal so negligently in it. For a sin
of no lower rank they make it, not to submit our hearts, minds, and
affections, unto the Popes negative decrees, though against that sense of
scripture, which conscience and experience give us. Unto all the doubts,
fears, or scruples these can minister, it must suffice; That the Pope says he
expounds scripture no otherwise then Christ would, were he in earth, but only
controls all private glosses or expositors of them. But can any Christian heart
content it self with such delusions, and defer all examinations of doctrine,
until that dreadful day come upon him, wherein the great Shepherd shall plead
his own cause, face to face, with this pretended Vicar and his associates? Do
we believe that Christ has given us a written law, that he shall come to be
our Judge, and call us to a strict account wherein we have transgressed or kept
it; yet may we not try by examination, whether these Romish guides lead us
aright or awry? Whether some better or clearer exposition may not be hoped for,
then the Pope or Council, for the present, tenders to us? What if the Pope
should prohibit all disputations about this point in hand, [whether obeying
him against the true sense of scripture, (as we are persuaded) we yield
greater obedience unto him, then unto Scriptures;] may we not examine the
equity of this decree, or his exposition of that Scripture which happily he
would pretend for this authority, his amplius, fili mi, ne requiras? No: by
their general tenent, and Lib. 2. sect. 2. cap. 5. par. 8.
Valentians express assertion, it were extreme impiety to trauerse this
sense, or exposition, under pretense of obscurity, etc. By the same reason, for
ought I can see, it would follow, that, if the question were, [whether, obeying
the Pope more then God, we did obey man more then God] we might not examine, at
least not determine, whether the Pope were man or God, or a middle nature
betwixt both, which came not within the compass of that comparison.

CHAP. IX.
In what sense the Jesuits may truly deny they believe the words of man better
then the words of God: In what sense again our writers truly charge them with
this blasphemy.
1. IF we reuiew the former discourse, we may find, that equivocation, which
Bellarmine sought (as a knot in a bulrush) in our writers objections, to be
directly contained in their Churches denial of what was objected. Whilst they
deny that they exalt the Churches authority above scriptures, or man's word
above Gods; this denial may have a double sense. They may deny a plain and
open profession, or challenge of greater authority in their Church then in
Scriptures: Or they may deny, that in effect and substance they overthrow all
authority of Scripture, save only so far as it makes for their purpose.

2. That the Pope should openly profess himself competitor with God,
Antichrist must not be a professed or open enemy but a secret underminer of
true Religion.
or, in express terms, challenge greater authority then Scriptures have: was
never objected by any of our writers. For all of us know, the man of sin must
be no open, or outward enemy to the Church, but Judas like, a disciple by
profession: his doctrine, indeed, must be a doctrine of devils, yet
counterfeiting the voice of Angels; as he himself, though by internal
disposition of mind a slave to all manner of filthiness, and impurity, must
be enstiled sanctissimus Dominus, the most holy Lord. If the poison of his
iniquity were not wrapped up in the titles of divine mysteries, it would
forthwith be disliked by many silly superstitious souls, which daily suck
their bane from it, because persuaded that the scriptures, which they never
have examined, whose true sense they never tasted, but from some relics of
heathenish zeal, idolatrously worship in gross, do fully warrant it. When our
Writers therefore object, that the Papists exalt the Popes laws above Gods;
(had not these holy Catholics an especial grace to grow deaf, as often as
we charge their mother with such notorious and known whoredoms, as they see
might evidently be proved unto the world, if they should stand to contest with
us) their meaning is plain; that the Pope, in deed, and issue, makes the
Scriptures, which in show he seems to reverence, The Pope and his followers
have good reason to magnify Christ's authority in words or outward show for
their own gain and glory could not otherwise be so great.
of no authority, but only with reference to his own. That he, and his
followers should in words much magnify Gods word, written or unwritten, we do
not marvel; because the higher esteem men make of it, the higher still he
may exalt his throne, being absolutely enabled, by this devise, to make all
that belongs to God, his Word, his Laws, his Sacraments, the precious Body and
Blood of his Son, blessed for ever, mere foot-stooles to his ambition. For,
if the authority of Scriptures, or such traditions as he pretends, be
established as divine, and he admitted, sole, absolute, infallible Judge of
their meaning; it would argue either Antichristian blindness not to see, or
impudency of no meaner stock, not to acknowledge that the Pope by this mean
might appropriate unto himself the honor due unto God, and play upon his
Creator in such sort, as if a corrupt Lawyer having evidences committed to his
trust, should by virtue of them take up rents, and let leases to the Landlords
damage, and Tennants overthrow. And (what is most villainous) unto whatsoever
prerogatives, though most prejudicial to the divine majesty; his Parasiticall
Canonists shall blasphemously entitle this most holy Father the son of God,
and his faithfullest servants, (Apostles or Prophets) must be brought forth to
abette the forgery, as if evidence given in Court by infamous Knights of the
Post, should in the final day of hearing be produced, under the hands and
seals of free Barons, or other chief Peers of the Land: for, as was
intimated before, whatsoever the Pope though in his own cause, shall say, it
must by this doctrine, be supposed, that Christ does say the same. Yea, if it
should please his Holiness to avouch ex Cathedra, that these words, Thou art a
Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech, are truly and literally meant
of himself as Christ's Vicar, or of perpetual succession in Peter's chair: the
evidence must be taken as upon the Almighties oath; who in that place has
sworn as much as these words import; but what that is the Pope must judge.
That then he permits Christ the title of his sovereign Lord, and vrges others
to subscribe unto his laws as most divine, is just, as if some Politician
should solicit the whole body of a kingdom, solemnly to acknowledge one,
otherwise lawful heir unto the Crown, for their Monarch most omnipotent and
absolute, (whose will once signified must be a law for ever inviolable, to all
his subjects) not with intent that he should in person retain such perpetual
soueraignety over them, but that he might have absolute power to dispose of
his kingdom, as he pleased unto the worlds end; or to nominate others, as
absolute in his place, whilst he spent his days as a soiourner in a foreign
land. Finally, not the most treacherous and detestable plot, the most wicked
Pope that has been, is or shall be, could desire to effect, but may by this
device be countenanced, with as great and sacred authority, as were the best
actions our Savior ever undertook which (as may better appear from what
shall be said in the next Cap. 10. 11.
Section) is to make every Popes authority as much greater then our Saviors,
as their lives and actions are worse then his was.

3 Suppose some Devil should possess the Popes place in similitude of a man,
The same plea the Jesuits make for the Popes absolute infailibility, the
Devil himself might use with as great probability, were he formally elected in
his place.
(as some Papists think the great Antichrist, who shall challenge as great
authority as the Pope does, shall be a Devil incarnate, or the son of a
Devil,) might he not hold his dignity by the same plea the Jesuits make for
their Lord and Master? Could he not be content to pretend Christ's name, or
succession from Saint Peter, (as Simon Magus might he have obtained what he
desired, would have done) for his own advantage? Could he not urge the
authority of Gods word to confirm his own over it, and all that is called
Gods? If in such a case it might not be permitted men to examine his
allegations out of Scriptures, how could the devil himself be convinced by
Scriptures, or deposed from his supremacy, thence pretended? And can we doubt,
whether he which makes no other plea, then the Devil were he in place might,
is not that Filius Diaboli, The great Antichrist? Were we not taught that the
sons of this world are wise only in their own generation, we might justly
wonder that any men endued with natural wit, could be so blind, as at the
first sight not to descrie the politic sophismes used by the Romanist to
cosen Christ of his kingdom. As their whole Religion is but the image of the
old Roman policy; so their maine plot of Templum Domini, Templum Domini, the
Church, the Church, as if all were rebels against Christ, that will not swear
absolute fealty to the Church Romish, may be most fully paralelled by the like
practice of such cunning Statesmen, as having always one eye to the
advancement of their own private fortunes, live under an absolute Monarch, of
himself royally minded, but not much intermedling in the affairs of greatest
moment. Opportunity of high place under a king, upon what occasion soever thus
sequestered, that poor men's complaints cannot possess his ears, tempts
politicians to effect their own purposes, under pretense of his right, to
condemn all of treason or disloyalty, that will not obey their designs
directed in their Sovereigns name, though most abhorrent from the disposition
of his royal heart, were he acquainted with such lamentable grieuances of his
poor Subjects, as are the usual consequents of Princes gracious favors upon
great ones. The more absolute such a Princes lawful authority, the greater his
native subjects love unto him is, the more both, may both be abused by such
unthankful officers. As it is the sovereign conceit all men have of Christ's
kingdom, which keeps the silly in such seruility unto the Pope, his pretended
agent.

4 This is the only difference in these two cases otherwise most like. An
earthly Prince may live and die deluded of his Machiauillian statesmen, over
whom he has no power, after he himself is once subject. But Christ lives and
reigns a King for ever; and though his throne be in the highest heavens,
beholds the things are done on earth; he sees, and yet suffers his pretended
officers to retain such as love darkness more then light, in grossest
ignorance and blind subjection to the Prince of darkness, and his associate,
the Prince of darkness; he sees and yet suffers them detain all such as
delight in lies more then in truth, from acquaintance with his holy spirit; He
sees, and yet suffers their foulest villainies to be countenanced by his sacred
laws; he sees, and yet suffers his holy name to be abused, to the
establishing of Antichristian heresies; he sees and yet suffers his glory made
a stale for maintenance of their secular pomp. He is the keeper of Israel,
and cannot so slumber, as any abuse should escape his notice; his indignation
shall not sleep for ever, but in due time he will rouse himself as a Lion
awaked, to take vengeance upon all the workers of iniquity, on them above
others, who have thus usurped his throne on earth, taking that judgment during
the time of his supposed absence wholly into their hands, which belongs only
unto him: Even so come Lord Jesus, holy and true, and with the breath of thy
mouth destroy him that has destroyed truth and sincerity from amongst the
sons of men.

SECT. III.
Containing the second degree of great Antichrists exaltion, in making his
authority more absolutely infallible then any the visible or representative
Church of the Jews, Moses or the Prophets ever had: Finally, in making it
greater then Christ's or his Apostles was.
THat the Church of Rome does advance her decrees above the laws and
ordinances of the Almighty, her words that in this kind is called Gods, above
all divine Oracles, written and unwritten, is apparent out of their own
positions hitherto discussed; yet is this but the first degree of great
Antichrists exaltations.

The second is the exalting the Popes above any personal authority that ever
was either practiced or established on earth. This in brief is the assertion,
which (by Gods assistance) we are in this present section to make evident; The
authority which the Jesuits and Iesuited Priests give, and would bind others
upon pain of damnation to give unto the present Church or Pope, throughout
every age, is greater then any authority that ever was challenged since the
world began, by any man or visible company of men, the man Christ Jesus not
excepted.

This conclusion follows immediately out of three positions generally held,
Romish positions whence the inconvenience proposed must be reduced.
and stiffly maintained by that Church.

The first, that the Pope (live he as he list) cannot err in matters of
faith and manners, when he speaks ex Cathedra: that we are bound infallibly
to believe whatsoever he so speaks, without examination of his doctrine by
Gods word, or evident external sign, or internal experiment of Gods spirit,
speaking in him.

The second, that we cannot assure our selves the Scriptures are the Oracles
of God, but by the infallible testimony of the Visible Church.

The third, that the true sense and meaning of Scriptures, in cases doubtful,
or controuersed, cannot be undoubtedly known without the infallible declaration
of the same Church.

CHAP. I.
What restraint, precepts for obedience unto the Priests of the Law, though
seeming most universal for their form, did necessarily admit: And how
universal Propositions of Scriptures are to be limited.
1 Seeing we undertake to prove, that no such authority as the Romish Church
does challenge, was ever established on earth: The answering of those arguments
drawn from the authority of the Priests in the old Testament, may to the
judicious seem at the first sight needless, yet because such as they set the
fairest glosses upon, if we look into the inside or substance, are fullest
fraught with their own disgrace and ignominy; It will not be superfluous to
acquaint the Reader with some particulars, prefixing some general admonitions
to the younger sort, for more commodious answering of all that can be brought of
like kind.

2 Their common places of consening the world, especially smatterers of
Logic, or school learning, with counterfeit proofs of Scripture, is either
from some universal precept of obedience to the people, or general promises
of infallibility made to the Priests in the old Testament. Such as come unto
the Scriptures, having their mind dazzled with notions of universal primum, or
other Logic rules true in some cases, think the formerprecepts, being for
their form universal, may admit no exception, limitation, or restraint,
otherwise the holy Ghost might break the rule of Logic: when as they admit
many restraints, nor always from one, Obedience may be complete though not
absolute.
but ofttimes from diverse reasons; from these following especially. God
sometimes inioynes obedience (as we say) in the abstract, to set us a pattern
of such true accurate obedience; as men should perform unto authority it
self, or unto such governors, as neither in their lives, nor in the seat of
judgment, would decline either to the right hand or to the left, but square
all their proceedings to the exact rule of Gods word. Unto such governors
continual and complete obedience, was to be performed; because the parties
governed upon examination, should always find them iumpe with the law of God,
unto which absolute obedience, as has been showed, is due. Nor does the word
of God in setting out such exact obedience, lie open to that exception, which
Politicians take against Philosophers; as if it (as Philosophers do) did give
instructions only, for happy men of Aristotle's making, or for the Stoickes
wise men, who can no where be found but in Platoes commonwealth, whose
Metropolis is the Region of Eutopia. For the ancient Israel of God had this
prerogative above all the nations of the earth, that their Priests lips whilst
they themselves were clothed with righteousness and bare holiness unto the
Lord in their breasts, should still preserve knowledge, and be able to
manifest the will of God unto the people, not only by interpreting the
general written law, but by revelations concerning particular facts of
principal moment, as may be gathered from that law, Exodus 28. 30.
Also thou shall put in the breast plate of judgment the Vrim and the Thummim,
which shall be upon Aarons heart, when he goes in before the Lord; And Aaron
shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the
Lord continually.

3 To omit the various interpretations, and diverse opinions of this
brest-plates use; why it was called the breast plate of judgment: Joseph. lib.
3. antiquit. c. none.
Josephus and Suidas in my mind come nearest the truth. That the Revelation by
it was extraordinary, that Gods presence, or iuridicall approbation of doubts
proposed, was represented upon the precious stones, that were set therein is
probable, partly, from the aptness of it to allure the Israelites unto
Idolatry, partly from that formality which the (...). Diodorus Siculus, l. 1.
c. 3. And a little after, (...). Suidas ex incerto quodam authore haec refert,
as says Fagius, Ephod, (inquit) nomen est Hebraicum, quod si interpreteris,
significat manifestationem aut redemptionem (Vides autem ^um authorem ex quo
Suidas hoc exscripsit, Hebraeae linguae ignarum fuisse. Ephod enim longd aliud
significat. Fortassis pro Ephod dicere voluit Hoschen) Erat autem forma eius,
textura palmaris, vario artificio instar pectoralis, ex aureis filis confecta.
Ac in medio habebat quasi stellam omnino auream. Ex vtraque autem part duos
Smaragdos, in quorum vnoquoque sculpta erant sex nomina, vidilicet, duodecim
nomina Tribuum Israel. Porro inter Smaragdos continebat lapidem Adamantem. Cum
ergo Sacerdos sciscitaturus erat de re quadam oraculum a Deo, ligabat Ephod in
super^umerali ad medium pectoris, and subijcieb^t manus suas sub ipsum, quas
cum retraheret, deprehendebat eas quasi color quodam infectas. Petebat autem a
Deo responsum defixis in Ephod oculis. Itaque si Deus annuebat ad id quod
petebatur, consestim micabat lapis Adamas Si autem negabat, nihil ad pristinum
and proprium lapidis sulgorem accedebat. Quod si Deus voluit populum subijcere
gladio. ^apis reddebatur cruentus. Si autem imminebat mors, lapis ficbat niger.
Fagius in caput 18, Exodus quem plur. Vido ib. de Rationali. vid. and Delrium
Disquisit. Magic. lib. 4. quaest. 2. Sect. 1.
Egyptians in imitation of the Ephods ancient use amongst the Jews, retained
long after in declaration of the truth in Judgment. For Diodorus tells us that
the (...), or chief Judge in that famous and venerable Egyptian high Court, or
Parliament, did wear about his neck in a golden chain, Insigne, a tablet of
precious stone, or (if the Reader be disposed to correct the translator)
(...), which they called (as the Septuagint did Aarons breast plate) (...), on
which he steadfastly looked while matters were debating, (as Suidas says the
High Priest did on his breast plate, whilst they asked counsel of God;) and
whilst he gave sentence turned it unto the beter cause (exhibited as the
fashion was in that Court, in writing) in sign the truth it self did speak
for it, that the Vrim or Thummim were more then an Emblem, yea an Oracle of
justice and right judgment, is apparent out of Scripture: When Joshua was
consecrated to be Isreal's chief governor in Moses stead, he was to stand
before Eleazar the Priest, ordained to ask counsel for him by the judgment
of Vrim before the Lord: 1. Sam. 23. 95.
So did Numb. 27. 21.
Abiathar certify David of Saul's malicious resolution against him, and the
Lords of Keylahs treachery, if he should trust unto them. 1. Sam. 30. 7. 8.
So again David is assured of victory, by the judgment of Vrim and I Thummim,
if he would follow the Amalakites that had burnt Ziglag.

4 Such Priests as these, were to be absolutely obeyed in answers thus given
from the mouth of God. And it is most probable, that the parties whom these
answers did concern, had perfect notice of the Revelation made to the Priests,
howsoever the truths of such answers being confirmed by experiment in those
days, they were to undertake what the Priests appointed, and to obey his
advice at least by cautelous obedience, That Gods promise unto the Priest or
people of Israel for their direction by Vrim and Thummim, or otherwise was not
absolute but conditional.
until the event did prove the truth. But neither was this certain
manifestation of Gods will so absolutely promised unto the Priests, but not
living according unto the direction of Gods law, he might fail in his
Oracles; Nor was this peoples prerogative above others without all limit; that
if they lived no better then others did, they should as often as they asked
counsel of God, infallibly know, whether the answer were from him or no,
albeit there were no defect in the Priest. For this reason the Lord answered
not 1. Sam. 28. v. 6
Saul, when he asked counsel of him, neither by dreams, nor by visions, nor
by Vrim, nor by the Prophets, for Saul was now cast off by God, not willing to
vouchsafe an answer unto his demands: which argues, that the revelation made
to the Priests, was also manifested to the party, solemnly and in sincerity
of heart proposing the questions, The Priests infallibility did depend upon
their continency and integrity.
whereof he desired to be resolved.

5 That the Priest had no such privilege, or absolute promise of Gods
infallible presence, as the Pope challenges, is apparent from the law of
temperance prescribed. Leuit. 10. ver. 9. 10.
And the Lord spoke unto Aaron saying, thou shall not drink wine, nor strong
drink, thou nor thy sons with thee, when ye come into the Tabernacle of the
congregation; lest ye die. This is an ordinance for ever throughout your
generations, that ye may put difference between the holy and unholy, and
between the clean and unclean, and that ye may teach the children of Israel
all the statutes the Lord has commanded thee by the hand of Moses. If these
Priests themselves were unholy and unclean, they could not infallibly discern
between the holy and unholy, between the clean and unclean: if they lived
not according to this, they could not teach the children of Israel the rest of
Gods express laws, much less could they infallibly manifest unto them his
will in all doubts and controversies. But the Pope (so absolute is his
prerogative, which the Jesuits attribute unto him) must be thought to be
infalliby assisted by the holy spirit, albeit he lead a most unhallowed,
unclean, polluted life.

6 But for the promise made unto Leui, and his seed, God himself by his
Prophet Malach. 2. 1. 2.
Malachy most expressly interpretes the meaning of it; And now O ye Priests,
this commandment is for you, if ye will not hear it, nor consider it in your
heart, to give glory unto my name, says the Lord of hosts, I will even send a
curse upon you, and will curse your blessings, yea, and I have cursed them
already, because ye do not consider it in your heart, behold I will corrupt
your seed, and cast dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn
feasts, and you shall be like unto it, and ye shall know, that I have sent
this commandment unto you, that my covenant which I made unto Leui might
stand, says the Lord of hosts. My covenant was with him of life and peace, and
I gave him fear, and he feared me, and was afraid before my name, the law of
truth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquity found in his lips, he
walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many from iniquity; for the
Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the law at his
mouth. As if he had said; Such Priests I have had in former times, and such
might your praises from my mouth, and your estimation with men have been, had
you framed your lives according to the rules which my servant Moses had set
you. But were these Priests, against whom he here speaks, infallible in
their doctrine still; because Gods promise was so ample unto Leui? If they were
not, why does Bellarmine bring this place to prove the Popes infallible
authority, in teaching divine untruths? If they were, why does the Lord
complain in the words immediately following? But ye are gone out of the way, ye
have caused many to fall by the law, ye have broken the covenant of Leui,
says the Lord of hastes, Therefore have I made you also to be despised, and
vile before all the people, because you keep not my ways, but have been
partial in the law.

7 This place alone (though many others might be brought) clearly euinceth
Gods promise unto Leui and his posterity, during the time of their priesthood,
to have been condititionall, not absolute. And as Gods promise of infallibility
was unto him and his seed, such was the obedience due to the^ and their
authority, not absolute, but conditional and where the precepts may seem
universal, yet are they to be limited oftimes by the condition of the priests
life.

8 But sundry propositions there be in Scriptures for their form universal,
which are also absolutely true in their proper subject, Universal propositions
in Scripture are to be limited by their proper subject, the end of the prece^
or other circumstance.
whose full extant or limits notwithstanding are not always evident. Whence
many mistake in stretching them too far; others seeing them Fails in some
particulars, which seem comprehended under the universality of their form
suspect the absoluteness of their truth; and account them rather morally
probable, or conditionally true, then necessary and certain; yet are they most
absolutely necessary and certain, only their universality is to be limited
by their proper subjects. This is a common difficulty in all arts, though less
apparent in the Mathematickes, or Metaphysickes, or other like abstract
contemplative sciences. But in Philosophy, as well natural as moral, many
general rules there be most true and evident to such as know the nature or
quality, either of the subject, or matter whereunto they are applied, or of
these particulars, whence the induction was gathered; and yet are obscure and
doubtful unto others, who mark the universality of their form, not so well
acquainted with the nature of those subjects, in which their true his
principally, and most evidently seen, nor so able to discern the identity or
diversity, the proportion, or disproportion which other subjects may have with
the former; but of the trial of rules in arts (if God permit) elsewhere. I
will now instance in Scripture only; what proposition could be for the form
more universal, what precept conceived in words more general, then that of
sanctifying the Sabbath. In it thou shall do no wanner of workees, Exodus 20. v.
10
(...) Non facies vllum opus? The Scribes and Pharisees putting a Religion in
the letter of the Law, (as the Jesuits now do, The precept concerning the
Sabbath then which none can be more universal did not extend to all manner of
works.
when it may make for their advantage) did conclude from the generality of this
precept, that our Savior brake the Sabbath, when he healed the sick upon it:
Their pretenses, if we respect the universality of the proposition only, were
far more probable then the Papists can pick any for their purpose: Yet
Jewish skill, in that they consider not the end of the Sabbath, which might
have limited the universal form of the precept, and restrained it unto some
kind of works only; for not all, but only all those works which were
repugnant to the end of this precept were forbidden. The end of the Sabbath was
to sanctify themselves unto the Lord; to set forth his praise both in words
and works. Such works then only are here only forbidden as did distract the
mind, or make men unapt to hear, read, or meditate on heavenly matters; all
works of secular vocation, or private consequence, which might hinder men's
endeauours for procuring the health, or welfare of others; not works of
charity, or present necessity, not works tending to greater public good, or to
the auoidance of greater harms, which could not be prevented but by present
working; for men are to read, hear, and meditate upon Gods word, that by it
they may be fruitful in good deeds by which Gods name is more immediately
glorified, then only by speaking well, and not doing so. Wherefore our Savior
Christ did better observe the Sabbath by working upon it, to save men's lives,
or recover their health; then the Pharisees did by abstaining from such works
of mercy, as might have glorified Gods name more immediately, then any
speculalatiue or precise rules, how it should be kept: Yea, by not working
these good works, when fair occasion was offered, they did the works of
Satan, even murder it self, as our Savior Christ implies in that question
proposed unto the Scribes and Pharisees which sought an accusation against him:
Luke 6. v. 9.
I will ask you a question, whether it is lawful on the Sabbath days to do
good or to do evil, to save life, or to destroy it?

9 The like limitations this precept had in case of necessity, or for the
auoidance of some great extraordinary calamity, not otherwise auoidable, then
by doing such works, as upon ordinary and daily occasions were unlawful to be
done upon the Sabbath day. It was an opinion received (as it seems) amongsts
the Jews, that they might not fight, nor build the breaches or places whereby
their enemies did hope for entrance upon the Sabbath. In this persuasion Mac.
2. 36. 36. 38.
about the number of a thousand Jews did lay down their lives. But when
Matthias heard of this his people, and Country men's massacre (more general
then it needed to have been, but for this their strict and precise
interpretation of the former general commandment, he and his friends wisely
resolved Mac. 2. v. 4^.
Whosoever should come to make battle with us upon the Sabbath day, we will
fight against them, that we die not all as our brethren that were murdered in
the secret places. Which they might have stopped, but would not, for fear of
violating the Sabbath. The reason of this their resolution (contained in the 40
verse) was most strong, drawn from the end of the Sabbath; For they said one
to another, If we all do as our brethren have done, and fight not against the
heathen for our lives and for our Laws, then shall they incontinently destroy
us out of the earth. And if the whole Jewish nation had been at that time
utterly rooted out; who should either have sanctified Gods Sabaothes, or
preserved his laws from the injury of times, or fury of the heathen? Nature
had taught the heathen, that it was foolish, propter vitam viuendi perdere
causas: much more might religious discretion teach all men, how preposterous a
course it were for the pre^ise keeping of one, to cross, or overthrow the end
of all Sabaothes.

10 Yet our Adversaries I am sure cannot bring any precept so peremptory or
general, for absolute obedience unto the High Priests, and governors, as the
former was for not working upon the Sabbath. And yet this we see has its
restraint from the end, and holds only absolutely true in certain kind of
works, not in all. The like restraint, either from the end, or from the
circumstance, may all those places likewise suffer, which seem to be most
general for absolute obedience unto Gods messengers or spiritual governors.

11 The end of obeying Gods messengers is, Universal precepts for obeying Gods
messengers must be limited by the end of obedience.
that men thereby may obey God himself. Suppose then God had said [Thou shall
obey the Priest in all things whatsoever he shall command thee:] a Wise man
notwithstanding all this would thus resolve; suppose the Priest command me to
do that, in doing which I shall disobey God, or to omit that continually, in
performing of which I should obey God: am I bound to obey him in all such
commands: so should I frustrate the end of the law, and commit the same offense
by this my blind obedience, which others do by presumptuous and wilful
disobedience unto spiritual governors. But it will be replied, who shall
judge whether the spiritual governor command thee such service, as argues
disobedience unto God, or no? If the case be doubtful, and I be commanded by
my lawful Pastor, I have answered already in what sense obedience must be
performed. But if the case be evident, men must openly disobey their Pastors,
before they certainly disobey God. But who shall judge of the evidence? Every
man's conscience. Shall that then be evident which every man shall say is
evident unto him? No, but what indeed and conscience is, and so shall appear
in his judgment that searches the heart and reins. Such as do not fear his
censure will make no conscience of disobeying men pretending authority from
him: Such as with fear and trembling expect the son of man's appearance will
not much esteem, how they be judged by men further then in reason they may be
persuaded; their sentence shall be ratified in the last day of judgment. And
because God has endued spiritual governors with power of retaining and
remitting sins; every one that fears him which gave, will fear to disobey
them to whom this power is given; lest if they retain, he will not remit; and
retain they justly may, or rather must, the sins of all sins, as add
thirst to drunkenness, contempt of Gods messengers, summons to repentance unto
actual breaches of his law. This is as open rebellion upon a riot, perhaps
first attempted upon ignorance of the Law, inconsideratenes or foolish passion,
but continued after proclamation made in the Kings name, by a public
magistrate authorized for such purposes: The parties admonished upon such high
terms, to desist from any suspicious enterprise (though no more) must be
certain of the Princes, or chief Lawgiuers future approbation of what they go
about, if they persist, otherwise disobedience to a lawful Magistrate or
inferior officer, will be found rebellion against the state or soueraignety.

12 Though it be most true what has been before delivered, that unto Pastors
conditional obedience is only due, Conditional obedience of two sorts.
yet is not the condition precedent to all acts of obedience, but subsequent at
least to some, and to be inferted by way of limitation or caution, for
desisting upon discovery of farther danger, rather then interposed as a stop
to breed delay, or prohibition of all obedience until evident proof be made,
that it is expressly due in the particulars enjoined. The want of this
distinction between a condition precedent, and a condition subsequent, or
annexed unto actual obedience, has been the original (I am persuaded) atwel
of the Papists error in demanding absolute obedience, without all condition of
limitation, as of many Protestants granting less then is due to Pastors, that
is obedience only upon this condition; If they show express warrant of
Scriptures for the particulars enjoined. Nor is the condition between the
Pastor and his flock like unto that between man and man in legal contracts,
or in controversies of debt, wherein all are equal, and nothing due unto the
plaintiff, before the performance of the condition be proved: but such as is
between a private man, and a Magistrate, (both subordinate in their several
places to one sovereign, unto whom only absolute and complete obedience is
due, though unto his officers some obedience is absolutely due, at the least to
be dicto audiens, to hear him with patience, reverence, and attention, not to
contradict, or neglect his commands, but upon such evident reasons as the
inferior party dare adventure to try the cause instantly with him before the
supreme Judge. The acts of obedience which are absolutely due from the flock
to spiritual magistrates, or Christ's messengers, and precedent to the
condition interposed or inserted, In what acts absolute obedience is due to
Pastors.
are the impartial examinations of their own hearts and consciences, the full
renouncing of all worldly desires, earthly pleasure, carnal lusts or
concupiscenses, because these vn^enounced have a command over our souls, and
detain them from performing service, best acceptable unto God, or yielding
that sincere obedience, which is absolutely due unto his sacred word. For this
end and purpose the flock stand absolutely bound to enter into their own
hearts and souls, to make diligent search and strict inquiry, what rebellious
affection, or unruly desire is harbored there, as often as their overseers shall
in Christ's name charge them so to do: otherwise their neglect or contempt will
be in that dreadful day a witness of their rebellion in this life, a bar to
keep sin in, and shut grace out.

13 But if any man out of the sincerity of a good conscience, and steadfast
resolution of a faithful heart, (which has habitually renounced the world,
flesh and Devil, that it may be always ready to serve Christ) shall refuse
his Pastors commandment, though threatening hell pains to his disobedience in
some particulars, he does yet better observe the former precept by this his
denial, then others do by performance of absolute blind obedience without
strict impartial examination of their consciences, for he does herein obey
God, whom to obey with heart and mind thus freed from the dominion of Satan,
and the world, is the very end and scope, the final service whereunto all
performance of obedience unto spiritual governors is but as a trayning of
Christ's faithful Soldiers. And in these acts of obedience, is that saying of
our Savior most generally and absolutely true; Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you, hears me, he that desp^seth you, despises me. That
precept of denying our selves, and renouncing all, is the foundation of all the
rest, concerning obedience: without performance of this, neither can our
undertaking any other acts be sincere, nor our refusal (lawfully admonished)
safe: our best obedience, not hereon grounded, is non christian, our
disobedience unchristian, and rebellious. For which cause we are absolutely
bound unto habitual performance of this, ere we can be admitted as lawful
auditors of Christ's other precepts. All other our resolutions, or deliberate
intendments; whether for performance of any action commended for good and
honest, or for maintaining any doctrine proposed by lawful pastors for true
and orthodoxall, must be limited by their proportion. or disproportion to the
end of obedience enjoined unto spiritual commanders; which as we said before,
was to obey God in all. Those acts then must be undertaken, which upon
examination appear not prejudicial to that oath of absolute obedience, which
we have taken unto our supreme Lord: these omitted, which out of this
general resolution of renouncing all, and denying our selves, and this
impartial examination of our souls in particular doubts, may seem to
derogate from that absolute loialty which we owe to Christ. No minister may
expect obedience, but upon these conditions; and he that sincerely obeieth in
the forementioned fundamental act of renouncing all, and denying himself, and
yet disobeyes in other particulars, upon such grounds and motives as we have
said, does perfectly fulfill that precept, (if any such there were) obey your
spiritual overseers in all things.

14 Be our bond of duty to such governors, whether by ordinary subjection to
their calling, or voluntary submission of our judgments, to their personal
worth, never so great; yet seeing they command only in Christ's name, and for
the adunacement of his kingdom, to imagine spiritual obedience should be due
to such injunctions, as upon sober and deliberate examination seem to cross
the end they propose, would argue such spiritual madness, as if a man should
adventure to kill (by all probability of present occurrence, his father or
mother, because he had formerly vowed (without consideration of any homicide,
much less pa^^icide) thence likely to follow, to kill the first live creature
he met. In such a case as Philo de specialibus legibus.
Philo acutely observes, a man should not forswear himself, or break his
vow, yet overthrow the very end and use of all vows, which were instituted as
bridles to make us refrain all occasions, or prouocations to evil, not as
halters to lead or draw us to such unnatural villainies.

15 These rules hitherto mentioned ritely observed, there is no greater
difficulty in restraining universal precepts of obedience to the Church; then
in limitting general commandments of kings to their Deputies or Vicegerents.
Now, if a King should charge his subjects to obey his Lieutenant in all that
he should command: any reasonable man would take the meaning to be this; That
he should be obeyed in all things that belong unto the King; service, because
this is the end of his appointment, and the proper subject of this precept. No
man in this case would be so mad, as to take the Princes word for his warrant,
if by his Lieutenant and he should be put into some service, which here more
then suspicious to be traitorous, or apparently tending to the Kings
destruction. If a Jesuit should see the Popes agent or nuncio (whom he were
bound to obey by the Popes iniunction delivered in most ample terms) tampering
with the Popes open enemies; either consorting with us in our Liturgy, or
communicating with us in our Sacraments; receiving pension from forrainers, or
secretly conferring with such of their Counselors as had more wit then
himself; could he dispense with his oath of absolute allegiance to the Pope,
upon these or like euasions? This is suspicious indeed; but how shall I know
whether the Popes Agent in doing this, do disobey his Holiness? If he say no,
must I not believe him? must I not obey him, and do as he does, whom the Pope
commands me to obey in all things? The Jesuits are not so simple in the Popes
cause, as they would make all other in Gods: they could tell how to limit such
commands, though delivered in most universal and ample terms. This is the
matter then which so vexes their denoute hearts, and sets them beside
themselves with furious zeal in this argument; that any Christian should be as
wary and circumspect, lest he should prove disloyal^ unto the Creator and
Redeemer of mankind, as they are, lest they should disobey the aduancer and
supporter of their order.

16 But to come nearer the point, Precepts of obedience unto masters or parents
though most universal for their form are limited by their subject.
and instance in some precepts of obedience delivered in most general form:
Might the literal or Logic note of universality carry away such absolute
soueraignety as they contend for: far greater reason there is, why every
father or minister should be an absolute Pope over his own family, then why the
Pope of Rome should be a father of all christian congregations, an absolute
Judge of Scripture, or master over men's faith. Collo. 3. ver. 20. Vide Bellar.
l. 2. de Mona^h. cap. 21.
Saint Paul commands children to obey their fathers in all things, for that is
well pleasing unto the Lord, which is as much as if he had said, in obeying
them you obey the Lord. Again, he commands servants to be obedient unto them
that are their masters according to the flesh in all things, not with
eye-seruice as men pleasers, but with singleness of heart fearing God. Both
these precepts are conceived in terms, as general, as any precept for
obedience to spiritual governors. In the precept concerning wives obedience
to their husbands, the note of universality is omitted: for he says wives
submit your selves unto your husbands, as it is comely in the Lord, not in all
things had the Apostle made any mention of obedience unto spiritual
governors, or were there any hope to comprehend Pastors under the name of
fathers or masters, it would quickly be inferred, the note of universality
was purposely added by our Apostle in these latter precepts, that men might
know absolute obedience without limitation or examination, was due unto the
Pope. So Aquinas expounds it as Bellar. acknowledges it: Quod vero B. Paulus
ait Col. 3 Filij obedire parentibus per omnia, vel ita intelligi debet, vt
illud ( per omnia) significat per omnia, ad quae se extendit patria potestas,
vt recte docet Sanct. Thom. in 2. 2. quae. 104. ar. qu^madmodum, si quis
diceret, opo^tere milites obedire Imperatori per omnia, exponendum esset per
omnia, quae ad militiam perttinent, vel certe tenentur filij per omnia
pareatibus obedire, sed dum paruuli sunt. Bellar. l. 2. de Monach. c. 21.


17 But the holy men of God, whose mouths always spoke out of the abundance
of their hearts, as the spirit gave them utterance, and were not curious to
cast their words in such exact scholastique mouldes, as men addicted to
artificial meditations, having their brains more exercised then their hearts
in Gods word, usually do, even where they seem to speak most universally for
the former, are to be universally understood only in that subject or matter,
which for the present they mind most. As when our Apostle commands servants and
children to obey the one, their masters; the other, their parents in all
things: the meaning is, as if he had said, ye that are christian servants,
be ye most willing to yield all obedience that is due unto masters; ye that
are Christian children, to yield all obedience unto your parents, which is
convenient for any children to yield to theirs: So that the universal note
does rather inioine a totality of heartinesse and cheerfulness, a perfection
of sincerity, in performing that obedience which other children ought to their
fathers, or servants to their masters, then any way extend the object of
christian childrens or servants obedience to more particulars, then others were
bound unto, at the least he does not extend the object of their obedience to
any particulars which might prejudice the sincerity of their obedience due unto
other commanders; whilst he enioyneth servants to obey their masters in all
things, he reserues their allegiance entire unto Princes and higher powers.
Such must be obeyed both by masters and servants, by fathers and sons. Much
more does God when he inioynes obedience in most ample form unto Kings or
spiritual governors, reserve obedience due to himself most entire and
absolute.

18 Yet entire and absolute it cannot be, unless it depend immediately and
absolutely upon his laws; That universal absolute obedience unto men is
incomparable with true loyalty unto Christ.
unless it be exempt from the vncontrolleable disposal, or infallible
direction of other authorities. Nor can Christ be said our supreme Lord,
unless our obedience to him and those laws which he has left us, do limit
and restrain all other obedience due unto any authority derived from him or his
laws, more then a Prince could be said to be that servants supreme Lord or
Sovereign, which were bound absolutely to obey his Master in all points,
without examination, whether his designements were not contrary to the public
laws and statutes of his Prince and Country. Wherefore as the oath of
Allegiance unto Princes does restrain the former precepts; Servants obey your
Masters in all things, that is, in all things that are not repugnant to public
laws, nor prejudicial to the Crown and dignity of your Sovereign: so must
that solemn vow of fidelity made unto Christ in Baptism, and our daily
acknowledgement of him for our Sovereign Lord, restrain all precepts in
joining performance of obedience to any power on earth, and set these
immovable bounds and limits to them; Obey thy King and Governor in all
things, that is, in all things that are not repugnant to the laws and
ordinances of the Great King, thy supreme Lord and Governor. Whilst thou
obeyest him, thou do well, in disobeying them, as well as that servant that
takes Arms against his Master in the Kings defense, whilst thou disobeyest
him, all other obedience is rebellion; Ye are bought with a price (says our
Apostle) be not ye the servants of men; Service according to the flesh he
elsewhere approues, he strictly inioynes: for that is freedom in respect of
this servitude of mind and conscience, in being wholly at any other man's
disposition.

19 Nor is it more difficult for Christ's servants to discern when governors
solicit them to disloyalty against him, then for servants according to the
flesh, to know when their masters seduce them unto rebellion; so Christian men
would fear God, as much as natural men do earthly Princes. Such as fear
God, are sure of a better expositor of his laws for fundamental points then
servants can have for their Princes. The transgression of both are easy to
discern in the beginning of reuolts or apostasies; but the latter more
difficult, when traitors or usurpers are grown strong, and can pretend fair
titles unto soueraigneties, or coin false pedegrees, yet is it not impossible
for sober and obseruant spirits in such a case, to foresee what party to
follow; unto such the signs of the time, and carriage of the several causes
will bewray who have the true title. But this difficulty is none in our
spiritual obedience, challenged by the Church of Rome: for that Church in
words confesses Christ to be the true King and supreme Lord, no usurper,
which is as much as to say, the Pope is an usurper, and a rebel, that dares in
deeds and substance challenge the soueraignety from him (as you heard in the
former dispute, by making claim to this unlimited, vnreserued obedience. Upon
what grounds especially we are now to examine, by these rules hitherto
discussed.

CHAP. II.
The authority of the Sanhedrim not so universal or absolute amongst the Jews
as the Papists make it, but was to be limited by the former Rules.
1 ONe especial place on which they stand, is from that Law in Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8.
9. etc.
Deuteronomy, If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, between plague and plague, in the
matters of controversy within thy gates, then shall thou arise, and go up
unto the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, And thou shall come unto the
Priests of the Levites, and to the Judge that shall be in those days, and
ask, and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment, and thou shall do
according to that thing which they of that place (which the Lord has chosen)
show thee, and thou shall observe to do according to all that they inform
thee: According to the Law which they shall teach thee, and according to the
judgment which they shall tell thee shall thou do, thou shall not decline
from the thing which they shall show thee, neither to the right hand nor to the
left: And that man that will do presumptuously, not harkening unto the Priest
(that stands before the Lord thy God to minister there) or unto the Judge,
that man shall die, and thou shall take away evil from Israel, so all the
people shall hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously*

2 This precept admits of many restrictions, any one of which does take away
all the force of our adversaries objections; First, it may (without prejudice
to our cause) be granted; although it cannot out of these words be
necessarily inferred; that God here prescribes obedience in the abstract, such
as was to be performed unto those Priests and Judges that lived, according to
that pattern which he had set them. Thus may this precept of obedience for
the extent be universal, and concern all causes whatsoever, spiritual or
temporal; doubts of conscience or matters of this life: in all which such
governors wereto be obeyed; but conditionally [if they were such as God in
his law required they should be] unto such (as you heard before) he gave
illuminations extraordinary, such as the parties that were to obey, might have
perfect notice of. But how great soever the extent of this precept be: not one
fyllable in it makes more for absolute obedience unto spiritual, then unto
civil governors; for it is said indefinitely Ver. 10. a Obijcit Brentius, hoc
loco non solum ad Sar^ce dotem, sed ad Iudicem etiam remitti eos, qui dubitant,
iudice^ autem fuisse politicum principem. RESPONDEO, nomine Iudicis posse tum
intelligi Principem Sacerdotum, nam in Hebraeo est: Ascend ad Sacerdotes, and
ad Iudicem: quasi diceret, ad Concilium Sacerdotum, and eorum principem, summum
Sacerdotem. Dico secundo, si intelligamus nomine Iudicis politicum principem,
tum esse distincta ossi^ia. Nam Sacerdoti tribuitur sententia definitiua,
iudici antem exequutio in contumaces: Qui superbierit, inquit, nolens obedire
Sacerdotis imperio, ex decreto Iudicis moriatur. Bellar.de verb. Dei interpret.
l. 3. c. 4.
thou shall do according to that thing which they (either spiritual or
temporal) of that place which the Lord has chosen shall show thee. And
again, the words are dis^unctiue, That man that will do presumptuously, not
hearkening unto the Priest or unto the Judge, that man shall die; whether the
Priest were to be supreme Judge or no, it is not said, at the least the High
Priest was not the chief man always in the Council, for he was not always
admitted into the supreme Consistory or Sanhedrim, which is established in this
place, yet This distinction is quite contrary to the words of the Text, for the
Hebrews call such as execute sentence (...), in opposition to the word (...),
used in this place which signifies such a magistrate as gives definitive
sentence Vid. Fagu. in 16. Deuteronem.
Bellarmine will have the b definitive sentence belong unto the Priest, and the
execution of it to the civil magistrate: so indeed the present Romish Church
in spiritual cases would be judge, and make Christian Princes her hangmen,
The Law of God, Deuteronomy. 17. did concern temporal causes, either only, or
especially.
but their practice must not be taken for an infallible exposition of that Law,
whence they seek to justify their practice quite contrary to the practice of
the Jewish Church and Synagogue. Nor does Bellarmine or any other, beside the
base parasiticall Canonists, or the Popes trencher chaplains, deny, but that
in many civil causes, the Prince or temporal Magistrate has a definitive
sentence; can he then gather out of any circumstance of this place, that only
spiritual causes are here meant? nay, he confesses that the law is general
concerning all doubts that might arise out of the law; yea it is most
probable, that it only concerns civil controversies, and Bellarmines reason
to prove, that it includes spiritual causes, or matters of religion, is most
idle. The occasion of this Law (says he) was for them that did serve other
Gods as appears, out of the beginning of the Chapter; now the service of other
Gods is a point of Religion. But what though Moses in the former part of this
Chapter speak of Idolaters, must this law therefore concern Idolaters. In the
former part he speaks only of Idolaters, but this law is not only for them
by Bellarmines confession. Yea the circumstances of the place, and the express
law against Idolaters mentioned before, euince, that in this Chapter, as in the
former, he first sets down laws concerning the true service of God, and in
the latte^ part gives precepts for the observation of the second Table, the
maintaining of love, by the final composition of all controversies that might
arise betwixt neighbors. In the former law Idolaters are sentenced to death,
and Idolatry (says Bellarmine) is a point of Religion; Was the Priest alone
then to give sentence, and the civil Magistrate only to execute it. There is
not the least pretense for it out of this Text. Any ordinary Magistrate might
execute him that was lawfully convicted of this crime, nor was it so hard a
matter to judge, who was an Idolater amongst the Jews, as it is to determine
what is an heresy amongst the Romanists. This was to be proved by witnesses,
not by Logical proof or force of speculatiue reason: Had the cunningest
Jesuit in the world been taken amongst them kneeling down before an Image and
praying to it, all the distinctions in the master of sentences, or Aquinas or
both their Commentators could not have redeemed him, against two honest men
that would have sworn he would have done thus much; there had been no
appeal from any City in Judah, unto any higher Court; his doom had been read
in the gates, and without them he should (as Homer speaks) have put on a
stony coat.

3 That the Kings of Judah were only to execute the Priests definitive sentence
in all hard controversies, is a positio^ well deserving execution without
appeal at Princes hands. And no doubt but it did so amongst the Jews. The
former Court as is most probable, was to cease, when they had a King amongst
them. And Moses in the former Chapter, after he had given the other law for
ending controversies, gives the law for the election of their king, if so be
they would have one: as if the former Court had then ceased to be the supreme
Tribunal; seeing all Subjects might appeal unto the King from it, in which
this Sovereignty did before reside, as being the supreme Tribunal, whence
there could be no appeal.

4 The King in the Law concerning his qualification, is commanded to have the
Law of his God written out. Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his
life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words
of his Law, and these Ordinances for to do them, that his heart be not lifted
up above his brethren, and that he turn not from the commandment to the right
hand, or to the left. Was he to take all this pains, only that he might
learn to execute the Priests definitive sentence? This any heathen might have
done. But the Kings of Israel, albeit they were not to meddle in the execution
of the Priests office, were notwithstanding to be so well skilled in
Scriptures as to be able to judge, whether the Priest did according to that
Law which God had set him to follow, and to control his definitive sentence,
if it were evidently contrary to Gods word, which both were absolutely bound to
obey.

5 It may perhaps here be objected, that the King had no such assurance of
infallibility in judgment as the Priest had, and therefore it was requisite he
should rely upon the Priests definitive sentence. What construction then can
any Jesuit make of these words; A divine sentence shall be in the lips of the
King, his mouth shall not transgress, he says not, in execution of judgment
given by the Priests, but in judgment given by himself, seeing it is an
abomination to Kings to commit wickedness, for the throane is established by
justice. And again, Prou. 16. 10. That the infallibility of kings may be
defended with as great probability of Scriptures as the infallibility of
priests. Prou. 16. 13.
Righteous lips (such the Priests should as and might have been, but usually
were not) are the delight of Kings, and the King loves him that speaks right
things. This place if we respect either the abstract form of precept, or
plenitude of Gods promise for abiliment to perform it, is more plain and
peremptory for the Kings, then any can be brought for the high Priests
infallibility, in giving definitive sentence; yet does it not necessarily
infer, Kings shall not; but rather shows that they should not, or that they
might not at any time err in judgment, so they would steadfastly follow those
rules which God had prescribed them. For when God says; A divine sentence
shall be in the lips of Kings; this speech does no more argue a perpetual
certainety in giving righteous sentence, then if he had said; A corrupt or
erroneous sentence shall not be in the lips of Kings, or his mouth shall not
transgress in judgment. For as that which God says, shall not be done,
oftimes is done: so may that which God says, shall be done, be oftimes left
undone. Who is he then would make this collection: God says, Thou shall not
steal, that is no man shall steal, ergo there can be no thieves, no theft
committed, yet is our adversaries collection as foolish, The Priests lips shall
preserve knowledge, Ergo they cannot err in giving definitive sentence, or
again, The spirit shall lead you into all truth, they shall be all taught of
God; therefore the Church shall be infallibly taught by the spirit, and shall
as infallibly teach others, live they as they list.

6 These places show what should be done, and what God for his part will
infallibly perform (so men would be obedient to his word) but neither do
these, or any of like nature, include any infallibility of not erring without
performance of due obedience in practice of life; nor do they necessarily
conclude, that men always shall perform such obedience. The most which they
infer, is this, that Governors by duty are bound to perform, that
performing such obedience in practice of life, they might be freer from error,
in their doctrine or definitive sentence. And it was abstinence and integrity
of life that was to preserve sincerity of judgment in Princes as well as
Priests lips, for which reason Princes had their precepts of temperance,
answerable to those rules prescribed for the Priests. So Solomon teaches
kings, Pro. 31. ver. 3. 4. 5.
Give not thy strength unto a woman, nor thy ways, this is to destroy Kings.
it is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for
Princes strong drink, lest he drink and forget the decree, and change the
judgment of all the children of affliction. This place evidently shows, that
if their Princes were of riotous or intemperate lives, they had no promise that
they should not pervert the judgment of the children of affliction. The
Conclusion hence arising is; all the places that can be brought, either for
the King or Priests authority, rather show what manner of men they should be
both in life and judgment, then assure them of any infallibility of judgment,
if they be dissolute in life. This was a point never dreamt of by any, before
the Popes notoriously infamous lives, did discredit the titles of sanctity and
infallibility (which from a conceit of their predecessors integrity they have
usurped) and enforced their parasites to frame a distinction of sanctity in
doctrine separated from sanctity in life.

7 It is questionable, whether both Priests and Princes of Judah had not an
extraordinary privilege above all other nations, both for being infallible in
their definitive sentences whilst they lived according to the laws which God
had given them, and also for their more then ordinary possibility of living
according to such laws. Gods blessings (as is most probable) in both these
respects, were extraordinary unto their Princes and Priests: yet not so
infinitely extraordinary, that either of them might without presumptuous
blasphemy hope for ordinary integrity (such as the more civil sort of heathens
had) much less for any absolute infallibility, if they were extraordinarily
wicked in their lives, or unfaithful in their other dealings. Even the peoples
wickedness did impair the force and virtue of these extraordinary blessings
promised to their Kings and Priests, God gave them priests as well as Princes
in his anger, such as should be pliable to their humor, not such as should
infallibly direct them against the suggestions of the world and flesh for their
spiritual good. So that these gracious promises both for their spiritual and
temporal governors sincerity in judgment, did depend in part upon the
condition of this peoples life.

8 The usual Proverb was most true (though the words thus inuerted) like
people, like Priests. Thus did the wise son of Sira^h interpret Gods promises
both to Priest and Princes Eccles. 45. v. 23, 24. 25.
Because Phineas the son of Eleazar had zeal in the fear of the Lord, and
stood up with good courage of heart, when the people were turned back, and
made reconciliation for Israel; therefore was there a covenant of peace made
with him, that he should be the chief of the Sanctuary, and of his people,
and that he and his posterity should have the dignity of the Priesthood for
ever. And according unto the covenant made with David, that the inheritance of
the Kingdom should remain to his son of the Tribe of Judah, so the heritage
of Aaron should be to the only son of his son, and to his seed. God give us
wisdom in our heart to judge his people in righteousness, that the good
things that they have be not abolished, and that their glory may endure for
their posterity.

9 For what we have said it is most evident, that the precepts inioyning
obedience unto civil Magistrates, are as large and ample as any can be found
for obedience unto spiritual governors, and what limitations soever the one
did, the other might admit, during the time of the Law. The promises of Gods
extraordinary favor, for directing both in their proceedings, were equal to
both always conditional in both cases.

10 As for this Law, Deuteronomy. 17. the very nature of the Text and circumstances
annexed thereto, That this law of Deuteronomy. does justify our English laws for
executing priests and Jesuits, or all such as acknowledge the Pope supreme
Judge in causes Ecclesiastical.
infer no more then this; That God would have a supreme Tribunal amongst
the Israelites, wherein all con^rouersis which could not be ended in inferior
Courts, were to be finally determined, lest private contentions might grow to
public dissentions, or wranglings for petty damages, turn to the overthrow of
the state by disturbance of common peace. It may be admitted then that
absolute obedience is here enjoined, but not universally absolute, nor in all
causes, but in causes of controversy betwixt man and man, not in causes
betwixt men and their own consciences. And although the ground of
controuersers plea might be from some spiritual law, (as concerning
succession in the Priesthood, etc.) or have some spiritual matters annexed as
consequent, the Judges censure was to extend only unto men's civil carriage,
in such controversies, and the Plaintiffes were to prosecute their right or
title (were it matter of wrong, of inheritance, spiritual or temporal) no
farther then the sentence of his Court did permit. All were bound upon pain of
death to sit down with their private loss, rather then raise tumults or
endanger the public form of government established in Israel. Even when they
knew the Judges sentence in particular to be erroneous, they were to do or
suffer as he commanded, to remit their right, to let go that hold and
interest which they thought they had in matters of temporal consequence
(though perhaps of spiritual title) and undergo what corporal penalty soever
the Priest or Judge (whethersoeuer were supreme magistrates) did inioyn them;
but they were not bound to think as the Priest or Judge thought, nor to hold
their sentence was always agreeable to the law of God. Albeit much easier it
was for the Sanhedrim, then for the modern Romish Consistory, to resolve more
controversies brought unto them by this divine rule. Because the ancient
Israelites did not use to trouble their Priests or Judges with such quirkes and
quiddittes, as coined for the most part by Schoolmen, have bred greatest
contention in the Christian world, such as never could have been decided by
the judgment of Vrim or Thummin, not by Prophets, visions or dreams: He that
had desired any, must have gone to Endor for resolution, Sam. 1. c. 28. v. 7.
In Jerusalem or Shiloh (whiles they flourished) the proposers of such
controversies should have bin punished for their curiosity, which amongst the
Israelites had been as hateful as the sin of Witchcraft. The want of such
a Tribunal as this, for punishing contentions and curious spirits, has
caused such fruitless contentions, and nice questions, as cannot possibly be
resolved, once set abroach or prosecuted, but might easily have been prevented
by the religious care and industry of such a supreme Consistory in every
kingdom.

What has been said concerning the meaning of this place, Deuteronomy. 17. is
confirmed by the practice of the Jews and their ancient Records; First, that
not only conditional, but absolute obedience is here enjoined, is not
probable out of those words, v. 11. Tria genera doctrinarum and sententiarum
veteribus fuerunt. Primum rece^ tum credebatur a Mose ac Prophetis, quod Cauala
nominatur. Secundum, quod opinatione iudicum constitit, vt in Scripturae locis
enarrandis, quae ad Occonomiam pertinebant. Ex quo intelligitur causa, quam ^b
rem sub priore templo and prioribus annis posterioris, tanta concordia
Iudaeorum Ecclesia administrata sit, donec enim magnum iudicium viguit omnia
certo desinita, summo consensu recipiebantur. Exinde in sententia facienda, and
respondendo de lege saepissime coniectu^is connix^ sunt, Et tamen quod sic erat
pronuncia^u^, pro lege recipibaturl Tertiam genus quod s^atuunt vltra lege^,
quo illa defenditur, seu obiecto sepimento, vt prius v^olandum sit hoc, quam in
lege a^ quid soris admittatur. Hoc Christi domini aetate inuerterunt, Nam
propter traditiones reliquerunt legem Dei. (...) interim duo genera, alia
perpetuo esse voluerunt alia tempora^ia. Fag^us in hunc locum.
[according to the Law which they shall teach thee:] not only the written law
of God (as some will have it) but such customs as were received in this Court,
though but probably deduced from the written law, or otherwise invented by their
magistrates in cases omitted by the Lawgiver. All such customs, decrees, or
ordinances were to be obeyed absolutely in such matters as did concern men's
temporal losses or commodities, there was not appeal to any other Court on
earth, for the reuersing of any sentence given in this; to have attempted thus
much, by this law, had been present death; and by the same all Christian
Princes justly might, yea ought to put death all such, as in any cause
spiritual or temporal, upon any occasion whatsoever, shall appeal to Rome
from the chief Tribunal allotted for the hearing of such causes in their
native Country: for by nature and Christian duty, all are bound to abide the
sentence of that Tribunal; though not to approve it, yet not to resist it, or
oppose violence unto it, though it offer violence to them: for God only must
take vengeance of their abusing of that authority, which he had given them for
others good, not for their harm. Would God all Christian Princes would put
this law in practice, and fulfill Gods word in the forementioned place, that al
might die which do thus presumptuously: that so evil, and (the mischief of
mischiefs) all appeals to Rome, might be taken away from Israel; that so all
Christian people hereafter might hear and fear, and do no more
presumptuously.

Secondly, that the high Priest was not the infallible Judge, nor above Kings
in giving definitive sentence, is most evidently confirmed by consent of Jewish
Sed nec rex in Sanhedrim admittebatur, eo quod prehibitum si contendere eum eo.
Sacerdos vero magnus recipieba^^a modo^^pientiae praeditus esset. Fagius in
cap. ^6. Deuteronomy. ex Hebraeis.
antiquity; for the High Priest was not admitted into their chief Consistory
but upon this condition, if he were a wise man, and being admitted, yet was he
not to sway al as he pleased, for so is it said in the same place, that the
king was not to be of the Vide Fagium in cap. 10. Deuteronomy. and the annotations
unto the 9.. of the next Chapter.
Sanhedrim, because they were forbidden to contend with him, with the High
Priest they might. But the Prophets of God did always in their doctrine
withstand either the Priests, Prophets, Kings or Judges, as often as they went
* contra stationes Montis Sinai.

CHAP. III.
That our Saviors iniunction of obedience to the Scribes and Pharisees, though
most universal for the form, is to be limited by the former Rules, that
without open blasphemy it cannot be extended to countenance the Romish cause:
that by it we may limit other places brought by them for the Popes transcendent
universal authority.
1 ANother place there is, which, as it seems has been too much beaten
heretofore, because some of the cunningest Anglers for Peter's tribute, begin
of late to relinquish it. The place is Math. 23. verse 2. 3. The Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses seat. All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do, but after their works do not, for they say, and do not.
Bellarmine in his first attempts, is more forward to fortify this hold then
any other; to what purpose, I cannot divine, unless to terrify such as view
it only a far off; but it seems he felt upon beter experience, the maintenance
of it once closely besieged, would not quit the cost; for elsewhere, he yields
as much expressly, as will enforce him to surrender up this, if it be instantly
demanded. Perhaps he hoped his premunitions might work some secret disposition
in most men's minds more prejudicial to our cause, then we out of our honest
simplicity could at first sight suspect. It will not therefore be amiss, partly
to prevent the possible danger of his concealed conclusion, by showing the
express folly of his premises; partly, to examine the place it self, because
the evidence of it failing, will be a presumption against all they pretend of
like kind, and may afforde some farther light how we may restrain propositions
for their form most universal, by the matter or circumstances concomitant.

2 The fortresses which he erects for defense, are three. His first, that our
Savior in this very Chapter Mat. 23.
wherein he reprehends the Scribes and Pharisees most sharply, yet gives this
cave at to such as are weak in faith, lest they should neglect their doctrine
for their bad lives and hypocrisy The note, Nota 3 PRIMO loto illo capite
(...) colligere, non^ (...) capitis (...) eorum (...) SECVNDO, nota cum (...)
ano lib. 4 Epist. 9 Nunquam Dominum, neque Apasto^s in tota Scriptura
reprehendisse Pontifices et Sacerdotes Iudaeorum, nominando eos Pontifices vel
Sacerdotes, sed solum sub nomine Scribarum et Phariscorum, ne videretur
roprchendere cathedram et Sacerdotium, et vt intell ge^^mus, semper deberi
honarem Sacerdot^o et Pontificatui, etiam si sort persona quae in Cathedra
sede^, sit minus (...). Ex quo intell gimus hareticos hu^us temporis, qui
^eassim in Episcopos et Sac^rdotes and praecipue in ipsum ^ummum Ecclesiae
Pontificem inuehuntur, nihil habere commune cum moribus Domini, and
Apostolorum. TERTIO nota, quod Dominus de Cathedra Mosis dicit, intelligi a
fortiori de Cathedra (...). Bell. de interp. ver. Dei. l. 3. c. 5.
considered in it self, is not amiss, but brought to countenance their bad
cause, or else to prejudice the truth of ours, by raising a suspicion in the
ignorant of our bad dealing, as if we taught the contrary.

3 His second fortress is, that neither our Savior Christ, nor his Apostles
did ever tax the Prelates, or inferior Priests, by these names directly, but
always under the name of Scribes and Pharisees, lest they might thereby seem
to reprehend the Priesthood or seat of authority. And this they did, that men
might know, honor and reverence to be due unto the Prelacy or PriesthOod,
although the Priests or Prelates in their lives and persons were not so
commendable. The consequence is not amiss; albeit his reason be not so firm,
and the corollary, which he hence deduceth, most malicious. Hence (says he)
we are given to understand, that the heretics of this age, which upon every
occasion inueigh against Bishops, Priests, especially the Pope, do but ill
consent in manners with our Savior and his Apostles. But did neither our
Savior Christ, nor his Apostles tax the Priests and Prelates by their proper
names for that reason which Bellarmine brings? Bellarmines idle and malirious
collections out of our Saviors words refuted.
We may suppose I trust without offense, that Gods Prophets did not go beyond
their commission, in taxing the chief offenses or offenders of their times;
that our Savior or his Apostles might upon the like or greater occasions, have
used the same form of reprehension the Prophets did, or other more personal.
The true reason why so they did not, was, because they had no such respect of
persons or titles, as Bellarmine dreams of, but aimed chiefly at the fairest,
for such usually gave greatest countenance to foulest sins. And who knows not,
now in the Synagogues latter days, the glorious titles of Scribes and Pharisees
had, in a sort drowned the names of Priests; as the reputation of Jesuits has
of late years much eclipsed all other titles of inferior ministers,
heretofore more famous in the Romish Church? It was likewise the high esteem
of these two Saint like sects, which seduced most silly souls throghout Iewry,
to follow traditions contrary to Gods laws, as the Jesuits late same has
drawn most of the blind Churches children (which go more by ear then eye
sight) to account villainy piety, and falsehood subtlety. As our Savior and his
Apostles reprehended the Rabbis or Priests in their times, not under the
names of Priests and Levites, but under the glorious names of Scribes and
Pharisees, then reputed the only guides of godliness: so would they, were
they now on earth (as we in imitation of them) tax the Romish Clergy,
especially under the names of Jesuits, or other more famous orders in that
church. But the Sect of Scribes and Pharisees being not known in Malachies
time, nor any other order so glorious then, as the order of Priests, Mala. 2. ^.
he tells them their own in their proper names; And now O ye Priests this
commandment is for you. So did Micah and Zephania, and every Prophet, as their
demerites gave occasion.

4 His third fortress is, that whatsoever Christ says of Moses chair, must
he conceived to make more for Saint Peter's, and such as sat therein. Why our
Saviors admonition should make more for the Popes authority within his own
territories then it did for the Scribes and Pharisees, or High Priests authority
in the land of Iewry; I see no reason that it may concern the people, living
under the Pope, and Clergy of Rome, as much as it did the people of Iewry then
subject to the High Priest, Scribes and Pharisees, I will not deny; for such
Judges as they were, the Popes of Rome in their several generations may be,
nay, would God they were not. Let us see then, what infallibility in giving
definitive sentence, Bellarmine can prove out of the forementioned place. The
words are plain, Whatsoever they bid you do, that do. What, all without any
exception? nay, you do the Papists wrong, if you collect so; Whatsoever they
speak ex Cathedra. Then the proposition, though most universal for the form
is restrained by our adversaries themselves, unto such doctrines only, as they
taught ex Cathedra. And justly, seeing this restraint has more apparent ground
in the Text then any other. Therefore it is said, they sit in Moses seat, they
are infallible, not always, because they sometimes sit; but whiles they sit in
Moses seat, or give sentence out of it; what is it then to give sentence out of
Moses seat? to pronounce sentence solemnly, and upon deliberation? If unto all
their doctrines or definitive sentences so prononnced, men had been bound in
conscience to yield obedience: the Pope (as shall be showed anon) had never
sat in Peter's chair; yea, Peter himself had been in conscience bound to be
an Apostata from Christ. Maldonates restraint of the former iniunction.
But what is the meaning of these words? They sit in Moses seat, all therefore
whatsoever they bid you, that observe, and do? That is, all that Moses first
said, and they recite, This is a strange interpretation indeed, will the
ignorant or illiterate Papist reply, yet (to omit many others of their own,) a
late Cum iubet seruare, ac facere quae Scribae and Pharisaei, dum in Cathedra
Moysis s^deat, licunt non de ips^rum, sed de legis, ac Moysis doctrina
loquitur, periade enim est, ac si dicat, omnia, quae lex and Moses vobis
dixerint, Scribis and Pharisaeis recitantibus seruate ac facite, secundum autem
opera eorum nolite facere, vt Hila. Hieron. videntur intellexisse. Cur ergo,
dicet aliquis non dixit, quaecunque Moses dicet, ^eruate ac (...), sed
quaecunque Scribae and Pharisaei dixerint? Duplex reddi causa potestcaltera:
quod voluerit Scribaru^ et Pharisaeoru^ hypocrism arguere: non autem artguisset
nisi dixisset eos aliter docere. Altera quod toto capite accrbe eos esset
reprehensurus, and conueniebat aliquantulum eos prius laudare, ne omnia ex
affect^, and sine iudicio improbare videretur. Maldonatus in c. 23. v. 3. Math.
S. Austins answer, [Non sequitur de Pharisaeis, nisi in Cathedra Moysis
sedentibus, tunc autem Cathedra ipsa coegit eos vera dicere.] He thus reiects
[Quis dubita^ illa ipsa falsa, quae docebant, in Cathedra ipsa, si in Cathedra
sedebant, aut in Syaagoga and Schola. 2. Moysis docuisse? Seeing the Jesuit
thus reiects the disjunction of speaking ex Cathedra, or as private men, what
reason have we to acknowledge the Popes public or infallible spirit, whilst he
speaks ex Cathedra, when by their own confession he may be worse then an
Heretic of Infidel if we take him as a private man.
Jesuits whole skill in expounding Scriptures (save only where doting love
unto their Church, has made him blind) none of theirs, few of our Church have
surpassed, [ Cum iubet seruare, ac facere quae Scribae and Pharisaei, dum in
Cathedra Moysis s^deat, licunt non de ips^rum, sed de legis, ac Moysis doctrina
loquitur, periade enim est, ac si dicat, omnia, quae lex and Moses vobis
dixerint, Scribis and Pharisaeis recitantibus seruate ac facite, secundum autem
opera eorum nolite facere, vt Hila. Hieron. videntur intellexisse. Cur ergo,
dicet aliquis non dixit, quaecunque Moses dicet, ^eruate ac (...), sed
quaecunque Scribae and Pharisaei dixerint? Duplex reddi causa potest:altera,
quod voluerit Scribaru^ et Pharisaeoru^ hypocrism artguere: non autem ar
guisset nisi dixisset eos aliter docere. Alters quod toto capite acerbe eos
esset reprehensurus, and conueniebat aliquantulum eos prius laudare, ne omnia
ex affect^, and sine iudicio improbare videretur. Maldonatus in c. 23. v. 3.
Math. S. Austins answer, [Non sequitur de Pharisaeis, nisi in Cathedra Moysis
sedentibus, tunc autem Cathedra ipsa coegit eos vera dicere.] He thus reiects
[Quis dubita^ illa ipsa falsa, quae docebant, in Cathedra ipsa, si in Cathedra
sedebant, aut in Syaagoga and Schola. 2. Moysis docuisse? Seeing the Jesuit
thus reiects the disjunction of speaking ex Cathedra, or as private men, what
reason have we to acknowledge the Popes public or infallible spirit, whilst he
speaks ex Cathedra, when by their own confession he may be worse then an
Heretic of Infidel if we take him as a private man.
When he commands to observe, and do all that the Scribes and Pharisees say,
whilst they sit in Moses seat, he speaks not of theirs, but of Moses his
doctrine. the meaning is, as if he had said, whatsoever the law or Moses
(recited by the Scribes and Pharisees) shall say unto you, that observe and do,
but do not ye according to their works.] This he takes to be Saint Hilaries,
and Saint Hieroms exposition of the place. If any man yet further demand, why
our Savior did not speak more plainly, [Whatsoeuer Moses says, observe and
doe] rather then [Whatsoeuer the Scribes and Pharisees say, observe and do:]
Maldonat in the same place gives two reasons: The first, because our Savior
did now purpose to tax the Scribes and Pharisees hypocrisy which he had not
taxed, unless he had showed, that they taught otherwise then they lived. The
second, that in this Chapter he intended to reprehend the Scribes and Pharisees
sharply, and therefore it was expedient, he should first commend them for
some things, lest all his reproves might seem to proceed from passion, or
want of judgment. Thus far Maldonat, unto whose answer we may adioyne,
that our Savior Christ (as Maldonat also well has noted) did speak these
words unto such as had seen his miracles, and heard his doctrine, and yet
could not be his daily auditors with his other Disciples: but were to repair
to the Scribes and Pharisees, as unto their ordinary teachers, and instructers
in the Law. Here, if we consider the humor of rude and ignorant people for
such may we suppose most of his auditors were as yet) it was very likely they
would either be slow to hear, or ready to distaste any doctrine that should
proceed from the Scribes and Pharisees mouths, whom they had heard so much
discommended by that blessed mouth, which spoke as never man's did. For it is a
work of great judgment* nay of the spirit ouerruling the flesh, to make men
relish their doctrine, whose lives and conuersations they loath. And such as
are but scholars (though never so mean) to an excellent master, will usually
be puffed up* with a conceit of themselves, from other men's conceit and
commendations of him, and in this humor scorn to learn of any more meanly
qualified, or of less estimation in the same profession. Again, there is a
jealousy in most illiterate minds, that their Preacher, if he follow not such
lessons in his life, as he gives them, does not teach them as they should be
taught, nor instruct them sincerely as he thinks, but rather in policy
inioynes them strictness of life, that he himself may follow his pleasures
without partners.

5 Hence usually are many wholesome spiritual medicines disproued, The
original of iealousies in the slocke, or needless exceptions against the
wholesome admonitions of Pastors.
ere proved or tasted, because the parties unto whom they are tendered, have no
conceit or relish of any good, but what is pleasant to sense, or profitable
for secular purposes; such as none that truly think, or call good, but will
so entertain it in action and resolution, never willingly preferring the less
before the greater, both being of the same kind. If a man should make choice of
that bargain, which he would persuade as less commodious unto others; none
would believe he spoke sincerely as he thought, but rather cunningly to
prevent others, or to effect his own gain without a sharer. But whilst
secular good stands in competition with spiritual, albeit we approve the one
as truly good, and condemn the other as evil; yet even the best of us is
often enforced to take up that complaint; To will is present with me, Romans 7.
18. 19.
but I find no means to perform that which is good for I do not the good
things which I would, but the evil which I would not, that do I. Rude and
illiterate minds, ignorant of this difference between sensitive and
spiritual good, as altogether unacquainted with the one, out of their own
custom always to act what they intend, suspect their Pastors, whilst they
commend wholesome food unto them, do not think because they do not as they
say. From this sourse issue these or the like mutterings amongst themselves,
Tush, if our Parson were of the same mind out of the Pulpit, as he makes show
for in it; why should be not frame his life accordingly? Does he love us (trow
we) better then himself? nay, I warrant him, he is old enough to know what is
good for himself: and if he knew that which he bids us do, to be as good for
him, as he would make us believe it is for us; what a Gods name, hinders him
from doing it? he has little else to do besides, much less I am sure then
any of us.

6 To meet perhaps with all these, but especially with this last temptation,
our Savior gives his auditors this preservative; The Scribes and Pharisees sit
in Moses chair, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe
and do, but after their works do not] As if he had said, Though their lives
be hypocritical and bad, yet be not too jealous of their doctrine: They
deliver that ordinarily unto you, which Moses did teach your forefathers. The
doctrine is exceeding good, howsoever these cursed hypocrites do not follow it:
But this is Gods judgment upon them, that they should see the truth with their
eyes, and not understand it by laying it to their hearts.

7 This I ta^e it, The true restraint of the former iniunction.
is the drift of our Saviors speech, whence the universal no^e [whatsoeuer]
must be restrained to such material doctrines, as the Scribes and Pharisees
themselves, either expressly delivered out of Moses, or whiles they interpreted
him, commended to others as good in the general, howsoever they shrunk back
or shufled, when they came to the practice of such particulars as crossed their
humors; or unto these precepts of good life, whose truth and equity their
auditors might easily have acknowledged, either from their conseruancie with
the principles of nature, or other undoubted mandates of Moses law, or from the
authority of bad, yet lawful teachers, whose advise is always to be followed
as good, unless there be just suspicion of evil, or sinister respects, of
which their bad lives are then only just presumptions, when they handle
particulars that concern themselves, as making for their gain, credit,
glory, Apologies in bad courses, or auertment of deserved disgrace.

8 If we take this whole universal affirmative, [Whatsoeuer they bid you, that
observe and do] in that sense our Savior meant it: it is but equivalent to
this, or the like universal negative, [Leaue nothing undone that either Moses,
or such as sit in his seat commandes as good] or your conscience cannot justly
witness to be evil, albeit they which commend it to you for good, are evil,
and cannot teach themselves to do it. Few Preachers in any well ordered
Church, are so unlearned, or bad of life, but what they solemnly one time or
other deliver out of Moses and the Prophets, might be a sufficient rule for
their hearers internal thoughts, and outward actions: did not the flock
preposterously make their Pastors doings, the rule of their thoughts and
sayings; always suspecting that, as not good, which they see left undone, and
accounting all lawful for themselves to do, which they see done and practiced
by their leaders. When as not the Pastors lives or doings; but their sayings
are to be made rules of other men's lives and actions. And our Savior enioynes
the former obedience unto the very Pharisees; who spoke as well, and did as ill
as any could do; very patterns of hypocrisy. In expounding Moses, hey could
not but often inculcate the orthodoxal doctrine of good works, of alms
deeds, and liberality; yet retained they the roots of avarice in their
hearts, whose bitterness would bewray it self upon particular occasions, Luc.
16. v. 14.
All these things heard the Pharisees, says Saint Luke, which were covetous,
and they mocked him. They often exhorted others to circumcise the heart, to be
humble and meek as Moses was, yet remained proud themselves, ambitious of
highest places in the Synagogues, Luc. 11, v. 39.
inwardly fully of raven and wickedness. They often taught others as Moses had
done, to walk uprightly as in the sight of the Lord their God; and yet did all
their works to be seen of men. They had often taught their auditors to honor
father and mother, and learnedly discoursed upon the equity of this precept in
general: yet could upon private respects dispense with it in sundry
particulars. They said well in the former, and did ill in the latter. And
albeit they justified their practice by tradition of the elders (as the
Pontificians do theirs, when they absolute subjects from the bond of duet, to
their civil; or children; to their natural parents, that they may be more
serviceable to the Church their mother,) yet their sayings in these Apologies
were but accessory to their doings; not comprehended under* that universal
affirmative [All whatsoever they bid you, observe, and do,] but under the
negative [After their works do not] for they were more desirous to be honored
as Rabbis and Fathers of the congregation, then to honor the parents of their
flesh: albeit they usually taught others so to do, save only when their
treasury might be enriched, or their own honor enlarged by dispensations,
which the people easily might have discerned for contrary, as well to the Law
of God and nature, as these dispensators own doctrine, when themselves were
not parties.

9 The authority of the Keys not universal, but to be limited as the former
precept or iniunction has been.
From the restraint of this universal precept, we may easily limit that
speech of our Savior unto Saint Peter, which Bellarmine labors to make more
then most universal, because the surest ground in their supposals of the Popes
transcendent authority, [ Math. 16. v. 19
I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou shall
loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.] By these keys says Per istas
claues non solum intelligitur potestas soluendi a peccatis, sed etia^ ab
omnibus alijs vinculis and impedimentis, quae nisi tollantur, non potest
intrare in regnum caelorum, siquidem promissio generalis est, nec dicitur,
Quemcunque solueris, sed quod cunque solueris, vt intellig mus modos omnes, seu
legum dispe^sando, seu peccatorum et paenaru^ relaxando, seu dogmatum, et
controuersiarum explicando a Petro eiusque, successoribus solui posse Bellar.
de verbi Dei interpret. lib. 11. cap. 37.
Bellarmine, is understood a power of loosing, not only sins, but all other
bonds or impediments, without whose remouall there is no possibility of
entrance into the Kingdom of heaven: for the promise is general; nor is it
said, Whomsoever, but whatsoever thou loosest, etc. giving us hereby to
understand, that Peter and his successors may loose all knots or difficulties,
of what kindsoeuer, if of laws, by dispensing with them, if of sins, by
remitting them, if of controversies, or opinions, by unfolding them. Thus far
would this cunning Sophister improve the universal [Whatsoeuer] above it
ordinary and ancient value in Scripture phrase: further then the condition of
the party, to whom the promise was made (being Christ's servants, not his
equal) will suffer. For what greater prerogative could Christ himself
challenge, then such as Bellarmine (for the present Popes sake) would make
Saint Peter's? The universal note in this place, as the like before, includes
only an abundant assurance of the power bequeathed; a full and irreuocable
ratification of the Keys right use, such a shutting as none can open, such an
opening as none can shut; as often as sentence is either way given upon
sufficient and just occasions. The proper subject that limits the universal
form of this more then princely prerogative, is the denial or confession of
Christ, either in open speech, in perpetual actions or resolution; as shall
be (by Gods assistance) made evident against Romish assertions) without
derogation from the royalty of Priesthood, which within these territories is
much more dreadful and sovereign, then worldlings will acknowledge, until
they be made feel the full stroke of the spiritual sword, in these our
days, for the most part borne in vain.

10 Whatsoever reasons else they can from any other places of Scripture pretend
for absolute infallibility in the High Priests, or Church representative under
the Law, fall of their own accord, these fundamental ones being overthrown.
But before I proceed to euince the Jewish supreme tribunal most grossly
erreneous de sacto: I must request the ingenious Readers, as many as understand
Latin, and can have access unto these great Doctors writings, to be
eyewitnesses with us, or if it please them, public Notaries of their
retchlesse impieties. Of which unless authentic notice be now taken, and
propagated to posterity by evident testimonies beyond exception: his impudent
generation in future ages, when these abominations grow old, and more stirred
in begin so to stink, that for the Churches temporal health, the books of
modern Jesuits must be purged, will surely deny that ever any of their grand
Divines were so mad with incestuous love of their whorish mother, as to seek
her maintenance by such shameless, That no argument (...) from the former
pla^e to prove the Churches infallibility, but (...) as (...) of our Savior.
gross, notorious, palpable written blasphemies, as ungracious Iudes would
rather have choked with an halter in their birth, then have granted them
entrance into the world through his throat. He in comparison of these
Antichristian Traitors, ingenuously confessed his soul offense in betraying
innocent blood. But even the flower of Romish Doctors Bishops, and Cardinals,
are not ashamed to justify him, in betraying; and the Scribes and Pharisees, in
solemnly condemning our Savior; For, if the one sort did not err in
judgment, the other did not amiss in executing what they enjoined: Tria
genera (...) hoc loco lex d^cu^tur, Puta ordin^ a^ones, edicta, vel traditiones
and consuetudines legitimae, quibus in multitudine publica honestas continetur.
Hinc est quod Prophetae constantissime refragati sunt, quoties contra stationes
montis Sinai, vt vocant, aut reges, aut Iudices, aut populus aliquid admiserat.
[Of which see the Annotations to the last. save one of the former Chapter.]
yet by that very consistory of Priests, and Elders, brought in by Bellarmine,
as chief supporters of the Churches infallibility, was the life of the world
censured to death for an heretic, or refractarious Scismatique; and the In
Talmud scribitur dominum nostrum illis damnatum. Caeterum accusationem falso
(...) nunquam voluit Pontifi^u^ and Pharisa orum tanquam iudicum authoritate^
esse conuuls^m, sed stab^^tam potiu^. Matthew. 23. Fagius in Deu. 17.
^al^udists, taking that Consistories authority but for such as the Jesuits
supposed, conclude directly from principles common to the Synagogue and the
Roman Church, that he deserved no less, because he would not subscribe unto
their sentence, nor recant his opinions.

11 Again; if we understand that other place [The Scribes and Pharisees sit in
Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you, that observe and do,]
universally as most Papists do, and Heart out of his transmarinall Catechism,
would gladly have maintained it: any Jew might thus assume; unto the Scribes
and Pharisees solemnly bid Judas and others to observe our Savior as a seducer,
or traitor, and charged the people to seek his blood: therefore they were in
consciences, and upon pain of damnation, bound so to do. Do I amplify one
word, or wrong them a jot in these collections? I appeal unto their own
Writers. Let Melchior Canus, inferior to none in that Church for learning, and
for a Papist a man of singular ingenuity be judge betwixt us. If from his
words, as much as I have said, do not most directly follow: let let me die
the death for this supposed slander. Against the absolute infallibility of
Councels, or Synods, maintained by him in his fifth book: our Writers, as he
frames their argument, thus objects. The Priests and Pharisees called Councels,
whose solemn sentences were impious, because they condemned the son of God
for such: in like sort may the Romish Prelacie give sentence contrary unto
Christ. Unto this objection, says Ad id quoque quod dem^eps sequitur, non est
difficile respondere. Nam sacerdotum veterum acta quidem Christo aduersa
fueruent al sententu. hominum ali^qui possimorum non solum verissinia, sed
reipub. etiam vtilissima suit. Quin diuinum o^aculum fuisse Joan. Euangel.
testatur. Cum enim post longam variamque, concilij deliberationem Caipha^, qui
vt summ^^ Pontifex Concino praesidebat* sententiam illam, cui omnes fere
consenserunt, dixisset: Expedit nobis, vt vnus m^riatur homo pro populo, and
non tota gens pereat: mox Euangelista subiecit. Hoc autem a semetipso non dixit
sed cum esset Pontifex animi illius prophetauit. Qua ex re sit, vt ex nostrorum
Pontifi^um vita quidem and opera contraria forte siat Domino Jesus, sed eorum
iudicia, quae videlu et a summo Pontifice comprobata s^nt, and vera erant and
Christiani vtilia, quae ad populi salutem suit diuinitus instituta. Imo adeo a
Spiritu sancto erunt ob eam (...), (...) am eb Euangelista ^id cimus, quia
scilicet Ecclesiae Chri^^i Pontifices sunt. At de secundo argumento satis.
Canus, lib. 5. cap. postremo.
Canus, the answer is easy; Let us hear it. The practices of the Priests
were indeed against our Savior: but the sentence of men otherwise most wicked,
was not only most true, but withal most profitable to the commonweal. Yea,
Saint John the Evangelist tells us, it was a divine Oracle: for after a long and
various deliberation used by the Council, Caiaphas now sat as chief, being
the High Priest, pronounced that sentence whereunto almost all ( at the least
the mayor part) agreed; [It is expedient, that one die for the people, and that
the whole nation perish not], upon which speech the Evangelist forthwith a^s;
This he spoke not of himself, but being High Priest for that year, he
prophesied, Whence it follows, says Canus, that our Prelates lives and
actions may perhaps be contrary to our Lord Jesus: but their judicial decrees
or sentences, such as are confirmed by the Pope ( who must be president in
their Councels, as Caiaphas was) shall prove true and profitable unto
Christians, as instituted by God for the peoples good, yea ^hey shall proceed
from the holy Ghost, for the reason which we have learned of the Evangelist,
to wit, because such as give them, are Prelates of Christ's Church. And this is
all I have to say unto the second argument.

12 It is easy indeed for them thus to answer: to whom it is most easy and
most usual to blaspheme, That the Popes, as well as Caiaphas prophecies, may in
the event prove true and profitable to Christ's Church, we do not doubt:
because unto such as love God, or are beloved of him, all things, even Satan's
malice that had suborned Caiaphas and his brethren against Christ and his
members, turn to the best. But he that had taken this High Priest, whilst
he uttered this sentence, for an infallible Prophet of the Lord, had been
bound in conscience to have done so to our Savior at his, as the people did to
Baals Priests, at Elias instigation. If our adversaries will permit us to
interpret the Trent Councels decrees, as the faithful of those times did
Caiaphas prophecy: we will subscribe unto them without delay. It is
expedient, we grant, and profitable withal unto the Church, that there should
be such decrees, whereby the faith of others might be tried. But as it was
not lawful for the people, to imbrue their hands in Christ's blood, though the
greatest benefit that ever befell the world, was by his death: so neither is
it safe to admit the Trent Canons, though a wonderful blessing of God they
should be set forth, because they so clearly testify the truth of his word
concerning Antichrist. Canus said more in this then was needful, according to
his supposed principles in his answer to the next argument. But God who ruled
the mouth of Caiaphas, and made him speak the truth, when he intended
nothing less, did also direct Canus pen to vent, what upon better
consideration he would have concealed. Yet herein he wrote, but out of the
abundance of his own, and most of his fellows hearts, who hold that the
Priests and Pharisees did err only in a matter of fact, not in any point of
faith, when they condemned Christ. Of which in the next Chapter. For conclusion
of this, consider with me, Christian Reader, how great cause we have to thank
our gracious God, that the sect of Jesuits, or rabble of Predicants, were not
founded in our Saviors days; for then doubtless the Devil had picked a
traitor out of that crew, whose impudent, sophistical Apologies for open
blasphemy, and unrelenting perseverance in traitorous plots, might have
outfaced the world, that the delivering of Christ into his enemies hands had
been no such sin, as Judas testified it was, both by his penitent speech,
and desperate end.

CHAP. IIII.
What it would disadvantage the Romish Church to deny the infallibility of the
Synagogue.
1. THat any visible company of men before our Savior Christ's time, Such
infallible authority as the Jesuits plead for more necessary in the time of
the Law, then of the Gospel.
did challenge such absolute authority over men's faith, as the Pope does, would
be very hard for them to prove; and no question but the High Priest and Rulers
amongst the Jews, did oftentimes challenge more then they had. If the Romanist
should say, that they had no such infallible authority in deciding all
controversies, as their Church now challenges: the assertion would be as
improbable in it self, as incongruous to their positio^s. For unto any
indifferent man such infallibility in the Watchtower of Sion, must needs seem
more requisite during the time of the law, then since the promulgation of the
Gospel. Be it granted, the points to be expressly believed of the ancient
people, were but few: yet even such of them as were most necessary to
salvation, were more enigmatically and mystically set down, then any in the
new Testament are; and the measure of Gods spirit upon every sort of men, (the
vulgar especially) in those times, much less. For this cause God raised up
Prophets to instruct them, whose authority though it was not such, as the
Roman Church now challenges (but given to supply the ignorance and negligence
of the church representative in those days:) yet much greater then is
ordinarily required in the light of the Gospel, by which as the doctrine of
salvation is become most conspicuous in it self, so is the illumination of
Gods spirit more plentiful then before it had been. And since the Prophets
have been so clearly expounded by the Apostles, and the harmony of the two
Testaments so distinctly heard, the ordinary Revel. 19 10.
testimony of Jesus is become equivalent to the spirit of Prophecy. Allowing
then these infinite ods on our parts, that enjoy the labors of formers ages,
with the ordinary preaching of the Gospel, an infallible oecumenicall
authority is much less needful now, then it was in the law.

2 Or if our adversaries will be so wayward, Unless the Jewish Church were
infalliable our adversaries principal arguments, to prove the Romish churches
infallibility are apparently false.
as to deny the like infallibility to have been requisite in the ancient
Jewish Church: they shall hereby thwart evidently themselves, disanull their
chief title, and utterly disclaim the maine plea hitherto used for their own
infallibility. For most of them do urge Gods promises made unto that Church,
to prove a necessity of admitting a like authority in theirs. And if these
promises made to the Jews, admit any distinction, condition, or limitation,
whereby this most absolute infallibility (as they suppose it) may be empaired:
then may all the promises made or supposed to be made unto their Church; admit
the same, or like. But besides the weakening of their title, by debarring
themselves of this plea (drawn from the example of the ancient Jewish Church)
no man that reads their writings can be ignorant, that all their chief and
principal arguments (wherewith they carry away most simple souls, and
importune such, as almost neither fear God nor man, to give sentence for them
and their Church against us) are drawn from these, or the like tropicks
[vnlesse God had ordained one supreme Judge, or infallible authority, that
might decide all controversies in matters of faith viua voce, he had not
sufficienly proved for his Church, yea, which were most absurd, he had left it
in worse estate, then civil Estates are for ordinary matters; for they,
besides their written laws, have Judges to determine all cases or
controversies arising. And seeing that Monarchical government is of all others
the best; and in any wise man's judgment most available for avoiding all
dissension, and keeping the unity of faith; there should be no question, but
God has ordained such an authentical manner of deciding all controversies. If
he have not, it must needs be, either because he could not establish such
an infallible authority, and uncontrollable power; or else, because he would
not. To say he could not, were to deny his omnipotency, open blasphemy: to say
he would not, were little better; for this were to deny his goodness and love
to his Church, both which the Scriptures testify to be great, nay infinite.

3 But how great soever his love to his Church, and chosen be (as we
acknowledge it to be infinite and everlasting) if these or the like arguments
make any things for the infallibility of the present Romish; they prove as
much, and as directly, for the ancient Jewish Church. For that was a visible
company of men, not of oxen and Asses, and of them God had a care also. Nay
they were his own peculiar people, and (without al controversy) Yet I know
not what Bellarmine should mean, when he makes it a particular Church, his
folly confutes it self, and it shall be sufficient to propose it Bellar. de
Ecc. milit. l. 3. c. 16. Ad tertium, de tempore Eliae, negat? consequentia and
antecedens huius argumenti. Consequentia quidem, quia non est eadem ratio
populi Iudaeorum, and populi Christianorum: nam populus Iudaeorum non erat
Ecclesia vniuersalis vt est ^opulus Christianorum, sed particularis, and
propterea etiam extra illum populum inueniebant fideles and iusti, vt
Melchisedech, Job, and postea Counclius Centurio, and Ennuchus Candacis Regine,
and alij nonnull. Itaque etiam si ^niuersa Synogoga Iudae^rum defecisset, non
continuo omnis Ecclesia Dei in terris defec. (...) Sed antecedens etiam negat?
Non enim estendi potest, vnquam Synagog^m Iudaeorum defecesse omnino vsque ad
Christi aduentum, quo tempore eti^m non tam defecit, quam mutata (...) His
comparison holds right thus. None were saved then but Israelites, none now but
Christian in heart* diverse were saved then, though not Israelites by outward
profession, or solemn association to the people of God: so are m^^y now, that
are not professed members of the true visible Church, whether that be theirs or
ours. They drink many amongst us ignorant of theirs, and we in charity hope
many amongst them ignorant of our Churches tenants, yet ready to embrace them
when it shall please God to reveal them: are elected to salvation. But it was
a pretty Sophisme in so great a Clerk to compare not Israelites in heart, or
in the sight of God, but the visible Church of Israel with Christians in heart,
not with any visible Christian Church.
the only visible Church, which he had on earth. Wherefore all the former
arguments, if they conclude any infallible authority in the present Romish
Church; they conclude much more for the like infallibility of the Jewish. And
by necessary consequence, if I prove that the Church had no such authority, my
assertion stands sure; That this infallible authority which the factors of the
Romish Church do challenge, is greater then any visible Company of men had
before our Savior time. And by the same proof, shall the Romish Church be
debarred for ever, of both the two former pleas; either drawn from the
authority of the Priests, or from the best form of government.

CHAP. V.
That justly it may be presumed the Jewish Church, never had any absolute
infallibility in proposing or determining Articles of faith, because in our
Saviors time it did so grievously err in the fundamental point of salvation.
1 FOr proof of the Conclusion proposed [that Jerusalem had no such absolute
infallibility, as Rome pleades for,] I took it for a long time as granted by
all, that if any such authority had been established in the law, it should not
have varied until the alteration of the priesthood. For Gods covenant with
Leui was in this sense everlasting, that it was to endure without interruption,
until his sacrifice was accomplished, that was a Priest after a more excellent
order. His oblation of himself, was the common bond to the law and Gospel:
the end of the one, and the beginning of the other. Nor did the legal rites or
ceremonies themselves (though these most obnoxious to corruption) vanish by
little and little, as this sacrifice did approach nearer and nearer, as
darkness does before the rising of the sun: rather that consummation
wrought upon the Cross, did swallow them up at once, as virility does youth,
youth childhood, childhood infancy. Seeing then our adversaries suppose this
infallibility was annexed as a prerogative royal unto the Priesthood: they
cannot imagine any tolerable reason, why the one should expire before the
other was quite abolished. Hence it is that most of them hold the Scribes and
Pharisees in our Saviors time, were absolutely infallible in their Cathedral
consultations. And I had just reasons to presume Bellarmine had been of the
same mind. For besides his urging that place (without all sense or reason,
unless grounded on this opinion,) They sit in Moses chair; All therefore
whatsoever they bid you, that observe and do,] these other words of his, seemed
to imply thus much, [ Non ostend^ potest, nunquam Synagogam Iudaeorum def^cisse
omnino vsque ad Christi adue^tum, quo tempore etiam non tam defecit, quam
mutata est in meluis, Bellar. de Ecclesia militante Lib. 3. cap. 16.
It cannot be showed that the Sinagogue of the Jews did fail [in saith]
until Christ's coming, at what time it did not fail, but rather become better
by change] By his speeches elsewhere I perceived, by the Synagogue thus
changed, he meant the Church planted by Christ: not the Consistory of the
Highpriests and Elders, not the Catholic representative Jewish Church. Sunt
qui dicunt, Concilium illud ( in quo Christus condematus est) errasse, q: non
processit s^cundu morem legitimi iudicis, sed tumultuaria conspiratione,
subornatis falsis testibus, Christum darmauit id quod adeo notu^ erat omnibus,
vt etiam Pilatus s^iret per inuidiam eum fuisse traditum sibi a Pontificibus,
vt habemus Math. 27 atque haec quidem responsio probabilis est. Quia tamen non
est inferiorum iudicare, an superiores legitime procedant ne^ne, nisi
manifestissime constet intollerabilem errorem committi, and redibile est Deum
non permissurum, and Concilia quibus summus Pontifex praesidet. n. legitime
procedant. Ideo respondemus, Pontifices and Concilia Iudaeorum non potuisse
errare antequem Christus veniret, sed eo praesente potuisse, imo suisse
praedictum erraturos Iudaeos and Christum negaturos. Isaiae 6. Danielis 9. and
alibi. Sunt enim, non est necessarium, vt V^carius Papae non possit errare, cum
ipse Papa regat Ecclesiam, and ab errore defendat. Sic etiam non suit
necissarium, vt Pontifices Iudaeorum non possent errare, quando Christus,
summus totius Ecclesiae Pontifex praesens aderat, and Ecclesiam per se
adm^nistrabat. Bellarm. lib. 2. de. Conciliorum. auct. cap. 8.
For, says he, as it is not necessary the Popes Vicar should be inerrable,
when the Pope himself does guide the Church, and defend it from error: so
neither was it necessary, that the Jewish high Priest should not err, when
Christ the High Priest of the whole Church was present, and did govern his
Church in person.

2 This example, were it true, might illustrate (though ill-fauoredly) his
assertion once supposed, as possible; but no way argues it to be probable.
Herein his similitude fails, that the High Priests in our Saviors time, were
Aarons lawful successors, their Priesthood as entire then as ever it was; and
they Deputies to none in this rank or order. That their Predecessors had such
infallibility, he feign would prove. Can he or any for him, show us when, or
by what means it should determine, whiles the Priesthood lasted? To take away
the Popes infallibility, even in this last age of the world, were, in their
construction to deny Christ's promise made unto Saint Peter's chair. And was not
the former like prerogative as inseparably annexed to Moses seat? did our
Savior before his Passover, either by doctrine or practice, derogate ought
from any lawful authority established on earth; much less from that, which
God had expressly instituted? The greatest prerogative, the Scribes and
Pharisees, Priests or Rulers ever had, was, that they were Aarons successors,
and possessed Moses place: and this authority was never disanulled, but rather
ratified by our Savior, after he had undertaken his ministerial function;
They sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you, that observe and
do. And elsewhere, Go, and show thy self unto the Priest, etc.

3* Yet this Sophister would persuade us, that Isaiah and Daniel had foretold
the expiration of this prerogative in latter times. They both indeed foretell
this peoples extraordinary general blindness; about the time of our Saviors
conversation on earth, But this directly proves, what we object; not what
Bellarmine should have answered, at least to us, who contend the Priests and
Rulers of this people, were not infallible in our Saviors time; nor does
Isaiah, or Daniel, or any Prophet of God say, they were at any time such. Let
any Jesuit prove (what easily he may) out of Bellarmines reason to prove the
Jewish Church (...) in faith in our Saviors time prous it to have been
erroneous in the time of Isaiah.
Isaiahs words, cited by Bellarmine, that the Jewish church representative was
not infallible in our Saviors time; and from the same we shall as clearly
euince it, palpably erroneous in Isaiahs own days, or immediately after. For
the self same words which the Evangelist says, were fulfilled in the
unbelieving Jews that heard our Saviors doctrine, were literally and exactly
veri^ied of their forefathers before the captivity of Babylon, as the Cardinal
himself (would he take the pains to read the whole Chapter, and revive the
place cited by him,) I know would not deny: His words are these; For Dan^^l
has nothing which can be wrested to this purpose, for which reason this
Imposter cites only his 9. Chapter at large.
And he said, go, and say unto this people: Isai. 6. v. 9. 10. 11. 12.
Ye shall hear indeed, but ye shall not understand, ye shall plainly see
and not perceive. Make the heart of this people sat, make their ears heavy,
and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,
and understand with their hearts, and convert and he heal them. Then said I
Lord, how long? And he answered, until the Cities be wasted without
inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be utterly desolate, and
the Lord have removed men far away, and there be a great desolation in the
midst of land. The truth of our assertion is so pregnant, that Dicitur autem
prophetia, quantum equidem obseruare potui, quatuor modis impleri. Primum quum
id ipsum sit, de quo proprie and literate vt dicitur, sensu intelligebatur,
sicut cap. 1. vicessimo secundo. Matthaeus dixit impletam in Maria Isaiae
prophetiam fuisse. Ecce virgo concipiet, and pariet filium. Secundo, cum sit
non id de quo proprie intell^gebatur prophetia, sed id quod p^r^ll^d
significabatur, vt 2. Regum 7. 14. Ego ero illi in pat^em, and ille erit nihi
in silium, qu^d proprie de Sal^mone dictum esse perspecuum est. Diuus tamen
Paulus de Christo cuius Solomon sigura ^rat (...). Heb. 1. 6. quasi in eo
impletum esset, and quod Exodus 12 46. dictum est, Os non comminuetis ex eo,
certum est intelligi de agno, tamen Joan. cap. 19. 36. in Christo, qui per
agnum significabatur, impletum dicit. Tertio, cum nec id sit de quo proprie
intelligitur prophetia, nec id quod per illud significatur, sed quod illi
simile erat, and om^no ciusmodi, vt prophetia non minus apt de eo, quam de quo
dicta est, dici patuisse videatur. Nam populus hic labijs me honorat* de
Iudaeis qui tempore Isai erant, Deus dixerat Isai. 29. 13. Christus autem in
ijs, qui suo erant tempore, impletum significat, Matthew. 15. 7. 8. Simile est
exemplum Matthae 13. 14. and Act. 28. 26. Quarto, cum id ipsum, quod per
Prophetiam, aut Scripturam dictum erat, quamuis iam factum suerit. tamenmagis,
ac magis fit. Tunc enim Scriptura impleri dicitur, id est, quod per eam dictum
erat, cumulatissime fieri. Maldonat. Comment. in Math. v. c. 2. The place cited
Matthew. 13. and 14. Act. 28. and 26. is that very place out of the 6. of Esai,
which Bellarmine urges to prove the Jews Church should fail in our Saviors
time.
Maldonat the most judicious expositor amongst the Jesuits, takes it as
granted, the words late cited were literally meant only of that generation,
with whom the Prophet lived, and brings this very Text, as one of the aptest
instances to illustrate the third kind, as he makes it of fulfilling
prophesies, to wit, when that which is truly and literally meant of one, is
fitly applied unto another matter or sort of people, for the similitude of
their nature or disposition. Although (to speak the truth) he might have
referred it more justly, at least, more artificially, to the fourth kind there
mentioned by him. For, as shall appear hereafter, this prophecy was alike
literally, properly, and directly meant of both, but verified of the former
times more immediately, as first in order, because that part of it object had
precedence in actual existence; of the latter more completly as principally
intended by the holy Ghost.

4 The blindness there spoken of, was even then begun, but did increase
from that age until the captivity, and continued until Christ's coming, in
whose days it was augmented, and the prophecy fully accomplished as the
desolation which followed their blindness in putting him to death, was greater
then that which Nebuchadnezer brought upon the City and land for the
prouocations wherewith Manass^th, Iehoiachim, and other wicked Rulers, as well
Priests, as Laics, had provoked: he Lord by cruel persecution of his
messengers sent unto them. This was a disease in their Prelates and Elders,
lineally descending to the Scribes and Pharisees, who took Math. 23. 52. Ye
^i^^enceked and uncircumcised hearts and ears, ye have always resisted the
holy Ghost, as your fathers did, so do you, which of the Prophe^s have not your
fathers persecuted? and they, have slam the^, which showed before of the
coming of that Just, of whom ye are now the betraiers and murderers. Act. 7
51. 52.
themselves for infallible teachers, and free from oppugning such doctrine, as
their forefathers had persecuted unto the death. The sin of these later in
crucifying Christ, was in degree more grievous, because his personal worth was
much greater then the Prophets; but the ignorance was of the same kind in both;
for, as our Savior says, the latter did but See Chap. 9. Parag. 4.
fulfill the measure of their fathers iniquity, in murdering Gods messengers.
And, as afterward shall be declared, such as the Romanists account the
Church representative most infallible, did continually cause, or countenance
these persecutions. The original likewise of this cruelty, continued from
former to later generations, was the very same in both: the one distasted Gods
word, whilst the Prophet spoke them; the other understood them, not, whilst
they were read every sabbath day unto the^, both Act. 13. v. 27.
fulfilled them in conde^ning Gods messengers, and shedding innocent blood,
upon such gross and palpable blindness, as Isaiah describes.

5 It will recreate the attentive Reader to observe, Respo ideo, quidam aiunt,
quaestionem fuisse de facto, non de iure, quam Concilium illud iudicauit,
videlicet number Jesus necandus esset, in e^u^modi autem iudicijs Concilia errare
posse, non dubium est. At quaestio illa etia^si de facto esset, tamen
inuoluebat quaestionem de fide grauissimam, nimirum an Jesus esset verus
Messiah, and Dei silius, atque adeo Deus verus. Quocirca errauit in fide
perniciocissime Caiphas cum vniuerso Concilio, cum iudicauit Iesum
bl^sphem^sse, qui se Dei filium appellauerat. Alij dicunt, Pontificem and
Concilium errasse, quantum ad errorem propriae mentis, non tamen errasse in
sententia, quam protulit. Vere enim I^s^s erat reus mortis. q. pecca^a nostra
in se^pso purganda susceperat, and vere expediebat, eum mori pro populo. Quare
Johan. cap. 11. dicit Caipham prophetasse. At licet verba Caiphae bonum sensum
recipiant, non tamen omnia, cum enim ait de Christo, Blasphemauit, quid adhuc
egemus testibus? Certe tunc non prophetauit, sed blasphemauit. Bellar. de
Conciliorum auct. cap 8. lib. 2.
how the Lord has confounded the languague of these cunning builders whiles
they seek to raise up new Babylon from the foundation of the old Synagogue.
Bellarmine would seem to make a conscience of blaspheming, and therefore has
rather adventured to be reputed ridiculous, in auouching (as you heard before)
without all ground or show of reason, that the infallible authority, formerly
established in the Synagogue did expire upon our Saviors entrance into his
Ministerial function. Many of his fellows knowing how necessary it is for
them to defend the public spirit of the Synagogues, and conscious withal how
frivolous it would be, to say it should vanish by our Saviors presence, who
came rather by doctrine and practice to establish, then overthrow any ordinance
of the law, resolve (though by open blasphemy) to maintain the Scribes and
Pharisees infallibility, until the abolishing of Aarons Priesthood. That they
condemned our Savior, was (in these men's judgments) an error only in matter
of fact, not of faith, or doctrine: and in such case the Pope himself may
err, whiles he speaks ex Cathedra. That the High Priest did not err in
faith, they take it as proved because the John. 11. ver. 50.
Evangelist says, he prophesied, It were good one should die for the people.

6 Such infallibility as this, I never shall envy the Pope: and I desire no
more, then that he would confirm this last cited doctrine ex Cathedra. That
the Pope did err in matters of says,, not only of fact when they condemned
our Savior.
For no question but all such throughout the Christian world, as bear any love
to Christ at all (any besides the Jesuits, who make no conscience of vilifying
their Redeemer for advancing the Popes dignity, by defending his infallibility)
would renounce his decrees, and take him for Antichrist ever after. For this
was no error de facto, upon false information, or privy suggestion. Even the
Highpriests themselves, for the inueterate hate which they had borne unto our
Saviors person and doctrine (such as the Romish Church did unto Hus, and
Jerome of Prage,) hold a Council, how they might put him to death; and so
far were they from being misled with false information, that they suborne
false witnesses against him, and failing in this, seek to ensnare him in his
own confession; and finally condemn him with joint consent, for auouching one
of the maine points of Christian belief, the article of his coming to
judgment. I think might Satan himself speak his mind in this case, he
would condemn Gretzer and his fellows, if not for their villainy, yet for
their intolerable folly, in questioning, whether it were an error in faith, or
no, to pronounce the sentence of death with such solemnity against the Judge of
quick and dead* for professing and teaching the maine points and grounds of
says. This villainy is too open and evident to maintain the policy of the
Prince of darkness. And if neither fear of God, nor shame of the world,
could bridle the Iesui^es mouths, or stop the pens from venting such
doctrine: yet certainly this Prince of darkness (their Lord and Master) for
fear of some greater revolt, will lay his command upon them, and make them in
this discoursing age speak more warily, though they mean still no less
wickedly.

7 Because this is a point worth the pressing let us overthrow, That the High
priest with his associates did err ex Cathedra in the main Article of faith.
not only their answers already given, or arguments hence drawn for their
Churches authority: but in brief prevent all possible euasions. If any Papist
shall here reply, that these High Priests, and their assistants did not speak
ex Cathedra, when they so far missed the cushion: this answer as it might
perhaps drop from some ignorant Jesuits mouth or pen, who is bound by oath to
say something (and therefore must oftentimes say he knows not what) sot the
defense of the Church: so we may well assure our selves, that the Pope
himself dare not for his triple Crown deliver it ex Cathedra; nor will the
learned Papists hold this point, if it be well urged. For, as these
Highpriests error was most gross and grievous: so was it received upon long
and mature deliberation, their manner of proceeding was public and solemn.
They took Jesus, says the Math. 26.
Evangelist, and led him to Caiaphas the High priest, where the Scribes and
Elders were gathered together. And lest a Jesuit should have picked a quarrel
at the time of their assembly, as if they had met at some unlawful hour,
Saint Luke 22. 66
Luke says, as soon^^ as it was day, the Elders of the people, and the
Highpriests, and the Scribes came together, and led him into their Council,
and examined him upon the very fundamental point of says; Saying, (...) thou
the Christ, tell us? For affirming this, which is open infidelity to deny the
High Priest himself, not misled by any witnesses, but from Math. 26. 65.
Christ's own words which he himself had heard, pronounces sentence against
him. And if this were not enough, he proposed the matter to the rest of his
associates; Ver. 66.
What think ye? and they answered and said, He is worthy to die? After all
this, they urged the people to approve of this their sentence, persuading them
to ask Barrabas, and to destroy Jesus. And so strongly had they coniured the
multitude by their pretended authority, that they apprehend this their choice
as a point of faith, or good service to God and his Church. For when Pilate
lays his blood unto their charge: All the people ( Math. 27. 25.
as the Text says) (all such as relied upon the Scribes and Pharisees, or
their high Priests) answered and said, His blood be upon us and our children.
One of your say Papists could not have been more thoroughly persuaded of your
Churches authority, nor more violently bent against John Hus, or any other of
Christ's Martyrs, for the like reasons, then this whole multitude was against
Christ, being condemned by the High Priest* speaking ex Cathedra. Here were
(...) and more solemnities observed in this proceeding (...) require in the
Pope speaking ex Cathedra. Theirs (...) public assembly, and sentence was
given by joint consent in (...) story, and in the morning: you hold it
sufficient for the Pope to give his definitive sentence alone, without evidence
of the fact it self, whereunto he ties men's faith, as shall appear by your
own confessions. Nor do you limit him any time, as well in the afternoon, as
in the forenoone; as well (for ought we can gather) when drink is in, and his
wits out of his head, as when he is sober. For you hold it not necessary for
him to use any long deliberation. But, if it be his will to bind all Christians
to believe him, the whole Church must believe that he was herein directed
chief by the holy Ghost: for the Church is bound to hear their Pastor: And,
if he bind all men to believe him, then must all of necessity believe, that
he was infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost, in showing that which he binds
them to believe: for otherwise the whole Church might err, nay were bound to
err, because it is bound to believe the Pope. These consequents are your own,
not mine, as may in part appear from what has been already, more fully from
what shall be said hereafter. Besides, the whole multitude of the Jewish
people heard the Priests and Elders utter their opinions concerning Christ and
his doctrine viua voce: we have the Popes decrees but by hear say. Either was
this sentence pronounced ex Cathedra, or else it will be hard for you to
prove, that any sentence in your Church has been so pronounced, or can be,
although the Pope himself be present in the Council, and be an eye witness
of all proceedings.

8 Yet if any of you should here shufle (as ye usually do at the last pinch)
and say [Howsoeuer Valentia, or some others of our learned, but private
spirits, may define, what it is to speak ex Cathedra; yet we know not,
whether our Church has so defined it, or no: and therefore although these
Highpriests and Elders did observe all the circumstances, which these doctors
require in a sentence given ex Cathedra; yet, for ought we know, they might,
nay sure they did fail in some circumstance which we know not, and did not
indeed speak ex Cathedra, albeit they seemed so to do: wherefore this does not
conclude against the Popes infallible authority, when he speaks ex Cathedra:]
if any of you shall take this last hold (as I cannot imagine any other left
you) we shall quickly beat you out of it. Though it were sufficiently proved
that the Pope could not teach false doctrine, ex Cathedra, yet were it not safe
to rely upon his authority, Vide lib. 2. Sect. 4. cap. 6. Parag. 3. etc.
For let it be granted for disputations sake, that the Pope has (as ye
suppose these Jews had) an infallible authority, when he speaks ex Cathedra:
yet seeing it is a matter so hard to be known, even by these that hear him,
whether he observe all circumstances required to the exercise and true use of
such infallible authority, and whether her he speak ex Cathedra or no, when
he may seem to sundry so to speak; it would be the only safe course for all
Christian Churches utterly to renounce all obedience to him, but upon
examination of his doctrine, to stand continually upon their guard, lest under
pretense of this his infallible authority, when he speaks ex Cathedra, he may
work some such inestimable mischief unto the Scriptures, or Christ's chosen
here on earth, as these High Priests did unto Christ himself, by his seeming
to speak ex Cathedra, when he does not. If, by abusing this his infallible
authority, he should either make away these Scriptures, or animate the people
to imbrue their hands in the blood of Christ's dearest Saints: it is not his
speaking ex Cathedra, that can redeem their souls from hell, nor restore Gods
word again; for these are matters of an higher price, then that they should
be purchased with two or three words of his Holiness unhallowed mouth.

9 To conclude, if this authority of your Church be but such, as the ancient
Church of the Jews had; you cannot expect any faithful people should
otherwise esteem of your decrees, then the faithful in our Saviors time were
bound to esteem of the Jewish Highpriests and Elders, whom surely they did
not take for Christ's only, nor best friends. If the Popes infallibility be
but such, as these high Priests had: you may be as guilty of the blood of
Christ's Saints, as they were. If you will challenge (as indeed you do) greater
authority then they had: ye must of necessity renounce your principal
arguments brought to prove it.

CHAP. VI.
That Moses had no such absolute authority as is now ascribed unto the Pope:
That the manner of his attaining to such as he had, excludes all besides our
Savior from just challenge of the like.
1 WHether Moses were a Magistrate (as the Papists think) spiritual, or (as
others) merely civil, or (whereunto upon grounds in due places to be
discussed, I most incline) actually neither, and virtually both, it will
suffice, for proof of our conclusion, that the Pope is no servant of God, but
an adversary, in that he exalts him self above Moses, whom none, besides the
High Priest, and sole Mediator of the new covenant, was to equalize in
soueraignety over Gods people. Nor does the excess of glory ascribed unto the
new Testament, in respect of the old, argue greater authority in Christian,
then was in ordinary legal governors, whether temporal or spiritual, much
less does it infer greater authority in any (Christ only excepted) then
Moses had.

2 If we take Christ's Church, as consisting both of Priests and people: it is a
congregation far more royal and glorious, then the Synagogue so taken was.
If we compare our High Priest (or mediator of the new Covenant) with theirs,
the Apostles comparison is fittest: Heb. 3. 12. 3. 5. 6. That the excessive
glory of the new Testament argues no greater soueraignety in spiritual
governors since Christ's time then the priest^ had in the Law.
Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus: who was
faithful to him that has appointed him, even as Moses was in all his house.
For this man is counted worthy of more glory then Moses, in as much as he
which has builded the house, has more honor then the house. Now Moses verily
was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a witness of the things
which should be spoken after: but Christ is as the sonn^ over his own house,
whose house we are. If severally we sort our people, or Ministers with
theirs, as the Apostles successors with Aarons, the pre-eminence both ways is
ours. Notwithstanding, this excess of our Ministers glory, whether ordinary or
extraordinary, compared with the like of theirs, is not so great as the
preeminences of Christ's flock above the people of the Synagogue. Yet must all
excess of in spiritual graces, which the ordinary hearers of the Gospel have
the ordinary hearers of the law, be subducted from that prerogative which we
that are Christ's messengers, have in respect of Aarons successors, ere we can
take a right account of our own authority over our flock committed to us, in
comparison of theirs over the ancient people. Computatis computandis, our
soueraignety will prove less, not greater, as our adversaries confusedly
reckon without their host. Their pretended glosses, that all such places of
Scripture as make for the authority of Moses chair, conclude a fortiori for
Saint Peter's, because the New Testament is more glorious then the old, are, as
if a man should argue thus: The ancient Roman and modern German, are States
far^e more noble then the Turkish or Moscouitish: therefore the Roman Consuls
had more absolute authority over the people, or the present Emperor, over the
Princes and States of Germany, then the Turk has over his Bashawes, or the
Moscouit over his Vassals.

3 The glory of a common weal, or praise of government, consists in the
ingenuitie or civil liberty, not in the slavery, or servile condition of the
governed: or in their voluntary obsequiousness to wholesome laws,
proportioned to common good; not in their absolute subjection to the omnipotent
will of an unruly Tyrant, subject to no law, but the law of sin. Our Saviors
authority over his Disciples was more sovereign, then is befitting any to
usurp or challenge over his fellow servants; his kingdom more glorious after
his resurrection then before: yet a little before his suffering, he says to
his Disciples: Ioh. 15. 14. 15.
Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Henceforth call I you
not servants, for the servant knows not what his Master does, but I have
called you friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father, have I made
known to you. It is the very conceit of the base degenerate, dissolute,
sottish later heathen Roman, more delighted in such gaudy shows as his
luxurious Emperors made happily, once or twice in their whole reign, then in
the valor and virtue of his victorious, freeborn Ancestors, that to this day
swims in the Jesuits brain, and makes him dream the royalty of Christian
Priesthood, or glory of the Gospel, should consist wholly, or chiefly in the
magnificent pomp of one visible high Priest, or Oecumenicall Bishop; for
garnishing of whose Court, the whole Body of Christ besides, must be content
to spend their lives, goods, or substances, and as his occasion shall require,
to pawn their very souls, as younglings, will be at any cost or pains they
can devise, to deck up a Lord of the Parish, a victor in a Grammar school; or
as merry fellows will be ready to spend more then their incomes will defray, to
have a gallant Lord of misrule of their own making.

4 But they demand, Wherein does the Pope aspire above the pitch of Moses
throne? Wherein the Popes Soueraignety is made greater-then Moses had any.
He desires but to he reputed an infallible teacher, and was not Moses such?
yet not such after the same manner. He approved himself perpetually infallible,
because always found most faithful in all affairs belonging to God: but had
it been possible for him to have worshipped the golden Calfe, to Psalm. 106. 28.
have eaten the offerings of the dead, or to have joined himself to Baal-Peor:
The Levites and such as claue unto the Lord in these Apostasies would have
sought Gods will at more sanctified lips, then his, at least for that time,
were If then we consider him not as he might have been, but as indeed he
proved; the peoples obedience unto him, was de facto perpetual and complete:
yet but conditionally perpetual, but conditionally complete, or perpetually
complete upon their sight and undoubted experience of his extraordinary
familiarity with God, of his entire fidelity in all his service. The Pope would
be proclaimed so absolutely infallible by irreuocable pattent or inheritance,
as no breach of Gods commandments, no touch of disloyalty to Christ in
actions, might breed a forfeyture of his estate, or estrange Christian
consciences from yielding obedience to him, every way as complete and absolute,
as that which the people of God performed unto Moses, or Christians do yet
unto their Savior. Whence though we admit Moses infallibility, and his to be
the same; yet the difference between the absoluteness of their authority, or
the tenor, or holds of this same infallibility, would be such, as is between
a Tenant at will, or one that enioyes a fair estate, perhaps, all his life
time, yet only by continuance of his Lords good liking of his faithful
service, and a Freeholder that cannot by any act of felony, murder, treason,
or the like, forfeit his interest in as large possessions.

5 Again, albeit the authority gotten, or manner of holding it, were the same;
yet the manner of getting it in Moses and the Pope is not alike. The one
profers no miracle for the purchase, no sign from heaven, no admirable skill
in expounding Gods word; his calling he professes to be but ordinary, and in
this respect (say his followers) he was to succeed Saint Peter: Moses not
such, nor so affected: his miracles were many and great; the signs and tokens
of his especial favor with God, almost infinite: his calling extraordinarily
extraordinary: otherwise that obedience the people performed to him, had been
no less then desperate Idolatry; as the challenge of the like without like
proof and evidence of such favor with God, is no better then blasphemy or
Apostasy. Hence says Cum igitur oporteret Dei lege^ in edictis Angelorum
^^erribiliter dari, non vni homini pa^^cisue sapientibus, sed vniuersae genti
and (...) coram eodem populo magna ^^ctasant in monte, vbi (...) per (...)
dabatur? consp^ciente multitudine metuenda ac tremenda, quae siebant. Non enim
populus Israel, sic Moysi credidit, quemadmodum suo Lycurgo Lacedaemony, quod a
Jove seu Apol^^ue leges quas condidit accepisset. Cu^ enim lex dabatur populo,
(...) vnus iubehatur^ (...) conspectu ipsias populi, sufficere di^^a
prouidentia iudicabat, mirabilibus (...) signis ac motibus (...) ad eandem leg
(...) creatori seruire creaturam. Aug. de Ciuit. Den. lib 10. cap. 13.
S. Austen, the people of Israel did believe Moses laws were from God, after
another manner, then the Lacedaemonians did Lycurgus laws were from Apollo. For
when the Law which enioines the worship of one God, was given unto the
people, it did appear (as far forth as the divine providence did judge
suff^cient) by strange signs and motions, whereof the people themselves were
spectators, that the creature did perform service to the Creator for the
giving of that Law. But we must believe as firmly as this people did Moses,
that all the Popes injunctions are given by God himself, without any other
sign or testimony, then the Lacedaemonians had, that Lycurgus laws were from
Apollo. Yet is it here further to be considered, that the Israelites might with
far less danger have admitted Moses laws then we may the Popes, without
any examination, for divine, seeing there was no written law of God extant
before his time, whereby his writings were to be tried. No such charge had
been given this people, as he gives most expressly, to this purpose Deuteronomy. 4. 1. 2
Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the ordinances, and to the Laws which I
teach you to do, that ye may live and go in, and possess the land which the
Lord God of your fathers gives you. Ye shall put nothing unto the word which
I command you neither shall ye take ought there from, that ye may keep the
commandments of the Lord your God which I command you. But was the motive or
argument by which he sought to establish their belief, or assent unto these
commandments) his own infallible authority? no but their own experience of
their truth, as it follows, Ver. 3.
Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baal-Peor. For all the men
that followed Baal Peor the Lord thy God has destroyed every one from among
you: The motive, used by Moses, for establishing the Israelites faith.
but ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God, are alive, every one of you
this day; so gracious and merciful is our God unto mankind, and so far from
exacting this blind obedience which the Pope does challenge, that he would have
his written word established in the fresh memory of his mighty wonders wrought
upon Pharaoh and all his host. The experiment of their deliverance by Moses had
been a strong motive to have persuaded them to admit of his doctrine for
infallible, or, at the least, to have believed him in his particular promises.
When the snares of death had compassed them about on every side, and they see
no way but one, or rather two inevitable ways to present death and
destruction, the red sea before them, and a mighty host of blood behind them,
the one serving as a glass to represent the cruelty of the other: they (as who
in their case would not?) Exodus 14. 10.
cry out for fear. He that could have foretold their strange deliverance from
this eminent danger, might have gotten the opinion of a God amongst the
Heathen: yet Moses confidently promises them, even in the midst of this
perplexity, the utter destruction of the destroyer, whom they feared. Ex. 14.
13. 14
Fear ye not, stand still, and behold the salvation of the Lord, which he
will show to you this day: for the Egyptians whom you have seen this day, Vide
Psalm. 106. ver. 10. etc.
you shall never see again. The Lord shall fight for you: therefore hold you
your peace. Notwithstanding all this, Moses never enacts this absolute
obedience, to be believed in all that ever he shall say, or speak unto them,
without farther examination, or evident experiment of his doctrine. For God
requires not this of any man, no not of those to whom he spoke face to face;
always ready to feed such as call upon him, with infallible signs and pledges
of the truth of his promises. For this reason, the waters of Exodus 15. 23.
Marah are sweetened at Moses prayer. And God upon this new experiment of his
power and goodness, takes occasion to reestablish his former covenant, using
this semblable event, as a further earnest of his sweet promises to them. [
Ver. 26.
If thou will diligently hearken O Israel unto the voice of the Lord thy God,
Faith must be confirmed by continual experiments answerable to Gods word.
and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear unto his
commandments, and keep all his ordinances: then will I put none of these
diseases upon thee, which I brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the Lord that
heals thee.] As if he had said; This healing of the bitter waters shall be
a token to thee of my power in healing thee. Yet for all this they distrust
Gods promises for their food, as it follows, cap 16. Nor does Moses seek to
force their assent by fearful anathemaes, or sudden destruction, but of some
principal offenders herein. For God will not have true faith thunderblasted in
the tender blade: but rather nourished by continuance of such sweet
experiments: for this reason he shewers down Manna from heaven Exodus 16. 4 12.
I have heard the murmuring of the children of Israel, tell them therefore, and
say, At evening ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning you shall be filled with
bread, and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God. For besides the
miraculous manner of providing both Quails and Manna for them, the manner of
nourishment by Manna did witness the truth of Gods word unto them. They had
been used to gross and solid meats, such as did fill their stomachs, and
distend their bellies* whereas Manna was in substance slender, but gave
strength and vigor to their bodies; and served as an emblem of their
spiritual food, which being invisible, yet gave life more excellently then
these gross and solid matters did So says Deuteronomy. 18. v. 3.
Moses: Therefore he humbled thee, and made thee hungry, and fed thee with
Manna which thou knew not, neither did thy Fathers know it, that he might
teach thee, that man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord.

6 Yet in their distress (so frail is our faith, until it be strengthened by
continual experiments) they doubt, and tempt the Lord, saying. Exodus 17. 7.
Is the Lord amongst us or no? Nor does Moses interpose his infallible
authority, or charge them to believe him, against their experience of their
present thirst, under pain of eternal damnation, or sufferance of greater
thirst in hell: such threats without better instruction in Gods word, and the
comfort of his spirit, may bring distrusts or doubts to utter despair, and
cause faith to wither where it was well nigh ripe, they never ripen and
strengthen any true and lively faith. Moses himself is feign to cry unto the
Lord, saying, What shall I do unto this people? for thy be almost ready to
stone me. As the Papists would do to the Pope, were he to conduct them
through the wilderness in such extremity of thirst, able to give them no
better assurance of his favor with God, then his Anathemaes, or feed them only
with his Court-holy-water, or blessings of mind* But even here again God
feeds Isreal's faith with waters issuing out of the rock, making themselves
eyewitnesses of all his wonders, that so they might believe his words and
promises, nay himself, from their own sense and feeling of his goodness, and
truth of his word.

7 Though no Lawgiver or Governor, whether temporal or spiritual,
especially, whose calling was but ordinary, could possibly before or since so
well deserve of the people committed to his guidance, as this great General
already had done of all the host of Israel; were they upon this consideration,
forthwith to believe whatsoever he should avouch without further examination,
sign, or token of his favor with God; without assured experience, or at the
least more then probable presumptions of his continual faithfulness in that
service, whereunto they knew him appointed? Albeit, after all the mighty works
beforementioned, wrought in their presence, they had been bound thereunto:
the meanest The Hebrews have a common saying, Ancilla plus vidit ad mare
rubrum, and monte^ Sinai quam viderent omnes Prophetae ^ag. in 5 De^t.
handmaid in that multitude had infallible pledges plenty of his extraordinary
calling, locked up in her own unerring senses. But from the strange, yet
frequent manifestation of Moses power and favor with God, so great as none
besides the great Prophet whom he prefigured, might challenge the like, the
Lord in his all ^acing wisdom, took fi^te occasion to allure his people unto
strict observance of what he Deu. 13. 1. etc. God in the establishing of Moses
authority, give a caveat to future generations for avoiding blind obedience.
afterward solemnly enacted, as also in the^* to forwarne all future
generations without express warrant of his word, not absolutely to believe any
governor whomsoever in all, though of ^ried skill and fidelity in many
principal points of his service. That passage of Scripture wherein the manner of
this peoples stipulation is registered, well deserves an exact (...) of all,
especially of these circumstances, [How the Lord by rehearsal of his mighty
works forepassed, extorts their promise to do whatsoever should by Moses be
commanded them, and yet will not accept it offered, until he have made them
eare-witnesses of his familiarity and communication with him.] First, out of
the Mount he called Moses unto him to deliver this solemn message unto the
house of Jacob; Exodus 19 4. 5. and 6.
Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I carried you upon Eagles
wings, and have brought you unto me. Now therefore, if you will hear my voice
indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be my chief ^easure above all
people, though all the earth be mine. After Moses had reported unto God this
answer, freely uttered with joint consent of all the people, solemnly Ver. 8.
assembled before their Elders [ Ver. 7.
All that the Lord commanded, we will do,] was the whole business betwixt God
and them, fully transacted by this Agent in their absence? No, he is sent
back to sanctify the people, that they might expect Gods glorious appearance
in Mount Sinai, to ratify what he had said upon the return of their answer;
Ver. 9.
Lo^ I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear, whilst I
talk with thee, and that they may also believe thee for ever. They did not
believe that God had revealed his word to Moses for the wonders he had
wrought; but rather that his wonders were from God, because they heard God
speak to him, yea, to themselves. For their principal and fundamental laws
were uttered by God himself in their hearing, as Moses expresses, Deuteronomy. 5.
22. Vide. Inn^t. a^ ex (...)
These words, (to wit) the Decalogue) the Lord spoke unto all your multitude,
in the mount, out of the midst of the fire, the cloud, and the darkness, with
a great voice, and added no more. And lest the words which they had heard might
soon be smoothered in fleshly hearts, or quickly slide out of their brittle
memories* the Lord wrote them in two Tables of stone, and at their
^ranscription not Moses only, but Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, with the seventy
Elders of Israel, are made spectators of the divine glory, ravished with the
sweetness of his presence. Exodus 24. v. 1. 9. 10. 11.
They saw says the Text, the God of Israel, and under his feet, as it were, a
work of a Sapphire stone, and as the very heaven when it is clear. And upon
the Nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand, also they saw God,
and did eat and drink. After these Tables through Moses anger at the peoples
folly and impiety, were broken, God writes the Exodus 34. v. 1.
same words again, and renewes his Covenant Ver. 10. 11.
before all the people, promising undoubted experience of his divine assistance.

8 Does Moses after all this call fire from heaven upon all such as distrust
his words? Aaron and Miriam openly derogate from his authority, which the Lord
confirms again viua voce, descending in the Numb. 12. 5. 6. 8. 9.
pillar of the cloud, conuenting these detractors in the door of the
Tabernacle; Wherefore were you not afraid to speak against my servant, even
against Moses? Thus the Lord was very angry and departed, leaving his mark
upon Miriam, cured of her leprosy by Moses instant prayers. No marvel if
Korah, Dathan. and Abirams judgments were so grievous: when their sin
against Moses, after so many documents of his high calling, could not but be
wilful, as their perseverance in it, after so many admonitions to desist, most
malicious and obstinate. Yet was Moses further countenanced by the appearance
of Gods glory Mumb. 16. 19.
unto all the congregation, and his authority further ratified by the Ver. 33.
strange and fearful end of these chief malefactors, ( Ver. 27. 28.
foretold by him,) and by fire, issuing from the Lord to consume their
confederates, in offering incense ungrateful to their God, Tantae molis erat
Iudaeam condere gentem! So long and great a work it was to edify Israel in
true faith, but without any like miracle or prediction, such as never saw him,
never heard good of him, must believe the Pope as well as Israel did their
Lawgiver, that could make the sea to grant him passage, the clouds send
bread, the winds bring flesh, and the hard rock yield drink sufficient for
him and all his mighty host, that could thus call the heavens as witnesses to
condemn and appoint the earth as executioner of his judgments upon the
obstinate and rebellious, yet after all this he inflicts no such punishments
upon the doubtful in faith, as the Romish Church does, but rather (as is
evident out of the places Deuteronomy. 4. ver. 2.
before alleged) confirms them by commemoration of these late cited, and
like experiments, making Deuteronomy. 7. ver. 17 18. 19. If thou say in thine heart,
These nations are more then I, how can I cast them out? Thou shall not fear
them, but remember what thy Lord thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt.
The great tentation which thine eyes saw, and the signs and wonders, and the
mighty hand, and outstretched out arm, whereby the Lord thy God brought thee
out: so shall the Lord thy God do unto all the people, whose face thou fear.
Gods favors past the surest pledges of his assistance in greatest
difficulties that could beset them. To conclude this people believed Moses for
Gods testimony of him, we may not believe Gods word without the Popes
testimony of it. He must be to God as Aaron was to Moses, his mouth, whereby
he only speaks distinctly or intelligibly to his people.

CHAP. VII.
That the Churches authority was no part of the rule of faith unto the people
after Moses death, That by experiments answerable to his precepts and
predictions, the faithful without relying upon the Priests infallible
proposals, were as certain, both of the divine truth, and true meaning of the
law, as their forefathers had been that lived with Moses, and saw his miracles.
1 TO proceed unto the ages following Moses; How did they know Moses law,
either indeed to be Gods word, or the true sense and meaning of it, being
indefinitely known for such? How far the traditions, exhortations, or
instructions of parents did steed their children for establishing of faith.
By tradition? Yes, By tradition only? No, But how at all by tradition? As by
a joint part of that rule, on which they were finally to rely? Rather it was a
mean to bring them unto the due consideration, or right application of the
written rule, which Moses had left them. So hard were their hearts with whom
this great Lawgiver had first to deal, that faith could not take root in
them, unless first wrought and subacted by extraordinary signs and wonders:
but once thus created in them, the incorruptible seed thereof might by means
ordinary, easily be propagated unto posterity, with whom it was to grow up and
ripen, not by bare credence to their ancestors traditions, nor by such
miraculous sights as they had seen; but by assiduous and serious observation
of Gods providence in their own times. For all his ways, to such as mark
them, are ever parallel to some one or other rule contained in this book of
life. The Israelites in every age might have discerned the truth of his
threats or promises, always fulfilled according to the diversity of their
ways, though thus much the best amongst them would seldom have observed,
perhaps not so much as once have compared their course of life, with either
part of Gods covenant of life and death, unless thus forwarned by their
Ancestors. The tradition then of former, was of like use, for begetting true
belief in latter generations, as the exhortations of tutors, who have already
tasted the sweet of helicon, are unto their pupils for attaining true knowledge
in good arts, of whose pleasantness they never conceive aright, until they
taste it themselves, though taste it but upon the others commendation, they
would not, without their direction, (ordinarily) they could not.

2 This Method Moses himself prescribes; Deuteronomy. 11. v. 2
Consider this day, for I speak not unto your children, which neither have
known nor seen the chastisement of the Lord your God, his greatness, his
mighty hand and his stretched-out arm, and his signs, and his acts which he
did in the midst of Egypt, unto Pharaoh the King of Egypt, and all his land.
For your eyes have seen all the great acts of the Lord which he did. Therefore
shall ye keep all the commandments which I command you this day, that ye
may be strong, and go in and possess the land wither ye go to possess it.
Gods wonders past, they were to consider to what end? That they might lay up
their Law-giuers words Ver. 18.
in their hearts, and in their souls, bind them as remembrances upon their
hands, that they might be as frontlets between their eyes, or sights whereby
to level their steps, lest they trod awry. Gods word so rooted in the
fathers, as thus to fructify in their carriage, gesture, speech, and action,
the seed of it was to be sown in the tender and supple hearts of children, as
Moses in the next words ads; Ver. 19.
And ye shall teach them your children, speaking of them when thou sit in
thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up. And thou shall write them upon the posts of thine house,
and upon thy gates. Thus was Gods covenant with his people, first, briefly
drawn in signs and wonders, and uttered by a mighty voice in mount Horeb, as
it had been a demise Paroll; afterward, conceived in more ample sort, and
written in more special terms by Moses, but was to be sealed to every
generation, by their sure experience of Gods mercy and justice; the one,
infallibly accomplishing their prosperity for obeying; the other, their
calamities for transgressing it, as in the same place follows, Ver. 22.
For, if ye keep diligently all these commandments which I command you toe,
do that is, to love the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways, and to
clean unto him; then will the Lord cast out all these nations before you, and
ye shall possess great nations mightier then you. All the places whereon the
soles of your feet shall tread, shall be yours; your coast shall be from the
wilderness, and from Lebanon, and from the river, even the river Perah, unto
the uttermost Sea. No man shall stand against you, for the Lord your God shall
cast the fear of you upon all the land, that ye shall tread upon, as he has
said unto you.

3 Every light or formal observation of this covenant suffised not to auert
Gods threats, or make them capable of those bounteous promises, which he
never failed to fulfill, as long as in heart and deed they used Moses writings
for their rule, nor weighing the foolish traditions of the Elders; Psalm. 78.
When he slew them (says the Psalmist) they sought him, Ver. 33. 34.
and they returned, and sought God early. And they remembered that God was
their strength, and the most high God their redeemer. Proportially to their
repentance (but far above, or rather without all proportion of deserts) did the
Lord deal with them. For, as their hearts (though in some sort turned unto
him) were not upright with him, neither were they faithful in his covenant: so
he being merciful, thus far forgave their iniquite, that he destroyed them
not, but oftimes called back his anger, and suffered not his whole displeasure
to arise.

4 The whole historical part of the old Testament, until David's time
(epitomized by this Psalmist) witnesses, what way soever this people went,
either the blessing or the curse which Moses there sets sets before them, did
always surely meet them Deuteronomy. 11. 26.
Behold I set before you this day a blessing, Ver. 26.
and a curse, the blessing, if ye obey the commandments of the Lord your God,
which I command you this day, and the curse, if ye will not obey the
commandments of the Lord your God, but turn out of the way which I command
you this day, to go after other Gods ye have not known. In these terms of
blessings and cursings, he enstiles the former dis^unctiue covenant; If ye
shall hearken therefore to my commandments which I shall command you this day,
Deuteronomy. 11, v. 13. 14. 15. 17.
that you love the Lord your God, and serve him with all your heart, and with
all your soul: I also will give rain unto your land in due time, the first
rain and the latter, that thou may gather in thy wheat, and thy wine, and
thine oil. Also I will send grass in thy fields for thy cattle, that thou
may eat, and have enough. But beware lest your heart deceive you, and lest
ye turn aside and serve other Gods, and worship them, and so the anger of the
Lord be kindled against you, and he shut up the heaven, that there be no
rain, and that your land yield not her fruit, and ye perish quickly from the
good land which the Lord gives you. To stir them up to more strict
observance of the former covenant, the blessings and cursings here mentioned,
were to be pronounced with great solemnity at their first entrance into the
land of Cannan, Deuteronomy. 11. v. 29.
When the Lord thy God therefore has brought thee into the land whither thou
go to possess it, then shall thou put the blessing upon Mount Gerizim, and
the (...) Mount Eball. And elsewhere Moses charge the people saying, Deuteronomy.
27. v. 11. 12. 13. 14.
These ( all sons of the freewoman) shall stand upon Mount Gerizim to bless
the people when ye pass over Jordan, Simeon and Leui, and Judah, and
Issachar, and Joseph and Benjamin, and these ( sons of the bondwoman) shall
stand upon Mount Ebal to curse, Ruben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulon, Dan, and
Nephtali, and the Leuits shall answer and say unto all the men of Israel, with
a loud voice. Nor was this rehearsal more strictly enioined by Moses, then
faithfully performed by Ioshuah; Iosuah. 8. v. 33. 34. 35.
And all Israel and their Elders and Officers, and their Judges stood on this
side of the Arc, and on that side, before the Priests of the Leuits, which
bear the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, as well the stranger, as he that
is borne in the Country half of them were over against Mount Gerizim, and
half of them over against Mount Eball, as Moses the servant of the Lord had
commanded before, that they should bless the children of Israel. Then
afterward he read all the words of the Law, the blessings and cursings,
according to all that is written in the book of the Law. There was not a word
of all that Moses had commanded, that Iosuah read not before all the
Congregation of Israel, as well before the women and children, as the stranger
that was conversant among them. The like solemnity was to be continued every
seventh year, as Moses commanded them, saying, every seventh year, Deuteronomy. 31.
v. 10. 11. 12, 13.
when the year of freedom shall be in the feast of tabernacles, when all
Israel shall come to appear before the Lord thy God in the place which he
shall choose, thou shall read this law before all Israel, that they may hear
it. Gather the people together, men and women and children, and thy stranger
that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and
fear the Lord your God, and keep and observe all the words of this law, and
that their children which have not known it may hear it, and learn to fear
the Lord your God, as long as ye live in the land, whether ye go over Jorden
to possess it.

5 The Israelites care to instruct their children in the precepts of the Law,
necessary unto Christians, seeing faith seldom grows without miracles, unless
planted in tender years.
Children were to be instructed first, privately, then publicly; that the
solemnity of the spectacle might work in them a modest fear and reverence,
without whose precedent impression true faith hardly finds entrance into the
heart of man. And without miracles it seldom takes, but where the seeds of it
have been sown in tender years; nor does it usually sink in younger breasts,
unless sucked in with admiration. All that Moses, all that Iosuah, all that
Priests and Levites, all that Parents or other Instructers, private or public,
could do to such, all they aimed at, was to propose the infallible word in
such sort, as might stir up their hearts to receive it with attention and
admiration; afterward to make sure trial of it (always sufficient to prove
it self) by their practice. No instructor in that people, ever taught his
hearers, either finally or jointly, to rely upon the infallibility of his
proposals.

6 But the Jesuits heart, though his mouth will not utter it, thus indites;
Did all this stir these Scripturians would seem to make, or tatling parents
daily inuitation of their children to strict observance of this rule, take such
effect as Moses dreamed of in posterity? No* But the reason why it did not, was
because they sought not in time to supply the defect or rarity of miracles in
latter, with more frequent and solemn memorial of such as had happened in
former ages; or with more abundant meditation upon their written law, and
diligent observation of their ordinary success, always correspondent
thereunto. Take heed to thy self says Moses, and keep thy soul diligently,
that thou forget not the things thine eyes have seen, Deuteronomy. 4. 9. etc.
and that they depart not out of thine heart all the days of thy life, but
reach them thy sons, and thy sons sons; forget not the day that thou
stoodest before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather
me the people together, and I will cause them to hear my words, that they may
learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that
they may teach their children. Judge. 2. v. 7. 8.
The necessity of this, and like premonitions, was too well manifested by the
event. The people (says another Penman of the sacred Canon) ha^ served the
Lord all the days of Iosuah, and all the days of the Elders that outliued
Iosuah, which had seen all the great works of the Lord that he did for Israel.
Not the auouchment or presence of infallible teachers, but their sure
experience of Gods power and mercy, did more surely fasten this peoples assent
unto the truth of that which Moses had left written, then Moses live personal
proposal could do their Fathers, to his words uttered in their audience. Ver.
10. 11.
But after that generation (with whom Iosuah had conuersed) was gathered unto
their fathers, and another generation arose after them, which neither knew the
Lord, nor yet the works he had done for Israel, then the children of Israel
did wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and served Baal. Whence it came to
pass, that whither soever they went out, the hand of the Lord was sore against
them, Ver. 15. 16.
as the Lord had said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them, so he punished
them sore. Notwithstanding, the Lord raised up Judges which delivered them out
of the hands of their oppressors: yet when the Judge was dead, they returned,
and did worse then their fathers, Ver. 19.
in following other gods, to serve them, and worship them, they ceased not from
their own inventions, nor from their rebellious way. What rule then was left
to reclaim them? the infallible proposals of their Priests? Though these or an
Angel from heaven should have proposed any other doctrine, then what was
consonant to their written law (whose true meaning in this respect, every one
of them should have known) Moses curse before mentioned, had overtaken them
following it. So much were they addicted unto Baals Priests proposals, Of
Gedeons distrust, and the means how his faith was established.
that Angels could scarsly be heard, though suggesting nothing but what their
Lawgiuer had taught, though assuring them by their presence of such assistance
from their mighty God as he had promised. Thus when the general of these
heavenly soldiers, sought to encourage Gedeon, The Lord is with thee thou
valiant man; Judge. 6. v. 13.
He replies, Ah, my Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this come
upon us, and where be all his miracles which our fathers told us of, and said,
Did not the Lord bring us out of Egypt? but now the Lord has forsaken us, and
delivered us into the hand of Midianites. As if he had said, I will not deny
but the Lord has done of old, as our fathers have declared unto us; Moses
story I distrust not, but am sure he has dealt far otherwise with us.

7 But does this defect of faith in him, convince the law of imperfection?
rather the object of his distrust, might have taught him to have believed the
perfection of Moses law, which had so often forewarned them of such oppression
by their enemies, when they forsook the God of their fathers. These
forwarnings had Gideon believed aright; he had not distrusted the Angels
exhortation. What was the reason then of his misbelieuing, or rather ouerseeing
that part of the law? Not ignorance of Gods word in general; for the miracles
related by Moses he had in perfect memory. What then? want of sufficient
authority to propose unto him these particular revelations, or their true
meaning? This is all the Romanist can pretend. Yet what greater authority could
he require, then that Angel had, which spoke unto Gideon? Our Apostle
supposes any Angels proposal of divine doctrines, to be at the least
equivalent to Apostolical, Though we says he (whether Paul or Cephas) or
(which he supposes to be more) an Angel from heaven preach unto you
otherwise, Gal. 1. 8.
then we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. Or, if we respect not
only the personal authority of the proposer, but with it the manner of
proposing Gods word: What proposal can we imagine more effectual then this
great Angel of the covenants reply unto Gideons distrustful answer; [and the
Lord looked upon him, and said Go in this thy might, Judge. 6 14.
and thou shall save Israel out of the hands of the Midianites, have I not sent
thee?]

8 Whether Gideons diffidence after all this, were a sin, I leave it to be
disputed by the Jesuits. A defect or dullness, no doubt it was, and only in
respect of the like in us, they hold a necessity of the visible Churches
infallibility: unto whose sentence whosoever fully accords not, is by their
positions, incapable of all other infallible means of divine faith. To pretend
doubt or distrust of Gods word once proposed by it, yea, to seek further
satisfaction or resolution of doubts then it shall vouchsafe to give, is more
then a sin, extreme impiety. Yet had this great Angel stood upon his
authority in such peremptory terms, Gideon had died in his distrust. For after
a second reply made by Gideon, Ibid. v, 15.
[Ah my Lord, whereby shall I save Israel? behold my family is poor in
Manasseh, and I am the least in my fathers house] and a further promise of the
Angels assistance not like the former, [haue I not sent thee] but [I will
therefore be with thee, and thou shall smite the Madianites as one man;] he
yet prefers this petition; I pray thee, if I have found favor in thy sight,
then show me a sign that thou talkest with me: Depart not hence I pray thee,
until I come unto thee, and bring mine offering, and lay it before thee. After
he had by more evident documents fully perceived it was an Angel of the Lord
that had parlied with him all this time, erecting his dejected heart with these
comfortable words, Peace be with thee, fear not, thou shall not die; He yet
demands two other signs before he adventures upon the Angels word. But after
it is once confirmed unto him by experience of his power, in keeping his fleece
dry in the middle of moisture; and moistning it where was nothing but dryness
about it; he is more confident upon a Soldiers dream, then a Jesuit in like
case would be upon the Popes sentence or blessing given ex Cathedra, Judge. 7.
15.
When Gadeon heard the dream told, and the interpretation of the same, he
worshipped and returned to the host of Israel, and said; Up, for the Lord has
delivered into your hand, the host of Midian.

9 Nor he, nor his people could at any time have wanted like assurance of Gods
might and deliverances, had they according to the rule which Moses set them,
turned unto him with all their heart, and with all their soul; but as far were
they, as the Papists from admitting his words for their rule of faith. The
unwritten traditions of Baal, were (at the least) of equal, or joint authority
with his writings, and in deed, and action, though not in word and profession,
preferred before them. Longer then their assent was, by such miraculous
victories as Gideon had now gotted over the Midianites, and as it were tied and
fastened to the blessings and cursings of Moses law, this stiff-necked
generation did neither cleave to it, nor to their God; Judge. 8. 33.
But when Gideon was dead, they turned away and went a whoring after Baalim,
and made Baal-Berith their God, and remembered not the Lord their God, which had
delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side. Miracles
after the Law-giuen, were usually either tokens of precedent unbelief, or for
signs to unbelievers, serving especially to put them in mind of what Moses had
foretold: the attentive consideration of whose predictions, wrought greater
faith and confidency in such as without miracles laid this law in their hearts,
then this people conceived upon the fresh memory of Gideons extraordinary
signs and glorious victory.

10 The peoples experience of such calamities as Moses thretned, was their
surest ground of such joyful hopes as he had promised.
The like occasions of such distrust as were observed in Gideon, were frequent
in those times, wherein the four and fortieth Psalm was written, yet the
author of it, is not so daunted with the oppression of his people, as Gideon
was. The manifestation of such reproach, contempt, and scorn, as Moses said
should befall them, did always animate such as indeed had used the Law as a
perpetual rule to notify the diversity of all success, good or bad, by the
degrees of their declining from it, or approach unto it. The greater calamities
they suffered, the more undoubted experience they had of divine truth contained
in Mosaicalthreats: the more undoubted their experience of their truth, upon
consciousnesse of their own transgressions, the greater motives they had upon
sincere and hearty repentance, to apprehend the stability of his sweetest
promises for their good. No depression of this people, but served as a
contersway to accelerate, intend, or enlarge the measure of their wonted
exaltation, so long as they rightly weighed all their actions and proceedings
in Moses balances, equalizing their permanent sorrow for sins past, unto their
wonted delight in transient pleasures.

11 Thus when Jeremy more admired then distrusted Gods mercies, in rendering
the purchase of his kinsmans field to him, close prisoner, for denouncing the
whole desolation of his country, when the Kings and Princes of Judah had no
assurance of so much possession in the promised land, as to inherit the
sepulchers of their fathers: the Lord expels not his suspensiue rather then
dissident admiration, with signs and wonders, as he had done Gideons doubt, or
his stiff-necked forefathers distrust. By what means then? by the present
calamities which had seized upon the Cities of Judah, and that very place
wherein his late purchased inheritance lay, when he cast these, and the like
doubts in his mind; Ier 32. 24. 25. etc.
Behold the Mounts they are come into the City to take it, and the City is
given into the hand of the Caldeans that fight against it, by means of the
sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence, and what thou have spoken is
come to pass, and behold thou see it: And thou have said unto me, O Lord
God, Buy unto thee the field for silver, and take witnesses: for the City shall
be given in to the hand of the Caldeans. Then came the word of the Lord unto
Jeremiah saying, Behold, I am the Lord God of all flesh, is there any thing too
hard for me? The Lord had Ier. 30. 13. 14.
stricken Jacob with the wound of an enemy, and with a sharp chastise me^^,
for the multitude of his iniquities, wherefore he cried for his affliction,
and said, My sorrow is incurable, not considering who it was had done all this
unto him: for, because the Lord had killed, they must believe he would make
alive again. Their present wounds inflicted contrary to the rules of politic
defense, where the best pledges of their future health, beyond all hope of
State-Surgeons. And this is the very S^ale of Ieremiahs assurance, from the
Lords own mouth: Ier. 22. 42. 43. etc.
Thus says the Lord, like as I have brought all this great plague upon this
people; so will I bring upon them all the good I have promised them. And the
fields shall be possessed in this land, whereof ye say, It is desolate, without
man or beast, and shall be given into the hand of the Caldeans. Men shall buy
fields for silver, and make writings, and seal them, and take witnesses in the
land of Benjamin, and round about Jerusalem. So absolute and all-sufficient was
Moses law in particular actions, much more in general or doctrinall
resolution, that God himself, for confirmation of his Prophets, and this
distrustful peoples faith, in a point by humane estimate most incredible,
thought it sufficient to be a remembrance to the Lawgiuer. For the Lord here
says to Jeremiah, concerning this particular; Moses many generations before,
had universally foretold; Deuteronomy. 30. 1.
Now when all these things shall come upon thee, either the blessing or the
curse which I have set before thee, and thou shall turn into thine heart among
all the nations, whither the Lord thy God has driven thee: then the Lord thy
God will cause thy Captives to return, and have compassion upon thee, and will
return to gather thee out of all the people, where the Lord thy God had
scattered thee. Though thou w^rst cast unto the uttermost part of heaven; from
thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he take thee.
And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed,
and thou shall possess it, and he will show thee favor, and will multiply
thee above thy fathers. By this rule of Moses, according to the prediction of
Jeremiah; does Nehemiah afterward frame his prayers to God, and direct his
enterprise for restoration of Jerusalem: We have grievously sinned against
thee, Nehemiah. 1. 7.
and have not kept the commandments nor the statutes, nor the judgments which
thou command thy servant Moses, I beseech thee remember the word that thou
command thy servant Moses, saying, Ye will transgress and I will scatter
you abroad among the people. But if ye turn unto me, and keep my
commandments, and do them, though your scattering were to the uttermost part
of the heaven, yet will I gather you from thence, and will bring you unto the
place that I have chosen, to place my Name there. Now these are thy servants,
and thy people, etc. O Lord I beseech thee, let thine ear now hearken to the
prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name, and I pray thee, cause
thy servant to prosper this day, and give him favor in the presence of this
man. He saw the truth of Moses divine predictio^ confirmed by the Kings present
grant of his petition, and speedy restoration of Jerusalem, Nehe. 6. 10. 11.
albeit a Prophet by profession, had dissuaded the enterprise, as likely to
prove dangerous to his person.

CHAP. VIII.
That the society or visible Company of Prophets had no such absolute
authority as the Romish Church usurps.
1 DId the Records of antiquity, afford us any the least presumption to think,
that absolute belief or obedience might safely be tendered by inferiors, as
due to any visible Company of men, without examination of their proposals by
Moses writings, since they were extant: the society of Prophets in all respects
the Romanists can pretend, had the most probable title to this prerogative.
That the company of Prophets had as great privileges as any (...) can challenge.
Their profession or calling was public and lawful; their distinction from
all others, eminent; their persons and places of residence, visible and known;
their promises for enjoying the extraordinary presence or illuminations of Gods
spirit, peculiar: many of them, venerable for their integrity in civil
dealings, and sanctity of private life; some of them endued with the gift of
miracles: In all these, and many like considerations, that fraternity or
collegiate society, might justly have pleaded all the privileges a public
spirit can grant to one sort of men before others. For, if the more or less
express testimony of Gods word for extraordinary assistance of his spirit, or
the different measure of his illumination, or manner of immediate teaching be
that which makes some men's spirit more public then their brethrens: this
difference was greater between the Priests or Prophets, and people of old,
then since God spoke unto the world by his son; yet what Prophet did once
intimate the necessity of his proposal, That the people were not bound to
believe what a mayor part of Prophets determined without examination.
for notifying the truth of Scriptures? What one did ever bewray the least
desire to have his interpretations of them, universally held authentic? or
his particular predictions, absolutely assented unto, without further trial
then his bare assertion, without examination of them by Moses doctrine already
establis^ed?

2 Had they been the infallible Church representative, had their assertions,
though given by ioinct consent ex Cathedra, or in the most solemn manner used
in those times been of such authority as the Romanist would persuade us a
Council of their Prelates lawfully assembled is, Gods people had stood bound
to embrace whatsoever a mayor part of that profession had resolved upon: but
this inference, though necessarily following the supposed premises, the Jesuit
I know, dare not affirm, lest Ahabs blood, untimely shed by confidence in
their infallibility, cry out against him. Yet De Eccles. milit. l. 3. c. 17. Ad
primum (...) illos 400. prophetas manifest fuisse pseudo Prophetas, ne^^^
ignorasse v^l ipsum Achab, qui cos consulebat. N^m ibid (...) rex I (...)
aliquis Propheta Domini per quem (...) Dominum? Respondet Achab, Romansit vnus,
sed ego (...), qu a ne^ prophetat (...) malum (...) quis nunc in media Sa^on^^
(...) 400. Ministro, ^uth^ranos de fide ^stificante, postea (...) non esset
mirum, si mayor (...) erraret: and sicut nun^^ non sequitur, totam ecclesiam
errare, e^am si (...) 400. Ministri Lutheram, (...) preter Saxoniam and (...)
alia mulla, (...), ita non sequitur, omnes Doctores Iudaeorum tempore (...)
etiamsi (...) Samaria erant. Nam praeter eos Prophetas erat (...) Sacerdotes in
Jerusalem, quibus ex officio (...).
Bellarmine too well knowing the liquorish temper of this present age, (for the
most part acquainted with none but table-talke Divinity) to be such as will
swallow down any doctrine, be it never so idle, profane, or poisonous, so it
be sauced with pleasant conceit and merriment, would put us of with this jest;
That as in Saxony, one Catholics verdict were to be taken before sour
hundred Lutherans: so should one of the Lords Prophets have been followed in
those times, before five hundred of Baals. And That Ahabs false Prophets were
not professed enemies of Baal.
Ahab no doubt had so done, had not the Devil taught his Divines then as he
has done Bellarmine and his fellows since, to take universality, as a sure
note of the Church; traditions, and customs of the Elders, for the rule of
faith, and (which is the undoubted Conclusion of such premises) to follow a
multitude to any mischief. So mightily did the opinion of a mayor part, being
all men of the same profession, sway with the superstitious people of those
times that 1. King. 22. 13.
Ahabs Purseuant conceived hope of seducing Micaiah whilst they were on the way
together, by intimating such censures of schism, of heresy, of peevishness,
or priuacy of spirit, as the false Catholic bestows on us, likely to befall
him, if he should vary from the rest. The best answer (I think) a Roman
Catechism could afford, would be to repeat the conclusion which Bellarmine
would have maintained, [All the rest besides were Baals Prophets.] They were
indeed in such a sense as Jesuits and all seducers are: but not by public
profession or solemn subscription to his rites, as may partly appear by
Iehosaphats, continuing his resolution to go up to battle against Micaiahs
counsel, which questionless, he would rather have died at home, then done,
had he known Michaiah only to have belonged unto the Lord, and all his
adversaries unto Baal; partly, by that reverent conceit which even the chief
of these seducers entertained at that time of Elias, whose utter disgrace Baals
servants would by all means have sought, for his late designs acted upon
their fellows: Yet as Antiq. l. 8. c. 10. Interea Sedecias quidam vnus (...)
Pseudo-Prophetis in medium progreditur, negans curandum quid Michaeas garriet,
nihil en^m very cum predicere, argumento esse praedictionem Eliae, qui sine
dubio melius quia^ iste futura cerneret Illum enim praedixisse apud Iezraelem
in Nabuthi suburbano lambendom a ca^^ bus regis sanguinem, quemadmodum,
^ambuissent cruorem Nabut^i opera ipsi^^^ lapidati a populo. Perspicuum igitur
esse eum mentiri, qui long prestantiori Prophetae no^ vereatur contrarium
dicere, quod: eriturus sit rex ab hinc die (...) sed mox sore euidentius etiam
quam verax sit aut a^status diuino spiritu.
Josephus records, the chief argument used by Zidkiah to diminish Micaiahs
credit with both Kings, was an appearance of contradiction betwixt his and
Eliahs prediction of Ahabs death, the accomplishment of both being apprehended
as impossible, less credit (as he urged) was to be given to Mica^ah, because
so impudent as openly to contradict so great a Prophet of the Lord as Elias, at
whose threatenings Ahab King of Israel trembled, humbling himself with fasting,
clothed in sackcloth. And it is likely he would so shortly after entertain
the professed servants of Baal for his Counselors? yet, seeing the event has
openly condemned them for seducers, and none are left to plead their cause: it
is an easy matter for the Jesuit or others to say, they were Baals Prophets
by profession. But were not most Priests and Prophets in Judah and Benjamin
usually such? yes, and (as afterward shall appear) did band as strongly with
as joint consent, against Jeremy, and Ezechiel, as these did against Michaiah.
The point wherein we desire resolution, is, by what rule of Romish Catholic
Divinity, truth in those times might have been discerned from falsehood before
Gods judgments did light upon the City and Temple. He is more blind then the
blindest Jew that ever breathed, who cannot see how such as professed
themselves Priests and Prophets of the Lord, as well in Judah as in Israel, did
bewitch the people with the self same spells the Papists boasts of to this day,
as the best prop of his Catholic faith. Yet such is the hypocrisy of these
proud Pharisees, that they can say in their hearts; Oh had we lived in the
days of Iezabel, we would not have been her inquisitors against such Prophets
as Elias and Micaiah were: When as in truth Iezabels impiety toward them, was
clemency in respect of Romish cruelty against Gods Saints, her witchcrafts but
as venial sins, if we compare them with Jesuitical sorceries. But of this
error more directly in the Chapter following; of their sorceries and impieties
hereafter.

3 Unto our former demand, [whether the society of Prophets were the Church
representative, whether the people were bound without examination to believe
whatsoever was by a mayor part, or such of that profession as were in highest
or most public place determined.] What answer a learned Papist would give I
cannot tell. Then this following, better cannot be imagined on their behalf,
[That this supreme authority which they contend for, was in the true Prophets
only; that they, albeit inspired with divine illuminations, and endued with
such authority as the Jesuit makes the Popes humana diuinitas inspirala, did
notwithstanding permit their declarations, for the hardness of this peoples
heart to be tried by the event, or examined by the law, not that they wanted
lawful power (would they have stood upon their authority) to exact belief
without delay; seeing readiness to believe the truth proposed, is always
commended in the sacred Story. And no doubt, but the people did well in
admitting the true Prophets doctrine, before the false, at the first proposal;
the sooner, the better. But were they therefore to believe the true Prophets
absolutely without examination? Why should they then believe one of that
profession, before another; seeing seducers could propose their conceits with
as great speed and peremptorinesse as the best? Nor did reason only dissuade,
but the Iud. 13. 1,.
law of God also expressly, forbid that people, always, and in all causes to
trust such, as upon trial had been found to divine aright of strange events.
Yet grant we must, that hardness of heart made this people more backward,
then otherwise they would have been to believe truths proposed; that oftimes
they required signs from their Prophet, when obedience was instantly due from
them to him; that oftimes they sinned in not assenting immediately, without
interposition of time for trial, or respite to resolve upon what terms
belief might be tendered. Thus much we may grant with this limitation; [if we
consider them absolutely, or so well disposed as they should, In what cases and
persons pronensse to believe particular truths is commendable, in what or in
whom suspicious.
and might have been, not as the Prophets found them.] For in men inwardly ill
affected or vnqualified, for true faith, credulity comes near the nature of
vice then virtue, a disposition of disloyalty, a degree of heresy or
infidelity, rather then a preparation to sincere obedience, or any sure
foundation of true and lively faith. Assent perchance men so affected, may more
readily then others would unto sundry divine truths: yet not truly not as
they are divine and consonant to the rule of goodness, but by accident, in as
much as they in part consort with some one or other of their affections. And
the more forward men are upon such grounds, to believe some generalities of
Christian duties; the more prone they prove, when opportunity tempts them, to
oppugn others more principal, and more specially concerning their salvation.
For credulity, if it spring not out of an honest disposition uniformly inning
unto goodness, as such; but from some unbridled humor, or predominant
natural affection: will always sway more unto some mischief, then unto any
thing that is good. John. 2. 23.
Many believed in Jesus (says Saint John) when they saw his miracles. It
pleased them well he had turned water into wine, that he had given other
proofs of his power, in driving buyers and sellers out of the Temple, did
minister hope unto proud hearts, he might prove such a Messiah as they
expected, as elsewhere upon the like occasion they said, John 6. v. 14.
This is of a truth the Prophet that should come into the world. The ground of
this their aptness to believe thus much, (as is intimated in the words
following) was their inordinate desire of having an earthly King, that might
rule the nation with an iron rod. John 6. v. 15.
When Jesus therefore perceived by their forwardness to profess the former
truth, that they would come and take him to make him a King, he departed again
into a mountain himself alone; for the same cause no doubt, which the
Evangelist specifies in the former place, (...). 2. 24. 25.
But Jesus did not commit himself unto them, because he knew them all, and had
no need that any should testify of man. He knew such as upon these glimpses of
his glory were presently so stiffly set to believe in him, upon hopes of being
fed with dainties, or mighty protection against the Heathen; would be as
violently bent against him, even to crucify him for a seducer, after they had
discovered his constant endeavors to bring them both by life and doctrine unto
conformity with his cross, mortification humility, contempt of the world,
patience in affliction, with other like qualities despiseable in the worlds
eyes; yet maine principles in his school, and elementary grounds of salvation;
so his countrymen of Nazareth suddenly admiring the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth, Luke 4. v. 22. 28. 29.
after he begun to vpbraid them with unthankfulness, as speedily attempt to
throw him headlong from the top of the hill, wherein their City was built. By
this it may appear, that of the Jewish people in ancient times, some did sin
in being backward: others, in an immature forwardness to believe
prophetical doctrines. But the fountains or first heads whence these swift
motions of life were depraved in the one, was inordinate affection, or
intrinsique habitual corruption; the root whence such deadness was derived
into the actions of the other, was hardness of heart, precedent neglect of Gods
word, and ignorance of his ways thence ensuing. Which presupposed, the parties
so affected, did not Bellarmine grants that he which doubts of the Popes
absolute authority does not amiss to examine it, albeit he sin in doubting of
it. Vide Annot. cap. 14^. 7. Sect. 1.. 10.
amiss, in not believing the true Prophets without examination; but in not
abandoning such dispositions, as disenabled them for believing all parts of
truth proposed with constancy, and uniformity, making them fit instruments to
be wrought upon by seducers. Hence says our Savior, Job. 5. 43. 44.
I come in my fathers name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his
own name, him will ye receive. How can ye believe which receive honor one
of another, and seek not the honor that comes of God alone: Nor
Prophetical, nor Apostolical, nor Messiacall much less could Papal
authority make them believe the doctrine of life, entirely and sincerely,
whilst their hearts were heardned; whose hardness though, might easily have
been mollified, by laying Moses law unto them, while they were young and tender.

4 It is a rule as profitable for our own information in many points, A rule
for the right settling of our persuasions in divine matters, or ripening of true
faith.
as for refutation of the adversary, that the commendation of necessary
means, is always included in the commendation of the end; which how good or
excellent soever it be, our desires of it are preposterous, all earnest
endeauours to attain it, turbulent; unless first addressed with
proportionable alacrity to follow the means that must produce it: sober
spirits always bound their hopes of accomplishing the one by perfect survey
of their interest in the other; as minds truly liberal, determine future
expenses, by exact calculation of their present revenues. Even in businesses
of greatest importance, though requiring speediest expedition, a wise man will
moderate his pace according to the quality of the ground whereon he goes,
otherwise the more haste may cause worse speed. The Jews were, as we are,
bound to believe truths proposed without delay: but both for this reason most
strictly bound to a continual uniformity of practicing divine precepts already
known, without dispensing with this or that particular, though offensive to
our present disposition without indulgence to this or that special time,
without all privilege sought from the pleasure or displeasure of men, both
bound, so to frame our lives and conuersations, as to be instantly able to
discern the truth proposed, not by relying upon their authority that propose
it, but for it self, or from a full and lively, though a quick and speedy
apprehension of immediate homogeneall consonancie between the external and
the internal word. For if any part of Gods word truly dwell in us, though
secret it may be and silent of it self, yet will it Echo in our hearts,
whilst the like reuerberates in our ears from the live voice of the
Ministry. Thus had the Jews hearts been truly set to Moses law, had their
souls delighted in the practice of it as in their food, they had resounded to
the Prophets call, as a string though untouched, and unable to begin motion
of it self, will yet raise it self to an unison voice, or as the souls of
heaven answer with like language to others of their own kind, that have
better occasion to begin the cry. In this sense are Christ's sheep said to
hear his voice, and follow him; not every one that can counterfeit his or his
Prophets call,

5 The issue of all that has been said is, that none within the precincts of
these times, whereof we now treat, from the Law, given, unto the Gospel, were
bound to believe Gods messengers, without examination of their doctrine by the
precedent written word. Only this difference there was; such as had rightly
framed their hearts to it, did make this trial of Prophetical doctrines, as it
were by a present taste, which others could not without interposition of time,
to work an alteration in their distempered affections. For this reason do the
Prophets always annex Mosaicall precepts of repentance, Why the Prophets
inioyne repentance whilst the^ fortell events to come.
to their predictions of future events, as knowing that if their hearts to whom
they spoke, were turned to God, their sight should forthwith be restored
clearly to discern the truth. For further manifestation of the same
conclusion, it appears sufficiently from sundry discourses in the former
book, that Isreal's incredulity unto their Prophets, was finally to be
resolved into their neglect, their imperfect, or partial observance of Moses
precepts. Wherefore not the live voice of them, whose words in themselves were
most infallible, and are by the approbation of time, with other conspicuous
documents of Gods peculiar providence, preserving them in divine estimation so
long, become an undoubted rule of life unto us: but the written word before,
confirmed by signs and wonders, sealed by the events of times present and
precedent, was the infallible rule, whereby the prophetical admonitions of
every age, were to be tried and examined.

6 The words of the best, while they spoke them, were not of like authority, as
now written they are unto us, nor were they admitted into the Canon, but upon
just proof of their divine authority. That one speech which Esaias uttered, was
an axiom so well known, as might bring all the rest to be examined, before
admission; Isaiah 8. v. 20.
To the Law and to the Testimony if they speak not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them. For Gods will already known and
manifested to the proples consciences, was to ouersway the contrary proposals
of known Prophets, though never so peremptory. Nor was it impossible for
Prophets to avouch their own conceits under the name of divine Revelations,
more immediately sent from God, then the Pope pretends: witness the 1 King. 13.
v. 18.
man of God, that went from Judah to Bethel, seduced by his fellow Prophets,
fained revelation from an Angel, counselling him to divert into his house,
contrary to the Lords commandment given before. The ones dealing was, I
confess most unusual; so was the others death, yet a lively document to cause
all, that should hear of it until the worlds end, take heed of dispensing
with the word of the Lord once made known unto themselves, upon belief of more
manifest revelations or instructions, by what means soever given to others,
either for recalling or restraining it. Hence may the Reader discry, as well the
height of our adversaries folly, as the depth of their impiety, making their
Churches authority, which by their own acknowledgement cannot add more books
to the number of the Canon already finished, but only judge which are
Canonical, which not, far greater then theirs was, that did preach and write
these very books, which both we and they acknowledge for Canonical. For the
Prophets words were no rule of faith, until examined and tried by the written
word precedent, or approved by the event; the Popes must be, without trial,
examination, or further approbation then his own bare assertion.

CHAP. IX.
That the Church representative amongst the Jews was for the most part, the
most corrupt Judge of matters belonging to God: and the reasons why it was so.
1 But was the neglect of Moses law, or this peoples inward corruption,
abounding for want of restraint by it, the sole cause of their dullness in
perceiving, or of their error in perverting the things of Gods spirit: This
ouerflow of wickedness served as a tide to carry them: but the continual
blasts of such vain doctrine, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, the Church, the
Church, was like a boisterous wind to drive them headlong into those sands,
wherein they always made shipwreck of faith and conscience. The true Prophets
never had greater opposites then the Priests, and such as the Papists would
have to be the only pillars, yea the only material parts of the Church
representative. Notwithstanding, whom the Fathers had traduced for impostors or
Sectaries, and oftimes murdered as blasphemers of the Deity, or turbulent
members of the state; Posterities good affection to the Prophets their fathers
had killed, oftimes an argument ^ather of hypocrisy then sincerity.
the Children reverenced as men of God, and messengers of peace unto the Church
and common weal. What was the reason of this diversity in their judgment? or
does it argue more steadfast belief in posterity? No, but more experience of
the events, foretold oftimes, not fulfilled until the Priests, and other
opposites, either coaeuals or ancients to the Prophets, were covered with
confusion. The childrens motives, to believe particulars oppugned by their
parents, were greater; and the impediments to withdraw their assent from them,
less: That the children should thus brook what their fathers most disliked in
the Prophets, is no more then we may observe, in other Writers. Few much
reuerenecd in any faculty by posterity, but had eager detractors in their
flourishing days, vicinity always breeding envy. And even of such, as did not
aemulate them for their skill, nor would have been moved with envy at their
fame or glory, they were not esteemed as they deserved, being defrauded of due
praise by such of the same profession, as better pleased the predominant humor;
always next in election to the lavish Magnificates of present times; but
usually rejected by posterity, when that particular humor, (evermore shorter
liuth than the humorous) began to change. Thus in every faculty, have those
authors which most applied themselves to solidity of truth, neglecting
new-fangle tricks or flashes of extemporary wit, endured in greatest request,
and best credit throughout all ages: as meats strongest and most nourishing,
not most delicate, are fittest for continual diet. Statius in sine 12. Thebaid.
What the Latin Poet said of his Poems, every Prophet might have more truly
applied unto his writings.

Mox, tibi si quis adhuc pretendat nubila, liuor
Occidet, and meriti post me referentur honores.
Though clouds of envy now may seem,
thy splendent rays to choke;
These with my ashes shall dissolve,
and vanish as their smoke.
What whilst I breath sharp censures blast,
when my leaf falls, shall spring,
Thy fame must flourish, as I fade;
grave honor forth shall bring.
It was a Method most compendious, for attaining such eternity of fame, as the
continual succession of mortality can affoorde us, which is given by Petrarch.
another Poet, but in prose; Dum viuas virtutem colas, inuenias famam in
Sepulchro; He that hunts after virtue in his whole course of life, shall be
sure to meet with fame after death; but hardly sooner, least of all could
these Prophets be much honored in their own Country, whilst men of their
own profession, Why the priests or spiritual rulers hated the living Prophets
whilst they loved the memory of the deceased.
carnally minded, possessed the chief seats of dignity, sometimes the best
stay and pillars of faith in Gods Church, most capable of that infallibility,
which their proud successors did more boast of. Yet were, even these seducers
always willing to celebrate the memory of ancient prophets, because the
authority given to their sayings, or reverence showed unto their memory by the
present people, over whom they ruled, did no way prejudice their own dignity
or estimation which rather increased by thus consorting with the multitude in
their laudatoes of holy men deceased. Thus from one and the same inordinate
desire of honor and praise from men, did contrary effects usually spring in
these masters of Israel. The dead they reverenced, because they saw that
acceptable unto most, and likely to make way for their own praise amongst the
people: but fear lest the living Prophets should be their coriuals in suites
of glory, whereunto their souls were wholly espoused, did still exasperate and
where the malice of impatient minds, conscious of their own infirmities,
against their doctrine, which could not be embraced, but their estimation must
be impaired, their affections crossed, and their politic proiects dashed. The
higher in dignity the Priests and Rulers were, the more it vexed them, such
poor men, as the true Prophets, for the most part, were, should take upon them
to direct the people. Their objections against those men of God, their
scurrilous taunts, and bitter scoffs, their odious (...) forged, to make way
for bloody persecutions, are most lively represented by the like practizes of
the Romish Clergy; continued almost as many years against the Albigeans,
Hu^sites, and generally against al whom they suspect to have any familiarity
with the spirit, whose testimony against them, is as authentic as evident;
only ouerborne through Gods permission in the worlds sight, by prejudice of
priuatenesse. Thus, when poor Michatah would not say, as the King would have
him, the politic State-Prophet Zidkiah; son of Chenaanah, gave him a blow
on the cheek, to beat an answer out to this demand; When went the Spirit of
the Lord from me to thee? As many proud Prelates would in like case, reply
upon his poor brother, that should cross his opinion, specially in a matter
belonging, though but a far off, unto the State; Sirrah, I am your better,
know your place, before whom, and in what matter you speak. Nor did Zidkiah
only, but 400. more (no otherwise discernable for false Prophets then by such
trial as we contend for) as if they would have bound the Almighty to have
followed most voices in bestowing victory, persuade the King to go up against
Ramath Gilead. But my former assertion is fully ratified by Michaiahs reply to
the others demand; When went the etc. Thou shall see (says he) in that day,
when thou shall go from chamber to chamber to hide thee. No question, but such
as were neuters before, after they see his prophecy fulfilled in Ahabs
overthrow, did take Michaiah for a Prophet, as true as Zedkiah was false.

3 In like manner when Jeremy a poor Prophet and Priest of Anathoth had come
unto Jerusalem among the Prelates, and prophesied the truth, but truth
offensive to the State, Ier. 29. v. 15.
That all the evils which God had pronounced, should be brought upon that City,
and her towns: Pashu^ the son of Immer the Priest, which was appointed
governor in the house of the Lord, entreats him worse then Zidkiah had done
Michaiah. He could have flouted him with as good applause of his accomplices, as
the Inquisitors can a Protestant now: You that can read State fortunes a far
off, can you tell where you shall lodge your self this next night? if you
cannot take him for a better Prophet that can. And by Pashurs Prophecy, he
was to take up his lodging in his way home in the Stocks that were in the high
gate of Ben^amin, near unto the house of the Lord. whose desolation he had
threatened. The like entertainment he found again at the whole multitudes
hands, but by the Priests and Prophets instigation; Ier. 26. v. 8. 9
Now when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the Lord had commanded
him to speak unto all the people, then the Priests and the Prophets, and all
the people took him and said, Thou shall die the death. Why have thou
prophesied in the name of the Lord, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh,
and this City shall be desolate without an inhabitant? As if the Church of God
could possibly err, or the gates of hell prevail against the splendour of it,
would the Romish Clergy add, should the Lord send a Prophet with such tidings
unto Rome. And did they not learn this interpretation of Christ's promise unto
his Church, from the hypocritical Jews their predecessors, which made the
like comment in Ieremiahs time, upon Gods words as pregnant for the
Highpriests succession as Saint Peter's; Ier. 18. v. 18.
Come and let us imagine some devise against Jeremiah, for the Law shall not
perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the
Prophet, come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed
to any of his words. Away with the heretic. The manifestation of like
affection in the Prelates toward Gods Prophets, did embolden Shemaiah the
Nehelemite, to write from Babylon unto Zephaniah the high Priest and his
associates to this effect. Ier. 29. v. 26.
The Lord has mad thee Priest, for Iehoiada the Priest, that ye should be
officers in the house of the Lord, for every man that raueth and makes himself
a Prophet, to put him in prison, and in the stocks. Now therefore, why have not
thou reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth which prophesied unto you. This captivity is
long: built houses to dwell in, and plant gardens, and eat the fruits of them.

4 But when Pashur found the Omen of that Ier. 20. v. 3. 4
name which Jeremiah gave him, when he and his mates proved indeed Magors
Missabibs, a terror to themselves, and all about them, when they saw with their
eyes all the miseries there expressed, then was Jeremiah held for a true
Prophet, especially by such as outliued the captivity, to see the truth of his
prophecy for their good as exactly fulfilled, as this had heen for their
harm, whilst according to his Ier. 29. v. 31. 32.
prediction, Shemaiah and his seed were rooted out from amongst Gods people
happily replanted in their native soil. For from the reasons set down before,
posterity did always better judge of prophesies then the age wherein their
Authors lived, at the least, the younger and meaner sort of that age which
out-liued the event, usually better digested their doctrine, then the ancient
or men of dignity that envied them credit amongst the people, yet were not
such as less maligned them, greater belieuers universally, as was said before,
but only of some few particulars. For, if a new Prophet should have risen
amongst the^ he was almost as evil entreated by the present Clergy, or
others, whose humors he contradicted. This is evident by the Scribes and
Pharisees, and the chief Rulers of the Jewish Church in our Saviors time;
Math. 23. v. 29. 30
They builded the tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the sepulchers of the
righteous, and said (as they verily thought) If we had been in the days of
our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
Prophets: yet made they the people of their own time so mad, as to be
partakers with the^ in the blood of that great Prophet, their long desired
Messiah, the only Savior of the world. Throughout the whole Story almost of
the old Testament, the truth proposed may appear, that the visible Church (if
it be taken in such a sense as the Romanists take it) was the most corrupt
Judge either of the truth, or true meaning of Gods word; that the people
seduced by their goodly shows and glorious titles of Moses successors, were
still brought into the combination of blood, until they brought upon
themselves, their posterity, and the holy City, Math. 23. v. 35
All the righteous blood that was shed upon the earth, from the blood of Abel
the righteous, until the blood of their Messiah.

5 But though their cruelty and hypocrisy be so notoriously known, What
means the people had to discern true Prophets from false.
as it even seems to point out the like in the modern Romanist: yet some
honestly minded will perhaps demand, how the people of those ages wherein the
Prophets lived, could possibly know the truth of their Prophesies, seeing for
the most part they saw a mayor part of men in Ecclesiastique authority, bent
against them. This happily may tempt vnse^tled minds to think the Lord had
determined his Prophets should have Cassandraes fates, never to be believed
till remedy were past. The peoples mist^king of their predictions, was in a
sort fatal, yet not necessary, but upon supposition of former neglect God sent
them Prophets for their good, but their wickedness turned his blessings into
cursings, their hypocrisy and folly made them so blind, that they could not
discern the signs of the times, until woeful experience, the fools only
Schoolmaster, began to teach it them, when their time for lore was ended.
Prou. 22. v. 3.
A prudent man (says the wiseman,) sees the plague, and hides himself: but
the foolish go on still, and are punished. But wherein does that prudence
consist, which might have prevented this plague? surely in reading Gods law and
continual meditation thereon; for this gives wisdom to the simple. Men in this
case should have asked Eccles. 37. ver. 13. 14. 15.
counsel of their own heart* for there is no man more faithful unto thee then
it, for a man's mind is sometimes more accustomed to show more then seven
Watchmen that sit above in an high Tower. And above all this, pray to the most
High, that he will direct thy way in truth. Had they thus done without
partiality to their corrupt affections, or without all respect of persons (in
which Christian faith cannot be had:) Moses law had been a lantern unto
their feet, for the discerning of true Prophets, and those discerned, had been
a light unto latter ages, for discerning the true Messiah.

6 The evidence of this truth, Of later Prophets subordinate unto Moses.
not without cause so often inculcated, will better appear, if we consider
^ow most prophetical predictions of particular alterations, were but
determinations of Mosaicall generalities, out of which they grow as branches
out of the stock. As for example, The Lord told Moses before his death, and he
gave it to Israel for a song to be copied out by all, Deuteronomy. 31. v. 16
That when they went a whoring after the Gods of a strange land, forsaking him
he would forsake them, and hide his face from them. After Ie^oiadahs death,
Zechariah his son seeing the Princes of Judah leaving the house of the Lord
to serve Groves and Idols, albeit he were moved as the Text says, by the
spirit of God, yet only applies Moses general prediction to the present
times, 2. Chr. 24. v. 20
Thus says God, Why transgress ye the commandment of the Lord? Surely ye
shall not prosper, because ye have forsakeu the Lord, he also will forsake
you. Saint Paul himself uses his own advise, not the Lords authority in such
points, as were not evidently contained in Moses law; 1. Cor. 7. v. 10
Unto the married command not I, but the Lord, Let not the wife depart from her
husband, for so Moses had expressly commanded. But to the Remnant, I speak, not
the Lord, If any brother have a wife that belieueth not, if she be content to
dwell with him, let him not forsake her. And again, concerning Virgins, I have
no commandment of the Lord, but I give mine advise as one that has obtained
mercy of the Lord to be faithful; This was his judgment, and as he thought
warranted by the spirit of God; yet he prescribes it not as a general rule of
faith to all, but rather leaves every man to be ruled by his conscience, and
the analogy of Moses law. So likewise, though God use an extraordinary
revelation to instruct Saint Peter in the free use of meats forbidden by
Moses; yet he persuades him it by manifesting the true meaning of another
clause of the same law; for what he uttered upon this Vide lib. 1. Part. 2.
Sec. 4. cap. 1. para 1. and lib. 2. Sec. 1. cap. 7. Para. 9.
instruction and the experiment answerable thereto, was but a further
specification of what Moses had said, Act. 10. v. 34.
I perceive of a truth (says S. Peter) that God is no accepter of persons,
Moses had said, Deuteronomy. 10. v. 17* 18.
The Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God, mighty and
terrible, which accepts no persons, nor takes reward, who does right unto
the fatherless and widow, and loves the It was a peculiar operation of Gods
spirit (the principal end of this Revelation) to instruct Saint Peter that
Gods graces were to be communicated henceforth to the Gentiles. And this was
but a branch of that Precept of loving strangers, so often ingeminated by their
Lawgiver. Had the Jews sincerely practiced this duty toward Aliens, the
communication of Gods graces unto the Gentiles could not have seemed so strange
unto them.
stranger, giving him sood and raiment.

7 These passages sufficiently inform us, that the extraordinary spirit
wherewith the Apostles themselves were above the measure of Gods former
messengers inspired oftimes, only made the stems, whether of the tree of life,
or of knowledge planted by Moses to blow and flourish in them by little and
little after the manner of natural growth, it did not always bring forth new
ones in an instant, as the earth did at the first creation. Much more usually
did prophesies during the standing of the first temple, spring out of Mosaicall
predictions. If we compare his writings with latter prophesies, not long
before the Babylonish captivity, though he had departed this life before their
fathers entered into the land of promise, yet he speaks unto this last
generation as an intelligencer from a far Country, that great preparation was
made against them, but who should be the executioners or managers of mischief
intended; he leaves that to such Prophets as the Lord should raise them up for
the present. Jeremy and Ezechiel upon his admonition, following his direction,
are sent by God, as it were, to scowre the coast, to discrie when the Navy
comes, for what Coast it is bound, and how near at hand. Here had the people
faithfully examined their hearts by Moses law, whether not guilty of such
sins as deserved the plagues threatened by him, they had quickly assented unto
Moses writings, and the Prophets words. For as consciousnesse of their sins
in general, might cause them fear some plague or other, indefinitely
threatened by their Lawgiuer, whose writings they best believed: so might the
diligent observation of their particular transgressions, and their progress in
them, have taught them to presage the determinate manner of their plagues and
punishments foretold by the present Prophet. For God in his usual course of
justice, so suites his punishments to the most accustomary habits or
predominant sins, as unto men religiously obseruant of times and seasons, the
growth and process of the one will give a certain crisis of the other.
Besides every age has peculiar signs subordinate to the general predictions
of good or evil foretold by Gods messengers, whereby the faithful learn to
know the day of their visitation, and as Solomon says, to hide themselves (in
latibulo altissimi) from the plague;) if not by their hearty repentance, godly
prayers, and religious endeavors to prevent it. And because we in this age,
are not so well acquainted with the particular signs of former times, wherein
true Prophets lived, it is hard for any living now, though easy to all the
faithful then, to give any certain or particular rule how the truth of their
prophesies might have been, at least probably known, before the event did
finally and absolutely approve them. Would to God we could discern the signs
of times present; and the Lord of his infinite mercy give us grace to know the
day of our visitation. But of this argument elsewhere by Gods assistance. It
shall suffice in the next place to show that our Saviors doctrine was by the
same means to be discerued.

CHAP. X.
That the Soueraignety given by Jesuits to the Pope is greater then our
Saviors was.
1 IT is a Rule in Divinity [whatsoeuer can rightly be conceived as an absolute
perfection, has real existence in the Almighty.] From this notion of the
Deity, swimming in the brains of such as in heart and deed make the Pope their
Lord and God, do the parties thus affected, usually take whatsoever power
might possibly be deligated by God to any, as actually granted unto his
holiness. And thus I imagine some Jesuit or other, when he shall bethink
himself will except against our disputes in this present cause, [Deny you
cannot that God can, and what if he should expressly grant such authority as
the Pope now challenges, would your arguments conclude him to be Antichrist,
or the doctrine we teach to be blasphemous.] On the contrary, seeing our
Savior Christ did never either practice or challenge, seeing neither Moses nor
the Prophets did ever so much as once intimate such absolute power should be
acknowledged in that great Prophet, of whom they wrote, we suppose the
imagination of the like, in whomsoever, cannot be without real blasphemy.
Yet suppose Christ's infallibility, and the Popes, Though the Popes
infallibility be made by Jesuits but equal to Christ's, yet is his sovereignty
much greater in respect of Christian people.
were; in respect of the Church Militant, the same: the Popes authority would
be greater: or were their authority but equal, his privileges with God would
be much more magnificent then Christ's. That which most condemned the Jews of
infidelity, in not acknowledging Christ as sent with power full and absolute
from God his father, were his mighty signs and wond^rs, his admirable skill
in Gods word already established; but chiefly his sacred life and conversation
as it were exhibiting unto the world a visible pattern or co^spicuous model
of that incomprehensible goodness which is infallible. Now, if we compare his
powerfulness in words and works, with the Popes imperfections in both; or his
divine virtues with the others monstrous vices: to equalize their
infallibilities, were to imagine God to be like man, and Christ (at the best)
but as his faithful servant, the Pope his Minion, his Darling, or some of his
age. For such is our partiality to our own flesh, that oftimes (though the
Wise man advise to the contrary) a lewd and naughty son (in that he is a
son) has greater grace and privileges, then the most faithful servant in
the fathers house. So would the Jesuits make God dote upon the Pope, whose
authority, be his life never so ungracious, if they should deny to be less
then Christ's in respect of us, their practices enjoined ex Cathedra would
confute them. For much sooner shall any Christian, though otherwise of life
unspotted, be cut off from the congregation of the faithful, for denying the
Popes authority, or distrusting his decrees, then the Jews that saw Christ's
miracles, for contradicting him in the days of his flesh, or oppugning his
Apostles after his glorification. Nor boots it ought to say, they make the
Popes authority less then Christ's, in respect they derive it from his;
rather, because they evidently make it greater then Christ's was, it cannot be
truly thence derived: or if it could, this only proves it to be less then
the other, whilst only compared with it, not whilst we consider both in
respect of us: for Christ's authority as the Son of Man, in respect of us, is
equal to his Fathers, whence it is derived, John 5. v. ^
For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son.

2 But wherein do they make the Popes authority greater then Christ's? That
our Sauiors doctrine was to be tried by Moses, and the Prophets writings: but
the Popes (if we believe the Jesuits) neither by these, nor our Saviors
doctrine.
First, in not exempting it from trial by Christ's and his Apostles doctrine,
neither of which were to be admitted without all examination of their truth,
for as you heard before Gods word was first uttered in their audience,
established by evident signs and wonders in their sight, and presence of whom
belief and obedience unto particulars was exacted. And it is a rule most
evident and unquestionable, that Gods word once confirmed and sealed by
experience, was the only rule whereby all other spirits and doctrines were to
be examined; that not Prophetical visions were to be admitted into the Canon
of Faith, but upon their apparent consonancie with the word already written.
The first Prophets were to be tried by Moses, the latter by Moses and their
Predecessors; Christ's and his Apostles, by Moses and all the Prophets, for unto
him did all the Act. 10. v. 43 Vide Act. 3. v. 18. 21. 24.
Prophets give testimony. The manifest experiments of his life and doctrine so
fully consonant to their predictions, did much confirm even his Disciples
belief unto the former Canon, of whose truth they never conceived positue
doubt.

3 Again, there had been no Prophet, no signs, no wonders, for a long time
in Judah, before our Saviors birth, yet he never made that use either of his
miracles, or more then Prophetical spirit, which the papists make of their
imaginary public spirit: he never used this or like argument, to make the
people rely upon him. How know ye the Scriptures are Gods word? How know ye
that God spoke with Moses in the Wilderness, or with your Fathers in Mount
Sinai? Moses, your Fathers, and the Prophets are dead, and their writings
cannot speak. Your present Teachers the Scribes and Pharisees do no wonders.
Must you not then believe him whom daily you may behold doing such mighty
works as Moses said to have done; that Moses, as your fathers have told you,
was sent from God; that Gods word is contained in his writings: otherwise you
cannot infallibly believe that there was such a man indeed as you conceive he
was, much less that he wrote you this Law, least of all can you certainly
know the true meaning of what he wrote. He that is the only sure foundation
of faith, knew that faith grounded upon such doubts, was but built upon the
sand, unable to abide the blasts of ordinary temptations; that thus to erect
their hopes was but to prepare a rise to a grievous downfall, the ready way to
atheism, presumption, or despair. For this cause he does not so much as once
question how they knew the Scriptures to be Gods word: but supposing them
known and fully acknowledged for such, he exhorts his hearers to search them,
seeking to prepare their hearts by signs and wonders to embrace his admirable
expositions of them. And because the corruption of particular moral doctrines
brought into the Church by humane tradition, would not suffer the generality of
Moses, and the Prophets already believed to fructify in his hearers hearts,
and branch out uniformly into lively working faith: he labored most to weed
out Pharisaisme from among the heavenly seed, as every one may see, that
compares his sermon upon the Mount, with the Pharisees glosses upon Moses. If
the particular, or principal parts of the law and Prophets, had been as
purely taught, or as clearly discerned, as the general and common principles:
His Doctrine, that came not to destroy, but to fulfill the law in words and
works, had shined as brightly in his hearers hearts at the first proposal, as
the sun did to their eyes at the first rising. For all the moral duties
required by them, were but as dispersed rays or scattered beams of that divine
light and glory; which was incorporate in him, as splendour in the body of the
sun. Nor was there any possibility the Jews belief in him should prosper,
unless it grew out of their general assent unto Moses doctrine, thus pruned
and purged at the very root; John 5. v. 46. 47.
Had ye believed Moses (says our Savior) ye would have believed me, for he
wrote of me, but if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my
words? For which cause, they were in conscience bound to examine his doctrine
by Moses, and the Prophets: otherwise they might have believed the saving
truth, To believe Christ without examination of his doctrine by Moses had been
neither to believe Christ nor Moses.
but falsely; and upon decitfull grounds. The stronger or more absolute credence
they had given unto his words or works without such examination, the more they
had ensnared their souls, and set their consciences upon the Rack, by
admitting a possibility of contradiction betwixt two doctrines both firmly
believed, without any evidence of their consonancie, or bothes conspiring to
the same end. The speedier and higher this edification in Christ had been, the
sooner it might have ruinated that foundation which God by Moses and the
Prophets had reared in Israel, unless this new work had been orderly squared,
well proportioned, closely laid, and strongly caemented unto the former. In
secular schools he is held an unwise answerer, that will admit Socraticall
intertogations; for, albeit there appear no difficulty in any one proposed
apart, yet in the process, a respondent may be easily brought to grant
conclusions, from which he knows not what consequences may be drawn, because
their consonancy with the problem whose defense he undertakes, is not so
evident nor immediate, as upon a sudden may be fully examined. And not
examining the consonancy of every other proposition with the principles of that
faculty, whereto the problem belongs, the best answerer living may be made
either grant what he should not, or deny what should be granted. Now Christ's
doctrine was to Mosaicall and Prophetical, as the conclusion to the premises,
or as the corollarie of greatest use unto the speculatiue theoreme. Suppose
then a Jew well skilled in Moses and the Prophets, should instantly upon the
first hearing of our Saviors sermons, or sight of his miracles, have admitted
him for such an infallible teacher, upon terms as absolute and irreuocable,
as the Jesuit would have the Pope acknowledged by all Christians, a good
disputant might easily have staggered him by these or like Socraticall demands;
Do you steadfastly believe Moses writings for Gods word? God forbid I should
doubt of this: Do ye believe this new doctrine confirmed by miracles as
firmly? What if I do? Do you know as certainly, whether both agree as well
as one part of Moses writings with another? What if I do not? until you be
fully resolved in this, your belief in both cannot be sound: for in case they
should disagree, the one must needs be false; and if choice were given you,
whether in sooth would you disclaim? Here a wise man, that (as the wise King
speaks) had eyes in his head and would not be led by a blind says, would have
paused a while, and thought with himself, This is a point that should be
looked to: for if these new doctrines should prove incompatible, as for any
just examination hitherto made, they may, I cannot see whether deserves more
credence; Whiles I consider Moses writings, and call to mind those mighty
wonders our fathers told us, with like continual experiments of their divine
truth; nothing can seem more certain then they; again, whiles I behold these
new miracles, me thinks his authority that works them, should be as great as
Moses was; yet if they should happen to disagree, the one must be better
believed then the other, or else (for ought I see) there can be no certainety
of either; for, if this man's possibly may be, why might not Moses doctrine
likewise be false? or if our fathers were deceived by his signs and wonders,
why may not we be so served by this man's miracles? But if upon just trial they
shall be found fully to agree in every point (as I trust they do) then
doubtless both are from God, and I shall steadfastly believe this new doctrine
to be divine, if such as Moses had foretold; and withal, more evidently
acknowledge, then before I could, that Moses spoke by the spirit of the all
seeing, everliving God, if this Jesus of Nazareth be in all points like to him,
and so qualified as he foretold the great Prophet should be. But in the
interim till the trial be made, it is best to lay sure hold on Moses and the
Prophets. For prior tempore potior iure: their writings doubtless were from
God, because hitherto they could not be destroyed: time and they shall try
whether Jesus and his doctrine be so or no; whether he be that great Prophet
that should come, or we are yet to look for some other.

4 Thus when John Baptist sent his Disciples to our Savior with this very
question, Prophetical testimonies did more sufficiently witness our Savior to
be the promised Messiah then any miracles.
Art thou he that should come, or shall we look for another; The answer he
returned again, (whether for confirmation of John's own faith, or as the most
interpreters think of his Disciples,) was this and no more; Math. 11. ver. 3.
etc. and Luke 7. ver. 18. 19. 22.
Go and show John what things ye have seen and heard, that the blind see,
the halt go, the leapers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise again,
and the Gospel is preached to the poor, and blessed is he that shall not be
offended in me. These or other of their fellow Disciples had informed their
Master John before of Christ's healing the Centurions servant by his word or
command, though absent; of his raising the widows son from death to life; of
the rumors spread abroad of him throughout all Judea, and the regions round
about: and upon this report, as Saint Luke tells us, did John make the former
solemn demand. But some will yet demand, how could he or his Disciples be
confirmed by the answer given them, wherein is little more then formerly both
had heard: for the raising up of the widows son which especially occasioned
their coming was the greatest of all in this Catalogue, and yet as great as
this, some of the ancient Prophets had done; how could it then prove him to be
the Messiah? Had he told them as much in plain terms, they might have believed
him, because this great work did witness him to be a Prophet, and therefore
one that could not lie: But by this answer, how could they gather more, then
the people upon the astonishment of that accident, had said? for Luke 7. v. 16
when the dead man sat up and spoke, fear, says the Evangelist, came on them
all, and they glorified God saying, A great Prophet is raised up among us, and
God has visited his people.

5 Yet this objection, at least the solution, confirms the truth of my former
assertion, that by his miracles alone considered, they were not bound
absolutely to believe he was the Messiah, but by comparing them with other
circumstances, or presupposed truths especially the Scriptures received and
approved prophesies of the Messiah: though no one for the greatness of power
manifested in it, could of it self, yet the frequency of them at that time,
and the condition of the parties on whom they were wrought, might absolutely
confirm John and his Disciples; because such they were in these and every
respect, as the Evangelical Prophet had foretold Messiah should work: for
this reason our Savior delivers his answer in the Prophets own words, as
Though in that 61 of Esaias no express mention be made of restoring blind men
to sight, yet the Septuagints (as elsewhere) truly express the meaning of the
Hebrew phrase there used. For in the Hebrew Dialect as some judicious Hebrecians
observe, the deaf or bind are called vinsti, or ligati.
elsewhere he himself did read them, then best interpreted by the signs of
the time, that John might see by the event, he was in the man of whom Isaiah
speaks Luke 4. v. 18. 19. At that time (when John's Disciples came vuto him) he
cured many of their sicknesses and plagues, and of evil spirits) and unto many
blind men he gave sight. And lesus answered and said unto them, Go your ways,
and show John what things ye have seen and heard, that the blind see, the halt
go, etc. Luke 7. ver. 21. 22.
He whom the Lord had anointed to preach the Gospel to the poor, whom he had
sent to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty such as were bruised, and
that he should preach the acceptable year of the Lord. The multitude of blind
men restored to sight in their presence was a good preparatiue to dissolve that
suffusion which had blinded their hearts; the releasing of so many from the
possession of unclean spirits, was an ocular demonstration he was the man
appointed to preach deliverance to the Captives, plagues and sicknesses then
cured by him in great abundance, were sure pledges to the obseruant, that he
was the great Physician of body and soul so often spoken of by Isaiah.
Besides, John's moving this doubt at that very instant, wherein such variety of
miracles; of all, or most of which, his Disciples one or other, were
eyewitnesses, did concur all so well suited to the several Isaiah. 6. v. 1.
2. 3. and caps 35. ver. 5. and cap. 53 ver. 4.
predictions of Isaiah, and these as For John him self from the words
immediately precedent had been taught by God himself to discern Christ for the
true Messiah. Compare John 5. v. 33. with Esaias 61. v. 1. and 42. v. 1. and 11.
v. 2.
John could instruct them, all unquestionably meant of the Messiah, was an
infallible argument of Gods unspeakable providence in thus disposing times and
seasons for their fuller resolution. The like disposition of the divine
providence, might the ungrateful Nazarites have observed. First, that when he
Luke 4. v. 16 17. etc.
stood up to read in the Synagogue, they should deliver the book of the
Evangelical Prophet before any other; afterward, that he should at the first
opening light upon that very place wherein his late miracles, yet rise in all
men's mouths, (as appears by Saint Mark. 6. v. 2. and Luke 4. 23.
Mark) were foretold: especially, if they had diligently marked the meannesse
of their own estate, the manner of his coming thither, moved (as the Luke 4.
v. 14.
Evangelist says) by the spirit, which as the Esaiah 61. v. 1*
Prophet had foretold, was to be upon him, and did manifest it self at that
time by his strange escaping his turbulent countrimens desperate attempts
against him. This melodious harmony betwixt his works and Gods word already
established, Luke. 4. v. 29. 30.
and this sweet disposition of the divine providence, in causing the one sound
in men's ears, whilst the other were in their eyes, were in his heavenly
wisdom the best means to establish true and lively faith: he never exacted
blind obedience, which who so suffers to be imposed upon him by others, or
seeks to enforce upon himself, strives to put out that light of nature or
inferior grace, whereby he should view and mark the ways of God, always
confirming his truth already revealed, by experimentes and signs of the time
proportioned to them.

6 From these instances, In what sense Christ's works are said to bear witness
of him.
to omit others, the Reader may resolve himself, in what sense Christ's works
are said to bear witness of his Divinity, or condemn the Jews of
infidelity. Both which they manifestly did, yet not in themselves, not as
severally considered or sequestered from all signs of times and seasons; but as
they inuolued such concurrence of Gods providence or presupposed such
prophetical predictions, as have been intimated. Every miracle was apt of it
self to breed admiration, and beget some degree of faith, as more then
probably arguing the assistance of a power truly divine. But, seeing Moses had
forwarned, God would suffer seducers to work wonders for the trial of his
peoples faith: who besides him that gave them this liberty could set them
bounds, beyond which they should not pass? who could precisely define the
compass of that Circle, within which only Satan could exercise the power he
had by that permission? Be it granted (which is all, men otherwise minded
concerning this point, demand) that Beelzebub himself with the help of all
his subjects, can effect nothing exceeding the natural passive capacity of
things created: he must be as well seen in the secrets of nature, as these
subtle spirits are, that can precisely define in all particulars, what may be
done by force of nature, what not. Hardly can we (without some admonitions to
observe their carriage) discern the sleight of ordinary Iuglers: much more
easily might the Prince of darkness, so blind our natural understanding, as
to make us believe (were the light of Gods word taken away) that were effected
by his power, which had bin wroght by the finger of God, that secret
conueighance of materials else where preexistent, into our presence, were a new
creation of them.

7 For mine own part (until I be by some others better instructed) I rest
persuaded our Savior taught the same doctrine I now deliver; thus much at
least, [Such signs and wonders might be wrought by seducers, that such as
would gaze on them, and trust their own skill in discerning their tricks,
should hardly escape their snares] Mark. 13. v. 21. 22.
If any man say to you, lo here is Christ, or lo he is there, believe it not.
For false Christ's shall arise, and false Prophets, and shall show signs and
wonders to deceive if it were possible, the very elect. And possible it was to
have deceived even these: if it had been possible for these not to have tried
their wonders by the written word. Wherefore necessary it was, that which
immediately follows, should be written for our instruction; But take you heed
(this he spoke to his elect Apostles,) behold I have told you all things
before. Much easier it was for such seducers to counterfeit his greatest
wonders with deceitful sleights, vndiscouerable for the present, then in these
plain distinct predictions of matters so far above the pitch of ordinary
observation, so to imitate him as time should not detect their impostures, nor
experience convince them of open folly, or their soothsaying of grossest
falsehood. And consequently, this very Oracle compared with the event, was of
more force to establish true faith, then any one miracle he ever wrought,
considered alone. Yea this foolish expectation the Jews had, their Messiah
should work mighty, but pompous and vainglorious wonders, did make them (not
prefashioned in mind to those descriptions the Prophets had made of his first
coming in humility) vndervalew both his true miracles and heavenly doctrine.
Even such as are said to have believed in him for the works they had seen him
do, seemed doubtful whether to acknowledge him for some great Prophet, or for
their long looked for Messiah. John 7. v. 31.
Many of the people, (says S. John) believed in him, and said, When the Christ
comes, will he do more miracles then this man has done. And as the same
Evangelist elsewhere tells us, such as had tasted of his miraculous goodness,
and in huge troops followed him for their daily food, that had no where to lay
his head by night, John 6. v. 30.
desire a further sign that they might see and believe the father had sent
him. His late satisfying five thousand hungry souls with five loves, they
deemed much less then Moses sustaining six hundred thousand so long with
Manna, a meat immediately sent from Heaven, Expectation of pompous and
vainglorious miracles the original of Jewish infidelity.
not made by multiplication of such bread as they might have bought of ordinary
Bakers. Nor does our Savior seek to win them by outuying Moses in multitude
or magnificence of his miracles: but by alluring them to taste and prove his
heavenly doctrine For the experiments that give us the seal and assurance of
lively faith, must of necessity be within us, even in our hearts, and in our
souls; and these are they. Had this people without miracles been dicto
audiens, as they were enjoined by Moses, in that they took him for a Prophet,
they might in short time have known what Peter confessed, John 6. v. 68. No
man is ever truly converted without an internal miracle, wrought in his own
soul, unto this end only outward miracles serve
Verba vitae aeternae habes, Thou have the words of eternal life, whose
sweetness once inwardly tasted was much more then all the miracles that could
be wrought without his hearers or upon them. But of such works these proud
Jews never dreamed, as not knowing the Scriptures, nor the virtue of their
Messiah, who as the Prophets had foretold, was to preach the Gospel unto the
poor, to comfort such as mourned in Sion, to whom no miracles could be more
welcome, then such as he did, for what could be more acceptable to the blind
then restitution of sight, to the lame, then right use of his limbs? what more
grateful message could be uttered to the deaf, then ephata, to have his
ears opened? what to the dumb, then untying of the tongue? what to the
possessed, then to be freede from the tyranny of Satan, or his Ministers?
Finally, as the Mark. 7. v. 37
Evangelist notes, he did all things well, and unto the best contentment
possible of every afflicted soul, far above the exigence or significations
of their peculiar necessities, but further beyond their expectation. In every
work he showed his willingness in all, his power to ease and refresh all that
were weary and heavy laden: but unto such as thought themselves so whole and
sound, as no way to need his Physic, rather desirous to feed their curious
fancies with superfluous or unnecessary wonders, he was not willing to give
satisfaction by turning Gods graces into wantonness, or vain ostentation of
his power or skill. Another especial occasion of this peoples stumbling at
this stone elect and precious, was their not considering that many of Moses
greatest wonders were types, partly of those glorious miracles which Messiah
was to work secretly by his spirit, manifested only to their hearts and
consciences, in whom they were wrought; partly of that his glory and power,
which was outwardly revealed to his Disciples, and might so have been to more,
had they not stumbled (as the Proverb is) in the very entry, and so departed
from him in despair, bred from a foolish prejudice, that no great good could
be expected from a Nazarite, of parentage, birth, and education so mean.

CHAP. XI.
Confirming the truth delivered in the former Chapter from the very law given
by Moses for discerning the great Prophet, further exemplifying the use and
^orce of miracles for begetting faith: The manner of trying prophesies: Of the
similitude betwixt Christ and Moses.
1 As Well for farther discovery of Romish blasphemy, as ratification of our
formar assertion: let us view with diligence that place of Moses, wherein such
strict obedience and attention to the Messiah doctrine is enjoined, as no where
else, such as no other may exact, without incurring the curse there threatened
to the disobedient, Deuteronomy. 18. v. 15 16. 17. 18. 19.
The Lord thy God will raise up thee a Prophet like unto me from among you,
even of thy brethren. unto him ye shall hearken. According to all that thou
desiredst the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the day of the assembly, when thou
saidest. Let me hear the voice of my Lord God no more, nor see this great fire
any more that I die not. And the Lord said unto me, they have well spoken. I
will raise them up a Prophet from among their Brethren like unto thee, and will
put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall
command him. The law cited literally meant both of Christ and the Prophets.
And whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my Name,
I will require it of him. This prophecy by joint consent of best interpreters,
as well modern, as ancient Pontificians as Protestants, may be truly and
literally applied to other Prophets, whether of the old or new Testament,
according to that measure of the spirit they had from him, of whose fullness
all, as well such as in time went before him, as those that came after him, had
received grace for grace. True it is, if we rightly value the strict propriety
of every word or clause in the whole context; what all historical
circumstauces put together import, or the full extent of S. Peter's Act. 3. v.
23. See Page 21.
paraphrase on the last sentence, it cannot be exactly fitted unto any but
Christ, unto whom only the whole discourse is as fully commensurable, as a
well made garment to the body that wears it: yet is this no impediment why the
same rule taken according to some literal circumstances, might not usually
serve for certain discretion of true Prophets from false, as we use to
notify lesser, but indefinite quanties of things, by the known parts of some
greater measure, commensurable, if we take the whole, to substances of a
larger size.

2 Evident it is out of the literal meaning of this law acknowledged by all,
that Israel was strictly bound to hearken unto such Prophets as God at any time
should raise them up, How far, and on what terms Israel was bound by the
former law to hear Gods Prophets.
though with most attention and greatest reverence to hear the Prince of
Prophets. But the question is, upon what terms, or how far they were bound
to hear all. Absolutely, and at first proposal of their doctrines, without
examination of them by the written law? So might he that could have set the
best leg foremost, and stepped up soonest into Moses chair, have kept the rest
of his profession in awe, by thundering out Anathemaes thence, as the Pope does
from Saint Peter's, to all gaine-sayers, priest or people. By what rule then
were true Prophets to be distinguished from false? By miracles? These were
means oftimes effectual, but (as was intimated) more usual for enforcing men
to an acknowledgement of the truth in general, then for trying particular
controversies by, amongst true professors: in respect of whom they were
subordinate to that rule given by Moses in the words immediately following:
Deuteronomy. 18. ver. 20. 21. 22.
But the Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in my Name, which I have
not commanded him to speak, or that speaks in the name of other Gods, even
the same Prophet shall die. And if thou think in thine heart. How shall we know
the word which the Lord has not spoken? When a Prophet speaks in the name of
the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which
the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously: thou
shall not therefore be afraid of him.

3 Before this or any other part of the law was written, somewhat in proportion
answerable to it, Miracles in themselves no sure rule of trying Prophets before
the Law was given.
did always necesssarily concur with miracles, for distinguishing true
professors from seducers. When the controversy was betwixt Moses and Pharaohs
Enchanters, the Lord confutes his adversaries by an ocular demonstration of his
power, yet further ratified by their confession whose words were the best
Oracles that people knew. These fair warnings concurring with the Egyptians
consciousnesse of their vnmercilesse practices against poor Israel, still
thriuing in despite of policy, could not but witness even to the most
unnatural men amongst them, that the God of Jacob and his seed, was a father
to the fatherless, an help to the helpelesse, a God of mercy, and a God of
strength, willing and able to right such as suffered wrong, to succor all in
distress, that with faith and patience commended their cause unto his
patronage. The most devoutly superstitious or idolatrous might (at the least)
more then probably have gathered, that the God of Moses was greater then any,
they or their cunning Magitians worshipped. But it is a curiosity incide^t to
superstitious hypocrites, at their first entrance into Gods schole,
scrupulously to demand full satisfaction in all doubts or difficulties can be
suggested, and (as if they sought to obtain mercy by way of bargain, not by
faith or favor) to have their assurance precisely drawn, and fully sealed,
before they surrender up the least part of their interest, in any pleasure,
commodity, or custom long enjoyed, though never so destitute of reason. As in
this case, imagine some Romish Schooleman or Jesuit had been in such favor in
Pharaohs Court, as that crew is now in too many Princes; what other collections
could we imagine he would have made, but these? [How do these wonders prove
the God of Israel to be so great a God, as Moses boasts of? He has more skill
we see in these particulars, then the Gods adored by us Egyptians: therefore
in all? or more, in these then the Gods of any other nation? These were
stranger works indeed, then we expected such poor silly fellows could have
wrought: but may not others by the same reason work more strange hereafter?]
And to speak the truth, more, that victory Moses had over the Egyptians, could
not prove unto the natural man (so long as he considered the wonders only in
themselves, without any concurrence of other circumstances or truth
(presupposed) then that this God of Israel was greater then any other he yet
knew of, not greater then any that might manifest himself hereafter.
Notwithstanding, these few documents or essaies of his power, compared with the
end and occasions, for which they were exhibited, were so fully conformable to
those natural notions, even the heathen had of the Deity, that no man free
from passion or prejudice of their mean estate, for whose good the cunningest
were thus foiled at their own weapon, and the mightiest among the Egyptians
plagued, but might have seen the finger of a good, a just, and merciful God
in all their troubles, had he in sobriety of spirit seriously consulted his
own heart. And who so syncerely had glorified his name, according to this
measure of knowledge, ot apprehension of his justice to him, no doubt more had
been given daily of this bread of life.

4 The Jews I am persuaded could have given as many instances of Devils cast
out by Mat. 12. v. 24 The end and manner of our Saniours casting out Devils,
did sufficiently testify his divine power, albeit others had cast out Devils
by the help of Beelzebub.
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, as might have defeated any induction gathered
from the manifold practice of such works (considered alone) to prove the divine
powers assistance. Most apparently, most malicious, notwithstanding was their
application of such instances to our Savior, whose usual manner of
dispossessing wicked spirits of those mansions wherein they had reuelled most,
did abundanrly witness he wrought by the finger of God, who only was greater
then that strong man whom he vanquished, bound and spoiled of his goods,
servants and possessions. For though Devils sometimes suffer themselves to be
commanded by men, neither of greatest wisdom, best place, nor fashion: yet
this they do (as any well instructed in Gods law, or illuminated with the
notions of good and evil will easily discern) always with purpose to bring
men unto a perpetual acknowledgement of some divine power in them, or to
performance of some Magical service unto them; no otherwise then cheating
mates or cunning gamesters can be well content to suffer bunglers beat them
the first or second set, in hope to entise them hold play longer, or for
greater wagers. On the contrary, the only fee our Savior demanded for all his
admirable cures in this kind, was, the parties should give such glory unto God
alone, as that infernal crew most detested, but which the law of Moses so
highly esteemed by his calumniators, did purposely require in defiance of
Beelzebub, and all the powers of darkness. The end of every particular
dispossession was such, and the multitude of legal confessions, sincerely
uttered by poor souls set free, so many as his bitterest adversaries own
consciences, could not but witness against themselves, that all the chief
titles of Satan's wonted triumphs over Gods people, were utterly overthrown,
that he could not urge them either unto such blasphemies against God, or
outrages against themselves or their neighbors, as he most delighted in.
Besides, few or no instances could (I think) be brought of Devils cast out in
any Magitians name, in Christ's they were, and (as it seems) by such as had
better acquaintance, or more alliance with his accusers, then with himself.
Thus much our Savior in my conjecture, intimates in that speech Math. 12. v. 27
By whom then do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be your
judges. Which words I neither would refer to Christ's Disciples, as some good
Interpreters do, nor (as others) unto such exorcists as those mentioned, Acts
19. verse 15. which attempting to throw out this strong man, were overthrown
in their own play: but unto such as John complained of, Mark. 9. v. 38,
Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy name, which followed not us, and
we forbad him. This man, though no Disciple, was neither so ill disposed in
himself, nor so maliciously affected to our Savior as these Jews were, as
appears by our Saviors answer unto John; Ver. 39.
Forbid him not, for there is no man that can do a miracle in my Name, that
can lightly speak evil of me, for whosoever is not against us, is on our
part. In the same words he concludes his disputation against the Jews in the
Math. 12. v. 30
forecited place.

5 Such as this man was, none of Christ's followers, but rather a friend (as
seems) of his accusers, yet using Christ's not Beelzebubs Name, to cast out
Devils, were competent witnesses of his heavenly virtue, and his adversaries
malicious partiality. Many other circumstances well known then; not now,
especially the long want of miracles more then prophesies, before his coming
did manifest their malice to be more impudent and shameless, then we in such
distance of time can discern. That finger of God (from such signs of the time
as we in general may suppose) far more apparent in his victories over
Satan himself, then in Moses over his Scholars the Enchanters, especially
whiles compared with known Prophesies of the Messiah, did point him out to be
the woman's seed, ordained of old to bruise the Serpents head; to be the son
of man, appointed to erect the everlasting kingdom, foretold by Daniel, unto
whose and other prophesies he referres his enemies in that speech, Math. 12. v.
28
But if I by the spirit (or as Saint Luke. 11. v. 20*
Luke reads) by the singer of God cast out Devils, then is the Kingdom of God
come unto you. Yet were not all his miracles of this kind thus considered, so
effectual to confirm the faithful, or so pregnant to condemn all
unbelievers, as the former rule of Moses. For this cause after the former
dispute ended, he gave his adversaries such a sign, as if it did follow* would
infallibly prove him to be that great Prophet, Moses there speaks of, and
consequently leave them liable to Gods heavy judgment without excuse, for not
harkening unto him. Of which hereafter.

6 Here I may once for all conclude, that the power of doing miracles was as
effectual to assure such as did them of salvation, as sight of them done, was
to establish spectators in saving faith. But the power of casting Devils out,
or doing greatest miracles, was no infallible pledge of salvation to such as
did them: much less could the acknowledgement of this divine power in them,
breed full assurance of true faith in others, but only serve as a means to
cause them rely upon the Law and Prophets as their only rule, and to taste
and prove the bread of life proffered to them by our Savior, which alone could
ascertaine them by their names were written in the book of life. But to
proceed by the former rule.

7 If others by experiments answerable to it, Christ was to be acknowledged
for the great Prophet by his supereminency in those gifts of the spirit,
whereby former Prophets had been approved.
were known to be true Prophets: Christ likewise by his known supereminency
in that which approved them, was to be acknowledged for the Prince of Prophets.
Now, if we reuise the history of the old Testament, how few Prophets shall
we find endowed with the gift of miracles; such as were, did exercise their
power rather among Idolaters, then true professors. So, when Gods messengers
were brought to as open competition with Baals Priests, in the King of Isreal's;
as Moses had been with the Enchanters, in Pharaohs Court: 1. King. 18.
Elias makes his calling as clear as the light, by calling down fire from
heaven, which Baals Priests attempting in most furious manner could not effect:
but Elias professed thus much before, as Baals Priests, no question had done:
so as the event, answering to his prediction, not to the others, did, by Moses
rule, demonstrate him to be, them not to be, Prophets of the living God. But
when the like controversy was to be tried between Zidkiah and his four
hundred accomplices, on the one part, and 1 King. 22.
Michaiah, on the other before king Ahab, in whom Elias late miracles, and
later threats, had wrought such a distaste of Baal, and such a liking of the
truth in general, as he would not consult either any professed servant of the
one, or open oppugner of the other; for his future success: Michaiah (as was
observed before) appeals to this law of Moses as most competent Judge between
such as jointly did embrace it; Ver. 28.
If thou return in peace, the Lord has not spoken by me, as if he had said
(what Moses there does) he has not put his word in my mouth. And having
brought his controversy to this trial, he desires the people to contestate
the issue thus joined [and he said hearken all ye people] From this and many
like cases, ruled by the former express and pregnant law of Moses, Jeremy
pleades his warrant, being born down by the contradictions of Hananiah a
professed Prophet of the Lord, as he was, but of greater favor in the Court,
because he prophesied peace unto the present state, and good success to the
Proiects then on foot; Ier. 28. v. 6. 7. 8. 9.
Even the Propeth Jeremiah said, So be it: the Lord so do, the Lord confirm
thy words which thou have prophesied, to restore the vessels of the Lords
house, and all that is carried Captive from Babel into this place. But hear
thou now this word that I will speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all
the people. The Prophets that have been before me, and before thee, in times
past prophesied against many Countries, and against great kingdoms, of war,
and of plagues and of pestilence. And the Prophet which prophesies of peace,
when the word of the Prophet shall come to pass, then shall the Prophet be
known that the Lord has truly sent him. Ezechiel likewise referres himself
to the same trial amongst such as were professed hearers of the word in
general, which they would not obey in particular Ezec. 33. v. 32* 33.
And lo thou art unto them, as a jesting song of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can sing well: for they hear thy words, and do them not. And when
this comes to pass (for lo it will come) then shall they know that a
Prophet has been among them.

8 From these debatements, In what case Moses rule for discerning true Prophets
did hold infallibly true.
we may gather in what cases the former rule held for certain. First,
negatiuely, it was universally true; for he that prophesied any thing which
came not to pass, did sufficiently prove himself to be no true Prophet, but
a counterfeit. So did not every prediction of what afterward came to pass,
necessarily argue it to have been from God. Yet as the force and virtue of
many things, not such of themselves, became evident from vicinity, or irriation
of their contraries: so though God permitted some to foretell strange events
for trial of his peoples faith; yet this power he restrained when the
controversy came to a former trial; then he caused the true Prophets words
to stand, whiles the predictions of the false, and the Princes blood which
relied upon them, fell to the ground, like Dagon before the Arc. So as the
fulfilling of what the one, and frustrating of what the other had said, did
sufficiently manifest the one had spoken of himself presumptuously; the other,
what the Lord had put into his mouth. Hence is the determination easy, what
means this people had to discern, amongst true Prophets which was that Great
one, in all things like to Moses. First if events foretold did sufficiently
testify of his divine spirit: his own witness of himself would be
authentike, because a true Prophet could hardly lie, or make himself greater
then he was. This is an argument, which directly confutes such, as acknowledge
Christ to have been a Prophet, sincere in doctrine; and mighty in deeds: and
yet deny him to be the Prince of that profession, the great mediator of the
new Covenant, both which he often avouched. Besides the quantity of that
spirit, whose sincere quality manifested him to be a Prophet, would notify
his excessive Greatness in that rank and order, or more directly to the
question.

9 The great Prophet there spoken of was to be known by his similitude with
Moses, Moses description of the great Prophet in strict propriety of the words
used by him, peculiar unto Christ.
who was as the symbol, or proportional mean between him and lesser
Prophets. Others in these few gifts wherein they resembled their father, came
far short of him: Christ in all, far exceeded him. Others, were all of
Jacobs line, raised up by Gods appointment, so to instruct their brethren in
doubtful cases, as they should not need to consult sorcerers, or entertain
familiarity with wicked spirits. Christ (to omit the eminency of his
Prophetical function till hereafter) besides this common fraternity with his
people was in more especial manner Abraham's seed, and in particular sort
raised up by Jehovah his God, by intrinsique assumption into the unity of his
person, not by external assistance or impulsion of his spirit. Raised likewise
he was in a strict and proper sense (...), from amid this people, being as it
were extracted out of the pure virgin, as the first woman was out of the man by
Iehouahs own immediate hand, from his craddle to his cross, most exactly
answering to that delineation of the Great Prophet, and Mediator to be
revealed, which was exhibited first in Moses, when he stood before the Lord in
Horeb, his strange deliverance from Herodian butcherie, whiles all the Infant
males besides did perish, was fully parallel to the others exemption from
Pharaohs cruelty, like to Moses he was, in the Numb. 11. 16. vid. 8* Luke 10.
v. 1. etc.
number of his Disciples, in So Exodu^ 24. God commands Moses to come up to the
Lord in the Mount, with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu. and 70. of the Elders of
Israel, which were to worship a far off while Moses himself alone went near
unto the Lord: so says S. Peter, God caused Christ to be showed openly not to
all the people, but to the witnesses chosen before of God, to such as did eat
and drink with him, after he arose from the dead His Disciples alo^ were
present when God called Christ into heavenly places, v. Exodus 24. v. 10. 11.
communication of his spirit unto them, in admitting them to more special
participation of his secrets, in the peculiar testifications of his familiarity
with God, in his fasting, in his transfiguration, in multitude of miracles. But
these and the like I leave to the Readers observation.

10 The excellency of the great Prophet in respect of Moses gathered from the
difference betwixt Moses and the lesser Prophets,
The peculiar and proper undoubted notes of the great Prophet there spoken of,
will be most conspicuous in our Savior, if we compare him, first, with Moses,
then with ordinary Prophets, according to that difference the Lord himself made
between these and Moses; Numb. 12. v. 6. 7. 8.
If there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, I will be known to him by a
vision, and will speak unto him by dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is
faithful in all mine house. Unto him will I speak mouth to month, and by
vision not in dark words, but he shall see the similitude of the Lord.
Wherefore then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant, even against
Moses? It is said signanter, he should see the similitude of God, not God; for
as the Evangelist says John 1. ver. 18.
No man has seen God at any time; so was it told Moses from the Lords own
mouth, that he could not see his face and live. Yet saw this great Prophet
more of God, then all the Prophets beside. Herein then was Christ like unto
him, but far above him, that he was in the bosom of his father, (not
admitted to see his back parts only) and has declared him to the world.
Moses from the abundance of his Prophetical spirit, so perfectly foretold the
perpetual estate of his people, from the Law given, to the time of their
Messiah, as the best Prophets may seem to be but his scholars. From
participation of that fulness which was in Christ, has that Disciple whom he
loved, far exceeded Moses, as well in the extent, weight and variety of
matters foretold, as in the determinate manner of foretelling them. And I know
not whether if it were possible to call both Christ and Moses from heaven,
their presence (though more glorious then it was upon Mount Tabor) would be
more forcible to illuminate the Jew or Atheist, then serious reading the books
of Deutoronomy, and the Revelation, comparing the one with the Jews known
misery, the other with Ecclesiastical Stories, the late abominations of the
Papacy, and Romanists more then Jewish blindness. The one, shows Moses to
have been the father of Prophets, the other Christ (from whose immensurable
fullness John had that extraordinary measur of the spirit) to be the fountain
of Prophesies, whose supereminencies and inexhaustible fullness, may yet be
made more apparent by comparing him, not with Moses the symbol or mean; but
with the other extreme, to wit, the rank of lesser Prophets.

11 It is rightly observed by the Schoolmen, The gift of prophecy not
habitual to ordinary Prophets.
Lumen Propheticum erat aliqualiter aenigmaticum; these ordinary Prophets
illuminations were not so evident or distinct, as certain; they discerned
rather the proportion then featur of truth, which they saw but as it were
through the cover, or in the case, not in it self. And albeit the event did
always prove their answers true, oftimes in an unexpected sense: yet could
they not always give such answers when they pleased. Nor did the light of
Gods countenance perpetually reside upon them, as the Suns brightness does
by reflection upon the stars: they had their vicissitude of day and night,
daily Eclipses, ouercastings many; their chief illuminations came but as it
were by flashes. Thus Ier. 28.
Jeremy in the late cited controversy dares not adventure to give the people a
sign for confirmation of his doctrine, or other more distinct, or determinate
prediction, besides that of the general event, about which the contention was:
That, he knew (because the Lord had put it into his mouth,) would in the end
condemn his adversary of presumption. But after Hananiah had outfaced him
with a sensible sign of his own making, breaking the yoke which he had taken
from Ieremiahs neck, on which the Lord had put it, Ier. 28. v. 10. 12.
and boldly avouched in the presence of all the people [Thus says the Lord,
even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, from the neck
of all nations within the space of two years:] the word of the Lord came unto
Jeremiah again, and sends him back with this message to his adversary; Ver.
12. 15. 16*
Hear now Hananiah, the Lord has not sent thee, but thou make this people
to trust in a lie. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, I will cast thee
from off the earth: this year thou shall die, because thou have spoken
rebelliously against the Lord. So Hananiah the Prophet died the same year, in
the seventh month. Not long after this event were both Prince and people of
Judah rooted out of the land the Lord had given them, because contrary to Moses
admonition, they reverenced the Prophet that spoke presumptuously, and would
not hearken unto the words which the Lord had put in Ieremiahs mouth: Elisha
likewise to whom Elias had given a double portion of his spirit in respect of
his fellows, of all the Prophets, (unless Elias might be excepted) most
famous for the gift of miracles, a lively type of the Messiah, in raising from
death and giving life, had his spirit of Divination but by fittes, and needed
Music to tune his spirits unto it. He gave the barren Shunamite a son, of
whose death notwithstanding he knew not as the Lord of life did of Lazarus in
his absence: nor ruled he by her unusual gesture or strange signs of sorrow,
distinctly divine the true cause of her coming: only, when Gehezi went to
thrust her away, he said as much as he knew: 2. King. 4. v. 2^*
Let her alone, for her soul is vexed within her, and the Lord has hid it
from me, and has not told it me.

12 But from the perpetual and internal irradiation of the Deity, John
Baptist more then a Prophet* from the vicinity of the great Prophet.
bodily or personally (such as the Apostle speaks) dwelling in Christ, and
incorporate in his substance, this spirit of prophecy, (if without prejudice
so we may call it) did never waine, was never eclipsed, always most splendent
in him, as light in the Moon at the full. As he never foretold any thing
which came not to pass, so could he at all times when he pleased, foretell
whatsoever at any time should befall his friends or foes, with all the
circumstances and signs consequent, or precedent. From this brightness of his
glory did John Baptist (who was sent from God as the morning star to usher
this Sun of righteousness into his Kingdom) become more then a Prophet for
distinct illuminations, concerning matters to come. A Prophet he was in the
womb, and bare witness of that light which enlightneth every man that comes
into the world, before he came into it himself, or saw this bodily Sun when
he could not speak, he daunced for joy at his presence, and at his first
approach, after Baptism, he thus salutes him; Ioh. 11. v. 29.
Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. What Prophet
did ever so distinctly prophecy of his passion, and so fully instruct the
people what was foresignified by the sacrifice of the Paschall Lamb? yet was
John himself secured by the former rule, that he spoke this by the spirit of
the Lord, not out of fancy, not presumptuously. For til this Baptism, John 1.
33. See the stimulator chap. 10. Parog. 5.
he knew him not, but he that sent him to baptize with water, he said unto him,
Upon whom thou shall see the spirit come down and tarry still upon him, that
is, he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And he saw it so come to pass,
and bare record that this was the son of God. From this more then
Prophetical spirit of John, manifested by this and the like testifications of
Christ, all afterward approved by the event, did the people gather, Christ not
John, to be that great Prophet, mighty in words and deed. For after he had
escaped the violence offered him at Jerusalem, John 10. v. 40. 41. 42.
and went again beyond Jordan, into the place where John first baptized, Many
(says the Evangelist) resorted unto him and said; John did no miracle, but all
things which John spoke of this man, were true. And many believed in him there;
For his works sake not doubt, but for these as accompanied with the former
circumstances of place and John's predictions. John had witnessed he was the
son of God, mighty in deed and word: and reason they had to think his works
were the works of his father, that his privileges were the privileges of the
only begotten son, and heir of all things; When John though a Prophet, and
more then a Prophet for his portion of the divine spirit, was yet restrained
(by reason of his approach that was before him) from doing such wonders as
meaner Prophets had done. To such as rightly observed this opposition between
John's power in words, and his defect in deeds: or Christ's superabundant power
in both, the case was plain, John was but the Isai 40. v. 3.
Crier, the other (in whose presence his authority decreased,) the Lord, whose
ways he was sent to prepare.

13 If unto the variety of Christ's miracles, The matter of our Saviors
predictions compared with the precedent prophesies of him, declare his Godhead.
compared with John's predictions, and other prophesies, we join his
arbitrarie usual manner, either of foretelling future, or knowing present
matters of every kind, many such as no Prophet durst ever have professed to
belong unto himself: our faith may clearly behold the sure foundation whereon
it is built, That he, even he himself, who had said by the Prophet, [ Isaiah
42. v. 8. 9.
I am the Lord, this is my Name, and my glory will I not give unto another,
neither my praise to graven Images. Behold the former things are come to pass,
and new things do I declare: before they come forth, I tell you of them] did at
the fullness of time manifest his Glory in our flesh, by the practice there
mentioned, of fortelling things strange, and unheard of to the world.
Prophesies of former times were fulfilled in his personal appearance, and made
their period at the beginning of his preaching. Whatsoever concerns the state
of the world, chiefly the Gentiles, since, came from him either as altogether
new, or was refined and renewed by him. For what man among the Nations, yea
what Master in Israel did from the Law or prophets conceive aright of John 3.
v. 5.
the new birth, by water and the spirit, or of that everlasting Kingdom,
whereunto only men so borne, are heirs predestinate? These were the new
things, which he only could distinctly declare before they came forth.

14 That their Messiah was to be this God here spoken of by Isaiah, Our
Saviors arbitrary discovery of secrets and predictions of futures contingent
fully consonant to the received notions of the Messiah.
dwelling and conuersing with them in their nature and substance, might have
been manifested to the Jews (had they not been hood-winked with pride and
malice) from that common notion, even the most vulgar amongst them had, of his
divine spirit, in declaring secrets, and foretelling things to come. What one
miracle done by Christ, did ever take so good effect with so great speed in
best prepared spectators, as his discovery of Nathaniels heart in presence, and
outward carriage, in so great distance? John 1. v. 49.
Rabbi (says Nathaniel) thou art the son of God, thou art the king of
Israel. Though faith be the true gift of God, only wrought by his spirit; yet,
no question, but Nathaniel was more inclined to this confession from the
general notion of the Messiah divine spirit; even by it he was capable of
that promise, habenti dabitur. And our Savior highly approues, and so rewards
this his docility; Ver. 50. 51.
Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, belieuest thou?
thou shall see greater things then these: What were they? Miracles? Yes, for so
he says to him, and the rest of his hearers: Verily, verily, I say unto you,
hereafter shall you see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon the son of man. Then miracles, it seems, were more effectual
to confirm faith, then this experience of his Prophetical spirit: not of
themselves, but joined with it, or as thus foretold by him, and foresignified
by Gen 28. v. 12. 13. 19.
Jacobs vision, which compared with the event, (whether that were at his
ascension or no, I now dispute not) did plainly declare him to be the way and
the door, by which all enter into the house of God.

15 Upon the first apprehension of like discovery made by him, did the poor
Samaritane woman acknowledge he was a Prophet, and upon his auouching himself
to be more then so, she takes him indeed for the expected Messtas, of whom she
had this conceit before, Ioh. 4. v. 25.
That when he came, he should tell them all things. From this preconceiued
notion, working with her present experience of his divine spirit, able to
descrie all the secrets of her heart, she makes this proclamation to her
neighbors: Ver. 29.
Come and see a man that has told me all things that ever I did: is not he
the Christ? Upon their like experience, fully consonant to the same common
notion or conceit of the Messiah, did a many of that City conceive faith from
the woman's report; but more Ver. 42.
because of his own words; And they said unto the woman; Now we believe, not
because of thy saying: for we have heard him our selves, and know that this is
indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world. From the like, but more lively
experience of his discovering secrets, did his Disciples make that confession,
John 16. v. 30.
Now know we that thou know all things, and need not that any man should
ask thee. By this we believe that thou art come out from God.

16 The manifestation of this Prophetical spirit, Our Saviors Disciples and
Apostles did (according to his instructions) more rely upon his predictions
then his miracles.
did give life unto his greatest miracles in working faith: for his Disciples
believed in him after his resurrection, because he had foretold his reedefying
the temple in three days space. Which speech of his the foolish Jews, not
knowing his body to be the true temple, wherein their God did dwell after a
more excellent manner then between the Cherubins, take as meant of the
material Temple, which had been 46. years in building. But (says Saint Ioh.
2. v. 22.
John) As Soon as he was risen from the dead, his Disciples remembered that he
thus said unto them: and they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus
had said. Nor did they compare these two together by chance: for our Savior
often inculcated this Method, as of purpose to imprint the former oracle of
Isaiah in their hearts. To assure them of his going to his father, he expressly
tells them: John 14. 29.
Now I have spoken unto you before it come, that when it is come to pass ye
might believe. Foretelling the persecution of his Disciples, he adds, John 16.
ver. 4
These things have I told you that when the hour shall come, ye might remember
that I told you them. That glory likewise which God had professed he would not
give to any other, Foretelling the fulfilling of that Scripture [He that eats
bread with me has lift up his heel against mee] in Judas, he gave this
general rule, from henceforth tell I you before it come that when it is come
to pass, ye might believe that I am He, John 13. v. 19.
he foretells should be given him, and so demands it, as if He that did
glorify, and He that was glorified, were both one: John, 12. v, 28
Father, Glorify thy Name. Then came there a voice from heaven saying, I have
both glorified it, and will glorify it again. How had he glorified it
before? By glorifying this great Prophet, who did fully express, but far
exceed Moses, in all things wherein former Prophets did resemble him, but
came far short of him. When was he so glorified? At his transfiguration upon
Mount Tabor, which none without sacrilegious impiety could have foretold, as
likely to befall himself, save he alone, that had, not as Moses, only seen
the similitude of the Lord, but being in the form of God, thought it no
robbery to be equal with him. Yet this Prophet of whom we speak, though like
to his Brethren in shape and substance, to assure them he should come in the
glory of his father, foretelles his Disciples that some of them should not
Marc. 9. v. 1. Math. 16. v. 28. Luke 9. 27. 2. Pet. 1. 17.
die until they had seen the Kingdom of God come with power: which was
accomplished in that transfiguration, where, as Saint Peter witnesses, He
received of God the father, honor and glory, when there came such a voice unto
him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved son in whom I am well
pleased; Yea, so well pleased, as for his sake the world might henceforth know
how ready he was to hear all, that through faith in his name should call upon
him, even such as had displeased him most. For this cause, the Codicill annexed
to the divine will and Testament here signified, immediately after to be sealed
with the blood of this best beloved soune, was that reciprocal duty before
intimated in the Law, Hear him: as is specified by Mark. 9. v. 7 Luke 9. v.
35, Math. 17. v. 5.
three Evangelists. For more public manifestation of his Majesty, as then
revealed but to a few, was that glorious commemoration of it lately mentioned,
celebrated again in the audience of the multitude: John 12. v. 30.
This voice says our Savior, Our Savior in his last con^erence with the
Jews proclaims himself to be the great Prophet foretold by Moses.
came not because of me, but for your sakes. And in that place again, after
his wonted predictions of things should after come to pass, as of his victory
over death, he testifies aloud to all the people that he was the great Prophet
foretold by Moses, sweetly paraphrasing upon his words; John 12. v. 44.
And Jesus cried and said, He that belieueth in me, belieueth not in me, but
in him that sent me. And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge
him not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. He did not
accurse such as would not acknowledge his authority, or derogated from his
person or miracles; nor needed he so to do: John 12. ver. 48
for he that refuses him, and receives not his words, has one that judges
him; the word which he had spoken, it shall judge him in the last day. This was
that which Moses had said; Deuteronomy. 18. v. 19
And whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which he [the great Prophet]
shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him, to wit, in the last day of
accounts, John 12. v. 49. and 50.
For I have not spoken of my self, but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment what I should do, and what I should speak. And I know that his
commandment is life everlasting: the things therefore that I speak, I speak
them so as the Father said unto me. What is this, but that speech of Moses
improued to it full value, according to the circumstances and signs of those
times, and as it concerned the Lord and Prince of Prophets? Deuteronomy. 18. v. 18.
Our Saviors prophetical spirit gave life to his miracles though his miracles
were good preparatiues to belief
I will raise them up a Prophet, from among their brethren like unto thee, and
will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I
shall command him.]

17 This being the last conference our Savior was willing to entertain with
the Jews, this his last farewell given in Moses words, warrants me to
construe that speech of S. John's John 12. v. 37.
[though he had done so many miracles before them, yet believed they not on
him] as I have done the like before: to wit, that not his miracles considered
alone, but with Mosaicall and Prophetical writings, or common notions of the
Messiah thence conceived, or (especially) as they concurred with his own
predictions, did immediately condemn the Jews. Under the name of works, his
words are comprehended; such at the least, as foretell his admirable works, or
in general, all those solemn inuocations of his Fathers name, in such
predictions, as had he not been the son of God, would rather have brought
speedy vengeance from heaven upon his head then such glorious testimonies of
his Divinity. And to me our Savior seems to call his very words works, in
that speech to Philip, John. 14. v. 10
Beleeuest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words
that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the father that dwells
in me, he does the works. Howsoever as all the works of God were created by
this eternal word: so did his words give life unto his greatest works; his
Diuinations were to his miracles, as his humane soul was to his body. And no
question, but the conception of their faith that heard him preach, was as
immediately from those words of eternal life which issued from his mouth, as
ours is from the Word preached by his messengers. To what other use then could
miracles serve, save only to breed a praeuiall admiration, and make entrance
for them into his hearers hearts? though his bodily presence at all times was
not; yet were his usual works in themselves truly glorious, more then apt to
dispell that veil of prejudice, commonly taken against the meannesse of his
person, birth, or parentage; had it been merely natural, not occasioned,
through wilful neglect of extraordinary means precedent, and stubborn
opposition to present grace most plentifully offered. His raising others from
death to life, was more then sufficient to remove that offense the people took
at that speech, John 12. ver. 32.
If I were lift up from the earth, I should draw all men unto me. To which they
answered, We have heard out of the Law, that the Christ bideth for ever: and
how say thou that the son of man must be lift up? Who is that son of man?

18 To conclude then, The peculiar similitude between Christ and Moses in the
office of mediation.
his distinct and arbitrary foretelling events of every sort any Prophet had
mentioned, many of them not producible, but by extraordinary miracles, withal
including divine testifications of far greater glory ascribed to him, then
Moses or any Prophet ever challenged, was the demonstratiue rule (according to
Moses prediction) whereunto all visible signs and sensible miracles should have
been resolved by their spectators: as known effects lead contemplators unto
the first and immediate causes, on which their truth and being depends. That
Encomium, [This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, Hear him;] with
the like given by John Baptist [Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the
sins of the world] unto all such as took him for a true Prophet, did more
distinctly point out the similitude peculiar to him with Moses, expressed (in
the forecited place of Deuteronomy) literally: though not so plainly, as most
Readers would without direction observe it, seeing even interpreters most
followed either neglect the words themselves, in which it is directly
contained, or w^est their meaning. Deuteronomy. 18. v. 15 16.
Unto him shall ye hearken, according to all that thou desiredst of the Lord
thy God in Horeb, in the day of the assembly. Their request then was; Talk
thou with us, and we will heart; but let not God talk with us lest we die.
Here the whole multitude bound themselves to hear the word of the Lord, not
immediately from his mouth but by Moses. For whiles the people stood a far
off, he only drew near to the darkness where God was. This their request
and resolution, elsewhere more fully expressed, the Lord highly commended;
Deuteronomy. 5. v. 28. 29.
I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken
unto thee: they have well said, all that they have spoken, Oh that there were
such an heart in them, to fear me, and to keep all my commandments always,
that it might go well with them, and with their children for ever. If we
observe that increment, the literal sense of the same words may receive by
succession of time, or as they respect the body, not the type, both which they
jointly signify; the best reason can be given of Gods approving the former
petition and Isreal's peculiar disposition at that time above others, will be
this; That as posterity in rejecting Vide lib. 1. part. 2. Sect. 3. cap. 11.
Parag. 8. 9. 10.
Samuel, rejected Christ, or God the second person in Trinity: so here the
Fathers, in requesting Moses might be their spokesman unto God, requested that
Great Prophet ordained to be the author of a better covenant even that
promised woman's seed, their brother according to the flesh, to be Mediator
betwixt God and them, to secure them from such dreadful flames as they had
seen, Heb 3 v. 3.
so they would hearken (as then they promised) unto his words, as unto the
words of God himself, esteeming him (as the Apostle says) so far above
Moses, as he that builds the house, is above the house. And in the Emphasis of
that speech [ Deuteronomy. 18. v. 18.
Whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I
will require it of him:] purposely resumed by Moses with these threats
annexed, as if he had not sufficiently expressed his mind in the like
precedent, [Vnto Deuteronomy. 18. v. 18.
him ye shall hearken] the same difference, between Moses and the Great
Prophet then meant, is included which the Apostle in another place expresses,
Heb. 10 ver. 28 20.
He that despises Moses Law, dies without mercy under two or three witnesses.
Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye he shall be worthy, which treads
under foot the son of God, and counts the blood of the Testament as an unholy
thing? Until the soueraignety of the Law and Prophets did determine; that
Encomiu^ of Moses did bear date [ Deuteronomy. 24. v. 10.
There arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew
face to face:] but vanished upon the Criers voice, when the kingdom of heaven
began to appear. The Israelites to whom both promises were made, did far
exceed all other nations, in that they had a law most absolute given by Moses,
yet to be bettered by an everlasting Covenant; the former being as an earnest
penny given in hand, to assure them of the latter. In respect of both, the name
of a Soothsayer or Sorcerer was not to be heard in Israel, as in the nations
which knew not God, much less expected a Mediator, in whom the spirit of life
should dwell as plentifully, as splendour does in the body of the Sun; from
whose fullness ere he visibly came into the world, other Prophets were
illuminated (as those lights which rule the night, are by that great light
which God has appointed to rule the day) at whose approach the Prince of
darkness with his followers, were to avoid the Hemisphere wherein they had
reigned. In the mean time, the testimonies of the Law and Prophesies, served
as a light or candle to minish the terrors of the night. Even Moses himself,
and all that followed him, were but as messengers sent from God to solicit his
people to reserve their allegiance free from all commerce, or compact with
familiar spirits, until the Prince of glory came in person.

19 Thus without censure of their opinion, that otherwise think or teach, The
chief grounds of Moses dissuading Israel for so^ce^y, was their expectation of
the great Prophet.
albeit the continuance of Prophets amongst this people, were a mean to
prevent all occasions of consulting forcerers or witches: yet the chief ground
of Moses disswasion from such practices, acording to the literal connection of
these words. Deuteronomy. 18. v. 14.
The nations which thou shall possess, hearken unto those that regard the
times, and unto sorcerers, as for thee, the Lord thy God has not suffered thee
so,] with those following hitherto expounded. [The Lord thy God will raise up
unto thee a Prophet] was the consideration of their late mighty deliverance by
Moses, the excellency of their present law, and their expectation of a greater
lawgiver, (when the first covenant should wax old, and Prophesies for a long
time fail) unto strict observance of whose precepts they solemnly bound
themselves (as was lately observed ever whilst the former was established.
That which moves me to embrace this interpretation, is Balaams Prophecy
uttered of Israel, considered in the abstract, as he might have been, not as
he proved (as cap. 1.
Malachie speaks of Leuy) or according to the excellency of his calling in
Moses and in Christ, or Gods promise, which he for his part was ready to
perform; Number. 23. v. 22.
God brought them (says he) out of Egypt, their strength is as an Unicorn:
For there is no sorcery in Jacob, nor soothsaying in Israel, according to this
time it shall be said of Jacob, What has God wrought? And in the God brought
him out of Egypt, his strength shall be as an Unicorn. He shall eat the
Nations his enemies, and bruise their bones, and shoot them through with his
arrows. He coucheth and lies down as a young Lion, and as a Lion: who shall
stir him up? Blessed is he that blesses thee, and cursed is he that curses
thee. I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not near. There
shall come a star of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise of Israel, and shall
smite the coasts of Moah, and destroy all the sons of Sheth: And Edom shall
be possessed, and Seir shall be a possession to their enemies: but Israel
shall do valiantly. He also that shall have dominion shall be of Jacob, and
shall destroy the remnant of the City. Number. 24. v. 8. 9. and 17. 18. 19.
Chapter following, he ioines Isreal's deliverance from Egypt, as the
foundation or beginning, and his victory in Christ, as the accomplishment or
finishing of his glory. Of that Jacob meant by Balaam, even we Gentiles are a
part, every way as strictly bound by Moses law, as Israel was to abandon
soothsaying and sorcery, but especially bound to abhor these and like works
of darkness, from that light, the star of Jacob has afforded us. These two
great Prophets then, Christ and Moses, appointed successively to declare Gods
will unto his people, were the maine supporters of true religion in Israel, by
whose doctrine all curious and superstitious arts weer to vanish. And, if my
observation fail not, Israel was much less given to sorcerie after ordinary
Prophets ceased, then before: because this great Prophet, the Hope of Israel,
was at hand.

20 The apprehension of what we now by long search hardly find; was more facile
to the ancient Jews, from the known conceits, or received traditions thereto
pertinent. Before the Law That our Saviors authority might have been and was
more manifestly proved out of Moses and the Prophets to the ancient: then it
can be to the modern Jews altogether unacquainted with the right manner of
interpreting prophecies, or such common notions or traditions, as the Scribes
and Pharisees had in our Saviors time.
was written, one they had heard should be sent from God, a mighty deliverer
of his people: unto whom Moses thought himself much inferior, as appears by
his reply to God when he was first sent to visit his brethren; Exodus 4. v. 13
Mitte, quaeso, quem missurus es; Send, I pray thee, whom thou will send: as if
he had said, One thou have appointed from everlasting, to declare thy name unto
his brethren, to show mercy to thy people, and thy power upon thine enemies;
and I beseech thee send him now, for this is work befitting his strength, not
my weakness. From the like notions or received opinions, did the Pharisees
understand this place, as meant of the Prophet that was to come: albeit it may
be doubted, whether they took him to be the same with the Messiah. For so they
demand of John severally; John. 1. v. 20. and 21.
Art thou the Christ? Art thou Eliah? Art thou the Prophet? Eliah was plainly
distinguished from the Messiah by Isaiah, or perhaps they knew the Messiah
and the Prophet to be the same: yet, like strict examiners, proposed these two
several names, to leave John no evasion. It was likewise a truth presupposed
and known, at least amongst the Some interpreters observe that S. John does
purposely insert these words, Now they which were sent were of the Pharisees,
Ioh. 1. ver. 24. though other Evangelists call them only Levites; to notify
unto us that this was a tradition known unto that sect.
Pharisees, that Eliah, Messiah, the Prophet, one or all, should baptize. Hence
they further question the Baptist; Ioh. 1. ver. 25.
Why baptizest thou then, if thou be not the Christ, neither Elias, nor the
Prophet? And of himself he says, because He ver. 31.
(to wit, the Christ) should be declared to Israel, therefore am I come
baptizing with water. This answer, with his practice permitted by the
Pharisees, and approved by the people, so fully concurring with the former
notion, but especially his praediction of Christ's baptizing with the holy
Ghost, and (as Saint Mat. 3. ve. 11.
Matthew adds) with fire; were most pregnant testimonies against unbelievers,
after they had notice of the Holy Ghosts descending (upon the same day their
Law was given) from heaven. for the plentiful manner of effusion, and placide
illapse into the souls of every sort, resembling water powered out (as the Joel
2. 28.
Prophets phrase imports;) but for outward appearance, and inward effects of
ardent zeal, like unto fire. And likely it is, as well the Ex. 13. 21. 22.
pillar of fire which enlightened Israel by night, as the cloud that rested
upon the tabernacle, under which (S. 1. Cor. 10. 1. 2.
Paul says) the Fathers being, were baptized in it, were such praeluding types
of baptism by water and the Holy Ghost: as the Rock was of Chrik; or the
waters thence flowing, of those springs of life, which issue from him to the
refreshing of every faithful thirsty soul. The mystical significations of
such shadows of good things to come, were sufficiently known to the Jews
living in our Saviors time. Whence, (as the two judicious Commentatours, Bucer
and Martyr observe) his adversaries mouths were instantly stopped, at the first
allegation of those places the modern Jews bark most against, as not
inferring what the Evangelists report their forefathers granted: because these
had a peculiar manner of interpreting scriptures not acknowledged by the later,
grown out of use for the most part amongst Christians, or rather ouergrowen
with the abuse of luxuriant a^legories, and mystical senseless, senses,
framed by Monkish or rather Apish imitation of orthodoxall antiquity. The
weeding out of such tares, as, through these bad husbands sloth and
negligence, have abounded in Gods harvest, will not (we trust) be either
difficult, or dangerous to the good seed primitive antiquity has sown: whose
general method and manner of interpreting prophecies (though in particulars
it often fail; partly, through aduenturous imitation of some Philosophers in
unfolding heathenish mysteries; partly, through want of skill in the original
tong^es) holds the just means between barbarous Postillers, and some late
preachers, worthily famous, yet too nice and scrupulous in this subject, as
shall appear when we come to handle it.

21 But to finish what we had last in hand, Our Saviors prediction of his
death and resurrection, was that which according to Moses prophecy, did most
condemn, the Jews*
the most remarkable, most public document our Savior gave to unbelievers,
of his designment to that great office foretold by Moses, was the constant
auouchment of his death and resurrection, unto such as so well observed his
words, that after they had taken away his life, Mat. 27. v. 63.
procured a strong watch to be set about his sepulcher least his Disciples
should take his body thence, and by emptying it seem to fulfill his prophecy.
Nor did he once only, but Mat 12. v. 39. Math. 16. v. 14
twice foretell; not barely, he would rise again: but that thus much was
presignified by the Prophet Ionahs three days imprisonment in the Whales
belly; thus inuiting them to observe all congruitie of circumstance between
the historical type already exhibited, and the substance prophesied: which
method, as hereafter (God willing) will appear* is, of all the best, for
insinuating faith into superstitious, perverse, and crooked hearts, otherwise
most unapt to recieue truths late revealed. Since Christ's glorification, sundry
impostors have done many works, hardly distinguishable by spectators from true
miracles: but the end of all their purposes, which they sought thence to
persuade, was always so dissonant to the vncorrupt notions, praecedent types,
or prophecies of the Messiah; as, unto hearts well settled, and surely grounded
upon scriptures formerly established and confirmed, their greatest wonders
seemed but apish toys, howsoever difficiles nugae. And some of these iuglers,
either out of the strength of their own illusions, or upon the presumption of
their profane skill in deceiving others, have adventured to foretell their
resurrection; but were not able to dissolve the bands of death: their
everlasting durance in whose prisons, has openly showed they spoke
presumptuously; that not Mahomet himself the greatest of them, was that Great
Prophet foretold by Moses. What was the reason then the Jews would not; the
Turks, unto this day, will not believe in Christ crucified? For the Act. 13.
v. 27.
inhabitants of Jerusalem, Saint Paul has answered, Because they knew him not,
nor yet the words of the Prophets which are read every Sabbath day, they have
fulfilled them in condemning him. The same apostle, though endued with the power
of miracles, yet in that place rather uses David's words, then his own works,
to prove Christ's resurrection. Of which, that saying of his was most truly
verified in the obstinate Jews, Luke 16. v. 31.
Not hearing Moses, and the Prophets (so as to be moved by them to true
repentance,) neither were they persuaded, though this great Prophet of whom
they wrote, was raised from the dead again.

22 Were we well acquainted either with that manner of interpretation, or those
praenotions the Apostle supposed as known, when he used that testimony of the
Psalmist Act. 13. 33. Psalm. 2. v. 7,
[Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee] to prove our Saviors
resurrection: it would not be hard to persuade us Moses words, hitherto
expounded, were as literally meant of Gods raising his Son out of his Maiden
grane as out of his virgin Mothers womb. And I make no question but the
conclusion of Saint Peter's. Sermon, Act. 3. 26.
Unto you (whom a little before he had termed children of the Prophets) has
God raised up his Son, were meant by him of his raising Christ from the dead.
And yet are these words but an application of the former principal text he
there insists upon Ve 3. ^r. 2^,
Moses said unto the Fathers* The Lord your God shall raise up unto you a
Prophet even of your brethren like unto me, ye shall hear him all things
whatsoever he shall say unto you. And unto this resurrection does the strict
propriety of that phrase [ Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
from the midst of thee] well agree. Act. 26. 26.
For these things were not done in a corner, but in Jerusalem, the metropolis
of Judea, not without express notice given to the rulers. Moses indeed
foretold his own death, and whatsoever other Prophets, (raised up by God unto
this people,) did foretell, came still to pass: yet none ever foretold his
own raising up. But seeing Christ's first raising from the virgins womb,
though most miraculous, was yet more private: he forwarned the world to expect
this second, altogether as powerful, but more public. And in it again he
is like to Moses raised up by God, to be a Savior of his people, out of that
Arc which without divine especial providence had been his tomb. This
similitude amongst the rest, betwixt Christ and Moses, as well in their latter
as first birth, but especially the notice our Savior gave unto his enemies of
the latter; has made them unwittingly Prophets to their woe. For seeing it
has left their unbelief without excuse, Math. 27. 64.
their last error concerning his resurrection, is become worse then the first
concerning his birth. Neither could have seemed incredulous (though both most
miraculous) to this ungracious seed of Jacob; had they looked (as the Prophet
willed them;) Isaiah. 51. v. 1.
unto the rock whence they were hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence they
were dug. The mighty increase of Sarahs womb, no better then dead, and
strange multiplication of Isaacks seed beyond the posterity of all the people
with whom he soiourned, did but portend the fruitful offspring of the Virgins
only son should in number and dignity far surmount the sons and
daughters of all the fertile mothers in Judea, Isaackes posterity had been
great; yet able to be numbered, by David. Isai 53. v. 8. 9.
But his generation who shall declare, that was cut out of the land of the
living? Heb. 11. 12.
Therefore sprang there even of one, and him as dead: (or destinated to death,
as Isaac was; yea of one truly dead, that made his grave with the wicked, as
many as the Stars in the sky in multitude (in dignity greater,) and as the
sand by the seashore innumerable. Mighitier was the increase of that Rock
wherein he made his grave, whence we are hewn, then of that pit whence Israel
according to the flesh, was dug. His exaltation since, has been their
fall. For seeing they would not believe his predictions, as their Lawgiuer had
commanded; the world may clearly see the curse indefinitely there denounced
against all such as would not hear, fulfilled upon that stubborn generation,
according to the full extent of Saint Peter's paraphrase Act, 3. ver. 23. For it
shall be that every person which shall not near that Prophet, shall be destroyed
out of the people.
upon it, Not one or a few only were destroyed out of the people (as Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, for disobedience unto Moses:) but the whole people, or
nation, were utterly rooted out of the land. All which, with all particular
circumstances and signs precedent or ensuing, this great Prophet in his life
time had so distinctly foretold; that, if we compare former Prophets with him,
they may seem to have but dreamed; he alone, that put these unknown ditties
into their heads, to have had the perfect skill of right interpreting their
meaning.

CHAP. XII.
That the method used by the great Prophet himself after his resurrection for
planting faith, was such as we teach: The excess of Antichrists exaltation
above Christ: The Diametricall opposition betwixt the spirit of God, and the
Spirit of the Papacy.
1 MOses was to be acknowledged a great Prophet, because the whole host of
Israel infallibly knew the Lord was with him in all he did; every Prophet
after him to be known by the rules which he had given, for their discrement;
Christ Jesus to be taken for the great Prophet and mediator of the everlasting
covenant, because in words, in works, in all his ways, exactly answerable to
Mosaicall and prophetical Characters of the Messiah that was to come. This
sweet harmony of legal types or ancient prophecies, as well with the whole
course of his blessed life, as with his ignominious and cruel death, or manner
of his glorious resurrection, I should either have esteemed or regarded less,
had not my Savior himself preferred the assurance of prophetical testimonies
before the certainty of their se^ses that had conuersed with him in their life
time, admitted to conference with him after his rising from the dead. For so
we read of two Disciples which had seen his miracles, heard his doctrine, and
acknowledged him for a Prophet, mighty in word and deed: but yet distrusted
the report of his resurrection after it had been the second time confirmed by
such of their fellows as had doubted with them: yea their Master himself had
told them as much before his death. And had he not good reason then to vpbraid
them with distrust, having now met them as liue-like as they themselves were?
Was he to them a Prophet, mighty in word and deed: and yet not able to
perform what he had constantly spoken? But what was the chief matter of
their just reproof? That they had not believed his words, nor given due
credence to his works? Dull, no doubt, they had been, in not esteeming better
of both; unwise, in not learning more of him, that taught as never man taught:
but (as in them he teaches us) most dull and most unwise, even Luke 24. 25.
fools and slow of heart, in not believing all that the Prophets had spoken.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things (as if he had said, Is it
possible your ignorance in them should be so gross, as not to know that
Christ was thus to suffer) and so to enter into his glory?

2. You will say perchance they did not well in giving so little attention and
credit to the Prophets, whose light should have led them unto Christ: but now
that they have light on him in person, without their help, only by his
seeking them, shall not he who was the end and scope of all prophetical
writings, teach them all? He will: but not by relying only upon his infallible
authority. This aedifice of faith must be framed upon the foundation laid by
the Prophets. For this reason happily our Savior would not bewray himself to
be their infallible teacher, until he had made them by evidence of Scripture,
by true sense and feeling of his spirit, believe and know the truth, which he
taught, to be infallible. He had opened their hearts, by opening the
Scriptures unto them before their eyes were open to discern his person: for
Luke 24. 27.
he began at Moses and at all the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in all
the Scriptures the things which were written of him. Steadfast belief then of
any man's authority, must spring out of the solid experience of his skill, and
truth of his doctrine. These two disciples might now resolve their hearts,
that this was he who John said should baptize with the holy Ghost and with
fire; when by the working of his spirit, v. 32.
their hearts did burn within them, whiles he talked with them, and opened
the Scriptures unto them. Though before they had received John Baptists
witness of the truth, as a tie or fest to stay their fleeting faith; Ioh. 5.
34. 32.
yet now they would not receive the record of man; there is another that
bears witness of him; the spirit of truth, which has imprinted his
doctrine in their hearts.

3. Would the Pope who challenges Christ's place on earth amongst his living
members, and requires we should believe his words, as well as these Disciples
did Christ's, but expound those Scriptures unto us which Christ did to them,
with like evidence and efficacy; could he make our hearts thus burn within,
by opening the secret mysteries of our salvation: we would take him for
Christ's Vicar, and believe indeed he were infallibly assisted by the holy
spirit. But seeing he and his followers inuert our Saviors method by calling
the certainty of both Testaments in question, telling us we cannot know them
to be Gods word unless it shall please this Roman God to give his word for
them, or confirm their truth; seeing this his pretended confirmation is not
by manifesting the mysteries of our salvation so distinctly and clearly as
Christ did unto these Disciples, nor by affoording us the true sense and
feeling of the spirit, in such ardent manner as they enjoyed it, and yet
accurseth us if we believe not his words as well as they did their Redeemers:
we may hence take a perfect measure of that A brief survey of the mouth of
blasphemies spoken of by S. John.
mouth of blasphemies spoken of by Saint John, according to all the three
dimensions contained in the three assertions prefixed to the beginning of this
Section. Nor can the reader imagine either any other forepassed, like unto it;
or yet to come, likely to prove more abominable: if it shall but please him to
suruay the length and breadth of it, but especially the profunditie.

4. The length of it I make that assertion; The Pope must be as well believed,
as either Christ was whilst he lived on earth, or his Apostles after his
glorification. The breadth; His absolute authority must be for extent as large
and ample as Christ's should be, were he on earth again; or that commission he
gave to his Disciples, Go Preach the Gospel to every creature: his directions
must go forth throughout all the earth, and his words unto the ends of the
world. The depth is much greater then the space between heaven and hell. For
if you would draw a line from the Zenith to the Nadir through the Center, it
would scarce be a gag long enough for this monstrous mouth; so wide as hell
cannot conceive a greater. The depth I gather, partly from the excess of
Christ's worth, either arising from his personal union with the Godhead; his
sanctity of life and conversation; or from his hyperpropheticall spirit and
abundant miracles. For look how much he exceedes any but mere man in all
these: by so much does the Pope (though supposed as not obnoxious to any crime)
make his authority and favor with God greater then Christ's, which is the
semidiameter of this mouth of blasphemies. The other part, equal hereunto in
quantity, but for the quality more tainted with the dregs of Hell, arises
from that opposition the Popes spirit has unto Christ; or from the luxury and
beastly manners of the Papacy, erected by Satan as it were of purpose to
pollute the world with monstrous sins, and to derogate as much from mankind,
as true Christianity does advance it: finally to make the Christian world as
much more wicked, as Christ's Disciples, Apostles, and faithful followers are
better then the heathen. Nor does the Pope exact belief only without miracles
or manifestation of a prophetical spirit: The chief arguments brought by
Romish Writers to prove the excellency of their church directly contrary to
the principles of Sense and Nature.
but contrary to all notions of good and evil, common to Christians and
Heathens, and as it were in despite of the prophecies that have deciphered him
for Antichrist. What heathen Philosopher could with patience have endured to
hear, that a dissolute luxurious tyra^t could not, though in matters of this
life, give wrong sentence out of the seat of Justice? The Jesuits teach it as
an Article of faith, that the Pope, albeit a dissolute and ungracious tyrant,
Mankinds reproach, the disgrace of Christianity, cannot possibly give an
erroneous sentence ex cathedra, no not in mysteries of religion. But as if it
were a small thing thus impudently to contradict nature, and grieve the souls
of ingenuous men, unless they also grieve their Isa. ^, ^^er. 13.
God, seeking as it were to cross his spirit by holding opinions not only
contradictory but most contrary to his sacred rules; they importune the
Christian world with tumultuous clamours, to take that, which the spirit has
given as the demonstratiue character of great Antichrist, the old serpents
chief confederate, for the infallible cognizance of Christ's Vicar, the very
signet of his beloved Spouse. Nor will they (I know) though friendly
admonished, cease henceforth to urge their outworn arguments, drawn from
antiquity, universality; from that reverence and allegiance which most
Kingdoms of Europe have for these thousand years and more borne to the Sea of
Rome; or from the bloody victories over all other inferior Churches or private
spirits, that have oppugned her. These or like allegations in their judgment
abundantly prove their Church to be Christ's best beloved, the Pope to be his
Deputy, or rather his corriuall here on earth, whose words sound as the word of
God, and not of Man; albeit the spirit has plainly foretold, that Revel. 13.
v. 4. 6. 7.
the beast which had his power from the Dragon, and should open his mouth unto
blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name and his tabernacle, and them
that dwell in heaven, should have power given withal to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them, yea, over every kindred, tongue and nation, so as
all that dwell upon the earth should worship him, whose names were not
written in the Book of life of the Lamb, which was slain from the beginning
of the world.

5 To the Jesuits bragges, that no visible Church since the world began, did
either spread it self so far, or flourish so long as theirs has done; I
only oppose that of our Savior, Ex tuo ipsius ore iudicabere serve nequam,
Thine own confession shall condemn thee, thou bondslaue of Satan. For if the
Romish Hierarchy be or has been in the worlds eye, the most potent and
flourishing that ever was: This description of the Beasts power cannot agree so
well to any as unto it, Nor does the Scripture any where intimate the true
Church militant should dominere over all Nations, or be so triumphantly
victorious, as they boast theirs has been. To think the Antichrist whom they
expect should in three years space subdue as many Nations as have been
tributary to the Sea of Rome, is a conceit that iustifies the Jew as well in
his credulity of things to come which are impossible, as in his hypocritical
partiality toward his present estate, which he never suspects of Apostasy.
Unto this observation the Reader may add other like descriptions of this
scarlet Whore; all so fitly agreeing to the Papacy, as he that will not
acknowledge it for the Kingdom of great Antichrist, has great reason to
suspect his heart, that if he had lived with our Savior, he would scarce have
taken him for his Messiah; nor can the Jesuits bring any better reasons, why
the Pope should not be the Antichrist; then the Jews did, why Christ should
not be the Great Prophet. Yet this I say, not to discourage such as doubt
whether the Pope be that Man of sin; or to bring them out of love with their
belief, which may be sound without express or actual acknowledgement of this
truth, not as yet revealed unto them: as those two Disciples, no doubt, were
neither hypocrites nor infidels, albeit they mistrusted the report of Christ's
resurrection; for they were farther from approving the practices of the Jews
against him, then from actual acknowledgement of it. If any man thus doubt,
whether the Pope be Antichrist, so he do not approve his hatred and war
against Gods Saints, or his other devilish practices: Gods peace be upon him;
and in good time I trust his eyes shall be enlightened to see the truth in this
particular, as those two Disciples did in the Article of the resurrection.

6 Seeing we have proved the Popes authority so far to exceed Christ's; it
may seem needless to compare it with the Apostles. Yet lest any Jesuit
should except, that their authority might be greater after their Masters
glorification, then his was before: let us a while examine, what they assumed
unto themselves; what they gave unto the Scriptures before extant.

CHAP. XIII.
That the authority attributed to the present Pope, and The Romish rule of
faith, were altogether unknown unto Saint Peter^ the opposition betwixt Saint
Peter's and his pretended Successors doctrine.
1 TO begin with Saint Peter, the first supposed to be enstalled in this See
of Rome. It may be presumed that this Supremacy over his fellow Apostles, were
it any, was in his life time, whiles his miracles were fresh, and the
extraordinary efficacy of his Ministry daily manifested, as well known
amongst the faithful, as the Popes now amongst Roman Catholics. If
necessary it had been to acknowledge him, or his successors, as a second Rock
or foundation: the commendation of this doctrine unto posterity, had bin most
requisite at the time he wrote his second Epistle, Pet. 2. c. 1. v. 14.
as knowing then the time was at hand he should lay down his Tabernacle; when
he endeavored his auditors might have remembrance of his former doctrine, to
make their calling and election sure. If ever there had been a fit season
for notifying the necessity of the Sea Apostoliques infallibility, all the
circumstances of this place witness this was it. 2. Pet. 1. 14.
If any, they to whom he wrote, were most bound to obey it: Their faith had
been planted by him: his present intent and purpose was, more and more to
confirm them in the truth wherein they were in some measure established. And
being thus mindful, will he not make choice of means most effectual to
prevent heresy or Apostasy? What are these then? absolute reposall in his and
his Successors infallibility? Had this been the best rule of faith, he knew
his fault were inexcusable for not prescribing it, to such as most willingly
would have used it. His personal testimony and authority was, I confess, as
great as any mortal man's could be: with his own eyes he had beheld 2. Pet. 1.
16.
the Majesty of our Lord Christ, whom he preached unto them. If any trust
there be in humane senses, this Saint of God could not possibly be deceived.
If any credence to be given unto miracles, or sanctity of life: his flock
might rest assured he would not deceive; his works so witness the sincerity
of his doctrine: or if his eyes were not, in these his auditors judgments,
sufficient witnesses of this truth: he further assures them, when his Lord
received of God the Father. 2. Pet. 1. 17.
honor and glory, there came such a voice unto him from the excellent glory,
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. And this voice says he,
we heard when it came from heaven, (being not a far off) but with him in the
mount. If Saint Peter's seat or chair had been as the Pole-starre, whereto our
belief, as the Mariners needle, should be directed, lest we floate we know
not whether in the Ocean of opinions: were the bosom of the visible Church the
safest harbor our souls in all storms of temptation could thrust into: this
Apostle was either an unskillful Pilot, or an uncharitable man, that would not
before his death instruct them in this course for the eternal safety of their
souls, whose bodily lives he might have commanded to have saved his own. Had
perpetual succession in his See, or Apostolical tradition never interrupted,
been such an Ariadnaes thread, as now it is thought, to guide us through the
Labyrinth of errors: Such was Saint Peter's love to truth, that he would have
so fastened it to all faithful hearts, as none should ever have failed to
follow it, in following which he could not err. Doubtless had any such
conceit lodged in his breast, this discourse had drawn it out, his usual form
of exhortation had been too mild, his ordinary style too low. This doctrine
had been proclaimed to all the world, with Anathemaes, as loud and terrible,
as the Canons of any Papisticall Council report.

2 But he followed no 2. Pet. 1. v. 16.
such deceitful fables, when he opened unto them the power and coming of
Christ: whose Majesty as he had seen with his own eyes, so would he have
others to see him too. But by what light? By Scriptures. What Scriptures? Peter
feed my sheep? Nay, but by the light of Prophecy. That is a light indeed, in
it self, but unto private spirits it is no better, (says Vide lib. 2^ Sect
2. cap 5. Parag. 6.
Valentian) then a light put under a bushel, unless the visible Church do
hold it out. Where did the visible Church keep residence in those days? In
Saint Peter, I trow. How chances it then he says not; fix your eyes on mine
that have seen the glory of the Lord, and the Prophets light shall shine unto
you? If by his commendation and proposal it were to shine, he had said better
thus: 2. Pet. 1. v. 19.
Ye do well in that you give heed unto me, as to your only infallible
teacher, that must confirm you in the truth of Prophetical Writings, and
cause them shine in your hearts: but now he says: Ye do well in that ye
take heed unto the Prophets, as unto a light that shines in a dark place,
until the day star arise in your hearts. This light of Prophets illuminated
the eyes of Peter's faith, albeit with his bodily eyes he had seen Christ's
glory. For speaking comparatively of that testimony which he had heard in the
Mount, he adds, We have also asurer Prophetical predictions of Christ surer
grounds of faith, then the live testimonies of the Apostles, that had seen
Christ, and conuersed with him. Amplectendus est Commentarius qui interpretatur
in hunc modum, habemus sirmiorem, id est, certiorem and compertiore^ [rationem]
Id enim temporis sermo Propheticorum spectatior erat, and latius receptus qua^
sermo Apostolorum and Euangelistariu^. Sasbout in hunc locum.
word of the Prophets. That the Lord had been glorified in the Mount, his
Auditors were to take upon his credit and authority; nor could he make them
to see this particular, as he himself had done: but that Christ Jesus whom he
saw glorified in the Mount, was the Lord of Glory; he had (...), a surer
testimony then his bodily sense, the light of Prophets. This then was the
commendations of his flock, that they looked upon it which shined as well unto
them, as him; to all without respect of persons, that take heed unto it; able
to bring them not to acknowledge Peter's infallibility, but to the day star it
self whose light would further ascertaine them even of the truth the Prophets
and the Apostles taught. For Christ is in a peculiar manner, the first and the
last in the edifice of faith, the lowest and the highest stone in the corner,
refused by the master builders or visible pillars of the Jewish Church: their
faith was not grounded upon the Prophets, whose words they knew not; and not
knowing them, they knew not him: but unto such as raise their faith by this
(...), the true square and line, Christ is both the fundamental Rock, which
supporteth; and the chief corner stone, that binds the whole house of God,
and preserues it from clifts and ruptures.

3. But least his followers might look amiss upon this prophetical light, 2.
Pet. 1. v. 19.
rightly esteemed in the general, Saint Peter thought it necessary to
advertise them, not to content themselves with every interpretation, or
accustomarie acknowledgement of their truth, grounded on others relations,
reports, or skill in expounding them, or multitude of voices that way swaying.
This had been as if a man that has eyes of his own, should believe there was
a Moon or stars, because a great many of his honest neighbors had told him
so, A thousand witnesses in such a case as this, were but private testimonies,
in respect of that distinct knowledge which every one may have that list. That
the Lord should preserve light in Goshen, when darkness had covered the whole
face of Egypt besides, seems unto me less strange, but more sensibly true then
before: whilst I consider, how in this age wherein the light of his
countenance has so clearly shined throughout those parts of Europe whence the
Gospel came to us, Ingolstade should still sit in darkness, environed with
the shadow of death. That her great professor Valentian, borne I take it,
within these fourscore years, should grope at noone day, as if he had been
brought forth in the very midnight of Popery, or died well nigh three hundred
years ago. Scarce Scotus himself, not Ockam (questionless) though shut up in
a prison, where no light of any expositor had ever come, could have made a more
dunsticall collection of the Apostles words, then he has done. Cum tam serio
ac grauiter admonuit beatus Petrius, vt hoc inprimis intelligeremus, quod omnis
inquit, Prophetia scripturae, propria interpretatione non fit. 2. Pet. 1. ali
quid e tribus significare voluit, nempe, 1. aut non posse vllo modo, scilicet
certo vel prohabili, exponi scriptura^ propria industia and ingenio: Aut. 2.
non posse certo quide^ exponi vnum aut alterum scripturae locum ex ingenio
proprio, sine collatione alioru^ scripturae locoru^, cum ea vero collatione
posse: Aut. 3. non posse certo quidem and infallibiliter vbique eam expani sine
sententia ali^uius alterius communis and infallibilit authoritatis, quae
proinde in Ecclesia sit fides Iudex. Sed nec primum nec secundum significare
voluit, Ergo tertium. Non quidem primum; Nam constat multa possim Scripturae
loca esse probabiliter exposita a sanctis Patribus, propria eorum ingenij
solertia atque industria. Non etiam secundum, nempe vt non putet aliquis se
posse vnum aut alterum scripturae locum ingenio proprio infallibiliter ac certo
exponere, non consultis and collatis alijs Scripturae locis. Nam quis omnino
haereticorum hoc putat? Aut quid opus crat hoc tam serio admonere? Item, si
vnum aut alterum Scripturae leci^, ingenio sensuque proprio interpretari certo
nemo potest: suanto minus locos scripturae plures inter quos collatio
institui^^ Vnde ipse D. Petriu: Omnis, inquit, Prophetia Scripturae, etc. Non
dicit, haec aut illa tantu^, sed absolute ac sine vlla acceptione, omnis
Prophetia Scripturae, propria interpretatione non fit. Restat igitur vt tertium
illud, quod diximus, significauerit hoc loco D. Petrus: Nempe vt vis atque
sapientia huius Apostolicae monitionis sit, Neminem priualo suo labor atque
proprio studio, quacunque demum ratione, atque adeo etiam ne ex ipsa quidem
Scriptura, doctrinam scripturae certo ac infallibiliter in controuersis
quaestionibus intelligere posse sed opus esse vt discat ex aliqua alia
authoritate in Ecclesia communi, per quam spiritus sanctus communiter loquatur,
ac omnes doceat. Nam vt ipse Apostolus ibidem subiungit, quemadmodum non
authoritate humana, sed diuina, locuti in Scripturis sunt sancti Dei homines,
ita etiam non humna ac propria industria huius vel illius hominis vllo modo, ne
ex ipsa quidem scriptura, sententia scripturae certo cognoscenda est, sed ex
aliqua authoritate, item diuina, per quam ipse spiritus sanctus, qui Scripturae
author est, sit etiam certissimus Scripturae interpres. Ita fit, vt sola
Scriptura non sufficiat nobis, ad certo dijudicandas fidei quaestiones. Valen.
Tom. 3. in Aquinat. disp. 1. quaest. 1. de object. fidei. Punct. 7.. 9.
Saint Peter meant one of these Three. First, that there can be no certain or
probable way of expounding Scriptures by our proper wit or industry: or
Secondly, that one or other place of Scripture cannot be rightly expounded by
humane wit or industry, but so compared they rightly may: or, Thirdly, that the
Scriptures cannot certainly and infallibly be expounded every where without
the sentence of some other common infallible authority, which in this respect
is to be held as judge of faith in the Church. The Apostle (he inferres) did
not mean the first or second: ergo, the third. So as the force and wisdom of
the Apostolical admonition, is this; No man by his private industry or study,
howsoever employed (either he thougt not of the holy Ghosts direction or
assistance, or did not except it,) no not by any search of Scripture it self,
can certainly and infallibly understand the doctrine of Scriptures, in
controversies (of which Saint Peter in that place speaks not one word) but it
is necessary he learn this of some other public authority in the church, by
which the Holy Ghost speaks publicly, and teaches all. His reason follows
more duncticall then the collection it self: For the Apostle straight
(subions: As the holy men of God did speak in Scriptures, not by humane
authority, but divine: so likewise cannot the Scriptures be possibly
understood by any humane or private industry of this or that man, but by some
other authority, likewise divine, by which the holy spirit which is the Author
of Scriptures, may be likewise the most certain interpreter of Scriptures

4 Had another read thus much unto me, and bid me read the Author or his works
wherein it was found: I should presently have named either Erasmus Moriae
Encomium, Frishlins Priscianus Vapulans, or some such like Comedian, disposed
in meriment to pen some old Dunces part. Cannot the Sun of righteousness
infuse his heavenly influence, by the immediate operation of his spirit?
Participation of that spirit, by which the scriptures were written, makes
private men's interpretations of them not private but authentic.
or does his influence want force without conjunction with this blasing Comet,
or falling star? Was it not the authority of this spirit which made Saint
Peter himself to be so authentic in his doctrine? Is it not the pretended
privilege of the same spirit which exempts the Pope from priuatenesse, and
makes his authority ecumenical and infallible? Whosoever then by participation
of this spirit understands the Prophesies, either immediately, or expounded by
others, whomsoever; his conceit of them, or their right interpretation, is not
private, but authentic. And Lib. 2. loc. Theol. cap. 8. Vide Sect. 4. cap 1.
Parag. 3.
Canus, though a Papist, expressly teaches, that the immediate ground or
formal reason of ours and the Apostles belief, must be the same; both so
immediately and infallibly depending upon the testimony of the spirit, as if
the whole world beside should teach the contrary, yet were every Christian
bound to stick unto that inward testimony which the spirit has given him.
Though the Church or Pope should expound them to us, we could not infallibly
believe his expositions; but by that spirit, by which he is supposed to teach:
so believing, we could not infallibly teach others the same; for it is the
spirit only that so teaches all. The inference then is as evident, as strong;
that private in the forecited place, is opposed to that which wants authority,
not unto public or common. The Kings promise made to me in private, is no
private promise: but will warrant me, if I come to plead before his Majesty,
albeit others make question whether I have it or no. In this sense that
interpretation of scriptures which the spirit affordes us that are private men,
is not private but authentic, though not for extent or publication of it unto
others, yet for the perfection of our warrant in matters of salvation or
concerning God. For where the spirit is, there is perfect liberty, yea free
access of pleading our cause, against whomsoever before the Tribunal seat of
justice; especially being wronged in matters of the life to come. To this
purpose says our Apostle Cor. 1. 2. 15
But he that is spiritual discerns all things: yet he himself is judged
of no man. In those things wherein he cannot be judged by any; he is no
private man but a Prince and Monarch, for the freedom of his conscience. But
if any man falsely pretend this freedom to nurse contentions, or to withdraw
his neck from that yoke whereto he is subject; he must answer before his
supreme Judge and his holy Angels, for framing unto himself a counterfeit
license without the assured warrant of his spirit. And so shall they likewise
that seek to command men's consciences in those matters, wherein the spirit
has set them free. This is the height of iniquity, that has no temporal
punishment in this life: but must be reserved as the object of fiercest wrath
in that fearful day; the very Idea of Antichristianisme.

CHAP. XIIII.
That Saint Paul submitted his doctrine to examination by the Words before
written. That his doctrine, disposition and practice, were quite contrary to
the Romanists in this argument.
1 SAint Paul, as well as other Apostles, had the gift of miracles, which
amongst Barbarians or distressed souls, destitute of other comfort, likely to
be won to grace by wonders, he did not neglect to practice: but sought not
to enforce belief upon the Jews, by fearful signs, or sudden destruction
of the obstinate, albeit he had power to anathematize, not only in word, but
in deed, even to deliver men alive unto Satan. When he came to Thessalonica,
he went as his manner was into the Synagogue, Act. 17. v. 2.
and three Sabbath days disputed with his countrymen by the Scriptures,
opening and alleging that Christ must have suffered, and risen again from
the dead: and this is Jesus Christ whom I preach to you. These Jews had Moses
and the Prophets, and if they would not hear them, neither would they believe,
for any miracles: which to have wrought amongst such had been as the casting of
pearls before swine. What was the reason they did not believe? because the
Scriptures which he urged, were obscure? but Saint Paul did open them. Rather
they saw the truth, as Papists do, but would not see it. They rightly
believed, whatsoever God had said, was most true; that he had said what Moses
and the Prophets wrote: and yet Saint Paul taught nothing which they had not
foretold. But that was all one; these Jews had rather believe Moses and the
Prophets meant as the Scribes and Pharisees, or other chief Rulers of their
Synagogues taught, then as Paul expounded them: albeit his expositions would
have cleared themselves to such as without prejudice would have examined them.
But the Beroeans were of a more ingen^ous disposition (so the word Acts 17. v.
11.
(...) imports) they were not vassals to other men's interpretations or
conceits, but used their liberty to examine their truth. Acts 17. v. 11.
They received the word with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures
whether these things were so or no. If they believed in part before, their
practice confirms the truth of our assertion, that they were not to believe the
infallibility of Paul, but of his doctrine, albeit they were well persuaded of
his personal authority. If they believed neither in part, nor wholly, before
they see the truth of his doctrine confirmed by that scripture which they had
formerly acknowledged; their ingenuity herein likewise confirms our doctrine,
and condemns the Papists of insolent blasphemy, for arrogating that authority
unto the Popes decrees, which is only due unto Gods word already established.

2 I would demand of any Papists, whether the Beroeans did well or ill in
examining Saint Paul's doctrine: if ill, why has the spirit of God commended
them? if well, why is it not lawful and expedient for all true Christians to
imitate them? Unless the Reader bite his lip, I will not promise for him he
shall not laugh at Bellarmines answer, albeit I knew him for another
Heraclitus, or Crassus Agelastus, who never laughed in all his life save once
when he saw an Ass feed on thistles. Surely he must have an Asses lips that
can taste, and a swines belly that can digest this great Clerks Divinity in
this point. Respondeo, etsi Paulus erat Apostolus, and non poterat falsam
doctrinam praedicare, tamen non constabat hoc initio Beroensibus, nec
tenebantur mox credere, nisi prius viderent miracula, aut alias probabiles
rations credendi. Itaque cum Paulus probaret illis Christumex oraculus
Prophetarum, merito illi scrutabantur Scripturas, an haec ita se haberent.
Bellar. de verb. Dei, lib. 3: cap. 10. resp. ad 7.
I answer (says he) albert Paul were an Apostle, and could not preach false
doctrine: thus much notwithstanding was not evident to the Beroeans at the
first, nor were they bound forthwith to believe unless they had seen some
miracles or other probable inducements to believe. Therefore when Paul proved
Christ unto them out of the Prophetical Oracles, they did well to search the
Scriptures, whether those things were so. If Saint Paul had thought miracles a
more effectual means then Scriptures, for begetting faith in such as
acknowledged Moses and the Prophets: no doubt he had used miracles rather then
their authority. Or if the Pope cannot expound the scriptures, as effectually
and perspicuously as S. Paul did: why does he not at the least work miracles?
are we bound absolutely to believe him, and is he bound to do neither of
these, without which the people of Beroea were not bound (as Bellarmine
acknowledges) to believe Saint Paul? We are if his reason be worth belief.
At Christiani quibus constat Ecclesiam non posse errare in explicanda doctrina
fidei, tenentur eam recipere, and non dubitare, an haec itase habeant. Ibidem.
Christians, which know the Church cannot err in explicating the doctrine of
faith, are bound to embrace it without questioning, whether the places
alleged be to the purpose or no. Let such Christians as believe the Pope
cannot err, in the name of God believe what soever he shall teach, without
examination; yet remember withal, that thus to believe is to worship the
dragon, by giving their names unto the Beast. But unto what Christians is the
Popes infallibility better known, then S. Paul's was to the Beroeans? Not unto
us whose fathers have forsaken him for his Apostasy from God, and taught us to
eschew him, as Antichrist; to hold his doctrine as the very doctrine of devils.
Unto us at least, his Holiness should seek to manifest his infallibility, by
such means as S. Paul did his even unto such as had seen his miracles, and had
experience of his power in expounding scriptures. Besides, Paul's conversation
in all places was continually such as did witness him to be a chosen vessel full
of the spirit of grace. He did not make merchandise of the word of God, as most
Popes do: 2. Cor. 2. v. 17.
but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, so he spoke through
Christ* he did not walk in craftines (yet who greater politicians then Popes?)
2. Cor. 4. ver. 2.
Nor did he handle the word of God deceitfully: but in declaration of the
truth, he did approve himself to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
This one amongst others, he acounts as an especial motive to persuade men of
his heavenly calling, in that he did not preach himself, but Christ Jesus and
himself their servant for Jesus sake. For so our Savior had said: John 7. v.
18.
He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory. The Pope (that we might
know him to be Christ's opposite) seeks almost nothing else, nothing so much,
as to be absolute Lord over all other men's faith. If this any Jesuit will
deny: let him define what Prince amongst the nations, what Tyrant in the world,
did ever challenge greater sovereignty in affairs of this life, then the Pope
does in all matters whatsoever concerning the life to come?

3 But it may be Bellarmine was either afraid or ashamed of this answer:
wherefore he adds another (as wise) to keep it from blushing. Addo etiam,
quod etsi haereticus peccat dubitando de authoritate Ecclesiae in quam per
baptismum regeneratus est, neque est eadem conditio haeretici, qui semel fidem
professus est, and Iudaei aut Ethnici, qui nunquam fuit Christianus: tamen
posito hoc dubio, and hoc peccato, non male facit scrutando, and examinando, an
loca scripturae and Patrum, a Concilio Tridentino prolata, ita se habeant, modo
id faciat intention inueniendi veritatem non calumniandi. Deberet quidem ille
sine examine recipere doctrinam Ecclesiae. tamen melius est, vt examinando
praeparetur ad veritatem, quam negligendo remaneat in suis tenebris.
I add (says he) albeit an Heretic sin in doubting of the Churches
authority, into which he has been regenerate by Baptism, (nor is the case
the same in an Heretic, which has once made profession of faith, and in a Jew
or Ethnique which never was Christian:) yet this doubt (which is a sin) being
supposed, he does not amiss in searching and examining, whether the places
alleged by the Trent Council out of scriptures or fathers, be true or
pertine^t; so he do this with an intent to find the truth, not to calumniate.
A man at the first sight would deem Bellarmine, for his own part at least, had
given us leave to examine the Popes doctrine by scripture: but that, as you
heard before, he absolutely denies: nor will he (I am sure) pawn his hat,
that he which searches the Scriptures and Fathers alleged, and cannot find
any such meaning in either, as the Trent Council would thence infer, shall be
freed by their Church from heresy: although he be not so uncivil, as to
calumniate the Pope, but only ( salua reuerentia) ingenuously profess, that
he thinks on his conscience the scripture meant no such matter as the Council
intended. This none of their church dare promise: for dubious infide (by their
doctrine) est haereticus: he that doubts after such an authentic
determination, is condemned for an heretic: and yet without such assurance of
being freed from heresy, this permission of reading scriptures is not worth
God a mercy, seeing he must at length be constrained to believe the scripture
says just so as the Pope says; albeit his private conscience inform him to the
contrary; so that by reading them, he must either wound his own conscience,
more then if the use of the^ had bin denied him; or else use the^ but as a court
favor or grace bestowed upon him by the Pope, for which he must in good manners
yield his full assent to his doctrine, with infinite thanks for his bounty.
Howsoever (if he be doubtful in their tenants) he may not read the Scriptures
with Calvin, Beza, or any of our writers expositions, or in any edition save
such as they approve, or with the Rhemish animaduersions or gloses, or
according to the analogy of that faith wherein the Jesuits have catechized
him. So that the reading of scriptures, if their opinions be erroneous (as we
hold the Popes decisions are) serves to as good purpose for confirming one of
their catechizing in the right faith, as the ringing of belles does to bring a
melancholy man out of some foolish conceit, which runs in his mind: both of
them will believe their former imaginations (though never so bad) the better,
because the one thinks the belles ring, the other, that the scriptures speak,
just so as he imagines. This Bellarmine cannot dissemble in his next words:
Bound he is to receive the Churches doctrine without examination: but better,
he were prepared unto the truth by examining, then by neglecting it to persist
still in his blindness. His meaning in plain English, is this; He and his
fellows could wish reformed Churches would all come off at once, and believe
as Romanists do, without all examination, whether they believe as Christians,
or Magicians: but if we will not be so forward as they could wish we were,
they could in the second place be very well content to admit us into their
Church again, though after a year or twoes deliberation, rather then loose our
company for ever.

4 The learned Doctor Whitakers, of famous memory, out of the former place
gathered these two corollaries: [Euery doctrine is to be tried by Scripture:
The Apostle taught nothing but what might have been confirmed out of Moses and
the Prophets.] Sacroboscus reply to these Orthodoxall collections, confirms me
in that conceit I entertained of Romish Schoolmen, when I first began to read
them. They seemed to me then, much more now, to handle matters of greatest
moment in divinity, after the same fashion (for all the world) nimble Artists
do Philosophical Theorems in the Schools, whiles they are coursed by such as
would triumph in their disgrace. Be the argument brought, in it self never so
good or forcible to euince the contradictory to their tenants: yet if the
opponent in his inference of what was last denied, chance but to omit some
petty term or clause impertinent to the maine question, or make his
propositions more improbable by framing them more universal then he needs,
occasion will quickly be taken to interrupt his progress and put him off,
especially (if the Answerer be so well provided) with some show of instance to
the contrary, or absurdity likely to follow, if all were true his Antagonist
would seem to prove. Nor do I censure this as fault in youth, or whilst we
are in Aristotle's forge, so the fire be out of us when we come into the
sanctuary. But just in this manner does the Mimicall Jesuit reply to the
former truth. Neque praetermittenda puto duo corollaria, quae ex hoc malo
argumento peius collgit doctor iste. Vnum est: Omnem doctrinam ex scripturis
esse diiudicandam. Alterum. Apostolos nihil praedicasse, quod non ex scripturis
propheticis confirmari posset. quaero enim number illi probetur haec consecutio?
Paulus praedicans Atheniensibus, suam doctrinam confirmauit testimonio Arati
poetae, recteque fecissent Athenienses, si Aratum scrutati fuissent, an ita se
haberet: Ergo omnis doctrina ex poc^is d^udicanda est. Sacro Bos. def. Decr.
Tree. page 122.
I demand (says he) whether the Doctor would approve this consequence; Paul
preaching to the Athenians confirmed his Doctrine with the testimony of the
Poet Aratus, and the Athenians had done well if they had sought whether Aratus
had said so or no: therefore all Doctrines must be judged by Poets. But what if
the Beraeans practice considered alone, or as Jesuits do Scriptures, only
Mathematically, do not necessarily infer thus much? The Learned Doctors
charitable mind would not suffer him to suspect any public professor of
Divinity, as Sacroboscus was, could be so ignorant in Scriptures, as not to
consider (besides the different esteem of Prophets, and Poets amongst the
Jews) what Saint Paul had else where expressly said; Act. 26. ve. 22.
I obtained help of God, and continue unto this day, witnessing both unto
small and great, saying none other things, then those which the Prophets and
Moses did say should come. Unless he could have proved Christ's resurrection
and other articles of Christian faith, out of Moses and the Prophets, the Jews
exceptions against him had been just. For they were bound to resist al
Doctrines dissonant to their ancient ordinances, especially the abolishment of
Rites and Ceremonies which Paul labored most; as knowing the Lawgiuer meant
they should continue no longer then to the alteration of the Priesthood: but in
whose maintenance his adversaries should have spent their blood whiles ignorant
they were, without default, of the Truth Paul taught, as not sufficiently
proved from the same authority, by which their laws were established. Nor
Vide c. 8. pa. 6.
was any Apostle, either for his miracles, or other pledges of the Spirit that
he could communicate unto others, to be so absolutely believed in all things
during his life time, as Moses and the Prophets writings. For seeing the gift
of miracles was bestowed on hypocrites, or such as might fall from any gifts or
grace of the spirit they had: though the spectators might believe the
particular conclusions: to whose confirmation the miracles were fitted, yet was
it not safe, without examination, absolutely to rely upon him, in all things
that had spoken a divine truth once or twice. In that he might be an hypocrite
or a dissembler, for ought others, without evidence of his upright
conversation, and perpetual consonance to his former Doctrine, could know, he
might abuse his purchased reputation to abet some dangerous error. Nor do our
adversaries (though too too credulous in this kind) think themselves bound to
believe revelations made to another, much less to think that he which is once
partaker of the Spirit should for ever be infallible. Upon these supporters
the forementioned Doctors reason (which the Jesuit abuses to establish the
Churches authority) stands firm and sound; Credo id verum esse quod Deus
dicit, quia ille dicit, nec aliam vllam quaero rationem; non audeo vero homini
tantum tribuere, ne ipsum Deo aequalem faciam. Whitt. q. 5. c. 8. arg. 3.
citante Sacrobo. p. 122
I absolutely believe all to be true, that God says, because he says it, nor
do I seek any other reason: but I dare not ascribe so much unto man, least I
make him equal to God; for God alone, and he in whom the Godhead dwells
bodily, is immutably just and holy. Many others have continued holy and
righteous, according to their measure until the end: but who could be certain
of this besides themselves? no not they themselves always. And albeit a man
that never was in the state of grace, may often times deliver that Doctrine which
is infallible: yet were it (to say no worse) a grievous tempting of God to rely
upon his Doctrine as absolutely infallible, unless we know him (besides his
skill or learning) to be always in such a state, Though both his life and
death be most religious, his Doctrine must approve it self to the present
age, and Gods providence must commend it to posterity Nor did our Savior
though in life immutably holy and for doctrine most infallible, assume so much
unto himself before his ascension, as the Jesuits give to the Pope. For he
submitted his doctrine to Moses and the Prophets writings. And seeing the
Jesuits make less acount of Him then the Jews did of Moses; it is no marvel
if they be more violently miscarried with envious or contemptuous hatred of the
Divine truth it self, then the Jews were against our Savior or his doctrine.
These even when they could not answer his reasons, drawn from scriptures
received, though most offe^siue to their distemperate humor, were ashamed to
call Moses and the prophets authority in question, or to demand him, how do ye
know God spoke by the^? Must not the Churches infallibility herein assure you?
and So Canus argues before cited L. 2. Sect. 3. c. 4. parag 8.
if it teach you to discern Gods word from man's, must it not likewise teach
you to distinguish the divine sense of it from huma^? This is a strain of
Atheism, which could never find harbor in any professing the knowledge of the
true God, before the brood of Antichrist grew so flush, as to seek the
recovery of that battle against Gods Saints on Earth, which Lucifer their
Father and his followers lost against Michael and his holy Angels in Heaven.

CHAP. XV.
A brief taste of our adversaries blasphemous and Atheistical assertions in
this argument from some instances of two of their greatest Doctors Bellarmine
and Valentian: That if faith cannot be perfect without the solemn
testification of that Church, the raritie of such testifications will cause
infidelity.
1 FOR a further competent testimony of blasphemies in this kind wherewith
we charge the Church of Rome, let the Reader judge by these two instances
following, whether the Christian world have not sucked the deadliest poison
that could euaporate from the infernal lake, through Bellarmines and
Valentians pens. Valentian, as if he meant to outflout the Apostle for
prohibiting all besides the great pastor Christ Jesus, for being Lords over
men's faith, will have an infallible authority which may sit as Judge and
mistress of all controversies of faith, and this to be not the Quod si igitur
aliquam humanam auctoritate^ diuina assistentia infallibilem, magistram ac
iudicem omnibus quaestionibus fidei, extare necesse est, vt superius,. 1.
probauimus: neque vero ea est illorum hominum propria, qui olim diuinam
doctrinam aut verbo, aut scripto tradiderum, and vita (...) sunt vt iam etiam
probatum est* restat, vt viuet haec auctoritas, successione semper inter
fidiles praesens, quemadmodum in assertione nostra posuimus. Vale^, To^. 3. in
Aquin dis. 1. q. 1 de object. fidei punct. 7.. 11. vide annot. Lib. 2. Sect. 4.
Cap. 5.. 21.
authority of one or two men deceased, not peculiar to such as in times past
have uttered the divine truth either by mouth or pen, and commended it unto
posterity; but an authority continuing in force and strength amongst the
faithful throughout all ages, able perspicuously and openly to give sentence
in all controversies of faith. Yet as these Ambassadors of God deceased, cannot
be Judges: shall they therefore have no say at all in deciding controversies
of faith? You may not think a Jesuit would take Jesus name in vain: he will
never for shame, exclude his Master for having at least a finger in the
government of the Church: Why, what is his office? or what is the use of his
authority, registered by his Apostles and Evangelists? Not so little as you
would ween. For, his speeches, amongst others that in their life time have
infallibly taught divine truths by mouth or pen, may be consulted as a
witness or written law in cases of faith, but after a certain sort and
manner, either to speak the truth, or somewhat thereto not impertinent, as
shall be declared in due place. The place he means, is, where he disputes
whether the Pope be bound to consult other authority besides his own, or use
any means to search the truth before he pass sentence ex cathedra, that is,
before he charge the whole Christian World to believe his decision. This he
thinks expedient, but so far forth only, as if it please his Holiness to
enjoin the belief of some particular point upon the whole World, all must
believe that he has consulted Scripture and antiquity as far as was
requisite for that point, as you shall after hear.

2 That in such controversies he includes the means of knowing Scriptures to
be the word of God: is evident out of his own words in the forecited place.
For the knowledge of Scriptures he would have to be an especial point of
faith, yet such as cannot be proved by Scripture, but by this living and
speaking authority, as he expressly contends in the eleventh paragraph of the
same question. His conclusion is; If it be necessary, there should be some
authority, though humane, yet by divine assistance infallible, to sit as
mistress and Judge in all controversies of faith, and not to be appropriated
to any deceased, as is already proved: it remains that it be always living
in the Church, always present amongst the faithful by succession, he means,
of Popes. Thus you see the present Pope must be Judge, and Christ and his
Apostles must be brought in as witnesses. And yet whether there were such a
Christ, as Saint Matthew, Luke, Mark, and John tell us there was; or whether
the Gospels which go under their names be Apocryphal, and that of
Bartholmewes only Canonical; we cannot know but by the Popes testimony: so
that in the end, he is the only Judge, and only witness, both of Christ, the
Apostles, and their writings, yea of all divine truths, at least assisted with
his Bishops and Cardinals. Which Bellarmine though otherwise a great deal more
wary then Valentian, has plainly uttered. Tertium testimonium est Concilij
Triden^^i ^ess^r Can. 1 vbi additur anathema negantibus sep^^ esse vera and
propria Sacramenta: quod testimoniu^ etiamsi nullum haberemus aliud deberet
sussicere. Nam si tollamus authoritatem presetis Ecclesiae, and praesentis
Concilij, in dub^um reuocari poter^^e omnium aliorum Conciliorum decreta, and
tota fides Christianae. Semper enim haec fuit consuetudo apud Christianos, vt
exortas controuersias definirent Episcop^, qui tunc viuebant. Et praeterea
omnium Conciliorum veterum, and omnium dogmatum firmitas pedet ab authoritate
praesentis Ecclesiae. Non enim habemus testimonium infallibile, quod Co^c^lia
ill^ fuerint, and legit mo fuerint, and hoc aut illud desinur^^t, nisi quia
Ecclesia, quae nunc est, and errare non potest, ita sentit and docet: quod enim
historici quidam meminerint eorum Conciliorum, non p^est parere fidem, nisi
humanam, cui potest subesse falsum. Bellarm. De ^ff. Sac. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
Unless (says he) it were for the authority of the present Church of Rome
(he means the Trent Council) the whole Christian faith might be called in
question; so might all the acts and decrees of former Councels: his reason was,
because we cannot know these antiquities but only by tradition and
historical relation, which are not able to produce divine, firm, infallible
faith.

3 Thus whilst this great Clerk would dig a pit for the blind (for he
could not hope (I think this block should stumble any that has eyes in his
head) he is fallen into the midst of it himself: by seeking to undermine us,
he has smothered himself and buried the cause he was to maintain. For if
without the Trent Councels testification we cannot by divine faith believe the
Scriptures, or former Councels, to be of divine authority; How can such as
were borne within these thirty years, believe that Council it self, which
ended above forty years ago? Few this day living were auditors of the
Cardinals and Bishops decisions there assembled; not hearing them, their faith
must needs be grounded upon hear says. Again, if it be true, the Scriptures
cannot be known to be divine, but by the authority of the present visible
Church: if this Church do not viua voce confirm all Christians in this
fundamental truth, their faith can not be divine, but humane. What the Pope
or his Cardinals think of these points, is more then any living knows
unless they hear them speak, and then it may be a great question whether
they speak as they think. Pope Alexander the sixts decisions should have
been negative, like the fools boult in the Psalm, There is no God, No
Christ, No Gospel, for so his meaning might have been interpreted, as they
say dreams are, by contraries, seeing he never spoke as he thought. Lastly,
if the Trent Council were so necessary for the confirmation of Scriptures and
other Orthodoxall writings, how detestable was your Cleargies backwardness to
afford the Christian World this spiritual comfort? For, whether fear it were
the Popes authority should be curbed, or mere sloth and neglect of matters
divine that did detain them; their shifts to put the Emperor off, the Reader
may sufficiently conjecture from Quod tam longum fuerit mearum literarum
^nteruallum and de quaestione corrigendi anni silentiu^, mallem equidem aliqua
mea desidia vel obliuione commissum fuisset, and in eo culpam agnoscere
soliciteque deprecari, quam ex vestra, hoc est, sacerdotum Romanorum (vt libere
loquar) negligentia, vera^ causam afferre, quos nimirum ^rigere and nihil minus
quam de cogendo concilio cogitare video, cuius, vt spes me prius acuebat, and
incitabat, sic desperatio iampridem hebetat atque retardat: quos enim maxim in
publicam Ecclesiae salutem excubare, atque eius dignitatis ^ugendae nullam
occasionem praetermittere oportebat, abijs Concilij rei salutaris, and si
vnquam ali^s, nunc maxim necessariae, mentionem fieri non alio tempore video,
quam cum bellum aut geritur inter Principes Christianos, aut impendet. Sepul.
Lib. 2. Epist 27. In his pijs deliberationibus, illud pervetustum, and
iustissimum decretum inprimis vsurpari renouarique solet, ne quae haeresis in
aliquo rite coacto Concilio priorum sententijs damnata in dubium ac
disputationem reuocetur. Cuius sacrosancti decreti ea vis est, vt hoc vno
cuncta dogmata Lutheranorum corruant. Quid enim noui excogitarunt ingeniosi
artifices? quid vero afferunt quod non hauserint ex veterum haereticorum
damnata sententia? Haec cum ita sint, religionis morumque summam in huiusmodi
controuersia paucorum doctorum hominum disputationi, and quasi certamini
aequatis vtrinque classibus, and quidem loco nostrorum iniquiore Pontificis
Maximi voluntate permitti, nonne simile est, ac si quos capitalium, and
manifestorum scelerum reos, quos liceat iustissimis legibus grauissime, and cum
summae auctoritate damnare, summus Magistratus sic suam causam agentes audiat,
vt crimina plaene confessi, in leges receptas sacro sanctas que, argute
disputent, and cum iustitiae, and innocentia virtutes omnes in discrimen
vocent? easdemque devetere sua paternaque possessione iudicibus quoque
damnatis, pellere nitantur? Sepulveda L. 2. Epist. 28.
Sepulueda at that time Chronicler to the Emperor in his Epistle to Cardinal
Contarene one of the Popes Legates in that Council; That my intermission of
writing, and silence in that question concerning the correction of the year,
has been so long; I wish the fault had laid in my sloth or forgetfulness,
that I might have been hence occasioned to acknowledge and deprecate the
blame, rather then (as now I freely must) impute the true cause to the
negligence of you Roman Priests, whom I perceive to wax cold and to think
of nothing less then of calling the Council: with hope whereof as heretofore
I was excited, so now despair has made me dull. For I see well that such as
are most bound to have a vigilant care of the Churches public welfare, and
not to foreslow any opportunity of increasing her dignity; never so much as
mention the Council, (at this time as necessary, as always useful) but when
Christians either are already, or are likely to be at variance. In one word,
never but them, when there is sure hope it may be hindered by their discord.
For when peace gets it turn, and all is quiet, not a word of the Council. So
as what they aim at by these unseasonable edicts, is so manifest, as will not
suffer the slowest capacity to live in doubt or suspicion:

4 This great Learned Antiquaries Learned advice, in another Epistle sent to
the same Cardinal, then employed by the Pope in the Council, was, not to
suffer matters decreed in any former Council lawfully assembled together, to
be disputed or called in question. Sufferance hereof was in his judgment no
less prejudicial to the State Ecclesiastique, then unto the temporal it
would be, to permit malefactors trauerse the equity of public laws
established and known, after sufficient proof or confession made of Capital
offenses committed against them. The marginall quotations of the Trent
Council, compared with this grave admonition, which had antiquitie-customes
Canonical, as the Author urges, to give it countenance, may serve as a
perfect index for our instruction, with what prejudice the Bishops there
assembled came to determine, by whose manuduction or set rules they drew their
supposed inerrable lines of life. Now it is impossible any determination, that
takes it force from multitude of voices, shoud be either in it self more
certain, or more forcible to persuade others, the^ are the motives or
inducements that swayed the suffragants so to determine; and these in this case
could, by Bellarmines reason, be but historical persuasions or presumptions.
For no Jesuit I think, will say these Bishops had the Popes sentence ex
Cathedra, to assure them before hand what Councels had been lawfully called,
and fully confirmed; or whether all the ancient Canons they afterward
reestablished were already as authentic and certain as they could be made:
For so it had been a labor altogether lost, yea a matter no less profane
then rebaptization, to have confirmed them by suffrages of Bishops, after their
Cathedral confirmation by the Pope. Even of his Holiness himself, whose
verdict (as in this case must finally be supposed) adds divine credence unto
testifications in their own nature fallible and merely humane, the question
proposed in the former Section remains still insoluble. For without the
relation of some Historian, or Register, or especial revelation from above, no
Pope can divine how many Councels have been held, much less what was finally
determined in every ancient Canon confirmed by the Bishops assembled at Trent.
Special revelations, such as the Prophets had, they acknowledge none. And yet
distinctly to tell what has been done in times past, or places a far off,
without relying on others relations, is an extraordinary effect of special
revelation, a work of higher nature and greater difficulty, then Prophetical
prediction of things to come. Are then the relations of Historians, or
Registers of Ancient Councels divine and authentic. Not without the Popes
ratification with it they are? Yes, or else a great part of Roman faith by
Bellarmines reason can be but humane.

5 Hence may we safely annex a corollary, as necessary, as suretable to the
maine conclusion proposed, for the principal subject of this section. [As the
Popes authority is, by Iesuitical Doctrine made much greater then our Saviors,
so may the assistance or countenance of his omnipotent spirit, make the reports
of any te^porizing Historian, or mercenary Register, as divine, authentic and
certain, as any Prophetical or Apostolical testimonies of the Messiah.] Yea,
if it should please him to authorize Baronius Annals, or relations of former
Councels, their credit should be no less than the Evangelists. Yea hence it
follows, (as the discreet Reader, without further repetition of what has here
been said, or new suggestion of the reasons whereon the inference is grounded
will (I hope) of his own accord Cha: 6. parag. 5. Sect. 4.
hereafter collect) That determinations proceeding upon any knaves or loose
companions testimonies; though more loosely examined, so examined at all, or
taken for examined by the Pope, shall, by his approbation, be of force as
all-sufficient, either for producing Divine belief of men's spiritual worth
we never heard of, or for warranting daily performance of Religious worship to
their memory, as any declaration he can make upon our Saviors promises unto
his Apostles. For we may no more doubt of any Religion he shall authorize, or
any man's salvation canonized by him (whosoever be the Relatours of their life
and death,) then of Saint Peter's, though our Savior promised he should be
saved. The reason is plain. The Pope is sole Judge of all divine Oracles: our
Savior (as you have heard out of Valentian) is but a witness, and so may
others be, whomsoever he shall admit.

SECT. IIII.
Containing the third branch of Romish blasphemy or the last degree of great
Antichrists exaltation, utterly overthrowing the whole foundation of Christian
Religion, preposterously inuerting both Law and Gospel to Gods dishonor, and
advancement of Satan's Kingdom.
THat the authority challenged by the Romish Church is altogether prejudicial
to Gods word, greater then either the visible Church of Israel from Moses till
Christ, or Christ himself or his Apostles, either before or after his
resurrection, did either practice or lay claim to; is evident from the former
treatise. It remains we demonstrate, how the acknowledgement of this most
absolute, most infallible authority, does quite alienate our faith and
allegiance from God and the Trinity, unto the Pope and his triple Crown. The
Proposition then we are to prove is this, Whosoever steadfastly believes the
absolute authority of the Romish Church, as now it is taught, does truly and
properly believe no article of Christian faith, no God, no Trinity, no Christ,
no redemption, no resurrection, no heavenly joys, no hell.

CHAP. I.
The Jesuits unwillingness to acknowledge the Churches proposal for the true
cause of his faith: of differences and agreements about the final Resolution
of faith, either amongst the Adversaries themselves, or betwixt us and them.
1 THE conclusion proposed follows out of their principles before In the
beginning of the second Section.
mentioned, and afterward to be reiterated, that they may be more thoroughly
sounded. But ere we come to raze the very foundation of their painted walls,
a few weak fortes must be overthrown, which some have erected in hope thereby
to save their Church from battery. Valentian Tom. 3. in Aquin. dis 1. q. 1. de
object. fidei puncto. 1. Vide verba integra L. 2. Sect. 4. c. 5. parag. 16. and
17
Valentian (as you heard before) seeing his Mother wouldly more open to our
assaults, if they should admit this manner of speech, [I believe this or that
proposition or article of faith, because the holy Church does so instruct me;]
would mitigate the harshnesse of it, thus; [If you ask me, why I believe a
Trinity, or God to be one in three persons, I would answer, because God has
revealed this mystery.] The divine revelation then is the cause of your
belief in this particular. But how do you know, how can you believe, that God
has revealed this? by an other divine revelation? No. For so we should run
from revelation to revelation without end. If by revelation you do not believe
it, by what means else? By the infallible proposal of the Church, as a
condition, without which I could not believe it. Mark the mysticalnesse of
this speech, Ob propositione^ Ecclesiae infallibilem, For the Churches
infallible proposal. Is not this as much as if he had said, because the
Church, which is infallible, proposes it to me? Why then does he make it but a
condition necessary or requisite to this assent? Belike he meant not so, but
would have us to see the co^ditio^, not the true and principal cause of his
belief. The Churches authority, by his doctrine, may in diverse respects be
truly said both a cause and condition; Or, to speak more distinctly; the
Churches proposal is a condition without which no man can ordinarily believe
propositions of faith: the infallibility of her proposal is the true and only
cause of every Roman Catholics belief in all points. This denial of the
churches authority to be (according to their principles) the true cause of
belief, Is the sconse that must first be ouerthrown; but after a friendly parley
of the difference betwixt us.

2 Valentian, if we well observe his process in the forecited place, proves
only that, which none in reformed churches did ever deny; albeit he profer
more in his premises: which whilst he seeks to perform, he has only proved
himself a ridiculous Atheist; as partly is showed, in the former treatises,
and shall more fully appear in the end of this. To ease his fellows hereafter
of such unnecessary, or impertinent pains, as often times they take, I dare
avouch in the behalf of all my brethren in reformed Churches, no Jesuit shall
be more forward to demand, then we to grant, That God in these latter days
does not teach men the Gospel in such sort, as he did S. Paul, Without the
help or ministry of man In what sense it is true: he that has not the
Church for his mother has not God for his father.
We maintain as well as they, God is not a father to such as will not
acknowledge the Church for their Mother. Notwithstanding, thus we conceive and
speak of the Church indefinitely taken, not confined to any determinate place,
not appropriated to any individual, or singularised persons. Now to verify an
indefinite speech or proposition, the truth of any one particular suffices: As
he that should say, Socrates by man was taught his learning, does not mean
the specificall nature, or whole Mankind; but that Socrates, as others, had one
man or other at the first to instruct him. The same Dialect we use, when we
say, every one that truly calls God father, receives instructions from the
Church his Mother, that is, from some in the Church lawfully ordained for
planting faith; unto whom such filial obedience, Lib. 2. Sect. 1. cap. 46.
and 7. seq.
as else where we have spoken of, is due. The difference likewise between the
Romanists and us, has Lib 2 sect 3. cap. 1. Parag. 6.
partly been discussed before. In brief, it is thus: We hold this Ministry
of the Church is a necessary condition, or mean precedent, for bringing us to
the infallible truth, or true sense of Gods word; yet no infallible rule
whereon finally or absolutely we must rely, either for discerning divine
Revelations, or their true meaning. But as those resemblances of colors, which
we term Species visibiles, are not seen themselves, though necessary for
the sight of real colors: so this Ministry of the Church, albeit in it self
not infallible, is yet necessarily require, for our right apprehension of the
divine truth, which in it self alone is most infallible; yea as infallible to
us as it was The object of the Apostles faith, and ours the same, though the
manner of our app^ehending it differ.
to the Apostles or Prophets, after it be rightly apprehended. The difference
is in the manner of apprehending or conceiving it. They conceived it
immediately, without the Ministry or instruction of man; so cannot we. This
difference elsewhere I have thus resembled, As trees and plants, now growing up
by the ordinary husbandry of man from seeds precedent, are of the same kind
and quality, with such as were immediately created by the hand of God: so is
the immediate ground of ours, the Prophets and Apostles faith the same, Albeit
theirs was immediately planted by the finger of God, ours propagated from their
seed, sown and cherished, by the daily industry of faithful Ministers.

3 Neither in the substance of this assertion, nor manner of the explication,
do we much differ, if ought, from Canus in his second book, Eorum hic errorem
dissimulare non possum, qui asserunt, fidem nostram eo tanquam in vltima^
credendi causam reducendam esse, vt credamus ecclesiam esse veracem, cui prius
(inquiunt) assen timur per fidem acquisitam, quam per infusam. Quod si verum
esset, prima ratio formalis infusae fidei non esset veritas increata, sed
creata. Praeterea Apost^li and Prophetae resoluebant vltimo fidem suam in
diuina^ and authoritatem and veritatem. Ergo nos in humanam Ecclesiae
authoritatem fidem nostram non res^luimus. Eadem enim fides est, idemque
proinde habet obiectum, rationemque formalem. Confirmat autem hoc, vel maxim,
quod ea quae per accidens contingunt, obiecto alicuius habitus, non variant
illius obiecti formalem rationem: sed articulos credendos proponi per hos, aut
illos homines, per accidens omnino contingit. Cum erga Prophetae and Apostoli
assentirentur articulis fidei, quia Deus reuelauit: eandem quoque nos credendi
rationem habebimus; Nisi forte fides nostra non est virtus Theologica, cuius
videlicet prima and formalis ratio, si his credimus, non diuina, sed humana
verita^ est. Canus. Lib. 2. de loc. Theol.
where he taxes Scotus, Durand, and others for affirming the last resolution
of our faith was to be made into the veracity or infallibility of the Church.
The Apostles and Prophets (says he) resolved their faith into truth and
authority divine: Therefore we must not resolve our faith into the humane
authority of the Church: For the faith is the same, and must have the same
formal reason. For better confirmation of which assertion he adds this
reason; Things incident to the object of any habit by accident, do not alter
the formal reason of the object. Now that the Articles of faith should be
proposed by these, or these men, is merely accidental: wherefore seeing the
Apostles and Prophets did assent unto the Articles of faith, because God
revealed them, the reason of our assent must be the same. Lastly, he
concludes, that the Churches authority, miracles, or the like, are only such
precedent conditions, or means for begetting faith, as sensitive knowledge,
exhortations, or advise of Masters, are for bringing us to certain knowledge
in demonstratiue faculties. Had either this great Divine spoken consequently to
this doctrine in his 5. Book, or would the Jesuits avouch no more then here
he does; we should be glad to give them the right hand of fellowshippe in
this point. But they go all a wrong way unto the truth, or would to God any
way to the truth, or not directly to overthrow it. Catharinus, though in a
manner ours, in that question about the certainety of salvation, says more,
perhaps, then they meant, whom Canus late taxed; Auouching (as At ( inquit
Catharinus) soli fidei Catholicae conuenit, vt ei fallum subesse nequeat,
quoniam est de obiecto probato ab Ecclesia. Fidei autem diuinae particulari
falsam subesse potest, quonia^ est de obiecto non probato ab Ecclesia.
Respondeo nouam, atque inauditam hanc esse doctrinam, vt fidei diuinae poss^^
subesse falsum, antequam eius obiectum probatum fuerit ab Ecclesia. Probatio
enim Ecclesiae facit vt omnibus innotescat, obiect^m illud esse reuelatum a
Deo, and propter hoc certum, and indubitatum; non autem tribuit firmitatem
verbo Dei aliquid reuelantis. Itaque implicat contradictionem, vt aliquid sit
reuelatum a Deo, and possit ei subesse falsum, sieve illud ab Ecclesia probatum
sit sieve non sit. Alioqui quod CHRISTVS Paralitico and Magdalenae dicebat,
Remittuntur tibi peccata tua, poterat esse falsum, quia nondum fuerat ab
Ecclesia approbatum; quis ita desipiat vt verba CHRISTI ab Ecclesiae
approbatione pendere arbitretur: Et si quis infantem baptizet, cum intention
vere baptizandi, nonne hereticus censebitur, si dabi^et an (...) ille su vere
iustisi catus? Et tamen non est hoc obie^^um ab Ecclesia approbatum, etc. Bell.
lib. 3. de iustific. cap. 3.
Bellarmine cites his opinion) that divine faith could not be certain and
infallible, unless it were of an object approved by the Church. Whence would
follow, what Bellarmine there inferres, that the Apostles and Prophets should
not have been certain of their Revelations, immediately sent from God, until
the Church had approved them; which is a doctrine well deserving a sharper
censure then Bellarmine bestows on Catharinus. Albeit, to speak the truth,
Bellarmine was no fit man to censure, though the other most worthy to be
severely censured. Catharinus might have replied, that the Prophets and
Apostles, at least our Savior, in whom Bellarmine instanceth, were the true
Church, as well as they make the Pope. Nor can Vide ^. seq. Parag. 3.
Valentias with other late Jesuits opinions, by any pretense or show, hardly
Bellarmines own, be cleared from the same inconveniences he obiectes to
Catharinus, as will appear upon better examination to be made hereafter.

CHAP. II.
That the Churches proposal is the true, immediate, and prime cause of all
absolute belief any Romanist can have, concerning any determinate divine
Revelation.
1 WHereas Valentian and (as he says) Caietan, deny the Churches infallible
proposal to be the cause why we believe divine Revelations: This speech of his
is equivocal, and in the equivocation of it (I think) Valentian sought to
hide the truth. The ambiguity or fallacy, is the same which was Sect. 2. cap.
1.
disclosed in Bellarmines reply unto us obiecting, that Pontificians make the
Churches authority greater then Scriptures. In this place, as in that, the word
of God, or divine revelations, may be taken, either indefinitely, for
whatsoever God shall he supposed to speak, or, for those particular
Scriptures or Revelations which we suppose he has already revealed and
spoken. Or, Valentian may speak of the object of our belief, not of belief
it self. If we take his meaning in the former sense; what he says is most
true. For the Churches infallibility is no cause why we believe that to be
true which we suppose God has revealed: nor did we ever charge them with
this assertion. This is an Axiom of nature presupposed in all Religions; yet
of which none ever knew to make so great secular use as the Romish Church does.
But if we speak of that Canon of Scripture which we have, or any things
contained in it; (all which we and our adversaries jointly suppose to have
come from God) the only cause why we do or can rightly believe them, is, by
Jesuitical doctrine, the Churches infallibility that commends them unto us.

2 If that Church which Valentian holds so infallible should have said unto
him totidem verbis: you must believe the books of Maccabes are canonical, even
for this reason, that your holy Catholic Mother tells you so: he durst not but
have believed as well the reason as the matter proposed; [To wit, That these
Books were Canonical, because the Church had enjoined him so to think:]
albeit his private conscience, left to Gods grace and it self, would rather
have held the Negative. For if we believe, as the Papists generally instruct
us, that we our selves, all private spirits, may err in every persuasion of
faith, but the Church which only is assisted by a public spirit, cannot
possibly teach amiss in any: We must upon terms as peremptory, and in equal
degree, believe every particular point of faith, because the Church so teaches
us, not because we certainly apprehend the truth of it in it self. For we
may err, but this public spirit cannot. And consequently we must infallibly
believe these propositions Vide Chap. 4. Paragr. 2.
[Christ is the Redeemer of the world, not Mahomet, Vide Chap. 4. Paragr. 2.
There is a Trinity of persons in the divine nature] for this reason only that
the Church commends them unto us for divine revelations: seeing by their
arguments brought to disprove the sufficiency of Scriptures, or certainety of
private spirits, no other means possible is left us. Nay, were they true, we
should be only certain, that without the Churches proposal, we still must be
most uncertain in these and all other points; because the sons are
perpetually obnoxious to error, from which the mother is everlastingly
privileged. The same propositions and conclusions we might condicionally
believe to be absolutely authentike, upon supposall they were Gods word: but
that they are his word, or revelations truly divine, we cannot firmly
believe, but only by firm adherence to the Churches infallible authority, as
was in the second Cap. 8. Parag. 4 etc. 2. Parag. 10
Section deduced out of the Adversaries principles. Hence it follows that
every particular proposition of faith, has such a proper causall dependence
upon the Churches proposal, as the conclusion has upon the premises, or any
particular upon it universal. Thus much The place is quoted in the second
Annotation, Parag. 5.
Sacroboseus grants.

3 Suppose God should speak unto us face to face, what reason had we
absolutely and infallibly to believe him, but because we know his words to be
infallible? his infallibility then should be the proper cause of our belief.
For the same reason, seeing he does not speak unto us face to face, as he did
to Moses; but as our adversaries say, reueales his will obscurely, so as the
Reuealer is not manifested unto us: but his meaning is by the visible Church, (
Vide Annot. cap. 4. Parag. 5.
which is to us in stead of Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself, and all
the several manners God used to speak unto the world, before he spoke to it
by his only son) this Pantheas infallibility must be the true and proper
cause of our belief: And Ex quo intelligitur eos qui in Scriptura
reprehenduntur, quod priuatis reuelationibus non crediderint, vt Sara Genes 18.
Zachaerias Lucae 1. non propter infidelitatem proprie, vt est vitium contra
fidem Catholicam, reprehendi, sed propter imprudentiam and duritiem ^ordis.
Pertinet enim ad prudentiam infusam, and ad donum Consilij, eiusmodi
reuelationibus priuatis assensum praebere vel negare, consideratis
circumstantijs, quae docent eas esse a Deo vel non: Et illae personae
commemoratae, ex prudentia and dono consilij credere illis debuissent. Valent.
Disp. 1. Quaest. 1. De obiecto fidei. Punct. 1. The ground of this Position is,
because, Sola Diuina Reuelatio ab Ecclesia proposita est obiectum fide*
Valentian himself thinks that Sara and others of the old world, to whom God
spoke in private, either by the mouth of Angels, his son, or holy spirit, or
by what means soever; did not sin against the doctrine of faith, or through
unbelief, when they did not believe Gods promises. They did herein
unadvisedly, not vnbelieuingly. Why not vnbelieuingly? because the visible
Church did not propose these promises unto them.

4 If not to believe the visible Churches proposals, be that which makes
distrust or diffidence to Gods promises, infidelity: then to believe them, is
the true cause of believing Gods promises: or if Sara and others did (as
Valentian says) unadvisedly or imprudently, in not assenting to divine truths
proposed by Angels: surely they had done only prudently and advisedly in
assenting to them; their assent had not been truly and properly belief: So
that by this assertion, the Churches proposal has the very remonstratiue
root and character of the immediate and prime cause, whereby we believe and
know matters of faith. For whatsoever else can concur without this, our
assent to divine truths proposed is not true Catholic belief; but firmly
believing this infallibility, we cannot err in any other point of faith.

5 This truth Vide lib; 2. Sec. 4. cap. 5. Parag. 19. Ratio credendi est causa
credendi
Valentian elsewhere could not dissemble, howsoever in his professed resolution
of faith he sought to cover it by change of apparel; Inuesting the Churches
proposal only with the title of a condition requisite, and yet withal (so
dissonant is falsity to it self) making it the reason of believing divine
Revelations. If a reason it be why we should believe them, needs must it sway
any reasonable mind to embrace their truth. And whatsoever inclines our minds
to the embracement of any truth, is the proper efficient cause of belief or
assent unto the same: Yea efficiency or causality it self does formally
consist in this inclination of the mind. Nor is it possible this proposal of
the Church should move our minds to embrace divine Revelations by any other
means then by belieeuing it: And belief it self being an inclination or
motion of the mind, our minds must first be moved by the Churches proposal,
ere it can move them at all to assent unto other divine truths. Again,
Valent. Tom. 3, in Aquin. Disp. 1 Quaest. 1. De obtest. fidei, Punct. 1. His
words are quoted. lib. 2. sect. 4. cap. 5, Parag. 16.
Valentian grants that the orthodoxall or catechisticall answer to this
interrogation; [Why do you believe the doctrine of the Trinity to be a divine
revelation?] is [because the Church proposes it to me for such.] He that
admits this answer for sound and Catholic, and yet denies the Churches
proposal to be the true and proper cause of his belief in the former point,
has smothered, doubtless, the light of nature, by admitting too much
artificial subtlety into his brains. For if a man should ask, why do you
believe there is a fire in yonder house? and answer were made, Because I see
the smoke go out of the Chimney: should the party thus answering in good
earnest, peremptorily deny, the sight of the smoke to be the cause of his
belief there was a fire; he deserved very well to have either his tongue
scorched with the one, or his eyes put out with the other. Albeit if we speak
of the things themselves, not of his belief concerning them, the fire was the
true cause of the smoke, not the smoke of the fire. But whatsoever it be,
[Cause, Condition, Circumstance, or Effect,] that truly satisficeth this
demand, [Why do you believe this or that] it is a true and proper cause of our
belief, though not of the thing believed. If then we admit the Churches
proposal to be but a condition annexed to divine revelations: yet if it be
an infallible [medium] or mean; or as our adversaries all agree the only mean
infallible, whereby we can rightly believe this or that to be a divine
revelation; it is the true and only infallible cause of our belief. That
speech of Valentian, which to any ordinary man's capacity includes as much as we
now say, was Lib. 2, Sect. 2. Cap. 5.. 8.
before alleged. [That Scripture which is commended and expounded unto us by
the Church, is, eo ipso, even for this reason, most authentike and cleare] He
could not, more emphatically, have expressed the Churches proposal to be the
true and prime cause, why particular or determinate divine revelations become
so credible unto us. His second, Sacroboscus, has many speeches (to be
inserted hereafter) to the same effect. Voluit igitur de fide supernaturali
indistin^le l^qui prout differt a fide naturali and acquisita: and vim
generandi fidem habere, quicquid ad actum sieve ex part potentiae, sieve ex
part obiecti est necessarium. Verum tunc, vt Scripturae vis haec concedi
potest; sic nequaquam debet excludi Ecclesia, quae respectu nostri est causa
proponens, vt est supra explicatum. And a little after; authoritas Ecclesiae
proponentis, and loquentis Dei in Scriptura respectu actus fidei, se habent vt
lumen, and color, respectu visionis albi; vel quemadmodum potentia, and
dispositiones in materia se habent, respectu actus informationis formae
substantialis: and quod consequens est, quae habetur fides a Scriptura Dei
mentem continente, eadem habetur ab Ecclesia and qui libri sint verbum Dei, and
quis sit verus scripturae sensus indicante. Sacroboscus Det. Decr. Trid. and
Sentent. Bellarm. Cap. 6 Parag. 1. Page 105.
Amongst others, where Doctor Whittaker objects, that the principal cause of
faith, is by Papists ascribed unto the Church; he denies it only thus far
[What we believe for the Churches proposal, we jointly believe for God
speaking either in his written word, or by tradition:] Yet, if a man should
have asked him why he did, or how possibly he could, infallibly believe that
God did speak all the words either contained in the Bible, or in their
traditions: he must have given either a woman's answer, [because God sp^ke
them] or this, [because our holy mother the Church does say so.] For elsewhere
he plainly Vide Annot. Cap. 5. Parag. 4. Viget ( Whittakerus) qui sensum
aliquem amplectitur propter nullam aliam causam, risi quia sit Ecclesia
statuit, non propter Propheticam and Apostolicam Scriptur^m in, tribuit
^ugustiorem authoritatem Ecclesiae quam Scripturae: sed cum in fide haec du^
sint, quid and propter quid, Pap^stis, propter quid, est sola authoritas
Ecclesiae. Veru^s espo^detur, id esse falsum: quae enim credimus propter
Ecclesiam proponentem, simul etiam credimus propter Deum loquentem, verbo suo
scripto vel tradito* vt est alias explicatum. Sacrobos. page 125.
auowes, the Books of Canonical Scripture need not be believed without the
Churches proposal, whose infallible authority was sufficiently known before
one title of the New Testament was written, and were to be acknowledged, though
it had never been; he plainly confesses withal, that he could not believe
the Scriptures taught some principal Articles of faith most firmly believed
by him unless the churches authority did thereto move him, against the light
of natural reason. Now if for the churches proposal, he believe that, which
otherwise to believe he had no reason at al, but rather strong inducements to
the contrary, as steadfastly as any other truth: the Churches infallibility
must be the true and only cause, both why he believes the mystery proposed, and
distrusts the natural dictates of his conscience to the contrary. In fine, he
does not believe there is a Trinity, (for in that Article is his instance)
because God has said it, but he believes that God has said it, because his
infallible Mother the Church does teach it. This is the misery of miseries,
that these Apostates should so bewitch the World, as to make it think they
believe the Church, because God speaks by it, when it is evident they do not
believe God, but for the Churches testimony: well content to pretend his
authority, that her own may seem more sovereign. Thus make they their
superstitious, groundless magical faith, but as a wrench, to wrest that
principle of nature, [Whatsoeuer God says is true,] to countenance any villainy
they can imagine, as will better appear hereafter. But first the Reader must
be content to be informed, that by some of their At inquies, qua^do Papistae
dicu^t se certo statuere, id quod Ecclesia definit esse verum: propositiones
ipsas statuunt esse vera^, vel quia Ecclesia id illis dicit, vel non quia
Ecclesia dicit, sed quia Scriptura dicit. Si primum, nullum discrimen inter
Deum and Ecclesiam statuetur, nam hoc proprium solius Dei est, vt id verum esse
credamus quod ille dicit, nullam aliam quaerendo rationem. Sin secundum: summa
authoritas desiniendi, non Ecclesiae, sed scripturae defertur. Verum ne in aere
disputemus, vt saepe solet adversarius, Catholici omnes firma fide credunt
Ecclesiam in nulla fidei quaestione determinanda errare posse: vbi igitur
Ecclesia desinit aliquid esse de fide, id illi hoc Theologico discursu
concludunt esse certum. Ecclesia non potest aliquid non verum profidei dogmate
credendum proponere. At hoc Ecclesia pro d^gmate fidei proponit credendum: est
hoc ergo certum. In qua ratiocinatione medius terminus est determinatio
Ecclesiae, atque ita, quo sensu medius terminus dicitur causa cognoscendi
conclusionem, dici potest definitio Ecclesiae causa, propter quam haec
conclusio, vt est terminus praedicti discursus, cert^ persuadeatur. Ab sit vero
vt quicquid per modum medij est causa certae cognitionis, eo ipso aequetur Deo.
Secus enim angulus externus foret Deo aequalis, nam per hunc cognosco omne
triangulum habere tres angulos aequales duobus rectis. Atque haec solutio
perspicua est, solum aduertat, qui minus exercitatos habet sensus, dictam
conclusionem, vt pendet ex discursu facto. pertinere ad habitum Theologiae (qui
quidem certus est; quemadmodum est habitus fidei and scientiae: est tamen ab
vtroque distinctus; vt verior tenet Theologorum sententia) nam aliae ratione
pertinere potest ad habitum fidei, quatenus assensu simplici sine discursu
creditur, and tunc Ecclesiae definitio non se habet per modum medij termini,
sed per modum sufficientis propositionis; and authoritas Dei loquentis verbo
suo scripto vel tradito in loco ex quo petitur desinitio, est formalis ratio
credendi: ita vt istae duae rations subordinatae, sunt causae coniunctae actus
fidei, qui exercetur circa propositionem definitam, sicque, quemadmodum ait
Aristoteles, non Policletus nec statuarius, sed Policletus statuarius est causa
statuae, dicere possumus: non definitio Ecclesiae per se and solitary, nec
solus locus ex quo petita est definitio Ecclesiae, est causa assensus fidei.
Sed definitio and locus, illa vt causa si^e qua non, authoritas Dei loquentis
in hoc, vt formalis ratio obiecti. Sacrobos. def. Decr. Trid. and Sent.
Bellarum, c. 6.. 1. p. 115.
tenants the same Divine revelations may be assented unto by the Habit either
of Theology or of faith; both which are most certain, but herein different;
That the former is discursiue and resembles science properly so called; the
latter not so, but rather like unto that habit or faculty by which we perceive
the truth of general Maxims, or unto our bodily sight, which sees diverse
visibles all immediately, not one after, or by another. Whilst some of them
dispute against the certainty of private spirits, their aguments suppose Divine
revelations must be believed by the Habit of Theology, which is as a sword to
offend us. Whiles we assault them, and urge the vnstabilitie of their
resolutions, they fly unto the non discursiue Habit of faith infused, as their
best buckler to ward such blows as the Habit of Theology cannot bear off.

6 Not here to dispute either how truly or pertinently they deny faith
infused to be a discursiue habit; the Logical Reader need not (I hope) my
admonition to observe, that faith or belief whether habitual or actual,
unless discursiue, cannot possibly be resolved into any praeexistent Maxim
or principle. From which grant, this emolument will arise unto our cause; that
the Churches authority cannot be proved by any divine revelation, or portion
of Scripture; seeing it is an Article of faith, and must be believed eodem
intuitu with that Scripture or part of Gods word, whether written or unwritten,
that teaches it; as light and colors are perceived by one and the same
intuition in the same instant. And by this assertion we could not so properly
say, we believe the divine revelation because we believe the church (nor do
we see colors because we see the light;) but we may truly say, that the
objects of our faith, ( divine revelations) are therefore actually credible, or
worthy of belief, because the infallible Church does illustrate or propose
them; as the light does make colors though invisible by night, visible by day.
This similitude of the light and colors is not mine, but Sacroboscus; whom in
the point in hand I most mention, because Doctor Whittakers Objections against
their Churches Doctrine, as it has been delivered by Bellarmine and other
late controuersers, has enforced him clearly to unfold, what Bellarmine,
Stapelton, and Valentian left unexpressed, but is implicitly included in all
their writings. But ere we come to examine the full inco^ueniences of their
opinions, I must request the Reader to observe, that as often as they mention
resolution of faith, they mean the discursiue habit of Theology. For all
resolution of belief or knowledge, essentially includes discourse. And See the
annotations. Sect. 2. c. 2. Par. 1.
Bellarmine directly makes, His words are quoted in the Annotat.. 6. of this
chapter.
Sacroboscus expressly avouches, the Churches authority the medius terminus,
or true cause, whence determinate conclusions of faith are gathered. From which
and other equivalent assertions, acknowledged by all the Romanists this day
living, it will appear that Valentian was either very ignorant himself, or
presumed he had to deal with very ignorant adversaries, when he denied, that
the last resolution of Catholic faith was into the Churches authority, which
comes next in place to be examined.

CHAP. III.
Discovering either the gross ignorance, or notorious craft of the Jesuit in
denying his faith is finally resolved into the Churches veracity or
infallibility: that possibly it cannot be resolved into any branch of the
first truth.
1 IT were a foolish question, as Caietan (says Recte illud quidem a Caietano
dictum est, Fatuam esse quaestionem, si quis alterum interroget, cur credat
primae veritati reuelanti. Nam in primam veritatem vltimo f^t resolutio
assensus Fidei, atque aedeo propter illa^ vltimo fides assentatur. Itaque no^
est quaerend^ vlterius ratio, quare fides assentiatur. Sed solum potest quaeri
vlterius, vnde habeat illa prima veritas, vt sit prima veritas ^ Et tunc
respondendum est, id habere secundum nostrum intelligendi modum ex diuinitate,
cuius attributum et quasi passio est, and quae neque falli neque sallere
potest. Valent. tom. 3. in Aquinat. Disp 1 quaest: 1. de object. fidei. punct.
1.
Valentian) has well observed, if one should ask another why he believes the
first truth revealing. For the assent of faith is finally resolved into the
first truth. It may be Caietan was better minded toward Truth it self first
or secondary, then this Jesuit was, which used his authority to color his
former rotten position, [That the Churches proposal by their doctrine is not
the cause of faith:] but our former distinction between belief it self and it
object (often confounded,) or between Gods word indefinitely, and determinately
taken, if well observed, will euince this last reason to be as foolish as the
former assertion was false. No man, says he, can give any reason, besides the
infallibility of the Reuealer, why he believes a divine Revelation. It is
true, no man can give, nor would any ask, why we believe that which we are
fully persuaded as a divine Revelation. But yet a reason by their positions
must be given why we believe either this or that truth, any particular or
determinat portion of Scripture, to be a divine revelation. Wherefore seeing
Christian faith is always of definite and particular propositions or
conclusions, and, as Bellarmine says, (and all the Papists must say) these
cannot be known but by the Church: As her infallible proposal is the true and
proper cause why we believe them to be infallibly true, because the only
cause whereby we can believe them to be divine revelations: so must it be
the essential principle into which our assent or belief of any particular or
determinate proposition must finally be resolved. Every conclusion of faith
(as is before observed out of Sect. 2. cap. 2.. 1.
Bellarmine) must be gathered in this or like Syllogism [Whatsoeuer God or
the first Truth says, is most true: But God said all those words, which
Moses the Prophets and the Evangelists wrote: Therefore all these are most
true,] The Mayor in this Syllogism, is an Axiom of Nature, acknowledged by
Turks and Infidels: nor can Christian faith be resolved into it, as into a
Principle proper to it self. The Minor, say Bellar. loco citato.
our adversaries, must be ascertained unto us by the Churches authority, and
so ascertained, becomes the first and maine principle of faith, as Christian;
Vide Arnob. and Sacrobosco, c. 4. Parag. 5.
whence all other particular or determinate conclusions are thus gathered.
[Whatsoeuer the Church proposes to us for a divine Revelation, is most
certainly such: Vide Sect. 1. Parag. 7.
But the Church proposes the books of Moses and the Prophets, finally, the
whole volumes of the old and new Testament, with all their parts, as they are
extant in the vulgar Roman Edition, for divine revelations; Therefore we must
infallibly believe they are such.] So likewise must we believe, that to be
the true and proper meaning of every sentence in them contained, which the
Church, to whom it belongs to judge of their sense, shall tender unto us.

2 For better manifestation of the Truth, Resolution twofold: either of objects
believed, or of our belief, or persuasions concerning them.
we now teach: the young Reader must here be advised of a twofolde
resolution; One of the things or matters believed, or known, into their first
parts or Elements; Another of our belief, or persuasions concerning them, into
their first causes or motives. In the one, the most general or remotest cause;
In the other, the most immediate or next cause always terminates the
resolution. The one imitates, the other inuerts, the order of composition; so
as what is first in the one, is last in the other, because that which is first
intended, or resolved upon by him, that casts the plotte, is best effected by
the executioner or manual composer. In the former sense, we say mixed bodies
are lastly resolved into their first Elements; houses into stones, timber and
other ingredients; particular truths into general maxims: conclusions into
their immediate praemises; all absurdities into some breach of the rule of
contradiction. Consonantly to this interpretation of final resolution; the
first verity, or divine infallibility, is that into which all faith is lastly
resolved. For (as we said before) this is the first step in the progress
of true belief, the lowest foundation whereon any Religion, Christian, Jewish,
Mohammedan, or Ethnicke can be built. And it is an undoubted Axiom, quod primum
est in generatione, est vltimum in resolutione; when we resolve any thing into
the parts whereof it is compounded, we end, in the undoing or unfolding it,
where nature begun in the composition or making of it. But he that would
attempt to compose it again, or frame the like aright, would terminate all his
thoghts or purposes by the end or use, which is farthest from actual
accomplishment. Thus the Architect frames stones and timber, and lays the
first foundation according to the platform he carries in his head; and that
he casts proportionably to the most commodious or pleasant habitation: which,
though last effected, determines all cogitations or resolutions precedent.
Hence, if we take this vltima resolutio, as we always take these terms, when
we resolve our own persuasions, that is, [for a resolution of all doubts or
demands, concerning the subject whereof we treat] A Roman Catholics faith
must, according to his Principles, finally be resolved into the Churches
infallibility. For this is the immediate ground, or first cause of any
particular or determinate point of Christian faith; and the immediate cause is
always that, into which our persuasions concerning the effect is finally
resolved, seeing it only can fully satisfy all demandes, doubts or questions
concerning it. As for example, if you ask why men, or other terrestrial
Creatures, breath, when fishes do not: to say they have lungs, and fishes
none, does not fully satisfy all demands or doubts concerning this Subject.
For it may justly further be demanded, what necessity there was the one should
have lungs rather then the other. If here it be answered, that men and other
perfect terrestiall creatures, are so full of fervent blood, that without a
cooler their own hear would quickly choke them, and in this regard, the God
of nature who did not make them (...), or give them life in vain to be
presently extinct, did with it give them lungs, by whose respiration their
natural temper should be continued: This answer does fully satisfy all
demands concerning the former effect. For no man of sense would further
question, why life should be preserved, whose preservation immediately depends
upon respiration, or exercise of the lungs, and is therefore the immediate cause
of both, and that whereunto all our persuasions, concerning the former subject,
are lastly resolved. Or, if it should be demanded, why only man of all other
creatures has power to laugh; to say, he were endued with reason, does not
resolve us; for a Philosophical wit would further question, [Why should
reasonable substances have this foolish faculty rather then others?] A good
Laurentin. de Risu.
Philosopher would persuade us the spirits which serve for instruments to the
rational part, are more nimble and subtle, and so more apt to produce this
motion, then the spirits of any other creatures are. But this I must profess
resolves not me: for how nimble or subtle soever they be, unless man had other
corporeal Organes for this motion, the spirits alone could not produce it: and
all organicall parts are framed for the operation or exercise of the faculty,
as their proper end. Whence, he that would finally resolve the former
problem, must assign the true final cause why reasonable substances, more
then others, should stand in need of this motion. Now seeing unto reason only
it is proper to forecast danger, and procure sorrow and contristation of heart
by preconceit of what yet is not, but perhaps may be: it was requisite that
our mortality through reason obnoxious to this inconvenience, should be able
to correct this contristant motion by the contrary, and have a faculty to
conceive such pleasant objects as might dilatate the heart and spirits; that
as man hurts his body by conceited sorrow, whereto no other Creature is
subject, so he might heal it again by a kind of pleasance, whereof he alone
is capable.

3 Answerable to this latter acception of final resolution, That acording to
the Jesuits own Principles, the Churches infallibility does so terminate all
doubts or demands in matters of faith, as the immediate or prime cause, does
all doubts or questions concerning any demonstrable effect.
if you demand a Roman Catholic [why he believes there is a Trinity, there
shall be a resurrection, or life everlasting;] his answer would be, because
God, or the first verity has said so: but this does not fully satisfy; for
we might further question him, as he does us, why do you believe that God
did say so? Here it suffices not to say, This truth is expressly taught in
Canonical Scriptures; for the doubt whereby he hopes to stagger us most, is
this, [Why do you believe, or how can you know, those Books which ye call
Scriptures were from God.] The last and final answer (according to the
Jesuitical Catechismes) wherein (as you heard before out of Sect. 2. cap. 2..
1.
Bellarmine) they think they have great advantage of us, would be this: The
holy Church our Mother does so instruct* giving us this express admonition
withal, Ecclesiastes, 12. ver. 11. Hoc loco Solomon docet, inquit Bellarminus,
non esse vlterius inquirendum, sed quiescendum penitus, quando sententia data
est a summo Pastore, adiuncto praesertim consilio sapientum. Quod si haec
dicuntur de Sacerdote veteris Testame^ti, quanto m^gis dici possunt de
Sacerdote Testamenti noui, qui long maiores promissiones a Deo accepit.
Bellar, de verb. Dei, lib. 3. c. 4.
his amplius fili mine requiras. Here (upon God their Father, and the
infallible Church their mothers blessing,) their souls are bound to rest
without further doubt or demand. Whence unless they use so me mental
reservation, or seek to shroud themselus in the former aequiuocation hitherto
unfolded, they must of necessity account themselves accursed, if they deny the
last or final resolution of their belief to be into the Churches
infallibility or veracity. Again, what reasonable man would demand further
resolution of any doubts incident to his faculty, be it real or verbal,
speculatiue or practicke, then into the prime and immediate rules? He should
surely be lasht in a Grammar school, that either for quantity of syllables,
right accent, construction of words, or the like, would seek a fu^ther
reason, then a known general rule which admits no exception. So should he
with disgrace be turned over the Bar amongst the Lawyers, that would demurre
or seek a deuolution of an evident ruled case, which by his own confession,
could never alter. Much more gross would his absurdity appear, that in the
Mathematiques or other demonstratiue science, should attempt to resolve a
problem or conclusion, further then into an unquestionable theoreme or
definition. Finally, might we have a centum^irall Court of all professions
under the sun, our adversaries would be condemned with joint consent, either
of intolerable folly, or impudency, if they should, with Valentian, deny the
last resolution of their faith to be into the Churches infallibility; seeing
they make it such a Catholic inerrable perpetual rule of Christian faith, as
admits no exception, no deuolution from it, no appeal. It is to them more then
he said of Logic, Ars artium, and scientia scientiarum, a faculty of
faculties, a Rule of Rules, able, rightly to resolve all doubts concerning the
very Canon of Scriptures, or Gods word, written or unwritten, or the true sense
or meaning of both; briefly able most authentically to determine and define all
controversies in Religion of what kind soever.

4 Nor will it boot them ought to say, that Gods word in the Churches mouth is
the Rule whereinto faith is finally resolved, seeing the Church defines nothing
but by Gods word either written or unwritten. For this is more then the party
which believes it can know, nor has he any other motive to believe it,
besides the Churches definition or assertion. Suppose then we should conceive
so well of a temporal Judge, as to presume he did never speak but according
to the true meaning either of statute or customary law: yet if we could not
know either the one or the other, or their right interpretation, but only by
his determinations; the law were little beholden to him (unless for a floute)
that should say, he were resolved jointly by the Judge and it. For, seeing the
Law is to him altogether uncertain, but by the Judges auouchment or
interpretation, his last resolution of any act of justice, must be only into
the Judges skill and fidelity. This inference At dices, quando Ecclesia
definit, ex verbo Dei scripto, vel tradito, semper definit: neque enim amplius
accipit nouas reuelationes and assistentia spiritus sancti ibi promissa, est
tantum ad ea, quae iam reuelata sunt, cognoscenda: ergo a primo ad vltimum,
quod terminat controuersias, and quod iudex est quaestionu^ fidei, est verbum
Dei. Respondeo: quoniam nobis non constat certo, quis sit verus Scripturae
sensus, nisi per vocem Ecclesiae, quae nostras audit contentiones, and
respondet, Ecclesia Iudex est, quamuis iudicet ex Dei verbo, quod illa
scrutando et examinando, propter assistentiam spiritus sancti, semper recte
intelligit. Si autem quilibet nostrum haberet infallibile donum intelligendi
verbum Dei, alio iudice non indigeremus. Nam hoc, fidei veritates continet, sed
quoniam ita non est, verbum Dei respectu nostri, non habet rationem iudicis:
non quasi certa^ and veram non contineat sententiam, sed quia de eius sensu per
nos ipsi nequimus infallibiliter esse certi, sicut certi sumus de mente
Eccles^ae, quae and audire and refer potest voces; vnde liquet deesse aliquid
scripturae comparatione nostri, quo minus noster iudex esse queat, quod non
deest Ecclesiae. Sacrobos. Def. Decr. Trid. and sentent. Bellarm. cap. 6.. 1.
These words immediately f^llow upon the last quotation (out of the same author)
cap. 2 5.
Sacroboscus would nor deny, he himself has made the like, to prove that not
the Scripture but the Church must be the infallible rule of faith. You will
object (says he) when the Church defines, it always defines according to the
word of God, either written or unwritten. New revelations it receives none: the
promised assistance of the spirit helps it only to know what is already
revealed: Therefore from the first to the last, that which determines
controversies, and is the Judge in all questions of faith, is the word of God.
To this objection thus he answers, because we cannot be certain of the true
sense of Gods word, but by the voice of the Church which hears our
controversies, and answers them: The Church is Judge although it judge
according to Gods word, which upon examination and by the spirits assistance it
always understands a right. And if every one of us should have the infallible
gift of understanding Gods word, we should not need any other Judge. The
Reader, I hope, will remember what was said before; that those flowting
hypocrites would feign believe the Pope says nothing but what God says, that
God may be thought to say all he says; which is the most abominable
blasphemy, that ever Hell broacht, worse then worshipping of Devils as shall
appear hereafter.

5 It may be some Nouice in Arts that has late read some vulgar Logicians
upon the demonstrations, might here frame this doubt in favor of the Romish
Churches Doctrine. As the final cause may be demonstrated by the efficient,
and the efficient by the final: so may the Church be infallibly proved by
Scriptures, and the Scriptures again by the Churches authority, both
infallibly believed each for others sake, as both the former demonstrations are
true and certain, and yet mutually depending one upon the other.

6 This objection, had some late Logicians understood what they said, would
carry some show of truth to countenance Valentians former circular resolution;
but they lace their Mrs. rule, uttered by him Pingui Minerua, too too
straightly. For taking it as they do, we should admit A rule in Logic by some
much misconstrued. Whose misconstructio^ not impeched might in some sort shroud
the Romanists sottishnes in this Argument.
of circular demo^strations, the conceit whereof can have no place but in a
giddy brain. To demonstrate the final cause in any work of Nature, were to
assign a Counsailor to the infinite wisdom of the God of Nature; in whose
intention the end is first, and is the cause of all operation or efficiency.
Who could give, or who would demand a natural cause why life should be
prescribed? for this is the will of him that gave it. If question were made of
the manner how the life of man and other creatures is preserved, when as their
heat might seem to choke them? A man might truly answer, by respiration: and
respiration is from the lungs. But it is one thing to ask how or by what
means, another, for what end any effect is produced. The former is an inquiry
of the efficient, within these precincts of means or motions always prime and
independent; The later of the final cause absolutely, indemonstrable, becauses
it implies a contradiction to give a reason why that should be, for whose sake
all other things of that rank have being. Nor is the end it self (to speak
properly) ever produced, though oftimes in common speech, we take the effect
immediately thereto destinated (because most sensible) for the end it self, as
we do the star next to the pole, because visible, for the pole or point
immovable. Thus we confound respirations or actual preservation of life with
the final cause why men have lungs; when as both are effects of the lungs,
both means of accomplishing Natures or rather the God of Naturs purpose, in
whose will or pleasure the final cause of any natural effect always
consists. And seeing nothing in Nature can preoccupate his will, no cause can
be precedent to the final. This consideration of natural effects tending as
certainly to their proposed end, as the arrowe flies to the mark, caused the
irreligious Aueroes.
Philosopher to acknowledge the direction of an intelligent supernatural agent
in their working, the accomplishment of whose will and pleasure (as I said)
must be the final cause of their motions; as his will or pleasure which
bestows the charges, not the Architect (unless he be the owner also) is the
final cause why the house is built. Finally, every end supposes the last
intention of an intelligent agent, whereof to give a reason by the efficient
which only produces works or means thereto proportioned, would be as
impertinent, as if to one demanding why the bell rings out, it should be
answered, because a strong fellow pulls the rope.

7 Now that which in our adversaries Doctrine answers unto the cause
indemonstrable whereinto final resolution of Natures works or intentions of
intelligent agents must be resolved, Faith cannot be resolved into any definite
branch of the First Truth.
is the churches authority. Nor can that, if we speak properly, be resolved
into any branch of the first truth; for this reason (besides others alleged
before) that all resolutions, whether of our perswasio^s or intentions, or of
their objects (works of Art or Nature) suppose a stability or certainty in the
first links of the chain which we unfold; the latter always depending on
the former, not the former on the latter. As in resolutions of the latter kind
lately mentioned (imitating the order of composition) actual continuation of
life depends on breathing, not breathing on it: breathing on the lunges, not
the lunges mutually on breathing: so in resolutions of the other kind (which
invertes the order of composition) the use or necessity of lunges dependes
upon the use or necessity of breathing; the necessity or use of breathing upon
the necessity or use of life, or upon his will or pleasure that created one of
these for another. Thus again, the sensitive faculty depends upon the vital,
that upon mixtion, mixtion upon the Elements, not any of these mutually upon
the sensitive faculty; if we respect the order of supportance or Natures
progress in their production. Whence he that questions whether some kinds of
plants have sense, or some stones or metals life, supposes as unquestionable,
that the former have life, that the second are mixed bodies. But if we respect
the intent or purpose of him that sets nature a working; all the former
faculties dpend on the sensitive, the sensitive not on any of them. For God
would not have his creatures endued with sense, that they might live; or live,
that they might have mixed bodies: but rather to have such bodies that they
might live, to live that they might enjoy the benefit of sense, or the more
noble faculties.

8 Can the Jesuit thus assign any determinate branch of the first truth, as
stable and unquestionable, before it be ratified by the Churches authority?
Evident it is, by his positions, that he cannot; and as evident, that belief
of the churches authority cannot depend upon any determinate branch of the
first truth, much less can it distinctly be thereinto resolved. But
contrariwise, press him with what Divine precept soever, written or unwritten,
though in all men's judgments (the churches authority set aside) most
contradictory to their approved practices: for example, [That the second
Commandment forbids worshipping Images or adoration of the consecrate host;]
he straight inuerts your reason thus, Rather the second commandment forbids
neither, because the holy Church, which I believe to be infallible, approves
both. Lastly he is fully resolved to believe nothing for true, which the
Church disproues, nothing for false or erroneous, which it allows Or, if he
would answer directly to this demand, [To what end did God cause the
Scriptures to be written?] He could not ( consonant to his tenants) say [That
we might infallibly rely upon them,] but rather [vpon the Churches authority
which it establishes.] For Gods word whether written or unwritten, Vide annor.
cap. 15. Sect 3. paragr. 2.
is by their Doctrine, but as the testimony of some men deceased, indefinitely
presumed for infallible, but whose material extent the Church must first
determine, and after wards judge, without all appeal, of their true meaning.
Thus are all parts of Divine truths, supposed to be revealed, more essentially
subordinate to the Churches authority, then ordinary witnesses are to royal
or supreme judgment. For they are supposed able to deliver what they know, in
terms intelligible to other men's capacities, without the Prince or Judges
ratification of their sayings, or expositions of their meanings; and judgment
is not ordained for producing witnesses; but production of witnesses, for
establishing judgment. Thus by our adversaries Doctrine, Gods word must serve
to establish the Churches authority: not the Churches authority, to confirm
the immediate sovereignty of it over our souls.

9 Much more probably might the Jew or Turk resolve his faith unto the first
truth, then the modern Iesuited Papist can. For though their deductions from
it be much what alike, all aequally sottish: yet these admit a stabilitie or
certainty of what the first Truth has said, no way dependant upon their
authority that first proposed or commended it unto them. The Turks would
storm to hear any Mufti profess he were as well to be believed as was
Mahomet in his life time; that without his proposal they could not know either
the old testament or the Alcoran to be from God. So would the Jews if one of
their Rabbines should make the like comparison betwxit himself and Moses, as
the Jesuit does betwixt Christ and the Pope: who, besides that he must be as
well believed as his Master, leaves the authority of both testaments uncertain
to us, unless confirmed by his infallibility. But to speak properly, the
pretended deriuation of all three heresies from the first truth, has a lively
resemblance of false petigrees, none at all of true doctrine and resolutions.
Of all the three the Romish is most ridiculous, as may appear by their
several representations. As, imagine there should be three Competitors for the
Roman Empire; all pleading it were to descend by inheritance, not by election;
all pretending lineall succession from Charles the Great. The first, like to
the Jew, alleges an authentic petigree, making him the eldest. The second,
resembling the Turk, replies, that the other indeed was of the eldest line,
but long since disinherited, often conquered and enforced to resign; whence
the inheritance descended to him as the next in succession. The third, like the
Romanist, pleades it was bequeathed him by the Emperors last will and
testament, from whose death his Ancestors have been entitled to it, and
produces a petigree to this purpose, without any other confirmation then his
own authority; adding withal, that unless his competitors and others will
believe his records and declarations (written or unwritten) to be most
authentic, they cannot be certain whether ever there had been such an
Emperor as they plead succession from, or at least how far his Dominions
extended, or where they lay. This manner of plea in secular controversies,
would be a mean to defeat him that made it. For albeit the Christian World
did acknowledge there had been such an Emperor, and that many parts of Europe
of right belonged unto his lawful heir: Yet if it were otherwise unknown
what parts these were, or who this heir should be; no Judge would be so mad
as finally to determine of either upon such motives. Or if the Plaintiff could
by such courses as the World knows often prevail in judgment, or other
gracious respects, effect his purpose: he were worse then mad that could
think the final resolution of his right were into the Emperors last will and
testament, which by his own confession, no man knows besides himself; and
not rather, into his own presumed fidelity, or the Judges apparent
partiality. So in this controversy whatsoever the Pope may pretend from
Christ, all in the end comes to his own authority; which we may safely
believe, herein to be most infallible, that it will never prove partial
against it self, or define ought to his Holiness disadvantage.

10 Here again, it shall not be amiss to admonish younger Students of another
gull, which the Secundum legem Dei ordinariam, vt quis per habitum fidei
Christianae alicui veritati reuelatae assentiatur, praeter ipsam reuelationem,
necesse est huiusmodi veritatem ab Ecclesia proponi, tanquam a Deo reuelatam,
and side credendam: non quia haec Ecclesiae propositio sit de ratione formali
obiecti fidei, sed quiae est conditio quaedam requisita: sine qua ordinary
assensus fidei Christianae non elicitur. Valent. Tom. 3. in Aquinat. Disp. 1.
Quaest. 1. de obiecto Fidei. Punct. 1. Assert. 3.
Jesuit would put upon us, to make their Churches doctrine seem less
abominable in this point, lest you should think they did aequalize the
authority of the Church with divine revelations. Valentian would persuade you,
it were no part of the formal object of faith. It is true indeed, that the
Churches authority by their doctrine is not comprehended in the object of
belieefe, whilst it only proposes other Articles to be believed. No more is
the Sun comprehended under the objects of our actual sight, whilst we
behold colors, or other visibles, by the virtue of it. But yet, as it could
not make colors, or other things become more visible unto us, unless it self
were the first and principal visible, [that is, unless it might be seen
more clearly then those things which we see by it, so we would direct our
sight unto it:] so would it be impossible the Churches infallible proposal
could make a Roman Catholics belief of Scriptures or their orthodoxal sense
the stronger; unless it were the first and principal, credible or primary
object of his belief; or that which must be most clearly, most certainly,
and most sted fastly believed; so as all other Articles besides, must be
believed by the belief or credibility of it. This is most evident out of
Sacroboscus and Bellarmines resolution, or explication of that point, how the
Churches proposal confirms a Roman Catholics belief. To give this doctrine
of their Churches infallibility, the right title, according to the truth: it is
not an Article of Catholic belief, but a Catholic Axiom of Antichristian
unbelief: which from the necessary consequences of their assertions, more
strictly to be examined, will easily appear.

CHAP. IIII.
What manner of causall dependence Romish belief has on the Church: that the
Romanist truly and properly believes the Church only, not God or his word.
1 THe 2. main assertions of our adversaries, whence our intended conclusion
must be proved, are these, often mentioned heretofore. First, that we cannot
be infallibly persuaded of the truth of Scriptures, but by the Churches
proposal.

Secondly, that without the same, we cannot be infallibly persuaded of the
true sense or meaning of these scriptures, which that Church and we both
believe to be Gods word.

How we should know the Scriptures to be Gods word, is a problem in Divinity,
which in their judgment cannot be assoiled without admission of Traditions, or
divine unwritten verities, of whose extent and meaning the Church must be
infallible Judge. It is necessary to salvation (says Quarto, necesse est
nosse, extare libros aliquos vere diuinos, quod certe nullo modo ex Scripturis
haberi potest. Nam etiamsi scriptura dicat, libros Prophetarum, and Apostolorum
esse diuinos, tamen non certo id credam, nisi prius credide to Scripturam, quae
hoc dicit, esse diuinam. Nam etiam in Al^orano Mahumeti passim legimus, ipsum
alcoranum de coe^o a Deo missum, and tamen ei non eredimus. Ita que hoc dogma
tam necessarium, quod scilicet aliqua sit Scriptura diuina, non potest
sufficienter haberi ex sola Scriptura. Proinde cum fides nitatur verbo Dei,
nisi habemus verbum Dei non scriptum, nulla nobis erit fides. Bellar. lib. 4.
de verbo Dei. Cap. 4.
Bellarmine,) that we know there be some books divine, which questionless
cannot by any means be known by Scriptures. For albeit the Scriptures say,
that the Books of the Prophets or Apostles are divine: yet this I shall not
certainly believe, unless I first believe that Scripture, which says thus,
is divine. For so we may read every where in Mahomets Alcoran, that the
Alcoran it self was sent from heaven; but we believe it not. Therefore this
necessary point [that some Scripture is divine,] cannot sufficiently be
gathered out of Scriptures alone. Consequently, seeing faith must rely upon
Gods word; unless we have God word unwritten, we can have no faith. His
meaning is, we cannot know the Scriptures to be divine, but by Traditions; and
what Traditions are divine, what not, we cannot know, but by the present
visible Church: as was expressly taught by the same Author before. And the
final resolution of our believing what God has said, or not said, must be
the Churches authority. To this collection, Dices Catholicos quosdam reiecisse
nonnullas Scripturae veras parts, quas caruisse Spiritu sancto nos inde non
affirmamus: Responde, quod si illi caru^ssent propositione Ecclesiae pro al^s
libris sicut pro illis, potuissent quoque de tota Scriptura sieve peccato
dubitare, iuxta illud Augustini: Ego Euangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae
commoneret authoritas. Et pari modo, vos qui Ecclesiae authoritatem in
praescribendo, and de fi niendo, quae sunt fidei, facilis insuff^cientem, qua
ratione aliquas Scripturae parts sine scclere (vt dicilijs) repudiatis; eadem
possetis and reliquas. Sacrobos. Def. Decr. Trid, and Sent. Bellar. cap. 6.. 1.
Par. 85. Vide eundem page 109.
Sacroboseus thus far accords: Some Catholics rejected diverse Canonical
Books without any danger, and if they had wanted the Churches proposal for
others, as well as them, they might without sin have doubted of the whole
Canon. This he thinks consonant to that of Saint Austin; I would not believe
the Gospel, unless the Churches authority did thereto move me. He adds, that
we of reformed Churches making the visible Churches authority in defining
points of faith insufficient, might disclaim all without any greater sin or
danger to our souls, then we incur by disobeying some parts of Scripture,
to wit, the Apocryphal books, canonized by the Romish church. The Reader (I
hope) observes by these passages, How Bellarmine ascribes that to Tradition,
which is peculiar to Gods providence: Sacroboscus, that to blind belief, which
belongs unto the holy Spirit, working faith unto the former points, by the
ordinary observation of Gods providence, and experiments answerable to the
rules of Scriptures.

2 Consequently to the Vide Sect. 1. 2, etc. et 7.
Trent Councels decree, concerning the second assertion, Septimo necesse est,
non solum Scripturam posse legere, sed etiam intelligere. At saepissime
Scriptura ambigua et perplexa est, vt nisi ab aliquo, qui errare non possit,
explicetur, non possit intelligi, igitur sola non sufficit. Exempla sunt
plurima: nam aequalitas diuinarum personarum, processio spiritus sancti a Patre
and Filio, vt ab vno principio, peccatum originis, descensus Christi ad
inferos, et multa similio deducuntur quidem ex sacris literis, sed non adeo
facile, vt sisolis pugnandum sit Scripturae testimonijs, nunquam lites cum
proteruis finiri possint. Notandum est enim, duo esse in Scriptura, voc es
scriptas, et sensum in cis inclusum; voces sunt quasi vagina, sensus est ipse
gladius spiritus. Ex huduobus primum habetur ab omnibus, quicuuque enim novit
literas, ^otest ligere Scripturas: at secundum non habent omnes, nec possumus
in plurimis locis certi esse de secundo, nisi accedat traditio, Et hoc forte
dicere voluit Basilius de spiritu sancto, cap. 27. Cum ait, sine traditionibus
non scriptis Euangelium esse purum nomen, id est, esse tantu^ voces and verba
sine sensu. Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei cap. 4.
Bellarmine thus collects: It is necessary not only to be able to read
Scriptures, but to understand them: but the Scripture is often so ambiguous and
intricate, that it cannot be understood, without the exposition of some that
cannot err: therefore it alone is not sufficient. Examples there be many. For
the equality of the divine persons, the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father
and the Son, as from one joint original Original sin, Christ's descension
into Hell, nd many like, may indeed be deduced out of scriptures, but not so
plainly as to end controversies with contentious spirits, if we should produce
only testimonies of Scriptures. And we are to note there be two things in
Scripture, the Characters or the written words, and the sense included in them.
The Character is as the sheath, but the sense is the very sword of the spirit.
Of the first of these two all are partakers; for whosoever knows the
Character, may read the Scripture: but of the sense all men are not capable,
nor can we in many places be certain of it, unless Tradition be assistant.
It is an offer worth the taking that here he makes, That the sense of
Scriptures is the sword of the spirit. This is as much as we contend that the
sense of the Scripture is the Scripture. Whence the inference is immediately
necessary, That if the Romish Church bind us to believe, or absolutely
practice, ought contrary to the true sense and meaning of Scriptures, with the
like devotion we do Gods express, undoubted commandments: she preferres her
own authority above Gods word, and makes us acknowledge that allegiance unto
her which we owe unto the spirit. For suppose we had as yet no full assurance
of the spirit, for the contradictory sense to that given by the Church: we were
in christian duty to expect Gods providence, and inuoke the spirits assistance
for manifestation of the truth; from all possibility whereof we desperately
exclude our selves, if we believe one man's testimony of the spirit, as
absolutely and irreuoucably, as we would do the manifest immediate testimony of
the spirit: yet Quod caput religionis maius aut celebrius est; quam mysterium
sanctiss^mae Trinitatis; quae triu^ personarum astruitur diuinitas? hoc tamen
tam paru^ clare in sinuatur in scriptura, vt contrarium e sacris literis ita
probabiliter atque vt videbatur vere docuerint Ariani; vt totos 300. annos
vexarint Ecclesiam, orbisque aliquando vniuersus se fuerit (Hieronymo test)
miratus Arianum. Immo hodie docetur in Transiluania, and tum scriptis libris,
tum publicis disputationibus, defenditur, multo acrius and melius, quam in hoc
regno Parlamentarianismus. Atque vt libere fatear quod res est, nisi me
Ecclesiae authoritas commoueret, quam certissime credo in vero Scripturae sensu
assignando errare non posse, non facile ex Scriptura c^lligerem eum sensum; qui
habet Deum esse natura vnum, and personis trinum, ita vt naturae vnitas,
numerosa sit, and personarum distinctio realis: praesertim vero cum pugnare
plane cum naturae lumine videatur, vt personae sint inter se realiter
distinct, and simil realiter identisicatae, diuinae essentiae, vni and
simplicissime. Sacrob. Def. Decr. Trid, cap. 6. Par. 1.
Sacroboscus acknowledges he beliues the mystery of the Trinity, as it is
taught by their Church, only for the Churches authority; and yet this he
believes as absolutely as he does, yea as he could believe any other divine
Revelation, though extraordinarily made unto himself.

3 In both parts of belief above mentioned, the causall dependence of our
faith upon the Churches proposals, may be imagined three ways: either whilst
it is in planting; or after it is planted: or from the first beginning of it to
it full growth; or from it first entrance into our hearts, until our departure
out of this world. How far, and in what sort the Ministry of men in the
Church is available, for planting faith; has been declared heretofore. Either
for the planting or supporting it, the skill or authority of the teachers
reaches no further, then to quicken or strengthen our internal taste or
apprehension of the divine truth revealed in Scriptures; or to raise or tune
our spirits, as Music did Elishahs, the better to perceive the efficacy of
Gods spirit, imprinting the stamp of those divine Revelations in our hearts,
whose Characters are in our brains. The present Churches proposals, in respect
of our belief, is but as the Samaritan woman's report was unto the men of
Sichars: Many (says the Evangelist) John 4.
believed in him for the saying of the woman which testified he has told me
all things that ever I did. But this belief was as none, in respect of that
which they conceive immediately from his own words. For they said unto the
woman, Now we believe not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our
selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ. Job. 34. v. 3.
The ear (says Job) tries the words, as the mouth tastes meats. Consonant
hereto is our Churches doctrine, that as our bodily mouths taste and try
meats immediately, without interposition of any other man's sense or judgment
of them: so must the ears of our souls try and discern divine truths,
without relying on other men's proposals or reports of their relish. No
external means whatsoever, can in either case have any use: but only either
for working a right disposition in the Organ, whereby trial is made; or by
occasioning the exercise of the faculty rightly disposed. How essentially faith
by our adversaries doctrine dependes upon the churches authority, is evident
out of the former discourses: that this dependence is perpetual, is as
manifest, in that they make it the judge and rule of faith, such an
indefectible rule, and so authentic a Judge, as in all points must be
followed, and may not be so far examined, either by Gods written law, The
principal difficulties in the Romists opinion, whereto no sufficient answer
can be given.
or rules of nature, whether it contradict not it self or them.

4 It remains we examine the particular manner of this dependence, or what the
Churches infallibility does or can perform, either to him that belieues, or to
the object of his belief; whence a Roman Catholics faith should become more
firm or certain then another man's. It must enlighten either his soul, that
it may see; or divine revelations, that they may be seen more clearly:
otherwise he can exceed others only in blind belief* The cunningest
Sophister in that school, strictly examined upon these points, will bewray
that monstrous blasphemy which some shallow brains have hitherto hoped to
cover. We have the same Scriptures they have; and peruse them in all the
languages they do. What is it then can hinder, either them, from manifesting;
or us, from discerning, their Truth or true meaning manifested? Do we want the
Churches proposal? we demand how their present Church it self can better
discern them then ours may? what testimony of antiquity have they, which we
have not? But it may be, we want spectacles to read them, our Church has but
the eyes of private men, which cannot see without a public light: Their
Churches eyes are Cat-like, able so to illustrate the objects of Christian
faith, as to make them clear and perspicuous to it self, though dark and
invisible unto us. Suppose they could: Yet Cats-eyes benefit not bystanders a
whit for seeing colors in darkness, albeit able themselves to see them without
any other light then their own. The visible Church (says the Jesuit) is able
to discern all divine truth by her infallible public spirit. How knows he
this certainly, without an infallible public spirit? perhaps as men see
Cats-eyes shine in the dark, when their own do not. Let him believe so. But
what does this belief advantage him, or other private spirits, for the clear,
distinct, or perfect sight of what the Church proposes? Does the proposal
make divine Truths more perspicuous in themselves? Why then are they not alike
perspicuous to all, that hear, read, or know the Churches testimony of them?
Sacroboscus has said all that possibly can be said on their behalf in this
difficulty; Aduerte Sectarios, vt supra insinuaui, nullius Ecclesiae
authoritate, tanquam sufficient proponente vti, ne quidem suae; Sed tanquam
proponente nude: nam sibi assumunt Ecclesiae sententiam corrigere quando libet,
and tunc opponunt Christum Ecclesiae, quasi Ecclesia aliud proponeret, Christus
vero aliud doceret; si autem illam Ecclesiam pro sufficient haberent,
oporteret in omnibus suam sententiam cum illa conformare. Vnde si quando verae
Ecclesiae authoritate ^tuntur: ne tunc quidem de veritate revelata fidem
habent, sicut non habet ille scientiam, qui medio quidem vtitur necessario,
existim^t tamen illud solum esse probabile. Nam ad fidem non solum opus est vt
Ecclesia sufficienter credenda proponat infallibili illa sua authoritate, quam
a Christo habet nos docendi, and qui libri doctrinam diuinam contineant, and
quis ve^us sit eorum locorum qui in controuersiam vocantur sensus: sed etiam
necesse est vtatur homo Ecclesiae propositione formaliter, and s^fficiens est,
scilicet in illam tendendo vt in infallibilem. Sacrobos. Def. Decret. Trid. and
Sent. Bell. Cap 6. par. 1. page 94.
The Sectaries, albeit they should use the authority of the true Church, yet
cannot have any true belief of the truth revealed. If the use of it be as free
to them as to Catholics: what debarres them from this benefit? They do not
acknowledge the sufficiency of the Churches proposal. And as a necessary
proof or medium is not sufficient to the attayning of science, unless a man
use and acknowledge it formally as necessary: so for establishing true faith,
it suffices not that the Church sufficiently proposes the points to be
believed, or auoweth them by that infallible authority, wherewith Christ has
enabled her to declare both what books contain Doctrines Divine, and what is
the true sense of places controuersed in them; but it is further necessary that
we formally use this proposal as sufficient, and embrace it as infallible.

5 The reason then, why a Roman Catholic rightly believes the Truth or true
meaning of Scriptures, when a Protestant that knows the Churches testimony as
well as he, in both points uncertain, is, because the Catholic infallibly
believes the Churches authority to be infallible, whereof the Protestant
otherwise persuaded, reapes no benefit by it, but continues still in darkness,
laboring in vain to see the truth of Divine revelations without it, as much
in vain as if a man should strive to see colors without light. Ad
discerne^dam doctrinam orthodoxam praeter habitum fidei in intellectu, and
supernaturalem spiritus sancti concursum, habenti habitum fidei debitum, quae
se tenent ex part subiecti: requiruntur praeterea alia duo ex part obiecti,
quorum si desit alterutrum, facultas nunquam obibit proprium actum. Horum vnum
est, vt propositio credenda, sit reuelata a Deo; alterum, vt nobis sufficienter
proponatur, Deum illum revelasse: necessitas prioris hinc ostenditur, quoniam
illa qualitas sieve habitus, quae dicitur fides diuina, and supernaturalis, and
inter virtutes theologi^as est origin prima, suapte natura ad hoc est
determinata, and ^imitata, vt inclinet tantum ad ea, quae sunt a Deo dicta, and
quidem obscure. Secus enim, si euidens nobis foret mysteria fidei a Deo esse
reuelata, eum lumine naturae notum sit illum non posse mentiri, aut falsum
dicere, de ijs haberemus scientiam.. Posterioris vero causa est, quod cum non
videamus fidei mysteria esse a Deo testificata, necesse est nobis proponantur
tanquam a Deo revelata, idque suffi^i^^t^r. Quoniam insufficiens propositio
obiecti, perinde est ac nulla propositio, vt patet exemplo luminis, quod oculo
proponit videndos colores. Quando enim lumen est in gradu valde remisso,
colores discernere nequimus: non quod desit obiectum; sed quoniam deest
sufficiens lumen in medio, illustrans obiectum.
For this is Sacroboscus instance. Besides the habit of faith seated in the
understanding, and the supernatural concourse of the Holy Spirit, due to all
endued with the habit of faith, but necessary in respect of the subject or
party, two things more are requisite on the behalf of the object, of which if
either be wanting, the faculty can never perform it proper function. Of
these two, the one is, that the proposition to be believed, be revealed by God;
the other, that there be a sufficient proposal made to us that God has
revealed it. For an insufficient proposal of any object is as none, as may
appear by the example of light, which proposes Colors to be seen. For when
the light is weak or scant, we cannot discern Colors, not that we want a
visible object, but because we want light sufficient to illuminate the object,
or the space betwixt us and it. Ia^ igitur qui ab authoritate Ecclesiae
recedu^t, and contenti sunt veritates fidei esse in Scripturis a Deo reuelatas,
sibi promittentes spiritus sancti concurium ad actus fidei eliciendos,
sufficient proponente carent, atque similiter faciunt, ac qui sine lumine sibi
promitteret conspectum colorum in area, eo quod ha^eat colores ante ^culos
positos et praeditus sit facultate videndi, cum qua Deus paratus est quoties
volumus concurrere. Nam nunc mortui sunt Prophetae, mortui Apostoli, Christus
in coelum recessit, and nobis omnium loco reliqu^t Ecclesiam; cuius
authoritatem cum ad^uc in terris ageret ipse stabiliuit, and tum miraculis, tum
alijs rationibus confirmauit, and quantum opus est etiam nunc confirmat.. Haec
nostra vult magistra sit, hanc audiamus, ab hac quid a Deo per Prophetas, and
Apostolos dictum sit, and quo sensu vnumquodque intelligendum sit, accipiamus:
^^que expectandum est, vt Deus temere, and passim per interni luminis copiam
nobis suppleat vt^^m propositionis externae, vt fecit primo parenti, and Paulo,
qui neque ab homine, neque per hominem, sed per reuelationem Jesus Christi
accepit Euangelium: haec enim priuilegia sunt. Sacroboscus page 93. and 94. Def.
Decret. Trid. and Sent. Bellarm. Cap. 6 part. 1.
He adds withal, such as disclaim the Churches authority, and are content
with this [That Truths of faith are revealed by God in his Word] and hence
promise themselves the supernatural concourse of the Holy Ghost for producing
acts of faith, are destitute of a sufficient proposer, and their presumption
such, as if a man should persuade himself, because he has Colors before his
eyes and God ready to afford his ordinary concourse as often as he is disposed
to exercise his visiue faculty, he should be able to see them without light.
For ( says this Jesuit) the Prophets are dead, Apostles dead, Christ go^e to
Heaven, and in stead of al ( Prophets, Apostles, or himself) has left us his
Church. Nor is it to be expected that God will every where, upon all
occasions, supply the want of the external proposals by the abundance of
internal illuminations, as he did to our first parent, or Saint Paul who had
his Gospel neither from man, nor by man, but by the revelation of Jesus
Christ. For those are privileges.

6 The calumny intended in this last instance, has often heretofore been
prevented. We never denied either the necessity, or sufficiency of the
Churches proposal, as an external mean: we account no other of that rank
and nature, is, or could be, either more necessary, or more sufficient. Saint
Paul we grant, had an extraordinary privilege, and yet for his private
information, had the Truth proposed unto him by Act. 9. v. 17.
Ananias, though the gifts of his public Ministry were immediately from God.
Both the measure of his faith, and manner of attayning it, were unusual: but
his faith it self, once attained, no otherwise independent of any external
proposal then ours is and all Christians must be. We should have been more
beholden to this professor, had he distinctly told us, what it is in their
language, to have a sufficient proposer: albeit this we may gather from his
words late cited, and these The latin are quoted. 4.
following; The Sectaryes take upon them to correct the Churches sentence as
often as they list, and then they oppose Christ to the Church, as if the Church
did propose one thing, and Christ teach another. If they admitted any Church as
a sufficient proposer, they were bound to conform their opinions to it, in all
things. As you heard before out of Sect. ^. cap. 8. parag. 12.
Bellarmine, That the Popes decrees may not be examined whether consonant or
contrary to Gods word or the foundations of faith already laid in our hearts:
and out of Sect. 1.. 11.
Canus, That we must believe the Church absolutely without ifs or ands. Thus
believing we have Gods Word sufficiently proposed; without this belief or
acknowledgement of such authority in the Church, we have no sufficient
proposal of it, but strive as foolishly to hear God speak, as if we sought
to see Colors without the light.

7 It appears, I hope, as clearly to the Reader as to me, that the Churches
testimony or authority by our adversaries Doctrine, benefits none but such as
steadfastly and absolutely believe it in all things. But he that so believes
it, may by it easily believe all other points, as he that can perfectly see the
light, may see Colors by it. Want of this radical belief in us, makes our
faith in their opinion, so unstable, or rather blind and dead. Yet can I
hardly persuade my self, all of them will grant the Church adds any inherent
or participated splendour to divine revelations, whereby they become perspicuous
in themselves, as Colors are made visible by irradiation of the Sun. Thus
much notwithstanding all of them, I know, willingly would subscribe unto: A
Protestant can neither of himself be infallibly persuaded of the Truth of
Scriptures, or other conclusions of faith; nor does he asolutely believe any
others, that are infallible in their determinations: but a Roman Catholic,
albeit by his private spirit he cannot infallibly believes them* yet he
infallibly believes the Church which cannot err in belief. All then that a
Papist has more then a Protestant is this; Vide sect. 2. c. 2. par. 12. and 13.
his belief of the Church: if once he doubt of this, he is where he was: Which
in plain terms is as much as to say, he believes the Church concerning
Scriptures; not Scriptures. That this is the true interpretation of their
tenent, may easily be gathered from their own writings. For Bellar. L. 3. de
verbo Dei. c. 8. Sacrob. p. 132.
Bellarmine expressly contends, and all of them suppose that saying of Saint
Austine [ Sacrobos^us instances to elude Docto^ Whittakers argument (as he
proposed it) do plainly confirm our inference. At vrget Whitakerus: cum
Augustinus ita erat dispositus vt non crederet, nisi ipsu^ Eccle. authoritas
co^moueret; authoritas Ecclesiae erat sola causa fidei ipsius, ergo fides qua^
tu^c habebat no^ erat diuina: Na^ hac praeter authoritatem Eccl* respicit etia^
authoritate^ Dei. Probat antecedens, nam particula (nisi) omnes alias causas
remouet, praeter ea^ cuius fit expressa mentio: Huius autem rei testes vocat
omnes Grammaticos. Verum meminisse debuisset regulae D. Dionisij: Bonum ex
integra causa, malum autem ex quolibet defectu. Vt ponatur effectus, necesse
est omnes causas concurrere; At vt impediatur satis est vnam deesse. Itaque
omnes istae propositiones sunt verae. Nisi Augustinus (quem etiam ipse fatetur
sanctum, imo sanctissimum) habuisset intellectum, non fuisset beatus. [Nisi
fuisset Deus, Augustinus non fuisset beatus] [nisi habuisset fidem Augustinus,
non fuisset beatus.] Page 133. Now as the particle (nisi) in his first
instance, excludes all Creatures save intelligent: in the second all
intelligent, save such as shall enjoy the sight of God: in his third all save
the faithful, from blessedness: So in this our instance, the same particle
excludes all credence of the Gospel, beside that credence we give unto the
Church.
Non crederem Euangelio, nisi me commoueret Ecclesiae authoritas; I would not
believe the Gospel, unless the Churches authority did thereto move me] to
be true as well after faith is produced, whilst it continues, as whiles it is
in planting. Now if a man should say, Non crederem Francisco; nisi me
commoueret Petri fidelitas; I would not trust Frances, but for Peter's word:
this speech resolved into it natural or proper sense, is aequiualent unto
this; I do not trust Frances, but Peter that gives his word for him. And in
case Peter should prove false, or be distrusted by him that took his word for
Frances, as yet not believed but for Peter's sake; the creditor could have no
hold of either. Thus if Bellarmine and his fellows be (as they would seem to
make Saint Austine,) minded, not to believe the Gospel but for the Churches
authority, or proposal of it: let them speak plainly and properly, not in
parables or metaphors; and so we shall know their meaning to be, That they
indeed believe not the Scriptures, but the Church; or, the Church truly and
really; the Scriptures only by extrinsecall denomination.

8 Nor can they reply either consequently to Sacrobos^us instance or their
general tenants, that as he which sees colors by the light, truly sees
colors; not the light only* so he that believes Scriptures by the Churches
infallible proposal, believes not the Churches proposal only, but Scriptures
as truly and properly. The diversity of reason in these two consequences,
arises from the diverse manner of seeing colors by the Suns light, and
believing Scriptures by the Church: which we are now to gather from this short
catechism containing the sum of Roman faith.

CHAP. V.
Declaring how the first maine ground of Romish faith leads directly unto
Atheism: the second, unto preposterous Heathenisme or Idolatry.
1 IT is a pretty sophisme (as a judicious and learned Divine, in his public
exercise for his first degree in Divinity, late well observed) wherewith the
Jesuit deludes the simple, making them believe their faith, otherwise weak
and unsettled, is most firm and certain, if it have once the visible or
representative Churches confirmation; when as the Church so taken, seldom or
never instructs or confirms any, at least not the hundred thousandth part of
them, unto whose salvation such confirmation is by Cum dicimus propositionem
Ecclesiae esse conditionem necessariam ad assensum fidei, N^mine Ecclesiae
intelligimus eius Caput, i. Romanum Pontificem per se, vel vna cum Concilio, ex
praedicta authoritate propositiones fidei fidelibus declarantem. Valent. Tom. 3
in Aq. Dis. 2. Q. 1. De obiecto fidei, Punct. 1. Vide Annot. ex Bell. Sect. 3.
c. 15. Parag. 2.
Jesuitical persuasions most absolutely necessary. But suppose the visible
Church or Romish Consistory; the Pope and his Cardinals, should vouchsafe to
catechize any; the Dialogue between them and the catechized would thus proceed.

Cons. Do ye believe these sacred volumes to be the word of God?


Catech. We do.


Cons. Are you certain they are?


Catech. So we hope.


Cons. How can your hope be sure? for Mahomet says, His Alchoran is, sundry
other heretics say, their fained revelations or false traditions are Gods
word? How can you assure us, ye may not be deceived as well as they? Are not
many of them as good Scholars as you?


Catech. Yes indeed, and better.


Cons. Are not you subject unto error as well as they?


Cat. Would God we were not.


Cons. What must you do then to be ascertained these are divine Revelations?


Cat. Nay, we know not* but this is that which we especially desire to know,
and would bind our selves in any bond to such, as could teach us.


Cons. Well said: do ye not think it reason then to be ruled in this case,
by such as cannot be deceived?


Cat. It is meet we should.


Cons. Lo, we are the men: we are the true visible Church, placed in
authority by Christ himself for this purpose. These Scriptures tell you
plainly as much Ad Quintum dico, nos non gloriari in templis, and successione
Episcoporum, and Apostolica sed e secundum se, sed propter Christi
promissione^, qui ait, Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc. and portae
inferi non praeualebu^t, etc. Qualem promissione^ Iudaei nunquam habuerunt.
Bell. lib. 3. de Eccl. militant. cap. 6
Tues Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc. His Holiness whom here you see, is
Peter's Successor; sole heir of that promise, far more glorious then the Jewish
Church ever had any.

2 This Fides diuina (quod omnes norunt) licet obscura sit, certa tamen est and
quide^ magis quam scientia. Isti vero desuis dogmatibus sint oportet incerti:
nam quicquid credu^t, hac sola de causa ex part obiecti credunt, quod ita
putant Scriptura^ sentire; in quo iudicio cum sint obnoxij errori, no^ possunt
certo statuer^, se reipsa no^ errare. Confirmatur: nam sib plus tribuere
nequeunt, quam Luthero, Caluino, aut sanctis Patribus; horum autem iudicio se
dicunt non teneri, and hoc ideo quod homo quilibe^, quantum^is sanct^s, and
spiritu plenus, errare possit. Quare cum generalis sententia ab illis data,
ipsos quoque comprehe^dit, quippe qui (...) hominum numerum non sunt, sequi^ur
eos adeo incertos esse de ^uis, ac de aliorum interpretationibus. Sacrob. Def.
Dec. Trid. cap. 6. Pa^, 1.
is the very quintessence and extraction of huge and corpulent volumes written
in this argument, which our English Mountibankes, sent hither from the
Seminaries, venditate as a Paracelsian medicine, able to make men immortal.
The sum of all others write, or they allege, is this; Every one may pretend,
what writings he lists, to be the word of God; who shall be the infallible
Judge, either of written or unwritten revelations? Must not the Church? for
she is Magistra and Iudex fidei. These are the words, and this is the very
Argument, wherein Valentians soul, it seems, did most delight, he uses them
so often. But to proceed: the parties chatechized thus by the visible Church it
self, should any Protestant enter Dialogue with them how they know those
received scriptures to be the word of God, could answer, I trow, sufficiently
to this question, thus: Mary sir, woe know better then you: for we heard the
visible Church which cannot err, say so, with our own ears.


Prot. You are most certain then that these are the Oracles of God* because
the visible church (Gods living oracle) did bear testimony of them?


Catech. Yea, Sir, and their testimony is most infallible.


Prot But, what if you doubt again of their infallibilities? How will you
answer this objection. Mahomet says his Alcoran is scripture; the Turkish
Priests will tell you as much, viua voce, and show you if you be disposed to
belieeue them, e^ident places therein, for his infallibility? Manes could say
that he had divine revelations. The Pope pretends he has this infallibility,
which neither of them had. Who shall judge? the Consistory? But why should you
think they may not err as well as others? Did they show you any evidence out
of scriptures, or did they bring you to such entire acquaintance with their
public spirit, as to approve your selves divine Critickes of all questions
concerning the Canon, as often as any doubt should arise?


Catech. Oh no, these audacious Criticismes of private men they utterly detest,
and forewarned us upon pain of damnation to beware of. For there is no private
person but may err, and for such to judge of Scriptures were presumption
justly damnable. Rely they must for this reason upon the churches
infallibility, and that continually. It alone cannot; without it, all others
may err, as well as Manes, Mahomet, Nestorius, or Eutyches: undoubtedly
believing it cannot err, we our selves are as free from error, as he that
follows such good counsel given by others as he cannot give himself, is
more secure then he that altogether follows his own advise, albeit better
able to counsel others then the former.


Prot. Then I perceive your only holde-fast in all temptations, your only
anchor when any blasts of vain doctrine arise, is this; The present Remish
Church cannot err: for if you doubt of any doctrine taught to the contrary,
ask her and she will resolve you; or if you cannot see the truth in it self,
yet believe without all wavering as she belieues that sees it, and you shall
be as safe, as if you road in the harbor in a storm.


Catech. Ah yes, Gods holy name be praised, who has so well provided for his
church: for otherwise heretics and schismatikes would shake and toss her,
even in this maine point or ground of faith, as evil spirits do ships in
tempests: we must either hold this fast sure, or else all is gone. God has
left off speaking unto men, and we cannot tell, * Vide chap. 4. Parag. 5. and
Arnob. and Sacrob.
whether ever he spoke to them or no; but as the present church, which speaks
viua voce, tells us.

3 But the Reader perhaps expects what inconvenience will hence follow. First,
hereby it is apparent, that belief of Scriptures, divine Truth, and their true
sense, absolutely and immediately depends upon the churches proposal, or
rather upon their belief of what it proposes, as well after they are
confirmed in that general point [That they are Gods word,] as in the instant
of their confirmation in it. The first necessary consequence of which opinion,
is; That the church must be more truly and properly believed, then any part
of Scripture or matter contained in it. For in this manner of dependence, that
transcendent rule of nature, Aristot. l. 1. post. cap. 2.
(...), has it proper force: Whether we speak of the Essence, Existence, or
quality of things being, or existing: that upon which any other thing thus
absolutely and continually depends, does more properly and really exist, and
has much firmer interest in it essence and existence, then ought can have
which depends upon it. One there is, and no more, that can truly say, my
Essence is mine own, and my existence necessary. Whatsoever is besides, is but
a shadow or picture borrowed from his infinite being. Amongst created entities,
all essentially depending on Him, Accidents have a kind of existence peculiar
to themselves; yet cannot so properly be said to exist, as their subjects, on
whom they have such double dependence. Nor can the Moon so truly say, my
beauty is mine own, as may the Sun, which lends light and splendour to this
his sister, as it were upon condtion she never use it but in his sight. For
the same reason, that for which we believe another thing, is always more
truly, more really, and more properly believed, then that which is believed
for it, if the one belief necessarily depend upon the other, tam in facto esse
quam in fieri, from the first beginning to the latter end. For of beliefes thus
mutually affected, the one is real and radical, the other, nominall, or at
the most by participation only real. This consequence is unsound.
[Intellectiue knowledge depends on sensitive: therefore sensitive, is of these
two the surer.] The reason is, because intellectiue knowledge depends on
sensitive, only in the acquisition: not after it is acquired. But this
inference is most undoubted; [Wee believe the conclusion for the premises:
therefore we believe the premises the better,] because belief of the
Conclusion absolutely depends upon the premises, during the whole continuance
of it. This is the great Philosophers rule, and a branch of the former Axiom.
And some justly question, whether in Scholastique propriety of speech, we can
truly say there is a belief of the conclusion, distinct from the belief of
the premises; or rather, the belief of the premises, is by extrinsical
denomination attributed unto the conclusion. This latter opinion, at least in
many Syllogismes, is the truer: most necessarily true in all, wherein the
conclusion is a particulall, essential^y subordinate to an universal of truth
unquestionable. As he that infallibly belieues every man is a reasonable
creature, infallibly belieues Socrates is such. Nor can we say, there be two
dictint beliefes: one of the universal; another of this particular: for he
that says, All, excepteth none. If Socrates then make one in the Catalogue of
men, he that formerly knew all, knew him to be a reasonable Creature: all he
had to learn, was what was meant by this name Socrates, a man or a beast;
After he knows him to be a man, in knowing him to be a reasonable creature,
he knows no more then he did before, in that universal, Every man is a
reasonable Creature. The like consequence holds as firm in our present
argument; He that believes this universal, [Whatsoeuer the Church proposes
concerning Scriptures, is most true,] has no more to learn but only what
particulars the church proposes. These being known, we cannot imagine there
should be two distinct beleefes: one of the churches general infallibility;
another, of the particular Truths or points of faith (contained in the
Scripture) proposed by it. For as in the former case, so in this, He that from
the churches proposal believes or knows this particular, The Book of
Revelations was from God, receives no increase of former belief: for before,
he believed all the church did propose; and therefore this particular, because
one of all.

4 The truth of this conclusion may again, from a maine pinciple of Romish
faith be thus demonstrated. Sacrosancta, Oecumenica, and generalis Tridentina
Synodus in spiritu sancto legitime congregata, praefidentibus in ea eisdem
tribus Apostolicae sedis legatis, hoc sibi perpetuo ante oculos proponens, vt
sublatis erroribus, puritas ipsa Euangelij in Ecclesia conseruetur: quod
promissum ante per Prophetas in Scripturis sanctis, Dominus noster Jesus
Christus, Dei filius, proprio ore primum promulgauit; deinde per suos
Apostolos, tanquam fontem omnis, and salutaris veritatis, and morum
disciplinae, omni Creaturae praedicari iussit: perspiciensque hanc veritatem,
and disciplinam contineri in libris scriptis, and sine scripto traditionibus,
quae ipsius Christi ore ab Apostolis acceptae, aut ab ipsis Apostolis, Spiritu
Sancto dictante, quasi per manus traditae, ad nos vsque peruenerunt,
orthodoxorum Patrum exempla secuta, omnes libros tam veteris quam noui
Testamenti, cum vtriusque vnus Deus sit auctor, nec non traditiones ipsas, tum
ad fidem tum ad mo^es perimentes, tanquam vel ore tenus a Christo, vel a
Spiritu Sancto dictatas, and continua successione in Ecclesia Catholica
conseruatas, paripietatis affectu, ac reuerentia suscipit, and veneratur.
Council. Trident. Sess. 4. Decret. de Canonicis Scripturis. And a little after
having reckoned up the Apoctyphall Books with the Canonical, they thus
conclude. Si quis autem libros ipsos integros cum omnibus suis partibus, prout
in Ecclesia Catholica legi consueuerunt, and in veteri vulgata Latina editione
habentur, pro Sacris and Canonicis non susceperit; and traditiones praedictas
sciens and prudens contempserit; anathema sit. Omnes itaque intelligant, quo
ordine, and via, ipsa Synodus, post iactum fidei confessionis fundamentum, sit
progress^ra, and quibijs potissinum testimonijs, ac praesidijs in confirmandis
dogmatibus, and instaurandis in Ecclesia moribus, sit vsura. The Council was
very wise in not expressing as well what unwritten traditions, as written
books, they meant to follow.
Whatsoever unwritten traditions the Church shall propose, though yet unheard
of or impossible otherwise to be known then only by the Churches
asseueration, all Romanists are bound as certainly to believe, as devoutly to
embrace, as any truths contained in the written word, acknowledged by us, the
Jews, and them, for divine. Now if either from their own experience, the
joint consent of sincere antiquity, or testimony of Gods spirit speaking to
them in private, or what means soever else possible or imaginable, they gave
any absolute credence unto the written word or matters contained in it, besides
that they give unto the churches general veracitie: the Scriptures by addition
of this credence (were it great or little) arising from these grounds peculiar
to them, must needs be more firmly believed and embraced, then such unwritten
traditions, as are in themselves suspicious, incapable of other credit then
what they borrow from the Church. For in respect of the Churches proposal,
Which is one and the same, alike peremptory in both; Scriptures, and traditions
(of what kind soever) must be equally believed. And if such traditions as can
have no assurance besides the Churches testimony, must be as well believed as
Scriptures, or divine truths contained in them: the former conclusion is
evidently necessary, that they neither believe the Scriptures nor the Truths
contained in them; but the Churches proposal of them only. For the least
belief of any Divine truth, added to belief of the Churches proposal, which
equally concerns written and unwritten verities, would dissolve the former
equality. But that, by the Trent Council, may not be dissolved. Therefore
our adversaries in deed and verity, believe no Scriptures, nor Divine written
Truth, but the Churches proposal only concerning them. And Respondeo:
orthodoxos omnes certos esse Ecclesiam circa fidem non posse errare, proindeque
nec dubitare eius sententiae acquiescere. Hoc enim inter caetera reuelata
tanquam a Deo dictum, ab ipsa matre Ecclesia acceperu^t: quae quidem veritas,
ante scriptam vllam noui testamenti parte^ and dicta a Deo, and ab Ecclesia
proposita, and a fidelibus credita fuit: and hodie quoque crederetur, etiamsi
noui testamenti ne vnus quidem apex scriptus extaret; quemadmodium reuelatae
veritates a fidelibus credeba^tur per annos bis mill in statu legis naturae
ante exaratu^ a Mose Pentateuchum. Sacrob def Decr. Trid. and Sent. Bell. C. 6.
Par. 1. pa. 109.
Sacroboscus bewrayes his readiness to believe the Church as absolutely as any
Christian can do God or Christ, though no title of the New Testament were
extant. For, that the Church cannot err, was an Oracle revealed by God,
proposed by the Church, and believed by the faithful before any part of the
New testament was written. Now he that without the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
would believe the Doctrines of faith as firmly as with it, believes not the
Gospel which now he has, but their authorities only, upon which, though we
had it not, he would as absolute rely, for all matters of doctrine supposed to
be contained in it.

5 Or further to illustrate the truth of our conclusion with this Jesuits
former comparison, which has best illustrated the Romish churches tenent That
Church, in respect of the Canon of Scriptures or any part thereof, is as the
light is to colors. As no color can be seen of us but by the light: so, by
his doctrine, neither the Canon of Scriptures, or any part thereof, can be
known without the Churches testimony. Again, as remoueall of light presently
makes us loose the sight of colors: so doubt o^ denial of the Churches
authority depriues us of all true and steadfast belief concerning Gods Word or
any matter contained in it, God (as they plead) has revealed his will
obscurely: and unto a distinct or clear apprehension of what is obscurely
revealed, the visible churches declaration is no less necessary, then light to
discernment of colors. The reason is one in both, and is this. As the actual
visibilitie of colors wholly depends upon the light, as well for existence, as
duration: so, by Jesuitical Doctrine, true belief of Scriptures wholly
depends on the visible Churches declaration, as well during the whole
continuance, as the first producing of it. By the same reason, as we gather
that light in it self is more visible then colors, seeing by it alone colors
become actually visible: so will it necessarily follow, that the churches
declaration (that is, the Popes privilege for not erring) is more steadfastly
to be believed, as more credible in it self, then either the Canon of
Scriptures or any thing therein contained: because these become actually
credible unto us only by the churches declaration, which cannot possibly ought
avail for their belief, unless it were better believed.

6 Perhaps the Reader will here challenge me, that this last instance proves
not all that I proposed in the title of this chapter. For it only proves the
Popes supremacy is better to be believed; then that Christ is come in the
flesh; that God did ever speak to men in former ages by his Prophets, and in
later by his son. But this inferres no absolute alienation of our belief
from Christ, seeing even in this respect that we believe the Church or Pope so
well, we must needs believe that Christ is come in the flesh and that God has
spoken to us sundry ways: for thus much the Pope avouches. Yea, but what if
the church teach us that Christ is our Lord and Redeemer, and yet urge us to
do that which is contumelious to his Majesty? What if it teach us that these
Scriptures are Gods Word: and yet bind us by her infallible decrees to break
his Laws, and give his spirit the lie? Should we make profession of believing
as the Pope teaches, and yet take his meaning to be only such as Marnixius,
whom we better believe, would make it: His Holiness would quickly pronounces
us Apostataes from the Catholic faith. Or if this suffice not the indifferent
Reader for satisfying my former promise: let him have patience but for a while,
and I will pay him all.

7 Their first maine position, The two main branches of Romish infidelity
springing from her former two positions.
[That no private man can certainly know the Canon of Scriptures to be Gods
word, but by relying upon the present Church,] inferres as much as has been
said: much more will follow from their second, [That no man can certainly be
persuaded of the true sense and meaning of particular propositions contained in
the general Canon, without the same Churches testimony, unto whom the
authentic interpretation or dijudication of Scriptures wholly belongs]
Imagine the former parties, now fully persuaded of the Scriptures divine truth
in general, should by the Consistory which late catechized them, be questioned
about the meaning of some particular places.


Cons. We hope you adore the consecrated host with divine worship, as often as
you meet it in procession.


Cat. Desirous we are to do any thing that becomes good Christians, and
obedient sons unto our holy mother the Church: but we cannot satisfy out
conscionces how this may stand with the principles of Christianity. Your
Holinesses (for which we rest yours unto death) have assured us these sacred
volumes are the very words of God, and his words we know must be obeyed. Now
since we know these to be his words, we have found it written in them: Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Math. 4. v. 5.
It is, we doubt, our simplicity that will not suffer us to conceive how the
consecrated Host can be adored as God without open breach of his commandment.
For, to our shallow understanding, there is no necessity to persuade us Christ
God and man should be hid in it. These words, Hoc est corpus meum, mny bear
many interpretations no way pregnant to this purpose. And it is doubtful,
whether Christ's body, though really present in the Sacrament, should retain
the same presence in procession: whereas the former commandment is plain, We
must worship the Lord our God, and him only must we serve. Consist. Ye
think this Text is plain to your late purpose: we think otherwise. Whether
is more meet? ye to submit your private opinions to our public spirits: or us
that are Pastors, to learn of you seely sheep?


Cat. Therefore are your servants come unto you, that they may learn how to
obey you in this decree without idolatry: well hoping, that as ye enjoin us
absolutely to obey you in it; so ye can give us full assurance we shall not
disobey the spirit of God, in the former great commandment, whose exposition
we most desire.


8 Would these or like supplications, though conceived in Christian modesty,
though proposed with religious fear, and awful regard of their persons,
though presented with tears and sighs, or other more evident signs of inward
sorrow, find any entrance into Romish Prelates ears, or move the Masters of
the Inquisition house to forbear exaction of obedience to the former, or other
decree of the Trent Council: Were the form of the decree it self, unto
private judgments, never so contradictory to Gods express written laws; or
the consequence of practizing as it prescribes, never so dreadful to the
doubtful conscience? How much better then were it for such silly souls, had
they never known the Books of Moses to have been from God? for so committing
idolatry with stocks and stones, or other creatures, they had done what was
displeasing to their Master, and justly punishable: Luke 12. 48.
yet with fewer stripes, because his will was not made known unto them. But now
they know it, and acknowledge the truth of this commandment. To what end? That
they may be left without all excuse for not doing it. They see the general
truth of Gods Oracles, that they may be more desperately blinded in wilful
perverting the particulars. For what glory could the allurement of silly
ignorant men to simple idolatry be unto great Antichrist? Let them first
subscribe to the written Laws of the everliving God, and afterward wholly
submit themselves to his determinations for their practice, and so the
opposition betwixt him and the Deity, betwixt his injunctions and the decrees
of the Almighty, may be more positive, more directly contrary. The Heathen or
others not acknowledging Gods word at all, are rightly termed unbelievers: men
thus believing the Scriptures in general to be Gods word, from the testimony
of the Church, and yet absolutely relying upon her judgment for the meaning of
particular places, are transported from unbelief to misbeliefe, from gross
ignorance to wilful defiance of God and his laws. Finally, they are brought
to know Gods word, that they may doubt in this and like fearful practices
enjoined: that so first doubting, and afterward desperately resolving
absolutely to follow the Churches iniunction, against that sense and meaning of
the divine decrees which the holy spirit does dictate to their private
consciences, they may without doubt be damned, for not abiding in the truth.
Like their first parents they hear Gods sentence, but prefer the
interpretations of Satan's first borne before their own, because it must be
presumed he is more subtle then they. Or to refer the two maine streams of
this iniquity to their proper heads: The first, [That we cannot know the old
or new Testament to be Gods word, but by relying upon the Church] makes all
subscribers to it, real Atheists or Infidels, and Christians only in conceit
or upon condition, [If the Church, whose authority they so highly esteem, be
as infallible as is pretended.] Heretofore I have much grieved at the Trent
Councels impiety: but now I wonder at these grave Fathers folly, that would
trouble themselves with prescribing so many Canons, or ouerseeing so large a
Catechism, when as the beginning of Protogoras book, one or two words
altered, might have comprehended the entire confession of such men's faith, as
rely upon their fatherhoods, The Atheist thus began his book; De dijs non
habeo quod dicam, vtrum sint necne: Concerning the Gods or their being, I can
say nothing. A private Roman Catholic might render an entire account of his
faith in terms as brief: De Christo and Christiana fide non haebeo quod
dicam, vtrum sint necne: Whether there be a Christ, or Christian Religion be
but a politic fable, I have nothing to say peremptorily, yea, or no, the
Church or Council can determine: whom in this, and all other points wherein
God is a party, I will absolutely believe, whilst I live: if at my death I
find they teach amiss, let the devil and they (if there be a devil) decide
the controversy. Yet this conceit or conditional belief of Christ and
christianity conceived from the former, serves as a ground color for disposing
men's souls, to take the sable dye of Hell, wherewith the second maine stream
of Romish impiety will deeply infect all such as drink of it. For once
believing Gods word from the Churches testimony, this absolute submission of
their consciences to embrace that sense it shall suggest, sublimates them from
refined Heathenisme of Gentilisme to diabolisme or symbolizing with infernal
spirits, whose chiefest solace consists in acting greatest villainies, or
wresting the meaning of Gods written laws to his dishonor. For just proof of
which imputation, we are to prevent what (as we late intimated) might in
favor of their opinion be replied to our former instance of light and
colors. An objection which might be made in favor of the Romanists, answered
and retorted.


9 Some perhaps, well affected, would be resolved, why, as he that sees
colors by the sun, sees not only the sun but colors with it, so he that
belieues the Scriptures by relying upon the Church, should not believe the
Church only, but the Scriptures too, commended by it. The doubt could hardly
be resolved, if according to our adversaries tenent, the Churches declarations
did confirm our faith by illustrating the Canon of Scriptures, or making
particular truths contained in it, inherently more perspicuous: as if they
were in themselves but potentially credible, and made actually such by the
Churches testimony, which is the first and principal credible; in such sort as
colors become actually visible, by illumination of the principal and prime
visible. But herein the grounds of Romish doctrine, and the instance brought by
Sacroboscus, to illustrate it, are quite contrary. For the light of the Sun,
though most necessary unto sight, is yet necessary only in respect of the
object, or for making colors actually visible; which, made such, or
sufficiently illuminated, are instantly perceived without further
intermediation of any other light then the internal light of the Organe, in
discerning colors always rather hindered then helped by circumfusion of light
external. For this reason it is, that men in a pit or cave may at noone day
see the stars, which are invisible to such as are in the open air: not, that
they are more illuminated to the one, then the other; but because plenty of
light does hinder the organ or eyesight of the one Generally all objects,
either actually visible in themselves, or sufficiently illuminated, are better
perceived in darkness then in the light. But so our adversaries will not
grant, that after the church has sufficiently proposed the whole Canon to be
Gods word, the distinct meaning of every part is more clear and facile to all
private spirits, by how much they less participate of the visible Churches
further illustration. For (quite contrary to the former instance) the Churches
testimony or declaration is only necessary, or available to right belief, in
respect not of the object to be believed [Scriptures;] but of the party
believing. For (as has been observed) no man in their judgment can believe
Gods word, or the right meaning of it, but by believing the Church: Vide Sect.
2. cap. 1. and Sect. 4. c. 4.
and all belief is inherent in the belieuer. Yea this undoubted belief of the
Churches authority, is that, which in Bellarmine and Sacroboscus judgment,
makes a Roman Catholics belief of Scriptures, or divine truths taught by
them, much better then a Protestants. If otherwise the churches declaration, or
testimony, could without the belief of it infallibility, which is inherent in
the subject believing, make Scriptures credible, as the light does colors
visible in themselves: a Protestant that knew their churches meaning, might as
truly believe them as a Roman Catholic, albeit he did not absolutely
believe the church, but only use her help, for their Orthodoxall
interpretation, as he does ordinary expositors, or as many do the benefit of
the Sun for seeing colors, which never think whether colors may be seen
without it or no. For though it be certain that they cannot, yet this opinion
is merely accidental to their sight: and if a man should be so wilful as to
maintain the contrary, it would argue only blindness of mind, none of his
bodily sight. Nor should distrust of the Romish churches authority, ought
diminish our belief of any divine truth, were her declarations requisite in
respect of the object to be believed, not in respect of the subject believing.

10 Hence arises that difference which plainly resolves the former doubt. For
seeing the Sun makes colors actually visible, by adding virtue or luster to
them: we may rightly say, we see colors, as truly as the light, by which
we see them. For though without the benefit of it, they cannot be seen: yet
are they not seen by seeing it, or by relying upon it testimony of them.
Again, because the use of light is only necessary in respect of the object,
or for presenting colors to the eye; after once they be sufficiently
illuminated or presented, every creature endued with sight, can immediately
discern each from other, without any further help or benefit of external
light, than the general, whereby they become all alike actually visible at the
fame instant. The Suns light then is the true cause, why colors are seen:
out no cause of our distinguishing one from another being seen, or made
actually visible by it. For of all sensible objects sufficiently proposed, the
sensitive faculty, though seated in a private person, is the sole immediate
supreme Judge, and relies not upon any others more public verdite of them. On
the contrary, because the Romanists supposed firm belief of Scriptures, or
their true meaning arises only from his undoubted belief of the churches
veracity which is in the belieuer as in it subject, not from any increase of
inherent credibility, or perspicuity thence propagated to the Scriptures: Hence
it is that consequently to his positions, most repugnant to all truth, he
thinks, after the church has sufficiently avouched the Scriptures divine
truth in general, we cannot infallibly distinguish the true sense and meaning
of one place from another, but must herein also rely upon the churches
testimony; and only believe that sense to be repugnant, that consonant to the
analogy of faith, which she shall tender, albeit our private consciences be
never so well informed by other Scriptures to the contrary. The truth then of
our former conclusion is hence easily manifested. For seeing they hold both the
Scriptures and their distinct sense to be obscure and unable to ascertaine
themselves, unless the Church add perspicuity or facility of communicating
their meaning to private spirits: such, after the Churches proposal, cannot
possibly discern them any better, or more directly in themselves, then they
did before, but must wholly rely upon their Prelates, as if these were the only
watchmen in the Tower of Gods church, that could by virtue of their place
discern all divine truth. Others must believe there is an omnipotent God,
which has given his law; a Mediator of the new Testament: but what the meaning
either of Law or Gospel is, they may not presume otherwise to determine, then
weak sights do of things they see confusedly a far off, whose particular
distance or difference they must take only upon other men's report, that have
seen them distinctly, and at hand.

11 To illustrate these deductions with the former similitude of the prime and
secondary visibles. Let us suppose for disputations sake, that the Sun which
illuminates colors by its light, were further endued (as we are) with sense
and reason, able to judge of all the differences between them, which it can
manifest to us, and hence challenge to be a Pope or infallible proposer of
colors. This supposition the Canonist has made less improbable. For Deus
fecit duo luminaria, God made two lights, that is, by his interpretation, the
Pope and the Emperor. Or, if you please to mitigate the harshnesse of it, let
the Man in the Moon, whom we may not imagine speechless, be supposed the
sun or Pope of colors, Mercury or Nuncio. As the Papists say, we cannot
know Scriptures to be Scriptures, but by the infallible proposal of the
Church: so it is evident we cannot see any color at all, unless illuminated
or proposed by the Suns light. But after by it we see them, suppose we
should take upon us to discourse of their nature, or determine of their
distinct properties as now we do, and the sun or Pope of colors, by
himself or his Nuncio should take us up, as Duke Humphrey did the blind man
restored to sight, which he never had lost; Yea? who taught you to distinguish
colors? were you not quite blind but now? as yet you cannot discern any
colors without my public light, and yet will you presume to desine their
properties, and distinguish their natures against my definitive sentence
known? Must not he that enables you to see them, enable you to distinguish
them seen? Must you not wholly rely upon my authority; whether this be white,
or that black? If a man upon these Motives should absolutely believe the
suns determinations, renouncing the judgment of his private senses: could
he truly say, that he either knew this color to be white or that black, or
another green? Rather were he not bound to say, I neither know white from
black, nor black from blew, nor blew from green: but I know that to be white
which the Sun, the only infallible Judge of colors, says is white; that
only to be black, that blew, and that green which he shall determine so to
be. I may think indeed that the snow is white, or coals black: but with
submission to the Suns determination.

12 And yet, as you have heard at large out of the Trent Council, and best
Apologies can be made for it, the Church must be the infallible Judge of all
Scripture sense, and must absolutely be believed without all appeal to
scriptures, not conditionally as she shall accord with them. The conclusion
hence issuing, is most infallible, and on their parts most inevitable:
[Whosoeuer absolutely acknowledges this authority in the Church or Consistory,
and yelds such obedience unto it in all determinations, concerning the Canon of
Scriptures, does not believe either this or that determinate proposition of
faith, or any definite meaning of Gods word. The best resolution he can make
of his faith is this; [I believe that to be the meaning of every place, which
the Church shall define to be the meaning:] which is all one, as if he had
said, I do not believe the Scriptures or their meaning, but I believe the
Churches decision and sentence concerning them. He that belieues not the
Church (says Nihil igitur efferunt, qui Ecclesiae authoritatem non absolute,
sed ex condition ponu^t. Si namque ad cum mod^ res habet, and mihi quoque
fides habenda est, quando pronunciauero secundum Scripturas recte intellectas.
Id enim est no^ mihi, sed Scripturae credere. Canus lib. 4. cap. 4. Vide lib.
4. sec. 2. chap. 5.
Canus) but with this limitation, [if it give sentence according unto
Scriptures;] does not believe the Church but the scriptures. By the same reason
it follows most directly; he that belieues not the true sense and meaning of
scriptures, but with this reservation, (If the Church so think or determine:)
does not believe them, but the Church only. For, as the Schoolmen say, Vbi
vnum propter aliud, ibi vnum tantum. He that serves God, only because he
would be rich, does not serve God but his riches, albeit he perform the
outward acts of obedience. Or if, we love a man only for his affinity with
another whom we dearly love: we truly and properly love but the one, the
other only by way of reflection or denomination, in such a sense as we say, a
man appears by his proxy, that is, his proxy appears, not he. In like sort,
believing the sense of Scriptures only from the supposed authentic
declaration of the church, or because we believe it: we infallibly believe
the Church alone, not the Scriptures, but only by an extrinsecall denomination.

13 Yet as a man may from some reasons less probable, The greater moral or
historical belief the Romanist has of the truth or true meaning of
Scriptures, the greater his condemnation by subscription to this doctrine of
the Churches absolute infallibility.
have an opinion of what he certainly knows, by motives more sound; or as we
may love one in some competent measure for his own sake, and yet affect him
more entirely for another, whom we most dearly love: so may an absolute
Papist, in some moral sort believe the Scriptures for themselves, or hold
their orthodoxall sense as probable to his private judgment; albeit he
believe them most for the Churches sake, and that sense best which it commends.
But this his belief of the Church, being by their doctrine more then moral or
conditional, does quite overthrow all moral or probable belief, he can
possibly have from what ground soever, of scriptures themselves. For as I said
before, when the This argument holds (as we say) a fortiori of faith infused:
for no man can be so fully persuaded, that he has divine faith infused of any
point, but must renounce his persuasion, when the church defines the contrary:
whose definition or asseueration, be it a cause or condition of believing, will
fully persuade the Romanist, that he now has divine infused says of the
contrari^ (...) that he believed before. For his divine infused says and his
habit of Theology may not disagree, and yet in this case his habit of
Theology may not yield unto the other, because it has the Churches
testimony, which (it is supposed) the other wants, Sect. 2. Chap. 2^ Porag.
9. Annot.
Church shall determine ought contrary to his preconceiued opinion, the more
probable or strong it was, the more it increases his doubt, and makes his
contrary resolution more desperate, yea more damnable if habitual, because,
(...) extremely contrary to the doctrine of faith. Bellarmines prescription in
this case, is just as if a Physician or Surgeon should seek to ease the pain
by ending of the Patients days. Lest a man should sin against his
conscience, this a Doctor advises him to believe the Church cannot teach
amiss.

14 To conclude then: He that absolutely belieues the Pope, as Christ's Vicar
general in all things, without examination of his decrees by Evangelical
precepts, neither belieues Christ nor his Gospel; no not when this pretended
Vicar teaches no otherwise then his Masters laws prescribe For thus believing
a divine truth only from this man's authority, he commits such Idolatry with
him (for the kind or essence) as the Heathen did with Mercury, their false Gods
supposed messenger, though so much more heinous in degree, as his general
notion of the true God is better, whose infinite goodness, cannot entertain
an interpreter no better qualified then most Popes are, did his wisdom stand
in need of any. But if when the Pope shall teach the doctrine of Devils, men
absolutely believe it to be Christ's, because his pretended Vicar commends it to
them: in thus believing, they commit such preposterous Idolatry, as those of
Calecut, which adore the Devil, upon conceit, doubtless, of some celestial
or divine power in him; as the absolute Papist does not adore the Pope, but
upon persuasion he is Christ's Vicar, and teaches as Christ would do, viua
voce, were he again on earth. And less it were to be lamented, did these
Pseudo Catholics profess their allegiance to Satan's incarnate Agent, as to
their supreme Lord, by such solemn sacrifices only as the inhabitants of
Calicute perform to wicked spirits. That this doctrine emboldens such as
embrace it, to glory in villainy
But this their blind belief of whatsoever he shall determine upon a proud
and foolish imagination he is Christ's Vicar, emboldens them to inuert the whole
law of God and nature, to glory in villainy, and triumph in mischief, even to
seek praise and honor eternal; from acts so foul and hideous, as the light
of nature would make the Calicutians or other Idolaters blush at their very
mention. It is a sure token he has not yet learned the Alphabet of their
religion, that doubts whether Jesuitical doctrine concerning this absolute
belief, extend not to all matters of fact. And if out of simplicity, rather
then policy, so they speak: I cannot but much pity their folly, that would
persuade us it were not the fault of Romish Religion, but of the men that
profess it, which has enticed so many unto such devilish practices of late. I
would the Jesuit were but put to instance what kind of villainy either has
been already acted on earth, or can yet possibly be hatched in the region
under the earth, so hideous and ugly, as would seem deformed or odious to such
as are wholly led by this blind faith, if it should but please the Romish
Clergy, to give a mild or favorable censure of it. No brat of hell, but would
seem as beautiful to their eyes, as young todes are to their dammes, if their
mother once commend the feature of it, or acknowledge* it for her darling. Did
not some of the Powder-plotte, after Gods powerful hand had overtaken them,
and sentence of death had passed upon them, even when the Executioner was ready
to do his last office to them, make a question whether their plot were
sinful or no? So modest were some of them, and so obedient sons to the
Church of Rome, that they would not take upon them to say either the one or
other, but referred the matter to their mothers determinations; hereby
testifying unto the world, that if the Church would say, they would believe so
great an offense against their Country were none against God. One of them was
so obstinate, as to solicit his fellow, whilst both were drawn upon one
hurdle to the gallows, not to acknowledge it for any sin. Or if these must
be reputed but private men, not well acquainted with their Churches tenants,
and therefore no fit instances to disapproue her doctrine: let the ingenuous
Reader but peruse their best Writers answers to the objections usually made
against the Popes transcendent authority, and he shall easily perceive how
matters of fact are included in the belief of it; how by it all power is given
him in heaven and earth, to pervert the use and end of all laws humane or
divine. I will content my self for this present with some few instance out of
Valentian.

CHAP. VI.
Proving the last assertion, or generally the imputations hitherto laid upon
the Papacy, by that authority the Jesuits expressly give unto the Pope in
matters of particular fact; as in the canonizing of Saints.
1 HOw often soever the Pope, Quotiescunque Romanus Pontifex in sidei
quaestionibus definiendis, illa qua est praeditus authoritate vtitur, ab
omnibus fidelibus tanquam doctrina fidei recipi diuino pr^cepto debet eu
sententia, quam ille decern^t esse sententiam fidei. Toti^s autem eum ipsa
authoritate vti credendum est, quoties in controuersia fidei sic alterutram
sententiam determinat, vt ad eam recipiendam obligare velit vniuersam
Ecclesiam. Valent. tom. 3. in Aquinat. Disp. 1. Quaest. 1. De object. fidei.
Punct. 7.. 39.
in defining questions of faith, shall use his authority: that opinion which
he shall determine to be a point of faith, must be received as a point of
faith by all Christian people. If you further demand, howshall we know when
the Pope uses this his absolute authority. this Doctor in the same place thus
resolves you.

It must be believed, that he uses this his authority, as often as in
controversies of faith, he so determines for the one part, that he will bind
the whole Church to receive his decision. Lest stubborn spirits might take
occasion to calumniate the Pope for taking, or the Jesuits for attributing
tyrannical authority unto him: this Distinguendi sunt modi, quibus potest
contingere Pontificem aliquid asserere. Primo enim potest sibi persuadere aut
asrere aliquid, vt priuata persona quaedam, vel doctor alius, quispiam, vt si
nollet Ecclesiam vniuersam ad recipiendam suam assertionem obligare, sed tantum
sententiam ipse suam reputaret veram. Hoc modo Innocentius 3. and nonnulli alij
Pontifices opuscula varia ediderunt. Ac illa quidem, quae sic Pontifex
asseuerat, communis sententia omnium Theologorum est, non oportere esse omnia
vera and infallibilia, quasi a Pontificia authoritate profecta. Quin imo a
plerisque authoribus conceditur, sieri posse; vt Pontifex tanquam quaedam
priuata persona in haeresim labatur Ibidem.
Jesuit would have you to understand that the Pope may avouch some things
which all men are not bound to hold as Gospel; nay he may err, though not
when he speaks ex Cathedra, as head of the Church, yet when he speaks or
writes as a private Doctor or expositor, and only sets down his own opinion
without binding others to think as he does. Thus did Innocent the third, and
other Popes, write diverse books, which are not in every part true and
infallible, as if they had proceeded from their Pontificiall authority. Yea but
what if this present Pope, or any of his successors, should bind all
Christians to believe, that Pope Innocents books, were in every part
infallibly true; whether must we in this case believe Valentian, or the Pope
thus determining, better? If Valentian in the words immediately following
deserve any credit, we must believe the Pope better then himself: yea, he
himself must recant his censure of Pope Innocents works. For so in the other
part of his distinction he adds; Secundo modo potest Pontifex aliquid
asserere obligando vniuersam Ecclesia vt illud recipiat, nec quisquam audeat
sibi persuadere contrarium. Et quaecunque Pontifex aliqua de religione
controuersia sic asserit, certa side credendum est, illum infailibil ter, ac
preinde ex authoritate Pontificia, hoc est, ex diuina assisse^tia, id asserere.
Ibidem.
Secundo, potest Pontifex asserere, The Pope again may avouch something, so as
to bind the whole Church to receive his opinion, and that no man shall dare to
persuade himself to the contrary: And whatsoever he shall thus avouch in any
controversy of Religion, we must assuredly believe he did avouch it without
possibility of error, and therefore by his Pontificiall authority. His proof
is most consonant to his assertion. I will not recite it in English, lest the
mere English Reader should suspect any, able to understand Latin, could be
possibly so ridiculous.

2 These lavish prerogatives of the Popes authority, the Jesuits see well to be
obnoxious to this exception. When the Pope does canonize a Saint, he binds all
men to take him for a Saint. Can he not herein err? As for canonizing of
Saints (says Itaque quod ad Canonizati: onem Sanctorum attinet, ami^ino, nego
id, quod communiter doctores Catholici iure optimo negant, vide^^^et posse
Pontificem hac in part errare. Quamuis enim testimonia, quae pro ali^uius
hominis sanctitate esseruntur, siut humana, id^oque natura sua faltibilia:
tamen posito quod Pontifex illis inducati^ tendem ad pronunciandum, quempiam
sanctum at que beatum iam esse, certa fide credendum est, testimoni^ ^lla
(quatenus in genere saltem probant pie atque sancte quenqua^ ex hac v^ta
excessesse) vera esse, et homme^ ei^smodi ex eorum esse numcro, quos per
revelationes Scripturae generales in communi constat, diuinae gratiae beneficio
conseq^^ aeternae vitae beatitudinem. Quae sa^^ certitu^do issdem illis Dei
promissionibus nititur, ex quibus compertum habemus, nunquam esse futurum, vt
vniuersa Ecclesia in rebus religionis fallatur. ^^^loretur autem (...), si sen
sum reputaret, ac pro tali veneraetur eum, qui sanctus non est. Hic autem
illud, quu^d (...) ab orthodoxis probatum atque defensum est, tanquam ex fide
certum pono, nemperem esse amnino, quae ad Ecclesie aedificationem, adenque ad
off tium Pontificis pertineat, vt Sancti quidam aliquando canoni^ ^ntur: ac
(...) Ecclesiam debere vt sanctum venerari illum, quem sam^us Pontifex number no
sanctorum adseribit sicut etiam vsus ipse perpetuus, atque traditio Ecclesiae
confirmat. Valent. ibidem. 40.
Valentian) I absolutely deny, (as the Catholic Doctors upon good reasons
generally do) that the Pope can err in such a business. The certainety of
this his belief he would ground upon those promises, by which we are assured
it shall never come to pass that the universal Church can be deceived in
points of Religion. But the whole church should err very grosely in such
matters, should, it repute and worship him for a Saint which is none. Here it
would be observed, how Satan instigates these men unto such tenants, as may
occasion God and his Gospel to be blasphemed. First, they would make it an
Article of faith, that all must believe as the Pope teaches* Whence it
follows, that either he cannot teach amiss, or else faith may perish from
off the earth. Which if it could, God were not true in his promises. The surest
pledge the Christian world can have of his fidelity in them, must be the Popes
infallibility, so as from the first unto the last, he must be held as true in
his dealings, as God in his sayings. If he fail in canonizing a Saint, whom
he cannot possibly know to be such, unless he knew his heart, which belongs
wholly unto his maker: God must be a liar, and there is no truth in him. The
final issue intended by Satan in these resolutions is this; When men have
been a long time led on with fair hopes of gaining heaven by following the
Popes direction, and yet in the end see (as who not blind sees not) his gross
errors and detestable villainies, they may be hence tempted to blaspheme God as
if he had been his copartner in this consenage. From this root (I take it)
has Atheism sprung so fast in Italy. For whilst faith is in the blade, and
their hopes flourishing, they imagine God and the Pope to be such friends as
their blind guides make them: But afterward coming to detestation of this
man of sin, and his treachery, holding his spiritual power as ridiculous,
they think either as despitefully, or contemptuously of the Deity; or say with
the Psalm. 14. v. 1.
fool in their hearts, there is no God.

3 Thus Antichrists followers still run a course quite contrary to Christian
Religion. The fearful manner of Jesuits tempting God in maintaining this
argument.
For if it be true (as it is most true) that faith cannot utterly perish from
off the earth; what damnable abuse of Gods mercy and favor toward mankind is
this, in seeking, as the Jesuits do, to make all absolutely rely upon one in
matters of faith? For so if he fail, all others must of necessity fail with
him. That is, the whole world must be as kind supernatural fools to him, as
that natural idiot was to his Master, who being demanded, whether he would
go to heaven with him or no, replied he would go to Hell with so good a
Master, seeing any man would be willing to go to heaven with an ordinary
friend, yea with his enemy. Though we should use no other argument but that,
Avoid ye sons of Satan; for it is written, ye shall not tempt the Lord
your God: It should, me thinks, be enough to put all the Jesuits in the
world unto silence in this point, did they not as far exceed their father in
impudency, as they come short of him in wit. For this manner of tempting God is
more shameless then the Devils suggestion unto our Savior, when he was
instantly silenced with this reproof. A presumption it is more damnable to
expect the protection or guidance of Gods spirit, in such desperate resolutions
as Valentian here brings, then it were for a man to throw himself headlong
from an high Tower, upon hope of Angelical supportance. For seeing (as I
said) God has promised, that true faith shall not perish from off the earth;
for all men to adventure their faith upon one man's infallibility, who may have
less saving faith in him then Turk or Infidel, is but a provoking or daring
of God to recall his promise. Or what more damnable doctrine can be imagined,
then that all men should worship him for a Saint, whom the wickeddest man on
earth does commend unto him for such?

4 But to proceed. As the doctrine is most impious, so are the grounds of it
most improbable. For how can the Pope or Papists infallibly know this or that
man to be a Saint; Seeing there is no particular revelation made of it, either
to the Pope or others? I answer ( says Valentian) that the general
revelation, whereby it is evident, that whatsoever the Pope shall decree, as
pertaining to the whole Church, is most true, may suffice in this case.
Moreover ( says he) unto the canonizing of Saints appertain these revelations
of Scripture, in which heanenly joys are generally proposed to all such as
lead a godly life. For by the Popes determination, we know the Saint which he
has canonized, to be contained in the foresaid universal proposition. Whence
it is easy to frame an assent of faith; by which we may persuade our selves,
that such a Saint has obtained eternal bliss.

5 I would request the Reader by the way to note the Jesuits injurious
partiality, in scoffing at such of our Writers, as without express warrant of
particular revelation, hold a certainety of their own salvation: when as
they, only by Gods general promises to such as lead a godly life, and the
Popes infallibility, in declaring who have so lived, can be certain ( de
fide) others are saved. But the former doubt is rather removed then quite taken
away by this his answer, if it stand alone. As yet it may be questioned, how
any can infallibly know the truth of what he cannot possibly know at all, but
only by other men's testimonies, in their nature (the Jesuit being judge) not
infallible, and in whose examination it is not impossible his Holiness may be
negligent? For how men live or die in England, Spain, or the Indies, no Pope
can tell but by the information of others no Popes. The Reader perhaps will
prognosticate Valentians answer, as in truth I did. For when I first framed
the doubt before I read it in him, me thought it stood in need of such a
reply, as Lib. 2. Sect. 4. chap. 6, Parag. 6.
Bellarmine brought for defense of the vulgar interpreter. Altogether as
foolish it were to think any private man's information of another uprightness
in the sight of God, as to hold Theodotion the heretic could not err in
translating of the Bible. But though they may be deceived in testification of
another sanctity; yet His words be cited, Parag. 2.
Valentian tells you, supposing the Pope is once induced by their testimonies,
though in nature fallible, to pronounce him a blessed Saint, all must
infallibly believe their testimonies (at least so far as they prove in
general, that he died a godly and religious death) are true, and that the
party commended by them is of that number, which as we may gather from the
general revelations of Scriptures, shall be made partakers of everlasting
life. Obij^i potest, quod vt postea dicturi sumus, vt Pontifex in definiendo
authoritate sua recte vtatur, studio and diligentia in inquirenda veritate opus
habet. Nihil autem obstare videtur, quo minus possit interdum ille ciusmodi
diligentia praetermissa, controuersiam definire. Poterit igitur tunc sattem
err^re. Respondeo, sieve Pontifex in definiendo studium adhibeat, sieve non
adhibeat: modo tamen controuersiam definiat, infallibiliter certe defi^iet,
atque adeo reipsa vtetur authoritate sibi a Christo con^essa. Quod in
promissionibus diuinis de veritate per magisterium vn^us Pastoris Ecclesiae
factis certissime colligimus; vt saepius argumentati sumus. Itaque studium ac
diligentia Pontif^i necessaria est, non vt omnino definiat, atque infallibili
sua authoritate v^atur, sed vt conuenienter ac recte (hoc est, sine peccato)
cavtatur: sicut pa^ebit etiam ex ijs, quae post dicemus. Huc accedit, quod si
maxim diligentia Pontifici necessaria esset, vt emnino definiat; tamen eadem
fide credere deberemus, illum quando rem controuersam definit, ^^ssicientem
adh^^uisse diligentiam; qua supra demonstratu^ est, debere nos credere, quod
tunc ille infallibiliter ac vere definiat. Cae^cr^m non est ratio vlla firma,
quam obrem existimare debeamus, study diligentia^ Pontifici necessariem esse
non modo vt (...) ac sine culpa, (...) sua in (...) vtatur, verum etiam vt
(...) illa vtatur. Quare quod a nobis ante responsum est (...) quod (...)
Valent. t^ n: 3. in Aquinat. Quaest. 1. de obiecto fidei. Punct 7 40.
Again, whether the Pope in defining a controversy use diligence or no, yet
without all question he shall define infallibly, and consequently use the
authority Christ has given him. Wherefore in his judgment care and diligence
are necessary to the Pope, not so as if he could not define aright, or rightly
use his authority without them: but that he do not sin himself, whilst
he defines an infallible truth for others to believe. Hereto may be added,
that albeit a diligent care were necessarily required for the infallibility of
the Popes decisions; yet the same faith, which binds us to believe he decides
the controversy infallibly, binds us also to believe that he used as much
diligence as was requisite. As for example, in like case, If God should promise
that the next year should be a plentiful year of corn, we would conceive he
promised withal good and seasonable wether, and whatsoever else were necessary
for effecting of his promise, as Canus well notes. But Valentiaus last
conclusion is, that no sure arguments can be brought, why we should think
study or diligence are necessary for the right use of the Popes authority; so
far as it concerns other men's faith that must rely upon it. Rely upon it
they must, whether he determine ex tempore, or upon deliberation, and (for
ought I can see) whether he give his sentence drunk or sober, rauing or in
his right mind, so he have the wit to charge all upon pain of damnation to
believe it. But what if some forreiner should of set purpose send a dead-mans
water to try this grand-Phisitions skill: could he without either care or
diligence, in examining their testimonies, or special revelation from above
(which in such businesses Valentian disclaimes) discover their knavery? Or
would his prognostication of life and health* redeem the party deceased from
the land of death, as some say Pope Gregory by his prayers did Traian? These
and many like questions might here be made, which fall not within the reach of
Valentians answers hitherto recited: and yet these must abundantly suffice for
resolution of all doubts concerning the canonizing of Saints, or approbation
of religious orders; And yet some religious orders authorized by Popes have
proved naught, but we must believe their rules were good whilst one Pope
approues them, but grew out of date and unfitting those times wherein
succeeding Popes did disanull them. See Valentian in the place above cited.
in which businesses likewise we must believe the Pope cannot err. Let the
Reader pausea while, look on their madness, and laugh his fill at their apish
drunkenness in this argument, that when his mirth has found a vent, and his
heart is well settled, he may with a sober, impartial, steadfast eye behold the
mystery of this iniquity.

CHAP. VII.
What danger by this blasphemous doctrine may accrue to Christian States: that
of all heresies, blasphemies, or idolatries, which have been since the world
began, or can be imagined till Christ come to judgment: this Apostasy of the
Jesuits, is the most abominable and contumelious against the blessed Trinity.
1 WHat the consequences of these positions may be, none can doubt. No less
they are then I have said; a resigning up of men's souls and consciences into
the Popes hands, a consecration of hearts, minds and bodies, to work any
mischief imaginable at his appointment. For what if the Pope upon the relation
of Rauilliackes stubbornness (they would say constancy) in his torture, or
Catesbyes praying to the virgin Mary at his death, should canonize both for
Saints, and enjoin the Christian world so to honor them: Every bloody
Assasinate would pray unto the one for good success in acting his bloudthirsty
designs on Princes bodies. Tibi nos Rulle, and istis tuis, (...) omnium rerum
machinatoribus, totam Italiam inermem tradituros existimasti, quam praefidijs
confirmaret^? colonijs occuparetis? omnibus vinclis deuincta^ and obstrictam
teneretis? vbi enim cauetur, ne in Ianiculo coloniam constituatis? ne vrbem
hanc vrbe alia premere, atque vrgere possitis? non faciemus, inquit. Primum
nescio, etc. De leg. Agrar. Orat. 15.
And if it should please the Pope so to determine, all men should stand bound
to give such solemn worship, as by their doctrine is due to sacred relics,
unto that bloody knife which has been sheathed in Rauilliackes Sovereigns
breast: Every deep dissembling Politician, or ambitious choleric
discontented spirit, would burn incense, saltpeter, sulphur and brimstone to
the others image, in hope of better speed in undermining states.

2 If any Jesuit or other brazen faced favorer of their order, or this
doctrine, should here reply: This dreamer casts doubts beyond the Moon; for is
there any likelihood his Holiness will ever canonize such wicked Imps for
Saints? I must answer him as Tully did Rullus, utterly disclaiming all purpose
of doing such wrong unto the Roman state, as his petition unto it once granted
might enable him to effect, and from my soul I wish every Christian Prince,
every Princes counselor would take that grave Senators words for his motto,
Primum nescio, deinde timeo, postremo non committam vt vestro beneficio potius
quam nostro consilio salui esse possimus. First, whether the Pope would
canonize such miscreants for Saints or no, is more then we know. Secondly, his
former practizes minister so just cause of fear to Christian states, that it
stands them upon rather in wisdom to prevent his power of doing, then rely
upon his fidelity for not doing them some inestimable mischief, by putting
this practice in execution, if opportunity serve, and ability be lest him
thereby to strengthen his faction. Did not his Dum haec in Belgio agere^tur,
Fabius Vrsinus Cardinalis a Po^tifice, post acceptum de Parisiensi tumultu
nunciu^, Legatus in Gallia^ venit. ^gitur ille vbi Lugdunum venit, more solemni
acceptus, multis laudibus ciniu^ fidem extulit, and Boidono illo lanienae
immanis antesignano palam laudato, etiam ei potestatis plenitudine gratie
beneficium impertiuit; and quanquam a Regijs ministris ex Iohannis Moruillerij
Co^silio monitus, vt sobrie and parce de ear loqueretur, non potuit sibi
temperare, quin Regis in eo negotio prudentiam, patientiam, animi magnitudinem,
public and in priuatis colloquijs vbique apud omnes etiam cum delectu verborum
commendaret. Thuan. l. 54. Anno 72.
Legate into France, upon notice of the Parisian massacre, bestow his
Holinesses best blessing, cum plentitudine potestatis; With absolute and
plenarie power derived from himself, upon the notorious assasinate Boydon,
chief Ringleader of that immane and woluish massacre committed at Lions;
begun without any warrant of public authority, only at this hellish
miscreants instigation, desirous to follow, or rather out-goe his Superiors in
cruelty? Was not that villainy it self authorized from Rome, where it found
such extraordinary approbation? Never did that City rejoice so much in memory
of Christ's birth or Saint Peter's, as at the hearing of this more then Herodian
but-cherie of so many thousands noble-minded Gentlemen, with other Innocents
and Saints of God. So full was this Legates heart of joy hence conceived, that
after he came into France, out of the abundance of it his mouth did sound the
praises of the bloody actors and contriuers of this shameful Tragedy, etiam
cum delectu verborum; With such choice and affected words, as caused them blush
to hear him, that had not been ashamed to act the villainy. And as if this
excellent exploit had been effected by virtue of the holy Catholic Church; the
Postea cum Rege collaquutus inter alia multis and enixis precibus ac rationibus
ab eo contendit, vt Concilium Tridentinu^, cuius publicationem, totum iam
novennium in Gallia magna cum vniuerfi Christiani Orbis offensione suspensam
ag^bat, in regni curijs promulgaretur, and recentis facti omnibus saeculis
depraedicandi, quod ad Dei gloriam, and S. R. E. dignitatem pertineret, memoria
Sacro sanctae Synodi approbatione veluti obsignaretur. Sic enim apud omnes tam
qui sunt, qaam qui postea erunt, constituetur, non odio, aut vltione, aut
priuatae iniuriae sensu Regem in tot capitum perniciem consensisse, sed ardenti
Dei gloriae propagandae studio a Christianissimo Principe datum, vt quod stante
Protestantium factione sperari non poterat, ijs sublatis, majorum religio, hoc
est, Catholica Apostolica Romana, quae per Synodum Tridentinam a sectario
veneno asseritur, citra controuersiam ac sine exceptione per vniu^sas Franciae
ditionis prouincias constitueretur. Ibid. Unless the French King had been
enforced to make a contrary Apology before this Legate came into France, this
bloody massacre had been authorized by the Sea Apostolical; as appears from
the same Authors words immediately following. His and alijs rationibus saepius
apud Regem repetitis, quae magni in Aula Romana ponderis, pleris^ etiam apud
nos speciosae videbantur, quo minus Rex ac Regina acquiescerent, obstabantiam
sumpta ad excusandum factum consi^^a. Nam diplomatis postea promulgatis Rex
contra contestabatur, non odio religionis, sed ad reuin^^ndam Colinij ac
sequacium (...), que iussu suo Lutetiae acta essent, accidisse, exemplumque ad
(...) suo cum dolor grassatu^ esse: idque literis, orationibus ac libellis
illis, de quibus diximus, vbique inculcabatur.
Popes petition to the French King was, that the Trent Council might, upon that
good success, begin to be of force in France, and be thus sealed with
blood. Yet can any man doubt, whether this Church would authorize murder, or
canonize Assasinates, for her own advantage? Publicly suppose she would not;
yet if the Popes decrees, when they expressly bind all, must, as Valentian
contends, be believed by all upon such terms, as he annexeth: no question but
if he give any special eniunction to the order of Jesuits, or such as they
shall adiudge sit Associates to whom these secrets may be imparted; it shall
be as devoutly entertained by them whom it concerns, as if it were universal.
If charged they be, under pain of damnation, secretly to worship this or that
damned villain; it will be held a formal denial of faith, either not to
perform what is enjoined, or to bewray what they perform. We may well suppose
the Jesuits, and others of their instruction, have more Saints in their
private Kalenders then all the world knows of. Nota^dum est, duobus ^od^s
posse aliquem canonizari, vno modo particulariter, ita vt solum in vna
Prouincia, aut Dioecesi habeatur Sanctus, and colatur pro Sancto. Alio modo
generaliter, ita vt in tota Ecclesia habeatur pro Sancto, nec vlli liceat de
eius sanctitate dubitare. Primo modo canonizare poterat quilibet Episcopus, vt
docet Thomas Waldens. lib. de Sacramental. tit: 14. c. 122. and paret ex
Cypriano l. 3. Epist 6. Tamen hoc, quod olim licuit, modo non licet. Siquidem
Alexander 3. and postea Innocentius 3. videntes abusus, qui oriebantur circa
Sanctorum cultum, prohibuerunt, ne deinceps aliquis pro Sancto coli inciperet,
sine Romani Pontificij approbatione, vt patet cap. 1. and 2. de Reliquijs and
Sanctorum veneratione. Secundo modo canonizare; id est, ita vt in tota Ecclesia
Sancti habeantur, communis sententia est, pertinere ad summum Pontificem: nam
id habetur c. Audiuimus, etc. Cum ex eo de Reliquijs, and veneratione
Sanctorum, and venerabile, de testibus and attestationibus, and patet etiam
ratione; nam ad eum spectat proponere toti Ecclesiae quid sit credendum, and
quid agendum in ijs, quae sunt religionis, qui Ecclesiae praeest. Dices,
plurimi Sancti sunt, qui in tota Ecclesia coluntur, quos non canonizanit summus
Pontifex: Prinius enim Pontifex (ni sort sallor) qui Sanctos legatur
canonizasse, videtur fuisse Leo Papa 3. Respondeo, Sanctos veteres caepisse
coli in Ecclesia universally, non tam lege aliqua, quam consuetudine. Sed sicut
consue^udines aliae vim habent legis ex tacito consensu Principis, and sine eo
nullam habent, vt patet ex B. Thoma, 1. 2. quaest 97. art. 3. Ita Sancti
alicuius cultus, ex consuetudine Ecclesiarum generaliter introductus, vim habet
ex approbatione tacita vel expressa summi Pontificis. Bellarm. cap. 7. de
Sanct. Beat lib. 1. Vide eundem cap. 7. scilicet, San^tos non canonizatos
priuatim posse coli and coram alijs, sed non inomni totius Ecclesiae.
Bellarmine grants the Pope may commend some under the title of Saints unto a
set Province or Diocese, though he enjoin not the whole Church so to esteem,
or at least not so to entertayne them: That Saints reputed, not canonized, may
be privately adored; That in this case a general custom may prescribe, and
breed just presumption of the Popes tacit approbation, though he give no
direct iniunction for the practice, nor positive signification of his consent.
For many were adored as Saints before the solemnity of canonizing was in use,
first practiced (as far as this great Clerks reading serves him) by Pope Leo
the third.

3 Now as their proiects are of another mold, and their means to effect them
more desperate then heretofore: so these intimations make it more then
suspicious, least secretly they crown such of every sort, as have been best
qualified for their purposes, or have adventured farthest for the Churches
dignity, with the titles of Saints, to encourage others to like attempts. And
if turbulent or ambitious spirits, greedy of same, may be fed with hopes of
being eternized in Jesuitical Kalendars; if men male-contented with this
present, may have sweet promises of everlasting happiness in the life to come;
upon what mischiefs will they not adventure? when as the one sort is weary of
life, the other curbed only with fear of present shame or disgrace after
death, otherwise ready to rush into any danger, or auow most desperate
outrages Albeit the parties proposed to be worshipped had been in their life
times no so bad, but rather incited to bold enterprises by their ardent zeal:
yet who would not desire to imitate the aduenturous actions of them whose
memory he adores? And yet this longing desire of imitating such extraordinary
enterprises, as others of noble spirits have been thrust upon by secret
instinct, is always dangerous, and in men not so well qualified as their
Authors were, preposterous. For it will find occasions of like practice when
^one is given; virtue shall be the object of despite, because in factious
oppositions, contempt of it may afford matter of glory; Hatred and malice to
Princes persons shall be accounted zeal and devotion to the Church. But if
powder-plotters, or public Assasinats may be dignified with titles of Saints,
or proposed for imitation: the Christian world may perceive the height whereto
this mischief may grow, when it will be too late to controuse it. It is an
excellent caveat which old (...) Caeterum de locis ab exemplo and simili, tot
sunt experimenta fallaciarum, quet hominum capita, dum quilibet assequi vult
quem^ibet, dum exemplo dicit se viuere talium and ta^um quos approbat aut
canonizat Ecclesia, vel qui superiores eorum sunt. Qui Rectores, qui Doctores,
qui Laudati. Quid facit silius, aiunt nisi quod viderit patrem sacientem?
Patres tamen optimos ipsi nolunt sed pessimos hoc exemplo sequi. Vox aliorum,
est Paulus se laudauit. Paulus visiones in raptu suscepit, cur non potest modo
Dominus in talibus and talibus similia operari* Hinc consictio p^^phetiarum,
hinc miraculorum admonitio Hinc etiam adoratio damnatorum heminum in populis,
Testis est mihi legenda imo de aderatione Canij mortui v^sum est in Vierna.
Caneat igitur sancta seeds Romana, caveat in ea sedens Papa, quibus argumentis
and ^ansis and medijs canoviz^ tio alicuius sit facienda, Gerson. Tractat. 8.
De custodia Angelorum partitio 3. super Magnificat.
Gerson has, not impertinent to this purpose, though intended by him
especially for private use. Amongst other sophismes used by Satan to ensnare
men's fowls, That Topicke of examples, or similies, affoords as many
experiments of fallacies as there be men; whilst every one seeks to imitate
any one, and professes to frame his life by the example of such, as either the
Church does Canonize, or their Superiors, Governors, Doctors, or men of same
approve. What does the son (say they) but what he sees the father do: and
yet these mates follow not the best, but the worst Fathers; (at least that in
them which is worst for them to follow) by this example: some of them stick not
to say, Paul commended himself, Paul had visions in a trance, and why may not
God in these days work the like effects in others? Hence are prophecies
feigned, hence are admonitions by miracles, hence are damned persons adored by
the multitude; witness the Legend, yea and Vienna can bear witness of a dead
dogs adoration. Let the sacred Roman See therefore beware, Let the Pope that
sits therein beware, upon what grounds or motives they canonize any.

4 Rather let all Christian States beware, least they give such authority to
either. For if the danger were not always imminent from their traiterous and
bloud-thirstie minds, that profess this doctrine in any Kingdom: yet from
divine Justice the plagues upon Prince and People, that authorize or permit the
profession of it, will be one day public and grievous. For better might they
nurse all other kinds of enchantments, or magical practizes; That Jesuitical
doctrine in this argument is truly and properly wicthcraft or sorcerie.
better might they give harbor to all other heresies broched since the world
began; then suffer this Ocean of all mischiefs, whether flowing from errors
in manners, or matters of doctrine, to encroach upon their coasts. And here let
not the Reader deceive himself by imagining the holy Ghost had used a
Metaphore, rather then strict propriety of speech, when he called the whore
of Babylon a Witch or Inchantresse. For the faith whereby the Romanist boasts he
believes the Scriptures, (as elsewhere God willing shall be showed) is merely
magical: this doctrine we now dispute against, the very Idea of infernal
superstition, or, as they term it, vana obseruantia, in respect of the essence
and quality, and for the extent of mischief whereto it leads, as the maine
Sea of sorcerie, and all other kinds of magical superstition, as so many
Brooks or Rivers. For whence springs Sorcerie properly so called? Either from
express compact with evil spirits, or from the solemn performance of
certain blind ceremonies, which are but sacrifices unto infernal Powers;
whereby they gain interest in the sacrificers souls, in witness whereof they
sometimes bear their marks in their bodies. But if we look into the mystery
of this iniquity, the Jesuits by subscribing unto this doctrine of the
Churches transcendent authority, and taking the solemn oath of their order;
enter a covenant, though not so express or immediate, yet more firm and
desperate then other Magicians usually do. For they swear, and teach others
to swear absolute obedience to the Pope: they think themselves bound, and
would bind others not to examine his decrees: to esteem of his pardons,
though destitute of al warrant from Gods word, as highly as the Magicians do
of Charms, for which they can give no reason either in art or nature: to
offer up their prayers and other religious worship unto such as he shall
appoint them, albeit, for ought they know, or as they justly may suspect,
damned miscreants; which is a more hellish sacrifice then any other Magicians
use. And though Witches do, yet all sorts of Sorcerers enter not express
covenant with the Prince of darkness. And it is all one, whether like Witches
they give their souls to him immediately; or thus absolutely betroath them to
his Proxy or principal Agent here on earth. For as the Apostle instruct us, by
thus worshipping the Beast they worship the Dragon his Master.

5 Lastly, in respect of this mouth of blasphemy, Mahumetisme and Gentilisme
are as a toy. The ancient Heathen, out of their inbred ignorance, and want of
external means for right information of their understanding, changed the
glory of the incorruptible God into the similitude of corruptible things;
often taxed by mere Philosophers for their grossness. These blasphemers,
though professing the worship of the everliving, true, and only God, though
partakers of his written word, and all the helps his gracious providence from
time to time has affoorded for manifestation of it right sense and meaning,
abuse philosophy (wherein they excel) with all other gifts of art and
nature, to transform the most essential attributes of the divine nature; to
turn his truth into lies, his goodness into all abomination. For having this
natural notion in their brain, [Whatsoeuer God says is true, whatsoever he
approues most just and good,] their next presumptuous assumption is, [But God
says whatsoever the Romish Church or Pope says ex Cathedra, whatsoever he
allo^es God allows the same.] That this doctrine inuerts the whole foame of
Christian Religion,
And this assertion, which thus confounds the limits of Gods truth and the
Popes, that the Christian world cannot discern one from another, once wrought
in men's hearts, what untruth or falsehood, what heresy can be hatched so
dangerous? what villainy conceived so abominable; but may be presently fathered
upon that holy One, from whom proceeds nothing but good? Thus may bloody and
prodigious massacres be invested with the most glorious titles the best of
Christ's Saints ever enjoyed for their best deeds. Just reward for matchless
impieties that benefit them, may be set forth to the world as the crown of
Martyrdom. Finally, their gain is hereby made the measure of goodness, their
pomp and glory the rule of piety, and end of every Christians faith, unto
which he must not stick to sacrifice his soul, as an Holocauslum ever burning,
never consuming in that brimstone lake. If it shall please the Pope to
authorize murder, though of the Lords anointed; God the Son must be the
chief Assasinate to give power and strength, and heaven for the reward unto
the Actor. If pleased he be to give way to incest, as for the Uncle to
marry the Niece, a fornication not named but with distaste amongst the ancient
Heathens, (I would abhor to speak it, would they be ashamed to give just
occasion:) the holy Ghost must not disdain to be his Bawd or Pander. If
disposed to dispense with perjury; God the Father must be as his Vassal, to
suffer disgrace at his appointment, to recall the sentence of vengeance, which
the party swearing by his name did imprecate upon his own head, if he
relented. Though this be the greatest injury that can be offered to so great a
Majesty (unto whom execution of just vengeance properly belongs) yet must the
Almighty, at the Popes appointment, be content to put it up.

6 It is a quality in Kings very commendable, says Paulus Quartus, Sed
multos, vt auctio, qui apud te plurimum possunt, fidei datae ac iusiurandi
pactis interpositi religio monet, qua vt nihil Principi antiquius esse debere
minime inficias ierim ita eos, qui pietatem suae opinioni praetexu^t videre
etia^ atque etiam oportet, ne dum rigidi religionis auctores haberi volunt,
religionem ipsam in discrimen ad ducant, quod procul dubio accidet, si
Pontificem tam necessario tempore deseras, ad cuius defensionem and maiorum
exemplum, and Fides nuper data, and tua denique te pietas obligat; quae omnia
prius violes, and diuina atque humana iura confundas necesse est, si induciarum
pactis stare velis. Thuan^s Hist. l. 17. anno 1556
Legate and Nephew unto Henry of France, Religiously to observe their oaths:
but, when the Popes dignity comes into danger, religion it self is in hazard,
and a preposterous course it were religiously to observe an oath, unto the
overthrow of Religion. With these and the like suggestions, impiously acute,
did this sweet Cardinal, by commission from the Tandem bellum pro Pontisicis
desensione decretum; postquam Carafa Regem iusiurandi induciarum pactis
interpositirel gione, potestate sibi a Pontifice tradita, soluit, libertatemque
ei fecit, in Caesarem and eius F. etiam sine praecedenti belli denunciatione
impetum facere. Ibidem paulo post.
Pope his Master, authorize, and animate this French King to violate the league
lately confirmed by solemn oath, betwixt him and Philip of Spain. Might he
not as justly, though not so politikely, in plain terms have told him, either
you must dishonor God, or suffer the Pope to be disgraced: choose which you
list. Doubtless in the language of Gods spirit, which searches the heart, he
that dispenses with an oath (of this nature especially) solemnly taken, is
greater then he by whom men swear; and is in heart and deed so esteemed, by
such as acknowledge his authority in thus dispensing, or sue unto him for like
dispensations: But as if wilful and open perjury, without deep and hellish
hypocrisy, were a sin too plain and simple for the Man of sin to
countenance: the Hac ^iducia ^retus Carasa Regem aggr^ditur, and gladio sacrato
Pontificis nomine ei vt Ecclesiae R. De^ensort magna pompa ac ^^^monia porrecto
ad pri^atu^ colloquium admiss^s, quo in statures Romana ac familiae suae,
fortuna sit, demonstrat, Ibidem paulo ante Iocum primo citatum.
Legate first inuests this besotted Prince with the glorious title of Defensor
Ecclesiae Romanae; and in witness hereof delivers him a sword, consecrated by
his Holiness own hand, ere he make him forswear himself, and forsake his
God, who has now forsaken him, and for his sin (scarce expiated unto this
day) plagued the Realm of France. For as the judicious Historian (who has the
Articles of this perfidious confederacy yet in his custody) well observes,
Nunc ingredimur (...) 57. supra quingentessimu^ and millessimum, iuxta Caroli
sapientissimi Principis auguriu^ Galliae ^unest^ss^num: quo res nostrae per
inducias in tuto collo^atae, improb^ Carasarum sugges^^one, and amb^tiosa
quorundam leui* tate in manifostu^ exitium praecipitatae sunt, and regnum hoc
hactenus slorentissimum ab eo tempore bellis ciuilibus diu iactatum, tandem per
illos ipsos belli auctores Hispanorum praedae, and ludibrio patuit. Thuanus
lib. Hist: 18. in initio anno 1557.
this was the root of all the miseries have since befalne that flourishing
Kingdom, and by Gods just judgments exposed it to the insolences of the
Spaniard, through their means especially, that wrought the King to breach of
his oath with Spain for entering this new confederacy with the Pope.

7 Whilst reading this story I called to mind the perfidious, and cruel
usage of that renowned Rex a Carafis sollicitatus negotium dederat Cosinio
maris praefecto and Picardie Praesidi, vt in hus^ico ex improuiso aliquid
conaretur. Is quanquam inuitus faceret, vt ^nducias, quas solemni iureiurando
ipse firma^crat, violaret, tamen cum res eo deductas videret, vt bello inter
Hispanos and Pontisicem exardescente Reges necessario ad arma descensuri
essent, antevertendum duxit, and insigni aliquo facinore hostem praeueniendum.
Itaque noctu^ cum prope oppidum 8. Eid. Ianu. Marcentibus viuo oppidanis
insidias struxisset, a vetula tamen insomm proditus est, quae vix tandem
improbo clamore excitatis vigilijs contum nostrorum irritum reddidit, inde
Colinius Lentium, cum medium inter Insulam and Regiacum Atrebatum municipium,
quod Nimeta-cum olim suisse antumant, vi capit, diripit, and licentiose habitum
postremo incendit, ingentique praeda abacta cum plusculos dies in limite
exe^^risset, ad suos reuertitur, hoc ruptarum induciarum initium fuit. etc.
Ibidem.
Admiral in the Parisian massacre: the treacherous impiety of his politic
enemies seemed highly to extol the wisdom and justice of his God calling him
to suffer his chasticement in this life, that he might not perish with the
wicked, or such as were impenitent for their former grievous sin; wherein
this worthy Counselor had in some sort (though with grief, yet for the good
of others I must utter it) communicated with the Pope, and his perjured
Sovereign. For knowing the breach of peace was fully resolved upon by the
State of France, he thought it a point of warlike wisdom to begin with the
enemy in his own Land, rather then expect his onset upon notice of war
proclaimed: and fair opportunity (as he apprehends it) being offered from an
insinuating Heremites discovering of the situation, and readiest way of
expugning Doway, he attempts the surprisall of it; but prevented of his purpose
by an old woman that awaked the Garrison, he deemed it a shame to return home
with empty hands; though fill them he could not, but with just imputation of
being the first that had actually broken the league, as afterward his
venerable person was the first, upon whom those perfidious Assasinates, and
Actors in the Parisian massacre did practice their intended butcherie, contrary
to the oath and faith which they had given him. God grant such, as in reformed
Churches do most detest, be never tempted by like opportunities to imitate the
wordly policies of the Papacy; that all our consultations to prevent their
malice, may always relish more of the Doves innocence and integrity, then
of the Serpents subtlety.

8 He that would accurately observe the weak supportance of the Roman See at
that time, when the French could not relieve it; how since that time the Popes
have shuffled themselves into the Spaniards favor, to the great prejudice of
France, who in love to them had brought it self so low; may by these modern
stories easily discern, the Papacies advancement in times past to have been
wrought by such means, as our Writers out of ancient records have deciphered.
Especially by sowing enmity betwixt Christian Princes, by seeking supportance
now from one then from another, as several Popes, for the most part
bystanders in such broiles, yet skillful to bet always on the fairest side,
saw fittest occasions; until at length they got both feet on Princes
shoulders, and being once mounted, learned cunning to sit fast, and ride them
safely. For most of that succession being still of several lines, and
different parentages, none of them were disposed to continue any ancient, or
hereditarie fohood with the posterity of their predecessors greatest enemies,
as lineall descents of royal Families, out of their personal love unto their
Ancestors, usually do, unto the great damage of their state and Country. It
is significantly spoken by the Evangelist, That the ten Kings should give their
authority unto the beast; Revel. 17. 12. 1^
thereby instructing us, that Antichrist should grow great by Princes favors,
and gracious privileges bestowed upon him, not as the Jesuit absurdly
imagines, by taking authority unto himself by strong hand before it was
given, as the Turks, or Saracens, or other Barbarians have done.

But to proceed; not the Infidelity of Turk, of Jew, or Saracen, not
malignant Apostasy is to be compared with this kind of Idolatry, and
blasphemy we now dispute against. The Turk calumniates the Cross, the Jew
accuses Christ himself as an impostor: but neither make him Author, or
approuer of such impieties as they commit. The Jesuit Fathers such prodigious
villainies, as his soul from Satan's suggestion has conceived, upon his
Savior: all other Heretics, or Idolaters, Turks, Infidels, or Apostataes do
then only, or principally offer contumelies unto Christ and Christianity, when
they open their mouths, and vent their bitterness against him. But of this
Whore and her attendants, that proverb is most truly verified, Sieve scortum
bened^cat sieve maledi^^t perinde est. The contumelies offered by them to Christ
are all one, (always most grievous) whether they bless or curse; whether they
magnify or blaspheme his holy Name. Whilst they profess such absolute
allegiance to the Pope, the Son of perdition, Christ's greatest enemy; in
taking our Redeemers praises in their mouths: they do but add profane
scurrilitie unto blasphemy, using him herein more contemptuously then the
Soldiers, which bowed their knees unto him, but buffet his face; salute him as
king, and yet wound his head by putting a crown of thorns upon it.

9 But some out of charity, not to be blamed, will here demand: Do all the
Maintayners of this strange doctrine expressly and wittingly conceive as
meanly, or despitefully of Christ, as these dissolute Roman Soldiers did,
though willingly (for their own advantage) to cloak their secret scoffs, and
mockery of his spiritual Kingdom with outward demeanure, more decent and
reverent then the others used? Do all the learned of that Religion in heart
approve that commonly reported saying of Leo the tenth, Quantum profuit nobis
fabula Christi; and yet resolve, as Cardinal Inde Carasa Lu^ctiam regni
Metropolum tanquam Pontificis ^egatus so^ita pompa ingreditur, vbi cum signum
crucis, vt fit, ederet, verborum, quae proferri mos est, loco, serunt eam, vt
era^ se^uro de numine animo and summus relig^^nis derisor, occusate passim
populo and in genua ad ipsi^s conspectum procumbente, saepius. se^reta
murmuratione haec verba ingeminasse. Qua^doquidem populus iste vult decipi,
decipiatur. Thuanus lib. Hist. 17. Anno 1556.
Carafa did, quoniam populus iste vult decipi decipiatur, to nussle the people
in their credulity? For mine own part, as yet I cannot think so, though I
have been friendly censured for saying the contrary. Many of them, I am
persuaded, think they honor Christ as much, as the best in reformed Churches
do. But does this their conceit, or imaginary love to him, lessen their
wrong, in respect of those contumelies offered him by the Heathen? Rather (in
the learned) it is a symptom of that grievous plague, inflicted upon the
Jews, That seeing, they should not see, that hearing, they should not hear,
nor understand: no sign at all of better real affection toward Christ, but
rather a token of greater seruilitie unto Satan, or of that strange spiritual
drunkenness spoken of by the Evangelist. Their hearts and heads are not
acquainted; the one endites what Satan suggests, and moves their outward
members to act what he commands; the other interprets all done in honor of
Christ, as if a man should be so deeply intoxicated with some pleasant poison,
as to enforce it upon his dearest friend, for an extraordinary dainty.
Finally, that these great Clearkes should thus acknowledge Christ for the
Redeemer of the world, and yet admit every Pope for his Compeere, and thus
devoutly embrace the doctrine of Devils, is an undoubted document, they are the
sworn followers of Him, whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all
power and signs, and lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenesse of
unrighteousness amongst them that perish. That which especially causes many
of us to doubt, whether the Jesuits do not equivocate, when they speak well
of Christ, is, because their learning and judgment are, on the one side so
great, and this imagination on the other so prodigiously absurd and sottish, as
one cannot possibly better brook the others company in the same heart or
brain, then the most flourishing Prince, or Potentate in the world could the
beastliest sluttish shee-foole living for the only consort of his bed;
howsoever these cunning Panders in pride of their nimble wits may hope to
betroth more simple souls into this outcast of hell. And though experience in
some sort has proved it true, that no opinion was ever proposed so absurd, but
found some Philosopher for it Patron: yet this imagination of the Popes
transcendent authority, far exceeds the limits of any experiments or
observation made in Philosophers, answerable to the former axiom.
Notwithstanding the more their infatuation, of whom we speak, exceeds the
bounds of all folly or vanity merely natural, the more it ascertaines to us
the truth of the Apostles prediction in the place late cited. 2. These. 2. 10.
11.
Doubtless because they received not the love of the truth, therefore has God
sent them strong delusions, that they should believe lies. The fulfilling of
which prophecy is most conspicuous in the modern Jesuits, the principal
maintayners of this doctrine. For were they not men of rare wit and exquisite
learning, were not this opinion withal of all that are or can be imagined the
most sottishly improbable, and preposterously impious; the print of Gods
finger, thus confounding their brain, could not be so eminent or discernable.
The first bait, cast out by Satan, was but to draw the Romish Clergy unto
practices, so suspicious amongst the people that they could not be justified,
but by a conceit of infallibility: and not checking their pride, being
challenged of error in doctrine, and impiety in their dealings; the Lord gave
them over to believe this monster of falsehood and untruth, a bottomless pit of
hypocritical preposterous blasphemies.

10 Would to God the daily ambitious practices of many, that are or would be in
great place amongst us, the pronenesse of most to transgress the bounds of
lawful authority, and their unreadiness to recall their errors though never
so gross, their extreme impatience of all impeachment by men, as far their
Superiors in spiritual graces, as their inferiors in secular dignity; did
not plainly show the passage from that point, where these men's resolutions
anchor, unto this new Tire, the Rock of honor, and seat of pride, to be but
short, and the transportation easy, if opportunities of Time and Tide did
serve them. But of the particular temptations, and opportunities that did first
drive the Romanists into this harbor, as also of inueterate errors in other
points, and relics of Heathenish dispositions, whereby they two others after
them, elsewhere (according to my promise) if God permit. At this time it shall
suffice to have waded thus far in these unpleasant passages, for discovering
the enemies weakness in his new Fortifications, or Repalliations rather of
such breaches, as our ancient Worthies have made in their imaginary Rock of
strength. Now as my soul and conscience in the sight of God, and his holy
Angels can assure me, these imputations of blasphemy, sorcerie, and
preposterous Idolatry, I have laid upon this fundamental point of Romish
faith, are most true, though much less exaggerated then it deserves: so
again, I must confess, it has in some sort ever gone against my conscience,
publicly to discipher or display her abominations. For my little experience of
this present ages temper too well instructs me, what great offense is oftimes
hereby given to men, as weak in faith as strong in their persuasions of it, to
slatter themselves in their hypocrisy, or make them seem unto themselves, men
rightly religious or thoroughly sanctified, whilst they measure their love to
true religion by their hatred unto this doctrine of Devils, or compare
themselves with Priests and Jesuits, as they are painted out in their native
colors by eloquent and learned Pastors. But his iniquity be upon his own
head, that thus peruerts my labors, undertaken for his good, unto his harm.
For unto a quite contrary purpose have I set forth this survey of Romish
blasphemy, in a larger volume then first I meant it, even to stir up my
self, and every Professor of true religion, unto serious amendment of our
lives, to hold fast our faith, by holding up hands pure from briberie and
corruption, by lifting up hearts and minds void of all guile and hypocrisy,
ardently zealous of every good work, unto the Lord our God continually; least
such swarms of Caterpillars and Locusts, as have chosen Beelzebub for their
God, devour this land, Mortis modus morte peior. To think such should be the
instruments of our woe, will unto most of us, I know far surpass all
conceit of any other woe it self, or misery that in this life can befall us.
And yet whilst I consider what God has done of old to Israel his first
borne, and Judah his own inheritance: the overplus of our ingratitude toward
him for all his goodness, especially our wilful continual abusing these
days of peace, more and more sweet and gracious then Jerusalem it self, the
vision of peace, did ever see so long together without interruption; I am, and
have been, as my public meditations can testify, for these few years of my
ministry, possessed with continual dread, least the Lord in justice enlarge
his threatenings denounced against Judah upon this Land. Fearful was that
message unto Jerusalem, I will bring the most wicked of the Heathen, and they
shall possess their houses: but more terrible is our doom, if this sentence
be gone out against us, I will plague you by the wickedst amongst the
Christians, by men more cruel, proud, and insolent, then Babylonian, Turk or
Insidell, or any other enemy of Christ's Church has been, or could be,
unless Christians or Jesuits in name or show, they were mere Antichristians,
or Bariesus heart and affection. Such titles we readily give, and willingly
hear given unto Loyolacs infamous brood. But if our ways shall continually
prove as odious unto our God, as these terms import that Society is unto us:
what have we done? Surely tied our bodies to the stake of justice, by the
wickedness of our hands, and proud imaginations of our polluted hearts; whiles
our tongues, in the mean while, have set our cruel executioners hearts on
fire, more grievously to torment, to consume and devour us.

11 But though likelihood of their prevailing against us be, without our
repentance, great, and their cruelty, if they should prevail, more then
likely to be most violent: yet this their hope it cannot be long.

Tu quoque crudelis Babylon dabis impia paenas,
Et rerum instabiles experiere vices.
The Lord in due time will turn again the captivity of his people, and the
now living may live to see these sons of Babel rewarded, as they have long
sought to serve us. Their shameless Apologies for equivocation, and this old
charm of Templum Domini, which like unlucky birds always flocking, or frogs
croaking against ill weather, they have resumed of late with joint importunate
cries (albeit with these they bewitch the simple, and choke the worldling or
careless liver, that accounts all serious thought of Religion his greatest
trouble) sound unto hearts settled in grace, or minds illuminated with the spirit
of truth, but as the last cracklings of Lucifers candle, sometimes shining in
the Roman Lantherne as the morning star, or an Angel of light, but now so
far spent and sunk within the socket, that it recouers it wonted brightness
but by flashes; nor can his nostrils, that is able with the least breath of his
displeasure from heaven in a moment to blow it out, any long time endure the
smell. Even so, O Father, for thy son Christ Jesus sake; even so, O Christ,
for thine Elect and chosens sake, impose a period to our grievous sins
against thee, and our enemies malice against us: infatuate their policies,
enfeeble their strength, and prevent them in their Deuillish purposes, that
seek to prevent thee in thy judgments, by setting the world in combustion
before thy coming. Amen.

The continuation of matters prosecuted in the first BOOK.
THe ingenious Reader, I trust, rests fully satisfied, that for planting true
and lively faith in every private Christians heart, experiments answerable to
the rules of Scripture, without absolute dependence upon any external rule
thereto equivalent, are sufficient; the assistance of the holy spirit (whose
necessity, for the right apprehension of divine truths revealed, the Romanist
nor does nor dare deny) being supposed. That Valentians heart did tell him
thus much, and secretly check him for his ridiculous curiosity to make way
unto his circular resolution of faith Lib. 2. Sect. 4. Chap. 5.. 16 and
sequent. Si autem quis demu^ rogetur, cum and reuelatio and propositio
infallibilis obscurae and ineuidentes sint, quid ipsum impulerit, vt hu^c quasi
labyrinthum rerum obscurissimaru^ ingressus sit ad fidem modo dicto accepta^dam
hoc est, ad credendum reuelatione^ propter Ecclesiae propositione, tanquam
propter condicionem requisita^, and hanc vicissim propter reuelationem tanquam
propter causam credendi: veniat tum ad illu^ alterum secundum processum and
rations, atque motiua clariora exponat, quibus and ipse inductus fuit, and
quiuis prudens indu^^ possit, ad acceptandam ciusmod^ fidem, quantumuis
secundum se inevidentem and obscuram. Id quod luculenter disserere licebit,
co^nitis co^munibus motiuis nostrae sidei. Valent. Tom 3. in Aquinatem disput
1. qu. est. 1. de object (...) punct. 1.. vlt.
before refuted, his diffident speeches immediately thereto annexed, (upon
consciousnesse no doubt of it insufficiency) will give the Reader, though
parciall, just cause of suspicion. If a man (says he) be yet further
questioned, seeing as well the divine revelations, as the Churches infallible
proposal; are obscure and ineuident; what should impell him to enter into such
a labarynth of obscurities, as to embrace the doctrine of faith by the former
method, [to wit believing the revelation for the Churches proposal, as for a
condition unto belief requisite; and the Churches proposal again for the
revelation, being the cause of his beliefe] then let him come unto the second
process (or method) and expound the reasons and clearer motives, whereby he
was, and every discreet man may be, induced to embrace faith, though of it
self ineuident and obscure. Thus do they traduce the grace of God, as if
there were no difference betwixt mid-day-light and mid-night-darkenesse; as if
the dawning of that day star in our hearts, or light of Prophets our 2. Pet.
1. 19.
Apostle speaks of, were not a mean betwixt that more then demonstratiue
evidence of divine Truths which glorified Saints enjoy, and obscurity or
Jewish blindness. The particular manner how Gods spirit works lively faith,
by such experiments as partly I did and hereafter must acquaint him withal,
the Reader I hope will gather, of his own accord, out of the discourses
following, concerning the nature of Christian faith, and the principal objects
thereof, whereunto my meditations are now addressed, my long durance in this
unpleasant subject having bred in my soul a more eager thirst after these well
springs of life.

FINIS.
Errata.
In the Preface page 3, line 3, for Author of, read Author. page 7, lin. 2, for
Damnable Idolaters, read damnably Idalatrous.

Page 13, line 31, there, read their. p. 14, l. 30, should, if any should. p.
24, l 27, go, ergo. p. 28, l. 17, ort, sort. p. 48, l 17, lest, left, ibid. l.
31, such, 0. p. 50, l. 9, fuutre, future. p. 52, l. 13, our confession, 0.
ibid. l. 16, exceptions, exception? p. 53, l. 5, of, or of. ibid l. 18, cause,
can. p. 54, l. 11, no, 0. p. 56, l. 8, his and, and his. p. 57, l 6, same,
omit. p. 60, l. 11 or super, and super. p. 62, l. 12, thereto, though. p. 63, l.
32, (...), p. 70, l. 14, offense, of offense. p. 73, l. 22, so, do. p 75, l.
21, it is, it is evident. p. 77, l. 19, least left. p. 79, l. 17,
disabundantly, this abundantly. p. 80, l. 20, be, can be. p. 83, l 34,
representiue, representative. p. 84, l. 11, interrupted, uninterrupted. ibid.
25, his, this. p. 85, l. 29 that, they. p. 86, l. 6, continue, all things
continue. ibid. l. 14, approved, an approved. ibid. l. 23, they, omit, ibid. l.
33, with them, within them. p 90, l 25, cords, records. p 93 l. 14, thy, they.
p. 109, l. 10, untruths, truths. p. 110, l. 18, skill, still. ibid. l. 24,
only, om. p. 112, l. 27, sins, such. p. 113. l. 22, of, or. p. 116, l. 13,
Minister, Master. p. 117, l. 21, former, form. p. 122, l. 3, would have, had.
p. 127, l. 7, mes, men's. ibid. l. 11, death, to death. p. 133, l. 28,
conseruancie, consonancie. p. 140, l. 32, tropickes, topickes, p. 141, l. 22,
the, om. p. 144, l. 15, revive, reuiew. p. 151, l. 18, of, om. ibid l. 19, the,
of the. p. 153, l 11, this, they. p. 155, l. 37, matters, meats. p 156, l. 13,
thy, they. ibid. l. 19, mine, wine. p. 168, l. 26, remembrance, Remembrancer.
p. 173, l. 34, uniformly, uniformly. page 183, l. 15, mist King, mistaking.
p. 192, l. 26, in, om. p. 204, l 4, irriation, irritation. ibid. l. 7. former,
formal. p. 205, l. 2, dele hebraica aut suppone vera ex Deuteronomy. etc. p. 207. l.
22, ruled, could. p. 251, l. 33, root, note. p. 258, l. 3, best, last. p. 279,
l. 20, fast, fest.


