A SERMON PREACHED AT PAVLES CROSS THE IX. OF NOVEMBER, 1589.

By WILLIAM JAMES D. of Divinity, and Deane of Christes-church in Oxford.

1. Joan. 4. Ne cuiuis spiritui credatis, sed probate spiritus an ex Deo sint,
Queniam multi pseudoprophetae exierunt in mundum.

Believe not every spirit, but prove the spirits whether they are of God or
not: For many false prophets are gone out into the world.

Jacob. 1. Si quis videtur religiosus esse inter vos, qui non frenat linguam
suam, sed aberrare sinit cor suum, huius vana est religio.

If any man among you seems religious, and refraineth not his tongue, but
deceives his own heart, this man's religion is in vain.

Hieron. ad Pammachium. Foelices (inquit Faebius) essent arts, side ijs soli
artifices iudicarent.

Happy (says Fabius) were the Arts, if they only who are skillful in them,
might judge of them.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON by GEORGE BISHOP and RALPH NEWBERIE. 1590.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MY ESPECIAL GOOD LORD AND MASTER Sir CHRISTOPHER
HATTON, lord Chancellor of England, Knight of the most noble Order of the
Garter, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford, etc.
IT pleased your good Lordship to require a Copy of my sermon which I preached
lately at Paul's cross: which albeit I had denied to my lord of London, and
diverse others before, yet seeing it pleased your good lordship at your leisure
to vouchsafe the reading of it, I have now at my return hither, put it down
as near as I could, and I think almost verbatim, as I vttred it Wherein as
my chief purpose was to assuage (if it might be) and for my small measure I
endeavored it, the contentions stirred up amongst us: so have I not kept back
my opinion, nay my conscience, touching the man that troubles us, and the
matter by him intended. Wherein I protest (before God) that as I flattered not
the Church government (of I owe to no bishop therein for any benefit received,
any thing farther then duty and good will:) so if it had been my last speech
that ever I should have had, even for the duty I owe to Gods Church, either
this, or what so ever God should have given to this sense, should have been
said. I am sorry, and it grieueth me to see the heaps of Novelties that in her
Majesty's most gracious reign, and in so plentiful a light of the Gospel,
our inconstant Islanders have brought into the world. It argues that the
envious man sleeps not, but has sowed tares, and that they fructify, and
labors by all means, by sea and land, to make Proselites. There was a time
when a learned ministry (a thing much to be desired, as also your Lordships
great care in bestowing the livings in your gift, and the regard which they
have, whom your Lordship puts in trust, by preferring learned men and
Graduates of the Universities, does testify to all the world, that your
Lordship does seek the like) was by the wisest and most zealous thought
sufficient. But if our brethren in zeal think that this can not be done, but
by extinguishing the ancient names and functions of Bishops in the Church, (a
calling begun and continued from the Apostles time unto this day) and
ouerturning the estate established: I will say with the Apostle, zelum habent,
sed non secundum scientiam. It is no way to bread a learned ministry, either
to pull down the reward that should encourage them, or the means to maintain
them, when they are bred. If any Bishops have transgressed in their callings,
especially in admitting of insufficient Ministers, (as it must be confessed
they have done) be it that he were an eye (though blind in this) that is, a
chief one, or but a hand, or a foot, that is of a lower place, surely it is
ill physic for this bleard eye, or for this sore hand or foot, to choppe off
the head, or kill the body.

It is hard that nothing can please these men, unless the Church possessions,
in deed their mothers bowels be pulled out: and the cause why they begin with
us, is this, they must first have a footing somewhere, and here they see the
hedge is lowest. It is pitiful to see how to this purpose in many places of
this land, he is thought the only zealous, learned, and godly preacher, that
can find most faults, pretend most wants, never giving God once thanks for
the abundance of his blessings upon this Church, and nation, which for these
32. years has been, yea even at this day is a nurse, nay rather a mother to
all the Churches almost in all Christendom. And whereas we ought to teach
repentance, amendment of life, faith to God, obedience to superiors, and
charity one to another, to rebuke pride, covetousness, wantonness,
newfanglednes, slaunderings, backbitings, and the like: if none of these be
once named, but our spiritual Pastors torn and traduced, our own vices not
once touched, but the Church and Churchmen paid home, then is he in many men's
judgments, a zealous man, a child of God, never man spoke on this wise. In
this simple sermon I did cast in my mite: if it persuaded, I have my hearts
desire, and God, I trust, has the glory: if it but a little stayed any, but to
make a pause, some Apollos may water it, and some others may build upon it. If
it offended, I know the truth does not always purchase friends, and that
nulla medicamenta tam faciunt dolorem, quam qu sunt salutaria. Surely as my
meaning was not to sow pillowes under any man's elbowes, so was it not to
grieve any, or to be contentious. For my own part, Liberaui animam meam. This
I here have sent, submitting it, and my self wholly to your Lordships good
pleasure, humbly beseeching Almighty God to guide your Lordship to the glory
of his name, the good of his Church, and Common wealth, and of this University
(not the meanest member thereof.) From Christes-Church in Oxford the 17. of
December. 1589.

Your Lordships Chaplain humbly in the Lord to be commanded, W. JAMES.

1. Cor. 12. 25 Least there should be any division in the body, but that the
members should have the same care one for another.

26 Therefore if one member suffer, all suffer with it: if one member be had in
honor, all the members rejoice with it.

27 Now ye are the body of Christ, and members for your part.


THe Apostle S. Paul having planted a church at Corinth, and now laboring with
the glad tidings of the Gospel, to lighte^ the hearts of the Philippians, or
(as some think) the Ephesians, who sat in darkness and shadow of death:
absent from Corinth in body, though present in spirit; in the mean time it
is not credible, what tares the envious man sowed in the Lords field, among
the Lords wheat, neither how many ravening wolves entered, not sparing the
flock. Hence there arose in their religion, in some, Apostasy and falling
from God, starting a side like a broken bow: in some others there were itching
ears, and desire of novelties: In their lives, singular iniquity and
wickedness: in their sacraments, intolerable corruption and profanation: in
every thing study of parts and contention, so as one held of Paul, another of
Apollos, another of Cephas: and, that which in this place did of all other most
miserably vex the Church, and threatened as it were an utter ruin, the
greater, and men of more excellent gifts, contemned them of meaner gifts,
insulting over them, pleasing themselves above measure, in love and liking with
their own excellency: on the other side, they on whom God had bestowed gifts
in smaller measure, envied their superiors, repined to live under their
subjection, nay, they found fault with God himself, as though he had not in
due portion distributed his blessings.

The Apostle in this similitude of the members of the body, goes about as a
good Physician to heal this disease, showing that no member, no not the least,
not the meanest, is to be contemned, nay, proouing that the meanest members and
of least account, are most to be honored.

Every man must walk in his calling contentedly: Non omnes possumus esse
Caesares, says he. They that brought not gold, nor silver, nor precious
stones to the building of the temple, yet did good offices, if they brought but
wood or stone. If we cannot attain to be in primis, to have the first gole,
yet is it praise worthy if we may have the second or the third. In the
building of the temple, they that laid the foundations, nay, that dug places
to lay the first stone in, that hewed and squared the stone and timber, were of
less reputation and account, then those that carved and gilded the temple: yet
was the others work and labor far more necessary.

They that till the land and sow the seed, that thresh and grind the corn, are
of less reckoning and estimation, then those that live in princes courts: yet
is their labor and service far more needful.

In man's body the sovereignty is the heads: the eyes, and ears, as in place,
so in dignity excel the hands and feet: yet cannot the eye say to the hand,
I have no need of thee, nor the head again to the feet, I have no need of you.

Yea much rather those members of the body which seem to be more feeble, are
more necessary.

And upon those members of the body which we think most dishonest, put we more
honesty on, and our uncomely parts have more comelines on.

For our comely parts need it not, but God has tempered the body together,
and has given the more honor to that part which lacked.

And that (as it is in my text) least there should be any division in the body.
etc.

This is then the Apostles scope and drift, that as there is great difference
between the members of the body, whether we respect the placing of them in the
body, or their force or dignity, yet none can lack another help and
ministry: so in the church, they who are as heads or eyes, that is, the
chief, may not contemn the hands and feet, that is, the meanest, but must
give them the more honor: and on the other side, they that are the hands and
feet, that is, the lowest and meanest, must not take unto them the honor of
the head, neither must murmr against it, and that therefore, least there
should be any division in the body, but that as members they ought to have the
same care one for an other.

Great was the occasion that moved the Apostle to use this similitude, whereby
he laid open their vain and fruitless contention: so as that if they were not
blind, they might see their own folly, and wax wise, and every man esteem
and judge of himself according to his place and condition, whereunto the lord
has called him. And I would to god we had not now a greater cause, and might
not make a more just complaint then S. Paul might.

As in a common fire every man brings somewhat with him, either water to
quench, or somewhat else to help, no man at such a time stands idle; so I at
this time, and in this place, do bring to you this saying of the Apostle.

Least there should be division in the body, let the members have the same care
one for another. If one member suffer, all suffer with it, if one member be had
in honor, al rejoice with it.

In handing whereof, I purpose by Gods assistance, and your patience, to
follow the division that Chrysostom. in his 31. homily on this epistle, and on
these words makes. Tria igitur hic flagitauit Apostolus: Ne scindantur, sed
penitissime copulentur: ex aequo sibi prospiciant: quicquid incidat, commune
putent. The Apostle has required (says he) three things: first, that they be
not rent or divided among themselves, but most firmly coupled together, and
that in these words, lest there should be any division in the body.

Secondly, that the members should have a mutual care one for another, and
that in these words, that the members should have the same care one for
another.

Thirdly, that they should account that all things that happened to one, were
common to all, and that in these words: Therefore if one member suffer, all
the members suffer with it: if one be had in honor, all rejoice with it.

First here is a prohibition, Let there be no faction or division among you:
then, a mutual care, Let the members have not only a care, but the same care,
one for another: thirdly, not only a care is commanded, but a commiseration,
If one member suffer, all the rest suffer with it, etc.

And lastly, if the time will suffer, shall be added the explication and
application of the Apostles similitude in the words following: Ye are the
body of Christ, and members in part.

The first part.
Lest there should be any division in the body, etc. Nature the common parent
of us all, who (as Philosophy teaches) does nothing in vain, albeit that all
her motions be by contraries; and that in this great and wide world, wherein
there is wonderful and strange variety, yet has she so tempered and mingled
all things, that there is not only not any division and discord, but (if we
believe some Philosophers) such and so sweet a harmony, that, as he says of
virtue, if it might be seen with bodily eyes, it would stir up incredible
love thereof: so if this harmony might be heard with our outward senses, it
would not only ravish us more then the sweet Syrene songs, but would
replenish us with an unspeakable kind of pleasure, fitter for the heavenly
gods (as they think) then for earthly men.

In this little world, this tabernacle of our bodies, this microcosmos, albeit
it consist altogether of contrary elements, and of those whereof every one
seeks to destroy another, and that by most contrary qualities, as the
extremities of heat, cold, moisture, and drought: and albeit there be never
any peace or rest, until (as Aristotle teaches) there be elementum
praedominans, a prdominant element that rules all the rest: yet all the rest so
serve and obey it, so consent all to the good of the body, the water asswaging
the extremity of the fire, the fire warming the coldness of the water, and so
of the rest, every one abating others exceedings, every one supplying others
wants, that albeit (as is in the proverb) nothing be more contrary then fire
and water, heat and cold: yet as Physicians of diverse deadly poisons make one
wholesome medicine, and as Bees of diverse noisome flowers make one sweet
honey, so nature the best scholemistres, of many contraries has made one the
most sweet and pleasant mixture in the body. And that therefore, lest there
should be any division in the body.

In this similitude of the Apostle, albeit the head be placed as the
watchtower, the eyes and ears as watchmen, the hands as champions, the
shoulders and sides as walls or bulwarks, the feet as proppes to support, or
as quick posts to dispatche, the tongue as an Interpretor or Ambassador: yet
they all, head, eyes, ears, hands and feet, so consent and agree, every one
lending help to another, that that which touches one, is regarded and cared
for of all.

Barnarde in his meditations, to show how easily every man might be directed
and amended by himself, says, that every one has in his own house
accusatorem, testem, iudicem, an accuser, a witness, and a judge. Accusat me
conscientia, te stis est memoria, ratio iudex. My conscience is mine accuser,
my memory the witness, my reason the judge.

The like has S. Basil on these words, attend tibijpsi, so that farther
then to himself, and to his own house, to his own conscience, to his own
memory, to his own reason, man needs not to seek, the most certain
censurer of himself. In like manner the Apostle S. Paul, to make manifest to
the Corinthians what a mischief contention was in the Church, sends them to
no other place then to their own bodies: as if he should say, If contention
and strife can not be between the head, eyes, hands, and feet, without the
danger, nay destruction of the whole body, much less in the Church, which is
the body of Christ: Ye are the body of Christ, and members in part.

This is that leaven which we with the Corinthians must purge out, before we
can be svveete bread.

These are those works of darkness, which we with them must cast off, before
we can put on the armor of light.

This is that old man with his deceaueable lusts, which we must lay aside,
before we can put on the new man Christ Jesus, which after God is shaped in
righteousness and true holiness.

God is charity, and he that dwells in charity dwells in God, and God in
him.

Our God is the God of peace, our Christ is the prince of peace, his Gospel
the Gospel of peace, his Apostles preachers of peace.

The Prophets prophesied of him, that in his days peace should flourish, the
Woolfe and the Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid, the Calfe and the Lion should
dvvell together: that they should in his days turn their swords into plovve
shares, their lances into sithes or sickles, their spears into spades.

In his nativity the Angels sang peace, Glory be to God on high, and in earth
peace.

His whole life was an example of peace: every where pax vobis. His
commission to his Apostles, a commission of peace: Into what house soever ye
enteter, say, Peace to this house. In his departure hence he left peace, My
peace I ^^^e you, my peace I leave you.

Gregory Nissen expounding these words, Pater noster qui es in coelis, As
often says he, as we say, Our father which art in heaven, so often we must
remember of what stock and lineage we are, namely sons of the almighty, and
whither we ought to aim and direct all our thoughts and deeds, namely to the
highest heavens, where our father dwells: otherwise, as bastard children, we
shall beat the air, and shoot at an uncertainty. In like manner, as often as
we consider what a God our God is, what a Christ our Christ is, what a Gospel
our Gospel is, what Apostles our Apostles were, how that his birth, life,
death, and all these, resounded nothing so much as peace: so often (as
Chrysostom notes) we must labor Vt similitudinem patris indicet actus
prolis, that is, that we may be fatherlike, that if we will be coheires with
Christ, we (as Cyprian says) see that we abide in the peace of Christ.

For seeing we have all one and the same father, redeemer, comforter, all one
and the same milk of the word, and food of the Sacraments: Seeing we all
inhabit here one and the same vale of misery, the valley of tears, having
all one and the same sworn enemy, the old malicious and canckred serpent:
Seeing there is but one God, one faith, one baptism: Seeing we are all
branches of the same vine, drawing all juice and moisture alike from the same
root, all servants of the same master, children of the same father, and (as
the Apostle says) all members of the same body: why do we either contemn or
contend one with another?

Seeing we all run for one gole, we all wrestle for one garland, we all
strive for one crown, a crown immarcessible: Seeing as this our Apostle
says, that by one spirit we are all baptized into one body, whether we be
Jews or Graecians, whether we be bound or free, and have been all made to
drink of one spirit: Why forsake we one another? why despise we (as the
Prophet says) the son of our mother, the son of our heavenly father?

Chrysostom expounding this place of the Apostle in his 30. homily on this
epistle, says that the Apostle used that word To have drunk of the same
spirit, in most apt and fit manner: for as we see (says he) in gardens,
herbs and plants all, although of diverse qualities, yet to be all watered with
one and the same rain, and all to fructify and increase: so we, although of
diverse nations, of diverse callings, yet have all bin partakers of the same
spirit, and have all tasted of the same grace. If therefore one spirit have
fashioned us all, and have made us all one body, and fed us with one and the
same heavenly table, have watered us all with one heavenly deaw from above,
which all are to have drunk of the same spirit: If it have united us who were
before so far different one from another: If the members then make one body,
when they all as it were do grow and knit themselves together: why dream we of
any the least dissension, the least difference? And a little after, albeit the
members be many and diverse, yet this is the prerogative of the body, to make
all those, although many and diverse, yet all one. In like manner, albeit the
Christians be many, scattered far and wide throughout all the world: and
although (as Tertul. says) that Christ's kingdom is not contained in any
bounds, as the Germans, Britons, and others are: but whither soever you go, his
name is believed on, and his power stretched out: and that although ye go to
the Indians, to the Moors, or whither soever else, every where you shall find,
In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that word was
God: yet notwithstanding, of al these, although thus far distant, yet while
they observe the unity of the spirit in the bo^d of peace, as of the 5000. in
the Acts of the Apostles, there is Cor vnum and anima vna, one heart, one
soul. This is the prerogative of the Church, to make that they, who are in
bodies many and diverse, yet being united in spirit, make all one mystical body
under their head Jesus Christ.

This is that catholic Church which we believe: this is that communion of
Saints, which not flesh and blood, but our father which is in heaven has
gathered together. This is that body whereof our Apostle here speaks, whose
head is Christ, whose members we are, wherein the Apostle labors for
agreement and confort, and that therefore, Least there should be any division
in the body.

Dissension, division, is a most miserable thing, whether ye respect the
Church, commonwealth, or private families.

The contention of the Apostles of our Savior, sauoured of those things which
are of the world and not of God. The dissentions between Paul and Barnabas,
although the Lord turned all to his greatest glory, yet gave the Church a
shrewd blow, even in her swaddling clothes. The strife between the East and
West Churches about the feast of Easter, armed the enemies of both against
both. The quarrels between Theophilus and Epiphanius, Chrysostom. Augustine,
Jerome and Ruffinus, caused Christ and his kingdom to be ill spoken of.

Clem. Alexandrinus Strom. li. 7. says, the Heathens were wont to object on
this manner, Ye Christians dissent among your selves, and maintain so many
sects, which although every one do challenge to it self the title of
Christianity, yet every one does hate and condemn another. For this cause
said Chrysostom, we are become ridiculous both to Jews and Gentiles, while
the Church is rent into a thousand pieces.

The family of Love in reproach in their writings, call us the divided people.

Chrysostom on the Acts notes, that some were wont in his time to say, I
would be a Christian, but I know not to which side to cleave: The one says, I
say true: the other says, I say true. Which if ever it were true in any age,
in this of ours is most true. By this we see many obstinate confirmed in their
error, many weak to be kept back, and many wicked to take occasion hence, to
say in their hearts Non est Deus: There is no God.

For albeit our contention be not so bitter as it was in Popery among the
Dominicans and Franciscans, and that whole unholy rabble, every one striving pro
aris and focis, one crying out, Lo here is Christ, another, lo here is
Christ, which every one has seen in every angle of every great temple, at
every sacring of every mass, all which controversies Iesuitisme has almost
swalowed up: yet as long as we with the Corinthians, hold one of Paul, another
of Apollos, another of Cephas, are we not carnal? do we not make a rent in
the body? I am sorry that these things, and greater then these may be spoken of
us.

Paul, Apollos, Cephas were excellent men in the church of God, and adorned
with most excellent and rare gifts: yet did the apostle reprehend the
Corinthia^s for depending on them, for dividing the church for them.

If the Apostle might in these our days revive and see our strife, what
itching ears we have, how we heap up teachers to our own liking, how that is
holy that we will, and as long as we like, how like straying sheep we forsake
our own sheepfold, and like foolish chickens fly from under the hens wings,
how in this city sundry assemblies in diverse places are thought far more holy
then this days assembly, or any other at this place or the like: what may we
think he would do or say?

Be it that they are (which God knows they are not) as Paul, Apollos, Cephas:
yet as long as for them, or by them the church is rent, until Paul, Apollos,
Cephas (if any such be) take away the scandal, the stumbling block, is there
not dissension in the body? So long as every one draws disciples after him,
seeking our own and not Christ's glory: So long as in giving honor, we go not
one before another: So long as we give not due food in due season, but as
crows feed on carrion, so we fill our auditors ears with the supposed faults
of other men: So long as we see not the beam in our own eye, but are ever
hagling at the mote in our brothers eye: So long as we put our faults into the
hinder part of the wallet, and lie prying into our brethrens which we hang
before us: So long as we do nothing but with cursed Cham lay open our fathers
nakedness: while we speak not to the heart of Jerusalem: So long we make a
schism, a dissension in the body, so long Christ dwells not in our hearts by
faith: So long we may seem zealous, but not for good. So long we grieve the
good spirit of God, wherewith we are sealed against the day of redemption, and
heap wrath unto our selves against the day of wrath.

As often as I consider a notable fruit of this contention, which is in deed the
contempt of the ministry (and I think of it oftentimes) so often I cannot but
tremble at the heavy judgments which have befallen so godless people. What
befell Mary Moises sister for her murmuring? Chora, Dathan and Abiram that set
themselves against Moises? the boys that mocked old Elizeus? what became of
the holy city Jerusalem? Niniue, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Colossa,
Laodicea, and others, now heaps of stones, now dens and cages for unclean
birds and beasts, now of Churches planted by the Apostle, become slaves, and
bound to Mahomet and infidelity, are things to all the world manifest, and
need not any further explication.

As often as I hear men for their age reverend, for their learning excellent,
for their conversation without just reprehension, examples of the flock,
elders that rule well, worthy of double honor, to be reprochfully traduced, to
be made laughing stocks to men and angels, and being such as have left all for
Christ, yet to be termed Antichrists, sometime in the pulpit, sometime at your
tables, sometime in lewd and shameless libels, and every where to be handled
unworthily, to be envied at, that kings have been their nursing fathers, and
queens their nursing mothers: As often as I behold his platform, whom I am
loathe to name, that personatus histrio Martine, who thirsts at the overthrow
of Bishoprics, and Cathedral Churches, like unto him that reapeth where he
sowed not: so often me thinks that I see a miserable ruin, first of the
Universities, and so consequently of the Church.

It is a thing worth the marking, that at this day in our Universities many
either altogether leave the University, or if they stay, yet do shun the
study of Divinity: some study Physic, some Law, dat Galenus opes, dat
Iustinianus honores.

It is truly said by Cicero, honos alit arts, omnesque incenduntur ad studia
gloria, iacentque ea quae apud quosque improbantur. Honor nourishes arts,
and all men are stirred up to study with glory, and those things are left
alone which are reproved of all men.

It is a profane speech (they say) But no man goes a warfare at any time at
his own charges.

There is a goal for them that run, and to them that strive, and strive
lawfully, there is a crown prepared.

After seed time there is a harvest. We may not mussel the mouth of the ox
that treads out ye corn.

The Elders that rule well are worthy of double honor: For if they sow
spiritual things, is it a great matter if they reap temporal things?

This practice has already deterred many from the ministry, and some that
have entered one step, it has caused to leave their calling, and yer long be,
it will cause that few will addict themselves to the study thereof.

Although I doubt not that there be in England 7. thousand, that never would
bow their knee to Baal, that never will take their hand from the plowe, that
would follow Christ through good report and ill report, that would account all
as dung to win him, men that know, as the Apostle says, egere and abundare,
to lack and to abound: For what shall I doubt what they would do, when I see
what they have done, veterani milites, old soldiers, nay most valiant
captains: yet forasmuch as nemo nascitur artifex, no man is borne his crafts
master: seeing that Christians are made, not borne, fiunt, non nascuntur
Christiani: seeing men are not now immediately taught of God, but (as the
Apostle says) they must attendere lectioni, attend to reading: and forasmuch
as the parents hand and head is chief in the education of this child, whose
endeavor for the most part is to leave them a name to posterity here upon
earth: what can we think to be the end of this?

I might use many examples to this purpose: I will only show you this one.
There is a notable story recorded of the mother and of the sons of Zebede,
the mother of an holy kindred: if any were, it is like she and hers were well
taught; the children the seed of the faithful, she asks, they ask, she
asks that her sons may sit the one on the right hand, the other on the
left; The Apostles James and John, the sons of Thunder, elected by Christ to
that place, taught by God, they make the same request, as the answer, You know
not what ye ask, manifestly shows.

Now if so good a mother, as the mother of the sons of Zebede, make this
suite for her sons already elected, already possessed of the Apostleship: if
the Apostles, touched (no doubt) with a good measure of Gods spirit (for they
had left all they had, and followed him) yet dreamed of an earthly kingdom:
what shall we think that animalis homo, the carnal man will do?

Surely in this case Demas will forsake twenty Paul's, and the young man in
the Gospel, although he will brag of doing all things commanded him, and
that from his youth, yet if it come to suffer affliction with Christ, nay if
it be but to sell all and follovv him, will depart from him sad and heavy.

The parents gather for their children, not the children for their parents.
What parent will gather misery, beggerie? Who will lay out these dear
pledges to reproach and ignominy?

The best mother must yield to the mother of the sons of Zebede: the best
scholars that are, are inferior to James and John: yet both mother and
sons, desire the right and left hand. What may we then think of our tender
plants, our young nouices, that may be turned into what their parents will? who
as in duty they are bound, depend wholly on their parents care and providence.

Physicians when they deliver any pills, or the like medicines, to provide that
they might not offend, either the taste with bitterness, or the sight with the
vnpleasantnes of the matter, wrappe them commonly in gold or sugar, and so draw
on the patient to receive the medicine: even so in the work of the ministry,
Christian Magistrates as good Physicians, to stir men up to that calling,
whereunto vix quisque idoneus, scarce any man is fit, have wrapped the outsides
thereof in gold or sugar, that is with recompense after long labors, whereas
in deed within, if men duly wey the burden thereof, there is nothing but
that which is heavy and bitter.

In popery the chiefest families were drawn hereunto, in hope to make their
children Cardinals, Bishops, and great men, and with us it was usual; and in
France it is in every second brother, almost in every great house, and surely
many among us did it of a zeal, although it were but blind.

But what shall I say of these, that under pretense to reform, seek to
overthrow all, abusing the zeal and credulity of the simple? who among them
has with Anna dedicated her one Samuel to serve the Lord, or once to
encounter the common enemies?

To speak what I think, and to speak my conscience freely, they that with
Martine seek the overthrow of all, do offer sacrifice to their god their own
belly: and although they would seem the most sincere, yet in this seeking
after the church spoils, they are in deed the greatest idolators, serving
their god Mammon.

And these are they that stir up these tragedies, men whom nothing can
satisfy, and yet they envy the ministry, if without them or their charges,
by the Lords blessing they may live.

If Ananias and Saphira for keeping back but half that which was their own,
were stricken stone dead; what may they look for, that to reap where they
sowed not, seek to overthrow all?

The devil also plaieth his part in this tragedy. For as Pharao thought that
there could be no more ready way to destroy Gods people, then by killing their
male children: so the devil seeing in the Primitive Church, that some resisted
unto blood, and that some others most notable men, as Cranmer sometime
Archbishop of Canterbury, Ridlie Bishop of this See, Latimer Bishop of
Worcester, Hooper Bishop of Gloucester, Farrer Bishop of S. Dauis, Bradford,
Saunders, Philpot, and others, in the midst of the flames to have given
testimony to the Lord Jesus: and albeit he see and perceive, that by our
contention he has profited much: yet seeing not all things to succeed after
his mind, he returns ad ingenium Pharaonis, to kill the male children of the
Hebrews, even in their swaddling cloutes: that is, by taking away the reward of
their labor and studies, to draw men by little and little from the study of
Divinity, and so to make their desire and zeal less earnest. For although
there be now many (the Lord be praised) that can and dare meet this enemy in
the gappe: yet he hops for a day, and that yer long be, when there shall be
none to bark at the wolf when he comes.

Principijs obstat, he seeks to hinder the very beginnings.

Dum seges in herba est, while the corn is in the blade and green, he makes
ready both sieth and sickle. He indeuoureth to stop and choke the first
springs, before they break out into any streams. His care is to writhe and
wrest the trees, while they be but young, before they get either top, root,
or great strength.

This mystery of iniquity has not now first begun to work and show it
self; nay, it has been seen and noted in all ages: and to leave off
multitude of examples of ancient time, I will only bring three witnesses of
famous memory, omni exceptione maiores, of our age, who in the spirit saw
what monsters these latter days should yield, three notable learned men,
Calvin, Brentius, and Gualter.

Calvin in an Epistle extant to that most reverend father Cranmer, Archbishop
of Canterbury, exhorting him to have a care, that in England there might be
established a certain form of religion, whereunto (says he) as all other
that bear rule there, must by common endeavor apply themselves, vt praecipuae
tamen sint tuae parts, yet so, as that the chief care must lie on your
shoulders: Vides quid locus iste postulat, vel magis quid pro muneris quod tibi
iniunxit ratione abs te suo iure exigat Deus. Thou see (says he) what this
thy place (he means of an Archbishop) requires, nay rather, what God may
exact at thy hands by reason of the office which he has laid upon thee. Summa
est in te authoritas, etc. There is in thee the chief authority, which not
only thy place of honor, but also the opinion of thy wisdom and integrity
has purchased with all men. Vnum tamen apertum obstaculum esse intelligo, quod
praedae expositi sint Ecclesiae redditus, malum sane intollerabile.

Yet I understand that there is one open let or hinderance, that the Church
revenues are laid open for a pray. A mischief truly intolerable. What think
you would he have said, if he had seen Martines plat-forme?

Brentius in an Epistle to John Schopper, Abbat in Heilsbrunen, prefixed before
his Homilies on the acts of the Apostles, says on this wise: I think (says
he) that not only Antichrist by his impiety, and the Turk by his cruelty,
threaten the destruction of the church, but those also to seek the utter
subversion thereof, Qui occupationibus and direptionibus facultatu^
ecclesiasticaru^, quas maiores nostri ad conseruanda studia religionis
contulerunt, adolescentes a studio sacrarum literarum deterrent. Who by
inuading and spoiling the Church possessions, which our ancestors have bestowed
to conserve and maintain the studies of religion, deter and drive away young
men from the study of Divinity. I know (says he) that the church of Christ
is builded on a sounder rock, the^ that it can be overthrown with any
storm, although never so vehement: and that the Church which rests on the
power of the holy Ghost, greatly needs not the aid of external riches:
tamen quia hi qui facultates Ecclesiasticas diripiunt, and in priuatum suum
vsum transferunt, depraedationibus suis id efficient, quo pauciores sacris
literis operam dent, and ad obeunda publica Ecclesiae munera erudiantur,
profecto Ecclesiam Christi, quantum in ipsis est, euertunt and deuastant. Yet
forasmuch as they who spoil the Church possessions, and turn them to their
private use, and by their robbery bring to pass that the fewer do study
Divinity, and be trained up to do the public functions thereof, truly as
much as lies in them, they overthrow and lay waste the Church of Christ. And a
little after, Non ferenda barbaries est, vt ea organa per quae Christus
incrementum suae conseruationis effudit, tam foede conculcentur. It is a
barbarism not to be suffered, that those means and instruments whereby Christ
had spread into the world the increase of his kingdom, should be so filthily
wasted.

Gualter on the 21. of S.Lukes Gospel in his 183. homily, speaking upon the
occasion of the poor widow, that cast in two mites to the treasury, and our
Saviors preferring her before the richer, and those that offered greater gifts:
forasmuch (says he) as Christ is wont to behold such things, we must remember,
that he also sees them, qui opes ecclesiasticas sacrilega audacia adse
recipient, aut saltem illas in vsus illicitos atque prophanos conuertunt. Who
with a sacrilegious boldness take the Church goods unto themselves, or else
convert them to unlawful and profane uses. Grave ergo illorum scelus, and
omni detestatione dignum sacrilegium est, opes illas in vsum alienum
conuertere, sieve id public fiat, sieve priuatim. Heinous therefore is their
offense, and a sacrilege worthy by all means to be detested, to convert
those possessions to any other use, whether it be done publicly or privately,
and yet it is too too usual and frequent.

And first he shows how in the papacy these things are abused. But to let
them pass: But among them (says he) qui Euangelij nomine and doctrina
gloriantur, and religionis reformatae sectatores videri volunt, impudentissime
the sauri illi sacri distrahuntur. Who glory in the name and doctrine of the
Gospel, and would seem followers of reformed religion, those holy treasures
are most impudently wasted: some snatching part to their own private use, other
some casting all that is left into the public treasury or checker, to make
thereof vain houses, to erect towers and bulwarks and munitions, to make
gunnes and other engines to shed Christian blood, to pay wages to bloody
soldiers. It comes then (says he) to pass, Vt alijs ex ecclesia
ditescentibus qui huius labes and macula dici poterant, ministri eius fideles
cum inopia and fame conflictentur, scholae frigeant, doctissimi quique
dilabantur, pauperes item, etc. that some waxing rich of the Church revenues,
who are in deed the spots and blemishes thereof, that the faithful ministers
strive with famine and penury, schools are every where contemned, learned men
as water slide away unrewarded, and the poor to the great reproach of the
Gospel, are constrained from door too door to beg of them, who hate them and
their profession.

Did not these men (think we) in the spirit foresee the Martines and
Macheuils of this our age? or is not this the same spirit that possessed the
pretensed reformers in their days? did Calvin, Brentius or Gualter either
maintain an idol ministry, or serve Mammo^ or their own belly, when thus
they bewailed and reproved in the old Martinists this shameless Church
robbery?

But whereunto shall we ascribe this vpstart insolency? Cyprian says, that
idleness and long peace have corrupted the discipline which the Apostles left.

Eusebius. by much liberty and overmuch indulgence, our manners be depraved, and
discipline corrupted, while we envy one another, while we derogate one from
another, while we bite and accuse one another, and stir up war and strife
among our selves.

Unthankful to God, who has vouchsafed us so great blessings: unthankful to
our sovereign, to make a rent in her kingdom, who has protected us in so
great dangers. Herein we show our selves most like the Vipers brood, who never
are brought forth, but by renting their mothers womb: Or to young Mules, of
whom Pliny writes, that they being well fed, all to beat their dammes with
their heels for recompense: Or to those beasts of whom Aristotle writes, that
having sucked up their dammes milk, are not contented, unless they may suck
up their blood also.

Whatsoever the pretense is, if this course may run on a while, neither shall
God have that glory, nor the prince that honor, nor learning that reward, nor
the Church that peace, nor the common wealth that government, that in the fear
of God, all good laws, and all conscience appertains to them all.

Of these I may say as Seneca some time said of the like, lib. 2. de Ira, cap.
9. Sitantum irasci vis sapientem, quantum scelerum indignitas postulat, non
irascendum illi sed insaniendumest. If you will have a wise man to be so angry
as the hainousnes of the offense does require, he must not be angry but he
must be mad.

To have eaten an apple as Adam did, to have looked back to Sodom with Lothes
wife, to have made an Ephod as did Gedeon, to have received a reward as Gehezi
did, to have denied Christ, to have doubted of the resurrection, to have kept
back half a man's own, in most men had been matters not of so great moment:
but in Adam, Loths wife, Gedeon, Gehezi, Peter, Thomas and Ananias, they were
most heinous and grievous offenses.

If Papists, Atheists, Turks or Infidels, should attempt this, it were but a
matter of small weight: but that they who are armed with the name of the Church
do fight against the Church, Ecclesiae nomine armantur, and contra ecclesiam
dimicant, as Cyprian says, that filij sponsi, the children of the bridegroom,
that Inimici eius, domestici eius, that they of his own house, should be his
enemies, nay that he who dippeth his hand in the dish with us, a man of our
own peace, that is called a brother should do this, should slander the
brethren, should seek the subversion of the Church, is to others incredible,
in him intolerable.

What is this, but (as our Savior says) Percutiam pastorem and dispargentur
oues? I will strike the sheepeheard, and the sheep shall be scattered? nay,
what if it come to this pass, either to make no sheepeheard at all, or else to
make that the sheepeheard shall be pastor idolum?

Take away the reward, lay open reproach and ignominy, and then see who will
put his hand to this plough. Who will then say with the Prophet, En ego domine,
mitte me. Lo here I am Lord, send me.

The Lacedaemonians finding a boie delighted in picking out birds eyes, put him
to death: for they foresawe that he would prove in time a most dangerous
citizen.

The Romans seeing one that in his walk did ever use to chop off the heads of
the Poppies, adjudged that in time he would cut off men's heads.

What shall we think they would do or say, if they might see what is shot at
by these men, who aim not at the heads of poppies or birds eyes, but at
bishoprikes and cathedral Churches which they planted not, the most renoumed
monuments through Europe?

What will be the end, the Lord only knows: but for the one university, I
can speak of knowledge, that Satan and these master builders have profited
thus much, that where as there were in some Colleges and Halles where they live
at their parents charge an hundred or more, there are now in many not half the
number, in some scant twenty; in other Colleges where there is allowed
maintenance, although the number be not much diminished, yet many change their
studies, and most doubt what is to be done, what course is to be followed.

If Satan may transplant these young plants, if he may dry up these
fountains and welsprings, if he may cut off this tender corn in the green
blade: what can we then look for but Barbarism and a sink of all mischief
to ouerflow all?

It is truly said of Aristotle, Finis intention primus, executione vltimus.
The end although it be last attained, yet it is first intended: and we here
live among men, Non cum perfectis, not with perfect men, and therefore they are
to be drawn on by humane means.

Martine Senior braggeth of an hundred thousand, whom he terms not a few, nor
of small reputation, but in manner the strength of our land, the sinew of her
Majesty's royal government, whom yet he reprehendeth, both Preachers and
people, that they suffer these things.

There are many, I am sorry to see it, and I must confess it, whom this vanity
has led aside, many that do reverence and admire this man's doings, unto whom
what greater evil could a man wish, then as he said of a covetous man Vt diu
viuat: so to them none other greater then this, that with their own mouths
they should lay open their own reproach?

The evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings out evil things:
and who so privily slandreth his neighbor, him will I destroy, says the Lord.

Michael the Archangel contending with the devil about the body of Moises, gave
no reuiling speeches, but said, The Lord reprove thee.

Never did any godly man write or speak on this manner. None of the fathers of
the primitive Church ever dealt in this sort, no not with most damnable
heretics. None of the most wicked heretics used such reproachful taunts
against the fathers. It cannot proceed from Gods spirit, to lay open Gods
children to be derided of Gods enemies. No man that by reading of holy
scriptures, praying, or meditating, talks with God, can speak with a spirit
so void of God.

O holy Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles, holy bishops. Martyrs, Confessors,
have ye so won kingdoms to Christ, converted nations, planted faith?

Is this, to revile our brethren, to make a scorn of the Lords ministry, to
have all our speech powdered with salt? Is this to minister grace to the
hearers? Is this to edify the Church? Is this to bear one another burden?

In this lavish and uncharitable reproching of fathers and brethren, I must say
to them as Seneca in an epistle, says, Similes sunt canibus rabidis qui
plusquam exigit fames mordent: They are like unto mad dogs that bite more then
their hunger or necessity requires.

It is notably said of Jerome in his 3. apology against Ruffinus, in a matter
of far less inconvenience then this is, wherein Ruffinus dealt in respect of
Martine modestly and charitably. Quid necesse est in multoru^ scandala
ruinamque proferri, quae secreto corripere valeas aut emendare? What needs it
to have things spread abroad to the offense and fault of many, which thou
may secretly either correct or amend? Of this man I will say, as sometime
Seneca lib. 14. epistola 95. said of Marius, Quid tu Caium Marium semel
consulem (vnum enim consulatum accepit, caeteros rapuit) etc.

What moved Caius Marius who was once chosen Consul (for in the rest they
chose not him but he chose them) to pursue the Teutonikes and the Cymbrians,
and to follow Iugurth through the deserts of Africa, and to undertake so many
perils and dangers? Was he (think you) moved thereunto by any instinct of
virtue? Marius exercitu^, Marium ducebat ambitio, Marius led the army, but
ambition led Marius, says he.

In like manner, if you ask what has moved Martine to this so great boldness,
whether there has therein appeared any spark of virtue? I answer, Martinus
populum, Martinum ambitio ducit, Martine leads the people, but ambition or
perhaps avarice leads Martine. As that wretch burned Dianaes temple to make
himself famous: and as he ouerturned Omnia iura diuina and humana, propter eum
quem ipse sibi opinionis errore finxerat principatu^, as Cicero says, to make
himself great, overthrew all the laws of God and man: so this man to satiffie
his own opinion, cares not though he do coelum and terra^ miscere, ouerturn
all estates never so well established.

It is a spice of singular envy, nay of impiety, to envy the church, that
kings have been her nourishing fathers, and Queens her nursing mothers, that
kings have ferued the lord, that they have kissed the son, that is, that they
have done all things for the Church, and the advancement of the ministers
thereof.

Is thy eye evil, because I am good? Chrysostom in his 31. homily on the
first to the Corinthians, proves that envy is worse and more hateful, then
covetousness the root of all evils. The covetous man (says he) rejoices
when he gains: the envious man when another loses, he counts it to go
well with him, when it goes ill with others, measuring his own felicity by
other men's miseries: a fruitless drone pining at others profitable labors:
Expressa quaedam Sathanae imago, a very lively image of Satan.

But as Joseph the more he was envied, the more the Lord prospered him: and the
more Moises and Aaron were maligned, the more the Lord wrought for them: and
the more Job was humbled, the more the Lord exalted and restored him: so this
fruit will come of these foes, that the more they shall set themselves against
the Church, and seek to undermine it, so much the more the Lord will
strengthen and confirm it.

What grieueth it thee (says Chrysostom) that thy brother has received a
spiritual or temporal blessing? but of whom has he, I pray thee, received it?
has he it not from him from whom every good and perfect gift descends? has
he it not from God above? be angry then with him who has given it, not with
him that has received it.

Grieueth it Martine, that the Lord has in so large a measure blessed his
Church, that as yet there remain some steps, some monuments of kingly and
gracious liberality, that at this day our most gracious sovereign (whom God
long preserve) her faithful Senate of elders lay not open all things to the
rashenesse and temeritie of some? let him bend his anger against GOD, in whose
hands Princes hearts are, a against the prince, against the state, for that
they suffer not the Church to be a pray unto their teeth.

Regalius est addere quam adimere, it is a more royal thing to add then to
take away.

Sooner may one rakehell burn Dianaes temple to ashes, then all the princes of
the world build it up again. In Phisike the method to kill, is easier then to
cure. It is a rule in Aristotle, Facilius destruere, quam construere. Easier it
is to pull down then to set up.

I may well in this matter say as it is reported, that Agesipolis once did:
unto whom when one reported as a strange thing, that Philip king of Macedonie
had in a few days space taken, and sacked, and rased Olinthus a most famous
city, and had either slain or sent into banishment all the citizens, and had
made a miserable spectacle of so renowned a place: Atqui, per deos inquit, but
I swear by the gods says this heathen man, that Philip king of Macedonie,
although a greatking and a mighty conqueror, yet can he not in a far longer
time, no not in many ye res build such a city as Olinthus was.

Let Martine brag of his thousands, of his good success, in deed of his own
shame: yet shall he not in many years, nay not in many ages, erect such a state,
build such temples as this before your eyes is, endow them with such
possessions, prepare such recompenses for learning and learned men.

If his plat might take place, he might then say, Ecclesiam inueni auream,
relinquam aeream, I have found the Church of gold, I will leave it of brass:
or, I found it of Marble, I will leave it of Brick, I found it covered with
Lead, I will do as Dyonisius did with Aesculapius, in taking away his golden
cloak, I will thatche it with broom, it is lighter in the summer, and warmer
in the winter.

If this man's counsel might be heard, I will say as Cicero says in another
case, Rempublicam says he, but ecclesiam say I, quae nunc aliqua est nullam
haberemus, whereas now by Gods great blessing, and her Majesty's gracious
favor, we have a Church, we should then have none at all.

Let no man object to me and my brethren, while we follow this argument, that
of Demetrius the silver Smith, Great is Diana of the Ephesians: for we herein
communicate not with flesh and blood. Many of us have one foot in the grave,
and al our life ought to be a meditation of death: this wevrge, that the Church
possessions, Christ's patrimony, is not as they desire, being so bountifully
bestowed, so graciously protected, so wickedly to be pulled down, and
scattered abroad.

If it be evil spent by some, it is their fault that abuse it: and if some
few be faulty, why should all be punished?

Even in the best times, there have been evil Priests.

S. Hierome on the sixth to the Ephesians, on these words: Fathers, provoke not
your children to wrath, but bring them up in discipline, wills Bishops and
Priests diligently to read that place, who bring up their sons in secular
learning, and cause them to read wanton comedies, and to sing filthy rimes,
and peradventure, such as they maintain with the Church revenues.

Eli the Priest was himself an holy man: but because he brought not up his
children in discipline with due correction, he fell backward, and brake his
neck.

And a little after in the same place: If the Apostle require of the Ephesians,
of Lay men, and of such as were conversant in the affairs of the world, to
bring up their children in discipline, and in the fear of the Lord: what may
we think he requires at the Bishops and Priests hands, of whom he writes
to Timothy, that their children must be brought up in obedience and all
honesty? and repeating the same to Titus, he says, A Bishops children must be
faithful, not riotous, not disobedient, and (as though the childrens offenses
were to be imputed to their fathers,) he adds: coniunctionem causalem, a
conjunction causall: oportetenim Episcopum, etc. For it behooves a Bishop to be
without crime, as the steward of God, and concludes thus: Non est ergo sine
crimine Episcopus, cuius filius non fuerit subditus, aut in accusatione
luxuriae. The Bishop therefore is not without fault, whose son is either
disobedient or dissolute.

Be it that some such there are, that feed themselves and not the flock, some
wicked, irreligious, accompting gain godliness, that have made the house of God
a den of thieves, that are but spots in our feasts: yet, the Lord be
praised, the Lord has his, that watch over Sion day and night, that weep for
her, that pray for her, that prefer Jerusalem in all their mirth, that go
in and out before Gods people, that give due food in due season, that care for
the souls committed to their charge, as men that must give a strict account to
the searcher of hearts and reins.

This land had some times evil Judges and Iusticers, that turned judgment into
wormwood, and justice into gall.

There was at Rome a proud Tarquine for their king, yea this nation has had
tyrants: what then? Liuie says of Rome, regale ius non regni, sedregis vitijs
ademptumest: the kingly power was not taken away for the fault of the
kingdom, the manner of government, but for the kings faults.

Tertullian de praescriptione aduersus haereticos, Quidergo si Episcopus, etc.
What then if a Bishop, if a Deacon, if a widow, if a virgin, if a Doctor, if
a Martyr, fall from the faith? shall heresies seem to have the victory? ex
personis probamus fidem, an ex fide personas? Do we approve the faith by the
persons, or the persons by the faith? let them fly away, chafe of light
faith, with every blast of tentation, the Lords corn shall be put up far the
cleaner into the Lords garner. Judas the Treasurer became a traitor, Philetus,
and Hermogenes, Phigellus, and Hymeneus forsook Saint Paul.

S. Augustine says well in Psalm. 131. Nonperijt fraternitas propter eos qui
profitentur quod non sunt: the brotherhood perishes not for them that profess
that which they are not.

Chrysostom hom. 4. de verbis Esaiae, Vidi Dominum, Quu^ videris Sacerdotem
indignum, ne traducas sacerdotium, Judas proditor fuit, verum ob id non
accusatur ordo Apostolicus, nec crimen est sacerdotij, sedanimi. When thou
shall see an unworthy Priest, accuse not his calling: Judas was a traitor, yet
was it not the fault of the Apostles order, it is the fault of his mind, not
of his ministry.

As water that runs through a wooden or a leaden pipe, neither washes away
the furrednes of the pipe, nor defiles it self, but waters the garden
whither it goes, and makes it fruitful: and as the Sun beams shine
through many loathsome places, and yet neither can purge the place, nor the
place pollute them; even so the word of God may be fruitful to others, when it
is fruitless in him that teaches others: it may be a whetstone to give an
edge, or a trumpet to stir up, when yet we may be as dull as stones, as
heavy as lead: and therefore the Apostle prays that when he has taught
others, he may not him self be found blame worthy.

Good corn is not the worse for a patched sack, nor bad wine the better for
a golden cup. No man refuses gold for the dross that is mixed with it, nor
roses for the thorns that grow among them. What if Saul be among the
Prophets? What if Judas be among the Apostles?

If the like measure might be used against any estates, against the nobility
of this land, the judges and gentlemen, and you the Citizens of this city, for
the pretended faults of some few to ouerturne the state of all, who might
promise him self one hours security? and we are some part of the body.

But I doubt not, but as England has heretofore had many notable men, most
worthy martyrs, whom not England only, but all Europe does for many excellent
gifts of God admire: so I doubt not, but at this day there are many Abraham's,
Phineeses, Noah's, Loths, Peter's, Paul's, even seven thousands, that is to say,
innumerable, who never bowed knee to Baal, and would, notvvithstanding all
those calumniations, account all as dross to win Christ, and let them enjoy
Gods blessings in his Church.

I am sorry that I have occasion to carry you thus along with this discourse:
but I must answer as Tertullian in another case said: Conditio praesentium
temporum prouocat hanc admonitionem nostram, the estate of these times
provoke this our admonition.

The second part.
The second thing that I noted in the Apost^^s words was, that there should be
a mutual care, Let the members have the same care one for another.

All the members in the body have one and the same beginning, all one and the
same substance, and none can do well, if any one do amiss: if one perish or
putrify, it infecteth first the next, and so in time anoieth all: or if any
one in a common calamity deny help to another, all thereby are brought into
danger: even so among Christians, let no man suppose, that his brethrens cause
appertains not unto him, but as the members of the body, the inferior serve,
the superior rule, every one cares for, and regards another: so in the
Church, so in the common wealth, let the highest and lowest, and all agree, and
consent to the good of all.

As in the body, without the mutual consent of the members, neither all,
neither any of them, can be long in health, or continue without grief: so in
the Church, without a mutual care, a mutual concord, nothing can succeed to
the good of the Church, or the increase or advancement of the cause or kingdom
of Christ, or any member thereof.

Let the members have the same care. A speech of great Emphasis, every word
carrying his just weight. First the name of the members teaches obedience to
the head, care for all the rest, love to all the rest.

Let the members care. Let no man think his brothers matters not to appertain
unto him.

Let the members not only have a care, but the same care, let the members have
the same care, let there be no distraction or separation of minds.

This place requires, that they who are in the Church and common wealth, the
chief should have good respect to them over whom they are placed, even of the
meanest: and that they whom the Lord has not exalted to so high place, should
in the Lord obey their rulers: that as the body then prospers, when all the
members agree together: so they all shall prosper, when they grow up as one
man in Christ Jesus, which is the head over all, in all, and through all.

It is a great mischief and present danger to the body, if the members care
not one for another: but it is far greater, if they rise one against another
if they fight one with another.

There is a notable history in Esdras, of them that builded the Temple. We
(say they) will build, and we alone will build, and we will build together:
as if they would say, We all covet, we all care for, we all as one desire the
speedy building of the Lords house.

Apocal. 12. Michael and his Angels al fight against the Dragon, all as one,
all desire the same victory, all set upon the same enemy. Virtus vnita
fortior, force united is the more forcible.

This teaches us thus much, that all must concur together, that all must
labor together, that all must care together. Art thou a member? care for the
body: carest thou not? thou bring the body into danger, and show thy
self an evil member.

All the soldiers of Jesus Christ must prepare them selves to fight under the
banner of Christ, to fight the Lords fight, to put on the whole armor of God,
that they may resist in the evil day. For as none is crowned but he that
strives, and as none obteineth the goal, but he that runs, and as no man
receaueth the penny, but he that labors in the vineyard, neither does any
reign with Christ, but such as suffer with him: so except the members care,
and have the same care, they show themselves not sound members of that body,
whereof Jesus Christ is the head. God has so mixed all things in this world,
that nothing, that no estate can stand by it self. Tum tua res agitur paries
cum proximus ardet. Then is thy matter in hand, when thy neighbors house is
on fire.

The husbandman ploweth not, sows not for him self alone: the seafaring man
saileth not for himself: the soldier fights for his king and country, not
for his own cause: the merchant aduentureth for foreign commodities, but not
for himself alone, but for others also. Nemo sibi nascitur, no man is borne to
himself, no man may live to himself.

The king rules not for his own, but for others commodities.

The preacher preaches not for his own, but for others edifyings.

It was a law among the Lacedaemonians, as I take it, that if any thing were
stolen from any man, his next neighbor should make it good, and that because
he had not greater care of his neighbors safety.

The time suffers me not to show how far off all estats almost are, from
this regard one of another.

If we consider how that many that are the heads and greatest, eat up the
poor as bread; grinding their faces: how some join house to house, as though
they would dwell alone upon the land: how they nestle themselves, as high as
Eagles, and (as the Prophet says) call their houses by their own names: how
you of this city have with usury eaten up many ancient families, the fat of
the land, and by your Monopoly have almost overthrown all your sister
cities, turning the common wealth to your own private commodity: what may we
say, think you? that there is a mutual care? nay rather, neither faith nor
truth, nor love left among men.

All which duly weied, we shall appear, first scant to be members, or if we
be members, scarce caring members: or if we care, we care not idem, we have not
the same care.

It was notably said of Agesilaus, that city that has this care, although it
have no walls, yet has it stronger walls, then walls of brass: and where
this regard is not, although the walls be of brass, yet are they as weak as
paper.

Magistrates, ministers, the highest, the learnedest in the church and common
wealths cause, must all concur.

The cutting off of the least part in the body, does not only bring a
deformity, but a detriment to the whole body.

Chrysostom. hom. 30. in 1. Cor. 12. Those members of the body which are but
mean, and seem to have little use, yet being taken away, disgrace the whole
body: quid enim capillis vilius? what is more vile then the hairs? yet shave
them either from thy eye lids, or from thy brows, thou shall not only
disfigure thy face, but hinder the sharpnes of thy sight. Cut off the nose, let
but one foot be lame: the whole body is maimed, though it be but the want
of one member. Cut off one finger, nay but the little fingers nail, thou shall
find the rest less able to do their work.

There is a notable treatise of S. Augustine in his 50. homilies, homil. 15. of
the manner how we should love one another. Consider (says he) and mark what
is done among us, even naturally how every member cares one for another. Ecce,
spinam calcat pes, Behold, the foot strikes against a thorn. What is so far
off from the eye as the foot? far distant in place, yet near in affection:
the thorn pricketh but in one and that a little place, and yet see the back
bone boweth it self, the eyes search, the ears hearken, if any can give help:
the hands handle most tenderly, and although the eyes, the ears, the heart,
the head, the hands, and all be well, yea the foot it self, every where saving
where it is pricked: yet heart, eyes, ears, hands and all, although they be
not hurt, yet have a mutual care to cure and comfort the part grieved, though
it be but the little toe.

Mutuis auxilijs stant omnia, All things are maintained by mutual helps.

Genesis 13. When Abraham heard that his nephew Loath was taken and carried away of
the five kings that made war against Sodom, he prepared himself with 318.
borne and bred up in his house, and pursues the enemies, slaieth the kings,
and recouereth and reskueth Loath and all his substance.

In the 10. of Iosue when Adonizedek king of Jerusalem, Hoham king of Hebron,
Piraking of Iarmuth, Iaphia king of Lachis, Dabir king of Eglon, make war
against the Gibeonites, for that they had joined themselves to Iosue, who had
devoted himself unto the Lord: then ought Iosue as a feeling member, to send
succor to them of Gibeon, to pursue the enemies: the Lord will shut them up in
a cave, Iosues soldiers shall set their feet upon their necks, Iosue sha and
hang them up upon sieve trees, until the Evening. Abraham, Iosue, all that fear
God, must set themselves against idolaters, Gods enemies.

In like manner, if we be lively members under our head Christ Jesus, let us
not only have a care, but the same care with them.

Wherefore it is most honorably done of her Majesty, while the Pope and
Spaniard, and all the Leaguers bend themselves against our neighbor king,
because he has set himself to seek the Lord, and to advance his truth, to
assist that Iosue: and we as members are to pray, that the Lord may abate the
edge of the enemies sword, and grant him victory in the day of battle.

In the first of Judges, Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Go up with me
into my lot, that we may fight against the Chananites, and I will go up with
thee into thy lot also: as if he should confess themselves being severed, to
be unable to match the Chananites, but if either would take care of other,
either help other in his lot, that then there were hope of happy victory. O
that those things might take deep root in our hearts, that Judah would help
Simeon in his lot, and Simeon help Judah in his lot: if Christian princes
abroad, and we as brethren at home, would help one another, we should with
ease ere this have subdued all the Chananites.

If ye of the laity would favor the ministry; If we of the ministry would
painfully preach to, and pray for you of the laity; If we would help you in
your lot, and you help us in our lot: surely Gods glory would be much more
promoted, and our comfort on both sides far the greater: where this care
takes place, all things prosper.

It is truly said of him, Concordia res paruae crescunt, discordia maximae
dilabuntur, by concord small things increase, by discord the greatest are soon
wasted.

Seneca reports in an epistle of his, that M. Agrippa a famous man was wont
to say that he did owe much to this sentence: Hac se aiebat and fratrem and
amicum optimu^ factum, for that hereby he said he was made the best brother,
and the best friend.

If an heathen learned thus much by the light of nature and humane philosophy,
what ought we to say, who have been taught as the truth is, and have tasted
how sweet the Lord Jesus is?

This may teach us (as the Apostle says) one to support and help another, one
to edify and build up another, if it be possible, and as much as lies in us,
to have peace with all men, one to bear another burdens, that so we may
fulfill the law of Christ.

S. Augustine in his book of 83. questions, and in the 71. question,
expounding these words, Bear one another burden, cites out of Pliny a
story of the Hearts, which when they pass over the sea to any Island to
pasture, do on this sort order themselves, that they bear the burden of
their heads, by reason of the weight of their horns, one upon another back,
so as every one that comes behind, does thrust out his neck and lay his
head on him that goes before: and because he that leads the rest, has none
upon whom he may rest his head, Vicibus id agere dicuntur, etc. they are said
to do it by courses: so as that he being wearied with the weight of his horns,
does cast about, and comes after all, and into his place the next
succeeds, whose head he did bear when he led: so one bearing another
burden they pass the sea, until they come to firm land.

If nature have thus taught wild beasts, what ought, not natural men or
philosophers, but Christians who have after another sort learned Christ, to do?

If Hearts do so agree, and so one support and bear another burden, and that
in the midst of the sea, among the raging waves: if there one forsake not
another, but all alike, the greatest as well as the least, yield to those
mutual services, and that only for a little pasture sake: what ought we to
do, who floting in this sea of miseries, yet look for a city having a
foundation, for better food, the joys prepared for the just in the land of
the living?

Thus it succeeds every where not only among Christians and natural men,
but even among the beasts of the field, while there is a common care one for
another.

I might here take just occasion to speak against civil dissension, where
none cares for other, but every one seeks to destroy and supplant another.

While the two eyes of Greece, Athens and Lacedemon, were either against other,
neither caring for other, they both felt the smart, and Greece became a pray
to the enemy. While Hanno and Hanibal envied either other, neither caring for
the good estate of Carthage, Carthage came to her confusion.

While the two brethren Etheocles and Polinices, contended about the kingdom
of Thebes, neither regarding the one the other, nor the good state of the
kingdom, they both lost themselves, and that they fought for.

While Aristobulus and Hircanus contended for the kingdom of Jerusalem,
forgetting that they were brethten, or that it was the holy city, or that
there was the holy temple, the temple of the Lord, Jerusalem is made a pray
to the Romans power.

Josephus reports, that not the famine within, which was such that Marie the
daughter of Eleazar did eat her own child, nor the sword without, did so much
harm to them, and good to the enemies, as the contention of the brethren and
the mutiny of the multitude.

It is notably said of Plutarch, In praeceptis politicis, Nullum in medio
reliquit fortuna certaminis praemium.

There is an excellent story in Liuie, lib. 1. decad. 1. to this purpose
worth the marking. There was between the Romans and the Albans deadly fued,
such as no way might be ended but by dint of sword: on both sides great
preparation, and when both armies had now as it were pitched the field, and set
their battle in order, and were now not far distant the one from the other,
even ready to join battle, and to encounter together, whereof was sure to
follow much bloodshed that might threaten the ruin of both kingdoms: Metius
Suffetius general of the Albanes, goes to king Tullus, to whom he speaks on
this wise: Let Tullus king of Romans understand thus much, that the Hetrurians,
a people mighty by sea and land, envy us both, and only look while we
spoil one another, Vt nobis bello exhaustis, and Roma, and Alba potiantur:
that when we shall have dispatched one another, they may make a pray of Rome
and Alba. Let us therefore think of some other way, that so great a slaughter
may not happen to both nations, Tullus receives the condition: and by chance
there were in either army three brethren, three of Rome, three of Alba, three
Horatians, three Curiatians, neither unlike in age or ability. The condition
is, that these three of either side should end the matter, Et ibi imperium
fore, vnde victoria fuerit, that there the sovereignty and empire should be,
where the victory was. The kings on both sides encourage their champions,
showing that in their virtue and prowess depend the estate of their gods,
their kings, their countries, and their parents, that on them were cast the
eyes of the whole army. The trumpets sound, the champions on both sides with
might and maine grapple together, although not with the strength, yet with the
courage of both armies: none of them now regarded his own estate, for that on
them depended the good estate of Rome, of Alba, the religion of their Gods, the
sovereignty of their king, the safety of themselves and country. The
glittering of their armor, the clashing of their swords, the distilling
drops of blood kept the Romans and the Albans Spem inter metumque, between
hope and fear. At the length two of the Romans fell down dead, and the three
Curiatij were sore wounded, the third Roman being not once touched: who seeing
himself unable to encounter three, Fuga sibi consulendum putauit, determined
to take himself to his heels: which they beholding, follow him as fast as
ever they can, and as their wounds would give them leave: and while every one
did as it were burn with desire of glory, forgetting their own feebleness,
their brethrens wounds and weakness, they did not as members of the body
hold together, but as they were of the more strength, did run the faster, and
so forsook their brethren: which when the Roman once perceived, seeing them a
good way asunder, he suddenly turned back, and killed him that was next,
wounded before and wearied, before the second could succor him, and the second
also, before the third could rescue him: there now remained only one-to one,
and of the Albans he that came lag, most wounded, most wearied, even clean
spent. Here was great inequality, great odds. The Roman untouched, imbrued in
blood, puffed up with victory, Behold (says he) here lie thy brethren dead,
and so thrust him through that was scant able to hold his shield.

True it is, that we of Alba have had a long contention with the Romans: we
have perhaps of three slain two, that is the greater part, yet so, as we are
all wounded: and although we be all yet left alive, and have but one Roman to
encounter withal, yet if in pursuit of him, we hold not altogether, but run
straggling, every man as the heat of his affections carry him, as did these
Curiatij, if he may once divide us, he will destroy us, although three to one,
yet if the man's policy, may separate us, it is not credible how easily he
will overcome us. Thus are those three every one not caring for another
safety, as no good members of Alba, causers of their own slaughter, and of
the perpetual subjection of their country to the Romans. Shall I apply this
to our selves, how we in the chase of this Roman are divided? Or shall I show
how we have now for many years left following after him, and being all wounded
by him, have fallen to fighting, nay to wou^ding, nay to killing one of
another, shething our swords in our brothers bowels? O my brethren, that the
members would have the same care! O that we would seek those things which
belong to the peace of Jerusalem!

It is a fable, but has a moral, that the Mouse and the Frogge did so long
contend for the masterie of the marrish ground, until the Kite in their
contention caught up both. The Lion and the Bear fell at one time on a young
Colt: either claims the pray to be his: the lion alleges his sovereignty
over the beasts: the Bear pleads his strength, neither is content to divide
with other: they both fight so long, until being wounded and wearied, they are
enforced to lie down to take breath: then the Fox, who all the while lay
behind a bush to behold their fight, to both their griefs took the whole
pray from both.

Aristotle in his 9. book De historia animalium, writes of the Cibind and the
Eagle, that they do so vehemently contend and strive, that oftentimes clasping
together in the air, they fall down unto the earth, and are taken up alive of
sheepeheards: and that the Cranes in like manner fight so eagerly, that they
will rather abide to be taken up of men passing by, then to leave off.

It was a heavy judgment of the Lord against the Madianites, who came in
number as many as the grasshoppers are, or as the sand in the sea shore against
Gedeon: and against the Philistines, who in like manner came against Saul: and
against the Ammonites and Moabites, and the inhabitaunts of mount Seir, who
came against Iehosephat, that every of them forgetting their enemy against
whom they waged battle, should every one slay another.

Let us (beloved in our Savior) consider with our selves, that most mighty
nations, most valiant people, most flourishing Cities, Greece, Carthage,
Thebes, and Jerusalem, for want of this due care, by this one mischief of
dissenting among themselves, to have come to an utter overthrow: on the other
side, Abraham with 318. agreeing together, to have delivered his nephew Loath,
and to have killed the five kings: and Iosue, with an handful in respect, to
have overcome five mighty princes, with all their power.

It is well said of Seneca, Auxilia humilia firma consensus facit. Small helps
by consent grow mighty.

If we have the courage of Lions, the strength of Bears, yet if we contend
about our pray, the Fox will deceive both.

If we have the eyes and wings of Eagles, or the strength of the Cibind or
Cranes, that we dare fight in the air, yet shall we be taken up by sheep
herds, by them that pass by. What? are we either more, or mightier then the
Madianites, Ammonites, Philistims, or Moabites?

It was a great plague that the Lord laid upon them, that every one of them
should be another slaughter man.

Be it that there be two Romans already by us vanquished, it may be that there
is yet one left untouched: if he can separate us, surely he will destroy us,
for we are already wounded: but what if we who are wounded wound one another?

Nestor persuading Achilles and Agamemnon to concord, used this reason, For
that otherwise Priamus and his sons would laugh at their variance. In like
manner, Priamus of Rome, and his sons, our sworn enemies, seeing our
hostility in books, in reproachful taunts, and slanderous libets, laugh at
it, and cry over us, There, there, lo so would we have it.

It was wisely said of Socrates, as Xenophon reports, that without mutual
care and concord, neither could any city be well governed, nor any house
quietly inhabited.

Six things there be which my soul hates, says the Lord, and the seventh my
soul detesteth: namely, him that sows discord among brethren.

He does injury to Christ, that sets Christians at contention. Wherefore if
this, namely the members not to care for the members, not to have the same
care, has brought confusion to most mighty nations. If it make us a laughing
stock to our enemies: if it show us not to be the sons of God: if he be not
only hated, but accursed, that sets debate between brethren: If every
kingdom or house divided within it self, shall come to destruction: If when
we bite one another, we shall be consumed one of another: let us have brotherly
love among us, brotherly care one for another.

Solomon says, that a brother that is helped of his brother, is as a strong or
well fenced city.

Ecce quam bonum, and quam iucundum est, habitare fratres in vnum. First Ecce,
behold, with an admiration, and then, how good, and how pleasant a thing it
is, brethren to dwell together in unity! not contented as you see, to say, It
is good, or it is pleasant, but behold, how good and how pleasant it is. Many
things are good that are not pleasant, as affliction, and the like: and many
things pleasant that are not good, as the bread of wickedness: but brethren to
dwell together in unity, is, Behold how good and how pleasant, etc.

S. Austen on this Psalm says: Ita dulcis est sonus, vt qui psalterium
nesciunt, ipsum tamen versum cantent. The sound (says he) of Ecce quam bonum,
and quam iucundum est, habitare fratres in vnum, is so sweet, that they who
know not the psalter, yet sing the verse.

The sum and conclusion of this point is, that we love one another: Thereby
shall all men know (says our Savior,) that you are my disciples, if ye love
one another, as I have loved you.

Owe nothing to any man, but this, that ye love one another.

For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision avails any thing, neither
uncircumcision, but faith that works by love.

The end and fulfilling of the law is love.

Let us therefore not love in word or tongue, but in deed and truth: with a
love without dissimulation, with such a love, swill cover the multitude of
offenses.

It was the Apostles joy, which he by many obtestations besought them to
fulfill, to be like minded, and as here is required the same care, so there the
self same love. Phil. 2.

Let us therefore (as the Apostle says to the Hebrews) consider one another,
to provoke to love, and to good works.

I might speak, and so had purposed, much more to this sense: but the time
has so overtaken me, that I must refer that, as also the third part of
mutual compassion, and the application: Ye are the body of Christ, and
members for your part, to your Christian consideration. Only this I wish you
all consider, that as in the grief of the body, the very heart sigheth, the
cies shead tears, the head aketh, the stomach refuses food, the whole body
is made feeble, though it be but the grief of a finger, or of a toe: so in the
church there ought to be a sympathy, and fellow feeling, to weep with them
that weep, to rejoice with them that rejoice.

Who is weak (says the Apostle) and I am not weak? to remember them that are
bound, as bound with them.

It is most aptly said of Chrysostom to this sense, hom. 35. in Matthew. Does
thy brother suffer trouble or loss? if thou be sorry for him, thou art placed
as a member in the body of the Church: if thou sorrow not, if thou suffer not,
thou art cut off, and peradventure thou therefore sorowest not, because thou
art cut off. Tamdiu dolet membrum, quamdiu in corpore continetur: si autem
abscissum fuerit, nec dolere poterit, nec sentire. The member so long grieueth,
as it is contained in the body: but being cut off, it has neither sorrow nor
sense: and so every Christian that contemns his brother, Quia iam est alienus
a corpore, ideo affectum charitatis non tenet in cord. Because he is now a
stranger from the Church, therefore he holds not the affection of charity in
his heart.

This your Sympathy and commiseration should show it self in releeuing your
needy brethren. in helping and succouring the poor maimed soldiers, in
aiding and assisting your afflicted brethren in France and Flaunders for the
Gospels sake.

Now is the time when Pharaoh of Rome, Senacherib of Spain, Rabsace of
Flaunders, in their pride set themselves against the Lord, and his Christ,
seek to displace your dread Sovereign, (whom let us beseech God ever
mightily to maintain) to conquer and subdue this nation to a foreign yoke,
to spoil man, woman, and child, and to make us all slaves to their Romish and
Spanish cruelty.

A heathen man could say, Qui non propulsat cum potest iniuriam, etc. He that
does not put away force or violence when he may, is as much in fault, as if he
should forsake his parents or his country.

Our Savior says, Quod vni existis, etc. What you have done to one of these
for my name sake, you have done it unto me: is it true in relief of the body
with food and raiment, and not in preserving the body and soul from idolatry
and superstition?

In the 9. of the Acts, Christ says to Saul, Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou me? Saul persecuted the Christians, not Christ that was in heaven, yet
(says Christ) because he had a compassion with his members, his Church, that
that might be verified which the Apostle here says: If one member suffer, all
suffer with it. Quando minimos meos persequeris, me persequeris. When thou
persecutest the least of mine, for my name sake, thou persecutest me.

It is said by our Savior, what you have given to one of these, ye have given
it to me: for he that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord: and truly in
this case, he that assisteth them that fight the Lords fight, lends unto the
Lord, and it shall be paid him again, and the Lord shall deliver him in the
day of trouble.

In which respects, in these days of the Spanish intended invasions, of the
seeking to supplant Christ and his members in our neighbors of France, ye
should not only not murmr at any help sent them, or look to be pressed
thereunto by power or authority, but freely and chearefully to offer, to make
a free will offering to serve the Lord.

The cause is Christ's, the enemy ours as well as theirs, and therefore we,
as well as they, should suffer with them.

The king is the Lords anointed: he is our neighbor, a good neighbor, and
such a one as fears God, that has from his youth borne the Lords yoke: the
danger great, for that through his sides he shoots at us, and by his
overthrow, making as it were a bridge on his back, the enemy hops for an
entrance to us.

Let us all therefore in this case, for as much as the danger is common, make
the care common: let us not seek to lay all on her Majesty's back, whose
care, and cost is only for us and our safety, who for Christ and his Gospel
sake, for the freedom and liberty of her loyal and loving subjects, to serve
the Lord her God, has adventured the wrath and indignation of most mighty
and malicious enemies, and has suffered the most detestable and damnable
practices of most vile and wicked wretches. But the Lord her God, whom she
serves, has stood by her, and delivered her, and they are fallen into the
pit they prepared for others, and have inherited the reward of blood.

There was a time, when our swords were turned into plowe shares: but the case
is now altered, we must turn our shares into swords, and he that has no
sword, must sell his coat and buy asworde.

Surely as Gods cause against whom they fight, is the principal motive that
stirs up those our enemies thus to malign us: so a second adiuuant cause
is, that abundance and plenty, vvherevvith the Lord our God in his mercy,
has so richly blessed us. Now as our Savior says, he that will save his
life shall lose it: so when Gods cause and our Countries requires it, he that
will spare then, shall lose all.

I may say of this kind of men that hoord up their filuer and gold, that are
rich in plate and jewels, and the like, (which these men thirst after) as Ajax
once did to Ulysses, when they strove for Achilles armor.

Cur spolieris erit, non cur metuaris ab host.

So this abundance, nay rather this close keeping of it, when our prince and
country may require it, where it rusteth and profits not, Cur spolieris erit.
It shall be a cause why we shall be spoiled, not why we shall be feared.

But I see I forget my self and abuse your patience: I must therefore, the
time being spent, without repetition end, humbly beseeching the almighty God
for his great mercy sake, so to softe^ our hard hearts, that there be no strife
or contention among us, but that all bitterness may be laid aside, and that,
as members, we may all have a care, and the same care, that if one suffer, all
may suffer with it, if one be honored, all may rejoice with it, that as we are
the body of Christ and members for our part, so we may with one mind and one
mouth, glorify God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the holy
ghost, three persons in one most glorious Trinity, one God in Unity, might
and majesty, be yielded all honor, praise and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.


