HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS LETTER TO THE EARL OF SOVTH-HAMPTON, Treasurer, and to
the Council and Company of Virginia here: commanding the present setting up
of Silk works, and planting of Vines in Virginia.

And the Letter of the Treasurer, Council, and Company, to the Governor and
Council of State there, for the strict execution of his Majesty's Royal
Commands herein.

Also a Treatise of the Art of making Silk: OR, Directions for the making of
lodgings, and the breeding, nourishing, and ordering of Silkewormes, and for
the planting of Mulbery trees, and all other things belonging to the Silk Art.

Together with instructions how to plant and dress Vines, and to make Wine,
and how to dry Raisins, Figs, and other fruits, and to set Olives, Oranges,
Lemons, Pomegranates, Almonds, and many other fruits, etc.

And in the end, a Conclusion, with sundry profitable remonstrances to the
Colonies.

Set forth for the benefit of the two renowned and most hopeful Sisters,
Virginia, and the Summer-Ilands.

By John Bonoeil Frenchman, servant in these employments to his most Excellent
Majesty of Great Britain, France, Ireland, Virginia, and the Summer-Ilands.

Published by Authority.

London Printed by Felix Kyngston. 1622.

royal seal BRITAINIAE FRANCIAE ET HIBERNIAE SIGILVM REGIS MAGNAE


JAMES R.
RIght trusty and well-beloved, We greet you well: Whereas We understand, that
the Soil in Virginia naturally yields store of excellent Mulbery trees, We
have taken into Our Princely consideration, the great benefit that may grow to
the Adventurers and Planters, by the breed of Silkewormes, and setting up of
Silkewormes in those parts. And therefore of Our gracious Inclination to a
design of so much honor and advantage to the public, We have thought good,
as at sundry other times, so now more particularly to recommend it to your
special care, hereby charging and requiring you to take speedy order, that our
people there, use all possible diligence in breeding Silkewormes, and erecting
Silkeworkes, and that they rather bestow their travel in compassing this rich
and solid Commodity, then in that of Tobacco; which besides much unnecessary
expense, brings with it many disorders and inconveniences. And for as much as
Our servant, John Bonoeil has taken pains in setting down the true use of
the Silkeworme, together with the Art of Silkemaking, and of planting Vines,
and that his experience and abilities may much conduce to the aduanceme^t of
this business; We do hereby likewise require you to cause his directions, both
for the said Silkeworkes and Vineyards, to be carefully put in practice
thorowout our Plantations there, that so the work may go on cheerfully, and
receive no more interruptions nor delays.

Given under Our Signet, at our Palace of Westminster, the ninth day of July,
in the twentieth year of our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of
Scotland the five and fiftieth. To Our right trusty and right well-beloved Cousin
and Counselor, HENRY, Earl of South-hampton, Treasurer of our Plantation in
Virginia, and to Our trusty and well-beloved, the Deputy, and others of Our said
Plantation. Virginia.

May it please the Reader to amend the faults in Printing thus.
Page line Amend. 17. 17. seven or eight weeks six or seven weeks 66. 20. in
store of Bears in store of Beuers 69. 19. millions of Mulberie trees millions
of Mulbery seeds 70. 11. to this Silkeworme to this Silk work ibid. 21. of
the Silkewormes breed of the Silkewormes bredde ibid. 30. the Silkewormes
spinning the Silkewormes coming 76. 4. strest rule strest rules ibid. 18.
only Spain only in Spain 82. 4. and a^ngentle them and engentle them

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE COMPANY OF VIRGINIA, health.
My Lords and others,
I Have been induced to present this small Tract unto you from the
superaboundant desire I have to further and advance the good success of that
noble Plantation: This discourse is therefore touching the feeding and
intertainement of your Silkewormes: it shows how Mulbery trees must be
planted, and their leaves gathered, how to sow the seeds of Mulbery trees for
him that will set up a Seminary or Orchard of the best trees of that nature:
also how to erect, set up, and build houses for the Silkewormes: withal, this
gives direction how to plant and set the Vine, how to dress and till it, of
sundry sorts and fashions. Likewise it shows when the grapes are fit to be
gathered, and how they are to make Wine. Furthermore, how to plant and set
Peach trees and Fig trees, which in hot countries are commonly set amongst
Vines, in Vineyards in the open fields: Also, how to set the stones of diverse
kinds of fruits, and how to dry both Raysins, Figs and Peaches, to keep
and preserve long. I have a servant of mine, who has dwelt in Virginia these
six years, besides others of my friends and acquaintance, of the Country of
Languedock in France (which now dwell in Virginia also, being sent thither at
the great charge of the Company, to make silk and dress Vines) all which have
certified me by their letters, which I have received from thence, that the
Woods in Virginia are full of Mulbery trees, of the tallest and broadest that
ever they saw in any Country, and great numbers there are of sundry sizes and
bigness: and namely, that they have seen there some special trees, of which
one alone is able to bring forth as many leaves as will feed so many
Silkewormes, as shall yield five pound of silk per annum. Also, they inform
me, that there is great abundance of Vines in Virginia, and many of them well
laden with Grapes: but because that young growing wood, bushes and weeds, so
much choke and cover them, they cannot come to their full ripeness: and the
vermin, by reason the grapes grow in the woods, eat many of them up before
they come to maturity: moreover, they avouch that Virginia is a better Country
then Languedock, which is one of the fruitefullest Provinces in all France, by
reason of the heat thereof and the richnes of the soil, which
notwithstanding, if so be Virginia be once well inhabited and peopled, it must
needs exceed it; namely for this reason, because the Mulbery trees, and the
Vines do both grow naturally in Virginia, with many other good things, which
come only by force and labor in the best parts of France: and none may doubt
hereof, to wit, that the Vine being chosen of the best plants there, and well
dressed* but that it will assuredly bring forth very good fruit. Also, other
Vine plants may be sent thither from other Countries, to try which of them will
prove best: and of that which we have formerly said, that the Mulbery trees
grow in abundance naturally in Virginia, it must needs thence follow, that the
Worms will feed much better, and with less labor of men, then those in other
Countries do, where Mulbery trees grow only, with maine labor and toil, and
the silk also of them will be far better: and such quantity of silk may
easily be made in Virginia (if there were store of hands) as in a very short
time it would serve all Christendom. What an honor and wealth it would be to
this Kingdom of England, all men may judge.

2. The manner how to prepare the places, wherein Silkewormes are to be
nourished.
Certain, yea and many Authors have written, that such places are neither to
be too near the earth, nor too near the tiles; neither too low nor too high:
to whom I confess, this is good for such men as have choice of places; but
there are many poor folks, that are not able to get housing with all
commodities and fitnes: and I have seen by experience in the Country of
Languedock, Prouence, and in Seuenes, and in the Country of Auignon, and in
some part of Italy, certain poor folks which dwell out of Towns, which have
but one house upon an earthen floor, and in it but one room, where at one end
they have their bed, and at the other they dress their meat, which
notwithstanding nourish Silkewormes in it, in the season of the year, at which
time they prepare and set forth a corner of the said cottage to the same
effect, according to the quantity of the leaves which they have: And oftentimes
they pay for the leaves of a great Mulbery tree, six or eight shillings the
year, yea and many times the Worms thrive better in them, then in great
Chambers with other men, I mean, for the little quantity of Worms which such
poor people have.

Moreover I have observed, that the Silkewormes do love and affect the air
that comes from the dry sweet earth: provided that care be had when the weather
is cold, or moist, to make some fire in such rooms, either of wood or of
coals, that are not of any strong smell.

3. Of the building of houses to nourish Silkewormes in.
THose that will build with small charges houses in Virginia, wherein to feed
Worms after the manner as is practiced in Messina in Sicilie (in which
country there is some store of Mulbery trees within the Woods) it is a thing
which may easily be done also in Virginia, because there are likewise great
numbers of Mulbery trees there within the Woods, and the Country hot, and all
things for this purpose most fitting. This to do then, they must choose a place
in a good air, and near the Mulbery trees, and there build a long house, in
form of a Bowling Alley, covered over; but a little higher and somewhat
larger. They must cover it well, either with tiles, plankes, or other things,
against the heat and rain, for the preservation of the Worms. And the sides
of the walls must be well closed either with plaster, plankes or other matter.
In these walls, make many windows on both the sides of the house; let the
windows be of wood, to open and shut, and to give air to the Worms,
whenever they need it; and for as much as the South wind is hurtful to the
Worms, those windows must be shut carefully on that side, when the wind
blows there; these windows may be covered with paper, which windows may be
set on and taken off the hinges when need is. Furthermore, some must watch,
that neither Rats, Mice, Birds, nor Poultry come there; for they will eat up
the Worms. Likewise the Pissemires sometimes hurt them much, and therefore
care must be had, to mark the places on which side they come, and there sow
saw-dust of Oak wood, Ashes, or Lyme, or else rub the walls whereby they
pass, with chalk, or with the oil of Juniper, or any other kind of oil, on
the outside of the house only: for on the inside of the house, oil would be
hurtful to the Worms; beware also, that the paper of the windows be not
oyled.

4. Touching the erecting and building up of Hot-houses or Ouens.
SVch men as are provided of fit houses as aforesaid for the said Worms, may
build in them Hot-houses, as they make in such countries, wherein they nourish
great numbers of Silkewormes. They must build of these Hot-houses, at both the
ends of the house, if it be great and spacious; but if the house be little,
one will be enough. And it must be built in this form following. First, a
hole must be made in the house wall, wherein you will build your Hot-house or
Oven, and therein build up, as it were an Oven, after the manner of the
Country Ouens. The Ouens mouth must be at the outside of the house, with a
little Chimney to it, and the back of the Oven, within the inside of the
house. Then must you have earthen pots, like Flower pots, without holes in the
bottomes, and scarce so big as they, which must be made purposely, so as they
may be able to abide the fire* These pots must be placed with a distant
proportion of space, between pot and pot, and so build them in, within the
vault of the said Oven, with brick and clay; the mouth of the said pots must
stand out at the back of the Oven, and look into the inside of the house, but
the bottomes of the pots must stand and look toward the fire, within the
inside of the Oven: and in this manner must the pots be incorporate within the
Oven. After this done, you may make fire in the Oven when need shall be; for
the pots being hot, will thereby cast a heat out, and warm all the house, and
the smoke gets out at the chimney of the Ouens mouth, at the outside of the
house. Item, it will be good to put into these pots, certain branches of
Rosemary, or Time, Roses, or other sweet smells, for that is a mean to keep
the house in a temperate and reasonable heat, as need and occasion requires.
Besides, those sweet smells are very agreeable and pleasing to the Worms. These
Ouens or Stoues will be very useful in Virginia, principally in those
Silkeworme-houses which shall be built amongst the Woods, where store of
Mulbery trees grow: for these places being more cold, shady, and moist then
others, where the sun comes freely: by this means they may heat, dry,
temper, and well qualify the air there as they please, and make the place
thereby every way well agreeing to the Silkewormes.

In these woody places also, you shall do well to cut down all other trees
that grow near to the Mulbery trees, and ouer-shade them, and also to prune
off the boughs of the Mulbery trees that grow too thick, that so the Sun may
come fairly to the trees and leaves, for the bettering of the food for the
Silkewormes.

5. Of the greatness of the Houses.
MEn may build them as great, or as little as they please, albeit the larger,
still the more commodious: howsoever, it will be well, to make a partition in
one end of the house, and to board that corner so parted with boords, to cool
the leaves in it, as soon as they are gathered, and to make a door on the
outside, to go in thereat to lay in the leaves, and the other door on the
inside, to take out and give meat to the Worms. Item, it will be convenient
to make either in the midst of the house, or against the walls, as they shall
judge the fittest, a certain frame of wood, with boords or little Tables, one
stage or story still above another, every one of which stages of tables or
shelues, must be distant from another, one foot and a half, or thereabouts,
and in every frame, there may be five or six stories or rooms of shelues,
according to the height of the roof of the house, all of one distance one from
the other; And as touching the breadth of the said tables or shelues of these
frames, they must be four foot broad, those shall be set in the middle of the
house: But such as shall be set against the wall, must have but three foot
breadth, because they cannot serve and reach leaves to the Worms, that shall
be laid upon them, but on the one side. It is to be noted, that the bords or
shelues that are to be put in such frames, are to be of Fur, or of other wood
that has no strong and ill smell, or else let them be made of Reeds, or best
of all of Indian Mats, to serve in stead of shelues of wood: for these are the
fittest of all other, because they keep the Worms more dry and fresh in hot
weather, by reason of the wind that blows through them. These Mats may have
cross Ioices of board to support them, or else Cord put through the bored holes
of the sides of the frame, as bedcords in a bedsted; but if the Tables or
Stages be made of boords, then they are to be very thin, to the end they may
not receive too much moystnesse from the Worms. The frame must be made very
firm and strong, lest if it fall, it kill all your Worms, and you lose your
labor, which has happened to some.

Touching the length of the said Frames, they may be according to the length
of the boords you have: but if the boords happen to be very long, then they
must be underpropped with some piece of wood in the middle. Men mayset up such
Frames in little houses, as well as in great houses, but less, according to
the bigness of the house; Also they may take away such Frames once a year,
namely, after that the Worms have spun their silk, and so for that time the
house may serve for some other use: provided always, they dress, nor take no
Tobacco there; for it is exceeding contrary and mortal to the Worms; even the
very breath of one that has taken it, breathing upon them, will certainly
kill them. Likewise care must be had, once every year when you set up the said
Frames and Tables, to wash them well, and to rub them with sweet smelling
herbs, as with Rosemary, Time, Fennel or such like.

6. The time when Silke-wormes are to be hatched out of their seeds or eggs.
FIrst of all, when the Spring time is come, and you see that the Mulbery trees
thrust forth great buds, and their leaves begin to show forth themsel^^s, then
must you take the Silk-wormes seed, according to the quantity of leaves, and
the room of the house that you have to feed them in, and put the said seed
within a new box, or in a clean linen cloth, and keep the seed reasonable
warm, either within your pocket or otherwise. After four or five days, you
shall visit it very often, and as soon as you see some Worms hatched, then
must you put the seed in a bigger box, if the former be too little, but let it
be very clean: and care must be had, that the said seed be no thicker in the
box, then half an inch thick. After that, you must take a piece of clean
paper, of the roundnesse or compass of the box, and fill it with holes, as big
as the tag of a point can make, and lay that round paper over the seed in the
box; then set Mulbery leaves, the youngest and tendrest leaves you can get, over
the said paper, that the Worms may pass through the holes, and feed on the
leaves.

Also care must be had, that when you shall see the leaves covered with little
and blackish Worms, you must draw them out of the box, with the whole leaves,
with the point of a pin or such like thing, and lay them in sheets of great
and strong paper, turning up all the edges of the said paper about an inch or
more, for the better containing of the Worms, and easier remoouing them, or in
a bigger box, the leaves with the Worms upon it, close by one another: and
as soon as you have taken away both leaves and Worms, put in new fresh leaves,
the youngest and tenderest upon the said seed, and so do still, till all the
Worms be hatched: for sometimes it will be seven or eight days till they all
can be hatched.

Then put together all such as were hatched in two or three days, without
mingling them with those that are bigger or lesser, and give them fresh leaves
once a day. Also care must be had, that while the Worms come forth of the
seed, to keep it in reasonable warmth, either near the fire or between two
pillowes, which are for that end to be warmed often, yet in a mean, lest you
spoil all with too much heat.

depiction of scaffold with leaves By this figure is showed the order, to rank
the tables on the scaffolds, for to lay the leaves on, to feed the worms
there.


depiction of scaffold with rods By this figure is showed the manner to place
the rods between the tables for the Worms to clime up(...)d spinne their
silk.


depiction of silk weaving engine By this figure is showed the fashion of the
Engine, how to wind often the silk from the cods, with the furnaces and
cawtherns for that purpose.


depiction of cocoons and butterflies By this figure is showed the portraits of
the cods, and the Butterflies comne forth of them, to engender and lay their
eggs upon black Serge, Chamblet, Tammey or such like stuffes as has been said.


7. How to enlarge the Silkewormes, and cleanse them from ordure as they grow.
WHen you perceive the Worms begin to wax in bigness, and therefore press
one another too much, about a quarter of an hour or thereabouts, after that
you have given them fresh leaves, you shall take out the said leaves again,
together with all the Worms from the said paper or box, and shall set them in
a larger place; and if there remain any Worms upon the old leaves, then must
you set fresh leaves in a small quantity, to the end the Worms may gather
themselves upon them, to be taken out as we have said: which when they have
done, you may cast out the old leaves and their ordure; and this must be done
twice a week or thereabouts.

It is to be noted, that in hot countries, the Worms do eat but seven or
eight weeks at most, in a whole year, and the four first weeks after they
be hatched, they require but very small attendance.

Also it is to be noted, that the Worms, before they come to their perfection,
have four sicknesses, natural to them, as we will show.

8. Touching their first sickness.
EIght or ten days after that you shall see the Worms heads grown big and
white, it is a sign that they enter into their first sickness, and mewing or
changing their first skin. Then shall you see them hide themselves under the
leaves, without eating of them. Then must you give them but a few leaves,
namely, to feed these among them that be not sick, and those only* for you
are to know, that their sickness comes not to them all and every one at once
and the same time. Two or three days after that, you shall see them come from
under the leaves of a grayish color, and creeping upon the leaves that are
freshly set on. Then must you shift them to another place, and cleanse them as
we have said.

Also you are to note, that until such time as the Worms have passed their
third sickness, you are to lay under them, upon the tables or shelues, leaves
of broad, coorse, clean paper, and twice a day give them new and fresh green
leaves to feed on, laying the smooth sides of the leaves upward, and that side
of the leaf which is full of veins and strings downe-ward, for the Worm
comes up to the upper part of the leaf always to feed, and it feeds best, and
with most ease, upon the smoothest side of the leaf, being the tenderest. You
must also tear the leaf in the middle, or in more pieces, that the Worm may
the more readily and easily creep through it, to get upon the top of it, which
will be more needful in Virginia, because of the broadnesse of the leaves
there.

9. Their second Sickness.
EIght days after, or thereabouts, the said Worms being waxen whiter, and
bigger by the one half, they begin to enter into their second sickness
natural to them. Then may you see them again hidden under the leaves: Then
are you to govern them as we have said before, and as they grow bigger, to
shift them from time to time, into new, clean, fresh, and more spacious places.

10. The third natural sickness of Silke-wormes.
EIght or ten days more after that, you shall see them wax bigger yet by the
one half, remaining under the leaves as aforesaid; then enter they into their
sickness, and alteration of their skin. Then must you give them but a few
leaves, as we said before, and keep the room where they are, reasonably
warm, during their said sickness; for it is the most dangerous of all the
rest, for there sometimes some of the Worms grow very yellow, and yield a
watrish matter out from them, which is a certain sign of their death, and
they are so contagious then unto others, that if then they be not picked from
the rest, and thrown away, they will likewise infect them. Then must you
change their place as before, into a larger and more spacious, according as they
increase in number and bigness of body. Then may you take them very gingerly
and softly, with all the leaves with your fingers ends, very clean. But have
special care, that you have touched no Tobacco; and if you have taken any,
beware you breathe not near upon them: for this and other strong sents are a
pest unto the Worms.

After their third sickness, give them fresh leaves three times a day: And you
must first let the said leaves be cooled an hour or more, for that is better,
before you give them to the Silke-wormes. When the leaves are too fresh, they
surfeit, and feed so greedily as to burst themselves. Beware you gather the
leaves not wet, that is to say, after the rain, or after the dew, but you must
gather them dry: take heed you give them not wet to the Worms; for that will
spoil them: therefore you shall do well, if you fear a Raynie season, to
gather in fair w^ather as many leaves as may serve you a day or two: for being
kept in a cool place, not moist, as in a dry Soller or such like, and the
leaves something spread abroad, and often turned that they heat not, after this
sickness, you may set your Worms upon the shelues without paper, if you will.

11. Their fourth natural sickness.
EIght or ten days more, after that, more or less, the Worms enter into
their fourth sickness: Now are they waxen far bigger of body, then ever
before; Then must you govern, and attend them as we have before described.

And then you must provide more places, according to the quantity of the Worms
you have; And from time to time shift them into fresh and neat places, more
ample and large, yet so, as they may be reasonably near one to another; And
then give them as many leaves as they will eat, tearing them in the middle.

12. What provision of branches must be made, to cause. Silkewormes to spin
their silk.
Seven or eight days before the Worms be ready to spin, you must make
provision of branches of trees, of the smallest and firmest that can be gotten,
as Birchin boughs, Heath or Hather, Broom, cuttings of Vines, or any flexible
and bending tough branches: they must not be used green, but dry, for fear
the moistness of the green branches hurt the Worms; And mingle with these
boughs certain sweet herbs, as Rosemary, Time, or Lauender, because the
Silkewormes love greatly aromaticall smells, but not sents that are strong and
unpleasant.

13. The time when to cause Worms to spinne; and how you are to set and dress
up boughs.
TEn or twelve days, after the Worms shall have attained to their full
bigness of body, according to their course of nature; then shall you see some
of them run upon the green fresh Mulbery leaves, without eating any of them.
If then you perceive them to be very bright and clear in their belly and
neck, that is a sign and token they are ready to spinne.

Then are you to prepare and set up your boughs and branches, and set them in
rancks, upon the stories of shelues or tables, upright standing, the bigger end
resting upon the lowest shelfe, and the small end of the said boughs, resting
against the next upper shelfe or board to that, and spread them about, arching
at large what you can, to the end the Worms may have more room and scope, to
make their balls or bottoms of Silk, leaving a foot and a quarter distance,
between the said boughs one from another, at the bigger, and lower end of
them. And between the two sides or arches of these said boughs, upon the
shelfe you are to set your Worms, and give them fresh, green, and tender
leaves, as much as they will eat. And as you shall perceive them to be ready
to make their Silk, they will be clyming up, upon the said boughs. And if you
see any of them not to get up, but wander here and there from the said
branches, not finding them, you must take him, or them with your fingers,
cleanely, and nicely, and set it at the foot of the bough: for then, if he be
ready to spin, he will get upon it.

At that time, you must cleanse them very often, because they dung much; and
then you may handle them with the hand, for that reioyces them, so you have a
care not to crush or press them. And when you shall see that there remain but
a few to spin, take the rest, and put them with others of the same
forwardness. Let care be had always, as well of those that gather the
leaves, as those that handle the Worms, that their hands be very neat and
clean, as we have remembered.

Likewise you must have care, when the weather is cold, or moist, to have some
fire in the room. If you cast a little Vinegar upon the coals, or some sweet
smelling herbs, or flowers, into the pots built in the Ouens to that end, it
comforts the Worms. And as for such men as have no such Ouens, they may make
some fire in the Chimney of the rooms, or in a pan with wood-coales well
kindled first.

14. When you must draw the Silk balls, b^^tomes, or cods, after that the
Worms have made them.
TEn days after, or thereabouts, that the Silkewormes have made their silk
balls, or bottoms upon the boughs; then are you to take away the branches with
the balls, and to take the cods off from the said boughs or branches. Then
also must you choose out the very best Silk balls, to make as much seed, as you
will preserve for the next year. There goes two hundred Silk cods, or
bottoms, to make one ounce of seed: But if they be double, that is to say, if
there be found two or three Worms in one Silk ball or bottom, as it often
falls out, we are to judge and estimate then, that one hundred couple of
Worms will make one ounce of seed, or thereabouts. And one ounce of seed
brings forth six, eight, and ten pounds of Silk by the year, more or
less, according as the season is fitting. In Valencia, in Granada, and in
sundry other places, they keep ordinarily for seed, those bottoms of Silk,
wherein are two or three Worms a piece: because their Silk is neither so
fine, nor so easy to be spun, as the others. They may be known by the
handling of them, for they are stronger, rounder, and bigger then the rest: But
sometimes it falls out, that the Worms cannot break through their Silk
bottoms; in such case, they must be clipped at the smaller end with the point
of a pair of Sisers, without cutting the piece clean off from the bottom, in
which you must have a care not to offend the Worms: Then with a needle and a
thread, must you thread them together, not thrusting the needle through the body
of the bottom, but at one side; only passing the needle through the first
coorse down or sleaue.

Note also, that such silk bottomes as have but one Worm, you need not to cut
them. Then hang them upon nails, or wooden pinnes, where Vermin cannot come.
And when the Worms shall come forth and be Butterflies, you are to take them
by the wings, and set them upon certain shelues; to the end that the male and
the female may couple together. Also then must you be provided of some stuff,
old or new, that has no wool upon it (but use no linen or paper) and hang up
the said stuff in some part of the house; then take the Butterflies all
coupled together as they are, by their wings, and set them upon the said
stuff, be it Say, Piropus, the backside of old Velvet, or such like stuff as
has no wool on it, so hanged up against the walls, as we have said; but in
any case, set not them thereon, till they be coupled and joined together; for
otherwise the seed would prove worth nothing. And if any be so poor, that
they cannot get such stuff, let them take Walnut-tree leaves, one handful, or
more, and tie them together by doozens, the back of the leaves on the
backside, and hang them at a nail, or pin, and set the coupled Butterflies
upon them, as we have said.

Note that the Butterflies come not out of the Cod commonly but in the morning,
about eight a clock.

You shall know the seed by the color thereof, the good from the bad, to wit,
that of coupled Worms which is good, becomes blackish within eight or ten
days after; the other remains yellowish, and that is worth nothing.

When you see that all the Butterflies be dead, and the seed become grayish,
you shall take it up with a knife, very gingerly, and that which remains upon
the leaves, you may take up easily with your fingers. And if by chance some
seed should be laid upon paper or linen, it cleaves so fast, that you cannot
get it off, without spoiling it; in such case you must keep it, paper and all,
to the next year; and in the due season, the Worms will come forth thereout
of themselves. But the other seed gathered from the stuff or leaves aforesaid,
you must put in a box, very clean, the sides close pasted with paper, that no
air nor dust get in, and keep it in a chest, in a dry temperate place, till
the next year: but take heed you keep it neither in too cold, nor in too
warm a place; for then the heat would hatch the Worms, though it were in
Winter; and then being no leaves to feed them, they starve and dye, and so all
your labor is lost.

15. How you may discern the male Worm, from the female, the silk bottomes of
the males, and females, and also the male Butterfly, from the female.
NOw to know the male Worm from the female, (which cannot be well discerned
till the Worms be grown great) you shall distinguish them by their heads,
because the male Worm has his head more wrinkled, having eyes, as a man would
think: whereas the female has her head round, with small appearance of eyes.
As for the bottomes, you may know the male, by the form of his silk bottom:
for the male makes his bottom lesser, and very sharp at one end, and but
half so sharp at the other end. Whereas the silk bottomes of the females, are
bigger, and softer, round at one end, and half poynted at the other.

As concerning the Butterflies, the male is lesser of body then the female, and
stirs the wings oftener then the female, and more strongly.

16. How you must manage and handle the silk bottomes, to draw their silk
out of them, before the Worms turn to be Butterflies.
AS soon as you have taken the bottomes of silk from the branches abouenamed,
before they turn to be Butterflies, it is best to spinne the silk from off
the bottomes, because after the bottomes have bin once pierced, they cannot
yield so fine silk, but only a coorse silk or sleaue. And he that shall not
be able to get his silk to be spunne, before the bottom may be pierced, which
will be about a fortnight, or three weeks, after the Worms have spun, then
aforehand you may kill the Worms thus with the heat of the Sun.

To this end then, you must spread the silk bottomes in the Sun, at noonday,
when it is in the greatest heat, upon plankes, or such like, for the space of
one hour, turning them often. After that, gather them all into a heap, in a
linen cloth, and therewith cover them, to smother the Worms within their
bottomes, and continue in so doing two or three days. And in case the Sun
should be wanting in light and heat, to kill the Worms; then after you have
drawn your bread from out the Oven, or else having heated it, to the same
measure and proportion of heat, all the embers of the fire first taken out,
you may put the bottomes into the Oven, upon wooden boords, or some such like
thing, and stir them often, as we have already said: But remember that you
leave not the bottoms above an hour in the Oven, lest the silk burn, or
being too much dried up, become unfit to be spunne afterward. Beware also the
Oven be not too hot. And if the Worms be not dead at the first time, put them
in again till they be dead. After that, you must keep the silk bottomes in
a place where they may not be pressed together too hard, and where Vermin
cannot come. And so you may keep them till you have time convenient to spinne
the silk. Yet if you can spinne the silk before you kill the Worms, the
silk will prove much better, and more easy to be spunne.

There is another way, and better, to kill the Worms within their bottomes,
for such as can do it; and this they practice at Messina. They have furnaces,
and great Cauldrons or Coppers, such as Diers use, those they fill half full
with water; then they make a fire in the furnace, to heat the water. Then they
lay a round lid or cover of planke or board within the Cauldron or Copper, but
so borne up by the Copper, that it touch not the water, though it lie near to
it, within three or four fingers breadth of it, which round lid or cover must
be bored as full of holes as a Sieve: upon this cover they lay a thin Carpet of
Darnix, or the like, and upon the Carpet, the silk bottomes are laid, which
must be stirred often, and the Cauldron or Copper must be covered above the
lid, that the heat may smother the Worms within the bottomes. When the Worms
be dead, take up the bottomes, and lay them in some room where there is air,
to draw out and dry their moystnesse. By this means the silk loses not the
color, and is as good, and as easy to be spunne, as if it had been spun
as soon as the Worms had made it.

17. The manner how to prepare the silk bottomes that be pierced, which were
kept for seed, how to make of them course silk, and of the best and finest of
that kind.
AS concerning such bottomes of silk as are pierced, they cannot serve to make
fine silk, but coorse, yet of that you shall make the best of that sort,
namely, when they be rightly managed in this manner:

Take the said pierced bottomes, and wash them in fresh water, having by you a
Cauldron with clear water in it, which being set on the fire, and ready to
boil, put soap in it, and when that it boyleth, and the soap is molten, put
the silk bottomes in it, and let them boil one quarter of an hour, or
thereabouts, and stir them. After that, take them out, and wash them in clean
water, and dry them. When they are dried, then must you beat them with a round
staff of a good bigness, upon a stone, or other thing, and then they will
become white, and smooth as wool: After that, women may spin them, in this
manner as follows:

First of all, they must pull them with their fingers one after another, and
open them very wide as they do wool when they spin it. Then must they put the
silk upon the Distatfe, and spin it as small and fine as they can, or will.
Others do card it with cards made for the purpose, but then it cannot be
spunne so even.

As touching the refuse or dross, that must be carded, for to spin it. He
that will have his said coorse silk yellow, be must put the pierced bottomes
in fresh water four or five days, and change the water every day, and press
the bottomes with his hands; after that, he must dry them and so they may be
spunne, as though they had been sodden; and this, without losing their color.

18. How you are to gather the Mulbery leaves, so as the trees may best thrive
thereby, and the leaves be the better.
IT is good for him that has Mulbery trees, that he gather his leaves but
once in two years; viz. if he have 500. trees, to gather the leaves of 250.
one year, keeping the other half for the next year; nevertheless, such as
cannot spare the leaves, may gather them in this manner that follows:

Of all the principal boughs and branches of the trees, you are to gather
leaf after leaf, leaving the stalks behind, and the ends or tips of the
branches together with the younger leaves, to the end that the said boughs or
branches may grow so much the better. And as for the little sprigs, that grow
within the trees, if they be in too great number, and thick or rank, you may
pluck them off with their leaves. As touching young Mulbery trees, you are to
gather the leaves only of the principal branches, as we have said. Care must
be had to keep the leaves of the older trees, till the Worms have passed
their third and fourth sickness; for then it is, that they beget their silk;
and the leaves of such old Trees beget more silk then the young ones. And the
Worms eat more leaves in three or four days after they are grown to their
bigness, then ever they did in all their time before.

Now, forasmuch as it sometimes falls out in the Spring time, that it raines
two or three days together, so as the leaves cannot dry by the weather; In
such a case, while the Worms are yet little, you may cut off some branches of
the Mulbery Trees, and hang them up in houses, where the air may come to dry
them, and as soon as the leaves be dry, you must pluck them; for otherwise
the branches would draw the sap and juice of the leaves to them. Otherwise,
if you gather the leaves wet, you may dry them, by spreading them upon a clean
linen cloth, stirring them often, and wiping them with another clean linen
cloth, till they be dry.

19. Touching the Husbanding of Mulbery Trees.
IT is to be noted, that Mulbery trees are to be husbanded, opened, dug,
and dunged at the foot, as the Olive tree, namely, in such places where they
grow, with main labor of men. But in such places where they grow naturally,
where the nature of the soil is such, that it brings them forth without so
much handy labor, there their fruit is better. And those men that will have
some trees planted upon their land, they are to make good choice of them in
Summer, and mark them so, as they may know them in Winter, to remove them in
the due season fit to plant them in. And to choose the very best of them, you
are to cull out such as have round leaves, and not forked, for both the fruit,
and the leaves of them are better then those of the other Trees. These five and
twenty years I have seen diverse Countries, where they began (and afterward
found it very profitable) to plant Mulbery trees about their grounds, in stead
of hedges, where they grow so speedily, that the second year they may begin to
gather some leaves, during the time that the Worms are small: forasmuch as the
leaves of little trees grow sooner, then they of big Trees. To plant Mulbery
trees in form of a thick hedge, for to have the first young leaves, for the
Worms new hatched, you must make a ditch of a foot and a half deep, and as
broad, and therein plant your young trees, then fill the ditch with earth almost
full: then cut off the branches of the trees that you have set; for that will
make them grow the better; and place them two foot near one another. And
whosoever will have a double hedge of them, let him make another ditch three or
four foot near that, and plant it as in the other: Their Wood, when they are
plashed, is as good to burn, as any other; and their Ashes better.

20. How to prepare the seed of Mulbery trees to make a Nurcery.
Whosoever will make a Nurcery of the seed of Mulbery trees, when the fruit is
ripe, let him observe that Tree, that bears the fairest and roundest leaf;
and of that tree let him gather so many Mulberies, as will fit him for his
seed, which must be thus used.

First, wash the Mulberyes in two or three waters, pressing them with your
hands, and then take up the seed that remains in the bottom of the water.
After that, dry your seed in the house, and keep it till the month of March
next coming. Such men as will gain one year, sow it as soon as they have
gathered it, without drying it; And other men sow the Mulberies whole as they
are, in that manner that we will say.

21. In what manner you are to sow the seed of Mulbery trees for a Nurcery.
FIrst, you must dig, husband, and make beds of fat earth, the mold being made
small, and well dunged with good old dung, thoroughly rotten, and you must make
your beds four foot, or four and a half broad: And within the said beds, you
must make four or five straight lines of rays or furrows, all half a foot
equally distant one from another, and every furrow must be two inches deep,
and four broad; And between every bed you must leave little Allies, or spaces
half a foot broad, which will serve you to go to weed or water them, without
treading upon them. Then are you to sow the seed in the said furrows, and
cover it an inch deep or thereabout, of the finest mould.

The first year you must take care to water it often, if the weather be dry,
and the earth must be kept clean from weeds. A year after that, you may pull
up, and transplant your Mulbery trees into another ground more at large, viz.
two foot one from the other, as ordinarily other trees are disposed of: and
there let them grow till they be as big as a man's arm at his wrest, or
thereabouts. And then you may transplant them, into the place, or ground, where
you will have them continue for ever: Leaving a distance the one from the
other, of fifteen or sixteen foot, namely, so as the boughs of one tree
grow not within another. Care must be had, that in hot Countries these trees
be set deeper into the earth, then in a cold soil, for fear of burning the
Roots.

1. Another Discourse how to plant the Vine, how to dress and husband it
sundry ways, how to choose the ground and the seat to that effect.
FIrst, such as will plant Vines, they are to choose a soil proper and
convenient for that use. If you plant it in a low ground, and moist, there the
Vine grows well, and bears store of fruit, but the Grapes never ripen well,
and therefore the wine is not good, nor can it be kept long. You must then make
choice of a dry soil, whose aspect is toward the full South Sun, and covered
or sheltered from the Noth wind, if it be possible. And if you meet with
rising ground, as the sides of hills hanging down, they are most proper, and
though they be full of little stones, and gravel, they are also the better
for them, and not the worse; the wine of such places being better able to be
kept long, and fitter also to be carried far.

First, you must open the earth, and dig it one foot and a half deep, or
thereabouts. And after you have dug as much earth as you have plants to set,
you must make ditches in the said ground looking toward the full South, one
foot and a half deep, and as broad, and of the length that the place is of.

The ditches must be three or four foot distant one from another: so after
you have selected your plants, whether with roots, or without, as of slips or
cuttings (for the Vine grows as well without root, as with, and that which is
set without root, is of the longer indurance and lasting; though true it is,
that the first year it will not grow so much as that which has roots) These
plants I say, must be planted three or four foot one from another, in as much
distance as the ditches are one from another. And the Vine plants must be
planted in a straight line, in form of a Checker, quadrangle-wise.

Here observe, that if the plants be without roots, you must cause them to
soke in fresh water, twelve or fifteen days ere you plant them, putting the
big end of the plant in the water a foot deep. But if they have roots, you
must cut them off (unless they were plucked up one day or two at most before
you plant them) and put them in water two or three days. He that shall plant
the Vine, must have one to help him, who shall lay the Vine in the ditch, all
along the said ditch, of what distance he will, one from the other. And in
planting, he shall tread in the ditch, letting some of the dug earth fall
into the place where he is to plant or set his Vine; then shall he take his
plant, and bow it one foot in the earth of the ditch, or thereabouts, according
to the length of the plant, putting the biggest end within the ditch, toward
the plumpe, South of the Sunne-rising, and with the hand, raising up the point,
end, or top of it, setting his foot on the root, and casting some mould on it,
half a foot deep or more, and treading on it, that it may be firm. And he
must do so, all along the ditch, using a line, to plant them with an equal
distance, doing the like in, and through all the ditches.

When your Vine shall be thus planted, then let fall more mould within the
ditch all along, yet you must not fill it up the first year. Also be sure
that you make that earth that is between two ditches, slaunt on both sides.
And husbanding the said Vine from time to time, the earth of it self will fall
into the ditches, and fill them. The Vine is no sooner planted, but it must be
cut, not leaving upon each branch above three knobs or knots, which we call
eyes: But the old Vine that is planted about houses, to make long Vines, that
must not be cut as yet; for you must leave it all the old wood or branches,
and one part of the last years branches; both must be cut the first year, in
the beginning of the new Moon: The second year it must be cut at the full
Moon, and then leave it but one branch, the lowest and strongest, leaving upon
the said branch, but four knobs or knots, or thereabouts, according as the
Vine shall be waxed.

Also you are to note, that in cutting the Vine, you must have a good knife, or
rather a sharp hook, as in France, in such a form as the Shoomakers knife,
wherewith you must cut the branches very even, and very near the old wood, to
the end that the Vine growing, may cover the cut.

When you see in the month of May or June, that there grow upon your Vine many
sprigs arising from tho foot of the old Wood, you must pluck them off with
your hand, and let none grow, but such as grow upon the last years branches,
unless the Vine be very strong; in such case you may leave her some of such
twigs to multiply her.

Those that will have their Vines grow without stakes or props, as they do in
Languedock and Prouence, such you are to cut so short every year, that you
leave them but two or three knobs, to the end the Vine may grow big and be
strong enough at the foot.

The third year, the Vine begins to pay and recompense or reward her Master
for his labors; then must you cut her a little longer, and leave her more
branches, ( viz.) two or three in every one, and ever the lowest. Observe also,
that if the Vine breed much Wood, then you must cut it when the Moon wayneth;
but if it bring forth little Wood or branches, cut it in the first quarter of
the Moon, toward the full thereof: all must be cut in December, January, and
February.

2. Another manner of planting the Vine, namely, such as have no roots.
FIrst of all you must dig and prepare the earth (as we have said) and make
it very even: then take a line and lay it along the earth where you will plant,
looking toward the South Sun, as we have said. You must have a Pin or
Dibble of Iron or of Wood, to make a hole therewith in the earth, one foot and
a quarter deep; then put the biggest end of your Vine-plant within the hole of
the earth so made; and if you have dung very rotten, put of it one handful in
the said hole; then tread it with your foot, and with the Pin or Dibble
bore the earth round about the plant to fasten it, that the earth may thereby
join close, and be combined with it; then cut it, as we have said, and keep
it very neat and clean from weeds all the year.

3. Another fashion of dressing the Vine, after the manner of Italy, and of
Piedmont or Sauoy.
THe greatest part of the Vines of those Countries are planted in the open
fields, and grow up upon trees, that are planted there to that end; they plant
one or two Vines at one Tree, namely, of the longest Vines they can get, to the
end they may grow, and be the sooner upon the top of each tree; and they cut
the branches of the Trees off, that be too long, that the Trees may grow
round, as much as may be.

Touching the Vine, it must be cut every year, as we said already, yet they
must leave this many more branches then are usually left upon other Vines. And
where there are no Trees planted, there cut off some long and big boughs of
trees, or get even whole Trees, of the bigness of a man's thigh or thereabouts,
leaving only upon them the bigger end of the boughs, and plant them in the
earth, to support and proppe up the Vine.

Observe also, that they plant the said Trees or boughs ten or twelve foot
distance one from another or thereabouts. You must be careful when they be
rotten, to set others in their rooms. Also they may till and sow that Land
with Corn, not endammaging the Vine, which is husbanded while they till the
said Land.

And for as much as in Virginia there are found old Vines in the lands, that
the Inhabitants do clear for their use, they might spare the said Vines, and
plant by them such Trees or boughs, as we said, and tie the Vines upon them,
to prop them up, as is said; for they would bring forth much fruit the very
first year, which would be as much time gained, and labor spared. Withal,
they might also plant of the longest Vines they could find, near to the
Trees, to cause them grow upon them, both near the houses and ways, where
they would have Trees to grow; and these Vines will bear great store of
Grapes, though not to make so good Wine, as is made of the low Vine, yet good
enough to be drunk at meat.

I have seen in the Low Geuanden in Languedock, a Tree bearing a Vine, which
has yielded in one year as many Grapes, as made half a Tun of Wine.

4. Another form of dressing the Vine, as they do in Viuaretz and in Auuergne.
THey plant it as we have said, and they cut it a little longer then they do
in Languedock; after that, they plant stakes of wood, of five or six foot
long, and bind three or four of them together by their upper ends, in form
of a round Tent; this they do thus, because the Vine there is stronger then in
other places of France, and they tie the Vine upon them. But in winter, when
they will cut the Vine, and husband it, they take away the stakes: and toward
the end of March, they set them up again, as they do in France, where they
stick but one stake upright at one Vine, whereto they bind it.

5. Another way to dress the Vine, after the manner of the Country of Seuenes.
THere they plant the Vine as follows. First, having prepared the soil, they
make ditches, as we have told you before; then plant they the Vine two foot,
one from the other: and the first year they cut it very short, leaving but
three knobs or knots out of the earth. The second year they cut it at the
first quarter of the Moon, and leave to every one but one branch, as long as
they can leave it, and set a stake at every one of the Vines. Two years after,
they provide them certain wooden forkes, of the bigness of a man's leg, and
wooden poles as big as his arm, also smaller poles: then they stick the
forkes in the earth, from six to six foot distance, all along the ditch
where the Vine is planted, and as much in height, or less if they think it
fit, and so they do alike in each ditch: then they lay the bigger poles from
one forke to another, tying them together with Osier or Willow; and then they
tie the lesser poles, being six or seven foot length, athwart over the bigger
poles, binding them together with Osier, in distance one from another of one
foot and a half, much in the form of the nets that men lay to take Dear to
transport from one Park into another.

They cut the Vine the second year, as long as they can leave it, and they
leave it but one branch, to wit, the strongest, to the end the Vine may mount
up the sooner upon the said frame of Poles, which we now described, and they
bind it thereupon. Now when the Vine is upon it, which is the year following,
then must you leave more branches to the said Vine, when you cut it, according
as you shall see that her stock is strong and able enough to feed her. And
you must leave in every branch, five or six knots or eyes, and every year
bind up the ends of all the new branches which are left uncut; upon the pole,
frame with Osier, or with green Rushes, or what you can get. They plant such
Vines upon the arable Lands about houses, and upon or over the high ways,
terming them Treillies or platted high Vines, which they plant as follows.
First, they dig a ditch in the place, where they mean to set the Vine, in
that sort we described before: And they plant the Vine within the ditch, as also
we have showed: then provide they wooden forkes, and bigger and smaller
poles, as is before set down.

Such forkes as are set in the ditch, must be but two or three foot high:
plant a row of them, six or seven foot from the said ditch or thereabouts,
right against the South, and lay on them great and small poles, and tie them as
aforesaid.

Such Vines as are planted over the high ways too, and near houses, there the
forkes must be longer, to wit, seven or eight foot high, and the poles so
much the stronger, to be able to bear the burden of the Vines, and having a
respect to the breadth of the said ways. Carts and horsemen pass under them
in those countries, without hurt to the Vines, or molestation to the
passengers. Such Vines, are to be planted, at both the sides of such ways, and
tied up and dressed as is said.

6. How to husband the Vine, and in what season of the year.
THe Vine must be husbanded three times a year, to wit, in March for the first
time, the second time in May, the third in August. In March you are to dig it
deep enough, (viz.) three quarters of a foot depth or thereabouts; and at the
other times half a foot deep or thereupon: And in plowing it, you must have
care to pluck off the ends that grow upon the old wood of the said Vines, for
they spoil the Vine.

7. How you are to choose the Vine-plants, for to plant of the best.
WHen the Grapes be ripe, then consider what plants be best, and which bear
most branches. Then mark the same plants so, as you may know them again in
Winter, to transplant of them elsewhere. And also if there be any Vines that
thrive not well, pluck them up, and set in their room some of those fruitful
ones: and if there be any Vine which has a branch long enough, cut it not
from the Vine, but lay it in the earth a foot and a half deep, or
thereabouts, leaving out of the earth the small end thereof, with three or
four knots upon it, and cut off the rest. It will bring forth fruit the same
year. But you must lay in the earth so but one branch of a Vine in one year,
for fear you spoil the Vine by too much sucking it. You are to cut the same
branch from the old Vine, the next year after that, to the end it draw not the
sap and juice away too much from the old one; and by that time the said
branch will have taken root enough, able to feed it self. And thus you may
store and furnish your Vineyard in a small time with very good plants.

8. How to make Wine, and how to know when the Grapes are fully ripe.
WHen you shall see the Grapes very black, and that there are no grayish
grains among them, and that the stalk of the branch is become reddish, and
the white Grapes draw to be of a yellowish color, and the graynes tender;
these be tokens that they are ripe, which thing you shall yet better perceive
in tasting them; If they be sweet in taste, and the liquor be gluish between
your fingers, then is it time to gather them. Yet in every place they cannot
ripen alike, so well as in some, though it be under the same Climate.

In low places, and moist wet grounds, they are never so good, nor so soon
ripe, as they are in the dry grounds, and the hilly or sides of hills, and as
in the stony and grauelly grounds; and that is the cause, why they are not to
be gathered so soon in moist grounds.

Note also, when you gather your Grapes, that you may have the Wine to be good
and fit to keep long; do it in dry weather, not in rayny, for that spoils
the Wine, and takes away his strength, and hurts the Vine.

When you gather your Grapes, choose the ripest, and carry them home; but
aforehand provide a Vat, or such a Tub as Brewers use in Brewing. And such as
have no great store of Grapes, (...) use lesser vessels, as barrels or half
Hogs-heads, to let the Wine purge it self in. The Grapes must be trodden in
the vessel, with bare legs and feet; first of all in a lesser vessel or tub,
and then after that, remove the trodden Grapes, into a bigger Vat, by degrees
as they are trodden, husk and all together: And you may fill the Vat or Tub,
within half a foot of the brim thereof. Such vessels must stand upon the one
end, upon their bottom, but all open upward: they must be well bound; for
otherwise the force of the new Wine will break them all in pieces.

Whosoever will have his Wine all Claret, let him gather all his Grapes all at
once, the white and the black, and put them all together in the vessel, and
let them work together.

Before you put them into the Vat or Tub, make a little bundle of short
Vine-branches; then make a hole in the low end of the Vat or Tub in the
forepart, to draw the Wine out, when it is purged: put the said bundle of
Vinebranches within the said vessel, just before the tap-hole, and lay a
clean stone or Brick upon it, to keep it from heauing up with the Wine; this
will hinder, when you draw the Wine, that the skins or husks of the Grapes
come not out at the tap-hole with it. You must let the Wine work, and purge it
self, five or six days, or more, if you will have it look very red. After
that, draw it below, and put it in Barrels or Hogsheads. By this time, you
having gathered your greener Grapes, after you have trodden the same, as we
have said, put them into the Vat or Tub, with the husks or skins of the
former pressed Grapes, out of which you have drawn the Wine, and mingle them
well together, either with the foot or with a staff, and let the Wine work
together as before, and it will be a mean small Wine for the household: After,
when it has purged it self seven or eight days, draw it out and barrel it.
Beware you stop not the large upper hole of the vessel, until the Wine has
lost and spent all his great heat.

There are some, who after this, press the husks in the press, drawing out
all that can come thereout, putting that liquor into a Barrel by it self.
Others go further, and put water to the husks and latter Wine, at diverse
times, not all at once, but by little and little, putting one Tenth part of
water, in proportion of the quantity of the Wine, which they have so drawn,
and they let it work and purge it self in the Vat, or lesser vessel, five or
six days, and then draw it and barrel it: This will be pretty small Wine for
the servants or household. And whosoever will make Wine merely white, let him
gather all his white Grapes by themselves, and let the Wine work and purge it
self in the Vat but two or three days; for if you let it stand longer, the
color will be yellow; this is the manner practiced in Languedoc, Prouence, and
elsewhere: but in Poictou and in some other parts of France, they do
otherwise, that it may be the whiter.

After it has been trodden, draw out the Wine, and put it in Barrels, and
there let it purge, without his husks or skins. You must be careful to fill
up the Barrels every day, according as it diminishes with working, otherwise
the Lees and other corruptions will go down into the Barrels, and when hot
weather comes, will spoil the Wine. You may do so with the Claret, when you
will not have it too red, but clear, and namely in hot countries.

9. Observations touching the wild Vine, that grows in Virginia, and how to
make Wine of the same.
I Have been informed by such as have bin in Virginia, that there grow infinite
number of wild Vines there, and of several sorts; some climb up to the top
of trees in the woods, and they bring forth great quantities of small black
Grapes, which are the plainer to be seen, when the leaves are fallen off from
the trees. Another sort of Grapes there is, that run upon the ground, almost
as big as a Damson, very sweet, and makes deep red Wine, which they call a
Fox-Grape. A third sort there is, which is a white Grape, but that is but rare,
which are all devoured by the birds and beasts.

Now if such men as dwell there, would take the pains to gather some of them,
when they be ripe, and tread them as aforesaid, and make the Wine work with
water, putting it in Vats or Tubs, as we said, it would purge it self as well
as good Wine does; and if the Grapes be too hard, they may boil them with
some water; and if the Cauldron be too little to boil them all together, boil
them one after another, till all be boiled, and then put them all into the Vat
or Tub, to wit, the Wine, the water, and the husks of the Grapes, and then let
them work thus together five or six days, or else so long till you think it
fit and good to be drunk. After that, you may draw it, and barrel it, as we
have said, and use it when you need. I have oftentimes seen such Wine made
reasonable good for the household. And by this means every man may presently
have Wine in Virginia to drink.

1. How to plant the Fig tree, and the nature of the same.
THe Fig tree is a tree that grows speedily, and the second year begins
to bear fruit, and is of that nature, that during a month or five weeks, in
that season when Grapes are ripe and good to eat, you may gather ripe Figs of
it every day. The Fig tree herein is like the Vine, that it may be planted
without roots, of a branch, albeit such as have roots, bring forth sooner: And
being either plucked up, or cut off a long time before, you must put them in
water (as we have said of the Vine) and plant them in the like manner. And in
hot Countries, they plant them ordinarily in the open Vineyards, for it loves
naturally to grow with the Vine, as having affinity together; for their fruit
grow, and are ripe at one time. When you plant the Fig tree without root, you
must lay the branch within the earth, as we have said of the Vine.

2. How to plant Peach trees, and the nature of them.
THe Peach trees of every kind, are trees of no long continuance, and
ordinarily are planted in the open Vineyards, as the Fig trees, without hurt
to them; and their fruit ripens in one season.

Many being in their Vineyards, when they gather and eat a Peach that pleases
them well in their taste, do forthwith plant the stone thereof in the earth,
in that place where they will have a Peach tree grow the next year, and there
the same grows without any further labor. The like may be done of all sorts
of Peaches, yea even with Apricots: and those that will not plant them in their
Vineyard, may plant them first in their Garden, and transplant them afterward
where they please, and they will bring forth the like fruit, as the tree of
which the stone was.

There are places in France, as at Paris, where they graft them upon
Plum-trees, or Almond-trees, which are more lasting, though not fit to be
planted in Vineyards, because the Plum-tree breeds too many roots and suckers,
which spoil the Vine.

3. How to plant Quince-trees.
AS for Quince-trees, they may be planted of a bough thereof, without root, as
Fig trees: though it is better to plant them with roots, when such may be
had. They like well to be planted in moist ground, yet they will grow every
where. Also you may graft them, one upon the other, thereby to get the better
fruit. Likewise you may sow his seed, to wit, when his fruit is ripe, then
are you to take out the kernels, and sow them, as you sow the seeds, and
kernels of Apples and Pears, which commonly is done in February and March.

4. Of the Olive tree, and the nature thereof.
THe Olive tree also is a great lover of the Vine, commonly they plant it in
March, April and May, ordinarily they plant no Nurceries of them, because they
are a long time in growing.

There grows at the root of the old trees, sprigs, or suckers, which being
grown big, they use to cut them off, together with as great a piece of the
stock of the old tree, as is a man's two fists or thereabouts, and this is
without hurting the tree, and so they plant the said sprigges or suckers with
their adiunct aforesaid, putting that great piece in the earth, which serves it
in stead of a root, then must we cut off his head or top upward, as commonly
we do to other trees.

Also you may sow some of his fruit, together with the stone thereof, being
very ripe, as about Christ-tide, when they are blackish, and this without
drying them. You must husband it at the root, as the Vine, twice in a year,
and fatten the earth with good dung, if need require. In many places they sow
corn or other things under the Olive trees, without hurt to them.

5. Of the Pomegranate tree, and of his nature.
THe Pomegranate tree is ever little, of the bigness and form of a white
Thorn: In hot countries they grow near the Highways, and in Woods,
especially in stony ground. They make few Nurceries of them, because they cast
many sprigs at the foot, whereof so many may be plucked off and planted where
they will, and as many as they please.

Note, that there are some sweet, and some bitter; the bitter are not eaten,
but are good for other uses, as namely, for Curriers to give a good gloss to
their Spanish Leather Skins. Being once sown or planted in any place, there
they grow of themselves, and he that will sow of them, when he eats of the
best of them, he may put the seed, or kernel of them presently in the earth.

6. The manner of sowing the seeds or kernels of sundry kinds of fruits, for
to have trees of them: and how to preserve the seeds, until the time be fit
to sow them.
FOr the seed of the Vine, it may be well sown, and it will grow as other
seeds do: but because it is a long time a growing, they use to sow very
little of it. Yet whosoever would be curious to try conclusions, may sow of
it, as they sow other seeds. For to draw out and get the seeds of them, the
Grapes being very ripe, you must gather* them and wring them between your
hands, and so take out the seeds or kernels, and then sow the same presently,
or else dry them in the shadow, not in the Sun, and keep them till February
or March next coming, and then soke them in fresh water two or three days
before you sow them.

7. For the seed of the Fig tree, draw it also out of his Figs, being fresh,
and sow it, as that of the Mulbery tree, whereof we have treated already.

8. The stones of Peaches and Apricots, are the seed of those trees, which
thrive best, when they are planted as soon as they are out of their fruit,
without drying them. And those that will keep them till March next, must dry
them in the shadow, not in the Sun. And before you plant them, put them four
or five days in water or wine, then put them four inches deep in the earth.
Otherwise, without drying them, you may keep them in an earthen pot, with
earth in it.

9. The Cherry stone is to be managed as the Peach and Apricot, as we said
before. The fruit that comes of them, will prove as the Cherries were,
howbeit, not altogether so big as the former were.

10. Wall-nuts must also be planted green, and fresh, and with all the upper
Rind, and take heed Rats and Mice come not at them to eat them, for they are
very liquorish of them.

Also, you may keep them dry, as we said heretofore of other things, but they
profit not so well. The Tree that shall come thereof, being of the said nature,
will produce the like fruit.

11. The Almond is to be husbanded and planted as the Peach and Apricot.

12. The stones of Plums are to be used and planted as the Almond; but the
Tree that shall come of them, will not be so good, and that is the reason why
they must be grafted.

13. The Chest-nut is to be planted green and fresh, else it will never
prosper, if you let it be dried. You must put them in the earth, three or four
inches deep; And to keep them, you must put them in fresh water three or
four days, then wipe off the water from them, and keep them in a pot with
earth in it, until the Spring come, to plant them. The Trees that will come of
them, will not bring forth so good fruit, as the Chest-nut was, and therefore
the best way is to graft them.

14. The seeds of Lemons and Oranges, ordinarily are sown, as soon as they are
taken out of their fruit. They prepare the soil toward the South, well dug
and dunged, and plant them the small end upward, two inches deep in the earth.
Also they graft them ordinarily, to get the better and goodlier fruit of them.

15. For the seeds of Apples and Pears, the fruit being very ripe, you are
then to take out the seed, and dry them in the shade, and you may keep them
till February following or March, to sow them. Then must you have prepared for
them good ground, and you must make in it small rays or furrows, of two or
three inches in breadth, and of like depth, each furrow being three quarters of
a foot distant one from the other, and you must sow the seed within the said
furrows, covering them with earth. It is very good to sow them, as soon as
they are taken out of their fruit; for they come forth of the earth the
sooner: And it is needful to graft them, because the fruit that proceeds of
them otherwise, is not so good. It is also good, that all the seeds and stones
here beforenamed, be planted and sown at the first quarter of the Moon.

16. How to dry Grapes, to keep them.
WHen the Grapes be very ripe, then are you to choose them in the Vineyard, of
the biggest and best, and namely, white ones. After you have chosen and
gathered as many as you will have, you must burn a certain quantity of
Vine-cuttings, not mingling therewith any other kind of Wood, and then gather
the ashes thereof (but the best is, that they be all of white Vine branches:)
after that, put fair water and those ashes in a Cawldron upon the fire, and
seethe them together, till you have made a clear liquor; then taking away all
the ashes, put the liquor into a clean Cawldron again, and set it over the
fire, and being ready to seethe, then must ye take rods of wood, such as
Chandlers use, whereupon they set and make their Candles; upon which rods you
must tie the bunches all along, one bunch of Grapes on one side the Rod, and on
the other side another bunch of Grapes; tie them with thread by their stalks to
hang them on; which done, then diue them in the liquour, as the Chandler puts
his Candles in the molten Tallow, and that sundry times, as four or five
times: thus, having diued one rod of Raysins, hang it by to dry; then take
another, and wet it in the same manner, and set it by, and do so of all the
rest: then hang them up in the Sun, or else spread them upon Hurdles or
Lattices of Rods, or such like, until they be almost dry: then barrel them,
pressing them very flat in the said Barrels. Others dry them, without this
steeping them, even as they come from the Vine.

17. How to dry Figs.
FIrst, gather them very ripe; And having made ready Hurdles or Lattices of
Reeds, or of Osier, joined together, as Osier Lattices use to be, with lights
or cli^ts between Osier and Osier, to the end that the air passing through the
rifts, and void spaces of them, may help the Sun to dry them up, when they are
spread upon the said Lattice Tables; and take heed, that neither the rain, nor
the dew fall upon them. Also you may dry them in this manner: First take a big
Reed or Cane, of two or three foot long, and bore little holes all the length
of it, through which holes you are to put little sticks very sharp, of two
foot long; then thread the figs upon the little sticks, till they be very full
of them; then hang the Cane in the Sun; and when they be dry, barrel them,
pressing them very hard in the Barrel, as we said of Grapes.

18. How to dry Peaches of all kinds, and Apricots.
WHen they be very ripe, then you must pare off the upper skin, and cleave
them into four quarters, and dry them as Figs, and barrel them, to keep them
for winter.

The manner how to dress them, after they are dry, for to eat them, is this;
You must provide a clean earthen pot, and after you have washed your Peaches
in fair water, then put them into the pot, and put in as much Wine as will
cover the Peaches, and then seethe them half a quarter of an hour. Also they
may be made ready another way without boiling them, by putting them in wine,
and soking them three or four days; and this way they are better. Also you
may put in some Cinnamom in powder; in this manner you may keep them one
month within the said pot. Using them every morning, they provoke an appetite
or good stomach, and are very wholesome.

19. How to hinder wild beasts, from eating the fruits in the night.
YOu must make fires in sundry places, and namely, in every such way as leads
to the wood, and that only in the night, and no wild beast will come near
them. And specially do this about the Vineyards, from the time the Grapes
begin to be ripe, until they be wholly ripe.

20. Advice for those in Virginia, touching the place for to plant Vines in.
FOrasmuch as every plat of ground is not fit for the Vine, it were good and
convenient, that every Town and Village, wherabouts is, or shall be found any
good or proper ground for that purpose, that there the inhabitants should plant
Vines one near another: and such men as have intrest or right to such grounds,
may change them for some other, in another quarter of the Country, according
to the quantity, that every one may be able to apply himself unto. For the
Vines being thus joined together, will not cost more to keep then one plat;
Neither shall the wild beasts eat any the more; and so one may help another,
and learn one of another like good neighbors.

Conclusion.
I Have many more useful things to impart, which for want of leisure I must
leave vnpublished till some other time. Wherefore I will now only heartily
recommend these my approved experiments (which I have sent you) to the care and
diligent practice, of you the Colonies of Virginia and the Summer Islands. If
you cheerfully apply your selves to these instructions, I shall be encouraged
to do more and better service for you hereafter; and you for your pains, I
dare assure it, shall be richly recompensed with ample profit. Especially, and
above all others, if you constantly pursue those two most inualuable
commodities of Silks and Wines, which you may with ease and little cost bring
speedily to perfection. For Nature (which does naught in vain) has every
where for this purpose, most luxuriously stored Virginia ready to your hands,
with excellent Mulbery Trees, and Vines of diverse sorts, which none, though
never so malicious, or can, or dare deny. Since then that Nature her self, as
proud of this her sumptuous work, beckens you to her, and points you round
about, with her bounteous hand, to behold here in every place, her brave
Mulberies, and her merry Vines, listen no more to me then, but hearken to her
now, what she says and truly counsels you, most part from her self, and some
part of what she has heard from others.

And thus she speaks unto you:

Friends of my best beloved Nation, view me well, and tell me if you are not
come into another Land of promise, into another Paradise? to pass by my most
fertile grain (so much of all commended) the nourishing Maiz, and many other
things; behold now only, my two great Treasures, my richest Plants, my
Mulberies and my Vines, which I have purposely provided ready for you, and that
abundantly, without your care, without your cost or charge. Believe me, I make
all my least and commonest works, for some good purpose ever, much more these
then that are so precious. Regard them well. I hear you all confess now, they
are rich and beautiful: How haps it then, that I and they are slighted so much
by you? and that which worst is, all for a smoakie Witch? I have heard some
say, that dice are made of Coniurers bones, and cards of Witches skins, whereby
those that handle them, though they lose still, and are undone by them, yet
they can never leave them. Sure there is some such sorcery in this weed; it was
first sown (it seems) by some Indian Enchanters hand, with spells and Magic
verses, or otherwise you could never so much dote on it. For all the fruit of
this, it is but smoke, which vanishes, and likely will not always last. But
these my two other bounties I have given you, for Silks and Wines, be they
never so plentiful, yet shall they be always durable, and generally staple,
to your excessive gain. Do not then still Ixion-like, embrace a cloud, for
Juno, and smoke, for substance. Let but the fruitful soil and happy Clime
here (the chief nurse of these and all other plants) persuade you for me.

All Authors of Agriculture will tell you, that neither Arable, Pasture,
Meddowes, nor any other grounds, are so proper to plant the Vine in, as those
cleared grounds are, wherein not shrubs, but tall Trees grew. And what Country
in the world so full as this, of tall and goodly Timber trees? so as when you
clear your grounds, you easily may remove your Vines into them, and the
remoouing gives them also a perfection. Likewise may you leave your Mulberies
still growing, even where you plant your Vines: for such love and affinity
there is between these two, (as good things always go together) That the
soil and Clime which fits the one, fits the other; and what the one loves or
hates, the other does the like. Were not this known to all, yet the abundance
of them both, so naturally growing here together, would, without other
experience, sufficiently confirm it. Again, were not this Country and
Climate here most proper which I have chosen for them, you should not have
seen them, be sure of it, so freely and willingly flourish every where as they
do. For this purpose compare Virginia now, with other Countries, that are
seated in the same degree of latitude that she is, mark their Commodities, and
you shall see, that she is as well a kin to them, in them, as in the same
degree. Your great Mathematician Hariot, who lived sometime in Virginia,
Virginia in the same degree of latitude that Persia is.
and who with many praises (justly due unto her) wrote of her, and her
Commodities, says in that his book, that she is seated in the same latitude
that Persia is: And they that have traveled Persia, and write of it, will tell
you Paulus Venetus, 1. Book, 19. Chap.
how it abounds with all good grain and fruits, and how it exceeds in Silks,
and Wines, as this her Cousin-german, in the same degree, Virginia, does the
like, with Mulberies, Vines, Maize, and other grain.

Another, an eye witness also of Persia, says, that Ludouicus Romanus, 3.
Book, 19. Chap.
Chorazain, a Province of that Country, is so fruitful of all things, that a
dearth is never known there: and that you may see in one only City, called,
Eri, such store of Silk, as in one day you may buy as much as will load 3000.
Cammels. And who knows not, that the abundance of Silk, raised from the
propriety of that soil and Climate, is the unspeakable rich Staple Commodity
of that great Empire? These Silks are the sinews of the Persian State, by
which treasure, the Sophy is enabled still as he does, to wage war with the
Turk, to the great good of all Christendom. I need not tell you, by the way,
how hopeful a Trade this is to the English East India Company, if it be not
(as pity it were) sinisterly hindered.

For by this means great store of Clothes may be vented there, multitudes of
poor set on work, See Master Mu^nes, and Master M^sseldens books of this
and England enriched, and made in time the Magazin for silks. And by this
fetching of silk still from the fountain head in Persia, the Turk shall be
deprived of this great Tribute, weakened in his treasure and impouerished; and
the Persian, by this Trade, be the more enriched and strengthened against the
Turk, to the common good of Christendom. And I hope all good men will wish
this Trade to prosper and proceed still with the Persian, far rather then
with the Turk. So much the more, for that all Authors and Travelers report,
Paulus Venetus, Mercator.
The Persian to be courteous, gentle, liberal, kind to Christians, and a lover
of learning and of Arts, especially Astrology, Physic, and Poetry; so as
when there shall be an Ambassador once settled with the Sophy, there can be
expected nothing but all good usage, with a greater gain. The Turk
contrariwise is rude, barbarous, cruel, covetous, perfidious, a Christian and
a Learning-hater. The love of Persia, so like Virginia in many things, has
made me stay longer in her then otherwise I would: but now I will take my leave
of her, and her rich store of Silks, and lead you thence, to a greater and a
more opulent Empire yet, to China, Virginia in the same degree of latitude that
China is.
which also is seated in the same degree of latitude that our Virginia is: and
here you may see how likewise they two are a kin in sundry natural
Commodities, which by reciting and comparing of them, you shall easily
perceive. China is stored with Woods of Mulberies to feed Silk worms with,
and such abundance of Silks they make, Joh. Bar^ius, De^ad Asia^. Mercator.
that at the City of Nimpo, which others call Liampo, the Portugals have
observed 16^000. pound weight of Silk, carried out in Ships in three months
space.

Into Cambula, the chief City of Tartary, there come every day from China,
about a thousand Wagons laden with Silk, as Paul Venetus. Mercator. Bertius
Geograph.
Authors of no small credit, and one that was there, reports. China also is
full of nauigable Rivers, and is fertile of all grain, Maiz, Rice, and others,
of which it has three or four Haruests in a year; it is stored with Fish and
Foul, it has Mines of Silver, Brass, Iron, and other metals, Quicksilver,
Niter, Allom, and precious Stones, Pearl, Musk, Cotton, Rubarb, China roots,
store of Flax, and rich Furs. Gonsales Mendosa history Of China. 1. Book,
3. Chap.
They lose not a span of ground, but all places are employed to their proper
use: the dryer, they sow with Wheat and Barley; the moist, with Rice and Sugar
canes: Hills and Mountains abound with Pinetrees, and Chessenuts, between
which they plant Maiz, and sow Panicke, and all kind of pulse: in other proper
places, are Mulbery Groves, fair Gardens, Orchards, and Flax grounds, no waste
Land, but all put to some good use or other. It is not my purpose to speak of
the sharp wit, or of the excellent Art and industry of the Chinese, wherein
they equal, if not exceed all Nations of the world again: that is besides our
matter now: but as there is a consanguinity betwixt China and Virginia, in the
same degree of latitude; so I will only compare and show the like affinity and
agreement betwixt the native Commodities of the one and the other Climate:
China has store of Maiz for food, and Mulbery trees for Silk, and what Maiz,
and Mulberies Virginia has, is so well known to all, as of that I need say no
more. China yields store of Fish and Foul, Virginia has the like; and for
Fish, no where more plenty, nor so large as there: witness your many Sails,
that yearly come out of England hither, for this purpose, so as at this time,
it makes a great trade, and will yearly more and more increase still,
especially after your Salt-works (that are now setting up) are finished; and
for the Flax of China, you have naturally growing in Virginia, Silke-grasse,
Flax, and Hemp, of diverse sorts, and of approved goodness, and which culture
will yet much more perfect. You have likewise, as China, known Mines of Iron,
and of Copper, and of other richer Mines also you have more then hopes: China
has Pearl, and some of the Indians wear it in Virginia: as it has Musk, so
has Virginia, the beasts called by some, Muscassus, which have good Musk, and
by all likelihood are of the same kind. The rich Furs reported of China, are
exceeded by Virginia, in store of Bears, Otters, Martins, and black Fox skins,
besides many others, of which the French and Dutch have made hard by you here,
a great trade, these many years. As for the other natural commodities,
mentioned, that China has, and are not yet here known to the now Colony, as
Rubarb, China roots, Mercator in his description of Virginia says, that it
has Allom, Niter, Pitch, Tar, Turpentine, Iron, Copper, Silk, Flax, Hemp,
Tobacco, and precious Stones.
Niter, Allom, Quicksilver, etc. You may probably at least presume,
considering that Virginia consorts with China in so many known things, as in
the same height, the like happy tempered Clime, the like fruitful soil, the
like many nauigable rivers, the many like native known Commodities, already
named: you may probably presume (I say) that time and your industry, in
diligent searching (which for these reasons you ought the rather to quicken)
will discover also hereafter many of these, if not all unto you. And as for
the other commodities that Virginia has not at all as yet, as Rice and Sugars,
likewise none may doubt, seeing the soil and Clime here are endued with no
contrarieties, extremities, or distemperatures to hinder the growth of them,
but has all conueniences alike fitting for these purposes; there is no doubt
then (I say) but that when they are once transported hither from other places,
and planted here, but that it must needs prove capeable of them, being so
naturally fitted already for them. Neither yet is it to be thought, that any
cultiuated Country in the world, though never so fruitful, had all things at
first there naturally growing in it, as now it has, but that many of them were
brought afterward thither from other places. And so in like sort, the
Spaniards have transported out of Europe and the East Indies, diverse plants of
fruits, drugs and dies, and many rich commodities, which they have prosperously
planted in the West Indies, to their great gain, as may easily be shown. And
you, if you consider your store of your plain, moist, fat, and fruitful
grounds, and your goodly rivers by them, for help of water, you cannot doubt
but that you are most fitly provided for the entertaining and bringing up of
Rice and Sugar Canes. You have already made succesfull trial of other grounds,
which prove most proper for Cotton wool plants and Indico, for the ordering
of which, and of many other more profitable commodities, you shall shortly (as
I hear) have directions printed and sent unto you. Now for the three or four
Haruests which China has yearly, so as dearth is never heard of there: It is
known likewise and written of Mercator, in his des(...)tion of Virginia.
Virginia, that at Roanoak they reap three Haruests in five months space: they
sow in May, and in June, and in July; and reap again, in July, August, and
September. And as for that part of Virginia which is now planted, there is Mr.
Perce, the Cape Merchant, under his handwriting.
one of the most ancient and expert Planters now in England, that credibly
auerres, that they may, and do begin to sow of our Country grain in
September, and so after continue still their seed season for wheat very well
until the middle of February following, and about the end of June, they begin
to reap the first Harvest of Wheat and Barley, which is very good, and in the
other months after, that which was later sown. Whereupon is to be inferred,
that Virginia having store of Ploughes and good Husbandmen, need not only
never fear dearth and scarcity, but may by the many seedings and many
Haruests, be made a Country as plentiful of all grain, as China, or any
other whatsoever in the world. Besides, some known commodities you have, which
China wants: to omit others, that which is called Terra-Lemnia, formerly a
peculiar treasure of the great Turks only, Mendosa, History of China.
and Wine of Grapes, whereof they have none: for all theirs are made either of
the Palm tree called Cocos, or of the Palm that bears Dates, which being
exceeding good, and made with diverse mixtures, after diverse fashions, this
perhaps makes them less care either to plant or to dress the Vine. But to bid
China farewell now, and the multiplicitie of her commodities and her affinities
with Virginia, I will return again to speak particularly of our Mulberies
and Silk: and for this purpose I will now carry you into France and Italy,
only to view the rich and mighty profits that they make of them:
Notwithstanding their Mulbery trees (which are esteemed always to counteruaile
the half of all the whole charges of this business) are not produced by the
earth of her own accord, with my help only, as here, but by labor and
industry and expense. Agricoltura Giornata. 16.
Augustino Gallo an excellent Author of Agriculture says, that but a few
years since (finding the sweet by keeping Silke-Wormes) in the Territory of
Bresci^* they did yearly sow Millions of Mulbery trees, which after four
years growth, the best and fairest of them were removed, to be planted by
high way sides or other places, where they thought fitting, and that both noble
and ignoble did take such a pleasure in keeping great store of Silke-Wormes, so
as gain quickening their industry, they did more and more amongst all sorts
yearly augment this business. Ol. Serres. Agricultur. Book 5. cap. 15.
It is not above twenty years, since these Silke-Wormes were generally set up
in France, Henry the Great, with great wisdom appointing Commissioners for
that purpose.

Le Tellier memoires and instructions, etc. page 3.
Le Tellier, in his book of the Silke-arte, says, that the invention and
first knowledge of Silk, came from the East Indies into Europe above a
thousand years since, and was brought into Italy, not above two or three
hundred years ago: for before that time, this fabric and work was more rare
and strange there, then it was about twenty years since, in France, before
which time (though not many years since) the people of Prouence, Languedock
and Dauphine (the neighbor Provinces to Italy) applying themselves to this
Silke-Worme, found the progress so easy and profitable, insomuch as the sole
reuenew of Silk, brings more money (says he) at this present to those
Provinces, then all their Corn, Oil, and Woad, together, which
notwithstanding are there in very great abundance; Ol. Serres Agricultur.
Book 5. cap. 15.
Another says, that France must save and gain by the progress of this Silk
fabric, above four millions a year; Italy then incomparably more: and yet
France for the getting of this great gain, makes of the Silke-wormes breed,
of one ounce of Seed, in the most places, but five or six pound of Silk,
every pound worth two and three French Crowns and somewhat more. Yet in the
better parts of France, as in Languedock, and Prouence, they make seven or
eight pounds of Sike, of an ounce of Sike-seede. Agostino Gallo 6. Giornata of
his Agriculture.
But in Italy, namely, in Brescia, they make of one ounce of Spanish
Silke-seede, eight, nine and ten pound of Silk, and the Silke-Wormes
spinning of this ounce of Silke-seede, cate but about two hundred and fifty
pound weight (after the The Brescia pound weight is twelve ounces weight of
Genoa and eight ounces weight of the great ounce of Venice.
pound weight of Brescia) of Mulberie leaves to make the said quantity of
Silk; And of an ounce of Calabrian Silke-seed, they make there in Brescia
eleven and twelve pound weight of Silk, and the Worms of that seed (as being
of a bigger breed) eat about three hundred Brescia weight of Mulbery leaves;
and no doubt but in other places of Italy, which are yet more proper for this
business, they make of the like proportion of seed, a greater quantity of
Silk then this.

Such difference there is betwixt Clymate and Clymate, in the natural
propriety of it, to the great increasing and bettering of this work.
Considering therefore the great charge and labor, that Italy and France is at,
in planting of Mulbery trees, and for that purpose sowing Mulbery seeds, and
expecting six or seven year after (for so long it is ere they grow to
perfection) before they can make good profit of them, and considering besides,
that their Clymate is nothing so proper for this Silke-commodity, as Virginia
is, and yet for all that, they make their greatest gain of it:

It cannot be doubted then, but Virginia having infinite store of the best sort
of Mulbery trees, ready grown up to your hands, without your charge or labor,
and having the Clymate (as is experimented) more naturally proper for this
work, and the food for the Silkewormes better, whereby they become more
strong, to pass their natural and other casual sicknesses with less danger,
and so are generally more healthful, and also are bigger bodied, and make
larger Silke-bottomes, and finish their work in a shorter time then other do
other-where; having all these preeminences, it cannot be doubted (I say) by any
reasonable man, but that Virginia is every way better fitted, to yield
incomparably a far richer profit by the Silkeworkes to you, then France or
Italy can do to them.

And if in France, their profit be thus rated by them, which account always,
that the fourth part of the price of the Silk defrayes all the charges, there
remaining three parts of clear gain to the Owner, and in Italy, a sixth part
will discharge al expenses, making five parts of clear gain, where they
reckon nevertheless, that the price of the Mulbery leaf (as I will show by
and by) counteruailes the full half of the whole charge of the Silkeworke; you
may then certainly assure your selves, that in Virginia, where you have what
store of Mulbery leaves you will for nothing, with all the other advantages
before mentioned, that the tenth or twelfth part of your Silk you make there,
must needs clear all your charges, and make nine; ten or eleven parts clear
gain to your selves. Your chief charge will be, for the gathering of the
leaves to feed the Worms. A man and a boy will feed the Worms, coming of
six ounces of seeds, till they be past their fourth sickness, and within a
fortnight of spinning. But for the last fortnight, because the Worms must be
then carefully and often fed (that being the chief time, wherein they
conceive, and store up the matter for the Silk, which they after vomit out and
spin) then you must add three or four helpers, to the other two aforesaid.

For the feeding, and shifting of the Worms, and other employments, women,
children, and impotent persons may be used. And as one skillful governor of
the Silkewormes may employ hundreds under him, so he may in six weeks space,
easily teach them the chiefest points of this art, if they be capable, and will
addict themselves to the learning of it. Ol. Serres ibid.
The Governor of the Silkewormes in France, has two, three and four crowns
a month, besides his diet: and his charge continues, from the first hatching of
the Worms, to the finishing and winding of the Silk. Le Tellier in his Book
of the Silke-art.
Moreover, you must not think it to be absolutely necessary, to be so
superstitious in curiously following all the book rules and written precepts,
so as if any of them be omitted, or every thing be not precisely followed, in
the hatching, lodging, feeding, and tending of the Silkewormes, that then all
the business is spoiled and overthrown: for it may notwithstanding profit and
succeed, to the contentment of those that keep them. Only let every man do
what he can commodiously, to his power and ability, and assure himself, though
he keep not all strict rules in every thing, that yet he may make a great
gain, notwithstanding still the greater, the more curious he be in observing
and practicing all the approved experiments, Rules, and precepts hereunto
belonging.

These Rules are chiefly to show the perfection of this Art, and that also a
man may learn thereby, that if the Silkewormes miscarrie or prosper not so
well one year, what might be the cause of it, and where the fault lay, and how
next year that may be remedied which was amiss before, without despayring or
being discouraged. Besides you must know, that all general Rules ever admit
some exceptions, and vary according to some particular circumstances. And
therefore to make the Rules the surer for you, the nature of the Clymate must
be observed, how and in what one Clymate differs from another, as also the
season of one year, altering from another, in cold, heat, drought, or
moisture, the manner of the lodgings, the qualities of the winds, to be let
in, and kept out upon occasion fitting, and so according to all the different
qualities, to govern this work differently with discretion. As if it be a
cold season, to use more artificial heat, for the cherishing the Worms; if it
be a very hot season, to let in the cool air and the winds, as much as may
be to refresh them, especially when they spin their Silk, for fear of
stifling them with too much heat. If it be a moist time (the worst season of
all other ever for the Silkewormes) to use drying heats and perfumes so much
the more, to qualify the moist and the ill season, and to be careful, that
the Mulbery leaf be well dried, and kept the longer after it be gathered, before
it be given. But if the season be dry, then consider, that the leaf, after it
has lain and cooled a while, may be given the fresher, and the Mulbery tree
roots may be watered in these droughts, to refresh the leaves, as they do
sometimes in Spain, especially if it be in a dry and hot ground, which
otherwise without these cautions were not so good. Then must you consider also,
if the Mulbery tree grow in a shady place, or in a sour, foul or wet soil,
what inconvenience that food may bring unto the worm, and thereafter either to
avoid it wholly, if it be possible, or else to qualify it as well as may be:
Nevertheless noting that in a hot and dry year, a man may be more bold to
feed with those leaves, that grow in a shady or moist ground, by reason the
temper of the season has the better corrected the ill quality of them. Thus
regard with reason always, what kind of ground the leaf grew in, and in what
qualified season you gather it in, and consider the kind, and nature of the
tree, and the nature and kind of the Silke-seed you use, and according to all
particular circumstances, well pondered, so to make your exceptions, and to
order every thing with judgment, and discretion thereafter. Time and
observation will teach you many experiments, out of which perhaps some more
rules of art may be made, as best fitting in some particularities, the Country
and Clymate of Virginia, which finding, after good trial made, you shall do
well to set them down in writing, that in time they may be published also, for
the better directing, and profiting of others. And because in Persia (where
such infinite store of Silk is made) it is not likely, that they tie
themselves to all the strict rule, and niceties, which for the most part are
necessary to be observed in many Countries, but do what is fitting otherwise,
for that Clymate, most proper for this work; (with which Virginia so nearly
agrees, and naturally consorts as is aforesaid) for this especial purpose
therefore, means are made (I hear) to certify you from the English Factory
in Persia, of the art and order that they use, in all particulars, for the
Silke-workes there; which may guide you, happily, to a more compendious and
ready way, for the better speeding of this rich business. And yet where all
these rules are curiously followed, they make not only Spain, and Italy, but
in the worser parts of France, and other-where, a far greater gain (so much
for so much) by feeding the Silke-wormes, then by any other commodity
whatsoever. Insomuch as some Gentlemen in Italy, which keep no Silke-wormes
themselves (and which are therefore of the worst sort of husbands) yet by
letting out their Mulbery trees to others, for the leaf only, make a great
part of their revenues, some 500. li. some 1000. li. a year; some more, some
less, according to the number, greatness, and goodness of their Mulbery
trees. Ol. Serres ibid.
So likewise in Auignon, Dauphine, Lauguedoc, Prouence, and other parts of
France, some let out their Mulbery trees to others, from two shillings, to
twelve shillings apiece and upwards, accordingly as they are. Augustino Gallo,
ibid.
But some other Gentlemen in Italy let out their Mulberie trees, after another
manner, namely, they are at the charge only, to give the leaf of their Mulbery
trees, to some poor folks, for which they are to find at their cost, the
Silke-seed, and are to feed and tend the Worms, till they have made their
Silk: which done, they divide the Silk bottomes, by halues between them.
Thus you see, what a rich revenue I have provided for you, in Mulbery trees
alone, which are half the charge, and yet cost you nothing. And I hope I need
not tell you, how it is a matter, no less profitable then easy, for the
better advancing this Commodity, to build for this purpose far from your
houses (if need be) in the most convenient places, of the best Mulbery woods,
some slight Silke-worme lodgings, soon set up, and with Stoues in them, after
that excellent manner of Sicilie, formerly described; which by this Art may
correct the ill site and temper, and qualify the Air well, in the cold, moist
and shady woods, lest otherwise that might be a hindrance to this work. And
here also in these lodgings, you may make good shift (especially for so great a
gain) with necessary provisions to lodge your selves, from the beginning, to
the end of your Silke-haruest time, about some six weeks only: where you
shall need but one third part of your company, the first four weeks, and two
third parts more, the last fortnight only, for the often then and plentiful
feeding of the Worms. To inuit you to this enterprise, you have abundance of
choice Materials, to erect these Silkelodgings with, which will cost you
nothing, but a little labor, to cut out some posts, and to fit them and set
them up; or to saw out small quarters, and rafters, and plankes, and boords,
to fence the sides in stead of walls, and to cover the roof in stead of
tiles; all which must be so close laid in all places, one within another, that
no rain, wind, nor weather get in at any riftes or creuises to hurt the
Worms. Which the better to prevent, the chinkes (if any be) may be all
stopped, every where about, with some loame or clay. And thus for their better
profit, may many Families (especially of the poorer sort) join hands together,
for the speedy setting up of these Silke-lodgings, and for the gathering and
sorting of the Mulbery leaves, and for the helping and teaching one another to
feed and order the Worms, and so work, and live together, all the
Silke-haruest time, and at the end of it, to divide all the Silk bottomes made
amongst them, by number, weight, or measure, after the number and proportion of
every Family, and person; as to some one, some two, some three, some four
shares, and so more or less ratably, and according to their first agreements
set down in writing. Here also in the mean time, for their better sustenance,
may they commodiously keep near about them, their Poultry, Swine, and Milch
cattle, for milk and butter, and spare their own pastures near home the
while.

Thus you see, what rich benefits I afford you, for your small labor only.
And if I should give you all things perfect, without your pains at all, I
should breed but mine own contempt, and nurse your sloth. For these my great
commodities, and all other then, I ask some little attendance of you (justly
due unto me) to bring them to perfection. Give me but two handmaids only, Art
and Industry, to wait upon me, and I will most honorably and richly then
endow both them and you. And for this purpose now (not to speak of Husbandry
at large) I will chiefly commend the skill of Gardening, to you all and every
one. Let none be ignorant to sow, to set, to plant, to graft, to manure, to
dress, and order all plants, according to their kinds, and that in proper
grounds and seasons fitting them. This is part of that skill, which Emperors,
Kings, and Senators of Rome have both writ of and practiced. Let no man then
disdain it, but get and peruse their and such like Books of this, and other
Husbandry. I know not whether the profit of it, or delight be greater.
Wherefore all and every one in Virginia, men and women too, from the highest to
the lowest in some proportion, must know and practice it, if they mind to
thrive, prosper, and have true delight. By Gardening alone (especially in these
rich grounds and temperate Clime) may all have delicate variety, and good
sufficiency of sustenance, were there nothing else, for Summer and for Winter.
Besides the Cassaui, for good bread, I might particularize the wholesome and
great variety of many other nourishing roots and herbs, and of other Garden and
Orchard fruits, in these hotter Countries especially, most excellent for food.
And this was the chief sustenance of the wise and sober Ancients in the golden
times. Panis and Holus ( Julius Scaliger.
by a most learned and judicious Writer) are derived from two Greek words,
that signify all, and the whole: for the Ancients esteemed (says he) that if
they had but bread and Garden fruit, they had all and the whole, and every whit
that was necessary for their food. Neither is this all for as you may be fed,
so may you be clothed also, by this skill alone, as by the expert planting of
Cotton, Silk grass, Flax, Hemp, and some such other like. Besides, the Art
of planting well followed, as it can, so will it bring you to the greatest
wealth above all things whatsoever else. I need not tell you besides of the
Mulbery plants for Silks, the infinite treasure by planting Vines, Olive
trees, and Sugar canes, for Wines, Oils, and Sugars, nor of many other rich
Plants, for Physical Drugs, Dies, Paints, and many other uses. And as for your
Wine and Oils to be made here, besides many other profits, you shall therein
be aduantaged, above the West Indies also, which have neither of these two
Commodities; the King of Spain, in policy forbidding the planting of them
there, notwithstanding the Country is very proper for them. For they two being
the great Staple Commodities of Spain, the Canaries, and other his Dominions,
with which they abound, and knowing that trade of Merchandise consists in
bringing in of wares from one Country into another, maintains mutual
traffic therefore, betwixt his West Indies and his other Dominions, by the
taking of the Commodities of one another, which cannot be done, unless one
Country have store of those Commodities, which the other wants; For store of
the same Merchandise in all parts, would but glut and hinder all. Wherefore to
balance the Commodities well of all his Dominions, for the good of all, the
planting for Wines and Oiles in the West Indies, upon good reasons were
inhibited. The like he does in Brasilia, who though they have store of Ginger
there, yet may it not be carried from thence into Spain, for fear of
impouerishing them of S. Domingo, whose chiefest Trade it is to get their
livings by. And the like does Great Britain for you here, which suffer no
Sheep to be carried thither, that Cloth might not be made there, but so orders
it for the good of both, that you here shall have from thence, her native
Commodities, and her Manufactures only, and use no foreign Merchandise, but
such as is for health or like necessity, for which you return the proper
Commodities of Virginia thither. Moreover, by the Art of skillful planting,
grafting, transplanting, and remoouing, the bad wild plants are wonderfully
bettered: Insomuch, as one of the best Authors of Husbandry says, Ol. Serres
Book. 6. Cha. 17.
that every replanting or remooing of wild plants (having regard to the
fitness of the soil and season) is worth half a grafting: so as two remooues
then, are worth a whole grafting. One that has writ a Historiosme, says well
and wittily, Plin. natural. Hist. lib. 17. c. 10
that this remoouing and transplanting of wild plants, does wonderfully
mitigate and a ingentle them, whether it be (says he) because that the nature
of plants, as of men, is desirous of nouelty and peregrination, or because that
at their parting (from the former grounds) they leave there that rank
wildness, virulence, and ill quality that is in them, and as wild beasts, so
they become gentle by handling, whilst the Plant is plucked up by the root.

Since then the transplanting and remoouing wild plants, do so much
domesticate and enable them, I need not tell you then, how by grafting, or
remoouing only, the Mulbery trees and wild Vines may infinitely be bettered; To
show this, I will instance in one Plant for all. In the printed Book of the
valuations of the commodities of Virginia, Sarsaparillia wild, is five pound
the hundred, and Sarsaparillia domesticke, is ten pound the hundred: so as the
Spaniard having no other but the wild Sarsaparillia at first, yet by
replanting and cultiuating it, that he made it domesticke, and so much thereby
innobled it in worth and goodness, as raised it to a double price you see. And
the like is to be done with other wild plants, by the often remoouing or
grafting of them. As he then that was asked, what was the first, and chiefest
thing in Oratory, said, Pronunciation: and being demanded what was the second
thing in it, and afterward, what was the third, still answered, Pronunciation:
so if I were asked what were the best Art, chiefly to advance the Plantation
and Planters; I should answer as often, or oftener, the Garden Art of planting,
planting still. I could wish therefore, that every Freeholder, besides his
proper profession, should be enjoined to have a Garden, and practice sometimes
Gardening and planting: And that according to the custom and wise institution
of the Roman Censors, those should be severely punished, that did not husband
well their fields and Gardens, and well culture their Vineyards, Trees, and
Plants. Let every one then in Virginia and the Summer Islands, that minds to
have plenty of healthful food, and of good raiment, and of great wealth, let
him begin to addict and delight himself, in this most profitable and pleasing
Art of Gradening and grafting.

Now whereas the labor of clearing the woodded grounds here in Virginia, is
supposed by some to be a hindrance to your profit; it is nothing so; for the
many great commodities that to good husbands may arise, by the wood still
cleared off the grounds, will with large interest, mean while, repay the cost
and labor, especially after that excellent and rare invention of Saw-Mills (an
incredible advancement to the Colonie) be once put in practice. What should I
speak of the store of Timber, so necessary for your buildings, and other uses?
for Clapbord, Pipe-staues, and other rich wood for noble services? or of the
abundant store of wood, never to be spent, for your Iron works? and for your
Glass Furnaces now set up? for Potashes, and Sope-ashes? for boiling of
Sugars? and of Pitch and Tar? and for all Furnace works? (the great deuourers
of fuel and destroyers of woods) besides, of the great use and profit of
propping your Vines, by whole Trees or by stalks? and for poles for the Hops
which grow here wild? But above all, what endless store of excellent Timber
have you for the most excellent use of building Ships? And herein I cannot, I
confess, conceal the pride I take in my Virginia. For what Country in the
world again, abounds so plentifully as this, with all things whatsoever for
making Ships? no one thing is wanting; for besides Timber of all sorts, for all
uses in this kind, and store of Masts, no where taller and larger; you have
tried Iron also of perfect goodness, and Silk grass, Flax, and Hemp, as
well for Sails and Cordage, as for richer uses, and Forests of Trees for
Pitch and Tar, so as nothing for this purpose was lacking here but only
Shipwrights, which now also with great wisdom are lately sent, to build you
Boats and Pinnaces for Trade, and Busses, for the richest fishing here that all
the world affords. Of Cod and Sturgeon, of great skulls of Herring, as big
again as those in other places, and such plenty also of other excellent fish
unknown to these parts, that by credible report, M. Purchase in his Pilgrimage.
there have been 5000. taken at a draught, the least, of two foot in length,
whereof likewise there might be a great gain made, by skillful salting,
pickling, or drying of them. Moreover, besides the increase of shipping and of
Mariners, and the store of sustenance that this fishing may yield unto the
Colony (for which purpose therefore, no householder that is a good husband, will
be without his Fisherboats and nets for his own provisions) there be yet other
great advantages and profits also that it brings with it, namely, the fishing
upon the coasts of Virginia, being much more timely then in other places, your
Merchants have made their prime Markets, and are ready to return, before
others come that bring their fish from other places. To this, Salt being made
now in Virginia, you shall with small charge transport great multitudes of
people hither: for since there may well be many hundred Sail employed in
fishing here, people will be brought most part for the Salt, that they lade
here for their fishing, which will cost you but little. And by this means
also, may a double profit be raised unto the Planters, by bringing their people
hither every fishing time, and as occasion serves, taking some of his men here
with him to help him fish; which done, he sends them back again unto the
Colony, to follow his Commodities and other businesses here. But to go on
now, though this be granted by some, that the store of wood in Virginia well
used, is no impediment but a matter of singular benefit to the Plantation, yet
others object some other hindrances by the native Savages. But as for the many
advantages that arise, rather by the just warring with them, and vanquishing of
them (a matter so easy to be done) I refer you to the last declaration of
the State and Colony of Virginia, where the reasons are well and fully handled.
As for my self I utterly disclaim them, they have done against all my Laws,
they are most unnatural, and so none of mine. And therefore they that know no
industry, no Arts, no culture, nor no good use of this blessed Country here,
but are mere ignorance, sloth, and brutishness, and an unprofitable burden
only of the earth: Such as these (I say) like the Dai and Syri, and such other
people, are naturally borne slaves, as my chiefest Arist. ^. Politic. (...)
Secretary well defines: And there is a natural kind of right in you, that are
bred noble, learned, wise, and virtuous, to direct them aright, to govern and
to command them. But others now there be, perhaps, that are discouraged from
this worthy enterprise, by raylers and scoffers at this noble Work, men next a
kin, indeed, to these hateful Savages, enemies herein to God, their King,
and Country; But regard not them. The mocker not regarded, is mocked himself.
Go on then, and cheerfully proceed, especially in those my two fore-praised
great Commodities, which if you do, as you know not yet the twentieth part of
them that this rich Country yields, so those then also, I will show hereafter
to you.

Amongst all which, the most honorable and the chiefest is, that by the
industry of some noble and heroicke spirits (borne to immortalize their names
and nation) a passage to the South Sea, will, beyond our Falls and Mountains,
through the Continent of Virginia, assuredly be found. All the Indians from
Canada to Florida, relate, that there is beyond the Mountains here, to the
West, and Northwestward, a great Sea, and men and Ships, in shape and fashion
like to yours that Trade there: So as this can be no fiction nor no falsehood:
these diverse nations being so far asunder, all constantly agreeing in the
same report. By this discovery and passage to the South Sea found, being from
our Falls (by the Natives relation hereabouts, and by the judgment and
computation of most learned Mathematicians) about a fortnights journey only,
or thereabouts, part to be made by land, and part by water, by some rivers
leading to that Sea: what an infinite rich trade may there be made from hence
then, to the East Indies, to China, to Cathay, and other places in the South
Sea? For this passage, as it will be short, safe, and easy, so will it not only
save the lives of many men now daily lost, and spare much shipping of necessity
wasted, by the great long voyages that now are taken, but will also bring great
wealth and treasure, trebling the gain now got, by your quick return that
will be hereby made. Moreover also, what a great rich Staple? what a mighty
Magazine of Commodities for all Christendom, will be thereby erected in
Virginia, and make the speedy peopling, advancing, strengthening, and enriching
of it, to the great and endless honor of his Sacred Majesty, in whose
auspicious Reign, and by whose wisdom, favor, and gracious furtherance,
this famous Work is brought to pass, to the unspeakable benefit of his
flourishing Kingdoms, and to the everlasting glory, and immortal name of them,
by whom this happy discovery must be perfected? But for this purpose, I
refer you farther to the Treatise of the West and North-west passage to the
South Sea by Virginia, written by that excellent Mathematician Master Henry
Briggs, and lately published, as also to his Map thereof, with a more large
Discourse, shortly to come forth in Print.

Lastly, remember now and practice what I have said, and in despite of malice,
you shall find all solid truth that I have spoken to you. I take my leave now,
and as I have blessed you many ways, so give I to all of you my hearty
blessing. Prosper and farewell.

FINIS.
THE TREASVROVR COUNCIL AND COMPANY OF VIRGINIA, TO THE Governor and Council
of State in Virginia residing.
AFter our very hearty commendations: His Sacred Majesty, out of his high
wisdom and care of the noble Plantation of Virginia, has been graciously
pleased to direct his Letters to us here in England, thereby commanding us to
advance the setting up of Silk works, and planting of Vineyards; as by the
Copy herewith sent, you may perceive.

The intimation of his Majesty's pleasure, we conceive to be a motive
sufficient, to induce you to employ all your endeavors to the setting forward
those two Staple Commodities of Silk, and Wine; which brought to their
perfection, will infinitely redound to the honor, benefit and comfort of the
Colony, and of this whole Kingdom: yet we, in discharge of our duties, do
again renew our often and iterated Instructions, and inuit you cheerfully, to
fall upon these two so rich, and necessary commodities. And if you shall find
any person, either through negligence or wilfulness, to omit the planting of
Vines, and Mulbery trees, in orderly and husbandly manner, as by the Book is
prescribed, or the providing of convenient rooms for the breeding of Worms;
we desire they may by severe censures and punishment, be compelled thereunto.
And on the contrary, that all favor and possible assistance be given to such,
as yield willing obedience to his Highness Commands therein. The breach or
performance whereof, as we are bound to give a strict account, so will it also
be required of you the Governor and Council especially. Herein there can be
no Plea, either of difficulty or impossibility; but all the contrary appears,
by the natural abundance of those two excellent Plants aforementioned every where
in Virginia: neither will such excuses be admitted, nor any other pretenses
serve, whereby the business be at all delayed: and as we formerly sent at our
great charge the French Vignerons to you, to teach you their Art; so for the
same purpose we now commend this Book unto you, to serve as an Instructour to
every one, and send you store of them to be dispersed over the whole Colony,
to every Master of a Family one. Silk-seed you shall receive also by this Ship,
sufficient to store every man: so that there wants nothing, but industry in the
Planter, suddenly to bring the making of Silk to its perfection: which either
for their own benefit (we hope) they will willingly endeavor, or by a
wholesome and necessary severity they must be enforced.

This particular advice we thought necessary to give you, lest that if it
should have come to you mingled with others, you would have interpreted it as a
common Instruction, or a business that was not taken so to heart, as this is
by us, and we hope will be by you in humble obedience to his Sacred Majesty's
Royal Instructions. The pains and industry of the Author, for the benefit of
the Plantations (being a member of our Company) are sufficient arguments of his
good affection to the Action, and they both deserve your best acceptance and
ours, that others may thereby be invited to impart their knowledge in business
of this and the like nature; whereby the Colony may not only be supported for
the present, but brought to that perfection, that may redound to the glory of
God, the honor of his Majesty, and the inestimable benefit of his noble
Kingdoms; which as they are the true aim and end the Adventurers and Planters
have proposed unto themselves; so ought they to be still the honorable seeds
to put others also forward in this action: we commend this business again to
your special care. And so we commit you all, and your weighty affairs, to the
protection of the Almighty.

HENRY Southampton.


