THE Education of children in learning: Declared by the Dignity, Utility, and
Method thereof.

Meet to be known, and practi sed as well of Parents as Schoolemaisters.

Teach a child in the trade of his way, and when he is old he shall not depart
from it.

Prou. 22 6. Fathers provoke not your children to wrath, but bring them up in
learning and information of the Lord.

Ephesians. 6. 4. The rod and correction give wisdom, but a child set at liberty
makes his mother ashamed.

Prou* 29. 15. Foolishnes is tied in the heart of a child, but the rod of
discipline shall drive it away.

Prou. 22. 15. Imprinted at London by Thomas Orwin, for John Porter and Thomas
Gubbin. 1588.



To the right Worshipful Master William Hawkins Esquier, Mayor of the Town
of Plimmouth, and to the worship full company his Brethren the Masters of the
Town. W. K. wishes prosperity in this life, and everlasting joy in the life
to come.
ALthough it be a matter of it self most evident, that the discipline and
virtuous bringing up of children in good learning is the very foundation and
groundworke of all good in every estate as well private as public: yet such is
the corruption and iniquity of our time, that most men are found very
careless and slack to do their duty therein; yea there want not those that
in flat terms affirm it to be superfluous, insomuch that they can do well
enough (in their own judgment) without it. For what parents in these days
have not more care to provide wealth for their children, than wisdom? More
care to leave the^ lands and livings in this world, than to bequeath them that
knowledge whereby they may enjoy the right use and fruits of these temporal
blessings, and be directed the right way to that glorious inheritance laid up
for Gods children in heaven? The common practice of many parents proves this
complaynt to be true, and the private talk of some defends this practice to
be good. Wherefore having regard of my duty in this behalf, and being
assured of your Worships courtesy in accepting my good will, to withdraw my
neighbors and country men from this profane opinion and pernicious custom,
and to allure them unto a better and more godly consideration, I have thought
good in your Worships name to set before them, first (as it were) in a Preface
the excellent dignity of this Discipline, then the utility, and afterward in
the rest of the book a Treatise of the easiest and playnest way to be used
therein.

Your Worships ever to command in the Lord, W.K.

To the Gentle Reader.
I Have sent you, dear friend, a little pamphlet, of the education of Children
in learning, which is no fantastical nor idle toy, but a very profitable
matter, and most necessary to be urged in this secure and licentious
generation. Wherein I confess, that many learned men have already bestowed
very exquisit and commendable labors: yet for that we have endeavored not
only to fill up the empty room with such members as wanted, and to sepatate
that which seemed superfluous; but also to new cast the whole in another mould,
and to bring it to another form, brief, and easy: I suppose that it will
seem altogether a strange and a new Book. Furthermore, where as the charge of
teaching apperteineth but only to a few of the learneder sort, namely, to
Scholemaysters, we to make the argument more popular, have prefixed a
necessary exhortation for all other sort of people, setting forth the
dignity and utility of the matter, with such holy and ancient Histories,
with such plain and sensible reasons, as may teach the unlearned with some
delight, and not be tedious to those that are learned. Again, to satisfye in
some part the expectation of the learned, we have handled the method more
methodically, and adorned the whole work with some witty, Greek, and Latin
sentences, englishing the same nevertheless in the Margent for the behoof of
the unlearned. And as generally both sorts may peradventure think that the
reading of it will be worth the labor, so almost every one of each sort in
particular, may find somewhat for his purpose. For who is it of what state or
degree soever, upon whom God has not cast the care and charge, either of
teaching, or of learning, or else of causing others to be taught and learned?

Farewell, VV. K.

Io. Sw. In Authorem ^ogdoastichon.
STurmius, and Ramus, Freigius, Manutius, Ascham,
Quicquid ad hoc spectans explicuere genus:
Kempus id omne tenet, been collocat, edocet Anglos,
Sedulitate simul, cum pietate pari.
Lectio, sedulitas, labor, hac placuere peritis,
Nec dabit inuidia tam pia cura locum.
Sin tamen immerito Theonino dente petare,
Perfer, ab hijs melius te meruisse memor.
Abrahami Wislaki de libri argumento Epigramma.
QVantus honos, Parnasse, tuus, reuerentia quanta,
Quos, Helicon, fructus, praemia quanta feras,
Front canit prima modulato pectine musa,
Doctisoni reserans limina trina fori.
Tum quid amor patrius peragat doctusque magister
Depingit, Satyros and procul esse iubet.
Quo mandat puer ore cibos, quae mansa remandat,
Quas tenero primas deligat vngue rosas:
Et qui firmato procurrat poplite tandem,
Perfacili rectum tramite, pandit, iter.
Vel tibi, Thersites mordax, quod carpere possis,
Hic nihilest, nihilest hic tibi liuor iners.
Semper enim Charites sequitur (licet obstrepat vsque
Stentorio Momus gutture) verus honos.
VLtimus and victor, telum contorsit Acestes,
Vltimaque and victrix, vestra Thalia canit.
Namque exsors tibi restat honos: rex magno Olympi
Sic vult, inuidit nec bonus Eurytion.
Hen. Whit. in operis and Authoris laudem.
QVe spinosa diu and rigidis fuit horrida saxis,
Plana fit ad musas, te duce, Kempe, Via.
AA


The Dignity of Schooling.
IT is common with heathen men, when they will commend their Nobility, to
derive their pedigree from their Gods, giving us to understand thereby, that if
there were any excellency in them, it came not of themselves, but God was the
author thereof. Therefore O most noble discipline, from whence do thou fetch
thy pedigree* What parentage have thou* Who is the author of thine excellency*
Who should it be else but the father of lights, even Iam. 1. 17.
the author of every good and perfect gift* He at the beginning created man in
perfect righteousness and holiness, and beautified him with all singular
knowledge. He also after the fall of man gave his only Son to restore him
again, and ordained means and ways, by the which not only his servants
might be made partakers of this restoration, but generally all men might lead
an honest and civil life here in this present world; the door and entrance
whereunto is this discipline and schooling which I speak of. But what are the
men upon whom this gift was first bestowed* Who entertained it* Who has been a
practiser and furtherer thereof* Surely if we search the Schools of all ages
and all places, we shall find that from time to time they were men of great
renown, great honor and virtue. Therefore, that we may the more orderly view
their traces throughout these schools, first let us enter into the old
school of Gods people, which 3. Schools.
we will call the school of the Hebrews: secondly, let us step aside into the
school of the Gentiles, which we may call the school of humanity: thirdly,
we will come near to our own school, comprehending in it the school of
Christianity.

In the first school therefore, though Adam be contained, 1 The school of the
Hebrews.
who no doubt did his duty in teaching his children: yet for that we find no
evidence thereof in writing, we will pass by him and come to his son Seth,
a very godly and learned schoolemaister, as I may term him. For besides that
it is recorded, that in his days men began to worship God, and to Genesis 4. 26.
Lib. 1. cap. 3.
call upon his name, Josephus witnesses that he was a singular man, given to
the study of wisdom, and taught the same to his Nephews, and they again to
their posterity, in ye which was Enoch that walked with God, prophesying and
teaching the old world, as appears by the testimony of Jude, and at length
was taken up into heaven alive. Moreover, Jude. verse. 14.
the same Josephus writes, that when they understood that the world should
be twice destroyed, once with water, and again with fire, they engraued their
learning in two pillars; the one of brick, the other of stone, that if the
brick pillar should be dashed in pieces with the flood, the stone pillar might
remain; and if the stone pillar should be consumed with the fire, the brick
pillar might remain to teach men this ancient knowledge. Then both before and
likewise after the flood, Noe is chronicled for a famous Doctor of
righteousness 1. Pet. 4. 19. 20 2. Pet. 2. 5.
and godly knowledge, not only by the holy Ghost, but also by profane men. For
whereas Socrates affirms, Plato in Philebo.
that learning being the gift of the Gods, was by Prometheus the repayrer of
mankind after the flood fet out of heaven and brought unto men, in very truth
it must be understood of Noe, who was the author of this reparation. Another
Genesis 18. 19.
most reverend teacher in this school was Abraham, of whom GOD himself
testifies, that he taught his children and family the way of the Lord. Who
also, is both for learning and teaching commended by Josephus and Berosus. Lib.
1. 8.
The like is to be understood of Abraham's posterity, as Isaac, Jacob, and the
rest, which we will pass over together with Melchisedec that ancient Priest,
seeing there is no mention made of their teaching. Thus we have in this
school, Seth, Enoch, Noe, and Abraham, four most ancient Patriarchs of
blessed memory, celebrated by name to be Doctors and masters, besides many
others unnamed.

But what? Some will say, touching their books we hear yet nothing, nothing
of writing, nothing of reading. No doubt these ages were adorned with such
heroical spirits and golden wits, that they did conceive and keep in mind
without the help of letters a great deal better than the ages following could
do: so that their letterlesse and unwritten doctrine did bring that fruit and
commodity, which ours does now being written. Howbeit, by Josephus report, we
see that they had the use of letters even before the flood, wherewith these two
pillars were engraven, as two famous books set forth to all the world. But
behold, the next renowned Doctor in this school comes forth with his pen and
ink, and writes the laws and precepts of the living God, with diverse
histories full of noble examples, containing the doctrine of all divine and
humane matters. I mean Moses, who also propounded and interpreted this
doctrine to a great multitude of people, and by the commandment of God
ordained a continual order of Priests, and promised a succession of Prophets
that should be teachers and expounders of the same, charging withal, all
parents and householders Deuteronomy. 67.
to do the like to their children and householders, as (we see) the Patriarchs
before time had done. This Doctor being brought up in the King of Egypts Court
was even from Act. 7. 22.
the cradle instructed in learning and wisdom, as also by all likelihood was
Aaron the eloquent Priest, his sons and Exodus 4. 16. and 7. 1.
others of the Israelites, though not brought up in the Court, yet instructed
in learning: for that if they had been unlettered, they could not have served
in that calling, neither had it been to any purpose to write these laws unto
them.

Next was Joshua, an active Captain, and a teacher of the people, who made unto
them many pithie Orations, and divided to every man the portion of his
inheritance: which thing also required knowledge in the Mathematical Arts.
After him succeeded many Judges and Prophets beautified with learning, as
appears otherwise, and also by the learned and Poetical Song of Debora in
the time of the Judges. Iud. 5.
Furthermore we read, that the holy woman Anna having dedicated her child
Samuel to the service of the Lord, 1. Sam. 1. 24. and 2. 18. and 3. 1
so soon as he was wained, committed him to Elie the Judge and Priest to be
trained up in learning: wherefore let Elie be added to the former masters of
teaching. Hitherto we have had worthy examples of Patriarks, Prophets, Preests,
and Judges, that taught Children privately at home, and all sorts of persons
publicly in the congregation. Now Scholars increase, and Parents being either
otherwise busied, or else not sufficiently for this purpose furnished, send
their Children to the common School, which, as we read, was 1. Sam. 19. 18.
19. 20.
first instituted in Naioth, whereof Samuel the Lords Judge and Prophet was
moderator and Master. Such an honorable man was the first public
Schoolemaister in this School, whose Scholars then, as the Scholars a long
time after him were called the Sons of the Prophets, because the benefit of
their good instruction, which they received of the Prophet their Master, was
esteemed at no less price, then the benefit of their begetting and birth which
they had of their Parents. Immediately heerevpon learning began to flourish, by
reason that there were store of Prophets and Preests to teach the same. Of the
Prophets two were famous Kings, David, and Solomon, two Diamonds of art and
gracious eloquence, which they have plentifully expressed in the Psalms,
Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, and other their works, but because their hands were
occupied with the royal Scepter, they could not also be public
Schoolemaisters to youth: howbeit, they instructed not only their households
privately, as Solomon says, that he was taught Prou. 4. 1. 2. 3.
of his Father, but also the assembly publicly, and therefore Solomon calls
himself the Preacher. The other Prophets Eccle. 12. 9.
in those days were Gad, Nathan, Heman, Elcana, Ahias, and Iedo: after in the
days of Roboam, Abias, 1. Chr. 29. 29. 1. Chro. 15. 5. 2. Chr. 9. 29. and 13.
22. and 15. 1. 1. King. 16. 1.
Asa, and Iehosaphat Kings of Judah, were Semias, Iddo, Azarias, and Iehu: all
the which, besides that they were Masters of the Schools and Colleges, wrote
also several Books (excepting one or two) as is mentioned in the Scripture.
Next unto these followed Elias and Eliseus Prophets, Iehoiada the Priest, and
his Son Zacharias a Prophet. Iam. 5. 17.
Elias was subject to such worldly affections as we are, yet by the spirit of
God he so subdued them, that he triumphed over them in a glorious Chariot
ascending, like Enoch, to heaven alive: but knowing thereof before, he went
from place to place with his successor Eliseus, and visited the 2. King. 2. 1.
2. 3. etc.
Schools of Gilgal, Bethel, Jericho, and another place beyond Jordan, of the
which place, there are fifty Scholars mentioned. And concerning Eliseus,
there is mention 2. King. 4. 38. etc.
made of an hundred Scholars that were under him in Gilgal, and of the poor
diet wherewith they were sustained. Further, how studious he himself was, we
may perceive, in that the Sunamit built a chamber, and furnished it with
necessaries of purpose for the Prophet, that he might lodge 2. King. 4. 10. etc.
and study there when he travailed that way, so that he did not intermit his
study, no not in his journey. Iehoiada besides other Scholars, taught also
very diligently Ioash the 2. Chr. 22. 11. 12. and 23. 1.
King, even from his infancy, and holp him to his kingdom. Which King
notwithstanding after the death of Iehoiada, fell to Idolatry so diuelishly,
that for the defense thereof, he murdered Zacharias the Prophet, being the 2.
Chr. 24. 18.
son of his great friend and godly Schoolemasster Iehoiada. Which I note by
the way, partly that parents may see, how good Schoolemaisters have now and
then lewd and unthrifty Scholars, and partly that Schoolemaisters meditating
aforehand with what unthankfulness, yea with what malicious cruelty their
diligence and good will shall be sometime requited, may the more strongly arm
themselves with patience to endure it. From the days of this Zacharias, unto
Malachi, we have sixteen Prophets, very famous for their pains in teaching
all sorts of people, both young and old, by their lively voice, whilst they
lived, and also by their writing continually, sithence their death, of whom
nine, to wit, Jonas, Osee, Esaias, Obadias, Amos, Micheas, Naum, Joel, and
Habacuck, were before the Babylonicall captivity: four, Ieremias, Zophanias,
Ezechiel, and Daniel, in and about the captivity. This captivity lasted
seauentie years, in the which, as upon the overthrow of the estates both
ecclestasticall and civil, of necessity followed the ruin of the Schools
and Colleges: so doubtless the Schools were repaired again together with
the repairing of the policy and Priesthood. In which renewed estate, God
stirred up the three other Prophets, Haggeus, Zacharias the latter, and
Malachi, to occupy the Doctors chair in ye congregation, and also in the
Schools. To these add Ezra, beth a Priest, and an excellent Doctor of the
Law, that obtained great favor for his nation of Ezra. 7. 1. 2. etc. Nehem.
8. 2. 3.
Artaxerxes the King, and by whose industry the old Testament was worthily
augmented and preserved in writing for all nations: in his time also was
Nehemias, a noble Courtier, of great learning and holiness, and a passing good
member in furthering the service of God, and the welfare of his Country.

And thus the race of the Prophets is come to an end, which thing brought an
end also to the goodliest beawtie of this Hebrewe School. For the Priests and
Levites, neither in this point, nor in doing their duty otherwise, were so
diligent, but that they are reprehended by the Prophets many times for their
slack and corrupt behavior. Neither were the Scholars ever called the
children of the Priests, but the children of the Prophets, because the Prophets
were their best masters: and yet in those days God sent some other good
masters that were Priests and learned men, as Ioachim the Priest, who, as
Philo says, wrote the histories of Judith and Hester: and the seauentie
learned Doctors, whom Eleazar the Priest sent to Ptolome Philadelphus King of
Egypt, to translate the Hebrewe Bible into the Greek tongue, by which means
the word of God came into the Kings Library at Alexandria, and so was set open
to the Gentiles also. With these may Jesus the some of Syrach be sorted, and
his grandfather likewise, men of great reading and learning, as their doctrine
in the book called Ecclesiasticus does witness.

All this while, the Judges and Captains, by whom the Jews were governed
after their captivity, were of the stock of David, in which order Ianna
Hyrcanus was the last. In whose days the itch of ambition and covetousness
had so infected the Priesthood, that whereas it should go by succession to the
posterity of Eleazar the son of Aaron, now it was, who might buy it for
money of the Kings of Syria, which then held them in miserable subjection.
Jason was the first that attempted this way to get the Priesthood; who to
shoulder out his brother Onias, gave for it to Antiochus 2. Macha. 4.
King of Syria three hundred and sixty talents, and a rent of eighty talents:
moreover he gave an hundred and fifty talents for liberty to erect a
College, wherein he might exercise the scholars after the profane fashion of
the Gentiles. Thus the civil policy being sore defaced, and the Priesthood
wholly corrupted, the Schools likewise degenerated from their ancient
integrity, bringing forth not the true children of the Prophets, but the
bastards of very wicked and heathenish Sophisters. Hereof it came to pass,
that within forty years there sprang up the sects of the Pharisees, of the
Essenes, and of the Saduces; which corrupted the sincerity of Gods word, and
broched very detestable and wicked opinions. Notwithstanding, they had their
Sinagogues and Colleges abroad in diverse cities and towns, but chiefly in
Jerusalem. And of the Pharisees was one Gamaliel Act. 6. 9.
Act. 5. 34.
a Doctor of great estimation, at whose feet and in whose discipline was
nourished up the Apostle Saint Paul, afterward Act. 22. 3.
a singular instrument in the Church of God. But to redress the foresaid
corruption, was sent the holy man of God John Baptist, replenisht with the
spirit of Elias, who taught publicly both the congregation, and also many
Scholars that continually attended upon him. Let us acknowledge therefore this
man to be a visiter and a reformer of the Colleges, and also the last Doctor
in this School of the Hebrews. So now for the dignity of Schooling in this
first School we have very worthy examples of teachers, first the Patriarks
that taught their households, then the Prophets and Priests that taught not only
their households privately, but also the congregation of the people, and
companies of Scholars publikly: and for amplifying the honor and estimation of
these offices, it pleased God that sometimes Kings and Princes should partly
serve the turn therein.

But here some will object, that all this teaching was for 2. The School of
the Gentiles.
Divinity, and therefore necessary but for a few now, seeing that most men
neither will nor may make their children Divines. Were none then trained up in
learning, but such as were Prophets or Priests* none but ecclesiastical
persons* yes, no doubt, Kings, Judges, Captains, and all Magistrates, have
need of the same education. Yea, though all men can not be learned Doctors,
yet learning is necessary for all sorts and all degrees of men, whether they
be high or low, rich or poor, rulers or subjects, ecclesiastical or civil.
For what have others done herein which knew not this divinity* which rightly
embraced but humanity* have they had no teachers* no School at all* yes
verily, and that of great antiquity: for as we have showed before, Socrates.
uttering the opinion of the Gentiles, affirms that Prometheus fet learning*
out of heaven, and brought it unto men. And the Egyptians, ere they had the use
of letters, expressing their sentences with the images of beasts and figures of
other things, did use ye figure of a deawing heaven, to signify discipline and
learning: so that as well the Panims as the Hebrews did acknowledge God to be
the author of learning, and that it was the deaw of heaven: but this dew among
the Gentiles did fall in diverse Countrey^ and upon diverse people, which we
will recite in order one after another.

Berosus writes, that about the time of the death of Noe, King Sarron amongst
the Frenchmen ordained public Schools of learning, to represit the outrageous
behavior of naughty men: and that King Ingenon for the like cause did the
like among the Thuyscones, a people of Germany. Of which thing also Cornelius
Tacitus makes mention in his book of the Germane manners. Although we have
here no Scholemaisters named, yet let us place in these examples a noble
foundation of the School of humanity, seeing we have two vetie ancient
Kings, that erected Schools for the expelling of barbaritie and intolerable
manners. Also the same Berosus records, that in the days of Abraham's
pilgrimage, there reigned amongst the Frenchmen one Druyus, a man of great
knowledge and learning, of whom the Philosophers of France, and the Countries
thereabout taking their learning, were a long time afterward called Druides,
according to the name of Caesar. 6. Tacit. 14* Plini.
their patron and first master: these were men of great estimation and
authority, for they did determine all causes and controversies, and as it were
excommunicate him that would not ^ and to their determination: they were free
from wars, from paying of customs, or any other dueues: which preferments
and rewards brought them a great number of Scholars, which they retained
twenty years in the School of their Philosophy, which was chiefly of the
power of the Gods, of the immortality of the Soul, of the course of nature,
as the Stars and their moving, the bigness of the world and the earth. Julius
Caesar adds, that this discipline came out of England into France, and those
which would learn the same more exactly, came hither for it: which argues,
that either the first founder Druyus himself was a Doctor here in England, or
else some of his successors within a whiles brought hither their discipline,
where it was so well entertained, that the fountain thereof was esteemed to be
here.

But in Egypt were noble Students of Philosophy and wisdom near about the
same time, with whom, as writes Book. 1. 9. Genesis 47.
Josephus, Abraham disputed, and in many things instructed them better. These
are they that were maintained by the Kings of Egypt, so that in the days of
Amasis the King, when all other people were through penury enforced to sell
their lands to Joseph to the Kings use, they living by the Kings ordinary,
kept their lands for themselves and their heirs. Of the three other Kings,
two, namely Sarron and Ing^^on, caused their subjects to exercise themselves in
learning* the third was a teacher and patron thereof* but what liberality any
of them exhibited toward Students, we know not: wherefore let this Pharao
Amasis be registered for the first benefactor in this School toward learning,
whonie his suco^ssors did diligently imitate therein, whereby it came to pass
that Egypt was a nourserie of learning for other Countries* for out of this
School came Atlas the learned Astronomer, that inhabited in Mauritania. Out of
this School came Osiris, who when he had travailed about all the world* set up
a pillar engraued. with the experiments of his journey* Out of the same School
came Moses, as I have showed before, a faithful Prophet, valiant Captain, and
prudent Judge of the Lords people. And about his time there flourished in this
School Mercury Trismegist, the wonder of Philosophy, whose writings yet in
some part remaining, declare the same, Heerehence came Cecrops King of the
Athenians, who was skillful in the toongs. Here flourished King Protheus with
his divine and Prophetical learning. Nouit tamque omnia vates, Virg. geor. 4.
For, things past, present, and to come, this Prophet knows them all.
Quae sint, quae fuerint, qu^ mox ventura trahantur, Phoenix and Cadmus from
hence carried the use of letters into Phoenice, and thence Cadmus carted the
same to Thebes in Greece, which City he builded and ruled as King. His letters
were but sixteen, to the which Palamedes in the war of Troy added four: to
wit, (...), (...), (...), (...). Finally, many famous learned men of Greece and
other Countries from time to time afterward, for the bettering of their
learning, resorted into Egypt, as to the head and spring thereof. In which
number are Thales, Pythagoras, and Plato: of whom we shall speak anon.

Now, when learning had taken a little root in Greece, it spread forth with
far and wide very wonderfully. Here then a little before the time of Debora,
Phemonoe commonly called Sybilla, invented the art of Poetry, and wrote her
Oracles in hexameter verse; whereof some pieces remain to this day. Then
flourished Orpheus the Thracian, and Linus a Thebane, two Poets, that for their
art and passing wit, were reputed to be the issue of the Gods: which Virgils
Virg. Eclo. 4.
words do import, making a supposed comparison of himself with the^, as with
the greatest that he could find. Orpheus no^ Line shall me surpass in making
verse aright,
Non me carminibus vincet, nec Thracius Orpheus, Though parents to the^ both
divine lend all their help and might,
Nec Linus: huic matter quamuis, atque huic pater adsit: To Orpheus muse,
Calliope: to Line Apollo bright.
Orphei Calliopea Lino formosus Apollo. Orpheus with his cunning harmony, as
Poets feign, ta^^ed wild beasts, and made stones to move at his pleasure:
that is in very deed, with his sweet eloquence and wisdom, he mollisted the
fierce manners of unreasonable men, and moved their stony hearts to embrace
virtue. Whose scholar Museus was, a princely Poet also, For he enclosed is in
throng with numbers great and tall, And they their heads incline to him. breast
high above them all.
Medium nam plurima turba, Hunc habet atque humeris extantem suscipit altis.
Linus wrote much of natural Philosophy, as well touching celestial as
terrestrial creatures, and had two noble Scholars, Thamaras that wrote three
thousand verses of their Divinity; and Hercules, who enterprised and atchiued
such incomparable exploytes for the common profit of mankind, that he was
taken for a God on earth. After all these, in the days of Elie, Homer the
prince of all Poets wrote his excellent works, by the which all good Schools
have been much furthered even unto this day. For all those that excelled in
learning, all those that were sage Lawmakers, discreet rulers, either at home
or abroad, either in pe^^e or in war, fet their precepts and examples of
instruction out of Homers works. His works therefore made Lycurgus and Solon
good Lawmakers: the one to the Athenians, the other to the Lacedaemonians. His
works made Hesiodus, Cynethon, Cumelus, Archimus, Archilocus, Sappho, Alceus,
Tyrteus and Thespis, cunning Poets. To the which add Stesichorus, that found
great liberality at the hand of Phalaris the tyrant, and Epimenides, out of
whom Sain^t Paul alleges this verse, (...). Tit. 1. 12. To lie, to hurt as
tigers wild, to sloth and belly ease, The men of Cree^are always bent, such
vices do them please.
His works made Thales Milesius, Anaximander his scholar, Pherecides,
Simonides and Pythagoras, wise Philosophers. Thales was the father of the
Mathematical arts in this school: for some inventions whereof he so rejoiced
and was so thankful, that he offered an Ox to the Gods. Simonides invented
four letters more, namely, (...), so that now we have the four and twenty
Greek letters with their authors, Pythagoras was the scholar of Pherecides,
and lived about the end of the Babylonicall captivity: who for singular
learning, order of study, and dexterity in teaching, was such a primrose of
all Schoolemaisters, that a long time after there were many famous scholars of
his sect called Pythagoreans, yea almost all students would be called
Philosophers, because Pythagoras first fant^fied that title: who also for some
singular inventions in the Mathematicals, offered to the Muses an Ox, like as
Thales had done. Then there followed a plentiful harvest of learned men, and
teachers of schools: as Hellanicus, Democritus, Anaxagoras, Aristagoras,
Philosophers: Pindarus, Esthylus, Sophocles, and Euripides Poets. Democritus,
to vnwrappe himself of all occasions that might hinder his study, gave his
ample possessions and riches to the common weal, and laughed to scorn the
foolish toyling of his Citizens, that bestowed both wet and dry to purchase
wealth and promotion: the continuance whereof was uncertain, and unable to
make them one jot the better. Toward Euripides was Archilaus the King of
Macedonia very bountiful, and so was Artaxerxes the King of Persia toward
Hippocrates the father of Physicians. In the days of Nehemias, Socrates (the
ornament of schooling) kept a great school of Phisosophers; for order and
discipline very excellent, and a most perfect looking glass, wherein we may
behold the image Xeno. book. 1. of Socra.
and state of a good school. For first he taught how necessary learning was
for all sorts of people: then who was fit to learn, and what things were to be
learned. Further, he opened Plato in Phaedro.
the method and way of bringing the precepts into the form of art, for the
more easy teaching and learning of the same. Finally, though he admitted into
his school all those that were willing, yet of none did he exact wages for
teaching, the people nevertheless contending of their own accord who should
bestow greatest gifts upon him, (...), insomuch that he reckoned it for a
great wonder, if any scholar should be found not to exceed in thankfulness.
Do ye marvel how this came to pass? Surely for that in old time, as Plutarch
records, men taught either their kinsfolk, as children, nephews and
brethren, or their dear friends: which without constraint of promise were
sufficiently bound by natural affection and the bands of friendship, with all
the duties of thankfulness to recompense their teacher. Howbeit, there were
some nigardly and unthankful persons in those days, as there are now, which
refusing this way of recompensing freely, commended by Socrates, would needs
have hired teachers for wages; which teachers very aptly he terms (...),
sellers of themselves for saues: and in deed they were not esteemed better,
but rather worse then slaves of those that hired them. For when one of these
money minded parents came to Aristippus, asking him what he should give to have
his son taught: and Aristippus had answered a thousand drachmes: he replied
that it was too much, seeing 17. Pound 10. shillings.
he might buy a slave with that money. Yea, quoth Aristippus, so thou may,
and if thou like better of slaves then of learning, by that means thou shall
have two slaves, both him that thou buyest and also thy son. This so slavish
a Plutar. educat. of child.
mind of parents caused Crates to go up into the highest place of the city,
and cry out: O ye citizens, what mean ye to bestow all your care for the
getting of riches, and almost no care on your children, to whom ye must leave
these riches: But at length, whether it were through this slavish covetousness
of parents, or else through the envious stomachs of vile persons, this good man
Socrates was put to death by the sentence of the Judges pronounced upon the
false testimony of suborned accusers. Notwithstanding, this ranckled enemy
did not so prevail against the innocence and good deeds of the man, but that
the authors of his death shortly after came to a shameful end, and the fruit
of his doctrine brought him perpetual honor and renown. For out of his
School proceeded many noble Philosophers and learned men, whose authority
among their scholars while they lu^ed was great, but far greater among all
students ever since their death, of whom, the divine Philosopher Plato being
chief, kept a School in Academia, a place by his means so famous, that
thereof not only the Students a long time after were called Academikes, but
also our Universities at this day are called Academiae. Dionysius, otherwise a
cruel and wicked King, having heard of the fame of this Plato, conceived such
a reverent estimation of him, that with many gifts and promotions he invited
him to come into his kingdom of Sicilie, and caused fires and sacrifices to be
made throughout his Realm at his coming therein, as if some God had entered:
which King moreover leaving his kingdom and kingly dignity, honored learning
so far, that he refused not in his own person to execute the office of a
Schoolemaister in the City of Corinth.

Next to Plato was Aristotle, a man surpassing no less in eloquence, and all
the liberal Arts, then in multitude of Scholars, among whom, was Alexander
the Great, a King that for magnanimity and amplitude of dominions, had never
his peer, for ardent affection toward learning made his Books his pillow to
sleep on, and for love to his master Aristotle, restored his Country
Stagira, which he had wasted: imitating in these things his Father King
Phillip, another mighty pillar of learning also. Many other notable Scholars
had Socrates, as Xenocrates, Xenophon, Eudoxus, Euclide, and Isocrates. Euclide
being a Citizen of Megara, upon pain of death might not come to Athens to
hear Socrates, by reason of public hostility between the two Cities, yet he
longed so greedely for learning, that to attain it, he hazarded his life,
coming and going to his master in disguised apparel, Isocrates was moderator
of a Rhetorike School, from whence issued forth troops of noble Scholars,
which for the most part were not only eloquent Orators, but also wise
Counselors, valiant Captains, yea famous Kings and Princes. This Master, to
animate his Scholars, and give them a sharper edge to learning, wrate over his
Schoolehouse door this sentence in golden letters, (...), If thou love
learning, thou shall attain to much learning: which counsel, his Scholar
Demosthenes embraced so earnestly, that he shaued the one side of his head, to
impose upon himself a necessity of staying within doors, and so spent more
Oil in studying by candle light, then wine in drinking: by which diligence, it
came to pass that the cunning of his mind did surmount the mighty armor of
King Phillip of Macedonia: wherefore the Athenians gave him this Epigramme,
agreeing with the word of Eccle 7. 21. and 9.
God, (...).

Robora simenti Demosthenis aequa fuissent,
Non Macedum Graias Mars populasset opes.
If strength equal to will and wit D^mosthenes had had,
The Macedonian Mars with spoils of Greeks had not bin clad.
After these and a great many other renowined Orators not far differing in
time, was Menander the Poet, whom the Kings of Egypt held in so high
estimation, that they sent unto him Ambassadors with many gifts, inuiting him
to come unto them, and whom S. Paul reverenced so far, 1. Cor. 15. 33.
that he has registered in the holy Bible that verse of his: (...). Many other
famous Staynde and destroyed are manners good by naughty foolish talk.
Doctors were there, some Philosophers: as Spe^sippus, Theophrastus, Theodorus,
Demetrius, Zeno, Cleanthes, and Eratosthenes. Zeno for his passing learning was
ado^rned by the Athenians with a Crown of gold. Again, some Poets, as
Metasthenes, Erasistratus, and Aratus, whose sentence (...), is sanctified also
by Saint Act. 17. 2. 8. For we Gods race and issue are.
Paul: which diligence of the Apostle in reading these authors, we have noted
now three times. In those days, being about three hundred years before the
birth of Christ, reigned P^olomie Philadelphus King of Egypt; who with great
cost procured a Library in Alexandria to be furnished with all stots of
books, gathered out of all Countries, in the which he had, as we have showed
before, the holy Bible, that this school of humanity might be amended by the
former school of Divinity. Besides that, this King mainteyned a great many
learned men very liberally, and took great pleasure and delight in their
learning. Now, as this school of humanity was well frequented in Egypt and
Greece, so in the mean time was it not neglected in Chaldea. For in that
Country long ago lived Berosus a skillful Astronomer and a diligent
Historiographer, of whose works some part is yet to be seen. Yea in Chaldea,
Daniel and his three fellows were by the Kings stipend and provision
mainteyned at school, to learn both the language and Philosophy of the
Chaldeans. And to be brief, these learned men which trauayled into Egypt for
the bettering of their learning, did for the same cause travail into Chaldea
also, because there was another great welspring of learning. But as the school
of humanity was brought out of Egypt into Greece, so at length some branches
thereof were transported over into Italy, and there husbanded and trimmed with
all diligence and industry. For to ouerpasse Pythagoras, who having left
Greeoe* taughe in Italy a school of six hundred scholars, and by whose
precepts Numa the second King of the Romans, Ovid Met. 15.
being instructed, set the common wealth in good order; there flourished first.
Liuius Andronicus: then Ennius and Plautus, old Latin Poets, near about two
hundred and sixty years before the coming of Christ. Plautus, being a
servant, was so conetous of learning, that he attended upon his masters
business by day, and wrote his cloquent Comedies by night. Next were Neuius,
Statius, Pacuuius, Accius, and diverse others, among whom was Terence, by whose
Comedies the learned men then, and our Schools now have great help for
purity and elegancie of the Latin tongue. Then there began a school of
Rhetorike in Rome, which was first taught by Plotius Gallus. At length there
were above twenty Schools at once, so that learning abounded plentifully, and
that chiefly in the Nobility. Of the which Master Varro, a noble Prince of
his Country, wrate Academ. Quaest. and Phillip. 2.
most exquisitly of all parts of Philosophy, of the mysteries of religion, of
the common wealth, of the laws and discipline both for wars and peace, of
the art of Grammar, and certain histories. Julius Caesar the first and
greatest Emperor that ever lived, with a most pure style set forth the
histories of his times, and certain books of Grammar, and such like doctrine.
Pompey a grand seniour and active Captain, after he had subdued many Kingdoms
and Countries, both in the East, and in the West, when he came to the house of
Posidonius a schoolemaister, caused the maiesticall Mace, borne before him, to
be laid down at the door, and so humbled that authority to the learning of
this schoolemaister, to the which authority almost all the world East and West
had submitted it self. What great Magistrates in the common wealth were Cato,
Marcus Antonius, and Brutus? Yet from them flowed the examples and rules of
eloquence. But of all other, for ^arietie in learning and paynfulnesse to set
it forth in writing, Marcus Cicero a worthy Prince also hat^h deserved most
praise. Whose books, as also the histories of Julius Caesar, Terences
Comedies, together with the books of the three Poets Virgil, Ovid and Horace,
and also of Quintilian the Rhetorician, and the only Latin schoolemaisters to
all good students even at this day. Of Virgil it is reported, that when he did
read some part of his book in the assembly, the people did no less
reverence unto him, then if it had been to the Emperor himself. And that for
the making of six and twenty verses he was rewarded by Octauia the Emperors
sister with no less than 1137. pound, to wit, above three and forty pounds
Ten Sestertia for every verse.
for every verse. Both he and Horace for their learning and passing wit were
the only darlings to Augustus the Emperor, and to Mecenas a noble man, two
mighty supporters of learned men, but especially the latter, insomuch that all
mainteyners of learning are called by his name Mecenates. Ouids learning, like
Orpheus music, persuaded even the Getes, a wild and barbarous people, to use
great humanity toward him while he lived, and afterward to bury him with
great pomp. Quintilian was the first that received the honor of a public
stipend for teaching of a public school in Rome. To these may be added
Callidius, Caluus, Cornificius, Salust, Sceneca, T. Liuius, Persius, Lucan, and
many more worthy to be named: which if I should do, Icaria I should but strive
Sea drops to tell.
numerum dicere coner aquae. Generally therefore let us remember how this
second School has been erected and mainteyned by the liberality of Kings,
Princes, grand captains, and other noble men; and then frequented and
exercised by men of great estimation and wisdom, in France, in England, in
Germany, in Egypt, in Chaldea, in all the Countries of Greece, and last of all
in Italy.

But what? Must we fetch examples of schooling either of 3 The school of the
Christians.
the Hebrews, that lived so long ago, or else of the Heathen, which besides
that they liue^ long ago, were also of a contrary religion? Are there no
examples thereof to be found in these latter ages, and in our own religion?
Yes verily, such examples, as one of them is enough to counterp^ise, yea, to
weigh down the heauiest examples of the two former, though he lay them all
together.

For in the former Schools God was acknowledged to be the author of discipline
and learning, but man was the instrument and messenger, by whose service God
did put it in practice: but this latter School was not only instituted by the
authority of our gracious God, but also the first Doctor therein was his only
dear Son our Savior Jesus Christ, and therefore of him is called the
School of Christianity. He, as the Prophets had done before, taught publicly
both the people in the congregation, and also was always furnishing of his
Disciples and Scholars with store of treasure, that out of the same afterward
they might be able, like good householders, to bring forth unto their audience
Math. 13. 52.
things both new and old. The noble acts and practices of which Scholars, are
in the new Testament set forth to the view of all men, so that it is
needless to say any thing thereof: only I note briefly that they forsook all
their wealth and worldly promotions, that they bare many times much trouble and
bitter affliction, to the end that they might become good Scholars in this
School. These Scholars at length being Doctors, to wit, Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, and Ministers, walked in the steps of Christ their
master, and of the old Prophets their predecessors, not only teaching the
multitude in the congregation, but also making their Scholars learned, and fit
for some function in preaching the Gospel. As to pass by all the rest, S.
Paul instructed Timothy, Titus, Erastus, Archippus, Epaphroditus, Denis,
Stephana, and Tychicus, with others. At Ephesus he taught daily for the space
of two years in the School of one Tyrannus. And what a diligent Acts. 9. 19.
Student he was himself, it may appear, in that he sent from Rome to Troas
above a thousand miles, for his papers 2. Tim. 4. 13.
and books, the instruments of study.

After the Apostles time, was a famous School of Divinity institut^^ at
Alexandria in Egypt, in the which, Pante^us was the first teacher* then
Clemens, then Origin, a Doctor of no less learning then fame. And about this
time flourished Cyprian the Bishop of Carthage. Now the Emperout Constantine
the Great, being the son of Helene, a woman borne and brought up in this
land, in all the countries and provinces of his large Empire, set up Schools
of all good Arts, but especially of Divinity, not only with liberal stipends
mainteining them, but also with honorable privileges and exemptions defending
them. So ther^ began to arise the great stars of Christianity, as Athanasius
Bishop of Alexandria, Gregory Nazianzene, Chrysostom Bishop of
Constantinople, Basile the great, Bishop of Cesarea, whom his Father
instructed multaque insignem And albedeckt with noble arts.
reddidit art, S. Hierome the eloquent Doctor, Ambrose Bishop of Milan, and
Austin his Scholar Bishop of Hippo, with many others, of the which, some were
brought up in the School of humanity, and afterward converted to
Christianity, and some from their infancy were trained up in the School of
Christ. But what should I sta^^ in rehearsing the names of a few men, of a two
or three Countries, when as in every parish of innumerable Countries and
Kingdoms throughout all the world, not only learned men are ordained to preach
the Gospel, and have several stipends publikly allowed for their maintenance:
but also Schools, Colleges, Uniuersities, and other places of study, are
every where erected for the increasing and nourishing of learned men to furnish
these vocations: as to name some, the Colleges and Uniuersities at Paris, in
the days of Charles ^he Great, at Bononia, and Pauie in Italy, at Br^ges, by
Charles King of Bohemia, at Craconia, Colen, Erford in Thuringia, at Lipsia, at
Vienna in Austria, at Friburge, Basile, Ingolstade, Tubinga, Wittemberge,
Francford, Marpurge, S. Andrews in Scotland, and at Maguntia by Ditherus the
Bishop, where the Art of Printing, the preserger of all Arts, was invented,
in the year of our Lord 1466. But if any man will be rather moved with home
examples of his Ancesters, then with foreign examples of Strangers, this our
Country of England, as well for embracing Christianity and all godly learning,
as also for liberality employed to maintain the same,

Tantum alias inter caput extulit vrbes,
Quantum lenta solent inter viburna cupressi. Virg. Eclo. 1. Her head so high
does mount above all other kingdoms wide* As does the cypres long and tall
above the shrubs excide.

For as the School of humanity was here planted when it was yet tender and
young, so was the School of Christianity, insomuch that our Countreyman
Gyldas writes, that the Gospel was received here even from the coming of
Christ, in the days of Tiberius, by the preaching of Joseph of Arimathea (as
others declare) whom Phillip the Apostle sent hither out of France. Then in
the time of the valiant King Arthur, the exercise and study of learning was
diligently applied in Southwales. The like is recorded to be done an hundred
and twenty years after in the days of Sigebert King of the Eastangles, who
set up Schools of the Greek and Latin tongue. And Egbert King of Kent forty
years after followed the same steps of his predecessors. King Ethelstane was
not only a founder of Schools for learning, but also a profound learned
Astronomer himself. Yet of all our ancient Kings, none may be preferred, no
nor compared to that most virtuous King Alfred, either for knowledge in the
Arts and all good letters, or for love and diligence to advance the same. For
besides that he translated diverse books into the vulgar tongue, and wrote many
new of his own, he also instructed all his Children, Sons, and Daughters, in
the liberal Arts, and did shut the door of climing to any dignity in the
Court against such as wanted the furniture of learning. Furthermore, he
procured with great charges learned men, some to be his Counselors, as the
godly Divine John Scot, afterward martired by his Scholars at Malmesburie,
some to teach the Schools and Colleges, whereof he ordained diverse in Oxford.
Therefore now we have the blessed founder of that famous University of Oxford,
founded above seven hundred years agone, whether before or after the founding
of the University of Cambridge it is not material, but in either of them at
this day are sixteen goodly Colleges: and moreover in Oxford eight Haules
builded by Kings, Queens, Princes, Bishops, and other good men, and enriched
with lands, revenues, stipends, as also established and fortified with laws,
ample privileges, and immunities for the maintenance and commodity of
Students and learned men. These are two bright fountains of learning, whose
wholesome streams run plentifully abroad, watering not only this Realm,
but also foreign Countries, to the great benefit of the Church of God. Also by
the like good Authors, after the same manner, and for the same cause, were
instituted many other houses of learning, Colleges, and free Schools, as
partly we see in this Town, and more amply may know and see in the Cities,
Towns and Uillages throughout the Realm, which I will surcease to pursue any
farther in particular for that it would be an endless labor. Now then we have
very hastily in respect of so copious a matter, travailed through these three
Schools of the Hebrews, of the Gentiles, and of the Christians, wherein
traching the dignity of learning and Schooling, whether ye consider the
setters forth and supporters thereof, or the teachers, or else the Scholars,
we have noted out unto you of all three sorts, besides God the principal
Author, Kings, Princes, wise Counselors, men of great estimation, virtue, and
godlynes, generally in all these Schools, and perticularly also we have
observed how every one does excel in his peculiar praise, namely, the School
of the Hebrews has the chief praise of most ancient and true godliness: the
School of the Gentiles, of framing an artificial way and method to attain
learning by: the School of the Christians, of manifesting the true practice of
all learning, referring it to the right end.

Now if by any means all these so honorable and godly personages should rise
out of their graves, and with their maiesticall presence appear unto us that
live in this age, and in this Country, and with their sage and eloquent toongs
declare unto us, some, what pains and charges they have employed: somewhat
diligence and study they have used in planting and watering, in nourishing and
cherishing of knowledge and learning, I suppose that many parents would hang
down their heads for shame of their negligence, and many children and youth
would lament their miserable estate and condition for want of good education.

The Utility of Schooling.
BUT peradventure at length some Father here among the rest will rub his
forehead and be so hardy as to ask those godly men, why they would spend
their goods and possessions about that which cannot feed the belly, nor
clothe the back, nor yet help a man in time of adversity. If David, Solomon,
Paul, or any other of these good men should answer thee, he would say that the
riches, which thou bestowest to get learning, is but dross and dung, in
comparison of the pure gold and precious pearl that is attained by learning,
and so would decipher the singular use and fruits of learning, with such
forcible and sound reasons, with such gracious and heavenly eloquence, that it
would pass the skill of any man now alive to express it. Wherefore let us
request some other to take this part in hand: and among all, now I suppose may
please our fantasy more, than blessed Alfred, who was out country man, our
King, and a principal patron of learning in our country. And albeit he can
handle the cause nothing so well as any of the other, which were Prophets and
Apostles: yet surely he will do it sufficiently for thine instruction, and
therefore hearken what he says.

Know thou not what profit and commodity learning brings to the children
of Adam? Look upon the barbarous nations, which are without it: compare their
estate with ours, and thou shall see what it is to be learned, and what to be
unlearned. They for want of learning can have no laws, no civil policy, no
honest means to live by, no knowledge of Gods mercy and favor, and
consequently no salvation nor hope of comfort. We by the means of learning
have and may have all these things. Therefore in that thou do enjoy thy
lands and livings, in that thou may procure such things as thou want, it
is the benefit of learning. In that thou sleep quietly in thy bed, in that
thou trauaylest safely on the way, in that thieves and enemies do not spoil
thine house and household, kill thy children, take away thy life; it is the
benefit of learning. Nay, go further. In that thou thy self runnest not to
the like excess of iniquity; art no thief, no murderer, no adulterer; it is
the benefit of learning. Do thou not see here what a plentiful harvest of
all good fruits learning brings forth? Yet what is all this in respect of
the favor and love of God, in respect of eternal salvation, which is offered
unto thee, and which thou receiuest by the hand of learning? To have peace and
atonement with God, to be assured that he will protect and defend thee against
all thine adversaries, to be assured that he will deliver thee out of all
dangers and troubles, that he will preserve and keep thee both in prosperity
and adversity, is a most excellent and comfortable benefit, it is the benefit
of learning, to be delivered from death and damnation, from everlasting
punishment of hell fire, to be an heir of the glorious kingdom of heaven, and
to hear this good tidings reported by faithful messengers, is so happy, so
blessed and so excellent a benefit, as no tongue can utter, nor heart
conceive; yet learning is the instrument whereby thou do atteyne it.
Wherefore did the Patriarchs, Prophets, Kings, Judges, Apostles, and all the
men of God sweat so much after learning, unless it were that they themselves
and others also might enjoy all these great blessings? But to this peradventure
thou wile object, that thy child has a good natural wit, whereby he knows
how to serve GOD and his Prince, and to get his living, so that he may be
blessed though be be unlearned, especially considering that we have already
learned men enough otherwise. But the great multitudes that are blind and
ignorant, show what want there is yet of learned men to be teachers; and the
natural wit of thy child will be confirmed and bettered a great deal by
learning. For (...), Learning doubleth Menand.
the quicknes of the sight: to wit, the sight of the Ovid Met. 15.
mind, as the Poet says of Pythagoras: And though his person were from Sky
far wide, yet Gods in mind
Isque licet caeli regione remotus, He touched, and by the sight of heart did
seek and out did find,
Mente deos adijt, and quae natura negabat, Those things wherein our fleshly
eyes are stark by nature blind.
Uisibus humanis, oculis ea pectoris hausit. Besides this, what can the child
do with his unlettered wit, be it never so passing? Can he aspire to heavenly
blessings therewith? No, they are fet out of Gods word, and that only by
learning. Can he then win worldly felicity with it? Nay, Socrates will tell
thee, that as a good and a courageous Colt, if he be broken while he is young,
will be tractable and fit to do good service, but being set run till he be
old, will be fierce and unprofitable: even so a boy endued with the gifts of
nature, if he be well instructed by discipline, will prove a good man: but if
he be not instructed in his youth with good precepts, will wax very
intolerable. Who was armed with better natural qualities than Catiline? Yet
for that he wanted good education, and was pampered up in the vicious school
of his lewd master Scylla, he became a most pernicious and wicked member in
the common weal, abusing this armor to the destruction thereof. Contrariwise,
Socrates was a man of singular and rare virtues: yet he confessed of himself
that he should have been so bad as any other, if he had not been a learned
Philosopher. This caused Solon and Lycurgus, ancient Lawinakers: this caused
Plato and Aristotle, noble Philosophers, to lay the foundation of their common
wealths in the good education of youth. Yea this, and all the former
considerations made me to seek for learning more earnestly than ever treasure
was sought for, to study both night and day, by reading, writing and
translating, to instruct those that apperteyne unto me: to fee learned men, and
to institute Schools for the instruction of my people and subjects, that so
learning being delivered from hand to hand many hundred years after my death
in the days of my successors, the people of this land might know how to
worship God aright, how to avoid the pestilent errors arising out of the
puddle of ignorance, how to obey their Prince, to walk honestly in this present
life, and by laying sure handfast on the mercies of GOD, at length to inherit
life everlasting. Wherefore if thou look for any favor or preferment in our
Court, ^ay if thou look for any seat or resting place in the Court of heaven,
seek for it by learning; love them that profess it; help and further it to
the best of thy power. Let thy children be nourtured up in all good knowledge,
according to their capacity. Thou see that the School doors are open,
teachers give atte^dance, that there want no books, nor any other commodity
necessary to make a good scholar, neither can thou leave thy children any
possession or patrimony, either for value, or for certeyntie, comparable unto
learning: Omit not therefore the good opportunity that God offers thee. So
shall thou thy self, which do help forward learning, with thy children and
all those that shall be learned by thy means, be enriched with many blessings
in this world, and most blessed with all riches in the world to come. Thus
would that Kingly patron of learning say to him that sees not how necessary
learning is. David, Solomon, Paul, and all the College of those godly men
would verify the same; and reprove most sharply that profane person which
makes so small account of instructing his children: yea Solon would make a
law against him, which should forbid even those his own children to give him
any relief in his old age. But what need have we to fetch them out of their
graves, whose bodies are laid up in peace, and whose souls enjoy a blessed
rest* Do not we see their presence most lively, and bear their voice most
plainly in their examples, in their sayings and doings, which are left unto us
as noble monuments for our instruction* Let us therefore diligently look upon
their deeds, and hearken unto their words, expressing withal the same in our
lives and conversation, seeing we can follow no examples that may advance us
to so great honor, or bring unto us so great profit.

And concerning your selves in particular, right worshipful, when your godly
wisdom does consider how many and how great blessings our gracious God has
bestowed upon your Town and the Inhabitants thereof, commodities by sea,
commodities by land, great wealth, plenty of all necessaries, no want of
Dainties. Again, schooling for your youth, the exercise of religion, and
continual preaching of the Gospel, the grace to receive it, and the praise of
forwardnes therein, even from the days of the last King Henry: when you do
call to mind, I say, that our bountiful father has in all these things
opened his hand of liberality wider to you than to other countries, yea than
to many towns of our own country; how can you but be fervently moved with
heart and will and all the veins of your body, to show your selves thankful
to the giver of these so unspeakable benefits, both in using them according to
his holy will and commandment, and also in praising and magnifying his
glorious name for them. Now, to use them aright, is not to stay in consuming
them privately upon our own bodies, but to employ them to the profit of the
Common wealth, and to the furtherance of our own salvation, that God thereby
may be glorified. And forasmuch as your children that prove skillful Merchants,
expert Mariners, and Masters in the art of Navigations, would in like manner
(a great many of them) be discreet, and wise Councellers, yea, Judges, Justices
and Rulers in the Common wealth, and (that which most is) learned and eloquent
Preachers in the Church of Christ, if they were brought up in the discipline
and sciences of these functions: the more of them you so bring up, the more
heavenly fruits will your labors bring forth, and the more persons shall be
partakers of the same. For then do Common wealths flourish most, and are most
happy when they are governed and ordered by learned and virtuous men, says
Plato. What, only Plato the Philosopher? Nay, Solomon Eccle. 10. 17. Psalm. 2.
10.
our divine Plato says as much, and that more spiritually. O therefore that
this Town might now bring forth some young impes and buds of learning, whose
fruit would be sweeter than all banqueting dishes to feed the Common wealth
and Church of God, both here and in other places. For what great good would it
do, not only to your selves and to this Western part of our country, but
also to strangers of other Nations, which resort hither for earthly gain, when
by this means they shall carry away heavenly treasures* When they shall find,
even in Merchants shops, learning more plentiful than wares, sufficient to
refute their errors, and to instruct them in the truth and way to salvation*
How would the glory of God hereby spread it self and shine every where*
What a perpetuity or perpetual stay of the manifold blessings of God would
this holy and right using of them bring unto us* In what estimation therefore
ye hold the glory of God, what account ye make of the salvation of your
souls, of the felicity of your Country, at that price must ye esteem the
planting of learning, and so great care must you have of the good education of
your children.

Wherefore it remains, that considering how much I am in debt to God, to my
Country, and namely, to this Town, for the discharge of my conscience toward
God, and the testifying of my thankful mind toward you, I do most earnestly
exhort you, and pray you, first, that you will fill your hearts and mouths with
the praises of our loving God, and songs of thanksgiving to his holy name,
as well for all these benefits, as also for giving unto us so gracious ^ Prince,
our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, in whose safety is folded up our safety, and
by whose happy government, we enjoy all these so many commodities: next, that
you would bow the knees of your hearts, and become faithful suitors to the
throane of grace, both for her Majesty's preservation and deliverance from all
conspiracies and mischiefs intended against her, that she may long reign a
blessed Mother in Israel: also for your own direction and assistance by the
Spirit of God, that with these talents which he has lent you, to wit, with
your favor, authority, industry and wealth, you may promote and further all
good learning and knowledge, whereby God may be glorified, sin and idolatry
overthrown, the truth advanced, the Church of God beawtified, and the state of
your Country with all good blessings amplifyed: so peace and mercy be upon
you, and upon the Israel that is of God.

The Method of Schooling.
IN that which is gone before, we have declared what a worthy work it is to
bring up Children virtuously in good learning, and what singular fruit it
brings to all kind of people, to all estates and degrees: whereby we would
provoke all those that have interest therein, be they Parents, Governors or
Masters, to do the best they can for the accomplishing of this so excellent a
work. Now because our life here is but a short flourishing flower, and our
understanding in our Childhood very slender and feeble, such as shall be
persuaded to follow this counsel, would know also the breefest and easiest
way to be used in this discipline, which by the help of God we will endeavor
to search out, if first we consider what children are fit for the same. For as
in tillage there is required not only a skillful husbandman, and good seed,
but also a good soil to sow it in: so in teaching, ching, there is required
not only a learned Master and good doctrine, but also a Scholar both apt and
willing to receive the seed of this good doctrine.

Socrates, as Xenophon writes, would have his Scholars Xen. book. 1. of
Socrat.
to be quick of understanding, sure of memory, and desirous of good learning,
so that albeit, he was a Prince of Schoolemaisters, yet would he not undertake
to make a good Scholar of a dulhead, nor of a fool, nor yet of an unwilling
mind. Unreasonable therefore is the request of many parents in these days,
which when as their children have one of these three faults, and sometimes all,
do look nevertheless that their Master should make them profound clarks: but
yet, as negligence and rudeness does mar the gifts of nature, so learning
does amend the imperfections of the same, if the party will at any hand admit
it, as Horace Epist. 1. 1. There is no man so wild nor fierce, but that he may
be tamd. If patiently he will abide with precepts to be framd. Odyss. 8. Like
gifts to all the Gods give not.
teaches, Nemo adeo ferus est vt non mitescere possit, Si modo culturae
patientem commodet aurem. Now, forasmuch as God bestows not on all like gifts
(says Homers Ulysses) (...), neither do al excel in quicknes, or in dulnes of
wit, but the most part are of a mean condition, we will frame our discipline
to a mean nature, and distinguish it according to the increase of years in a
mean Scholar, which the variety of all circumstances being observed, may be
with little alteration applied to a better or a worse also.

Children therefore are virtuously trained up in good learning, partly by the
help of the Parents, and partly by the diligence of the teacher. The Parents
first care is, as soon as his child begins to speak, to provide that he use
none other company, then such as are both honest and civil, as well in
behavior, as in language. He shall therefore seclude from his Child barbarous
nursses, clownish playing mates, and all rusticall persons: neither shall he
himself speak in the hearing of his Child either wantonly, or otherwise, any
rude or barbarous speech, much less shall he teach him any lewd or dishonest
talk, as many do, or suffer him to be in the company of unthrifty and
dishonest persons. For a Child like an empty new vessel being void of all
learning, is most apt to receive that which is first taught, and that which is
first taught, sticks deepest in memory, whether it be good or bad. Timothy
was nourished up in Godliness by 2. Tim. 1. 5. and 3. 15.
his Mother and Grandmother, godly nursses, therefore he followed the doctrine
of godliness continually. Again, as 1. Tim. 4. 6.
Cornelia the mother and nursse of Tiberius and Caius Gracchus, was an eloquent
woman, so none in Rome were more eloquent then they. So Hortensia exceeded
other women in eloquence, for that from her infancy she was accustomed to
hear her Father Hortensius, a most excellent Orator. And to leave other
particular examples untouched, there live here amongst us sundry men borne in
sundry Countries, some in France, some in Spain, some in Italy, some in
Germany, and some in Ireland, and every of these even against his will
retains partly the pronounciation, and partly the phrase proper to the
language that he first learned, and contrary to the property of the language
that he now uses. Nay, the small diversity of speech even in one and the same
country being admitted at the first, will hardly afterward ever wax out of
use. Whereof it comes to pass, that together in one town, yea, in one
house, we hear one speak Northernly, another Westernly, another Kentishly,
Adeo a teneris consuescere multum est. Finally An use in tender years began
and kept has so great force.
we see, that soft Wax will receive any print, that young plants may be bowed
any way, that the bodies of infants may be fashioned as ye list: but neither
the Wax being hardened, nor the plant being waxt a tree, nor the infant being
grown up, can easily change the fashion which it first received. Seeing
therefore that virtue and vice, eloquence and Phocylides. In young and tender
years betime thy child good things must learn.
barbarousnes have most easy entrance, and unremovable continuance, if they
come first, (...), verily it behooves fathers, that would have virtuous and
learned Children, to enter them first of all in honest actions and civil
language, which care must not be omitted at any time afterward. And as it must
be had generally concerning all the company that the child uses at the first,
so especially concerning his first Schoolemaister. Therefore when the child is
about five years old, the Father for the causes before alleged, shall commit
him to some Phoenix (...), Hom. Iliad. 9.
that can teach him all things, framing him to eloquence in talk, and vert^e
in deeds. Our Teacher then must be both learned and discreet, considering that
the foundation of the learning following which the first Teacher lays,
requires an artificer as prudent and as cunning in that behalf, as does any
of the rest require. Those Fathers then do unadvisedly, which care not to what
Teacher they commit the prime of their Children, so that he be better learned
than the Children, although he be not his crafts master, nor have any
judgment nor dexterity in teaching, whereby it happens now and then, that
the first master being misliked, another is sought for, then the third, and
likewise the fourth, and perhaps the fifth, sixth, or more, which change and
diversity of Masters must needs be troublesome to the Scholar, and a great
hinderance to his learning. Some here do counsel the Father to seek out a
private Schoolemaister for his child, and we see that those which would be most
exquisit herein, do follow their counsel, because a private teacher has
leisure to use more diligence, and the learner under him is safer from taking
hurt by infection of bad company: but forasmuch as the correcting of a fault
in one is the commending of virtue in another, the praise of virtue in one, is
the reproouing of vice in another, and both correction and commendation are
profitable examples to all sorts, we have greater cause to prefer a public
Schoolemaister, then others had to prefer a private, especially seeing that
the more persons he has in charge, and the more fruit he sees to come of his
labors, the more diligence and better courage will be use in perfourming the
same. That I speak nothing what help comes to the Scholars by teaching one
another, what by emulation and striving who may do best: for, Tum been Then
stately steed does course it brave when some to leave behind, Or some before to
pursue hard in race he may still find.
fortis equus reserato carcere currit, Cum quos praetereat, quosue sequatur
habet. And this is the Fathers first care, that his Child take the beginning of
his behavior and speech of honest and civil parents, nursses, playing
fellows, and other company: likewise, the beginning of his learning, of an
honest and learned Teacher, and the same public, rather then private.

His second care is to keep his Child being now a Scholar, in good order at
home, and there to exercise him in such things as he learneth, or has learned
in the School. Neither may he neglect the ordering of his child, because he
has put him in the hands of a Master, for Scholars are many hours, and some
whole days out of their Masters sight, whereas they have always need of the
presence of a Governor, Ineuntis enim ^tatis inscitia senum constituenda and
Cic. Off. 1.
regenda prudentia est, For the unskillfulness and folly of youth must be ordered
and guided by the wisdom of old men, because youth is forgetful, not greatly
moved with regard of things past, or things to come, but wholly carried away with
that which is before their face. Semper enim Hom. Ili. 3. For always youth
inconstancy does toss now here now there.
iuuenes leuis inconstantia versat. The Father therefore must keep his
fatherly authority over his Child, and jointly with the Master prescribe unto
him a good order for manners and behavior, for repairing home, for attendance,
for diet, for apparel, for exercise in learning, that his behavior be godly
and honest, in serving God, in keeping his Church, in hu^^^itie toward his
superiors, in humanity toward all men: that he repair home as well from
School as from play in time convenient: that he give attendance to do service
either at the Table, or any other way: that he be sober and temperate in his
diet, well mannered in taking the same: that he be cleanly and frugall in his
apparel: that he employ the vacant time in reading, in writing, in all good
exercises for the gain of learning. These and such like conditions all Parents
will require in their children: but yet many giving their Children the bridle
to run whether they list, think it sufficient when they offend, to say unto
them, Your Master shall hear of it. But what Parents are those that will have
their children to stand more in awe of their master being absent, then of
themselves being present* Uerely, the scholar that is thus threatened, may
suppose that either his father shall want opportunity to complain to his
master, or else that his mind will change when his anger is cooled, or else
that he may altogether forget it, or at leastwise that he himself by some
colorable excuse, may persuade his master, who knows not certainly all
circumstances of the matter. And finding it to prove so diverse times, at
length will make small account of these peevish and inconstant threats.
Whereupon the father most commonly conceiueth an ill opinion of the master,
imagining that he causes not his scholars to observe any good order, or that
he is too remiss and full of lenity. But inasmuch as it is the property of
youth to be moved more with one stripe given, then with ten promised, and to
fear more the presence of a father, than the remembrance of a master, With
sharp rebuke sometime him chide, sometime the rod let walk.
Corripe nunc verbis duris, nunc vtere virga. The fathers discipline, I say,
here joined with the masters, will be a singular help to the good education
of the scholar, and at once redress and cure the foresaid malady. And thus I
conclude the duty of the father, which is not only to provide by good
company, good teachers, and good examples of himself, that his child be first
exercised in such things as savor of virtue and learning; but also to keep
him continually in this good order even when he is under a Schoolemaister. But
that which is here spoken of parents, must after a sort be extended to every
one that has the like charge or opportunity, be he tutor, governor,
schoolemaister or host, though they cannot, especially the last cannot do
as much herein as the father may.

Now follows the duty of the Schoolemaister, which is to use the best way
and order both in teaching and also in governing. Touching the former, all
knowledge is taught generally both by precepts of art, and also by practice of
the same precepts. They are practiced partly by observing examples of them in
other men's works, and partly by making somewhat of our own; and that first-by
imitation, and at length without imitation. So that the perfection of the art
is not gotten at the first, but Per numeros veniunt is it a These things come in
but one by one in order and degree.
gradusque suos. Wherefore first the scholar shall learn the precepts:
secondly, he shall learn to note the examples of the precepts in unfolding
other men's works: thirdly, to imitate the examples in some work of his own:
fourthly and lastly, to make somewhat alone without an example. Now, all these
kinds of teaching are seen in every special sort of the things taught, be it
Grammar, Logike, Rhetorike, Arithmetike, Geometry, or any other Art. The
Grammar which handles diverse languages, as English, Latin, Greek, Hebrewe,
and such others: needs not to be wholly taught in our own language. For by a
natural use we learn the inflexion of words together, with the variety of
their accidental significations: as father, fathers, fatherhod, fatherles,
fatherly, fatherlines. So likewise by the same use is learned the framing of
words together in speech, as he is a father, they are fathers. But yet by this
use we have not the perefect skill neither to make, nor to unmake a word by
his parts and parcels. Which faculty is called Prosodia, in pronouncing of
letters, syllables, and words with the mouth: and Orthographia in writing of
them with the hand, wherein I place the first degree of teaching. Therefore the
artificial precepts in this faculty, are the four and twenty letters, and
the table of the syllables. These the scholar shall learn perfectly, namely,
to know the letters by their figures, to sound them aright by their proper
names, and to join them together, the vowels with vowels in diphthongs, and
the consonants with vowels in other syllables. Next he shall proceed to
practice the same in spelling and reading other men's works, as the Catechism
and Primer. Wherein let him not learn by rote, spelling one syllable of a
word, and shufling up the rest without distinct spelling. As if he had to
learn this word mercifulnes, suffer him not, as some would, to go on thus:
m-e-r, mer, c-i-f-u-l-n-e-s, mercifulnes. But according to the letters and
syllables, which are as precepts in this behalf, let him learn it by reason
thus: m-e-r, mer: c-i, ci, merci: f-u-l, f^^, merciful: n-e-s, nes,
mercifulnes. For if he repeat the former syllables with every other added unto
them, he shall have all in perfect memory when he comes to the end: whereas
otherwise he may err or forget. But because in the table of syllables commonly
there are set forth no syllables that have above two letters a piece, whereas
they may have three, four, five, six, seven, or eight a piece: if he know
not the force of many letters in a syllable, he shall first learn the force of
two alone, whereof one must be a vowell, then of the same two and the third
added to them, and so the fourth: as in the^ foresaid word, the first syllable
is of three letters m, e, r* if he know not what m-e-r makes, ask him first
for m-e, he will answer me, as his table teaches him: then for m-e-r, no
doubt he will answer mer. The like is to be done in the two last syllables full
and nes. So strength a syllable of eight letters, being too hard for a child
to learn all at once, he may learn letter by letter thus: r-e, re; t-r-e,
tree; s-t-r-e, stre; s-t-r-e-n, stren; s-t-r-e-n-g-t-h, strength. The like
practice is it, when the master names the letters and the scholar gives
their signification. And this is the readiest way to induce the true meaning of
the letters and syllables, and consequently the pronouncing of every word into
the fantasy of the child. For as Cato even in his tender years by searching
the reason of those things that were taught him, did profit wonderfully above
his fellows: so surely one word by reason thus exactly learned, will bring
more fruit then twenty words rawlie passed over.

(...) Hesiod. For though thou add but grain to grain, yet shall thou
quickly make A heap full big, if oftentimes to add regard thou take.

(...)
But here the scholar shall find one hinderance and stumbling block, in that
the practice both not always agree with the precepts. For whereas he learned
in his table t-i, ti, g-i, gi; he shall sometime in practice say t-i, ^i, g-i,
ghi. As in these words salvation, given. And so in diverse other syllables, the
letters have otherwhiles a variable sound: otherwhiles no sound at all. Which
difficulty, seeing it is not reformed by them that are learned, the child
must overcome by continual observation and custom. Yet the Printers might
easily redress that barbarous kind of printing ye for the, yt for that, etc.
Where y very absurdly does represent th, and tha, when as it far differs
from the force and fashion of any of these letters. And therefore the child in
learning will eftsoone repugne against this barbarism, and say: yt, ye: yt,
yt. These and such like difficulties are as rough ground in the way of the
learner: which he cannot ouerstride, unless the Master do lead him as it
were by the hand, supporting him again and again least he fall: which must
needs be tedious to them both for a while. Now, the scholar in learning
every word shall pronounce him with his true accent: as he may not say majesty
but majesty. Also after that he has spelled his lesson, he shall read the
same, observing therein the points and distinctions of the sentence.

Now follows the like practice in making words, first by imitation: as the
scholar having learned that band is spelled with b-a-n-d, so he shall imitate
to spell bond with b-o-n-d: as bold with b-o-l-d, so told with t-o-l-d: as seem
with s-e-e-m, so seen with s-e-e-n. Lastly without imitation: as if ye ask him
how he will spell this word or that word. Thus if he be exercised in spelling
and reading his lessons, and in spelling other words propounded unto him,
sometime by his teacher, sometime by his fellows, when he shall have ended his
first book the Catechism, he will be able to pass through the Primer
commendably without spelling; some hard words here and there excepted.

About the end of this Book, for the better confirming of all these things in
memory by Orthographie, let him learn to write. For Orthographie, which
teaches with what letters every syllable and word must be written, and with
what points the sentence and parts thereof must be distinguished, is a practice
of the same knowledge, but expressed by the hand, as the former is by the
tongue. Which expressing and skill of the hand, belongs properly to the Art
of Painting, and not unto Grammar, so that the best Grammarian is not always
the fairest penman. Nevertheless, seeing it has singular use and commodity
in the exercise of Grammar, the Master shall teach his Scholar to write by
precepts of holding the Pen, of forming the letters in due proportion, of
joining them aptly togethers: by practice, of drawing the Pen upon the figures
of shadowed letters, then of writing without shadowed letters by imitating a
Copy, lastly, of writing without a Copy. In this exercise of writing, the
Scholar shall spend but two or three hours in a day at the most, employing
the rest of the time in reading, until he be about seven years old. At which
time, he shall proceed to the second degree of Schooling, which consists in
learning the Grammar, and knowledge of other languages, and in this degree are
certain fourmes, every one whereof may occupy a year.

The first form therefore, shall begin to learn the Grammar in the Latin
tongue. As for reading, though the Scholar have it already, yet for that there
is some difference between the reading of English and Latin, first let him
read over the rudiments of the Latin tongue, and then learn by heart the parts
of speech with their properties, as the deri^^tion and composition of words:
the forming of Nombers, Cases, and Genders, in every declension of Nounes: the
forming of diminitiues in Substantives, of comparisons in Adjectives: so the
forming of Nombers, Persons, Tenses and Moobes, in every Co^iugation of all
sorts of Uerbes: whereof he shall rehearse afterward some part ordinarily
every day, illustrating the same with examples of diverse Nounes and Uerbes. And
so having learned the concordances of speech, made plain unto him by the
examples there added, and being about eight years old, let him move forth
into the second form, to practice the precepts of Grammar, in expounding and
unfolding the works of Latin Authors: whereof the easiest shall be chosen
first, the middle sort next, and the hardest last. Now, because Children learn
first to talk familiarly with their fellows or others, Dialogs are most easy
for their capacity, as are the Dialogs of Corderius and Castalion. The Master
shall first read sensibly a competent Lecture, then declare the argument and
scope of the Author, afterward english it either word for word, or phrase for
phrase, as the property of both languages will permit. Last of all teach, or
cause another to teach the diverse sorts of the words, their properties and
syntaxes of speech. And about three or four hours after, the Scholar shall
be diligently in every point examined, and tried how he can refer the
examples of his Lecture to the rules of Art. This exercise of the artificial
expounding of other men's works, I need not to set forth by examples, for that
it is common and manifest, as is also the last exercise of making somewhat
without imitation: only imitation therefore remains to be declared by
examples. For the which in this place the Master shall propound a like
sentence in English, which the Scholar shall express by like phrase in Latin.
As if the Scholar have learned and rendered this short Lecture, Pater bonus
diligit filium probum, A good father loves an honest son, the Master may
propound the like sentence with diversity, first of Nombers, then of Genders,
thirdly of Persons, fourthly of Tenses, fifthly of the form of the Uerbe, and
lastly of the words. For the variation of nombers, he may use this English,
Good fathers love honest sons, which peradventure may be hard for a beginner
to make in Latin all at once: but live fit quod been fortur onu^. Wherefore as
in reading he Good skill in bearing is the thing that makes the burden light.
learned letter by letter, syllable by syllable, so here let him learn word
by word, phrase by phrase, until he have all the parts, which are equal to
the whole, as may be expressed in this manner of talk between the Master and
the Scholar* Ma* a father. Sch* pater. M. fathers. S. patres. M. a good
father. S. pater bonus. M. good fathers. S. patres boni M. a good father
loves. S. pater bonus diligit. M. good fathers love. S. patres boni diligunt.
M. a good father loves a son. S. pater bonus diligit filium. M. good fathers
love sons. S. patres boni diligunt filios. M. a good father loves an honest
son. S. pater bonus diligit filium probum. M. good fathers love honest
sons. S. patres boni diligunt filios probos* thus the teacher, as a painful
nursse, omnia minima mansa infantibus pucris in os inserit, Cice. 2. Ora.
cheweth it all to small pieces, and thrusts it into the child's mouth,
wherein peradventure he may spend more words, and repeat more often not only
the English, but sometime the Latin also of all that went before. Secondly,
follows the variation of Genders, as, a good mother loves an honest
daughter. Matter bona diligit filiam probam. And again, good mothers love
honest daughters, matres bonae diligunt filias probas. Thirdly of Persons, thou
love an honest child, in diligis filium probum. Fourthly of Tenses, he has
loved an honest child, ille dilexit filium probum. Fifthly of the form of a
Uerbe, an honest child is loved of a good father, filius probus a patre bono
diligitur. Sixthly of the words, a skillful Master teaches a diligent
Scholar, praeceptor peritus docet discipulum sedulum. Besides this, every one
of the four former sorts of varieties, may receive also all the three other
varieties, and the fifth again is capable of all the varieties going before,
and the sixth likewise of all the rest, so that many ways may the imitation of
this one sentence be fashioned and expressed. Now after that the Scholar has
bin a few days enured to this imitation, he shall three or four times every
week, meditate alone to make the like in writing also. This kind of exercise
will both lead him to understand the congruitie and syntaxes of speech, and
also make him expert in forming of Nounes and Uerbes. And so having ended his
year, let him march forward into the third form, the which besides the
harder Dialogs, shall read also Tullyes Epistles collected by Sturmius,
learning them in such manner as is showed before, and noting moreover the
principal phrases in a note book. And here the exercise of writing Latin by
imitation, shall be a translating of the same speech into another like
sentence, but altered with many varieties at o^ce, and chiefly with the last
variety of the words, as if the scholar have this first Epistle of the first
book for his lesson.

Marcus Tullius Cicero Terentiae Vxori salutem.
SI vales been est, ego vales. Nos quotidie tabellarios vestros expectamus, qui
si venerint, fortasse erimus certiores quid nobis facierdum sit, faciemsque te
statim certiorem. Valetudinem tuam cura diligenter.

Vale. Calendis Septembris.

When he has learned this lesson, let him have an Epistle in English of the
like sentence, which he shall express in Latin with Ciceroes phrase. To make
the sentence like the matter must be followed with like reasons: Cicero writes
to his wife, let us imagine the Father to write to his Sons: he writes of her
messengers, of certainty what to do, of care for her health: let the father
write of their letters, of certainty what to look for, of care for their
learning, in this wise:

Peter Cole to John and Charles his sons, sends greeting.
IF ye be in good health, it is well. I my self am in good health. Oftentimes
I find lack of your letters, the which being brought, verily I shall be more
certain what I am to look for, and will certify you thereof forthwith.
Apply your Study diligently.

Farewell. The Ides of December.

The Scholar may easily by imitating his Author, translate it after this
fashion.

Petrus Colus Ioanni and Carolo filijs salutem.
Si valetis been est, ego valeo. Ego saepe literas vestras desidero, quae si
allatae erunt, profecto ero certior, quid mihi expectandum sit, faciamque vos
statim certiores, studia vestra colite diligenter.

Valete. Idibus Decembris.
Now the Scholar by these means having gotten some footing in the Latin
tongue, shall begin to practice without an example of imitation, both in
speaking, and also in writing. His exercise of speaking Latin shall be first in
common and easy matters, as of his lesson, of orders in the School, of dinner
and supper etc. Afterward in all matters, heed being taken that he be reformed
when he uses barbarous words, or trippeth in his speech, his exercise of
writing without imitation shall be a translating of the same sentence into
another speech, of latin into english, and of english into latin. For the
turning of english into latin, some would have the Master to translate into
english the sentence out of some place of Tully unknown to the Scholar, and
then give him the english to translate again into latin, which being done, to
show him Tullyes latin, wherewith he shall confer his own, and correct it:
this counsel is good, and may be used when opportunity and leisure will serve.

And this is the method and exercise of teaching and learning fit for the third
form, which must be continued also in the other fourmes following, but with
some augmentation of length, and hardness of the same, according to the ability
of the learner. Yea, the same books of Dialogs and Epistles may serve for the
fourth form also, so that the hardest of both sorts be chosen.

Then to the fifth form shall be read Terences Comedies, Tullyes treatises of
friendship and of old age, which are a more artificial and harder kind of
Dialogs, whereunto, let Ovid de Tristibus, or some such within a while be added
for Poetry. Now for writing here by imitation, let us take this example,
being the words of Laelius, as Cicero brings him in speaking. Haecigitur
prima lex in amicitia sanciatur, vt neque rogemus res turpes, nec faciamus
rogati. Turpis enim excusatio est and minime accipienda, cum in cateris
peccatis, tum siquit contra rempub. se amici eausa fecisse fateatur. Etenim eo
loco, Fanni and Scaeuola, locati sumus, vt nos long prospicere oporteat
futuros casus reipub. deflexir enim iam aliquantum de spacio curriculoque
consuetudo maiorum. Tiberius Gracchus regnum occupare conatus est; vel regnauit
is quidem paucos menses. Nunquid simile populus Romanus audierat aut viderat?
hunc etiam post mortem secuti amici and propinqui quid in Publium Scipionem
Nasicam effecerint, sine lachrymis non queo dicere. Nam Carbonem quoque quem
modo posuimus, propter recentem poenam Tib. Gracchi sustinuimus. De C. Gracchi
tribunatu, quid expectem non libet augurari. Laelius here speaks concerning
friendship, let us speak concerning religion, and prosecute our matter with
the same arguments disposed after the same fashion, that the same syntaxes may
serve to express them.

This law in religion ought first to be established, that thou entice no man to
false doctrine, nor embrace it when thou art enticed of other. For the excuse
is shameful and in no wise to be allowed, neither in other faults, nor in
this, if we confess that we have used any doctrine against the Church of God,
for man's authority sake. For thou art placed, dear brother, in that place,
that thou ought to see long before, the chances that may befall the Church
of God. For the custom of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and godly men is
already far declined from his trade and course. The Bishop of Rome has gone
about to occupy the throne of Christ, or rather he has occupied it now many
years. Did the people of God ever hear or see the like before? Yea the Kings
and Princes following his counsel, what they have done against the professors
of the truth, I cannot think without great grief. For the true Christians
have sustained most bitter torments for the testifying of a good conscience.
And touching the issue of these present troubles, I list not to divine what is
to be looked for. Which words, a scholar of this form by imitation, thus
turned into Latin. H^c prima lex in religione sanci^tur, vt neminem solicites
ad falsam doctrinam, nec amplectaris solicitatus. Turpis enim excusatio est and
minime accipienda cum in caeteris peccatis, tum si contra ecclesiam dei humanae
authoritatis causa nos vlla doctrina vs^s esse fateamur. Etenim eo loco, chare
frater, locatus es, vt te long prospicere oporteat futuros casus ecclesiae
dei. Deflexit enim iam multum de spacio curriculoque consuetudo Patriarcharum,
Prophetarum, Apostolorum, and piorum hominum. Pontifex Romanus Christi thronum
occupare conatus est, vel occupauit is quidem multos iam annos. Number quid simile
populus dei audierat aut viderat? Eius etiam consilium secuti reges and
principes quid in professores veritatis effecerunt, sine magno dolor non queo
cogitare. Nam very Christiani acerbissimos cruciatus propter bonae conscientiae
testificationem sustinuerunt. De praesentium vero malorum exitu quid expectem,
non libet augurari. Herewithall shall be used now and then the other
translating, without imitating an example, as before. But if the scholar shall
be a Grecian, let him learn the Greek Grammar while he is yet in this
form, and proceed therein after the same order that he did in the Latin,
bestowing that way the fourth part of his time; and like wise another fourth
part in the Hebrewe, if he will be an Hebrician. And so I conclude the second
degree of schooling with the end both of this fifth form, and the twelfth
year of the scholars age.

Then shall follow the third degree for Logike and Rhetorike, and the more
perfect understanding of the Grammar and knowledge of the tongues. First the
scholar shall learn the precepts concerning the diverse sorts of arguments in
the first part of Logike, (for that without them Rhetorike cannot be well
understood) then shall follow the tropes and figures in the first part of
Rhetorike, wherein he shall employ the sixth part of his study, and all the
rest in learning and handling good authors: as are Tullies Offices, his
Orations, Caesar's Commentaries, Virgils Aeneis, Ouids Metamorphosis, and
Horace. In whom for his first exercise of unfolding the Art, he shall observe
the examples of the hardest points in Grammar, of the arguments in Logike, of
the tropes and figures in Rhetorike, referring every example to his proper
rule, as before. Then he shall learn the two latter parts also both of Logike
and Rhetorike* And as of his Grammar rules he rehearsed some part every day; so
let him now do the like in Logike, afterward in Rhetorike, and then in Grammar
again, that he forget not the precepts of art, before continual use have
ripened his understanding in them. And by this time he must observe in authors
all the use ^f the Arts, as not only the words and phrases, not only the
examples of the arguments; but also the axi^me, wherein every argument is
disposed; the syllogism; whereby it is concluded; the method of the whole
treatise, and the passages, whereby the parts are joined together. Again, he
shall observe not only every trope, every figure, as well of words as of
sentences; but also the Rhetorical pronounciation and gestur^ fit for every
word, sentence* and affection.

And so let him take in hand the exercise of all these three Arts at once in
making somewhat of his own, first by imitation; as when he has considered the
property of speech in the Grammatical etymology and syntaxis: the ^^^enesse
of speech in the Rhetorical ornaments* as comely tropes, pleasant figures, fit
pronounciation and gesture: the reason and pith of the matter in the Logical
wright of arguments, in the certeyntie of the axioms, in the due form of
syllogismes, and in the easy and plain method: then let him have a like
theam^ to prosecute with the same artificial instruments, that he finds in
his author. As admit that he has learned and noted all the art of this short
example in Cicero against ambition.

In ambitionem.
Miserrima est omnino ambitio, honorumque contentio, de qua praeclare est apud
eunde^ Platonem, similiter facere eos, qui inter se contenderent vter potius
rempub. administraret, vt si nauta certarent quis eorum potissimum gubernaret.
Idemque praecepit, vt eos aduersarios existimemus, qui arma contraferant, non
eos qui suo iudicio tueri remp. velint. Qualis fuit inter P. Africanum and Q.
Metellum sine acerbitate dissensio.

Now let the scholar have a theme against some like vice, as against
covetousness, and prosecute it step by step, like unto this against ambition.

In auaritiam.
Teterrima est omnino auaritia diuitiarumque cupiditas. De qua praeclare est
apud Ciceronem, similiter facere eos, qui multis incommodis conflictarentur
propter pecuniam adipiscendam, vt si qui liberi homines certarent propter eum
dominum, qui eorum etiam mentes teneret obstrictas, easque nullo tempore
respirare permitteret. Idemque praecepit vt eos auaros existimemus, qui ea qua
habent tum perpetua libidine augendi crucientur sunt pari amittendi metu; non
eos qui honesta ratione rem familiarem amplificent, atque ad largiendum sint
pro modo facultatum parati. Qualis fuit in maioribus nostris sine auiditate
frugalitas and diligentia.

Here though in some place we have swarued a little from our example, as need
requires, yet for the most part we have expressed phrase for phrase, trope
for trope, figure for figure, argument for argument, and so of therest. But let
us add a more copious example of the same exercise.

Magnanimi est rebus secundis non insolescere.
Atque etiam in rebus prosperis and ad voluntatem nostram fluentibus,
superbiam, fastidium, arrogantiam magnopere fugiamus. Nam vt aduersas res, sic
secundas immoderate far leuitatis est: praeclaraque est aequalitas in omni
vita, and idem semper vultus eademque frons, vt de Socrate, item de C. Laelio
accepimus. Philippum quidem Macedonum regem rebus gestis and gloria superatum a
filio, facilitate vero and humanitate video superiorem fuisse. Itaque alter
semper magnus, alter saepe turpissimus fuit. Vt recte praecipere videantur, qui
monent, vt quanto superiores simus, tanto nos summissius geramus. Panaetius
quidem auditorem Africanum and familiarem suum solitum ait dicere, sicut equos
propter crebras contentiones praeliorum ferocitate exultantes, domitoribus
tradere soleant, vt his facilioribus possint vti; sic homines secundis rebus
effrenatos sibique praefidentes tanquam in gyrum rationis and doctrine duci
oportere, vt perspicerent rerum humanarum imbecillitatem varietatemque
fortunae. Atque etiam in secundissimis rebus maxim est vtendum consilio
amicorum, hisque mayor etiam quam ante tribuenda est authoritas: ijsdemque
temporibus cauendum est, ne assentatoribus patefaciamus aures, nec adulari nos
sinamus, in quo falli facile est. Tales enim nos esse putamus vt iure laudemur,
ex quo nascuntur innumerabilia peccata, cum homines inflati opinionibus
turpiter irridentur, and in maximis versantur erroribus. sed haec quidem
hactenus.

Frugi est bona non effundere.
In rerum copia, diuitiarumque abundatia, luxuriam, effusionem, inconsultamque
largitionem magnopere fugiamus. Nam vt tenaciter and sordide, sic luxuriose and
prodige viuere turpe est. Praeclaraque est mediocritas in omni vita, and
temperatus semper victus cultusque, temperata item largitio, vt de
Lacedaemonijs, item de priscis Romany accepimus. Cn. quidem Octauium opibus
and diuitijs superatum a filio, parsimonia vero and moderatione videmus
superiorem fuisse: itaque alter in suam domum consulatum primus intulit, alter
clarissimi viri filius in domum multiplicatam retulit ignominiam and
calamitatem: vt recte praecipere videantur qui monent, vt quanto ampliores
fortunas habeamus, tanto maiorem diligentiam in illis administrandis
adhibeamus. Cleopen enim Aegypti regem insano sumptu eo redactum inopiae
legimus, vt etiam filiam ad meretricium quaestum exponeret venalem. Quare,
sicut vitem luxuriantem (quod inquit Cato) and multiplici lapsu errantem, ferro
amputans coercet ars agricolarum, ne nimia fusa syluescat, fiatque sterilis:
sic homines omnibus copijs circumfluentes, multaque luxuria diffluentes,
tanquam ferro rationis and doctrine amputantis coerceri oportet, vt fer^nt
vitae fructus parce, continenter and prudenter actae. Atque etiam in
amplissimis fortunis maxim est vtendum consilio sacrarum literaru^, hisque
plus etiam quam alias temporis impertiendum. Ijsdemque temporibus caue^dum est
ne appetitibus proprijs assensum praebeamus, nec nostris desiderijs nimis
indulgeamus; in quo falli facile est. Id enim rectu^ esse putamus, quicquid ad
libidinem nostram fingimus. Ex quo nascuntur innumerabilia peccata, cum homines
prauis* opinionibus caecati iurpiter se gerunt, and in maximis versantur
erroribus.

Dixi.
By the way, the scholar must in imitation observe four things. First, that
if the author whom he imitateth, have general sentences, sometime he may
reteyue the very same: as because there ensues much mischief as well of other
errors, as of hearkening unto flatterers, therefore that sentence Ex quo
nascuntur, and.c. is common and may be applied to our cause. Secondly, that he
may leave out the imitation of some sentences or arguments. As Tullie sets
forth the similitude by the authority of African, and the relation of
Panaetius: whereas only the protasis or first part of our similitude is
attributed but to Cato, for want of a like similitude garnished with like
authority. Thirdly, he may add more than his author has: as here the example
of Cleope is added to recompense that which wants in the similitude.
Fourthly, he may in some part alter the method, form of syllogtimes, axioms,
arguments, figures, tropes, phrases and words. All which must be done wisely
and to good purpose, according to the circumstances of the matter.

Moreover, touching matter and method, this imitation may be exercised in
verse likewise: but the form of argumentation or syllogisines; the words and
phrases, the verse will not suffer to be imitated, save only in some places. As
we see Virgil to have imitated Homer in method: to wit, in beginning with the
midst of the matter, in reciting of things past by occasion, and in
concluding with a notable issue, even as Homer had disposed his Ilias: then in
general matter, namely, in setting forth Aeneas like to Ulysses, and sometime
like Achilles: in particular matter and arguments, as the coming of Aeneas to
Carthage and Dido, like to the coming of Ulysses to Alcinous and Calypso,
Aeneas going to hell, like to Ulysses going to hell, Aeneas games of rowing,
running, whorlebatting, shooting, and skirmishing on horseback at the grave of
Anchises his father, like to Achilles games of riding, whorlebatting, running,
sword playing, hurling the stone, shooting and casting the darte at the Tomb
of Patroclus his dear friend: the harness of Aeneas, made by Vulcan, like to
the harness of Achilles made by him also. And in diverse places, but not every
where, he does imitate Homers descriptions, similitudes, phrases and words, as
Manutius, and other learned men have both noted and quoted.

Now, when the Scholar has been a while exercised in this kind of imitation,
sometime in prose, sometime in verse, let him assay otherwhiles, without an
example of imitation, what he can do alone by his own skill already gotten by
the precepts and the two former sorts of practice.

After a three years exercise in this degree of study, he may a^tend to the
fourth degree, of Arithmetike and Geometry. And according to the same manner,
easily pass through these Arts in half a year, and so before the full age
of sixteen years be made fit to wade without a schoolemaister, through deeper
mysteries of learning, to set forth the glory of God, and to benefit his
Country. And thus the masters duty of orderly teaching by precepts and by
practice of them, not only in unfolding other men's works, but also in making
somewhat of a man's own, and that either by imitation of examples, or without
imitation we have breefly declared.

His duty of governing, is to prescribe a good order both for manners and
learning, and to cause the same to be kept. These good orders therefore spoken
of in the fathers duty, as well concerning godliness, as of daily praying,
of resorting to the Church, of reverent attentiuenes there, of learning the
doctrine of Christian religion: as also concerning Christian honesty, that is,
of obedience to parents and governors, reverence to superiors, courteous
manners toward all men, civil behavior in all words and deeds, the master
shall ef^soone repeat unto his scholars, sowing in their tender minds the
seeds of Christian holiness. Further, he shall appoint unto them the time of
coming to school and going thence: how and wherein they shall spend every
hour there, when they shall repeat precepts of Art, when they shall meditate
and learn their lesson, and renter an account thereof to their master, when
they shall exercise themselves in translating, writing of theames, verses, and
such like studies.

These and all other good orders that may further virtue and learning, the
Master shall plainly declare, and straightly enioine unto his Scholars, causing
them with all carefulnes to observe the same, by encouraging the good, and
reforming the bad: for considering that the hope of honor and the fear of
punishment are elementa virtutis, wisely did Solon place the The principles of
virtue.
preservation of the common wealth, and consequently of the School in pr^mio
and poena. In reward and punishment.


The good then he shall encourage, first with words, praising them for their
well doing, declaring what great commodity ensues thereof, and exhorting them
to go forward. This praise of it self alone is such a bait to draw men to
virtue, that the Apostles Peter and Paul took it generally for all 1. Pet. 2.
14. Romans 13. 3.
rewards of well doing: and Simonides says, that for the desire of glory, men
will take any pain. Then he shall encourage Virg. AE^e. 5.
them with rewards, for a good Schoolemaister is like a good Captain With
gifts slack minds provoke, and sets before them prises meet.
Inuitat pratijs animos and praemia ponit, as sometimes to give trifles and gay
things to such as show any token of forwardnes, diligence, and wittines, and
to such as are victors in virtue, according to Horaces saying, Cakebread and
figs on scholars young the master does bestow,
Pueris dant crustula blandi Doctores, elementa velint vt discere Ser. 1. Sat.
1.
prima, sometime to reward their painful study with liberty to recreate
themselves by rest, honest disport, and walking abroad: for otherwise, as a
bow always bent, at length will lose his strength, so the mind always
occupied in study, will wax dull, and not be able to endure. Wherefore That
they their lessons perfectly to learn should not be slow.
What so has not his rest by turn, it can no while endure, Rest strength
renues, rest wearied lims with pleasant ease does cure. AEne. 5.
Quod caret alterna requie durabile non est, Haec reparat. vires, fessaque
membra iuuat. Lo here such praises, such rewards are propounded unto thee, if
thou be a good Scholar, consider them well, So goodly gifts with trial none
to loose is it no grief?
Tantane tam patiens nullo certamine Dona sines? Shall they not encourage thee*
Shall they not make thee willing and diligent* at leastwise, though thou be so
retchles, that thou carest not for these rewards, yet blush at that which
follows, No man is so barbarous, but that though he regard not honesty for
it self, yet reproach and shame will enforce him unto it.
Nemo est tam agrestis, quem si non ipsa honestas, contumelia tamen and dedecus
magnopere moueat. Let the unthrifty then, and those that do amiss, be
reformed and corrected by admonition, rebuking and punishing, acording to ye
quality of the fault, for One medicine is good for one disease and another for
another.
(...). First therefore let him be admonished, then rebuked: herein the cause
shall be thoroughly sifted, patiently heard, by equity judged, and last of all
soundly reproved, that the conscience of the offender may be touched for the
fault: if this will not serve, for One ancker cannot fast alone the fleeting
vessel hold.
Non satis vna tenet ceratas anchor a puppes, a^ also punishment, sometime with
the rod, which according to Salomons saying, drives away foolishnes, that is
tied to the child's heart, and makes him wise and learned: sometime punishment,
by restraining that liberty of recreation, which otherwise should have bin
granted, and sometime by service of drudgerie, as may be the sweeping of the
School, etc. Generally of all these corrections, none may be differred when it
is fit time, nor executed before due time, As (...) the time so physic works,
wine dr^nke in time does ease: Again wine used out of time, does hurt much and
displease. Hom. Ili. 1. 4.
Temporibus medicina valet, data te^pora prosunt, Et data non apto tempore vina
nocent. But if the Master at any time for some just cause do omit the deserved
correction, he shall threaten a greater, and perform it also, when the next
fault shall require ye same, His lingering blow must pay su^e home. Ovid Met. 1.
Et semper lentu^ pensabit acerbo. These are the means to allure Scholars to
virtue, and to drive them from vice, which, as Plutarch counsels, must be
used by turn, sometime the one, and sometime the other, after the fashion of a
loving nursse, who when she has made her child weep for his fault, gives him
the teat to still * Pro^. 22. 15. and 29. 15.
him again: which resembles also the discretion of the cunning Physician,
that tempereth his bitter medicines with sweet and pleasant drink. But if any
be so incorrigible, that neither the sweet rewards of virtue can lead him,
nor the bitter correction of vice draw him to amend, let him be cut off from
the School, Least that he should infect the sound.
Ne pars syncera tra^atur, for he that dwells with a Creple, will learn to
halt, and doubtless, many have perished with this poison.

Now we see all the parts and properties of this most noble and profitable
discipline as it were portraied out before our face, which to some peradventure
may yet seem too hard, for that it is so manifold, the parts so diverse, and
respect so diverse persons. But what then? should this make us shrink at the
matter? what good thing can be obtained without painefulnes and great
diligence: For labor, God sells us every good thing.
Dij nobis laboribus omnia vendu^t bona, For as Hesiodus says of food, (...),
and as Virgill says of tillage, Pater ipse colendi haud facile^ esse viam
voluit: so again does Hesiodus say of virtue, (...), yea even so Solomon says
of knowledge, that God had (m) Man's food the gods away have hid. Before thou
may virtue attain*
given to the children of Adam great travail in searching out wisdom, to
humble their vain minds, and to exercise them, Curis acue^s mortalia corda,
Nec torpere graui passus sua regna veterno, and yet in seeking for food and
bodily relief, the manifold labors and toiles do not daunt our courage, but
rather (n) God wills thy brows to drop again. Eccl. 1. 13. and 3. 10.
sharpen our minds, and make us more earnest and skillful: and will not this
variety of labor employed about learning and virtue bring forth the same, or
rather more godly and plentiful fruit? To keep the mind therefore from
sluggishnes the mother (o) Sifting men's wits with labors great, and heaps of
griping cares, No^ suffering soil through drousie sloth to bring forth
noisome ^ares.
of all vice, to make it expert in wisdom and virtue by continual exercise,
to beat down the pride thereof in manifesting by experience that it is not
able to attain to the full perfection of knowledge, God has ordained for man
such a paradise of labors, which as they be many and diverse, so will they be
pleasant and fruitful, if they be aptly disposed, and wisely sustained.

Laus Deo.

