PALLAS ARMATA, OR Military Instructions for the Learned: And all Generous
Spirits, who affect the Profession of Arms. THE FIRST PART. Containing the
Exercise of Jnfanterie, as well Ancient, as Modern Wherein are Clearelie set
down all the Postures and Motions, belonging to Battaillions of Foot.

PRO PRINCIPE ET PATRIA INVTRVMQVE PARATV


Printed at Edinburgh by the Heirs of Andro Heart, 1627.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, and NOBLE LORD, JOHN Earl of Rothes, LORD Leslie, etc.
MY Noble LORD,
It is not unknown to Your Lo. what perfect concord is between Mars and the
Mu^es, and how much the Brave and renowned Persons of Ancient times were endued
with the knowledge, both of Letters and Arms, that both in Peace and War,
they might be serviable unto their Country: Epaminondas, Themistocles,
Aristides, Phocion, Alcibiades, and mante other Brave Grecians, As also Fabius,
Cato, Piso, Pompeius, and many other excellent Romans can bear witness: But
the Grecians did excel all Nations in both, and were the first, that out of a
long practice and experience, reduced the knowledge of Arms to an Art, and
gave instructions for right exercising and due ordering of a Battle: for which
effect, they had Schoolmasters called (...), who taught the Art Military:
whose precepts the Veget. de ^e milit. lib. 3. in Prologo.
Romans themselves thought no disparaigement to put in practice, and commit to
writ: Wherefore a well governed Commonwealth, ought to have a care, so to
instruct her Children, that they may be steadable to Herboth in Peace and
War: And a well affected Subject ought to enable himself to do service to
his Country, by the studies, both of Mars and Minerva. Hence is it that I,
although least in power, yet not the last in affection, have ever endeavored to
enable my self to serve my King and Country, both by Book and Sword, and
applied my mind in my Travels, to learn and practice all that I could in the
Art Military: wherein, what I have obtained by mine own experience, study, or
conference with learned Soldiers. I have adventured to publish for the use and
benefit of my Countrie-men, and chiefelie of my fellow Lawers, not so much
that I think any Works of mine worthy of light; but only to stir up those
of better spirits to do more perfectly in this subject. This Treatise I have
presumed to Dedicate unto your Lo. in respect the matter does much become You,
as well for the martial Virtues already shining in You, as for the Simpathy
that your honorable Birth and Nobility has with this subject of which I
treat, being War and Arms: War, the exercise of true Courage and
Fortitude, the Art and pastime of Kings and Princes, the Theater of Honor and
Glory: And therefore a fit Court for your Lo. to walk into, who aims at
nothing, but what is Noble, Heroicke, and Glorious. And moreover, your Lo.
being not only a Favorit of Mars but also of Minerva, having your mind
equally affected, and perfected in the studies, both of War and Peace
(although your years and the quietness of by past times, in the first, has not
yielded you much experience) deserves to be crowned, as well with the Laurel
as the Olive and therefore fitly chosen by me to be a Protector to Armed Gown;
men, seeing most justly, ye deserve to be a Tutelar Patron to men of both
professions; So that men of Arms ought to offer unto You, as to their Mars,
and men of learning ought their vows unto You, as to their Apollo. Pirhus,
Hannibal, and Julius Caesar, the brauest Generals that ever lived, were both
learned, and Martial, and did use the Pen no less, than the Pick as their
memorable exploites, and their choice writtings do testify: The works of
Caesar are amongst our hands: the writtings of the other two, are perished by
the injury of time, but were extant in the days of Aelian* Tact. lib. ^. cap.
1. Plutarch. in P^rro. and in Hanib. Emil. Prob. in Han ib.
Aelia^ Plutarch and Aemilius Probus. Great Alexander himself is not renowned
so much for his many Diademes, as that he did delight in the understanding of
the Acroamaticke Sciences: Of those Heroicke Spirits. Your Lo. is a lively
image, who trading their honorable steps, does imitate them both in
learning and Martial courage. I will not here speak of the compleatnesse of
your other eminent Graces and Virtues, wherewith ye are endued far above
your years (without any blemish of vices) of your beautiful Personage, your
admirable Prudence, your rare and pregnat Wit, Your gracious affability, and
courtesy, the only token of a true Noble mind, your zealous affection to do
service to your KING and your Country, Your forewardnesse to assist and
advance all honorable enterprisses, your singular judgment and understanding
in affairs of all Natures, and the rest of your eminent and conspicuous
Virtues, whereby Ye adorn and decore your Noble Race, which is one of the
most Ancient, and most Illustrious of our Kingdom: So that I may boldly
affirm, that Your Lo. in the Hight and Abundance of all Honorable and
Heroicke Virtues, does Excelle, and Shinne amongst the rest of the Nobiitie of
our Age.

Sicuti inter Stellas, Luna Minores.

And therefore, how can I who am (...), but love and admire in You, that (...),
which most gloriously shinneth in You, to the admiration of all men. I have
offered these instructions to your Lo. view and protection, that under the
shadow of your name they may be sheltered from the envious censure of the
Critickes of our time, who are more ready to reprove, tha^ to amend, to carpe,
than to set forth of their own. Neither do I offer this tribute to your Lo.
as to add any thing unto your knowledge, whose mind is plentifully enriched
with the perfection of all noble Arts, and Sciences, But only to testify my
humble and bound duty to your Lo. For, the honor that I have to be tied to
Your Lo. by Blood, being descended of your House, by my Grandmother, does
oblish me to consecrat all my endeavors unto You. Wouchsafe then My Thrice
Noble Lord, out of your gracious generositie, favorably to accept, and
protect this poor Present of mine, and to esteem the Author thereof to be
for ever.

Your Lo. most humble and affectionate Servant, T. K.

To His Fellow Advocates.
Ye are not forgetful (worthy Colleagues) when I entered into your Society:
how I spoke of the great Harmony that was between Mars and Minerva, and the
necessity of their coherence, although the Ignorant vulgar conceive in them,
a great repugnance and contrariety: And how that I coming from my trauells,
where I had studied to better my mind, as well with the knowledge of Arms as
of letters, and had labored to approve my self such a one Quem fora pacatum
bellantem castra decerent. did enter in judiciariam Palaestram, where with you
I might Exercere Togatae,
Munera Militiae -- and sine Sanguinis haustu,
Mitia legittimo sub judice bella movere.


But now the times are changed, according to the Dispensation of the Almighty,
and euer-turning vicissitude of the World: The Temple of Ianus which has been
long shut, is now opened, and there is an Invasion threatened by the Enemies of
this Kingdom: It is your parts to put off your Gowns, and to take the Sword
in your hands for defense of your Country: Ye are Patrons of all men in this
State, and with your tongues ye defend their Lands, and their goods as your
Clients, and ought ye not as well to prove Patrons to them, when not their
goods and their Lands, but their life's, and their liberty are in question, and
not theirs, but your own also: and not only theirs and yours, but the Honor
of our Prince, the safety of our Country, the standing of our State is in
danger: Nunc pro aris and fo^is di^^icandum est. Ye have examples of this, in
Ancient times, and all well governed Commonwealths had their men ready for
both: The fountain of Greek eloquence Demosthenes (to omite Pericles,
Themistocles, Alcibiades, Epaminondas, and many other Brave Grecians, who did
excel both in learning and faits of Arms) was a resolute Soldier and did
use the Sword for defense of his Country (although Plutarch most unjustly*
blaemisheth his courage, with the note of couardice at Thermodon) and did
behave himself very valiantly in all exployts, as he showed at the taking in of
Polyenus Stratag. lib. 3. in Demost.
Pilus from the Lacedaemonians and in overthrowing the Peloponesians, who
exceeded him far in number. All the Grave Roman Orators: The Fabii, Camilli,
Scipiones, Pisones, etc. were also expert Soldiers, and being In utraque
militia fagata and togata pariter exercitati did as good service to their
Country in time of war with their Swords, as they did in time of peace in
their Robbes. And there was none of eminency amongst them that did not enable
himself to be such a one, who Si bella vocabant,
Miles erat, si pax positis toga gestiat armis.
Cato was a grave Orator and brave Soldier, and did write of the Art
Military. Plutarch in his life sets down his valiant acts against
Antiochus and testifies of his learned writings Veget de re. milit lib. 2. cap.
3.
Vegetius says thus of him: Cato ille mayor cum and armis invictus esset, and
consul exercitum sepe duxisset, plusse reipublicae credidit profuturum si
disciplinam militarem conferret in literas, Nam unius aetatis sunt res quae
fortiter fiunt, quae vero pro utiltate Reip. scribuntur aeterna sunt: And in
another place, he cites Veget de re. milit. lib. 1. cap. 15.
his Books, de disciplina militari, which by injury of time are perished. The
Prince of Latin Orators himself if he had not been sufficiently instructed
in the knowledge of Arms, he could never have acted his part so bravely in
preserving the Commonwealth from the coniuration of Catiline: And having the
Roman Army committed unto his charge in Cilicia did wisely and valiantly
carry himself in all exploites, and gained such notable victories at Amanus,
that he was declared Imperator, and a Triumph Plut in Cicer.
decerned unto him by the Senate, which out of a humble modesty he refused. A
short narration of this, ye shall find in his own Epistola. lib. 2. ep. 10
and lib. 45. ep. 4.
Epistles: And in diverse of them, he styles himself M. T. Cicero Imperator:
That he did alike worthily behave himself in his Arms as in his Gown for
his Country, ye shall see the testimony of Cato in an Epistle to him:
Epistola^. lib. 15. ep. 5.
M. Cato. M. Cicer. Imperatori. S. P. D. Quod and Resp. me and nostra amicitia
hortatur libenter facio, ut tuam virtutem innocentiam dilige^tiam cognitam in
maxi nis rebus, ^ogati domi, Armati foris, pari industria administrari gaudeam.
Calphurnius Piso, descended of the Noble and warlike house of the Pisones To
whom it is said, Armorumque decus praecede forensibus actis, was himself a
brave and renowned Warrior, and also such a facound and eloquent Orator, that,
how much he did by his discourse in pleading, ravish the heart of the Judge,
and by his forceable speeches move his mind to sorrow, joy, anger, or any
passion he pleased, may be seen in these words, Luean. ad Pisonem^
Laudibus ipsa tuis resonant fora: namque ubi Piso
Iudicis affectum, possessaque pectora tentas
Victus sponte sua sequitur quocunque vocasti,
Flet si fl^re libet, gaudet gaudere coactus,
^ttedante capit judex si non habet iram.
And thereafter, Quis non attonitus judex tua respicit ora?
Quis regit ipse suam nisi per tua pondera mentem.


I will give you but one instance of our own days: Brave Desdisguieres, so
much beloved of Henry the Great, the late French King, was an Advocat in the
Parliament of Aix, and finding that he might be also steadable to his
Country by the Sword, did take Arms, and by long and fortunate service came
to that perfection of the art Military, that for his martial valor he was
both honored at home, by receiving the Supreme Dignity of his Kingdom, and
was also such a terror to the Enemies of his Country, that I have seen them
affright their children, with the name of Aldiguera. But what do I talk of
Mortality? The fountain of all Arts and Sciences, The Eternal Himself is a
Soldier as the Exodus chap. 15. verse. 3.
Scripture says: The Lord is a Man of War, His Name is JEHOVAH. But I will
go further on with you, and evidentlie prove the profession of Arms, not
only to become your profession and fitly to be joined therewith, but also
to be far more Noble and more excellent, then yours, or any other else: I
will not produce Testimonies from martial men least ye reject them as
partial, but I will bring an irrefragable conclusion from him, whose sentence
I hope ye will not decline, and it is from your own Doctor and Master, who
although out of an inconsiderat Poetical humor, did cry, Cedant arma togae:
Yet when he was in his own settled and wise disposition, he freely
confesses the verity, and says. Cicero. in Orat. pro L. Muraen^
Ac^nimirum (dicendum est enim quod sentio) Reimilitaris virtus praestat
caeteris omnibus, haec nomen populo Romano, haec huic urbi aeternam gloriam
peperit, hec orbem terrarum parere huic imperio coegit: Omnes urbanae res,
omnia haec nostra praeclara studia, and haec forensis laus and industria,
latent in tutela, ac praesidio bellicae virtutis: And immediately before, he
said; Multo plus affert dignitatis res militaris quam juris civilis gloria;
Vigilas tu de nocte ut tuis consultoribus respondeas, ille ut quo intedit
mature cum exercitu perveniat; te gallorum, illum buccinarum cantus exsuscitat,
tu actionem instituis, ille aciem instruit, tu caves ne tui consultores, ille
(...) urbes aut castra capiantur. And a little thereafter, Summa dignitas est
in iis quae militari laud antecellunt, Omnia enim^quae sunt in Imperio and in
statu civitatis, and iis defendi and firmari putantur: summa enim utilitas,
siquidem eorum consilio and periculo cum repub* tum etiam nostris rebus perfrui
possumus: What can be better and more truly said for the Dignity and
Excellency of Military profession? Since then the carrying of Arms is a thing
so Noble, so Generous so befitting your profession, I doubt not but ye will
all apply your minds to the understanding and practice of the Art Military:
For ye have Strength, Courage, Judgment, Learning, and other qualities
befitting a perfect Soldier: and in this ye add great praise and happiness
to your Country: Seeing Veget. de re milit. lib. 1. c. 13.
Nihil est neque firmius, neque laudabilius, neque foelicius republica in qua
abundant milites eruditi: I have set down some Military instructions for your
use, which I have learned by sight and practice abroad in my Trauells, or by
discourse of learned Commanders, or by my own reading: Whereby I do not
presume to instruct You, whose knowledge exceeds mine in all things, but
only to stir up you of greater gifts, than I, not only to take the Pen
and publish more perfectly in this kind, but also to put the same in
practice, as I have done, either abroad, or at home, for service of your
Country. For Bellona and Minerva are my two Mistresses, whom I have this long
time equally Courted, whose Service I have with equal affection prosecuted,
although of them I have obtained but small Favors, being always unfortunate
in my love: Yet if any of you of better merit will give attendance upon them,
ye may be better rewarded, and in this love, I will not envye, but will
cherrish my Corrivalles, and shall be ready to impart to any the small
favors which I have received. So that at this time I have set down in the
first part of my Treatise, as copiouslie and perspicuouslie as I could, the
modern Exercise of Infanterie, and has clearlie descriued all the Postures
and Motions belonging to Companies, of Foot, together with them use, and
manner how to perform them, and has illustrate them by precepts of the best
Tactict writters Aelian, and the Emperor Leo, giving you their own words,
and confirming them by examples of practice, of the brauest Greek Commanders,
to show you a conformity between the Ancient Milit^rie Discipline and our
Modern. I doubt not therefore (worthy Colleagues) but ye will follow out
reallie, that which I have aimed at; and hereafter accustom your selves to
do service to your Country, as well by the Sword as the Gown, Seeing it is a
thing so Generons so Honorable, and so convenient for your calling: I speak
not to Base Spirits, whose only happiness is to live in a brutish
sensuality, and to deride all Virtue, But to the Generous minded, who by
following Virtue: and doing actions worthy of memory; are desirous, Ipsorum
ut vivat post funera fama,

Those I love, those I honor, to those I offer my endeavors, and to those I
will be while I live.

An affectionate Friend and Servant. T. K.

To the indifferent Reader.
NOBLE, worthy, and courteous Reader: although I have set out this Treatise,
principally for the use of my Fellow-Lawers, coting the chief instructions and
terms of Aelian and Leo (the best Masters of the Art Military) in their own
Idiome; yet I have had a care to put the same passages in our language for the
use and profit of those who understand not the Greek tongue, and have set
down a plain description of all the Motiones of Infantery, with a
demonstration of them in figures, so that I think they shall be facile and
perspicuous to the meanest capacity, whereby I hope the Noble and
worthy-minded Reader shall be allured, not only to a further understanding of
Martial exercise, but also animated to put the samine precepis in practice for
the well and service of his Country. For I hope, he is not ignorant of the
worth and dignity of the Art Military: and how much It, and the professors
thereof, have ever been esteemed in the World. Plutar. in Lycurgo.
Lycurgus in his Laws did Ordain, that no Epitaphe should be made, nor no
man's Name remembered upon his Tomb, except of him who had been a Soldier,
esteeming them only worthy of memory. When the several Provinces of Grecia
sent their Ambassadoures to Plutar. in Pelopida.
Artarxerxes, King of Persia, be preferred Pelopidas and the Theban friendship
to the rest, because he heard they were the best Soldiers, and best practiced
in the faites of Arms: not respecting the wealth and power of the Athenians,
Spartans, and other Cities. Philip of Macedone King of a poor Country, by
exactly learning the Exercise of Arms, and practicing a new military
discipline invented (as some say) by himself, did not only fry his Kingdom
from the oppression of the Poeonians and Illirians, but also subjected the most
goodly rich Provinces and Cities of Grecia to his Crown; So that making a
preparation against the Persians, he died, and left his young Son Alexander
successor of his Kingdom, and of his Designs, who being carefully
instructed by his Father in the discipline of Arms, and surpassing him far
in martial valor, Vt Telamonem Ajax vt Pelea vicit Achilles, did not only
execute his Fathers designs against Darius, by overthrowing him in two great
Battles, but also in a short time did overcome and subdue the most populous
Kingdoms of Asia; And by terror of Arms, made all the World to tremble at
his Name. The Romans rose from nothing to be Masters of the World, by no other
means, but a continual Exercise of Arms: and when through laziness, they
left off their use, they were over run, by the barbarous Goths and Vandals:
And in the time of their Imperial Government, how many were there, who by
Military virtue, did rise from a mean Birth and condition to Supreme
Honors, yea, to Sway the Imperial Scepter? As Severus, Pertinax, Valerius,
Aurelianus, Maximinus, and many other, whom ye shall find in History. The
Suyzers, a basse mechanicke Nation, of little account, being provoked by
Charles of Burgundy, to take Arms against their will, like Oxen ignorant of
their own strength, has ever since continued in that course, and has gained
such credit and reputation amongst Christian Princes, that the mightiest of
them are glad to buy their friendship at a great price. Our Neighbors the
States of the united Belgic Provinces, lately were reputed, a dull, poor,
lazy people, But by taking Arms, and maintaining the professors of Arms,
they have not only vindicate themselves from subjection to a mighty and
powerful Master, and gained Liberty, (which if it were not in our Age would
seem incredible) But have come to such a height of wealth, and power, that
they are extremely redoubted by their Enemies, and respected by their
Friends. Hence it was, that our Heroicke King ROBERT the First of most famous
memory, left in His Testament, that our Scots should never make a long Peace
with England: knowing well, that the Exercise of Arms was the only means to
maintain our Credit, Honor, and Liberty, and that the desuetude thereof was
the loss of all. Since then the benefit of the Art Military is such, that
the poor have grown rich, the weak strong, the vile and abject, valorous and
of good Fame: Since it is the only means to Conserve the Honor and Liberty
of a Nation, I hope there are no worthy and Generous minds, but will apply
themselves to Military exercise, and take Arms, if not for other ends, yet
for defense of the Honor and Liberty of their Country, now when it is in
danger: And I hope they will spend their Blood before they suffer this our
Ancient and Noble Kingdom, which having ever been Externi immunis Domini,
out-braues the rest of the Nations of the World, with Nunquam victa; now to be
subjected, and to fall in the hands of any foreign usurper. A well governed
Commonwealth in time of Peace, will prepare for War, knowing the course of
the world, to be still subject to change and alteration (resembling the ebbing
and flowing of the Sea.) and constant in nothing but inconstancy; yea, a well
Settled Mind in time of Prosperity will prepare for Adversity, Metuens
alteram sortem: How much more ought we, now, when the Time of Peace is gone,
and the Days of War come upon us, when a fearful Invasion is threatened by
a mighty and powerful Enemy; Now to rouse up our Spirits, and prepare for
Resistance: Shall we be still slougishlie secure, and lie in a lavish
senslesnesse, without making any address for Defense: Where is the Ancient
Vigor of our Scottish Blood? Where are those, who not only at Home, defended
their Liberty against foreign Hostility, limiting the proud Roman
Triumphs at our Borders, and repressing the Fury of the Goathes, Danes, and
Vandals, But also assisted their Friends, and Allies abroad? where are those,
without whom, Nulla unquam Francis Fulsit victoria castris? Those (I say)
who put Crowns upon Kings their distressed Friends heads: Those (I say) who
at the Conquest of Italy, were always the first in acquiring, and last in
surrandring, when adverse Portoune brought necessity, (although that
assistance be now by them, ingratfullie buried in oblivion:) Where are all
those Brave Spirits now in this Age? Now (I say) when not our Friends and
Allies stand in need of our help: But the Daughter of our King, the Sister of
our Dear Sacred SOVEREIGN, is in extreme distress: The true and lively
Image of his own Goodness, and Gratiousnesse, A Princess, although
suppressed by Fortune yet of Her self vvorthie, to whom the World should
ascribe, and on whom the Heavens should bestow, the highest Degree of Glory,
and Felicity, that Humane condition is capable of: Whose Worth no Lines can
express, nor Fame duly report of, Being endued with all Royal Graces and
Virtues, and cheifelie with an Invincible Fortitude of Mind, in the midst of
Her Calamities, far above the Condition of her Sex: She is by the consent
of all; The Flower of Princes, The Grace of Queens, and The Queen of Graces,
The Delight of the World, the Glory of Her Sex, yea, by confession of Her
own Enemies, The Jewel of Europe; A Princess whose rare Virtues are so
infinite and eminent, whose Maiesticall Carriage is so sweet and so Gracious,
that I dare avouch, Never Eye did see Her, whose Heart did not admire and adore
Her. And when Her so many Princely Children partake Her Calamities, But above
the rest, That most Hopeful Prince Frederick, Her first Borne: A Plant, out
of which all Heroicke Virtues do budde; Adornde with all Princely
Qualities, of a singular activitie in all exercises of body becoming His
Highness, Of an Admirable Judgment and Understanding in all Noble Sciences,
far above His Age; He is of so rare Hopes, and such exquisite Perfections,
that I cannot remember Him without Admiration: I wish my Pen were as able to
express Their due praises, as my Sword shall be reddie to Redress their Wrongs:
Can a true hearted Britain live in Security, and think of the Distresses,
of those Princes? Can a Mind any ways affected to Grace, and Virtue, not be
commoued to see the very Temple of Virtue defaced? Can neither the duty which
we owe to those afflicted Princes, nor the Safety of our own Country, move
us to tak Arms? Shall we be still slow in advancing the affairs of the
Magnanimous and Invincible KING of Denmark: a Prince, who for his Royal
Courage, His Incomparable Valor, His Compleetnesse in all Martial Virtues is
to be paralelled with the Greatest Kings and Princes, and Brauest Generals
that ever lived: who has adventured His Life, His Crown, His Posterity, for
our Quarrel, our Safety, and Restitution of these distressed Princes: who by
His only power withholds the Enemies Forces from falling upon us: Shall
we then be still insensible of our own Danger, and of the Obligation which
we owe to this Most Valorous KING? Shall we contribute nothing to the
furtherance of those levyes, which our Most Sacred SOVEREIGN, out of the
Duetifull respect which he ought to Him, and the tender Love which He caries
to His Dear Sister, and the Earnest Care which He has of oursafetie, hes
granted unto Him: O let it never be said! and let the averseness of sundry
from this Service be amended, that they may eschew the note of Disloyalty to
their King and Country, and of ill affected minds to these Princes: I can not
likewise, but remember with due Praises those two Worthy and Generous minded
Noblemen, who have left their Ladies, their Children, their estate in this
Country, and with extreme difficulty, and great charges, have lifted their
Regiments, and have consecrated their Fortunes, Blood, and life's, for the
Service of their King, their Country, and those afflicted Princes, under the
Banner of that Most Valorous CHRISTIAN General: and also all those Worthy
Gentlemen, who have accompanied them in this expedition, as well Officers, as
private Soldiers: And likewise all other Noblemen, Gentlemen, and well
affected Subjects, who have bent their whole power to further and advance those
Levies: What praise is due unto their merit? and with what Commendation ought
they to be extolled? Let their Fame live for ever, and the Sincerity of their
minds be known to all those who are interressed in our Querrell. The example
of those Brave Spirits (Noble and worthy Reader) I hope will allure You,
either to follow them, that ye may be partaker of their Honor, (for I assure
You that our Countrie-men, both with that Magnanimous KING, and with all other
Princes and States for their Military Valor are more respected, than other
Nations:) or at least to Dedicate your selves to a daily understanding and
exercise of Arms at home, that ye may be able and ready to do Service to
your Country in time of Danger. I speak not to Base vulgar minds, whom I
know, no persuasions, nor examples will allure to follow Honor, who being
naturally repugnant to all Grace and Virtue, and being unprofitable burdens
to the Earth, make themselves to be esteemed unworthy of life: But to You,
whose Noble Minds breathes after all Honorable and Vertoues Designs, who
carry an upright and well affected heart to your Country, who are always
ready to purchesse her Quietness by painful Industry, her Honor with
effusion of Your Blood, her Safety with lose of your lyfes: It is You, whom I
exhort, It is You, whom I affectionatelie honor, and to whom I will ever
approve my Self.

Your most duetifull Servant, T. K.

D. THOMAE KELLIE Equiti Aurato, Libellum eruditum, De Re Militari aedenti,
Simul and in Militiam, cum Mandato Serenissiimi Regis proficiscenti.
SI been de Patria meruitque and Caesare, leges,
Qui Martis doctas rettulit in tabulas?
Pro REGE and Patria, atque aris, sudore cruento
Rugnasse, extremus si sit Honoris Apex?
Gloria quanta tua est, nostram qui in praelia Gentem
Pectore Mavorti, and ducis and art doces?
Aliud.
SCinditur in parts pro Mart, and Pallade mundus,
Palmam pro genio, dat fere quisque suo:
Vincat uter, par erit Semper tua Laurea, sive
Cedant arma togae, seu Literae, lituo.
R. Balcanquall.

PARAINETICON.
Poor Rhene, and can Thou see,
Thy Natives Gore Thy Crystal Curles deface,
Thy Nymphs so bright which be,
Halfe-Blackamores embrace,
And (dulled with Grapes) yet not resente Thy Case?
Fallen are Thy Anadeames,
O of such goodly Cities Famous Flood;
Dimmed be Thy Beauties Beams,
And with Thy Spoils, and Blood,
Hell is made rich, proud the Iberian Brood.
And You fair Europes Queen,
Which have with Lillies decked your purple Seat,
Can You see those have been
Stern Cometes to Your State,
On Neighbors Wrack to grow so hugelie great?
Look how much Iber gains,
By as much lessened is Your flowrie Throne;
O do not take such pains
On Bartholomewes alone,
But seek to reacquire your Pampelone.
Brave People, which endwell
The happiest I Will that Neptunes arms embrace,
World, which does yet excel
In what first Worlds did grace,
Do never to base servitude give Place.
Marshalle your Wits and Arms,
Your Courage whett with Pity and Disdain,
Your deem your Allies Harms;
All lose or reobtaine,
And either Palm or fatal Cypress gain.
To this Great Spirits Frame
If molded were All Minds, all Endeuoures,
Could Worth thus All inflame,
Then not this I Will were Ours
Alone, but all between S^nnes golden Bowres.
W. DRVMMOND.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, His Dear Friend, Sr. Thomas Kellie Knight.
WHO reads these Tacticts (Old new Art of Wars)
Must ravished rest, although he knew no more,
But knowing Thee an Actor in these larres,
And Thine Adventures, must Thee more adore:
Essential life This to Thy Book does lend,
Whilst that Thine Hand performs, what Wit has pend.
Thou make Pallas truly to confess,
A Corslet, than a Gown, now fits Her better:
The Thracian God his precepts does express
In learned terms, and restes for this thy Debtor,
And Themis ever silent amongst Alarmes
Speaks loud by Thee, an Advocat in Arms.
A Thousand ways Thou do display Thy Worth,
Honored of Mars, still honoring Apollo:
Brave, learned, All where Thy Virtues Beams burst forth,
Beloved of Kings; O! who Thy Steps can follow?
This Sympathy makes me above all other,
Admire Thy Valor, love Thee as a Brother.
Sr. G. Keith. Knight.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. Thomas Kellie, Captain, and Gentleman of His
MAJESTY'S Privy Chamber.
EPIGRAM.
MArs and Minerva both in one Conspire,
To make the World, Thy high Attempts admire:
Each day Thou'art seen, to trace the twofold Way,
Which leads to Honors, sweet Immortal Bay:
For by Thy Virtue, Thou have raised again
Thy blasted Stem, which Envies breath had stain,
You from the Ashes of Oblivion rise,
And by Your Worth and Virtues climes the Skies:
To King and Country, Thine affection dear,
Claims on the Frame of Fame the highest Sphere,
Arts, Arms, are only Thy proposed Aim,
To make Thee gain a Great and Glorious Name:
Since Thy Brave Mind affects such Noble Things,
Thy Praise yet more shall flow from Mouths of Kings.
ANAGRAMS.
Sir Thomas Kellie Lo, Mars is lik Thee, or als like Themis.
NAmes, often agree with Fates, Thy Heaven bred Name,
Lo, Mars is lik Thee, does express the same,
Or als like Themis; These make All to know,
The diverse Gifts Heavens do on Thee bestow,
The Justice and the Courage they Thee give,
Shall make Thy Fame Eternally to live.
W. Forbes.
^
OF THE ART MILITARY. Of Foote-men, and their Arming: Of drawing of them into
bodies.
Tit. 1.
TAKTIKH, Leo Tacticor. cap. 1 1.
or the Art Military is defined by the Emperor Leo to be (...), A Science
of warelike motions, and thereafter Leo ibid. 2.
(...). A Generals Art of framing of Battles, and of Military motions and
Arms.

Aelian Tact. cap. 3.
Aelian the most accurrate of Tacticke writters cites the former out of
Aeneas his book of Tactickes, which by the injury of time has perished.

The preparations for War, are of two sorts (says the Emperor Leo. ibid. 7.
Leo and Ael. Tactic. cap. 2.
Aelian) (...): The one are Landforces, who fight upon Land, the other navall
forces, who fight upon Sea.

The Levees for Land service, are twofold, Vterque, ibid.
(...): Some are that fight, some are that fightes not, but comes for their
use that fights: as Physicians, Clerks, Merchantes, Chirurgians, Women, and
all those that follow the Camp, for the necessary use of the Army. Those who
fight are either Vterque. Ibid.
(...), Foot men, or Horsemen. I will treat at this time of foote-men
only: of their arming, ordering, and exerceasing.

The Foote-men then are either Aelian. Ibidem.
(...) or (...) armed, or naked, that is, heavy armed or light armed: as for
the (...) I reckon them with the light armed.

The (...) had a complete armor covering the body, called, (...) and an (...)
or Target for defense: and a long (...) or Pick of Aelia^ Tactic. c. 14.
14. some of 16. cubits long, which is 21. or 24. foot, for offense. The light
armed had for offensive arms only Arrows, Deartes, and Slungs. The Roman
heavy armed, called, Scutati, was of three sorts, Hastati, Principes and
Triarij. The light armed, called, Velites, were Sagittarii funditores and
ferentarii. How they were armed, see Veget de re militari lib. 2. cap 15 and 16.
Vegetius Polyb. Hist. lib. 16. Sect. 8.
and Polybius; for I will not burthing this short Treatise with citations of
antiquities, my purpose being to treat only of the Military discipline
used in our days.

Ye shall therefore know that our Pickemen and our Musketeers serves in
place of the Greek and Roman heavy armed, and light armed, our Picke-men
resembles their heavy; our Musketeers their light armed, since the invention
of Artillery.

The Arms which our Picke-men are accustomed to carry, are: a Head-peace, or
Morion, a Gorget or Craige-peace, a Corslet, or Cuirace with Taces; I have
seen some wear Puldrons or arm Pypes, and those are defensive: his offensive
arms, are a Sword, and Pick of 15. foot long, shorter than the Grecian
(...): The Arms of a Musquetier offensive, are a Musket, the Barrel of the
length of four foot, the bore of 12 bullets to the pound: Bandelier with 12
charges at the least, primer, bullet Bag, and pruning iron, with a Rest of a
length proportionable to his stature, and a Sword. As for defensive Arms, he
has none, although in some parts I have seen them wear an Head-peace.

The (...) amongst the Greeks, were ordered in bodies by themselves, and had
their own Officers, differing both in command and appellation from the Officers
of the (...) of a Phalanx: for a Company of (...) confisting of 16. files, and
containing four dilochies, was called, Ael. Tact. cap. 9
(...), and the commander of it (...): But a Company of (...), consisting of
as many files, was called, Aelia^. cap. 16.
(...), and the Leader of it, (...), and had their own Colors carried by
their own (...), who was distingushed from the enseignie of the (...), the
deipth also was but half so much as the other. A Regiment of armed, containing
16. (...), was called a (...): and the Commander of it (...): a Regiment of
(...) containing 16 (...) was called a (...), and the Commander (...): and so
forth, which all ye may see in Ael. Tactic. cap. 9. and cap. 16.
Aelian: The Roman Velites, sick like were not comprehended under the maniples
of the Legion, but were ordered by themselves, and had their own Commanders.

In our modern Discipline, we differ from them both: for our Picke-men and
our Musqueteirs concur together, to make, up one Company, and one Regiment
under the command of the self same Officers, and are alike ordered, and alike
framed for service, and follow both of them one Colors.

All Soldiers the^ both Picke-men and Musketeers, according to our
Discipline are collected into Companies, Companies into Regiments, Rigiments
into one Army, which are all under the command of a General (whose duty the
Emperor Leo sets down through his whole Book of Tactickes) Every Company
has for Officers of the field: A Captain, a Lieuetenant, an Enseigne, (whom
the English corruptly calls Ancient), two Sergeants,, three Corporalls, with
their Lanzprazados: those resembles the Officers of a Grecian (...), who were
(...), Aelian. Tac. cap. 9.
as Aelian shows. Every Company has also two Drums a Furrier forlodging
the Company, (but in the Lowcountries the Sergeant discharges this duty.) A
Prouoost, a Clarke, and Chirurgian. Companies are not always of alike number:
Some have 100. some 200. some 300. men; sicklike Regiments contains not
always alike number of Companies; some have 10. some 15. some 20. Companies;
and in this we differ from the Grecian (...) and (...) who did always consist
of one equal number of Files. A Regiment has for Officers of the Field, a
Colonel, a Lieuetenat Colonel, a Sergeant major, and for Delinquents, a
Prouoost marshall a Quartermaster for lodging the Regiment, a prouiant Master
for providing of victuals, a Chirurgian. The Spanish Discipline admits no
Lieuetenant Colonel to a Regiment, nor Lieuetenant to a private Company, but
makes the Sergeant major discharge the place of the one, and the Alfiero or
Enseigne the place of the other. The duty of these Officers who have not yet
learned them by practice. may read them in a Treatise published by the
illustrious C. Mansf. in his directions of war.
Count Mansfeilde, or at the least in his name: and in Markhams Epistles of
war, and in sindrie others, for I will only at this time insist in the
exerceasing of a Foot Company.

A Company is a Body of men composed of Files.

Of Files and Ranks.
Tit. 2.
A File or String called by the Greeks (...) is defined by Aelian Tact. cap. 4.
Aelian (...). A number of men from one Leader, and his followers to the last
man: and again, Aelian Tact. cap. 5.
(...). A row of followers placed after a Leader, every one according to his
worth. We define it commonly to be. A Sequence of men standing one behind
another back to belly. Ma^s. in his direct. of War
Count Mansfeilde calls a File which consist of 10. Soldiers armed alike,
whereof every one knows his place; all of them standing in a direct Line
downe-ward, behind one another, and comprehended between the Leader and the
bringer up.

The File is the deipth or thicknes of the battle.

The number of a File is uncertain, and variable according to the diversity
of Discipline of every Nation; and according to occasions Aelian Tact. cap. 4.
Aelian says, that the Files of the Grecian Phalanx were some times 8. some
times 12. but most ordinarlie 16. deep, yet some times of 50 deep, as you
may see in Zenoph. hist. Grec. lib. 6. 596.
Zenophon, at the Battle of Leuctra, the Thebans were ordered 50 deep: but
Cleombrotus drew up the Lacedaemonians 12. deep Zenophon d. l. 6. number. 605.
Agesilaus bringing his Army out of the strait of Mantinea, ordered them in 9
deep; but I think the Text be corrupted: for all odd numbers are rejected
by Tacticks, as vnfite for doubling. The Emperor Leo Tactic. c. 4. 94.
Leo gives command to his General, to make the Files of the foot Battles
16. deep, and the front according to the number of his men: But I find in
Veget de re militari. lib. 2. cap. 8,
Vegetius and Polyb. hist. lib. 6 Sect. 9.
Polybius, that the Files of the Roman maniples consisted only of 10. men:
the File was called, Decuria or Contubernium, the Leader of it Decanus,
Decurio, or Caput Contubernii*

The deipth of a File according to our modern Discipline is 10. howsouer the
Spaniards and the Italians makes it incertaine: for the deipth of 10. is
thought a sufficient thickness to receive all charges.

Every man in his File is placed according to his worth and dignity; The
first man in dignity is first in place, and is called by Leo Tac. cap. 4. 71.
Leo and Aelian. Tac. cap. 5.
Aelian (...), the Leader, or Forestander: He has commmandement over his
File, and sees that every one of them do their duty both in March and
Fight, and in exercease, as he moves and turns, so must the rest of his File
do. The second man in dignity is last in place, and is called Leo and Aelian
ibid.
(...) Bringer-up, or Reare-commander. He has command over the File next unto
the Leader, and sees that those before him keep a right Line. The third and
fourth dignity is in the 5. and 6. place, and they are called middle-men, the
one middle-man to the Front, the other middle-man to the Rear. The fist, sixth,
and seventh Dignity are in the 2.9 and 4. places. The eight, ninth, and tenth
Dignity in the 7.3. and 8. places, as this Table shows. Number of place.
Number of dignity. 1. 0. Leader 1. 2 -- 5. 3. -- 6 4 -- 7. 5. 0. Middleman 3.
To the Front. 6. 0. Middleman 4. To the Rear. 7. -- 8. 8 -- 10. 9 -- 6. 10. 0.
Bringer-vp. 2.

Joining of Files, produces Ranks, which is called, (...); for if ye jone 6.
Files or 8. Files together, ye make 6. men, or 8. men in a Rank, and the more
Files ye join, the more ye extend the length of your Battle; for as the File
measures the deipth or thickness, so does the Rank the length of the
Battle. Those who are in one File are called (...) and (...), Leaders and
followers Those of one Rank, are called, Of Ra^ks.
(...), or Sidemen.

A Rank then is. A row of men standing one by another, in a right Line,
shoulder to shoulder, or as Aelian describes it, (...) When the sidemen
bears straight forth in length. The length is called (...) and it is the
dimension of the Battle from the one winge or Flank to the other. The deipth
is called, (...) and it is; the dimension of the Battle from the Front to the
Rear.

The first Rank is: A row of File Leaders, and is called, (...), Frons, Acies.
The Front. The last Rank is: A row of Bringers-vp, and is called, (...) Cauda
the Rear.

As men in their Files are placed according to their worth, so are the Files
ranked in the Battle according to their dignity: The first place of dignity
has the File on the right hand, which is the right Flank. The second place
has the File on the left hand which is the left Flank, being the tenth (if
there be only 10. in Rank.) The third and fourth dignitic, has the 5. and
6. Files, which are in the midst of the Ranks. The fifth, sixth, and seventh
dignity, has the 2.9. and 4. Files. The eight, nynth, and tenth dignity has
the 7.3. and 8. Files. Lefe Flank. Number of place. Right Flank. 10. 9. 8. 7.
6. 5. 4. 3. 2 1. 0. 1. 1. 1. 0. 0. 1. 1. 1. 0. 2. 6. 10. 8. 4. 3. 7. 9. 5. 1.
Number of dignity.

Count Mansfeilde his discourse in this varieth from his Table. C. Man's. in his
Direct. of war. Page 31. and 32.


Every man in the first Rank is Leader of a File; every man in the first
File is Leader of a Rank.

ABCD


This Figure, A, B, C, D, shows you the distinction and disposition of Ranks
and Files, A. B, is the Front. C. D. the Rear. B. D. the right Flank. A, C,
the left Flank. The Lines A. B. and C D. with the others between them, are
Ranks consisting every one of 10 men. The Lines B. D. and A C with the others
between them, are Files consisting every one of 10. men also. The number of
Files, is from B to A, which is the length of the Battle: The number of Ranks,
from B. to D. which is the deipth of the Battle. From B. to D. are Leaders and
Followers, from B. to A. Sidemen.

In placeing our best me^ in the Fro^t, of the Battle, and putting our brauest
Soldiers in the Auantgarde of the Army, we follow the custom of the
Grecians, who put always their choicest Soldiers, in the Front of the
Phalanx; contrare to the custom of the Romans, who placed the Maniples of
their Hastati Soldiers of least experience in the Fro^t of the Legion; their
principes Soldiers of better worth in the middle; their Triarii the oldest
Soldiers, and of greatest valor in the Rear, who were not to join with the
Enemy, till the former had been beatten or retired.

Of Distances.
Tit. 3.
Soldiers being armed, and put in a Body, they must then know their
distances, for all Ranks ought to be parallel one to another, as also Files;
and therefore, a Soldiers chief care, should be to have an eye to his Leader
and his Sideman, that he may keep an equal distance both in his Rank and
File; for: not keeping of distance, breeds confusion, and oft-times is the
cause of the overthrow of a Battle, and too much thronging together, makes a
Soldier unable to use his Arms, too much standing removed, weakneth the
Battle, and makes way to the Enemy to break it: as Veget. de. re. Militari.
lib. 1. cap. 26.
Vegetius pertinentlie admonishes. Nec ultra magis quam expeditant conglobent
agmen aut laxent; nam constipati perdunt spatia pugnandi and sibi in vice^
impedimento sunt; and rariores atque interlucentes aditum perrumpendi hostibus
praestant. Wherefore due distances are the midst betwixt those extremities.

Distances than in our modern Discipline by the opinion of the most learned
Comma^aders are three, First, second, and third distance or open Order, Order
and close Order.

Open Order or first Distance, is when your men both in Rank and File stand
removed six foot from another. This distance contains (...) or 4. cubits in
square; at this distance ye are to exercise your Company.

Order or second distance is when they stand removed 3. foot both in Rank and
File one from anothere: this distance is used, when ye embattell your Troops,
and lead them against the Enemy, or when ye come to stand, or means to
wheale the Body. This distance is called of the Aelian Tact. c. 11.
Greeks (...), Densatio, and takes up 2. cubits, that is three foot, as the
former did 4. cubits, for a cubite is a foot and an half: Observe that when
your Company marches, they must keep 3. foot between Files, and 6 foot
between Ranks.

Close Order or third distance, is when your Soldiers stand a foot and an
half removed from File to File, and 3. foot from Rank to Rank, and this
distance is only for Picke-men, when they charge, or receive the charge of the
Enemy: For the Musketeers are never to be closer, than three foot in
square, because they must have a free use of their Arms. Aelian Tact. c. 11.
Aelian calls this distance (...) Constipatio or a joining of Targets
together, and takes up a cubitt. There is also a double Distance, or open open
Order, which contains 12. foot betwixt Ranks and Files; and is used when ye
march toward a Forte, to let the shot go through the Files: and when ye
double your Files by conversion.

Now the measure of those Distances cannot be taken justly by the eye; but the
Soldier to learn them must acompt the distance of six foot to be betwixt
File and File, when the Soldiers streatching out their airmes, touches one
another hands: and betwixt Ranks, when the ends of their Pickes come well
near to the heelles of them that march before: As for the Musketeers, they
must keep level with the Pickes: And the measure of the 3. foot betwixt the
Files, is when their Elbowes touches one another, betwixt Ranks, when they
come up to touch one another Swords; The measure of a foot and an half
betwixt Files, is when they join shoulder to shoulder.

Many Commanders holds that open Order is not six foot in square, but is 12
foot in Rank, and 6. in File; Order 6. foot in Rank, and 3. in File: but I
leave every man to his own opinion: For it is in Military Discipline, as in
all others Sciences: Certant doctores and adhuc sub judice lis est. Always the
former opinion is most received.

What Distance and intervall the Romans used betwixt the Maniples and Cohortes
of their Legions Veget. de re Militari lib. 3. cap. 15.
see Vegetius.

Of Marching.
Tit. 4.
AFter that a confused Body of men is orderly digested into Files and Ranks,
and that every one of them knows their Distance; the next thing of
consideration is how to make them March in due order.

All Marches are either in Battle array or by divisions.

I will not here touch the Grecian Marches, (...); the knowledge whereof I
remitte the Reader to find in Aelian Tactic. cap. 35. and cap. 36.37, 38. and
sequent.
Aelians Tactikes, but will only speak of the ordinary Marches used now
a-dayes.

Suppose then that ye have a Company of men consisting of 200. whereof the
one half are Pickes, and the other Musketeers: and ye would draw them up in
Battle. You must first know what should be the length of your Battle, that
is, How many men ye should put in Rank, the deipth already known 10. which
is speedily done thus: Divide your whole number 200. by the deipth 10. the
quotus being 20. shows you the length of your Battle, so that you have 20
in Rank, and therefore your Battle consists of 20. Files; 10. deep. Of
those 20. Files, 10. are Pickes, 10. Musketeers: which you shall dispose after
this manner. Set your 10 Files of Pickes altogether: divide your 10. Files of
Musketeers, and draw them up, five of them upon the right hand of the Pickes,
and the other five upon the left hand of the pickes, all fronting equally, so
that the Body of your Pickes shall be flanked, with your Musketeers upon the
right and left, as you see in the Figurs following, where P. signifies the
Picke-men, and M. the Musketeers, for lack of better figurs to express them.

ABCDEF


Here then ye see your 10. Files or body of Pickes, are B. E. your five
Files of Musketeers on the right Flank of your pickes, C. F. the other 5.
Files of Musketeers, on the left Flank, A. D. from C. to A. is the whole
number of your Files as well Musketeers as Pickes; from C. to F. the number of
your Ranks.

Now if ye would march by divisions as being forced by the straitness of the
ground, ye are to command the Body to make an halt, or stand, then ye
command the five Files of Musketeers which are on the right Flank of the
Pickes, to march out from the Body, till their Bringers up be before the
File-Leaders of the Pickes: And this shall be your first division of
Musketeers. Next ye are to command the five Files of Pickes on the right
hand, to march out from the rest, and to follow the Musketeers Fileing euin
with them but keeping a distance of 12 foot betwixt the divisions where the
Enseigne must march, and this shall be your first division of Pickes; After
them shall follow therest of the Pickes, which shall be your second division
of Pickes, keeping also a distance as the former. Last of all shall follow the
5. Files of Musketeers, which was on the left Flancke of the Pickes, and this
shall be your second division of Musketeers. The Officers of the Company
must be thus placed: The Captain marches in the Front before the first
division of Musketeers; The Enseigne with the Colors is to march before the
first division of pickes: The oldest Sergeant is to lead the second division
of pickes. The second Sergeant leads the second division of Musketeers. The
Leiuetenant marches after the second division of Musketeers, and brings up
the Rear. The chiefest Drum beats in the first division of Pickes, betwixt
the 3. and 4. Rank; The second Drum beats in the first division of
Musketeers, betwixt the 3. and 4, Rank: but some by the contrare, makes the
chiefest Drum to beat in the first division of Musqueties, because (say
they) the Captain ought to have the chief Drum with him: Some also I have
seen make the Drum who marches with the Pickes, to beat in the Front beside
the Enseigne, but those differences are not of great moment; if the Company
have a third Drum, he shall beat in the last division of Musketeers: The
figure following expresses this march clearclie.



In this figure then. A. B. C. is the first division of Musketeers, before
which the Captain marches. In D. the second Drum beats betwixt the 3. and 4.
Rank. D. E. F. is the first division of Picks. C. D. is the interuall, or
distance betwixt the first division of Musketeers, and the first division of
Pickes where the Enseigne marches. In E. the first Drum beats betwixt the
3. and 4. Rank of Pickes. G. H. is the second division of Pickes. F. G. the
distance betwixt the two divisions of Pickes, which is the oldest Sergeants
place. I. K. is the last division of Musketeers. H. I. the interuall where the
second Sergeant marches. K. is the place of the Leiuetenant in the Rear.

Now when ye come again to a fair Campaigne and desires to march in Battle,
to be the more ready to withstand the assaults of the Enemy. The Captain in
the Front, commands the first division of Musketeers to halt; then
commands the first division of Pickes, which the Enseigne leads to march up
upon the left hand of them; thereafter the first Sergeant, to bring up the
second division of Pickes upon the left hand of the former; Lastly the second
Sergeant to march up with the second division of Musketeers upon the left hand
of all; and so they stand embattelled, as they were at the first.

Observe when they march in Battle, the Enseigne goes in the Front of the
Pickes with his Colors fleeing, chiefelie if he be in sight of the Enemy,
or yet be going out, or coming into his Quarter, or entering upon Guarde, but
in fight, he is to retire into the middle Rank of the pickes: The Drums
beats also in the Front, but in fight, they must draw aside to the angles on
the Flanks: The chief Drum is to attend the Captain, to deliver his
Commands by touke of Drum to the Soldiers when the voice cannot be heard. The
Sergeants marches in the Flanks, the oldest in the right, the other in the
left: having care that every man march orderly, and keep his distance, and
that no man go out of his Rank. The Lieuetenant remains in the Rear,
bringing up the Company, and seeing that no man fall back, but that every
man do his duty.

That which I have shown of a single Company, may be understood of a division
of a Regiment, a brigada, or any greater Body: but the^ the divisions both of
Pickes and Musketeers, must be framed according to the number of your Body,
and the Officers are placed according to the Sergeant major his Direction.

Observe, that when ye march by divisions and comes to a narrow Strait,
where only one or two can go in Front as over a little Planke or the strait
of a Ditch: Ye must make them march away by Files leading out one File after
another, or by Ranks, commanding Ranks to rank 1. or 2. or 3. according to
the capacity of the Strait: and that either to the right or left hand, as the
Strait shall ly upon the right or lef Flank of your division: If upon the
right; then the right hand man marches fordward with his sideman, if the place
suffer 2. and the nixt 2. sidemen of that Rank follows: And so the rest of
the Ranks, till all the divisions be past over: which being done, he is to
command Ranks. Rank as ye were: And so they return all to their first
Station and Posture.

Observe also, that if ye be to draw up your men in a Battallion Quarre, or
Square Battle (I mean of men, not of ground) that is a square Quadrate, which
is a Eucl. lib. 1. in defin.
figure Equilaterall and Rectangulare; whose Ranks and Files shall be of
equal number: It is quickly and exactlie done by extracting the radix
quadrata, or the Square root of the number of your men, which will be both
the length and deipth of your Battle: As for example, ye have 400. men to put
in a square Battle, ye seek out the square-roote of 400 which ye find to
be 20. And therefore in an instant you draw up your men 20. in File, and 20.
in Rank. But if ye be to make up any other square Battle Quadrilaterall,
which is Euel. lib. 1. in def.
Figura alter a part longior, called by the French Battallion Quarreen lo^gue,
ye have nothing to do, but to divide the number of your men by the deipth
given: and the quotus shall be the length of your Front, which I show before,
as in this instance divide 400. by the deipth of 10. the quotus 40. shall give
you 40. in Rank, and siclike of any greater number, the figure following A. B.
shows the first. C. D. the second.

A.B.


C.D.


Observe by the way, that with a contrary operation, ye may at the first
sight, find the number ofa Batallion, passing by it, and counting the length
and the deipth thereof, and multiplying the one by the other as in the former
instance, multiply 40. in Rank, by 10 in File, ye shall find the whole number
to be 400.

I will not here speak of the other Battles, which are not square, as of
Round, Demilunar, concave or convexe, Rombus or Diamond, Triangle or Vedge,
which is half a Diamond; and such like others; because they are not fit for
march, neither are they now much used in Battle or fight, as also they are
discribed Aelian Tact. cap. 46, 47.
by Aelian, where they may be found by any, who are curious to understand them.

But before I go further, I must advertise of one thing, that the Soldiers
be acquainted with the several beats of the Drum, and to understand when
the Drum beats a Call, or Gathering; a March, a Troop, a Charge, a
Retreat, a Releife; and according as the Drum beats, swift or slow, so to
accommodate their motion: as to march slow or fast, to charge with greater or
less violence, to retire with greater or less speed, and so forth.

Of the several Postures of the Pick and Musket.
Tit 5.
IN the next place, the Soldiers are to be taught the use and postures of the
Arms, that every one of them does carry, be they Pick or Musket, and to
handle them gracefullie.

The Postures then, which the Picke-men should use, either standing or
marching, are these following: In the column upon the right hand, are
contained the terms of command in our Scots Language: on the left the
English: for I thought good to acquaint you with both, seeing sometimes the
words are different.

1. Take up your Pick. 2. Shoulder your Pick. 3. Slope your pick. 4. Level
your pick. 5. Order your pick. 6. Advance your pick. 7. Traill your pick.
8. Cheek your pick. 9. Recover your pick from traill or cheek by palming.
10. Port your pick. 11. Charge your pick. 12. Charge to the right hand. 13.
Charge to the left. 14. Charge to the Rear by the right or left. 15. Charge at
the foot against horse and draw your Sword. 16. Lay down your pick.
1. Lift your pick. 2. Shoulder your pick. 3. Sclant-carie your pick. 4.
Plate-carie your pick. 5. Over end, or set down your pick* 6. Mount your
pick. 7. Traill your pick. 8. By the point hold your pick. 9. Recover your
pick by palming. 10. Port your pick. 11. Present your pick fordward. 12. To
the right hand, or right about present your pick. 13. To the left hand, or
left about present your pick. 14. To the Rear, or to the lefe roud about
present your pick. 15. Foot your pick, and draw* your Swords. 16. Lay down
your pick.
Observe that those three Postures, Take up your Pick, Order your Pick, Lay
down your Pick, are to be done only standing: The rest standing or
marching: but ye must remarke that when your Soldiers charge, standing to
make them fall back with the right Leg, and marching to set fordward the
left: Also they must know to charge to the right, to the left, to the Rear,
from being advanced, ordered or shouldered, all alike ready, and with alike
promptitude: For howsoever the Enemy appear, they must be ready to charge
from every Posture they stand in.

The Charging to the Rear by the left, is the most easy and most commodious
motion: For the charging by the right (although it be much used by the French,
when they command, La charge be a demytour a droit) is very troublesome and
dangerous, and is discharged by the Law Country Discipline, for they being at
close order, (which is the distance, wherein they Charge, or receive a Charge)
and turning to the right hand, their Swords do chap and are entangled upon
their Sidemen, so that they annoy their Sidemen, and themselves are hindered
to turn, and therefore breeds a great embarras and confusion in the Battle.

This Posture, Advance or Mount your Pick, (which the French calls, Pique en
haut, the Greeks (...)) is to be used in a Troop, and in exercising their
motions.

In a march they must always have their Pickes Shouldered, either Level or
Sloppe, as the word shall be given: When they come through a gate^ or port, they
must port their pickes, that is, carry them as as they were half charged:
Upon an halt or stand, they must order their Pickes, unless there be command
to the contraire.

When the whole Battle charge one way, the first 5. Ranks must only
charge, they way commanded, and the other 5. (if they be 10. deipth) must
only port their pickes, and carry them so over the heads of the Leaders, that
they no ways empesh them, either in charging or retiring: When they lift their
Pickes from their shoulders to charge, let them take heed to lift them in a
right Line and parallel with their own File: for otherwise by inclining of
the^ to either hand, they shall trouble their next Files.

When Battelles comes to push of pick, good Commanders says, that your
picke-men must not push by aduanceing and retireing their Arm as commonly is
done; but only go joyntlie on together in a Rout without moueing their Arms.

The charge at the foot against horse, is not now used in the Low Countries,
but they charge over hand aloft: because (say they) they have the pick more at
command to turn where they will.

The Posturs of the Musquetier are those following, our Scots in the right hand
columme, the English in the left.

1. Take up your Musket, and your Rest. 2. Recover your Musket, and join
your rest to your Musq. 3. Draw out your match. 4. Blow your match. 5. Cock
your match. 6. Try your match. 7. Guarde your pan. 8. Present by blowing your
match and opening your pan. 9. Give fire. 10. Dismount your Musket, and carry
it with your rest. 11. Vncocke your match. 12. Return your match. 13. Blow
your pan. 14. Prime your pan. 15. Shoot your pan. 16. Cast off your louse
powlder. 17 Blow your pan lidde. 18. Cast about your Musket, and traill your
staff. 19. Charge your Musket. 20. Draw out your Ram stick. 21. Shorten your
Ram-sticke. 22 Put in your Bullet, and ram down your powlder and Bullet. 23.
Draw out your Ram stick. 24. Shorten your Ram stick. 25. Put up your Ram
stick. 26. Fetch your Musket forward with the left hand, and hold it up in
the right, and recover the staff. 27. Shoulder your Musket, and carry your
staff with it. 28. March, and carry your staff in your right hand. 29. Sink
your Musket, and vnshoulder your Musket. 30. Lay your Musq. on your staff.
31. Stand to your Se^tinell posture. 32. Hold your Musket in your staff with
the left hand, only in balance. 33. Lay down your Musket.
1. Take up your Musqut, and your staff. 2. Recover your Musket, and join
your staff to your Mus. 3. Take out your lunt. 4. Blow your Lunt. 5. Cock
your lunt. 6. Try your lunt. 7. Guarde your pan. 8. Present or lay on by
blowing your lunt, and opening your pan. 9. Give fire. 10. Take down your
Musket, and carry it with your staff. 11. Vncocke your lunt. 12. Put your
lunt between your fingers. 13. Blow your pan. 14. Morse your pan. 15. Shoot
your pan. 16. Cast off your lowse powlder. 17 Blow your pan. 18. Cast about
your Musket and traill your rest. 19. Charge your Musket. 20. Draw forth
your scourer. 21. Shorten your scourer. 22. Charge with bullet and ram down
your poulder and bullet. 23 Draw forth your scourer. 24 Shorten your scourer.
25. Return your scourer. 26. Bring about your Musket, and paise it, and
recover your rest. 27. Shoulder your Musket, and carry your rest with it. 28.
March, and carry your rest in your right hand. 29. Slip your Musket, and
vnshoulder your Musket. 30. Rest your Musket. 31. Stand to your Se^tinell
Posture. 32. To your saluting Posture. 33. Lay down your Musket.
Observe that all this multitude of Postures in service, are redacted to three,
Make ready present, and give fire.

The Musquetier upon a March is always to have his Musket shouldered, and the
Rest in his right hand, his left upon the Butte-end or head of the Musket:
Although I have seen many Soldiers and chiefelie the lazy Duchess, to carry
their Musket with their hand upon the Barrel, and the mouth before them,
which is an unseemly Posture, and very unready for service.

Upon one halt or stand the Musquetier is always to rest his Musket, unless
he have command to the contrary.

The Musketeers are to carry the mouth of their Musket high, as well when
they are shouldered, as when they prime or guarde their pan, or come up to give
fire: And when they blow their Match, they are to bring their Musket to their
mouth, and not to stoop to it.

A Musquetier in making ready, and in falling away through an division, or by
countermarch, must take good heed to carry his Musket in a evin straight
line with his File, for if he carry it cross, he will disturb his neighbor
Files.

When they give fire against the Enemy, being in open Field, they must aim
no higher, than the Girdle of a man: But within a Trench or Parapet; where
perchance nothing shall be discovered, but the head of the Enemy, they must
aim at that part which appears.

How those Postures, as well of the Pick as Musket, are to be performed, may
be somewhat understood by the figures which are set down in his Excellence
Grave Maurice, his Book of postures, but they are never to be learned without
action and practice.

Of Motions, and first of Faceing.
Tit. 6.
Soldiers then being Armed, and drawn up in an orderly Body, and knowing
their distances, marches and Postures: The chief thing thereafter that they
are to learn, is their Motions, which are the life of an Army, for as the
Soul is to the body, so is Motions to a Battle: and it is assured that a few
number of men well disciplined, and being perfect in their Military Motions,
are able to rencounter and overthrow great multitudes without practice of Arms
(...) Aelian Tact. cap. 3.
(says Aelian) (...), We find often great Forces to be by their disorder
overcome by a few well ordered and exercised, and therefore; the chief thing
that Soldiers are to understand, is their Military Motions, for the Science
of their Motions, is the definition of the Art Military: These then, I shall
set down in some few Titles with as great variety and perspicuitie as I
can, touching only the ancient exercise in so far as it is a ground, or
does agree with our modern Discipline.

The Motions of Troops are two fold: of the whole, or of a part: of the
whole, either in keeping ground, or changing ground: Keeping ground when every
person moves in his proper place, as in Faceing: Changeing ground, when the
Battaillon changes the ground it stood in, as in countermarch and wheeleing:
The Motion of a part, is when a part of the Battle moves, and a part
stands still, as in doublinges, closinges, openings, for in those Motions,
some Ranks or Files stands, and the rest moves: I will then begin with
Faceing.

Faceing is: a Motion transferring the Soldiers face to the Flank or the
Rear of the Battle: And therefore is of two sorts, the one, when the
Soldier makes a Quarter turn to the right or the left hand, the other when
he makes an half turn: The first Motion the Greeks called (...), which is
defined by Aelian Tact. c. 24.
Aelian, (...), a Motion of the Soldier, turning his face to the Pick or the
Target, that is to the right, or the left hand, For the Grecians (as I told you
before) carried a Pick in their right hand, and a Target in the left, but I
wonder why Aelian calls it a Motion of the Armed Soldier only (...) seeing
the (...) did also use this Motion.

The action of this Motion is thus performed, How to perform the Motion.
the Soldier stands firm with his left Leg, and turning only upon his
heel, draws back the right Leg, if he face to the right hand, or
brings foreward the right Leg if he face to the left hand and this is to
be done in a stand, but in a March, faceing to the right hand, they must bring
foreward their left Leg. The use of the Motion


The use of this Motion, at a stand is to be ready at an instant to receive the
charge of the Enemy, if they assail either of your Flanks: But if ye face
and march, ye may thereby prevent the Enemy from falling upon your wings Leo
Tact. c. 7. 79.
(as Leo shows) by bringing your Battle to some River or other Strength, and
also to eschew some dangerous ground: as Alexander did at Arbela, who
perceiving that Darius had strowed the ground between the two Battles with
(...) or Calthropes, faced his right winge to the right hand: and marched
about: Polienus Stratag lib. 4. in Alexandro 17.
See Polienus.

But if the Enemy charge both your Flanks at one time, ye must face the
half of your Battle to the right hand, the other half to the left, that is:
the half of your Files which are upon the right Flank, faces to the right
hand, the other half which are upon the left Flank, faces to the left hand:
and this is the (...) described by Aelian Tact. c. 38.
Aelian, and not (...) as Captain In his Notes upon Ael. Tact. cap. 25.
Bingame, says. The forms of (...) ye shall see in the figures following.

ABCD


EFGH


IKLMNO


The figure A. B. C. D. is a faceing of the whole Battle to the right: where
that which was before the right Flank. B. D. is now become the Front: the
Rear before C. D. is now become the right Fla^ke: the Front before A. B. is
now become the left Flank: the left Flank before A.C. is now become the
Rear: The figure E. F. G. H. is a faceing of the Battle to the left, where
that which was the left Fla^k before E. G. is now become the Front: The right
Flank F. H. the Rear: The Front E. F. the right Flank: The Rear G. H. the
left Flank. The figure I. K. L. M. N. O. is a faceing of the Battle to the
right and left by division, where the one half of the Battle K. L. N. O.
consisting of 5. Files of Pickes and 5. of Musketeers, faces to the right
hand, and makes the Front. L O. which before was the right Flank, and the
other half, I. K. M. N. consisting of alike Files, faces to the left, and
makes the Front. I. M. which before was the left Flank, so that thereby it is
(...), or a double fronted Battle.

The words of command are these, Face to the right, As ye were. Face to the
left, As ye were. Face to the right and left by division. As ye were.
Some say only, To the Right, To the Left, etc.

Our Scots words of command are, Right about, To your first oder. Left about,
To your first oder. Right and left about, To your first oder.


But they are not so proper as the former.

The second manner of faceing is when the Soldiers makes an half turn to
the Rear, by the right or left hand: The French calls it Demi tour a droit
or a Gauch. The Greeks calls it (...), which was either (...) or (...) Leo
Tact. cap. 7. 79. and 84
Leo calls it (...). Aelian Aelian. Tact. c. 24.
defines it to be (...) Translation of the former aspect to the Rear.

The Motion is done as the other, How to do the Motion.
except that the Soldier makes twice so great a Turn, for standing fast with
his left Leg, he only turns upon his heel, and draws back his right
Leg if he face to the right about, and brings foreward his right Leg, if
he face to the left about, but in a March faceing to the right about, he must
bring foreward his left Leg.

The use of it is, The use of the Motion.
if the Enemy charge your Rear, then ye are ready to receive him by turning
the faces of all the Soldiers of your Battle to the Rear against him, which
Plutar. in Pyrro.
Pyrrhus King of Epirus did coming out of Argos being pressed with a
multitude of Enemies; and Zenoph. Cyroped. lib. 7. 189.
Cyrus coming from the walls of Babylon to his Camp, often faced about his
Army to receive the Enemy, who saliing out of the Town, did charge his
Rear: But if your Enemy charge both Front and Rear, the^ ye must face about
the half of your Battle, that is, if ye be 10. deep, ye face about the
half Files or middle-men with their followers, (which are the last five
Ranks) to the Rear, so ye shall be able to receive his charge both in Front
and Rear: The Aelian. Tact. c. 38.
Greeks called this (...), and not (...) as Captain Bingam would have it: The
figures following will manifest them.

PQRS


TVXY


The figure P. Q. R. S. is a faceing of the whole Battle to the Rear by the
right or the left, where R.S. which before was the Rear, is now become the
Front and the Front before P.Q. now the Rear: the right Flank Q.S. now the
left: The left P.R. now the right. The figure T. V. X. Y. is a faceing only
of the half Files, or last five Ranks to the Rear, so that ye see the one
half of your Battle, both Pickes and Musketeers faceing toward the Front,
T. V. and the other half faceing toward the Rear, X. Y. which is now also
become a Front, so that it is likewise (...), or a double Fronted Battle.

The words of Command are those,

As ye were. Face to the right about, Face to the left about, Half Files face
to the right or left about.

Some say only, To the right about, to the left about, etc.

Count In his direct. of war.
Mansfield his words of Command, are: By the right hand to the Rear: By the
left hand to the Rear: which are all one with the former.

But our Scots words, To your first order. Right round about, Left round about,
Sixth Rank right or left round about.



They are very improper, and I wish our commanders could agree to change them,
for to turn round about, is to bring your face to the part where ye stood in
before ye turned, and so ye shall face not to the Rear but to the Front
again.

If the Enemy charge you on all sides, ye must face to the Front, Rear, and
Flanks: the Grecians called this Battle (...). Alexander at Arbela was forced
to draw up his Battle after this fashion as Frontinus Stratagem. lib. 2. cap.
3.
Frontinus does report: Alexander ad Arbela cum hostium multitudinem
vereretur, virtuti autem suorum fideret, aciem in omnem partem spectantem
ordinavit, ut circumventi vndique pugnare possent. It is also described by
Aelian Tact. c. 36.
Aelian to whom I refer the Reader, for I cannot insist particularly in all
things: but you shall mark that when such a charge is expected, and that, ye
are forced to frame such a Battle, ye must enlarge your deipth above 10.

But before I go further, I must advertise you, of one thing, which will serve
in all Motions: When ye would reduce your Soldiers to their first station, ye
are to command them, As ye were, or To your first order: which the Aelian.
Tactic. cap. 25. and 27.
Greeks called (...) Leo Tact. cap. 7. 79.
Leo (...). The French calls it Remettez vous, and so ye are to bring them
back to the place from which they went by the contrary way, As for example,
if they turned to the right hand: they must return back again to the left
hand: If they turned to the left, they must return to the right: If they
turned to the right about, they must return to the left about, and so forth.
Aelian Aelian Tact. cap. 25.
describes this Motion to be (...), to restore the Soldiers sight to the
former aspect he had in the beginning: That is, before he turned.

Of Doublings.
Tit. 7.
DOubling is, a Motion of a part of the Battle (for the part doubled stands,
and the part doubling only moves) Whereby either the length or the deipth is
augmented: and therefore Doubling is of two sorts, Doubling of Ranks.
of Ranks or of Files.

Doubling of Ranks is a Motion whereby the length of the Battle is enlarged,
and the deipth diminished, by inserting the one half of the Ranks in the
other. Leo Tact. cap. 7. 16. etc. 9. 109.
Leo calls this Motion (...), and (...). Aelian Tact. c. 28.
Aelian calls it (...), or (...). The Motion is performed sundry ways.

FIrst when the evin Ranks are inserted into the odds, as the second in the
first, the fourth in the third, the sixth in the fifth, and so forth, and this
is to be done either to the right or left hand.

If the Command be to double to the right hand, then every man that doubles
steps foreward upon the right hand of his Leader: If the command be to the
left, he that doubles steps foreward on the left hand, of his Leader, so
that of ten ranks they become five, and consequently five deep, and if they
were before 20. in Rank, they become 40. and therefore 40. Files, as in the
figures following is shown.

ABCD


EFGH


The figure A. B. C. D. is a doubling of Ranks to the right hand, where ye
see the evin Ranks 2.4.6.8.10. step forwards upon the right hand of their
Leaders, the odd Ranks 1. 3. 5. 7. 9. The evin Ranks, are marked with these
points..... by which you may consider the place they stood in before the
doubling, and these marks / /// shows the way they go up on the right hand
of their Leaders: and being doubled, ye see the second Rank is inserted in
the first, the 4. in the 3. the 6. in the 5, the 8. in the 7, the 10, in the 9.
The figure E. F. G. H. is a doubling to the left hand, where ye see the evin
Ranks are inserted as the former, but only that they step forward on the
left hand of their Leaders as these marks \\\\ shows. In the first figure I
have put the number of the Ranks upon the left Flank A. C: In the second on
the right Flank F. H. because the Motion is most perceptible upon those sides.

The Motion is to be performed by the Soldiers in three steps, How the
Motion is done.
beginning with the left leg and stepping forward with the right upon the
right or left hand of their Leaders, and then bringing up the left leg, place
themselves in evin Rank with the rest: but in reducement, they must turn to
the contrary hand, that is, if they doubled to the right, they must turn
again to the left: and if they doubled to the left, they must turn to the
right, because it is the shortest way to to their own place.

The words of Command are, Ranks as ye were. Ranks to the right hand
double, Ranks to the left hand double,



Our Scots words of Command, Ranks to your first order. Double your Ranks to
the right hand, Double your Ranks to the left hand.



Secondly Ranks are doubled by the Bringers-vp, when the last Rank aduanceth
through the distances between the Files, and after it the nixt last Rank, and
so the rest successively till the Bringers-vp be in Rank with the Leaders.
The 9 Rank with the 2. the 8 with the 3. the 7 with the 4. The Bringers-vp
middlemen with the Leaders middlemen: so your Front is doubled with your best
men: and this is done as the former, either to the right or left hand: If the
Command be to the right, the Bringers-vp with those that follow, go up, upon
the right hand of the Leaders: if to the left, they go up upon their left
hand, as in these figures following appears.

IKLM


NOPQ


The figure I. K. L. M. is a doubling of the Bringers-vp to the right hand:
where ye see the 10 Rank with the 9. and 8. following it, are marching through
the distances of the Files, and going up upon the right hand of the Leaders,
until the 10 Rank come to the Front I. K. And as the Ranks marches up to the
Front, they leave as many void places toward the Rear L, M. as in the figure
ye may see marked by these points...

The figure N O P Q shows a doubling of the Bringers-vp to the left hand,
where the 10. Rank with the rest following it, are marching up upon the left
hand of the Leaders toward the Front N. O. and leaves the void spaces toward
the Rear P. Q. as did the former.

Let the Pickemen observe when they begin to double, that they Advance or mount
their Pickes: and when they have doubled, that they order or ouer-end them: and
in reducement, that they turn to the contrary hand, as I show before in the
first doubling.

Count Mansfield in his directions of War.
Count Mansfield calls this Motion, A doubling by induction.

The words of Command are, Bringers-vp as ye were. Bringers-vp, double your
Front to the Right. Bringers-vp double your Front to the Left.



Our Scots words of Command are, Tenth Rank to your first Order. Tenth Rank
to the right hand advance to the Front. Tenth Rank to the Left hand advance to
the Front.



Thirdly Ranks are doubled by Middle-men, or half Files, that is to say, The
last five Ra^ks marches up through the distances betwixt the Files, till the
Bringers-vp Middle-men be in evin Front, with the File-Leaders, so that the
sixth Rank (of 10, deipth) doubleth the first, the 7. the 2. the 8. the 3. the
9. the 4. the Bringers-vp the Leaders Middle-men: And this is done, either to
the right or left hand, as the former, when the Middle-men goes up either to
the right or left hand of the Leaderes: according to the word of Command, as
the figures following shows.

RSTV


XYZA


Those two figures are battles of Pickes only, which I have set down for
breafe perspicuities cause: for ye may imagine the like Motions to be done, by
Musketeers on the Flanks: The Battle then R. S. T. V. is a doubling of
Ranks by Middle-men to the right hand, where ye see the sixth Rank with the
7.8.9. and 10. following it, is going up upon the right hand of the Leaders, to
the Front R.S. and leaving the void spaces where they stood toward the Rear
T. V. so that the deapth which was before from S. to V. is now diminished to
the half. X. Y. Z. A. is a doubling by Middle-men to the left, where the samine
ranks marches up upon the left hand of the Leaders to the Front X. Y. leaving
their void spaces toward the Rear Z. A. and diminishing the deapth as the
former.

The words of Command, Half Files as ye were. Middle-men or half Files, to
the right hand double your Front. Middle-men or half Files, to the left hand
double your Front.



Our Scotes words of Command are, Sixth Rank to your first order. Sixth Rank
to the right hand, advance to the Front. Sixth Rank to the left hand, advance
to the Front.



Observe that those doublinges are to be done at open order.

FOurthlie, Ranks are doubled by Middle-men or half Files enteare, or by
division: enteare, when the half Files or last five Ranks faceth about to the
hand, to which they are commanded to double; and marches out altogether from
the Body, till they be clear of it, and then face to the Front, and march up
to join themselves in evin Front, with the File Leaders: By division, when
those half Files do face the one half to the right hand, the other to the
left, and so going out from the Body, they march up upon both Flanks, until
they come and Front with the File-Leaders, as may be seen by these figures
following.

ABC


DEF


GHIK


The figure A. B. C. is a doubling of the Front by the half Files to the right
hand enteare, where ye see the last five Ranks C. are passed out together
from the Body, and are marching up upon the right Flank B. to join in evin
Front with the first 5. ra^kes. The figure D. E. F. is a doubling to the left
hand, where the last five Ranks F. are gone out from the Body to the left,
and are marching up the left Flank D. to front with the rest, as the former
did upon the right. G. H. I. K. is a doubling to the right and left by
division, where ye see the last 5. Ranks I.K. has divided themselves and
gone out from the Body; the one half K. marching up the right Flank H. the
other half I. marching up the left Flank G. to join all in evin Front with
the rest.

The words of Command are, Half Files as ye were. Half Files to the right,
double your Front Enteare. Half Files to the left double your Front Enteare.
Half Files double your Front to the right and left by division.



I have not seen our Scots Commanders use this Motion in their exercease, and
therefore I cannot set down their words of Command.

In this Motion, if you would keep your shot and your pickes together, ye
must cause your shot on the Flanks to edge out-ward, and leave a distance for
the Pickes to come up and join with the rest, and your Shot that doubleth,
marches out, and joyneth with rest of the Shot.

I have heard many Commanders slight this Motion as unprofitable: but I do not
approve their opinion, for I hold it the most useful Motion that can be
practiced in doubling of Ranks, and more serviceable tha^ any other doubling
whatsoever: because all other doublings must be done at open order and
therefore cannot be used when the enemy comes to charge, or in time of
fight, because that distance is not fit to receive the charge of the Enemy,
but these doublinges are done at close order, and therefore may be used in time
of fight, and at all other times, without any trouble: Again, other doublings
disturbes the Battle, and makes a confusion by marching through the Files of
the Body: And in this doubling, the half Files marching out from the Body,
breeds no disorder, nor disturbance at all: but on the contrary brings up
fresh aides upon the Flanks against the Enemy, and will affright him no
less, than if a new Battaillion werecomming to charge him. Lastly, it is
more conducible for the use of doubling (which ye shall see hereafter) seeing
it extends more the length of the Battle, and keeps it more from
ouer-winging, than any other doubling: For if the enemy come upon you with a
(...), that is, an ouerwinging Battle, minding to encompasse either of your
Flanks: by this Motion ye may handsomelie rencounter him: For if it be your
right Flank which he persewes, ye ought to use the doubling Enteare to the
right hand, A. B. C. If it be the left Flank, ye are to use the doubling
Enteare to the left hand D. E. F. But if he come upon you with a (...), that
is, an ouer-fronting Battle, minding to encompasse both your Wings, then ye
are to use the doubling to the right and left by division G. H. I. K. so that
by this Motion, ye are ready to resist all his attempes Capt. Bing. in his
Notes upon. Aelia^ Tac. c. 29. 3. and 5.
Captain Bingam (whose learning and understanding in the Airte Militar is
sufficiently known) does allow of this Motion, and commends it above the
other do ublinges. The illustrious Count Mansfielde in his direction of War.
Count Mansfield himself (whose Authority is sufficient to stop the mouths
of all contradictors) discribeth this doubling, and sets it down with the
words of Command, as very useful: But laying aside Authority, the argument
is clear.

That Motion which in time of fight, without disturbance of the Battle
brings supply unto it, and annoyeth the Enemy, is a steadable Motion.

But, doubling of the Front enteare to either hand or by division, is such a
Motion.

Ergo it is a steadable Motion.

The major is manifest, the minor I have already provene: so that this Motion
remains good and steadable in service, although those who understand it not,
disdain it, and neglect the practice of it: I have insisted longer in this
point, than I would have done, because I cannot digest the hautie ignorance of
many Commanders, who slighteth and contemns all things which surpasses the
reach of their understanding.

There is yet other doublings of Ranks, as namely by Countermarch, which Leo
Tac* c. 7.9.84.
Leo describes in those words (...) etc. And I have seen it often practiced by
the English. It is thus done: The Captain commands the Files to
countermarch to the right or left (what Countermarch is, ye shall see
hereafter) then the File-Leaders begins to turn, and the rest following
them, they march down through the Files, till the Leaders be in evin rank
with the Bringers-vp: then presently he commands them to halt or stand, so
that the last five Rank are faced to the Front, and the first five to the
Rear: The Captain then if he will have the Battle fronting as it was, he
commands the first five Ranks to face about to him: which done, they shall
all have their faces directed one way toward the Front: But if he please to
turn the aspect of his whole Battle toward the Rear he commands thee
Rear division, or last five ranks, to face about, and so the whole Battle
shall be faced about to the Rear: This is of singular use against an enemy,
coming to charge your Rear, and to encompasse you: For by this Motion in an
instant, ye both double the length of your Battle, and bring your best men to
receive the charge of the enemy: And this is the use which the Emperor Leo.
Tact. c. 7.
Leo makes of this Motion, who was the breauest Commander of his time, and who
for his exquisite knowledge in the Art Military was brought to wear the
Imperial Crown.

There is another doubling of Ranks, when the evin Ranks are drawn out
fully from the Body toward either of the Flanks, or else when they divide
themselves, and march out toward both Flanks together, Count Count Mansfield
in his direct. of war.
Mansfield calls this to double the Front by the Flanks: The Emperor Leo.
Tac. c. 7. 69.
Leo speaks also of it, and says, It is to be done by this word of command
(...).

Ranks also are doubled by wheeling the Flanks, into the Body, as ye shall
see here after. The use of Doubling of Ranks.


The general use of Doubling of Ranks Aelian Tact. c. 28.
Aelian sets down clearelie, (...). The length of the Battle is doubled,
when either they purpose to ouerwing the Enemy or else expectes to be
ouerwinged by him.

This did Polienus Strat lib. 2. in Cleandrida 4.
Cleandridas the Lacedemonian General against the Leucans, for he surpassing
them in multitude, first drew his Battle to a great deapth, that he might
allure them to charge, which the Leucans seeing drew out their Army in length
and came foreward to encompasse his wings: but Cleandridas doubling the length
of his (...) ouerfronted them and overthrew them.

The Emperor Leo. Tact. cap. 7. 69.
Leo gives another reason of Doubling the length of the Battle (...) (says
he) (...). etc. The length of the Battle is doubled for ornament, and to make
a fair show, or to make it equal with another Battle: or else to affright
the Enemy, making him think your multitude to be greater then it is: as did
Polienus Strat. lib. ^. in Antigono 19.
Antigonus against Eumenes.

But the Emperor Leo Tact c. 14. 108.
Leo gives an good advertisement and caution for doubling the length of the
Battle, whereof all Commanders should take heed: (...) (says he) (...) etc.
When the deapth of the Battle is drawn up in length, it must not be so
lengthned that it be ouerweakned in the deapth, for it will fall out that the
Enemies shall easily break it asunder and make a passage through it, and will
not only encompasse it before but passing through the midst will be found
behind, and there do great harm: Wherefore a General should not only seek
to prevent this, but to do the like to the Enemy.

Aelian speaks of a doubling of Ranks in place, which is nothing but an
opening of Files to a greater distance.

DOubling of Files, OF doubling of Files.
is a Motion whereby the deapth of the Battle is increased, and the length
diminished by inserting the one half of the Files in the other: Leo Tact. c.
7. 16 etc. 14 109.
Leo calls this Motion (...): and (...). Aelian Tact. c. 28.
Aelian calls it, (...): And is performed sundry ways.

FIrst, when the one half of the Files fall in into the other, the evin Files
into the odd, when the command of Doubling is to the right hand: the odd
Files into the evin, when the command is to the left, so that of 10. deep they
are made 20. and therefore 20. Ranks and if they were 10. in Rank, they
become but 5. and therefore 5. Files. The first is this way done, The right
hand File which is the first, stands still, the second Filenext it, steps
about and moves in into it: every one going behind his right hand Sydeman, so
does the 4. into the 3. the 6. into the 5. the 8. into the 7. the 10. into the
9. and so forth if there be more Files in your Battle. Doubling to the left is
when the left hand File together with the rest of the evin Files stands still,
and the odd Files turns about to the left and steps in behind their Sydemen
on the left hand, so that the first File is inserted in the second, the 3* in
the 4; the 5. in the 6, and so forth of the rest of the Files of your Battle,
as the figures following shows.

PQRS


LMNO


The figure L. M. N O. shows you a doubling of Files to the right hand, where
ye see the evin Files 2. 4 6. 8. 10. inserted in the odd Files. 1. 3. 5. 7.
9. P. Q. R. S. shows a doubling to the left hand, where ye see the odd
Files 1. 3. 5. 7. 9. moves into the evin. 2 4. 6. 8. 10. These points ^
lets you see the place where the Files stood ^ before the Doubling. Those
marks / \ shew^ eth the way of the Motion, which in the first figure is
toward the right hand M. O. and in the other toward the left hand P. R. How
to do the Motion.


For the right action of this Motion, your Soldiers must observe, that if the
command be to double to the right hand, then they who double first turns
about, and sets foreward the right Leg, next steppeth foreward with the
left leg behind their Sidemen on the right hand, and then brings on the right
Leg, and place their Body even in a right line behind their Sideman now
their Leader, and in reducement to come again to their former Posture, they
must first move their left Leg and in three steps recover their first
Station: If the command be to double to the left hand, they who double first
turns about, and sets foreward their left Leg, then steppeth foreward
with the right, behind their Sydemen on the left hand, and then brings on
their left Leg, and places their Body in an evin line with their Side. men.
In reducement they first move their right Leg, and in three steps returns
to the Posture they were in.

The words of Command, Files as ye were. Files to the right hand double Files
to the left hand double



Our words of Command, Stringes to your first order. Double your Stringes to
the right hand Double your Stringes to the left hand



Observe that this Doubling must be done at open order.

I have seen some Commanders in exerceasing, command a Doubling of Files to
the right and left by division: which was done by inserting the evin Files of
the right Flank in the odd, and the odd Files of the left Flank, in the
evin: But in this Motion the Files must consist of a number diuisible in evin
numbers, as 8. 12. 16. And this I think more curious then profitable

Observe that Doubling of Ranks and Files, are one another reducements, but to
the contrary hand, as if there be a doubling of Ranks to the right hand, ye
may command Files double to the left, and so the Ranks are reduced to their
first Posture. If the Ranks be doubled to the left, then command Files to
double to the right, and so ye bring the Ranks as they were. Again, if there
be a doubling of Files to the right, command Ranks to double to the left, and
so ye restore Files to their first Station: If the Files be doubled to the
left, command Ranks to double to the right, and so the Files are reduced.

Secondly Files are doubled by Countermarch (says Aelian. Tact. c. 28.
Aelian) when the evin Files countermarch, to the Rear, and place themselves
behind the bringers. up of the odd Files: And this is if the Command be to
the right hand: But if it be to the left, the odd Files Countermarcheth and
places themselves in the Rear of the evin. Or it is done, when the Files
divides themselnes (says. s. Aelian) that it to say, Aelian dict. cap. 28
The Files upon the one Flank separates themselves from the Files on the other
Flank (for ye must conceive the Body to be divided into two Flanks) and
countermarcheth to the Rear, and there places themselves behind the standing
Files of the other Flank, according as the word is given to the right or left
hand: for if the command be to the right hand, the Files of the left Flank
countermarches to the Rear, and places themselves behind the Files of the
right Flank: if the Command be to the left, the Files of the right Flank
does the like behind the Files of the left Flank, as in the figurs following.

ABCD


TVXY


IKLM


EFGH


This figure T. V. X, Y. is a doubling by countermarch to the right hand. X. Y
was the Rear of the Battle before the Doubling, but after the Doubling, ye
see the 2. 4. 6. 8. and 10. Files are counter-marched to the Rear, and placed
behind the odd Files, so that the deapth which streatched before from V. to Y.
is now augmented to the double. A. B. C. D. is a Doubling by Countermarch to
the left hand, where the Rear before the Doubling was C. D. and the deapth of
the Battle which was only from B. to D. is now extended so far as the odd
Files are countermarched and placed behind the evin Files. The figure E. F. G.
H. is the second manner of Doubling, by Countermarch, where the half of the
Files that was upon the left Flank E. G. to wit, the 10. 9. 8. 7. and 6. has
divided themselves from the Files of the right Flank, and are Countermarched
to the Rear and enlarged the deapth F. H. to the Double. In. I. K. L. M. the
first five Files of the right Flank K. M. are divided from the rest, and
countermarched to the Rear of the left Flank, and has augmented the deapth
I. L. as did the former.

The words of Command may be those, Files as ye were. Double your Files by
Countermarch to the right hand. Double your Files by Countermarch to the left
hand. Diuid your Files and double them by Countermarch to the right or left
hand.



This Motion was often used amongst the Grecians, but I have not seen it
practiced in our modern exercease.

Thirdly, Files are doubled by advanceing or leading forth: when the evin
Files marches out from the Body, and places themselves in a right* line
before the Leaders of the odd Files, if the Command be to the right hand: and
the odd Fills before the evin, if the Command be to the left hand: or else it
is done when the one half of the Files upon either Flank marches forth
together and advances before the Files of the other Flank, according as the
Command is to the right or left hand if to the right, the Files of the left
Flank advances before the right Flank: if to the left, the Files of the
right Flank advances before the Files of the left Flank, as in the figures
following.

RSTV


NOPQ


DEFGHI


XYZABC


The figure N. O. P. Q. shows a doubling to the right hand by advancing the
evin Files before the odd: N. O. was the front of the Battle before the
Doubling: the deapth was fio^ O. to Q. which now is extended to the double. R.
S. T. V. is a Doubling to the left hand, by advancing the odd Files before the
evin: R S was the Front before the douling, and S. V. the deapth, which is
extended as the former: The other two figures are doublings by advancing of the
half of the Files: Z. A. B. C. is a doubling of the half of the Files to the
right, where the Files of the left Flank Z B, the 10. 9. 8, 7. and 6.
advances together before the Files of the right Flank. Z. A. was the Front or
length of the Battle before the Doubling which now is contracted to X. Y. A C
was the deapth of the Battle, which is now extended to C. A. Y. The other F.
G. H I. is a Doubling of the half of the Files, to the left; for the Files of
the right Flank 1. 2 3. 4. and 5. advances before the Files of the left
Flank the Front of the Battle before the Doubling F. G. is now d^minished to
D. E. the deapth F. H. is now augmented to H. F. D.

Those Doublings extends the deapth of the Battle toward the Front, as the
doublinges by Countermarch did toward the Rear.

Those Doublings alters ground, but if ye desire to keep the same ground,
Count Mansfield in his Direct of War. page 45.
Count Mansfield shows a way, which is to make the Files that are to double
to close their Ranks forewards: and the other to close backwards, and so by a
little edgeing aside, shall be placed before them: But the publisher of his
directions has mistaken himself in saying, that the Leaders of the half,
which is to double, will stand alittle beyond the Bringers up of the other
half: for it is the Bringers-vp of the half which is to double that will
stand before the Leaders of the other half.

The words of Command, Files as ye were. Files advance, and double to the
right hand. Files advance, and double to the left hand. Divide your Files, and
double them to the right or left.
Count Mansfield uses those words File upon File. Files double the Body to
the right or left hand.


FOurthlie, Files are doubled by the Flanks, that is, When the Files of either
Flank are inserted in the other, and so double them, and that either to the
right or left: If the Command be to double the right Flank, then the Files of
the left Flank (for ye must conceive the whole Body to be divided into two
Flanks) faceth to the right hand, and marches through the spaces of the right
Flank, till the sixth File be in one evin File with the first, the 7. with the
2. the 8. with the 3. the 9. with the 4 and the 10. with the 5. and then they
face as the rest: If the word be to Double the left Flank, then the Files of
the right Flank faceth to the left, and do as the former, till the fifth File
join with the 10 the 4. with the 9. the 3. with the 8. the 2. with the 7. the
1. with the 6. as these figures following shows.

OPQR


KLMN


The figure K. L. M. N. is a Doubling of the right Flank by the left: where ye
see the Files of the left Flank K. M. which are the 10. 9. 8. 7. and 6. are
joined with the Files of the right Flank L. N.

O P Q R shows a Doubling of the left Flank by the right: where the Files of
the right Flank P. R. the 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5. are inserted in the Files of the
left Flank O. Q. Of both the Battelles, the length K. L. and O. P. are
contracted to the half; and so the Battle is brought into a wing, whereof is
made the (...), described by Aelian. Tact c. 27.
Aelian^. These points ^ in all these former figurs shows the place where ^
the Doubling Files stood.

The words of Command, Files as ye were. Files double your right Flank. Files
double your left Flank.



Some say, Half Ranks double your right or left Flank.

This Doubling mixeth your Arms, which if ye would eschew, ye may
countermarch your Flank, beginning the Motion with the uttermost File of that
Flank, which doubleth: making it march through the distances betwixt Ranks,
till it join with the uttermost File of the other Flank, the rest following it
successively, so your Pickes shall double your Pickes, and your Musketeers
your Musketeers: As if ye should suppose the tenth File of the figure K. L.
M. N, to double the first, the 9 the 2. the 8. the 3. and so forth. But of
this ye shall know more hereafter.

Observe that ye may proceed in doubling your Files, till ye bring your
whole Battle in two Files, or one File.

Or ye may do this, by making your Ranks File to either hand, or both by
division: If ye command Ranks to File to the right hand, the right hand man of
every Rank stands still, the next to him falls behind him, the rest of the
Rank follow, until the whole Rank be in a File: All the Ranks do the
same, falling behind their right hand man, and making one File of the whole
Body. If the word be to the left, the left hand man stands firm, the next to
him falls behind him, and the rest follow, and all the Rank falls behind
their left hand man, and so are converted in one File: But in this Motion ye
must observe a Double distance, Yet if it be in a March, ye may do it at any
Or der: Some call this Motion, Fileing by conversion: But ye must observe that
in a great Front ye can not well use this Motion. If ye would bring your Bodic
in two Files, the one half of the Ranks fall into the right hand File, the
other into the left hand File, the right and left hand File standing fast, and
the rest of the Files inverting to them, for some calls this Motion Fileing
by inversion.

VX


ST


VZ


The figure S. T. is a Fileing of Ranks to the right hand, where ye see the
first rank is casting it self in a File behind the right hand man. V. X. is a
Fileing to the left hand, where the first Rank is going to File behind the
left hand man, and as the first Ranks in both does, so ye must imagine the
rest to do in an instant. Y. Z. is a Fileing to the right and left by
division, where ye see the half of the first Rank falling in behind the
right hand man, and the other half of it behind the left hand man: which also
ye must conceive the rest of the Ranks to do.

The words of Command, File Rank as ye were. Ranks File to the right hand
Ranks File to the left hand
Some say, Ranks File by conversion to the right or left hand.
Files as ye were. Ranks File to the right and left by division. Or Ranks
File by inversion to the right or left.



There is yet a Doubling of Files by wheeling the Ranks to the right or left
hand. If the word be to the right, the right hand man turns to the right, and
the rest of his Rank wheel together, and come above him on the left hand, all
the Ranks does the like: If the command be to the left, the left hand man
turns to the left, the rest of his Rank comes all above him on the right
hand, and so all the other Ranks.

CD


AB


The figure A. B. is a wheeling to the right hand: where ye see the first
Rank wheeling about the right hand man, and coming up upon his left hand. C.
D. is a wheeling to the left hand, where the first Rank is wheeling about the
left hand man, and coming up on his right hand, and so does all the rest of
the Ranks.

The words of Command, Ranks as ye were. Ranks wheel to the right hand,
Ranks wheel to the left hand



Ye may wheel Ranks also to the right or left by division.

The use of Doubling of Files, is to strengthen the deapth of your Battle, to
resist the Enemy, The use of Doubling of Files.
when ye think he minds to break through and divide your forces: It serves
also to let the shot go through your Files, when ye are marching toward an
Fort, for which the first manner of Doubling is proper, and the Fileing of
Ranks to the right or left hand: Also to give a Vollie of Musquetados upon
either Flank, or both: or to make a street for a General, or some great
Commander to go through, or else to lodge the Colors: The Fileing of Ranks
to the right or left, or both by division, or the wheeling of Ranks performs
this. It serves also to make your Forces seem small to allure the Enemy to
fight as did Polien. Strat. lib, 2. in Cleandri.. 4.
Cleandridas against the Leucans: who first first drew out his (...) in a
greath deapth, whereby his enemies contemning his apparentlie small number, did
charge him, but he instantly doubling his Ranks, did encompasse them, and
overthrow them.

But ye must take heed (as the Emperor Leo Tact. c. 14.. 109.
Leo advertiseth in these words (...) etc.) That when ye double the deapth of
your Battle, ye make not the Front of your Army too narrow, and so give
occasion to the Enemy to ouerfront you, and encompasse you, which was Polyb.
histor lib. 1.. 10.
Marcus Attilius Regulus, his error in the Battle against the Carthagenians
for he fearing the Forces of the Carthagenian Elephants to break through his
Army, drew his Battle to so great a deapth, that it was easily encompassed
by the Carthagenian horsemen, led by Zantippus the Lacedemonian, and by them
utterly defeat, and himself taken prisoner. For as too much weakening of the
deapth, and doubling the length of your Battle puts in danger to be divided
and broken: So too much Doubling the deapth, and diminishing the length puts it
in perrill to be ouerwinged, and encompassed: And therefore a wise Commander
will have a care, if his Front be narrow, to take the advantage of a Trench,
River or Marish, thereby to secure his Flanks that the Enemy may not annoy
him there, and if he can attain to none of those, yet to make use of his own
Wagons.

Observe that this Motion of Doublings alters the form of the Battle,
changing both the length and the deapth thereof, which no other Motion does.

Observe also, that in Doubling the length of your Battle ye make the (...),
and in doubling the deapth ye make the (...) described by Aelian Tact. c. 29.
Aelian. Aelian Tact. c. 28.
Aelian speaks of a Doubling of the deapth, in place which is nothing but an
opening of Ranks to a geater distance.

Of Evolution or Countermarch.
Tit. 8.
EVolution or Countermarch called by the Grecians Aelian Tact. c. 26.
(...). is a Motion of the whole Battle whereby the Front is brought in place
of the Rear, or one Flank in place of the other.

And therefore Countermarch is two fold: of Files, or of Ranks, and both of
those, says Aelian Tact. c. 26.
Aelian is threefold, for either they gain ground (in marching not in
charging) or loose ground, or keep that same ground, the first is called the
Macedonian Countermarch, the second the Lacedemonian, the third the Chorean or
Persian.

The Macedonian Countermarch by File (so called from the Macedonians who were
the inventers and users of it) is described by Aelian Tact. c. 27.
Aelian in those words (...), (...) etc. When the File-Leader turns his
face, and the bringer up with all the rest go against him on the right or left
hand, and passing on to the ground before the Fro^t of the phalanx places
themselves in order, one after another according as the File Leader himself
has turned his face: Or it is, when the File-Leader turns his face, and the
next to him passing by him, on the right or left hand, places himself behind
him, and so all the rest one after another: As ye shall see in the figure
following.

EFABCD


A B C D is the Battle before the Countermarch. E F A B the Battle after the
Countermarch, which has left the ground A B C D wherein it stood, which ye
see marked with points, and taken the ground before it E F A B, and are all
faced about to the Rear. A B which before the Countermarch was the Front,
does yet remain the Front, but the right hand File B D is become the left
hand File B F and the left hand File A C, the right hand File A E. the Rear C
D is now the Rear E F.

The words of Command, Files Countermarch and gain ground.

The Lacedemonian Countermarch by File, (so called from the Lacedaemonians who
invented and practiced this Motion) is set down by Aelian Tact. c. 27.
Aelian in those words (...) etc. When the File-Leader turning his face about
to the Pick transferreth the whole File to a place equal to the first, and
the rest following stands behind him: or else, When the Bringer-vp turns his
face about, and he that stood next before him passing by on either hand, is
placed again next before him and the rest following takes place one before
another as they stood till the File Leader be first.

GHIKLM


G H I K is the Battle before the Countermarch I K L M the Battle after the
Countermarch which has left the ground it stood in before, and taken the
ground behind it, the Flanks are changed as in the former figure. H K the
right Flank to K M the left, and G I the left Flank to I L the right: But the
Front G H is brought to be the Front L M contrary to the former, where the
Front of both figures A B did keep still one place.

The words of Command, Files Countermarch and loose ground.

The proceeding of this Countermarch is contrare to the former, for the
Macedonian took the ground before the Battle, but this possesses the ground
after the Battle: In the Macedonian the Motion is from the Rear to the Front,
in this the Motion is from the Front to the Rear: The Macedonian seems to
run away, but the Lacedemonian to charge, and therefore it is preferred to
the Macedonian by Aelian Tact. c. 27.
Aelian, because says he, (...). It makes a show of falling on, the Enemy
appearing behind: Whereas the Macedonian (...), It makes a semblance to the
Enemies appearing in the Rear of flying away: neuerhelesse, in some cases, the
Macedonian is of greater use, as if ye desire to gain some ground of
advantage, or else when ye desire to March on and not give Battle, for by it
ye do noways hinder your March, but continues the same, and in the mean time
may make your Musketeers give fire upon the Enemy, so that ye both March and
fight: But the Laced emonian falls on upon the Enemy, and interupteth the
March, Zenephon. bistor. grec. lib. 6.605.
Agesilaus the Lacedemonian General seems to have used this Countermarch,
when he made his Army to March out of the Straites of Mantinea, perceiving
that his Enemies were to charge his Rear, from the Hills he made his
Reare-guarde to Countermarch, and go out of the Straites, himself staying
last with the Avantguarde: The samine: Zenoph. hist. grec. lib. 4.519.
Agesilaus having embattelled his Troops at Coronea against the Thebans
himself had the right wing of the phalanx and put the Argiues on the left wing
of the Theban Army to flight, but the Thebans having beaten the Orchemenians
who were upon his left wing forced a passage through them to the Baggadge;
which he understanding, did presently Countermarch his phalanx and led
against them, where after a fnrious chocke he killed many of them: and many
fled away to Helicon after their Confederates.

The Persian or Cretan Countermarch, used by the Persians and Cretans, is also
called Chorean, from the similitude of the Grecian Dances, which ^he Dauncers,
called Chorus, used. for they ordered themselves in Ranks and Files, and
danced one through another, keeping the same bounds of the place. This
Countermarch is described by Aelian Tact. c. 27.
Aelian in those words (...) etc. The Chorean is, when the File-leaders
turning to the Pick or the Target preceedeth the File: The rest following,
till the Leader have gotten the place of the Bringer-vp and the Bringer up the
place of the Leader, the Bedie moving joynthie together, so that this
Countermarch maintains and keeps the samine ground the Batell stood in: And
this is our Modern Countermarch which we use in our exercease.

NOPQ


Ye see the figure N O P Q, where the File-leaders of every File, with their
next followers, that is to say, The first two Ranks are turned to the right
hand, and has begun to Countermarch, and are in the distances betwixt the
Files, so that the two last of every File, that is, The 10. and 9. Rank has
marched up with the rest to the Front N O. and has left the place of the Rear
P Q so much void as the first two Ranks has marched through the Files from the
place of the Front: so that the File-Leaders shall march until they come to
the place of the Bringers-vp P Q. and the Bringers up, till they come to the
place of the File leaders N O. and there do stand, and face about with the
rest.

Captain Bingam in his Notes upon Aelians Tact. c. 28.
Bingam expresses this Motion more lively by figures of Armed Picke-men.

The words of Command, Files to the right hand Countermarch. Files to the left
hand Countermarch.


Our words of Command are, Stringes to the right hand Countermarch. Stringes
to the left hand Countermarch.


Because this Chorean Countermarch is that which is used in our exercease, How
the Motion of this Countermarch is done.
I will show you how the motion is performed. If the word of Command be to
Countermarch to the right hand, then all the File-leaders at one instant
stepeth foreward with the right leg: and bringing about their left leg
turns their Body to the right hand, and so march down through the Files,
till they come to the place of the Bringers-vp, where they shall stand, the
rest that follows the File-leaders, must not offer to turn, before they have
come up to the place of the File-leaders. If the Command be to the left hand
then the File-leaders must step foreward with the left leg, and bringing about
the right leg turn their Body to the left hand, and march down as the
former; The figure N O P Q shows a Countermarch to the right hand. The other
to the left hand, by it may be easily understood, for if ye make the
File-leaders to turn toward N P. which ye see now turned toward O Q. it shall
be a Countermarch to the left hand.

It seems to me to be this Chorean Countermarch whereof the Emperor Leo
Tact. c. 12, 65.
Lee speaks, giving this word of Command (...).

It is to be observed in this Motion of Countermarch, that cuerie follower
remarke his Leader, and his right hand man, that by them he may keep a due
distance; for otherwise the least disorder in this Motion will breed a
confusion of the whole Body.

Observe also that this Motion of Countermarch cannot be done, but at open
Order: Also it ought not to be practiced when the Enemy is near hand: for if
the Enemy should suddenly charge a Battle, while it is Counterraarching, he
should assuredly overthrow it, so that in this case, the best expedient is to
face about your Battle.

The use of Countermarching of Files is, if the Enemy appear in the Rear and
come to charge you, ye may by this Motion bring your File-leaders who are your
best men to encounter with him: for it was ever the use of good Co^manders to
bring the front of their Battle against their enemies: Thus Fro^tinus
witnesses, Alexander and Julius Caesar to have been accustomed to bring the
Soldiers who were in acie or the Front of the Battle, to fight against their
Enemy Frontinus Strat. lib. I. c. 3.
Alexander Macedo cum haberet vehementem exercitum, semper eum statum belli
elegit ut acie confligeret. Caius Casar Bello civili cum exercitum vete, ranum
haberet, hostium autem tyronem esse sciret, acie semper decertare studuit.

COuntermarching of Ranks is when one wing of your Battle is brought in place
of the other, OF Counter-marching of Ranks.
or the wings into the midst of the Battle, or one wing to double the other.

This Countermarch is also threefolde as the former of Files, for it is
Macedonian Laceden onian and Chorean. The Macedonian takes the ground which is
on the contrare wing from the Enemy, and therefore seems to march away from
him.

The Lacedemonian takes the ground which lies on the side of that wing which
is toward the Enemy, and therefore makes a show of charging him. The Chorean
keeps still the same ground whereon the Battle stood before the
Countermarch: Aelian speaks but little of those cou^termarches by Ra^ks,
neither have I seen them much used in our exercise: Yet for your understanding
I will set down their Motion, and their figures, because some good use may be
made of them.

In the Macedonian Countermarch by Rank the right hand corner File faces to
the left hand, and stands, the rest of every Rank passes through, and place
themselves orderly behind their right hand sidemen, beginning either with the
uttermost File on the left Flank, or with the File next the right hand File,
and so they take up the ground which was on the right wing of the Battle.

RSVX


STXY


R S V X is the Battle before the Countermarch, S T X Y the Battle after the
Countermarche, which has left the place it had, and takin the place upon the
right wing, and are all faced about to the left; so that the front before R S
is now become the right Flank S T. The right hand File before S X is now
become the Front.

The words of command Left wing Countermarche through to the place beyond the
right wing. or Ranks Countermarche from the left wing to the right.


The Lacedemonian Countermarche by Rank is when the left hand corner File
turns his face to the left hand and the rest of every Rank pass through to
the left, and place themselves orderly before their left hand side-man,
beginning either from the uttermost File on the right hand, or from the File
next to the left hand File.

ABDE


BCEF


Ye see this Battle has left the place where it stood B C E F, and taken the
ground beyond the left wing A B D E, and they are all faced about to the left.
The Front before the Countermarch was B C and is now become the right Flank A
B. The right hand File C F is now the Front A D: The left hand File B E keeping
still its place becomes the Rear.

The words of Command. Right wing Countermarche through to the place beyond
the left wing. or Ranks Countermarche from the right wing to the left.


The Chorean Countermarche by Rank is when the right hand corner File faces to
the left, and marches forward to the place of the left hand File: the rest of
every rank following it, and the body moving jointly together while the right
hand File come to the place of the left hand File, and the left hand File to
the place of the right hand File, so that the body keeps still that same
ground it had before: or to do this more easily, face only about your Battle
to the left, and then command a Countermarche of Files and this will produce
the samine effect,: for it is all one to bring the front of your Battle to the
Rear when it is faced to the right as to bring the right wing to the left
before it be faced.

GHIK


In this Battle ye see the first man of every Rank with his Sydman that is to
say, the first two Files on the right Flank H K are turned and are
Counter-marching through the distances betwixt the Ranks: the rest has
followed them on, to the right Flank and has left the place of the left Flank
G I so-much void as the first two Files has marched through the Ranks from the
place of the right Flank, So that the right hand File shall march on till it
come to the place of the left hand File G I: And the left hand File till it
come to the place of the right hand File H K, and so the Battle shall
maintain the samine ground it stood in, and be faced to the left.

The words of Command are, Ranks to the right or left hand Countermarche and
maintain ground.


Our words of Command are, Countermarch your Ranks to the right or left hand.


The use of Countermarching by Ranks is: when the enemy appears on your left
wing to charge you, ye may by this motion oppose him with your best men, and
bring your right wing in place of the left against him: and may apply your
left wing to some advantage, as a River Marish or Trench, that thereby it may
be secure from encompassing: or else it serves to bring one of your wings in
place of the other: when being embattelled ye mind to change the form of
your embattelling: as if ye desire to set the right wing of your Battle
against the right wing of your enemies Battle for some advantage of fight:
This did Herodot. in Calliope. 248. and Plutarch. in Aristide.
Pausanias general of the Grecian army at the Battle of Platea against the
Persians: who having embattelled the Lacedaemonians in the right wing of his
army and the Athenians in the left: Mardonius the Persian General gave the
Thebans and other Greeks his right wing and the Persians the left wing, Now
Pausanias desiring to oppose the Athenians against the Persians as being
better acquainted with the Persian fights then the Lacedaemonians, he
Countermarched his right wing to the place of the left: and so brought the
Athenians against the Persians, which Mardonius perceiving did the like, and
immediately Countermarched his right wing of Thebans to the left wing of the
Persians as fearing to join the Persians with the Athenians.

By this manner of Countermarche ye may bring your wings in place of the body
of your batallion which is this done: Your right hand File faces to the left:
the left hand File to the right, and march both in toward the center of the
Battle while they meet other face to face: the rest of each Rank upon both
wings follows them and marches out until the two middle Files have gotten the
place of the corner Files, and the Corner Files the place of the middle Files.
By this means P. Scipio making war in Spain against Asdrubal brought the
Romans into the wings, and the Confederates into the midst of his Battle,
whereby he overthrew Asdrubal, as Polyb. Hist. lib. 11 Sect. 7.
Polybius and Livius, decad 3. lib. 8. 204.
Livius at more length reports. This is of excellent use in our discipline, to
bring the picks to the wings and the Musketeers to the midst of the Battle,
incase there were ane charge of Horse upon both your Flanks, for by this, the
Pickemen would receive the charge of Horse, and the Musketeers give fire upon
them.

Ye may also by this Motion double one wing with another to make the (...):
which is done as before, except that the Flanks do not march through, but when
the Corner-File of the one Flank is come in evin line, and joined with the
Corner file of the other Flank, then ye command an halt and a faceing of them
all to the Front:

Observe, that the Countermarch of Files and of Ra^ks taks not the denomination
a movente, as would appear: but a loco in quo fit motus evolutionis: for in a
Countermarch of Files, it is the Ranks that countermarches and moves down
through the distances between the Files, the first Rank beginning, the second
with the rest, continuing the Motion, till it be ended: In a Countermarch of
Ranks, the Files Countermarches, and moves through the distances betwixt the
Ranks: the Corner-File which has the command to Countermarch, beginning the
Motion, and the rest of the Files continuing it until it be finished. And
therefore in the Countermarch of Files, the Motion is in the deapth of the
Battle, in the Countermarch of Ranks the Motion is in the length of the
Battle. Hence it is, that the illustrious Count Count Mansfield in his Direct
of war.
Mansfield calls a Cou^termarch of Ranks when the Front is brought in place
of the Rear, and a Countermarch of Files when one Flank is brought in place
of the other, which is contrary to the common appellation both of the
Ancients and moderns, or else I cannot see how he can be reconcealled unto
them.

Of Closiing, and Opening the Battle.
Tit. 9.
Closing, is a drawing of the Battle to a less distance. Opening, an
extending of it to a greater distance then it had before: and both are either
in length or in deapth. And therefore two fold: of Files and of Ranks.

Closing of Files is a contracting of the length of the Battle maintaining the
samine deapth, and it is threefolde, for Files are either closed to the right
hand, or to the left, or to the middle of the Battle: The Aelian Tact. c. 32.
Greeks calls these Motions (...) or (...) or (...). To thicken to the right
wing or the left wing, or the midst of the Phalanx. Leo. Tact. c. 7.. 33.
Leo calls the closing to the right and left (...): To be thickened toward
the sides.

Aelian Aelian. d. cap. 32.
shows how the closing to the right hand is to be done in those words (...)
etc. Ye must command the right hand corner File to stand still, and the rest
turning their faces to the Pick to advance forwards toward the right hand,
until they have gotten the distance commanded, the second File first taking
his distance, and the rest their distance from him; and then all to face as
they were.

ABCD


The figure A B C D is the bounds where the Battle stood at open order;
imagine then the right hand File B D to have stood still, and the rest of the
Files to have marched from the left Flank A C. toward the right B D so that
they are contracted to half the bounds they possessed before the closing, and
therefore stands at order or the distance of three foot, from A C to the left
hand File, is the bounds which is left after the closing wherein the half of
the Battle did stand before the closing, to wit the 10. 9. 8. 7. and 6. Files:
so that the 10. File does now stand in the place where the 6. stood before the
closing.

If ye close Files to the left hand, ye must make the left hand corner File
stand still, and the rest facing to the Target advance forward to the left hand
as the former did to the right until they have all gotten their distance
required, and then they face as they were.

EFGH


E F G H is a closing to the left hand, where ye must conceive the left hand
File E G to have stood still, and the rest of the Files to have advanced from
the right Flank F H until they have contracted themselves as ye see: so that
they possess only the half of the bounds they had before they closed: From F
H to the right hand File is the bounds wherein the half of the Battle stood
before the closing to wit, the 1. 2. 3. 4. and 5 Files: so that the first File
possesses now the place which the fyft had.

If ye would close your Battle to the middle, Aelian. d. c. 32.
(says Aelian) ye command the two middle Files to stand still, and then the
diphalanx (that is the half Battle) on the right wing to face to the Target,
and the diphalanx on the left wing to face to the Pick, and then to move
forwards to the middle of the phalanx, the two middle files also close, and so
after they have gotten their true distance they face as they were.

IKLMNO


This figure is a closing of the Battle to the middle: The middle Files in K
N: that is, the 5 and 6 files stands still: The half Battle K L N O moves
from the right Flank L O toward the middle K N: The half Battle I K M N
moves from the left Flank I M toward the middle K N: so that the whole
Battle I L M O is closed to half the distance it had before, leaving the
bounds void on the right Flank L O where the first and second File, and on
the left Flank I M: where the 9. and 10. did stand.

The words of Command, To your order or clo order. Files close to the right
hand. Files close to the left hand. Files close to the middle, or

as some say, Files close; for when the Command is only for Files to close:
without nameing any hand, it is to be understood a closing to the middle.

Our Scotes words of Command, To your first or second distance. Close your
Stringes to the right hand, Close your Stringes to the left hand, Close your
Stringes.



Some will Close Files to the right and left by division making the half
Battle on the right hand, move from the middle to the right hand File, and the
other half on the left hand, to the left hand File, leaving the void distance
in the middle which other closings leaves upon the wings, as if the half
Battle should move from K N to L O, and the other half from K N to I M, with
this word of Command, Files close to the right or left by division to your
order, or close order. To reduce your Files after closing to their first
posture or station is to open Files to the distance they had before their
closing of which I shall shortly speak.

Aelian Tact. c. 32.
Aelian says that closing of Files is to be done by facing as indeed it is
the most fit action, How the Motion is to be performed.
but I have seen many Commanders in exercise use this Motion without any
Facing; only moving sydelings to the hand to which the command is to close, and
forsooth they will defend this to be good, because say they Facing in so small
a bounds as a private company takes up is needless, but, I say they maintain
ane error, for laying aside the authority of the Grecian practice (which
justly may be termed the touchstone of martial discipline,) they are easily
convinced by reasone, because Facing performs the Motion more assuredly and
more gracefully then going asydwayes, seeing their steps are not sure being
subject to stumbling, neither the actio^ comely, and although the first or
second file next the hand to which they close, have but a little ground to go:
Yet the ground does accresse according as the Files are removed from the
standing File (which our blunt Commanders does not consider), so that the
uttermost File must march the half of the bounds wherein the battle stood
before the closing: as for example, Say, ye had a single company of 200 men,
making you 20 in Front, and standing at open order, six foot betwixt Files:
The bounds that the length of your Battle takes up, is 120 foot (this is
found by multiplying the number of your men in Front by the distance they stand
in: as 20 multiplied be 6 the factum is 120) if then ye command Files to close
to the right hand to their order or distance of 3 foot: the left hand File
shall have 60 foot of ground to march before he close to his distance
required: which if he march sydelings ye may easily consider what a steadfast
and graceful Motion it will be: The Argument then is evident.

The most assured and most graceful Motion is the best Motion.

But so it is, that closing of Files by facing, according to the Grecian form,
is the most assured and most graceful Motion.

Ergo, Closing of Files by Facing is the best.

The major I hope no man will deny: The minor I have already proven. This I
thought good to advertise you, whom I would wish to learn the Art Militare,
scientifice, and not according to the vulgar (...) for there are many men who
pertinaciously will maintain their badde customs, and will obtrude them for
precepts and good Laws upon men, as also I have known many Commanders more
fraught with a Thrasonicall ostentation, then any skill to perform their
charge.

Closing of Ranks is a contracting of the deapth of the Battle, Of Closing of
Ranks.
and it is performed one way only, to wit, toward the Front, which is thus
done.

The File-leaders or first Rank stands still, the second Rank comes up and
closes to the distance commanded, the rest of the Ranks move up, and close to
the samine distance, every man taking his distance from his Leader.

PQRS


This figure P Q R S is the bounds wherein your Battle stood at open order,
or distance of 6. foot betwixt Ranks, Now the deapth is contracted and the
Ranks has marched up from the Rear R.S. and closed toward the Front P Q. to
their order or distance of 3 foot, so that your Ranks possesses only the
half of the bounds they had before the closing: from R S to the 10 Rank is
the void ground wherein the half of your Ranks did stand before your closing
to wit, the 10.9.8.7 and 6. so that the 10 Rank stands now in the place where
the 6 stood before the closing,

The words of Command, Close your Ranks to your order or close order.

Our words of Command Ranks close to your second or third distance.

The Emperor Leo Tact. c. 7.. 84.
Leo speaks of a closing of Ranks backwards to the Rear, which he calls
(...); this Motion because it is not commodious nor yet aggreeable to our
modern practice I will not touch.

OPening, OF opening of Files.
is an extension of the length or deapth of the Battle and therefore is
twofolde: of Files or of Ranks.

Opening of Files is an extension of the length of the Battle in place: and it
is threefolde as was the closing: For Files are opened to the right hand, or to
the left hand, or to both.

Opening of Files to the right hand is thus performed. The left hand File
stands still, the next File unto it first takes its distance pressing upon the
next File on the right hand and so the rest of the Files successivelie still
presses upon the right hand till they have all obtained the distance commanded,

TVXY


TVXY is an opening of Files to the right hand where ye must conceive the left
hand File TX which is the 10 to stand still, so ye see the 9 and 8 to have
already taken their distance, and the rest of the Files to be moueing toward
the right hand VY, till they have all gotten their distance, required.

In opening of Files to the left hand ye must do the contrare way, for ye
make the right hand File stands still, and the rest to open toward the left
still pressing upon the left hand, as the former did upon the right hand, till
they have all gotten the distance commanded: and so both of them takes up the
double of the bounds they stood in before.

ABCD


ABCD is an opening of Files to the left hand, where the right hand File BD
stands still: The 2 and 3 have already gotten their distance, the rest are
moving toward the left hand AC, till they also get their distance required.

Opening of Files to both hands is performed thus: The two middlemost Files
press upon the Fla^ks, the one upon the right, the other upon the left, and
take their distances and stands, the rest of the Files on both Flanks takes
their distance from them, moving, the one half to the right, and the other to
the left hand: till they have all gotten their distance commanded.

EFGH


EFGH is an opening of Files to both hands, where ye see the two middlemost
Files to have got their distance, the fyft having pressed upon the right
Flank FH: The sixth upon the left EG: the files next unto them, the 4 upon the
right Flank, and the 7. upon the left, has also taken their distance: The
rest are moving upon both Flanks till they likewise get their distance
commanded, so that in this Motion, as in the other openings, the Battle shall
possess in length after it be fully opened the double of the ground it had
before the opening.

The words of Command for these Motions, To your open oder, or any order else
Files open to the right hand. Files open to the left hand. Files open to the
right and left



Or as some say open both ways: and some only, files open: for when there is
no nomination of any hand, it is understood (as before in closing) an opening
from the middle, to both hands.

Our words of Command, To your first distance or any distance else. Open your
Stringes to the right hand. Open your Stringes to the left hand. Open your
Stringes.



OPening of Ranks is an extension of the deapth of the Battle in place, and
is performed but one way, to wit, toward the Rear, which is thus done: The
File-leaders, or the first Rank stands still, and the rest of the Ranks
falls backwardes toward the Rear, until the second Rank have gotten its
distance, which then stands; the rest of the Ranks moves still backwardes,
until they all have gotten their distance commanded.

IKLM


IKLM is an Opening of Ranks where ye see the 2 and 3. Ranks has moved
backwards, and has already taken their distance, and ye must conceive the
rest of the Ranks to be moving from the Front IK backwardes to the Rear LM
until they all get their distance required.

The words of Command, Ranks open to your open order or any order else.


Our words of Command.

Open your Ranks to your first distance or any distance else,
Some use an opening of Ranks also forwards from the Rear to the Front if the
ground permit:

The action of these Motions of opening which I have now shown both of Files
and Ranks by making the Files press upon their Sydmen, and the Ranks upon
their Followers, is according to our common modern exercise, which differs
much from the action of the Ancient Aelian. Tact. c. 32.
Greeks; for they in opening Files and Ranks did perform the Motion by
Facing: but in my opinion our common form is rather to be followed: for
although it want not its own inconvenients being subject to stumbling on
stobbs stones, or holes in the way; Yet in respect the terminus ad quem is not
certain nor seen as it was in closing of Files and Ranks: The last Rank, or
the uttermost File which begins the Motion of opening, shall never be
assured where to stand, or in what part to set themselves, to give a due
competent ground to all the Ranks or Files to take their distance commanded;
neither can the samine be discerned be the ey of the Commander: and therefore
the Motion must be begun, and the distance must first be takin from the
terminus a quo which is seen and certain: to wit, the Rank or File that
stands and so every one after other shall assuredly get their distance
commanded, which they could not do behind their backs if they used a Facing but
in this I submit my self to the judgment of the more learned: For I think
also that Soldiers may be taught to take their distance by pacing.

Observe that closing and opening both of Files and Ranks are one another
reduceme^ts as if ye closed Files to the right hand, and would reduce them to
their first station, command them to open to the left; if ye opened Files to
the left hand, to bring them as they were ye must close Files to the right
hand; if ye closed to the middle open to the right and left by division: and
so they are reduced, and e contra. Again if ye close ranks forwards open them
backwards, and so ye bring them as they were and e contra.

Aelian. Tact. e. 28.
Aelian calls an opening of Files or Ranks (...) a doubling of the length or
deapth in place, which in my opinion is not fitly spokin, for although Files
and Ranks be opened to a greater distance yet the Battle cannot be said to
be doubled.

The use of opening and closing the Battle in length and deapth ye may find
Supra Tit. 3.
before, when I spoke of distances to the which I remitt you, for I will repeat
nothing: only this, I add that Battles are opened and closed, when a General
will make his Army appear strong or weak according as he minds to terrify
or allure the enemy, Files are closed to the right or laft hand when a troop
of Horse or Foot or Waggones with bagadge are to pass betwixt either of your
Flanks and some strait: Files are closed to the right and left by division
when ye will make a street through your Battle for a General or some great
Commander to pass.

Of Conversion or VVheeling
Tit 10.
COnversion or Wheeling is a Motion of the whole Battle toward the Flanks or
Rear, changing the ground.

And therefore Wheeling is two fold, the one when the Battle makes a quarter
turn to the right or left Flank which the Greeks calls (...) or conversion
the other when it makes an half turn to the Rear be the right or left hand,
and this they call (...) or inflexion: no other languadge except the Greek
does express this Motion in two several words.

Epistrophe, is described clearly by Aelian Tact. c. 24.
Aelian (...) etc

When closing the Battle be the Sydemen and the followers we turn it wholly
as the Body of an man either to the Pick or the Target it being carried about
the corner File-leader as about a center, and changing the place of the Front,
transfer the countenance of the Soldiers to the right or left Flank.

Aelian. Tact. c. 31.
Aelian in an other place sets it down more amply, and it is thus to be
performed: Ye must command the Files to close to the hand to which ye mean to
Wheel and the Ranks to close also forwards: Then ye cause the Corner
File-leader on the samine hand to stand still as the fixed foot of a compass
but moueing in his own place, and all the rest keeping their Files and Ranks
closed to turn to the samine hand jointly about the corner File-leader, until
the Front of your Battle be toward the Flank to which ye Wheel, so that the
Front of the Battle being wheeled falls like a perpendicular line upon the
Front of the Battle before it Wheeled, making a right angle of 90 degrees at
the corner File-leader about whom they Wheel, and the Flank falls upon the
Front as a parallel which the figure following shows.

ABCDEF


GHIKLM


The figure ABCDEF is An Epistrophe or whee ling to the right hand. CDEF is the
Battle before the Wheeling, whereof CD is the Front, DF the right hand File:
The Command being given, the right hand File-leader D who is thus marked *
stands in his place, and the whole body turns about him, until the Front of
the Battle be in an evin line with the right Flank of the former. The Battle
after the wheeling is ABCD whereof BD is the Front DC the right hand File: BD
falls as it were perpendicular upon the former Front CD, making the angle BD C
a right angle, DC falls as it were parallel unto the former Front.

The other figure is a Wheeling to the left, which by the former ye may easily
understand: for the left hand File leader. I. having also this mark * stands
still, and the whole Battle moves about him to the left, leaving the place
they stood in IKLM and taking the place GHIK. The Front of the Battle before
the Wheeling is IK, the left hand File IL: The Front after the Wheeling is GI:
The left hand File IK, which is parallel unto the former Front, and GI falls
upon I K, and maks the like angle as was in the former figure.

After ye have made them close Ranks, and Files: The words of command for
Epistrophe, are, Wheel your Battle to the right hand. Wheel your Battle to
the left hand.


Our words of Command are, The Great turn to the right about, The Great turn
to the left about.


(...) (says Aelian. Tact. c. 24.
Aelian) (...). Perispasmus or Wheeling about is a Motion of the Battle in two
Epistrophes or single Wheelinges, whereby the Front is brought in place of the
Rear.

In performing of the Motion ye must do all as before in Epistrophe, except
that your Battle must make an half turn toward the Rear to the right or
lefthand, whereas before it made only an quarter turn to the right or left
hand: So that Epistrophe brought the Front of the Battle to either of the
Plankes, Perishasmus bringes the Front to the Rear as ye see in the figure
following.

VXYZABC


NOPQRST


The figure N O P Q R is a Perispasmus or Wheeling about to the Rear by the
right hand where the left hand Fileleader Q*. sta^ds still, the rest of the
body moves about him an half turn until they be all faced to the Rear and
leaves the place they stood in, P Q S T: and taks the place N O Q R, so that
it falls upon the other like an quadrant upon an others angle the right hand
Fileleader being the point of the angle to them both: the Front before the
wheeling is P Q: the right hand File Q T: the Front after the wheeling Q R: the
right hand File Q N which falls in a right line with the former Q T.

The other figure is a Perispasmus or wheeling about by the left hand, where
the body moves about the left hand Fileleader Z* to the left making an half
turn till they be all faced to the Rear, and leaves the place they stood in Z
A B C and takes the place V X Y Z. The tront before the wherling is Z A the
left hand File Z B: the Front after the wheeling is Y Z, the left hand File Z
X, which falls in a right line with Z B. Observe that the corner Fileleaders
about whom the Battle is turned, either to the Flanks or to the Rear, which
I have marked so*, are said to stand still, not in respect of Motion, but of
altering of ground, for they do also move in their own place where they stand,
not changing the ground, only facing to the hand they wheel, but all the rest
changes the ground and moves to the Flanks or the Rear as the Command is.

The words of Command for Perispasmus, after closing the Battle are, Wheel
your Battle to the righthand about, Wheel your Battle to the left hand
about.


Our words of Command are. The great turn to the right round about. The great
turn to the left round about.


The reducement from a wheeling which the A lian. Tact. c. 24. etc. 31.
Greeks calls (...) is thus performed. If ye made an (...) or quarter turn
to either hand, ye must first face them to the contrary hand, and then wheel
the Battle back to the place it stood in before: and after they have faced
again as they were, Open Ranks and Files, and so they shall be brought to
their first station, (many do not use a facing in this Reducement): but if ye
have made a (...) or half turn, To reduce the Battle, ye must yet make another
Perispasmus or wheeling about to the same hand, as if ye wheeled about to the
right hand, ye must yet wheel about to the right hand: if ye wheeled about
to the left hand, ye must yet wheel about to the left, and then open Ranks
and Files, and so your Battle shall be reduced to its first Station.

Observe that the Remoter the Soldiers be from the Fileleader that stands, and
the nearer they approach to the opposite corner, the swifter pace they must
move in wheeling, because they make an greater arc of an Circle, and therefore,
has more bounds to walk, for every Rank of the Battle in wheeling
considdered as a Rhombe, describes an quadrant or semi circle according as the
wheeling is to the Flanks or the Rear about the corner Fileleader as a center:
And ye know that of many Circles described about one center, taking
proportionable arcs, they shall be Unequal in bigness, for the Remoter the
Circles be from the Center the greater the arcs of them are, as ye see in the
figure following.

ABCDEFG


F G and D E and B C are proportionable arcs of three Circles described about
the center A, whereof ye see F G to be the biggest, because it is remotest,
and B C the least, because it is nearest to the center A. Suppose then three
men were placed, the one in F, the nixt in D, the third in B, and were to make
their course, the one to G, the next to E, the third to C, which they behooved
to make in equal time, it is certain that he who goes from D to E must go
more swiftly than he who goes from B to C, because his bounds is greater, and
he who walks from F to G must go yet a swifter pace than he who went from D
to E, because his arc is geater.

Hence it is clear that the Remoter the Soldiers are from the File leader
about whom they turn, the swifter pace they must go, because they describe
the greater arcs, and the File-bringer up who is Diagonallie opposite to the
File-leader that stands as Center, describes the greatest arc of all: For lack
of this consideration, I have seen much disorder in wheeling of a Battle.

There is another kind of VVheeling used in the Low Country exercise: which is
a wheeling by the Center to either hand, or to either hand about: It is thus
performed: The middle File-leader of the Flank, to which they wheel stands
still, as the Center, all the rest moves about him, the one half falling
backward, the other half advancing foreward, according as the Command is to
wheel: If the Command be to the right hand, the right Flank middle
File-leader stands still, and all those of the right Flank goes backward,
the left Flank forward: If to the left hand, the left Flank middle File
leader stands, the left Flank moves backward, and the right forward, until
they have all made their Quarter-turne, or half turn, as the word is to
wheel to the Flanks or the Rear.

ABCDEFGH


This Figure is a wheeling of the Battle by the Center, to the right hand,
where the fifth File leader D* did stand as the Center, the body has moved
about him, the right Flank F C falling backward, and the left Flank A B
advancing forward, until they have left the place D E G H and taken the ground
A B C F. D E is a part of the Front before the wheeling E H the right Flank. B
F is the Front after the wheeling, F C the right Flank: the number of the Files
are set down in the Rear of both the figures, because I had no place to set
them in the Front, for the intersection of the two Fronts.

By this ye may also easily conceive a wheeling to the left, for making the
sixth File leader to stand, and the right Flank F C to move forward, and the
left Flank B A to fall backward and make a quarter turn, until the Front B F
shall be converted to the left hand. Likewise ye may consider a wheeling to
the right or left about, if ye cause the Body make an half turn to either
hand, until the Front be toward the Rear, so that B F shall fall parallel
unto the former Front, whereas now it cuttes it perpendicularlie.

The words of Command for this Motion. Wheel your Battle by the Center to
the right hand. Wheel your Battle by the Center to the left hand. Wheel
your Battle by the Center to the right or to the lefth and about.


This VVheeling does not alter the ground so much as the other wheelings.

The use of this Motion, The use of VVheeling
is when the Enemy comes to assault you in any one place, as on either of the
Flanks, or the Rear, ye turn the Front of your Battle toward him, and so
bringes your best men to fight with him, which Good Commanders was always
accustomed to do, as I show before; But if he come to charge you on more
places then one, as in the Flanks and the Rear, or in the Front and the
Rear, or in the Front and the Flanks, VVheeling will do you no good: your
only remeade will be to face about, and receive his Charge: By this Motion
Plutar. in Pyrrho.
Pyrrhus overthrew Arieius King of Lacedemon, and Polyb. Hict. lib. 1. Sect. 21.
Amilcar defeat Spendius with the rest of his Rebels: See the Histories, For
I will not burding this small Treatise with many Allegations.

Observe that Epistrophe and Perispasmus are in the whole Battle, the same
which Clisis and Metabole was in a particular Soldier, for as their turns the
face of the Soldier to the Flanks or the Rear, keeping still his place, so
does the others turn the Face or Front of the whole Battle to the Flanks or
the Rear, changing the ground.

There is another kind of VVheeling which is when the wings are wheeled into
the Body: and this is done either toward the Front or toward the Rear, If
toward the Front, then ye command the middle File leaders to stand still (I
mean from changing of ground not from Motion, for they move in their own
place) and the right wing to wheel forwards to the left, about its own middle
Fileleader, transferring their faces to the contrary wing: The left wing in
the same time wheels forward to the right, about the other middle Fileleader,
meeting the other wing in the midst face to face: Then the Commander bids the
right wing, face to the right hand, and the leftwing to the left hand, and so
they shall all have their aspect toward the Front, If the wheeling be toward
the Rear, ye must first face your Battle about by either hand, then the
bringersup of the middle Files who are now become leaders stands still and both
the wings shall move about the Bringersvp, the one to the right hand, the other
to the left, till they meet other in the midst as did the former: then the
Commander may bring their aspect to the Front or the Rear as he pleases.

IKLMNOPQ


This figure is a Wheling of the wings into the midst of the Battle toward
the Front, where ye see the right wing K L O P to be wheeling to the left
hand, about the middle Fileleader K* and the left wing I K M N to be wheeling
to the right, about its own middle Fileleader, marked also K* and ye must
conceive those two wings to move still on, until they meet other, the Pickes
joining with the Pickes and the Musketeers with the Musketeers, and then the
left hand File of the left wing I M shall come in evin line with the right hand
File of the right wing L P making thereof the Front of the Battle after they
are turned, and the File K N shall come in an evin line with K O making thereof
the Rear. N Q O is a part of the ground where the Battle stood before it
began to wheel. But if ye wheel your Battle toward the Rear ye must
conceive N and O to be joined and to stand still, and the right wing after it
is faced about, to wheel to the right hand about O, and the left wing to
wheel to the left hand about N, until they meet other face to face, so that
the File I M^ shall come in evin line with L P.

The words of Command for this Motion are Wheel the wings into the midst of
your Battle Or Wheel your Battle to the right and left hand by division
toward the Front or toward the Rear.


The use of this wheeling is to bring all your Musketeers or all your Pickes
to the Front as occasion shall serve, and therewith to double your Front: The
Musketeers are brought to the Front, by wheeling toward the Front, (if they
were before on the Flanks.) The Pickes are brought to the Front, by wheeling
toward the Rear (if they were before in the middle): Suppose then that an
troop of the enemies horse were coming to charge your Front, or your Rear,
minding also to encompasse your wings, by this wheeling of the wings into the
midest of your Battle, with one labor ye both bring your Pickes against the
Enemies horse, and doubles the length of your Battle to eschew over-winging.

This wheeling has only a quarterturne, but if ye will make an half turn
either to the Front or the Rear, ye shall bring the Pickes to both Flanks,
if they were before in the mids: as in the former figure, if ye should make an
half turn, the Files K O and K N shall come to be the Flanks of the
Battle, and I M and L P shall join in the middle.

This is of good use against troops of horse coming to charge both your
Flanks, for the Pickes may withstand the charge of the horse, and the
Musketeers play upon them from the middle.

The words of Command. Whele your Battle to the right and left hand about by
division.


If ye would reduce any of those to their first station, ye have nothing to do,
but to face to the contrary hand and to wheel your Battle back the contrary
way quarter turn or half turn as they wheeled first, and then they face as
they were.

Aelian. Tact. c. 24. and cap. 31.
Aelian describes an triple wheeling which he calls (...), but I think it
is an superfluous and foolish Motion, neither can I believe that ever the
Greeks did use it, for to what effect shall ye make an (...) or triple wheeling
of your Battle to the Pick or the Target, when a single wheeling, or quarter
turn to the contrary hand will effect the samine with greater readiness, and
thrice alse little pains and time? as for example, if you make an (...) to the
Target, that is, if ye wheeled your Battle thrice to the left hand, ye bring
the Front of it to the right Flank against the enemy; now if you make but one
(...) or single wheeling to the right hand, ye do the same thing, and I think
there is no man of sense but will accord that it is superfluity, to use three
turns when one turn will do the business, and chiefly in affairs of war
where the lest moment of time does carry with it a great weight: This I
thought good to advertise any who shall read this Motion in Aelian that he
may eschew it, for it is not only against our modern exercise, but contrary
tosense and reason.

Of the particular exercising of Picke-men and Musketeers.
Tit. 11.
Our Pickemen (as I show before) represents the heavy armed, our Musketeers
the light armed, both of the Grecian Phalanges, and the Roman Legions.

Their heavy armed, did carry for defense: a Target, besides the complete
arming of the body: but whether the Discipline of our time has done well or
not, in laying aside the Target from our Pickemen, I will not disput, because
it is thought heavy and vnwealdie for an armed man, and very noisome in a
March, yet I think that custom and exercise would alleviat those
difficulties, and I believe no good Commander will deny, but it were expedient
that strong able men being File, leaders of every Battaillon, were appointed
to carry large Targets of proof, after the Macedonian fashion, that under the
shadow of them, the rest of the Battaillion might be sheltered from the shot
of the Enemy, and also the Battaillion might be kept strong against the charge
of the Enemy, minding to break it, as the Greckes did, when they made their
(...) which did mightily astonish the Romans themselves when they had ado
with them, for Plutar. in Emilio. Suidas in (...).
Consul Lucius Aemilius saepe apud Romanos confitebatur se nihil unquam vidisse
terrililius Phalange Macedonica.

Now as for the particular exercise of the Pickemen alone, there is no other,
but that they ought exactlie to do their Postures shown Supra Tit. 5.
before (the Motions which I have hitherto described, being alike competent to
them and the Musketeers) for ordinarlie the pickemen in time of fight or
skirmish does nothing until the Battles come near to push of pick, and
then only they charge their pickes against the Enemy, for the burding of
sustaining the fight before that, lies upon the Musketeers of both sides,
during which time the Pickemen stands as idle spectators, serving only as a
prop for the Enemies shot, and never being able to offend them, which is a
pitiful consideration.

To remead this inconvenient, the Gentlemen Soldiers of the trained bands of
the Artillery Garding of London do practice a shooting with the Bow they who
are Pickemen, without any disturbance or hinderance of the use of their pick,
which is thus done:

They have a Bow tied to the pick in that place where they shoulder by a
little engine or vice, about which it turns as they list, so that pla^ting
the Butend of the pick on the ground, against the right foot, and holding the
Bow with their left arm, the pick sloped, and being as it were a rest unto
the Bow; they shoot off their volie of Arrows (which hang in a Case at their
Girdle behind their back) with great ease and dexterity, if they be exercised
therewith: and thereafter they may fasten their Bow to a little pin, and
recover their pick, order, advance, shoulder, or do any other posture
commanded as well with the Bow as without it: When the whole Battle shoottes,
the followers must shoot throw their own File over their Leaders head: and
they must stand in order at the least. But when the Enemy comes near hand
to charge, the first five ranks must close to their close order: and if it be
against horse, while they foot their Pickes to receive the charge and have
their swords drawn, the last five Ranks may shoot their volies of arroues,
and do great execution against them, whereas without their Bows they can do
nothing but stand with their pickes ported.

The words of Command for the use of the Bow with the Pick are those. Order
your pick. Slope your pick. Vnfasten your Bow. Draw out your Arrow. Noke your
Arrow. Shoot wholly together. Recover your pick. Fasten your Bow. Advance
your Pick.


This weapen is of excellent use both against the Enemies foot and his horse:
as for the foot it overthrows clean the Musketeers, seeing they are
unarmed, and the pickmens face, arms, and legs are also subject to the
wounds of the Arrow, which parts being hurt, makes them unable for service:
but it does especially gall the horse; for a horse being wounded and having
an hooked Arrowe fixed in his flesh he will so rampage and run to and fro,
that he shall disorder the whole Battle: They serve also to shoot fireworks
into the Enemies Trench or Fort, and also are steadable for convoyes, who
oft-times are assallied by horse.

But ye will say, that those only of the first Ranks can use this Bow, and
that it cannot be handled by them of the middle and Rear of the Battle, for
they will harm their own Leaders: To clear this, I would ask you, How did
the (...) or light armed of the Grecians any service, being placed in the
Rear of their phalanx, or the Roman Velites in the Rear of their Maniples?
for they were sundry times so ordered as ye may see in Aelian Tact. c. 7. and
15.
Aelian and Leo. Tact. c. 14. 69.
Leo: and also being placed in the middle of the Battle, or in the (...)
described by Aelian Tact. c. 8.
Aelian, or yet being inserted between the Files of the armed men, as in the
Aeiian. Tact. c. 30.
(...), how could the light armed, I say, and chiefelie Archers, do any
service? how could they do any harm to their E nemies without endamnadging
their own Phalanx, or Maniples? The doubt is alike, and yet the Ancients many
times were accustomed to use this form of Embattelling: There is no question
then, but our Pickmen with their Bows may do the same execution, as did the
(...) or velites, yea in this respect they have a great advantage above their
Archers, seeing they had to shoot their Arrows over the heads of 16 deep
attour the deapth of their own Body: but the last Ranks of your Pickemen has
to shoot over the head of 9. deep only: Al. ways, ye shall consider,
that the Enemy must be at a far distance, when the whole Battle shootes
off; otherwise, when he comes nigh to charge (as seldom he will do, if
this weapon be rightly used) they must shoot a straight shoot, and then the
last Ranks can hardly let flee their Arrows, except the first ranks charge
at footte, as I said: in which case the first Ranks recouers their picks,
fastens their Bows, comes up to close order, and charge their pickes
against the Enemy, the last Ranks standing still at their shooting Posture.

This Bow is very steadable in warlike service, Wherein the Bow excelles the
Musket.
and although the use thereof is almost quite extinguished by the furious
execution, which the Musket appears to make, yet I will prove it to surpass
the Musket in many respects: first in surenesse because an archer cannot
miss to nock his arrow, and to shoot off, but an Musquetier may fail of his
shot, by sundry accidents, as by rolling out of the bullet, by an badde
match, an match not right cocked, by evil powlder, or wet powder in his Pan,
and such like: and I have oftentimes seen an Rank of Musketeers having
presented and given fire, that three or four of ten has failed of their shot
and ye must know that in service there is no time to prime again, or to right
their match, for they must fall away with the rest of their Rank and make
place to the next Rank to give fire. Again it surpasses the Musket in
readiness, for an Archer shall shoot six arrows at the least, before a
Musquetier have dismounted his Musket; Vncocked his match, Blown his Pan,
primed, shoot his Pan, cast off his loose Powlder, cast about his Musket,
charged, drawn out his scourer, shortened his scourer, and done all therest of
the Posturs which are requisite for the right using of the Musket: Also the
Musket, as all fiery wapons, is dangerous to them who are Unskillful, for an
unexpert man may spoil himself and many about him, which inconvenient is
notsubject to the Bow. Lastly, it excels the Musket in execution and
plurality of vollies, for an whole Battallion of Archers or Pickmen, with
their Bows may shoot off all together, whereas one Rank only of Musketeers can
give fire at once, unless the rest would either shoot at random, or else kill
their leaders, so that in an Battallion of 200 men, half Picks, half
Musketeers, the Pickmen shall shoot 100 arrows for 10 shot of Musket:
wherefore so many flights of 100 arrows following suddenly, and continually
after others, upon the enemies Battallion shall assuredly so terrify and
disorder them, that they shall be forced rather to save themselves by flight,
than either follow or a abide the charge.

Of what esteem the Bow was in ancient times and how serviceable in wars,
Veget. de re milit. lib. 1. c. 15.
Vegetius cites the Books of Cato de disciplina militari, and shows the
example of Claudius and Scipio Africanus, who by this weapon overcame their
enemies, whom otherwise they could not have matched. His words ar those.
Qua^tum autem utilitatis boni sagittarij in preliis habeant, and Cato in libris
de disciplina militari evidenter ostendit; and Claudius pluribus jaculatoribus
ante institutis atque perdoctis hestem cui prius impar faerat superavit:
Africanus quidem Scipio cum adversum Numantinos, qui exercitum populi Romani
sub jugum misera^t, esset acie certaturus, aliter superiorem se futurum esse
non credidit, nisi in omnibus centuriis lectos sagitarios miscuisset. The
Emperor Leo. Tact. c. 11. ^ultimo.
Leo after he has given Command to renew the practice of Archerie he
subjuneth (...) (meaning (...)) (...) for the neglect of Archerie has brought
great skaith and damnage to the Roman army: and it is certain that by this
weapon the Veget. de. re milit. lib. 1. cap. 20.
Goths did subdue the Romans and exstirpat their Empire. By this weapon in
leate times the English did ever overthrow the French cavallery, and thereby
obtained many great and famous victories, as those of Cressi, Poictiers, agin.
court, and others.

The Soldiers of the military yard at London are taught to use a Musqueton
or demi Musket, with their Pick, which hangs about their Neck in a Belt like a
carabine, being two foot in length, and of full Musket bore 12. bullets to a
pound, but having a snapwork, it will carry blanck as far as a Musket which I
have seen: This demi Musket they charge and discharge with as great facility,
as if they had nothing to use but their peace: making their Picks as it were a
rest unto it: but the use hereof cannot be so well understood by discourse as
by practice, Yet it is certain that the first or last two Ranks only can have
the benefit of this weapon, whereas the whole Battle of Pickmen may shoot
off their Arrows altogether.

And thus much for the exercising of Pickmen with a Bow or half Musket,
wherein I have insisted longer then I intended, because the matter is worthy
of imitation; for it has oftentimes grieved my mind that the choicest men in
the Battle should patiently stand as a mark to the enemies shot, and
thereby fall to the ground before they come to hands. OF the exercising of
Musketeers.


This exercise of Pickemen with the Bow and half Musket, I have not else
whereseene except in the fornamed places, but the exercising of Musketeers is
ordinary euerie-where.

The Musketeers most commonly are placed in the Flanks of the Battle,
although upon occasron the Commander sometimes will place them in the Front,
sometimes in the Rear, sometimes make plottons of them or troops of reserve.

Musketeers then are to be exercised and taught to Give fire three manner of
ways: In the Front, in the Rear, in the Flanks: By the first they gine fire
advancing upon the enemy, or receiving his charge: by the second reteiring
from the enemy: by the third marching by an enemy.

First then they are taught to Give fire in the Front advancing upon the
enemy, after this manner: How to Give fire in the Front.
A Sergea^t or some higher Officer if the body be great stands some 7 or 8 pace
before the body and comma^ds the first two Ranks of both wings to make
ready, and to come up to him: which when they have done he commands the first
Rank to present and give fire, and thereafter to fall away, those of the right
Flank to the right hand, those of the left Flank to the left hand, that is:
to march away one after another in a File down by the Flanks of the
Battallion and join in the Rear every man behind his own File. When the
first Rank is fallen away, the second presents and gives fire, and falls
away, as the first: Immediately as the first two Ranks does move to go up, and
give fire, the next two Ranks must make ready, and as soon as the first two
Ranks are fallen away, they go up to their place and gives fire, and falls
away in the like manner as they did: So all the other Ranks by twoes are to do
the samine, one after another, until they have all given fire: when the first
two Ranks are advanced, the body moves up to their place, and the rest
successively till the whole Ranks have given fire, and made way for the first
Rank to renew the volie.

ABCD


Ye see in this Battle A B C D the first two Ranks of each wing are advanced
before the body to give fire, and the first Rank of both wings has already
given fire, and fallen away, That of the right wing B D to the right hand, that
of the left wing A C to the left hand, and both of them falls down to the
Rear, every man behind his own File: The second Rank of both wings has
presented to give fire, and thereafter falls away as the first did, and so all
the rest.

But if your Battallion cosist of any greater number as of 400 or 600 men, so
that ye have 10 or 15 Musketeers in Rank on each wing, then ye must observe
to make them fall away by divisions, that is, they must divide themselves and
fall away down by the divisions or streets, which the Sergeant causes make to
that purpose through the body of the Musketeers, those of the right wing
falling to the right hand, those of the lest wing falling to the left hand.

EFGHIKLMNO


Ye see here a Battallion of 400 men, consisting of half Picks half
Musketeers, having 10 Musketeers in Rank on each wing: The right wing is G H
M O, The left wing E F I L: The first Rank of both wings has given fire, and
fallen away, That of the right wing to the right hand, the one half without
the right Flank H O, the other half through the division N, That of the left
wing to the left hand, the one half without the left Flank E I, the other
through the division K. Or else ye may make them fall away (as I have seen many
do) on each wing to the right or left hand, making those who fell away to the
right hand through the division N, to fall away to the left hand through the
division G M betwixt the right wing of the Musketeers and the body of the
Pickes, and those who fell away to the left hand through the division K, to
fall away to the right hand through the division F L, betwixt the left wing of
the Musketeers and the body of the Pickes, and by this means ye shall keep
the body of your shot whole and vndisioyned, which many Commanders study to
do.

But if your Battaillion be greater, as consisting of 600 or 800 men, so that
ye have 15 or 20 Musketeers in Rank on each VVinge, then of necessity ye
must make streets or diuisiones through the body of your Musketeers to them
to fall away five and five: For good Commanders holds a maxim, that more than
five Musketeers (to make ready service) ought not to fall away together, and
if the Front be long, then to make so many diuisiones as there is fiues to
fall away, because when the whole Rank of Musketeers (if they be many)
falls away together, one after another, they take a long time before they can
all fall away, and so hinders the next Rank to come up and give fire, whereas
falling away by divisions, they do it in an instant, and makes present way for
the next Rank to give fire, as ye see in the figure following.

OPQRSTV


O P Q V is the right wing, of a Battle of 800. men, containing 200.
Musketeers, making 20 in Front: ye see then the first Rank O P has given
fire, and divided it self in four parts, containing every one five, falling
all away to the right hand, whereof the one is falling away by the right Flank
P V, the next through the division T, the third through the division S, the
fourth through the division R: So that the whole twenty Musketeers falls
away in as short time, as five only would have done: whereas if they had
fallen away altogether to either hand, they would have taken four times as
much time, or had fallen away to the right and left, they would have taken
twice so much time as they have now taken in falling away by divisions, and
therefore makes ready way to the following Ranks to come up and give fire
against the Enemy: The like ye may understand of the left wing of Musketeers,
where they will all fall to the left hand as these has done to the right: This
form of falling away, I have found approved, and have seen practiced by the
most judicious and best experimented Commanders of our days: Notwithstanding,
I know many Commanders, who not considering this, make all their Musketeers
fall off together, or at the most, to the right and left by division, how many
so ever they be: For there are many more curious to make unlawful gains by
their company, then careful to perform a duty belonging to their charge.

I have seen another manner of falling away, used by the English, which is by
Counter march, thus: when the first Rank has given fire, all those of the
rank turns together to the right hand, and marches down through the
distances between the Files, while they come to the Rear, and likewise the
second Rank, and all the rest one after another: And it is chiefelie used in a
Phalanx amphistomus; where the half of the Ranks of the Musketeers gives fire
in the Front, and the other half in the Rear, when they Countermarch to the
division, which is made through the middle of the Ranks: But to perform this,
the Files must be at open order, and they must be very expert Musketeers.

They use another form of giving fire in the Front without any falling away,
thus: when the first rank has given fire, it stands still, the Rank next
it, passes up through the same Rank, and presenteh in due distance before it,
and gives fire: the third Rank passes through them both, and gives fire
before them, and so the rest of the ranks successively, till the bringers-vp
have given fire in the Front: But I think this not so fit for service, as to
show the variety of exercise.

If the Commander please to make more execution against the enemy, he may
command the second Rank to double the first, and to give fire altogether, so
that for five shot, he may shoot ten, and for ten twenty.

The use of this exercise is to advance and to charge the Enemy if ye be
stronger than he, and to gain ground upon him.

But if ye desire not to gain ground, as being more fite to defend, then
offend, ye may make the Ranks give fire, where they stand without advancing,
and fall away to the right, or to the right and left, as before.

If ye sustain a charge both in Front and Rear, then they who has given
fire, falls away to either hand, and joins in the the division made through
the middle of the Battle, between the two middle ranks, as in the figure
following.

ABCD


A B C D is a winge of 100 Musketeers, whereof the one half of the ranks
gives fire in the Front A B, The other half of the Ranks gives fire in the
Rear C D: and the Ranks that has given fire both of A B and C D, to wit the
first and the tenth, falls away to the right and left hand, and joins in the
division E, every man toward his own Front: the Ranks next them presents,
gives fire, and falls away, as the former, and so all the rest. Or else they
may fall away by Countermarch, as I have said before: but in so doing, they
must be expert Musketeers, and carry their Pieces aright, otherwise they will
disturb the whole Ranks: And it is a very comely sight to see this Battle,
when the pickes are charged, both to the Front and Rear, and the Musketeers
doing their duty, that is, giving fire, and falling away by Countermarch,
gracefullie and with readiness, as I have seen the Soldiers of the
Artillery Garding do it most exactlie. How to Give fire in the Rear.


The second way of Giving fire is in Reteiring from the Enemy, and then they
give fire in the Rear, which is in this manner: The Captain marching in the
Rear, (for that is his place in a retreit from the Enemy (honor being
always accompanied with danger) commands the last Rank to make ready, and
then to the right hand about, and give fire, which they do, the body still
continuing their march, and thereafter turns off to the right hand, or (if
they be many) to the right and left toward both Flanks, or else through the
divisiones of the body which are made for that end, and marches up a good swift
pace to the Front, where every man falls in the Front of his own File: As
soon as the last Rank is turned to give fire, the next Rank makes ready, and
when the last Rank is fallen off and marched away, it turns about, gives
fire, falls off, and does all as the former did, and so all the rest of the
Ranks successively one after another, as in the figure following.

FGHI


F G H I is a winge of an 100 Musketeers Retireing from the enemy: where ye
see the 10 Rank in the Rear has given fire, turned to the right hand,
divided it self, and fallen away the on half through the division H F betwixt
the Musketeers and the Picks, the other half through the division K, and are
marching away up to the Front, but if ye would keep the body of your
Musketeers whole, ye may make the Rank which gives fire, divide it self, and
the one half fall away to the right hand, the other to the left, so that the
half which falls away through the division K shall fall away by the Flank I
G. The ninth Rank has turned about and presented, and after it gives fire,
divides it self, and marches away as the former, and so does all the Ranks
successively, one after another continueing still their march, and giving fire
upon the Enemy.

If ye would make more execution upon the Enemy, ye may make the penult
Rank double the last: as I show before in doubling the Front.

The use of Giving fire Reteiring is, when the Enemy is stronger than you, and
follows you in the Rear, ye being much weaker, and not able to encounter
him, ye march away, and makes haste to gain your own Quarters or Trenche or
Forte, from whence you sortied, or to join with more of your own arm, and yet
ye skirmish with the Enemy giving fire upon him, and no ways hindering your
own march.

The third way of Giving fire is, How to Give fire on the Flanks.
Marching by an Enemy, which is done upon the Flanks after this manner. The
outmost File of the Flank next the Enemy is commanded to make ready and to
turn to the right or left hand (according as the Enemy appears upon the
right or left wing) and to give fire altogether: thereafter they march not with
the body, but stands still, and keeps their ground, and charges their
Muskets again: Now whenever the foresaid File turns to give fire, the next
File unto it makes ready, keeping always along with the Body, till its
bringer-up be past a little beyond the leader of the File that gave last fire;
and then the whole File must turn and give fire, and do all as the former
did. Thereafter the first File marches up and joins with the second File:
As Soon as the second File turns to give fire, the third File which is now
outmost toward the Enemy, makes ready, turns about, gives fire, and does all
as the other two, and so the rest one after another: and then the first two
Files marches up to the third, and those three to the fourth after it has
discharged, and so forth all the rest till the whole wing of shot be
gathered together, and then they all march up, and join in equal Front with
the Pickes: as ye see in the figure following.

KLMN


K L M N is a winge of 100 Musketeers marching by an Enemy who shows
himself on the right Flank of the Battallion L N: Your first File P. toward
him, has given fire upon him, and has charged their Muskets again in the
place they stood: The next File. (). has also given fire upon him, and are
charging again in the same ground also, the third File has turned to the
right hand, and so has presented to give fire: after which, ye must imagine
the first File. P. to march up and join with the second File. O. and both of
them to march up to the third File, and so forth till the whole wing gather
and join together again after they have given fire.

The like ye may understand if the Enemy appear upon your left wing for then
the left hand File is to turn about to the left, and to give fire, upon the
Enemy, and to do all as the right hand File has done: and so the rest of the
Files in the left wing do after the like manner, as those of the right,
observing only the diversity of the hand: Or if the Enemy be on both your
Flanks, ye may make both your Flanks do as one has done.

Although this form of Gathering together of the Files which I have shown,
be most usual, yet there is many good Commanders who dislike it, and thinks
it better that the File which has given fire do not stand longer than they be
free of the body, but turning a little to the left, march immediately up to
the other side between the Picks, and the wing of Musketeers, where there is
a distance left for that effect.

QRSTV


Here ye see the first File. V. having given fire and being free of the body
is marching up the division Q. S. to join with the rest on the left side
between the Picks and the Musketeers: the second File does the like, and so
all the rest one after another: but in this the whole wing in marching is to
edge a little to the right, that it may keep the division clear and free to
receive the Files as they give fire: This they think does not so much
dismember the body as the other, nor yet oppose the Files so much to the
Enemies shot for when three Files stands one before another they make a great
proppe to the Enemy: But I leave every one to their own opinion, for
Martial Commanders differs amongst themselves, in points of exercise, every
one following the custom of his own Country.

If ye would Give more fire upon the Enemy ye may make the second File to
double the first, and both to give fire together, and so, through the rest of
the Files, as I show before in giving fire by doubling of Ranks in the Front
or the Rear.

The use of Giving fire in the Flanks, is when the Enemy appears on either
of your Flanks to charge you, and ye not able to sustain his charge, ye
march away by him in good order, and gives fire upon him: and if he would
continue his march with youres thinking to hasten and cut off your passage, or
come betwixt you and your retreete, ye may make as much haste as he, and yet
sustain skirmish with him.

A Collection of the Words of Command which are most necessare in exercise and
service.
Tit. 12.
IN this treatise I have set down sundry Motions with their words of
Command, more to show the variety of exercise than to approve them as
steadable in Service: Therefore I have made here a collection of the words of
Command, which are most necessary in the exercise of Motiones, and useful in
Service. Our Scotts words, I have set down in the right hand Column, the
English in the left: But the words of Command for the Postures of the Pick
and the Musket I show you Supra Tit. 5.
before: Your Company then being orderly drawn up and standing at a due
distance, both in Ranks and Files which is open order: The Captain or other
Officer, after he has commanded Silence, he begins.

Stand right in your Ranks and your Files. As ye were. To the right hand. To
the left hand. To the right and left hand by division. To the right hand about.
To the left hand about. Half Files to the right or left hand about.


Ranks as ye were. Ranks to the right hand double. Ranks to the left hand
double.

Bringers up as ye were. Bringers up double your Front to the right hand.
Bringers up double your Front to the left hand.

Half Files as ye were. Middlemen, or Half Files to the right hand double your
Front. Middlemen or Half Files to the left hand double your Front. Half Files
to the right double your Fro^t enteare. Half Files to the left double your
Front enteare Half Files double your Front to the right and left by division.

Files as ye were. Files to the right hand double. Files to the left hand
double.

File ra^k as ye were. Ranks file to the right hand. Ranks file to the left
hand. Ranks file to the right and left by division.

Files Countermarch to the right hand. Files Countermarch to the left hand.
Ranks Countermarch to the right Flank. Ranks Countermarch to the left
Flank.
To your order or close order. Files close to the right hand. Files close to
the left hand. Files close. Close your Ranks to your order or close order.

To your open order, or any order else. Files Open to the right hand. Files
Open to the left hand. Files Open
Ranks Open to your open order or any order else.
Wheel your Battle to the right hand. Wheel your Battle to the left hand.
Wheel your Battle to the right hand about. Wheel your Battle to the left
hand about.
Stand right in your Ranks and your Stringes. To your first order. Right about.
Left about. Right and left about Right round about. Left round about.
Sixth Rank right or left round about.

Ranks to your first order. Double your Ranks to the right hand. Double your
Ranks to the left hand.

Tenth Rank to your first order. Tenth rank to the right hand advance to the
fro^t Tenth rank to the left hand advance to the Fro^t.

Sixth ra^k to your first order. Sixth Rank to the right hand advance to the
Fro^t. Sixth Rank to the left hand advance to the Front.

Strings to your first order. Double your Stringes to the right hand. Double
your Stringes to the left hand.

Strings to the right hand Countermarh. Stringes to the left hand Countermarch.
Ranks to the right hand Countermarch. Ranks to the left hand Countermarch.
To your second or third distance. Close your Stringes to the right hand. Close
your Stringes to the left hand. Close your Stringes.
Ranks close to your second or third distance.
To your first distance or any distance else. Open your Strings to the right
hand. Open your Stringes to the left hand. Open your Stringes.
Open your Ranks to your first distance or any distance else.
The great turn to the right about. The great turn to the left about. The
great turn to the right round about. The great turn to the left round about.
The words of Command for the exercise of Musketeers. The words for Giving
fire in the Front. First Rank make ready, Advance before the Front six paces.
Present and give fire. Fall away orderly to the right or to the left hand, or
to both by division. Next Rank do the like. All the rest follow.

For Giving Fire in the Rear. Last Rank make ready, To the right about
present, and give fire. Fall off to the right or left hand, or to both by
division. March up to the Front, Next last Rank do the like. At the rest
follow.

For Giving fire in the Flanks. Right or left hand File, make ready. To the
right or left hand present and give fire. Keep your ground and charge your
Muskets again. Next File to the right or left hand present and give fire.
Keep your ground and charge your Muskets again The rest of the Files do the
like. First File march up and join with the second: March up both and join
with the third and so forth.



AND this much for exercising of foot Companyes, in their Postures and
Motions. I intended to have spoken of the Duty and Charge of every Officer
of foot; and of the Embattelling and Encamping of Footmen, if I had not been
pressed with shortness of time, and diverted by sundry distractiones, besides
the leevying of my Company, and chiefly by a little praeparation which I have
made for the plantation of New Scotland, in America: A Work so Noble, so
Glorious, so conducible to the honor, and commodity of this Kingdom, that the
like hitherto, was never intended. The Author whereof, although his rare
Virtues, be not now according to their hight acknowledged by us, yet ensueing
times will approve them, and prove him to have been the Glory of his Age.

If in this treatise I have committed any error, I submitt my self to the
judement and censure of the Learned and experimented Soldier, whose amendation
I crave: As for the envious Thrasonicall Critic, who will still be carping
that which he understands not, I disdain him, I defy him. If in this I bring
any profit to my Country men, it shall encourage me with the first
opportunity God willing, to proceed and set forth somewhat of the exercise of
Cavalerie: and also of the form of erecting any regular, or irregular figure
of Fortification, with the manner of assayling, and defending a Fort; and that
more, to allure others of better understanding, to employ their pen, and
publish more perfectly in this subject, then that I esteem any thing of mine
worthy of light: avouching only this, that in a true affection to my KING and
my Country, and in a firm resolution to spend the last drop of my Blood in
their service, I shall be Inferior to no Man living.

FINIS.
Printed at Edinburgh by the Heirs of Andro Heart, ANNO DOM. 1627.


