A Miracle, of Miracles.

As fearful as ever was seen or heard of in the memory of MAN.

Which lately happened at Dichet in Sommersetshire, and sent by diverse credible
witnesses to be published in LONDON.

Also a Prophecy revealed by a poor Country Maid, who being dead the first
of October last, 1613. 24. hours, revived again, and lay five days weeping,
and continued prophesying of strange events to come, and so died the 5. day
following.

Witnessed by M. Nicholas Faber, Parson of the Town, and diverse worthy
Gentlemen of the same country. 1613,

Withal, Lincolneshire Tears. For a great deluge, in which five Villages were
lamentably drowned this present month.

woman in bed surrounded by four others standing and one seated, most with arms
upraised or hands clasped in prayer, one holding a candle; angel bearing cross
with pennant at foot of bed; black headless bear beside bed

At London printed for John Trundle: and are to be sold at Christ Church gate.
1614.

TO MY LOVING FRIENDS AND READERS IN LONDON.
BELOVED and courteous friends and Readers, we have to consider by this
strange discourse, how ready Satan is to take hold on us, if we fall from GOD
never so little. He continually runs up and down, seeking whom he may
devour: But notwithstanding his temptations, which are great, the mercy of
God is greater, who never fails to send comfort in temptation, if we accept
thereof.

Great are the examples both of Gods mercy and might, to put us in remembrance
of our sins which are infinite and loathsome, wherein if we continue, let us
undoubtedly look for the reward thereof, which is an everlasting destruction
both of body and soul.

Let not this which is here declared seem a fained fable unto thee, but
assure thy self that all such things are sent as warnings for our wickedness,
and to put us in mind of the stay of our salvation, which is an assured faith
in Christ Jesus: from which pillar if we once shrink, the Tempter is ready
to drive us into despair of Gods mercy.

Many are the wonders which have lately happened, as of sudden and strange
death upon perjured persons, strange sights in the Air, strange births on the
Earth, Earthquakes, Commets, and fiery Impressions, with the execution of GOD
himself from his holy fire in heaven, on the wretched man and his wife, at
Holnhurst in Hampshire; written by that worthy Minister master Hilliard; and
all to put us in mind of God, whose works are wonderful.

These and such like examples (good Reader) warns us to be watchful for the
day of the Lord which is at hand, least suddenly his wrath be kindled against
us. Let us therefore pray to Almighty God to hold back his rod, to be
merciful to us, and to forgive us that is past: that through the assistance of
his Spirit, we may with penitent hearts live in his fear to our lives end.

Your friend, T.I.

STRANGE NEVVES out of Sommersetshire.
Upon the ninth day of September. last past, there was a Yeoman of honest
reputation, dwelling in the Town of Dichet, which is within three miles of
Bruton (the most ancient town within Sommersetshire) whose name is Steven
Cooper, a man of good wealth, and well beloved of his neighbors: who being
sick, and lying in a weak state, sent his wife (whose name was Margaret
Cooper) upon the ninth day of Sept. past into Gloucestershire, to take order
concerning a Farm which he has in a village called Rockhampton, alias
Rockington, at whose coming thither, it seemed al things were not according to
her mind. Thus continuing there one day and something more, she returned home
to her husband, partly agrieued at such things as she thought her husband
might reform, if God lent him life. Now when she was come home again to
Dichet, she found her husband recovered to an indifferent health: to whom she
began to use very much idle talk, as well concerning the same Farm, as also
concerning an old groate which her son (being a little boy) had found about
one week before. Thus she continued (as it were one that had been bewitched
or haunted with an evil Spirit) until Tuesday at night following, which night
she took her rest something indifferently until toward the morning: at which
time she began with much vain speech to disquiet her husband, and to use much
idle talk: but her husband seeing her in such a mind, and finding that she
was as it were one that were desperate, he perswadod her to call upon God, and
that being the creature of God, she should not forget to call upon her
Creator in the day of trouble, wherefore he counseled her to pray with him,
and to say the Lords Prayer after him, which she partly did. But the Devil,
who always does build his Chapel so near as he may to vex Gods Church,
began to withdraw her from Prayer, and to put her in mind to call in most
fearful sort for the groat which her son had lately found, as also for her
Wedding Ring, desiring to see them with all speed: her husband made no great
have thereunto, but continued in Prayer, that it would please GOD, to send her
a more quiet spirit and to strengthen her, that faith might speedily vanquish
such vanity in her. But the more he prayed and persuaded her to Prayer, the
more she seemed to be as it were troubled with some evil spirit, calling
still for the old groat, which her husband neglected to show her: whereat she
began with a very stern and staring countenance to look on her husband in
most wonderful sort, so that he was sore frighted with the same. Then he
called for her sister, for that he was not able to keep her in her bed: which
when her sister and other were come into the Chamber, they kept her down
violently in the bed: and forthwith she was so sore tormented, that she
fomed at the mouth, and was shaken with such force, that the bed and the
Chamber did shake and move in most strange sort: her husband continued praying
for her deliverance: so that within one half hour after her shaking was left,
she began to tell them that she had been in the Town to beat away the Bear
which followed her into the yard when she came out of the Country, which to
her thinking had no head. Then her husband and friends wished her to leave
those vain imaginations, persuaded her that it was nothing but the lightness of
her brain, which was become idle for want of rest. Wherefore her husband and
friends exhorted her to say the Lords prayer with them, which she did, and
after took small rest. And thus she remained until the Sunday following: in
which time she continued raging as it were bestraught of her memory, which came
by fits, to the great grief of her husband, friends, and neighbors. Upon the
Saturday following there was good hope of her recovery, for that she in the
night before had taken some reasonable rest: her friends and neighbors came to
comfort her, yet sometime she would talk somewhat idly to them, which came by
small fittes. And upon the Sunday she seemed very patient and conformable to
reason, until midnight: at which time the Candle, which was set burning in the
same Chamber, was burned out. She then suddenly waking, called to her husband,
and cried out, saying that she did see a strange thing like unto a Snaile,
carrying fire in most wonderful sort. Whereat her husband was amazed: and
seeing the Candle was clean burnt out, called to his brother and sister that
were in the house with other of their friends watching and sitting up, to
comfort her if her extreme fit should any way molest her, who hearing her
husband call, came in and brought a Candle lighted, and set it on the Table
which stood near where the woman lay. She began then to wax as one very
fearful, saying to her husband and the rest: do not you see the Devil?
Whereat they desired her to remember GOD, and to call for grace, that her faith
might be only fixed upon him to the vanquishing of the Devil, and his
assaults. Well (quoth she) if you see nothing now, you shall see something by
and by: and forthwith they heard a noise in the street, as it had been the
coming of two or three Carts, and presently they in the chamber cried out
saying, Lord help us, what manner of thing is this that comes here? Then
her husband looking up in his bed, espied a thing come to the bed much like
unto a Bear, but it had no head nor tail, half a yard in length, and half a
yard in height: her husband seeing it come to the bed rose up, and took a
joined stool and stroke at the said thing, the stroke sounded as though he had
stricken upon a Fetherbed: then it came to the woman and stroke her three times
upon the feet, and took her out of the bed and so rouled her too and fro in
the chamber, and under the bed. The people there present, to the number of
seven persons, were so greatly amazed with this horrible sight that they knew
not what to do, yet they called still upon GOD for his assistance: but the
Candle was so dim, that they could scarsely see one another. At the last this
Monster, which we suppose to be the Devil, did thrust the woman's head betwixt
her legs, and so rouled her in a round compass like an hoope through three
other Chambers down an high pair of stairs in the Hall where he kept her
the space of a quarter of an hour. Her husband, and they in the Chamber above
durst not come down to her, but remained in prayer weeping at the stairs
head, grievously lamenting to see her so carried away. There was such an
horrible stink in the Hall, and such fiery flames, that they were glad to
stop their noses with clothes and napkins. Then the woman cried out, calling
to her husband. Now he is gone. Then (quoth he) in the name of GOD come up to
me. And so even upon the sudden she was come so quickly that they greatly
maruailed at it. Then they brought her to bed, and four of them kept down the
clothes about the bed, and continued in prayer for her. The Candle in the
Chamber could not burn clear, but was very dim, and suddenly the woman was
got out of the bed, and the window at the beds head opened: whether the woman
did vnpin the window or how it came to pass they knew not, but it was opened,
and the woman's legs after a marvelous manner thrust out at the window, so
that they were clasped about the post in the middle of the window, between
her legs. The people in the chamber heard a thing knock at her feet as it
had been upon a Tubbe, and they saw a great fire, as it seemed to them, at her
feet, the stink whereof was horrible. The sorrowful husband and his Brother
imboldens themselves in the Lord, and did charge the Devil in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to depart from her, and to trouble her
no more. Then they laid hands on her, and cried to the Lord to help them in
that their great need, and so pulled her in again, and set her upon her feet.
Then she looked out at a window, and began to say, O Lord (quoth she) me think
I see a little Child: but they gave no regard to her. These words she spoke
two or three times. So at the last they all looked out at the window: and lo
they espied a thing like unto a little Child, with a very bright shining
countenance, casting a great light in the Chamber, and then the Candle burned
very brightly, so that they might one see another. Then fell they flat to the
ground, and praised the LORD that he had so wonderfully assisted them, and so
the Child vanished away. Then the woman being in some better feeling of her
self, was laid in her bed, and she asked forgiveness at Gods hands, and of
all that she had offended, acknowledging that it was for her sins that she
was so tormented of the evil Spirit. And so God be thanked she has ever
since been in some reasonable order, for there has been with her many godly
learned men from diverse places of the Country.

FINIS.
These be the names of the Witnesses, that it is most true.
Steven Cooper. John Cooper. Alis Easton. John Tomson. John Anderton. Miles
Foster. With diverse others.
THE VVONDERFVLL work of GOD, showed by a Prophecy of a poor Country man's
Daughter in GERMANY. 1613.
UPON the first of October last past, 1613. There was a marriage solemnized at
Rostorfe, a mile distant from Melwing, in Germany, between one James Cranisen,
an honest Towns man: and one Margaret Henslers, the daughter of Hans Steeman
of Melwing, deceased. This James had been servant and Clarke, unto the
worshipful master George Ramyts Gentleman, the time of twelve years, who was
(by his Master and sundry other persons of good calling,) brought to the
Church, and at their return were conducted to his Masters house again, who
had prepared for him and his guests, a sufficient Feast, at his own costs and
charges: and although this James was but a hasband man's Son, yet was he
beloved of the whole inhabitants, and that of the chiefest sort. Thus was this
Feast kept in good order, with great Love and quietness: mixing with their
meat, honest mirth, well liked, and noted of sundry Nobles and Gentlemen,
being present at the same Feast, and inhabiting there abouts.

The next day following, a young maid of the age of fourteen years, being
Sister to the Bridegroom, came to the wedding-house to her Brother, bringing
with her the Daughter of one Simon Franiken of Melwing: both which after they
had seen the house, and in what order things stood, were desirous to see the
Daughter of the Worshipful Master George van Ramyttes, whose name was Mistress
Annys: who being in the Chamber, they both went to visit her, and doing their
duties, they demanded how she did: she answered, indifferent well. Then the
two Maids sat down by her, where together they conferred of many matters,
especially, as concerning their attire and apparel. The Bridegroom, before
specified, had made his Sister a silk vpper-body, with which she had dressed
her self as handsomely as she might, and withal she wore the best and
seemliest apparel that she had put on for that day. But the Gentlewoman seeing
it, began to floute at her, saying: Can thy Father cloth thee thus, and
seem so poor? Alas Mistress (quoth the Maiden) hitherto my poor Father has
always to his power apparelled me: but this which you see, my Brother has
bestowed on me, to do him honesty at his marriage: God knows who shall wear
it out, how long I shall owe it, or when I shall put it on again. And though
we be poor in goods, I trust God will make us rich in Spirit, and so she
held her peace, departing for a fine Cake and Wine, wherewith they made merry.
Soon after, the Citizens Daughter that was well apparelled (and somewhat
vainglorious withal) said that her mother gave her all things she could
get,, but her Father was so hard, that she might not wear that she had, but
was feign to keep it from his sight. The Gentlewoman replied, saying: my Father
bids me wear what I will, and if it were not for offense unto the
Nobility, he would apparel me like a Princes: and therewithal she caused
sundry fair Jewels and Chains to be taken forth of her Chests, which were
very curiously wrought, and caused great admiration unto the beholders. The
poor Country Maid that knew no Pride, nor had any such attire to boast on,
held her peace, accounted her self with her poverty, as acceptable before
God, as the richest or fairest of those fine Dames present: saying inwardly to
her self, God is a jealous God, he hates Pride, he punishes the unrighteous,
he comfort the poor, which have no delight therein: and maintains them
that are continually bent to the service of him.

After that al together had talked their pleasures, to their contentment: every
one severally took their leave one of another, and after a while departed to
the houses of their Parents.

The third day after this Marriage was solemnized, all the joy was turned into
heaviness, for the death of two of the Maidens before mentioned: namely, the
Daughter to the Gentleman, and the Sister of the Bridegroom, who died both in
one afternoon, between three and four of the clock. This so sudden death,
brought great terror and fear unto their Parents, and also to the hearers
thereof, insomuch that some thought them to be poisoned, and other gave forth
their judgments according to their fantasies.

The next day after, preparation was made for their burial: Nicholas Faber,
Parson of that Villedge, would have had them both buried in one grave, but the
Gentleman would not. Great lamentation was made for both these Maidens, the
Gentleman and his friends, for the loss of his Daughter: and the Father and
Mother, with her Brother and Friends, for the loss of their godly Child. Now
the Mother of this poor Maid, understanding that her neighbors were in hand
to wind her up, and so to send her to the earth: came unto them and desired
that she might yet once more see her Daughter, which they willingly granted:
so they went altogether to the dead Corpse, (which had been laid forth, the
full space of two and twenty hours) and the Mother lifted up the sheet,
sighing, purposing then to take her last farewell, and fight of her dear
Daughter, whom she so tenderly loved. But contrary to her expectation, and of
all the beholders, her Daughter, even as one awaked from a slumber, raised up
herself, and with a mild and cheerful countenance, spoke unto her Mother as
follows. My most dear Mother, why have you sinned so sore against GOD? You
have made me sorrowful many times, but be you content, GOD has forgiven all,
for I am sent as a messenger to you, and within five days I shall return
again to the place I came from, where I shall live in all peace. Therewith
they fetched her clothes, which she put on, and walking with them, she
demanded meat.

This sudden sight amazed the beholders, for they looked for some other
meaning in it. But where as this Maid was seldom before seen to be merry,
They now perceived her more cheerful, and with a pleasant disposed
countenance, so that the apparent show of her iesture was wonderful to
behold, then meat was brought, and she did eat in all men's sight, disgesting
it naturally.

Diverse of the chief of the Town came to see this strange event, where after
many speeches by them uttered the Maid required silence, and to them all she
said.

Beloved Christians, wonder not that I have been a short time from you: but be
thankful to God, that he has certified you by sundry signs, how the end of
the world is at hand, and the day of rest coming to rejoice us: Our charge
shall be taken away, and our travail have an end: Let us make our selves
ready against the Sabbath of our Savior, the only true Son of God. Let us
now with pure hearts, prepare to meet the heavenly Bridegroom, that with him
we may enter into his everlasting Kingdom, where we shall enjoy eternal life.

Master Nicholas Faber, (Parson of the Town) demanded of her where she had
been? To whom she answered: I was overtaken near the bridge of the Brook, by
a comely old man, with a long gray Beard, who saluted me, saying: Daughter,
whether will thou? Is thy Father at home? I answered yea. Then said he to me,
come my loving Daughter, I must needs talk with thee, and tell thee that
which as yet is hidden from thee, for great effect depends thereupon. And be
not afraid, let the grace of God suffice thee, and look that you conceal not
my words, but reveal them to others: tell what I show you, unto old and young.

So we came to a fair costly Forte, (no Princes Court like it, nor any
earthly building to be compared unto it,) where we were let in. In which
place, we saw many bright Angels, shining like the beams of the Sun all
singing melodiously with clear voice: Holy, holy, holy, is our Lord God of
Saboath. Among which I knew a great number: But the old man forbade me to
speak unto any. Forthwith I was brought again to the Brook, where he ouertook
me: I becam very pensive, when I thought of the worthiness of the place where I
had been.

But the old man, willed me to rest contented, for this short time shall
quickly have an end, and within five days thou shall be brought again into
this place.

He willed me, besides, to manifest (unto the Penitent) the mercy of GOD, and
to say unto the world, that he is bent to wrath: chiefly to those that despise,
and give no credit to his examples, which he miraculously has showed unto
his people. These are but warnings sent us, to mollify our hard hearts, and to
admonish us from the detestable Pride, which is here maintained, because
before GOD you shall find it damnable.

O people full of contempt, despising one an other, some for Riches, some for
Beauty, others for Wisdom, some for one thing, some for an other: where as
before GOD, we are all alike with him, poor and rich: notwithstanding, he will
not go forward with his anger, he will hold his hand, and moderate it with
mercy, if he find but some small number, penitent for their sins.

If you amend not, and turn to GOD, he will forthwith send on you a general
alteration, and such an one, as not only men, but Birds of the air and all
living things, shall tremble at his wrath. Wars shall greatly grieve the
earth, and they shall destroy Countries and people: Men shall be most
grievously chased from their houses, and most miserably murdered. And before
this happen, there shall come a great dearth: and then God will take his own
that have turned unto him, not suffering them to see this misery: but those
that live after, shall truly feel the wrath of God, so that those which
remain in the third year shall well say, Where have you been, that you are
not yet destroyed? Many for fear shall decay: there shall be great
Earthquakes, through which. Towns and Steeples, Castles, Fortes and houses
shall be thrown down on heaps. Then shall follow such mishap, as is not
necessary to be spoken of, for the sin of the people is abominable and cursed
before God.

After this great and terrible trouble, there shall great Peace arise, and the
people shall live in great tranquillity: there shall be want of learned men,
and good Rulers: wherefore good people, let this terrify your pride, being
even the whole puddle of sin, and the root of abomination.

The clothes which Mistress Annys did wear, for the Pride and vainglory of
her Parents, they shall become loathsome to all persons, whereby none shall be
able to wear them, but shall remain as a necessary example to all persons.
This speech twice spoken, was marked of many: and others were inquisitiue, to
see the cloths: which being stirred, there arose a great and detestable stink,
that no man could either wear them, or abide by them. Which strange thing, the
good Gentlewoman her Mother considering: caused the said Chamber to be walled
in, so that none may come to them any way. Thus the Maid continued in these
and sundry such other speeches.

In the mean time, diverse learned Preachers came unto her, and talked with
her, as concerning Spiritual matters, which she was glad of. To whom she
yielded hearty thanks, signifying to them, that the fifth day was now come,
wherein she should be taken from the world. But before she departed, she was
desirous to receive the Sacrament, and Christian Communion of the body and
blood of Christ, which Master Nicholas Faber did minister unto her: And all
that day he did reason with her: to whom she uttered such godly reasons, as it
made him marueilously astonished.

Many people came to see her at that day, and to see what would fall out. Then
meat was brought, and she sat down at the Table, she said Grace, thanked God,
and blessed her Father and Mother, and instantly desired her Brother, that he
would honor his Parents, and not to leave therein their old age: in so doing,
he should be rewarded with the blessing of God.

Master Faber came now again to visit her (as his manner was) and he said
unto her, how do you? To whom she friendly gave her hand, and smiling, thanked
him of his pains which he had taken with her.

Then for a last farewell, she rehearsed all the warnings to the people,
desiring them, not to be unmindful of them: And anon after, between one and
two of the clock, patiently sitting in a Chair, she committed her Soul to
God; and yielded up the Ghost. Being the 6. of the said Month of October. 1613.

FINIS.
The names of certain men of good worship and credit, that were then present.
Master Nicholas Faber, Parson of the said Town, Master George van Ramyttes.
Master Ioachim Schiell of Melwing. Master Peter Schulban of Melwing. Adam
Dorhoff of Margenberg. Hans Ronneman, Scowt of the Town. Master Stephen.
Lawrence the Schoolemaister. Hans Lidwig: And Peter Barchart.
Master Knact Clighton, Berger and Superintendent of Melwing, had the
examination of the truth, before it was published in Print.

LAMENTABLE News out of Lincolne-shire of the ouerflowing of waters, breaking
from the Seas, which drowned 5. Villages with all their goods and cattle, with
other places of the Land, this present month of November: 1613. to the great
hurt of many people there dwelling.

view of city with birds overhead; three figures in upper left background
(kneeling in prayer?)

At London printed for JOHN TRVNDLE: and are to be sold at Christ Church gate.
1614.

THE OVERFLOWING OF Waters, breaking from the Seas in the County of Lincoln,
with other places of the Land, this present month of November, to the great
hurt of many people there dwelling.
IF we do consider the estate of mankind aright, we shall find by experience
how sudden is his fall, and we see the man that has lived many years,
carefully getting together wealth in abundance, in a moment is undone, and
brought to nothing, as for example, this present month of November, brings us
sufficient witness, where in Lincolne-shire, that plentiful country, that soil
so large and full of increase, as well of Cattle, as other fowls of the
earth, has lately felt the vnresisting force of waters, by the raging and
unruly winds blown over the sea Banks, where many hundreds of people, were
even forced by the sodainnes thereof to shift for their lives, leaving all the
substance they inioyed to the mercy of the commanding floods.

And now to begin the discourse of my lamentable reports, near unto the
Town of Wisbidge, one of the principal market towns in that county of
Lincoln, is situate a Village called Long-sutton, a place for husbandry and
pasture grounds answerable to most in that country, but by reason of the marshy
and fenny valleys adioining to the same, the most part thereof has been
lately ouerflowed: for the wind then sitting North and North-east, beating the
seas so violently against the shores, by which means the commanded waters
exceeded their bounds with such force, that their mighty banks were not able
to contain them.

At the first entrance of this watery conqueror, it is said it apeared to the
inhabitants a far of, like unto a cloud rouling out of the skies, or a storm of
rain, by the winds blown nearer and nearer, but approaching to the sight of
men, it seemed to be a second deluge: a fear so sudden, that well was that
man that by flight could preserve his life: not one place, not one field, not
one village, nor one town received hurt by the ouerflowing of these waters,
but many: yea, many were the losses coming thereby: for it is well known, and
by true reports justified, that near unto Long-Sutten aforesaid, some
eighteen or twenty villages had share of this lamentable spoil, and as much
ground ouerflowed as is compassed in the circuit of sixteen miles, all the
low parts of that country stood like the maine Ocean, or the Zurick seas
betwixt Holland and Zeland, where nothing is left in sight above waters but
pinacles and Church steeples: so was here at that woeful time, nothing seen
but the upper parts of houses, and the tops of trees: the fury and strength of
the salt waters thus broke in so prevailed, that they ouerturned whole stackes
and Rickes of Pease and Beans, and carried them away like stating ships into
the maine ocean.

It is also credibly reported, that above two thousand head of cattle, besides
many thousands of sheep perished in the same floods, and no news of them as
yet to be heard of, but only some few, scattering here and there, floting
upon the waters ten or twelve miles from the owners, the rest are supposed to
be born into the sea, whose devouring womb is able to drench up all the wealth
that remains upon the land, for the sea is much more larger and richer then
all the world beside: therefore let us pray that the Lord with his mighty and
strong arm, may keep us from the Rigor of this merciless inuades, and so
strengthen her banks, that she may be kept within her bounds, otherwise
unhappy shall we be in this Northern part of the world, but now again to our
purpose.

At those Villages bordering nearest upon the sea coasts many of the
inhabitants were forced in saueguard of their lives to clime the tops of trees,
and there sat staruing in the cold day and night, until Boats came to
preserve them, likewise upon house tops, and the Leads of churches, sat both
men, women, and children, whose frighted friends supposed them to be buried in
the deep waves: but amongst all these lamentable reports, this one is most
wonderful of a Lincolne-shire man that swomme a long mile bearing his wife and
two children upon his back to save them from drowning, whose love and
adventure herein deserves a perpetual commendation: likewise diverse men of
that country were forced to ride upon horses swimming also at least two miles
even to save themselves: to speak truth, in this extremity nothing was cared
for but peoples lives, wherein as yet few are known to have perished: for
according to the custom of that country, they have boats and other means
always in readiness provided against the dangers of such ouerflowing waters,
but of goods and cattle such a spoil was made in less then five days, that
the loosers thereof will hardly recover their former estates in seven years
following; God of his mercy pity their cases, and in his bounty relieve their
wants, for great poverty is now fallen upon the woeful inhabitants of that
country. Behold I say, the estate of man, one day rich, the next day poor:
the one day alive, the next day dead: no certainty of this worlds prosperity,
no assurance of wealth, all things variable, all in a moment destroyed.

Let us call to mind the like mishap some six years since in the West parts
of England, where the waters of the Sea were violently driven over their Banks
by a South west wind, as these were opposite to them with a Northeast, where
likewise many a wealthy village sustained much hurt, hardly recovered at this
day: now Lincolnshire thy sorrows may compare with theirs, the waters have
emptied thy pastures of increasing cattle, as they did their fields; such is
the cruelty of this liquid element, for if it is rebel and get beyond his
bounds, it is able to invade a whole kingdom, ouer-turne Towns and Towers,
and devour up all living creatures therein remaining: let this one thing
following be a sufficient president, to make known the strength of these
headstrong waters, straying from their sovereign Prince the maine ocean, for
the abundance thereof came into the low marsh grounds of that country, with
such sudden violence, that a strong built house, wholly as it stood, without
splitting or separation, was borne like a ship upon the waters, two miles from
the place where it fast was builded, the people remaining therein having no
hurt, but safely set upon a hill side, and so preserved from the further
danger: An other strange accident happened in the same County. The salt waters,
most seafayring affirm, are of a greater strength then the fresh or the land
water, and is able to bear up what others will suffer to sink, so was it here
approved, for a woman lying in childbed, was borne with her child, bed and all
safely floting upon the waters, with the house wherein she remained lying, for
her best safety, in a close boarded chamber, until such time as the waters
abated and so miraculously preserved from death. It is also to be maruailed,
that at the last, when the waters fell, and returned to their own abiding,
which is the sea, there were found upon the land abundance of fish of diverse
sorts, which the waters had left behind, the like seldom seen or heard of:
Contrariwise, the sea made an exchange, and for her fish, received into her
watery womb the like number of flesh: as horse, kine, sheep, swine and such
like, to the great hinderance of that part of this kingdom.

I will not grieve the owners with the remembrance of their losses in other
goods, as corn, hay, and other household stuff: as bedding, linen, woollen,
and such like, which these turbulent waters spread abroad, and made prizes to
pilfering Vacabonds, it is a lamentable case, when the two elements of Fire and
Water gets liberty, for then is no mercy, but mere confusion.

Not only Lincolneshire can complain of the seas oppression. but diverse
countries bordering upon her shores, which the eastern part of Essex can well
witness: what goodly grounds and fair pastures have been there ouerflowed: what
herds of kine and sheep have been there drowned: what long time spent for the
recovery, to the great charge and half undoing of the owners, nay further a
hinderance to the whole Country.

With grief of heart I now call to mind, the great loss and hinderance of an
honorable Lord of this land, happening this present month of November, in the
said County of Essex, where many a hundred akers of gallant ground, closing
upon the sea coast, is quite ouerflowed, standing now like a white Sea, hardly
ever to be recovered, a loss of many thousand pounds, which might have
relieved the estates of many thousands of poor people: God is angry with us,
in changing this land habitation, into a watery ocean, which by little and
little, seeks to steal the whole earth into her insearchable and deep
circumference.

Goodwin sands upon the borders of Kent is likewise one of the Seas cruelties,
which sucking sandy gulf has devoured so many goodly Ships, many other
breaches gives the Sea passage into the Land threatening our destruction. The
wealthy River Thames presents unto our remembrance diverse violent passages of
water, which from time to time begets fear and care unto our Country, joined
with a continual toil for the recovery.

Come nearer home to our famous City of London, and think upon the strange
tides there swelling, this last week this beginning of November, almost still
remaining before our eyes, how at Queene-Hiue the water flowed into the
Meale-market, and bore sackes and vessels of meal up and down the streets,
and drowned many vaults and sellers, to the great hurt and spoil of much goods
and commodities. God of his mercy keep under this outrageous element, let it
not gather head and go beyond the bounds: for being kept under government, it
is a sweet good, and comfort to us all, so is the element of Fire, both good
being well used, and both evil if once abused, from the which if they once get
command, let us use this proverb or rather Prayer, from fire and water good
Lord deliver us.

FINIS.

