THE Souls Solace, OR Thirty and one Spiritual EMBLEMS.

Sold by Thomas Ienner, at the South entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1626.

TO the Reader.
LOving and Christian Reader: Loving thou must be, else thou will never cover
the defects of this Book, for it is love that covers a multitude of faults,
Christian thou ought to be, else can thou not conceive of the matter
herein contained Hearing many Ministers, I have plucked from some of their
Gardens, flowers which I have put altogether, and made a Pofie (if not for
thee, yet for my self) to smell on: if they profit not thee, yet I am sure
they have done me good, counting one by one, I have found out the number
thirty and one. And as they shall be accepted in the world, I shall be
encouraged to add as many more, for often hearing, will bring them to my hand;
and because men are more led by the eye, then ear, it may be thou looking upon
these little printes, mai'st conceive of that which many words would not make
so plain unto thee. A healthy stomach turns all that is wholesome unto good
nourishment, which I desire God this may do: and to that end, I desire him to
bless both it, thee, and me, and rest

Thine in Christ, T. I.

1. Justification by Faith.
FOr want of forecast and good husbandry,
It comes, that many fall to misery:
And when some unthrifts run in debt, at last,
We see him rested, and in prison cast:
When being in bonds, his child seeks his repreeving,
And labors with some friend, for his releeving,
The friend the money brings, which being paid,
The Captiue's free, and th'action forthwith stayed,
Yet none will say, the Lad, has him enlargd;
But his fast friend which has the debt dischargd.
Thus man for sin (the debt) Gods Sergeants rest,
Who then for dread of wrath, and Hell's distressed;
When faith, (his child) forth stepping* sees that woe,
FAITH

That he because of sin must undergo:
And breaks through the clouds, to fetch from thence,
The price of Christ his blood, a Recompense
Sufficient, and above, to pay that debt;
That all the Devils spite shall not him let,
Or hinder from that freedom, placed in heaven;
Which to the faithful ones by Christ is given.
Not that the Art of Faith can do it alone,
The work is Christ's, whom Faith lays hold upon:
The Boy frees not the Man, but money paid;
So frees not Faith, But, as on Christ it is laid.
M. D.
2. The way to get Riches.
Look how her need some Maiden to supply,
Seeks here and there, for water earnestly;
Her Paile's half full perhaps, But it is too little
To serve her turn; she must fill up a kettle,
Or other vessels of a larger size,
For diverse necessaries to suffice.
Then wisely to the Pumpe, in have, she goes,
And half, or all, she has, therein she throws,
Where pumping, there comes back of water store,
If 20 Pailes she le fill; and yet there is more,
Consider this, who mournest all the day,
For want to wealth, see this, and cast away
Thy carking carefullnes; Mark well this Maid,
And do thou likewise, so these griefs shall fade.

Thou have some wealth in hand, yet wishest more,
Give freely of that little to the poor;
And as the Widows meal and oil, she dressed,
For the Prophet still a'st wasted, still increast,
In Barrel and in Cruse, So thou shall have,
By giving, more then erst thou thoughtst to crave,
Which by mine own experience I have seen;
The more I sowed more has returned been:
What measure thou do meet, shall measured be,
Full pressed down, and running ore to thee.
The Pumpe's the Poor, the water that is thy riches,
Giving is pumping, which together fetches,
And draws such blessings from Gods hand above,
Thou shall abound through his free grace and love.
M. S.
3. A Remedy against Despair.
A Great large Payle of durty water thrown,
In some pau'd Hall, Or other room of stone,
Seems so abundant, all the pavement flows*
Able to make one wet-shod, much it shows*
But were this powrd the Ocean Sea upon,
It Is swallowed straight, as if there had been none.
So if thou will one sin upon thee lay,
And dare for that thy self engage, to pay;
Thou Wilt find it greater, and much more, then ever
Thou can discharge* For this can man do never.
But though thy sins be dipped in scarlet die;
Or as the immense sands in weight they lie,
Though they be black, as is the dark of Hell,
Lay them on Christ; In him does fulness dwell,

To answer all; Redemption's plenteous
With Him, who sinlesse was made sin for us,
Christ is this great all-comprehending maine,
Which able is, thy sins to abolish plain:
Do them through Faith in sound Repentance drown,
They shall like drops in Him be swallowed down.
E. V.
4 The means to get a soft heart.
THe Pible stone (experience daily shows)
Hurl it against the ground with fircest throws,
Or strike a flint with Hammers blows not weak,
Yet hardly will these stones thus forced break:
But take some Cushion, lay that stone thereon,
You Will shiver it with blows not more then one.
This Cushion of Gods love, put Nathan under
King David's heart, which straight did break in sunder,
Vpbraided thus; Thy Mastersthrone, (says he)
House, wives, and children, God has given thee:
Which were it too little, more He meant to add,
But foolishly thou Him, requitest bad.
This made King David cry, Oh I have sinned
Against my gracious God, to me most kind!

So, to Repentance should Gods love thee lead,
Who for his mercies chooses to be dread:
For that he is a just revenging God,
To stand in awe of Him; and 'cause his Rod
Will force thee else; this argues servile fear,
But not the obedience that his children bear
To Him, and to his Laws: Gods faithful child
Yields honor, love, and awe, because God's mild,
Long suffering, gentle, patient, slow to wrath:
And 'cause his love no limitation has.
If worse then stony, then be not thy heart,
Let Gods* great mercies thee to him convert.
M. F.
5. The course to keep a continual soft heart.
IN Countries hot, where running streams are seant,
In parching years, of water they have want;
Which to prevent, they digg oft-times great ponds,
Wherein at winter, store of water stands:
Yet are they of no use, when frosts do fall;
Because they then be frozen over all;
Which to prevent, they break one part of that,
Wherein their Beasts, those times, they water at:
And if it freezeth every day, then still
Be tampring with it, every day they will,
To keep it open; which three days, or a week,
Standing untouched, will put them to o't, to seek
With waightey bars, and Irons, it to rend,

And many strookes, and heavy blows to spend.
Mark this, good Christian, and this Rule ^^ist try,
Woul'dst thou thy heart keep soft continually?
Be breaking of it daily, with often groans,
To God in Prayer, and with thy prayers join mones,
For sin; and Practice some thing, every day
To Set thee onwards, on thy Christian way:
Or Hear, or read; Confer, or meditate.
But if thou let these pass, thou shall feel straight,
Such a benumdnes, over thy heart to fall,
That then if thou would pray, hear, read, or all
Thou can devise, with never so great Devotion,
It may be hardly thou shall get the Motion:
Of Gods good spirit, thy heart to soften so,
As formerly, before thou let'st him go.
How prayed King David to' the Almighty Lord,
That he again his spirit would afford
Unto him; when through negligence, and pleasure,
He might, what erst he counted all his treasure?
What duties promised when thou were first called*
Be sure, by sloth, thou let not be for-stalld;
For what thou faylst of them, who ere thou art,
So much of Joy, be sure, thou shall come short.
As here this man by clearing of the way,
Daily with ease, come to the Water may:
So if thou let good duties no day lie,
Thou a soft heart shall hold inseprably.
M. F.
6. The trial of a true broken heart.
AS two men passing on the Kings high way,
Should be surprised by thieves, that would them slay;
But through much struggling, are not killed out*right,
For both have yet some life, and little spirit.
Yet one in mad despair, does dying lie,
Because he will not seek for remedy.
But the other crawles, as weakness will permit him,
To some good Surgeon, timely help to get him.
Which Surgeon does to him his health restore,
And makes him sound, as ere he was before.
Of these two men, one's good; but the other vild,
The Divills own, and not Iehovahs Child;
These both has Satan wounded in the soul,
With some gross reigning sin, that is most foul:

The wicked crying mightily, so lies,
Under the fear of wrath; dispayrs, and dies.
Gods servant cries, yet comes to God above,
That he would for Christ's only sake, and love,
Heal him from this his sin, his soul distressing,
And from that conflict give him due refreshing;
And never will leave him, till he has attaind,
Pardon for's sin; and Gods sweet favor gaynd.
If thou can say, why did I thus offend;
Against this gracious God, thus good, thus kind?
And can withal, to that rich fountain go,
From whence all mercy, comfort, grace, do flow:
Though sin thy soul has smitten greviously,
Thou shall not, for it, be condemnd to die:
For then assure thy self, soft is thy heart,
In that thou go, for ease of this thy smart.
False Judas had a torturde heart and said,
Oh I have sinned, in that I have betrayed
My Master innocent, and Caine was driven
To cry, My sinn's more then may be forgiven*
Whilst, they for grace and mercy, never did call,
Which had they done, they never had felt their thrall.
Sue thou for grace, Then art thou in the number
Of those, whose hearts are rightly rent in sunder.
M. F.
7. A Caveat against reigning sin.
THe Hog tyd by th'leg, with a small cord,
Is to the slaughter driven to be goard.
Thus every man may to himself apply,
Though not in all gross sins, I live, and die,
Yet brought I may be to' the depth of Hell,
With some one reigning sin, with one, as well,
As if my soul with many more were fraught:
And cry with Caine, This, my damnation wrought.
The Ships at Sea are made most tite, and sure,
From every little leake, to be secure;
Least one, as well as more, them cast away.
As one disease, in stead of more, will slay
The impotent. For there is not any sin,
That thou can say, Gods not offended in.

Then thus I argue; If God be displeased,
That wrath of his must some way be apeas'd;
Which only comes by faith, and sin forsaking;
Which if thou give not over; there is noe slacking,
But die thou must, for that foul darling One;
Though all the others thou had long for-gon.
With a small Cord the Swine's to slaughter driven,
By one gross sin, the soul's of heaven depriven.
M. T.
8. The use of the failings of Gods Children.
THe Mariner, when Beacons he perceiues,
Or Boys before him; warily them leaves
On either hand; For well he knows, that if
They be not shunned, he hazardeth his life.
The true converted Christian likewise knows,
Gods Children falls, and errings, scripture shows,
Not to be followed, but forgone with heed;
For to this end, their given us to read.
May be thoult think, why may not, I, as they,
So sin, and live? For those were saved, they will say,
Yes, truth they were: But that with much ado:
Before they came to heaven, they hell past through.
I roared all day, for the disquieture
Of soul, which I for sin did aye endure,

(Says David) All my bones are broke, and bed
I wash with tears, distilling from my head.
If thus thou like to morn, then like to sin;
For none has pardon, ere repented been.
The ways of sin, never yet produc'et true pleasure:
Whose seed is quickly sown, but brings full measure
Of grief, paind, woe. What Is good, that imitate.
Nor let vain hope seduce thee, till too late.
Many have stumbled at this stone, that now
In torments are; which said, Thus, so may thou
If thou will tread the bypath, they have tried,
The bitter cup of theirs too, thou must bide.
Look how on sea marks, sea men will not run:
So faylings of good Christians, Christians shun.
M. D.
9. Reconciliation to God.
HE that some frame of diverse pieces makes,
Of one he can do naught; but two he takes,
Or more, according as the frame is high:
And each by other lays them, to try
If they will fit, if not, even then he squares
The one, and something from the other payres.
That done, he takes the glue, and joins them fast,
And so of two makes one, long time to last.
So God and man, disparted are, and twain;
And cannot of themselves be joined again;
They both are ruff, unequal to be one;
And joined together they can be by none.
But Christ, the skillful Carpenter, does set
On this great work, and thoroughly finish it.

He takes from God his wrath, by suffering,
And sin from man, his grace attributing;
Then by his spirit, that combining glue,
Sweetly unites them, which before were two.
This plain similitude bear still in mind,
Who sorely art unto despair inclinde,
Thy sins do vex thee, Christ does them deface;
In stead of sins, he gives thee his grace;
But Oh I fear the Ire and wrath of God.
Christ also that remooues; he bore his Rod.
But how shall I this know? He gives his spirit,
That knitteth both in one. Thou shall inherit
Heaven in this life, and when this race is over,
Thou shall be joynd in bliss for evermore.
M. D.
10 The Touchstone of Spiritual life.
MOrs is a morsel, whereof all must taste;
Some soon come to it, others make no have.
But all at last must die; for'tis sins due.
Noe man can sin escape, nor death eschew:
Yet dies not every one alike; a Trance
Some seizes on; some slain, as'twere by chance,
Others in downy beds, their spirits expire;
Some's vital powers (may be) benumd, retire
To the hear; those are not dead; for put a glass
(Thus triall's made) against their mouth, and face,
Breath being found thereon, alive they seem;
If not, them to be dead do all men deem.
Death seizes on the body; Not on soul,
That must live aye* death can it not control.

But yet the soul is dead too, spiritually,
When as upon its face, you shall apply
Christ's righteousness; but it, like a dead stone,
Breaths not thereon; That man is such a one,
In whome's noe spiritual life, nor living grace;
For this Divines count life in the last place.
And this rule's certain; If there show no breath
No truer sign can be of life, or death.
Therefore though I be wounded, like to die,
I am not dead yet; for the whilst that I
Breath at my Christ, I live, and shall live ever,
I'n ghoastly breath, which shows I shall die never.
Christ is the glass, thy sins do cause the sound,
If breath of faith; then life of grace is found.
M. F.
11 The sacrifice of the Mass.
THe Law Leviticall to know's much worth,
For that the offices of Christ sets forth;
And manifestly shows, the Papists Mass
A needless Ceremony ever was.
For why? They offer Christ continually;
Which you shall see confuted presently.
The Priest was one, who only was to enter
Into the holy place; none else might venture;
Where, for the people, he did sacrifice;
And they without God worshipped otherwise,
But might not make an offering; that alone
Concerned the Priest, that in to God was gone.
When all was done within, and he come out,
He straight in peace dismissed all the rout.

Thus Christ our high* Priest entered is within
Holy of holiest; offering (there) for sin,
His merrits; with an incense does afford,
Sweet smellings in the nostrills of the Lord.
The world's the outward court, where we remain,
Whose duties are to praise, and laud Gods name,
Not do the Sacrificing work at all,
For Christ that same performed once for all.
And when himself He offered up, that day
All sacrifices else took end, for aye.
Leave off then Mass, and such like trumperies;
Unless Christ's offering will not you suffice*
Who as he is that one, so he is the best;
Yea to this end is entr'd in that rest.
While Nadab and Abihu brought strange fire,
God cut them off, in his provoked ire.
Then fear ye Papists, while you are at Mass,
You be not slain; for God is as he was.
M. D.
12. A remedy against spiritual pride.
THe grass, and herbs, to look on cheares the sight,
So do the flowers, and fruits; it is man's delight;
He takes great comfort, and can glory much
To see them green, and sprout; his joy is such
He thinks one well could live by these; But when
He veiwes the sun, the case is alterd then;
For though he gaze upon them, naught he spies
That seems pleasant, or can glad his eyes;
Cause now a while he is blinded, though he took
That great delight, (before) on them to look.
This is the cause why Christians are so proud,
Of their transcendent grace God has bestowd,
For they themselves do with themselves compare,
And many times with those that weaker are,

And see not how far they of him come short,
Who knew noe guile, and had in sin no part.
When one shall wisely see what God desires,
What himself wants, and what the Law requires,
He Is stricken blind, who did before behold
Such graces in himself, he grew so bold
To vaunt of them* This rule to make thee humble
be sure thou take, and then thou shall not stumble
Upon the Rock of thine own haughty mind,
If thou wilt see what thou want, and what is behind.
M. B.
13. Some time spent in holy duties, hinder not a man's particular calling.
THe Swayne that with the sweating of his brows,
Food to himself and family allows;
Who Digs, and Delues, and mowes the Corn, and Grass*
And will no precious time in vain let pass,
Yet whets his sithe, and time to make it keen
Spends daily much; for thereby it is seen
He cuts the Corn more smoother and a pace,
And rids more work: And counts it no disgrace
Ost so to do; and that way further gains
Then if he used (in cutting) greater pains.
So knows the true Nathaniell Israelite,
By taking pains in good things, his delight,
He loses not by that, but double gets:

First comfort to his soul, and yet not lets
His own peculiar calling* That day more
He speeds, then worldlings do with labor sorr.
And I for my particular can say,
I gain more then, Then any other day.
The Lords Commandment was to Israel,
When they did come in Canaan land to dwell,
All their male Children thrice should in the year,
Before the Lord of Lords go vpt' appear;
And while they so would worship often; The land
None should assay to get, from out their hand;
But each thing prosper, and succesfull prove,
And all occurrents turn to their behooue.
On Christian practices whet often thy sithe;
And take it for certain, thou and thine shall thrive.
M. D.
14. The way to please God in all our actions.
THat Archer will not aim with both his eyes,
Which shoots in a game to winn a prize;
But looks with one eye narrowly, to hit
That pinn, or mark he shootes at, in the white.
So he that God will please, serve, and obey,
That eye must shut, that uses to survey
Honors, or praise of men, or worldly pelf;
And thus he good may purchase to himself.
Good things then for themselves must freely follow*
Or else Gods name aright thou can not hallow:
If I should seek to please men (says S. Paul)
Then were I not Gods Minister at all;
Who does an heart and heart, with hate detest:
The single eye, and simple heart, are best.

While men do seek the love of men to gain,
They sail of that; and loose the Lord, the maine.
The Lord with him Corrivall will have noue,
But who alone Him loves, is blessed alone.
O let my heart be in thy statutes sound,
That shame may not my soul or face confound!
The Lord all creatures for man's use did make,
But for himself vouch safed man to take;
Since so's Gods mind, let man to God surrender
Himself, and leaving all, God only tender.
And when these two shall meet, My profit, ease;
Gods glory, will* Let this, down to their pease.
The while, Gods glory man's self the eye shut quite:
Disclaimst thy self in all. Thou'st hit the white.
M. S.
15. The cause why wicked men, die either suddenly, sullenly, or desperately.
THe Parents to their Children wont each night,
To deal out some convenient jnch of light,
That seemelier they might to their rest resort:
Who fall parchance to wrangle, or to sport,
And so their piece of candle vainly wast;
Which being out, themselves in bed they cast
They know not how; one runns in at the feet,
Another hawles the blancket for the sheet:
And commonly that night no rest they take,
Because no better use of light they make.
Like to these foolish Children, most men are;
Who though the Lord them time, and health does spare,
And little light of life affords them here,

To serve Him still in trembling, and in fear:
This precious time misspent, to grave they go,
As men bereaved of sense, they care not how.
But though this life's a moment, yet depends
Eternity heereon, which never ends.
Statutum est, That thou, as all, must die,
And after that, to Gods Tribunal hie:
See therefore what the prisoners do, that hear
Deaths doom; Noe more themselves deboist they bear,
But pensiuely towered execution go.
Take pattern then by them, and do thou so.
Do not the Candle of thy life extinguish,
Before thou grace pursue, and sin relinquish;
Least thou cry (locked in sable bed of Hell)
To late; Ah, had I life now, I Would line well!
M. D.
16. The impediments of Christian conversation.
THe Citizens for most part Hacknies hire,
And none so soon as they, their horses tier*
Which rises hence; With full career they Ride;
And in their Innes the beasts to the Rack are tied
Meateles undressed; yet are they switcht, and spurrd,
If on their way they have a whit demurrd.
But cause they provender withold them from,
They grow unable (through) to bring them home.
Like unto these are some; those Christians sad,
Who look not on the Gospel, which makes glad;
But on the Rigor of the Law, their eyne
Do fix, and on their faults their souls to pine;
Considering not what Christ for them has paid,

And what is beat upon so often, and said,
Rejoice ye Righteous, and again Rejoice;
And ye of perfect heart, life up your voice.
Those see thou not. But tiest thee to the Rack
Of the laws Curses, which do make thee slack
Thy pace unto thy home, in heaven attending;
And so before thy time thy zeal has ending.
When Sampson dranck that mistick spring amain
His spirits refresht, and he reviu'd again.
Unto the house of David opened is
A fountain for their foul vncleanesses.
A proclamation's made; Ho, he that will
Come, wine to buy; without price, Take your fill.
Who has no power, and's faint, He makes strong.
And strength unto the strengthlesse does prolong.
As Eagles mount, to heaven So shall they flee;
And in that walk, or race, unwearied be.
Drinck then of these Rich promises Collection,
And thou shall strengthened be unto perfection.
M. F.
17. The cause of ignorance in lay Papists.
THose Thieves that use to pilfer, hate the light,
And seek by all means, to extinguish quite
What light so ere they see; For that discouers
Their mischeife; which else in the darkness houers,
Therefore before they will act their wickedness,
All light shall surely out, both more and less.
Then they no consctence make; but all they can,
They steal* against the laws of God and man.

Those thieves are Popelings, and this light the word
Which they obscure; and will it not afford
Unto the people, least it should discry
Their double dealing, and their villainy:
For when the people naught (thence) see, or know,
They make them deem what they say, must be so*
Elisha once the blinded Syrian host
Diverted from along the Dothan coast*
Into the midst of Samar's dreadful bands;
Where they together by their foes strong hands,
Might soon have perished, ere they were aware.
Thus Papists, by the Pope perverted are.
Who suffers not the Gospel of our Christ
To shine; But his inventions gloomy*mist
Misleades them, for the God of this world blinds
The hearts of them, and darkeneth their minds.
Wherefore with this, ye shauclings be ashamed,
And Antichrists vild brood for ere be blamed,
That hide from people that, which should afford
Them light of life, to bring them to the Lord.
For as a lantharne serves shining bright,
In places dark, so does Gods word give light.
As cursed he was, of old, who drew astray
The blind man, which was going in right way.
So cursed for ever be that man of sin
That thus does men's damnations travel in.
M. D.
18. The Reprobates utmost bounds.
AForraine Chapman from the Country comes,
To buy much wares, and to disburse such somes
Of money, as necessity does crave.
And here and there he seeks about, to have
That which is good, and good cheap as he can:
And where he looks, and likes, he cheapens than,
And likewise money bids; and feign them would
Have at his price, if possibly he could:
But deeming them held at too dear a rate,
Goes thence, comes back, it is gone, then greiues too late.
To Christ the young man comes, and thus he sayn,
Master, What shall I do heaven to obtain?
Commandments keep (says Christ) steal not, ne kill;
These from my youth I have observed still,

Replies he. Then Christ; one thing lack'st thou more,
Go sell what e're thou have, and give the poor,
And thou in heaven shall have abundant treasure:
Take up thy cross, come follow me, such measure
For this, ere long upon thee I Will bestow
Of good, as having thou would not forgo.
At thesed* epe words, the man departed sad.
If at this price Gods Kingdom must be had,
He rather from his first speech will digress,
Then leave his Mammon of unrighteousness.
The Formalist or Reprobate thus far
Goes towered the purchase of this heavenly ware,
To taste the swectnes of the word some deele,
And of another world the powers to feel;
Put rather then he all his sins will flee,
At length his soul he damns Eternally.
And like the foolish shapman, though too late,
Mourns; that he has lost heaven, though at that fate.
M. C.
19. The first false putting on of Christ.
THe Simplest or vnmannerliestrude Clown,
That meets his friend in field, or in a Town,
Or farther off, if any he epsy,
He mooues his hat; that must of presently.
If in one day a hundredth friends he meets,
Off goes his hat, to every one he greets.
Like to this hat, that is often put off, and on,
Are such as falsely Christ rely upon.
And such are they, who only Christened are;
And being no more, in Christ have no true share.
These seem to have him on, but curse, drink, swear,
And to dishonor God, nor care, nor fear.
This makes so many Whores, and Rogues increase,
Because they put off Christ, they never cease.

For sanctity Him did they never assume:
And therefore falsely say, thy king dome come.
Simon the Sorcerer so far proceeded;
He made profession, with some faith was speeded,
Became baptized for Christ, with Philip stayed,
And saw what works and miracles he made,
Wondering thereat: But Peter plain him told
He was not of Christ's flock, but Devils fold.
In gall of bitterness thou art (says he)
And in the bondage of iniquity.
As Paul of Circumcision once did say,
To thee concerning Baptism so I may;
The Ceremony nothing does avail,
If thou in keeping of Gods laws do fail.
Flesh of thy slesh make Christ, Bone of thy bone,
If but thy Hat, in Him part thou have none.
M. L.
20. The second false putting on of Christ.
THis farther is of Christ a false assumption,
Think it not well, it is but a mere presumption*
When forth Religion as a cloak we wear,
But down we lay't soon when at home we are.
In Shops we will not keep it, nor in house,
We will not have it on; It hangs too loose.
But brush it, rub it, make it clean, and fine,
This must be borne abroad; Then we will be seen.
To wear it but at home, it is too good.
By this (thou hypocrite) is understood,
How thou (abroad) a Connert wilt profess
Thy self to be, which art in truth naughtlesse.
Yea, to their Gowns, to their indignity,
Some Clarks have said, lie there Divinity.

In midst of my house with a perfect heart
(Says David) I will walk. But, lo, thou art
A wretch at home and in thy private Chamber.
Which mooveth wicked men the good to slander.
Saint Peter to the convert Jews thus said,
Seeing you are a holy Nation made,
And a peculiar people, walk in sight
Of Gentills, like to those are brought to light
From out of darkness, who before were not
A people, but as men of God forgot.
Walk in the Law, though you from law are free
And do you not abuse your liberty,
Nor use it as a cloak, to sin; but keep
Your selves within Christ's fold, like faithful sheep.
As they their liberty a cloak to sin
Might not put on; So only to be seen
Wear not thy Savior; Certainly i f thou
Be not the same, thou do to others show*
Hee*le strip thee naked, so the Nations shall
See thou of His no member weart at all.
He that at home is one, abroad another,
Is not adorn*d with Christ; with Satan rather.
M. L.
21. The third false putting on of Christ.
THere is a third, which have not truly taken
And put on Christ; such, whom the Lord does slackers*
Of these external comfort's here below,
These are like travailers, that sarre do go,
And being sure to meet with many a storm,
They put on Hoods, and Coats, and thoroughly arm

Themselves, for Cold and Rain* But warm, and fair,
They cast of all, for love of open air.
And merrily they pass their time away;
But otherwise it proves a doleful day.
Consider now God takes away thy wealth,
Thy goods, and peradventure too, thy health;
O! Then thou vow'st if God will theee restore,
Thou will Him better serve, then heere-to-fore.
Most grievously thou mourn'st for what is past;
And now to God thou wilt come, in all the have:
He hears thy vows, and grants thy request,
But what use make thou since thou were distre'st.
Some I have known have worse become by far,
Then e're in all their lives (before) they wear.
When as afflictions are not sanctified,
And better thee, it is sign thou art not tried
For one of Gods* for who belong to God,
He as a father betters with his Rod.
Be thou the same in thy prosperity,
Which thou have vowed to be in misery*
Nor only as a Coat, thy Christ put on;
But, Storm, or Calm, Him wear thy soul upon.
This which one Wittily writ, may heereto be alluded.
Aegrotat Doemon, monachus tunc esse volebat
Convaluit Doemon, Doemon vt ante fuit.
The Devil was sick; The Devil a Monk would be:
The Devil was well; The, Devil a Monk, was be.
M. L.
22. The benefit of keeping the Sabbath.
A Stronomers by their high skill do find,
The sun does light the skies, of every kind:
And by the brightness of his beams* conuayes
Power to the Clouds to cast on us their rays;
By whose fair luster, we have light to go
About our works, or travel to and fro.
The truth whereof in Mystery to say,
Apply^^ to this sense I am sure I may.
Take the Sun for Suns-day, or day of rest,
Or Sabbath day; or Lords day, which is best
To call it, for the Lord the same did hallow,
And blessed that day, and blessed those men that follow
This his ensample. And least we forget
To do so, to it a Memento set;

Saying, Remember thou keep this to me,
Then in thy six days I will prosper thee.
The Jews spoke false against Christ of God's not he,
That on the Sabbath takes such liberty:
But true it is of thee, who e're thou art,
That sette'st not that day for God a part.
It is but equal in seav en to take one,
Who might have all required, and spared us none.
If any send his servant far away,
To a strange Country, and him charging, say
I give thee six days for thy use, and pleasure*
And food and clothing and sufficient treasure
To spend, and will maintain thee; Only this,
One day in seven spend in my services
Wholly apart; If notwithstanding he
On that day doing his own work will be;
His Master may in justice with disgrace,
Both turn him from his service, and his place.
The Sunn's the Suns-day Skies thy six days* see,
Sun lightneth them, and Suns-day prospers thee.
M. M.
23. The opposition of sin and grace.
IN great and common Wells for every man,
Such as is near the Burse in Amsterdan,
There are two Buckets fastened to a chain,
The easier down to sway, and up again.
One being alost, the the other then is under,
Necessity does force them thus asunder
When one is empty to other straight does fill;
They never are both above; one's under still.

Like to these Buckets, hanging thus a part,
Is grace and sin; in every mortals heart.
See thou a man is given much to swear?
That man it is sure has not the gift of prayer.
And see thou one to wrath that is much inclind?
That man has not a meek and quiet mind.
The Scripture says, in Amos, you may read;
Can two together walk, not well agreede?
There Is mortal Enmity twixt sin and grace,
The one the other striveth to deface.
If the strong man keeps house, himself he will fence*
In quiet, still a stronger drives him thence.
When the Soul garnish't is, and swept from sin,
Then comes Gods spirit, and forthwith enters in.
When the hearts empt'ed quite, and quit of grace,
Then enters straight the Devil, and he takes place.
Soon as God's Ark to Dagons temple came,
The Idol falls, and brake, to Ashdods shame.
Consider this, who loue'st in sin to live,
Yet hop'st in heaven thy portion God will give.
The Iron chain compells one Bucket low,
And forces still the other up to go.
So sin and grace (Gods justice does command)
Nor in one heaven, nor in one heart may stand.
M. D.
24. The Bridle of the Wicked.
THe greedy Dog, whose nature is to pray
On sheep, or foul, and whatso'ere he may
Come never, he is ravening at; but mark it, when
The Cudgells over his head, he trembles then,

And dares not once to satisfy his lust;
Well knowing else what punishment he must
Severely undergo; which him withholds,
That otherwise would worry roosts, herds, folds.
This is the cause some run not out so far
In all excess of lewdnes, and do spare
To meddle with gross sins; their confidence smites them:
And fear of hell within their hearts affright's them.
That they by no means dare become fo gross,
It Is not for love to good, or doubt to lose
Virtue; Ne flesh and spirit in them striving:
But will and Conscience, one the other driving*
The Will pursues what is wickedness amain,
The Conscience pricked repells it back again.
The Righteous sins not, cause he fears God:
The Wicked sins not; Why? He fears the Rod.
Good Joseph says, shall I commit this thing,
And so offend my God by trespassing?
Yea wicked Balaam cried, I cannot go
Beyond Gods word, to do or less or more;
And why? Because he knows Gods Angel stands
To smite him through, nor can he escape his hands.
When Balack said, what have thou done to me?
I called thee not to bless mine enemy.
Balam makes answer, Must I not take heedo
To speak, but what the Lord has sure decreede?
The Dog desires the pray, but dreads the Wan:
Gods Judgments drives from sin the Wicked man.
M. F.
25. The right carriage of a Christian in his calling.
THe little Children are the parents pleasure;
And fitly may be called their parents treasure*
Who please sometimes to send them to and fro,
It Is their delight to see how they can go.
If to his Child, one say, Sirrah go gather
Those Chips that yonder lie; and bring them hither;
He s^reight way goes, and seeks his lap to fill,
Not earing for them; it is his fathers will
That he should gather them; If any fall
Out of his lap, he vexes not at all;
Nor lets he down, and cries; But what he took,
Unto his father bears with cheerful look*
What Is Wealth, but Chips? So should they be esteemed,

Nay worse then so, mere dross in scripture deemed.
And what is our calling, but the Lords command?
That not in Idleness our days should stand.
If the one, be Chips; and the other, to obey
The Lords Command is done, you well may say;
They are but worldlings, who no other heart
Do labor for, save to get up a part
Of gain, and profit. Wealth must not be sought
For It self; nor for himself a man keep ought.
And if perchance thou should great losses have,
Thou must not greiue, because thou could not save
Thy state from such disasters; and more pine,
Then if thou had lost heaven, and grace Divine*
And let thy days on earth vnchearesull be,
That crosses do, or losses follow thee.
Make not thy Gold, thy God, thy Calling more
Then to fulfill Gods will, and keep His Lore.
And what thou have, be thou content to carry
Unto thy grave with joy, crave not to tarry
For wealth and pelf, of God there is none respected
For these; but with these many are reiccted.
The poor man's poor cstare with grace, is more
Then rich men's rich comport, and heaped store.
Children for loss of Chips repine not, then
Droope not for loss of outward things, being men.
M. D.
26. The danger of wicked men abiding in the Church.
Fair walks and gardens, richly decked with flowers
And beautified with pavements, and with bowers:
Rich men and Nobles for these pleasures care,
To keep which seemly, they no cost will spare;
And for that purpose Gardeners do provide
To see to them at every time and tide:
Which Gardener daily does with industry
Trim, Prune, and Dress it; and if he epsy
A Weed, or Cockle, with his ready hand
He roots it out; It shall no longer stand.
The Owner of his Church and bower's, the Lord,
Who does at every turn and time, afford
A prying eye, and narrow search, to see
If in his Garden weeds, or thistles be;
These with his Hook of Instice roots he out,
And will not let them there to grow, and sprout,
See this thou Hypocrite, that will not part
With sin, but love and hid'st it in thy heart.
Go live with Turks, and Heathens, from the pale

Of Christian people; Else God will not fail
Thee to cut up, and cast out, for (says He)
I Will honored be, by those draw near to me.
Thy sin is double, who do bear a part
In gross transgressions; yet live in the heart
And bosom of Gods Church; Pagans offend
Against one Law, but thy sin does extend
To breach of two; Of grace, and natures light;
Which in these days in Gods church shines bright.
That light they have without excuse shall leave them;
Which thing the Jews worse made, and did deceive them,
So that Gomorrah's state, and sodomes land,
In day of Judgment, easter shall stand
Then theirs; and why? Because to them Christ gave
Far greater means, (then those) their souls to save.
As Gardeners suffer Weeds in feilds to grow,
Because on them they never pains bestow;
So heathen lands the wicked Rout may nourish;
But where Gods Gospel is, they must not flourish.
M. T.
27. The New Creation.
A Music Instrument, though fitting strings,
Apt peggs, and frets, it has; and other things
Which Instruments require; Yet it is rejected,
If It be but out of tune's not once respected
Of skillful Masters; being still the same,
With all the Ornaments that they can name,
As other Instruments; which sweetly play;
Only that it is not tuned, it is naught they say,

Away with*t. Would you know the reason why?
It Is out of tune, 'twill make noe melody.
But being scrude, and tuned, and new amended,
It sounds pleasingly, and is commended.
So every man that is borne is a [full] creature,
Fraught with all humane faculties, as feature
And parts of body* and souls powers, as mind,
Will, Conscience, Memory; he is naught behind
The perfect'st Christian; What can be desired?
There Is all in him, that is in man required.
Yet yields he not to God a pleasant sound,
Because he is not a new creature found.
But when Gods minister shall these up screw,
And so does tune and make this creature new,
He straight resounds Spiritual melody,
And in Gods ears gives heavenly harmony.
The Bones Ezechiell saw both dead and dry,
Became of use, when he did Prophecy.
Thou nothing art, whilst thou art but mere nature.
Stocks, Stones, and Beasts, each one of them's a creature
And thou no more; But will thou better be?
Let Gods word new transform, and fashion thee:
As Instruments, unless in tune, are slighted;
So men, except new made, never God delighted.
M. D.
28. The foolishnes of Transubstantiation.
THe Bush that hangs at Tavern door does show
That there is Wine within; This all men know.
Wee'de count him madd, who*le run to that, and think
He can there-out sufficient liquour drink:

And will be sucking at the Bush, when true
It is, that hangs there unto the vein view
Of all men passing by; but to declare
Vendible Wines, within that house there are.
Such mad men Papists are, which verefie
That in a little Wafer (hid) does lie
Christ's very flash; While the elements (there) be
Hung out to Comers in, that they might see,
In Christ alone stands that spiritual food*
Which must not of these signs be understood.
For bread is bread, even after Consecration;
The work being done for Christ's Commemoration*
If to remember Him, then he is not their.
Thus Rings for absent friends we use to wear.
Now this bread, consecrate, nor common is
To me, for it inwraps high Mysteries.
So of this seal, that little wax, is more
Than all the rest, in the wax*chandlers store.
The bread's the same, and wax the same, that is sold*
But by this seal, I all my lands do hold;
And by this bread, my title is made sure
In God, to heaven, and life, that aye shall dure.
The bread's the evidence, but not possession,
And to affirm it more, it is transgression.
The Bush does show within are Wines to sell*
So shows the bread in Christ does fulness dwell.
M. V.
29. The Ruin of spiritual comfort.
THe Country Hind from field to field does go*
And here and there seeks narrowly, if so
That he perhaps may sewell get for fire:
Who when he finds some Log, does much admire
His hap; and that vp-taking bears a while
On's neck, to the next gate, or combrousstyle;
Where having once consulted with his sloth,
Counting his way; to carry it he is loath
So far as home; But (fond) the pains refuses:
And so the good thereof unwisely looses.
Examine now when some learned Minister
Would give thee signs, if then thy self thou stir
Not up, and think, O, I will these make sure!
For they will yield me comforts, long to dure:
But trialls being many, and thou loft
To muse upon them usually, and often;
Loosest that comfort; had which bin retayn'd,
Thou had thy coldness lost, and zeal had gayn'd.
The stony ground, and worldly heart, Gods word
Receive sometimes with gladness in the Lord,

As Gospel testifies; but er'e the end
Give over, and to their former ways descend.
Thy heart once wrought on; it is thy greater sin,
If thou that course do not continue in.
That son which did his Sire deny, yet went
Into the Vineyard, was not so much shent,
As he, who said immediately I Will go,
But soon recanted his first speeches fro.
What gaynes the man, that finds the wood, which might
Him cherrish in a cold and frosty night,
If home he bring it not (I do enquire?)
And warm him well therewith being set on fire*
So I to thee this question thus may frame.
What doft thou gain, by hearing of that same,
That might reviue thy soul in troublous state,
If Gods Word hearing thou forgetst it straight?
Naught gaynes that man* no profit thou shall find,
Which hear'st Gods word, and keep'st is not in mind.
M. F.
30. The equality of Justification by Christ.
PInks, Barks, or Boats, driven by wind or oar,
To ferry passengers from shore to shore;
They take in all, both halt, and blind, and lame,
Young, old, of any quality, or name;
Who being there embarkt, one cannot boast
G*ainst the other thus, I Will come to yonder coast
Sooner then thou, for I am lusty, strong,
Able to have, and like to travel long,
I can far (speaking to another) stride
But thou art lame; He cannot thus deride
Him, why? They Are in the Ship, and that does carry
Each one alike; If they therein do tarry.
They are not brought to the port by their own power;

The Ship bears all, all arrive at one hour.
Christ is this Ship, all his are shipped in him,
In whom all his elect to heaven must swim.
Art thou within board there? Then though thou say*
I am by him sore foyld, from day to day,
Wounded I have my soul, no hope have I
To go to heaven, I must despair, and die,
Yet art thou well. Another says, I Am blind,
And never can the way to heaven find.
O were I with the faith of Abraham blessed,
I might assure my self to go to rest!
If I as Samuel could obedient be,
In after days none evil I should see.
There is a Christian, he can well command*
His own corruption; but I cannot stand:
If I could do as he does; then it were well;
At Christ's right hand he shall sit, where pleasures dwell*
Fear not good Christian, it is not anye's merit
Can save him, nor thy sins thee disinherit
Of that blessed state, if thou of this be sure,
Thou art in Christ; Rejoice, thou art secure.
For as a Ship both weak, and strong, does bear
Together, to the haven free from fear:
So Christ the Christian souls true Ship, does land
All his Elect in heaven, at his right hand.
M. W.
31. Tobacco.
THe Indian weed withered quite
Green at noone, cut down at night
Shows thy decay, all flesh is hay,
Thus think then drink Tobacco.
The Pipe that is so lilly white
Shows thee to be a mortal weight,
And even such, gone with a touch,
Thus think, then drink Tobacco.
And when the smoke ascends on high,
Think, thou behold'st the vanity
Of worldly stuff gone with a puff:
Thus think, then drink Tobacco.
And when the Pipe grows foul within,
Think on thy soul defiled with sin,
And then the fire it does require
Thus think, then drink Tobacco.
The ashes that are left behind,
May serve to put thee still in mind,
That unto dust, return thou must,
Thus think, then drink Tobacco.
Answered by G. W. thus,

Thus think, drink no Tobacco.

FINIS.

