A SERMON PREACHED AT the funeral of the Lady MARY VILLIERS, eldest Daughter of
the right honble Christopher Earl of Anglesey;

Who dyed the xxi. of January 1625. at Horningold in Leicester shire, and was
buried the xxiiij. at Goadeby in the Sepulchers of her Ancestors.

Preached by GEORGE IAY, Master of Arts, and Student of Christ-Church in OXFORD.

Psalm. 39.6. Behold thou have made my days as it were a span long.

Imperat cum Superior rogat. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Harper. 1626.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Christopher, Earl of Anglesey, and his most virtuous
Lady, Grace and Peace.
My Lord, my Lady;
Honor shall it ever be to me, to obey your commands; at my Lords I preached, at
my Ladies I printed: but the disadvantage of so short an allowance of time as
two days, and mine inabilities besides, will show this not to be a Sermon fit
for, though it has past, the Press. This will be spoken when it is read; but
he rises betimes, that thinks worse of it than I do. I made a covenant with
mine eyes, that they should neither go out in sleep nor slumber, until they
had lighted me to perform my Lords pleasure; which if I have done I have a
protection* and no man shall dare to arrest me, because I was imploi'd in his
service. I know in these times of war, I shall meet with some tall men of their
hands, that will put every syllable to the sword: but it is an honor to me to
die in my Commanders service. Some mouths are Musket-bore, and do so scatter,
that though I pass the Pikes, yet I cannot escape them: yet I shall think my
self out of Gunne-shot, when your Lordship has given me a dispensation for
not giving a due honor to the most promising, Lady (if I flatter, I flatter my
self) that ever mine eyes beheld. The Leviticall law gives a large restitution
for a damage; God, out of his mercy, when he thinks fit, a greater for what
he takes. I will therefore make bold with my Reader, and change my Epistle
into a Prayer. May the God of fruitfulness give your Honors a numerous, and
an obedient issue, in supplement of her that is gone now to him, that you and
yours after a length of happiness here may succeed, exceed her in glory,
shall ever be the prayer of him who is, and professes still to continue,

your Honors in all humble duty and observance at command, GEORCE IAY.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
I could wish that some better, some other occasion rather than this, had
brought me hither; Et Si mea cum vestris valuissent vota. Ovid. Met.
And if I (I will believe the same of every one here) had been master of mine
own desires, some other example should have told me that I must dye, and this
body of mine must return to dust. But it is mine, and I hope your daily prayer,
Thy will be done, O Lord. My prayer was otherwise, the same our Savior used
when the sorrows of death encompassed his soul, O my Father, Mat. 26.39.
if it be possible let this Cup pass from me. And as David did, in 2. Sam.
12.16. I besought God that the Child might live. His words shall be the
subject of my discourse: may his resolution and cheerfulness, in this or the
like case, be ever yours, and mine example and precedent. The words you shall
find, in 2. Sam. chap. 12. verse. 22, 23.

While the child was yet alive, I fasted, and wept: For I said, who can tell
whether God will have mercy on me that the child may live?

But now being dead, wherefore should I now fast? Can I bring him again any
more? I may go to him, but he shall not return to me.

HEre is David and his Child; the one lying sick upon his bed, the other
lying weeping upon the ground. God smites the child with sickness for the
Fathers fault; David punishes himself with fasting and weeping for the misery
of the child, Who can tell whether God will have mercy on me, that the
child may live? The prayers of the Faithful are never without fruit, though
sometimes they bring it not forth in the same kind that we desire. God knows
what is better for us than we our selves. The child was not for David's
keeping, and therefore the Lord will have him to himself; Death is sent, and
fetches him away: what says David to this now? Sure he that was so passionate
when the child was but sick, will now grow outrageous when he hears of his
death. This is indeed the temper of worldly minds; but David's heart was cast in
another mould: He that showed so much devotion and humility whilst the matter
was in suspense, and before he knew what God meant to do; now he knows his
pleasure, can as easily submit his obedience to Gods will with comfort. But now
that God will so have it, and that he is dead, Why should I fast any longer? I
will not fight against Gods pleasure, and vex my self to no purpose: He
cannot return to me. I will rather make use of it for mine own instruction,
and take it up for a meditatiof mine own mortality: I must go to him.

Thus the words may run in Paraphrase. And if you will have them in parts,
you shall have these four. First, the sickness of David's child; in these
words, Propter infantem jejun. Vatab.
While the child yet lived: that is, whilst the child was weak, sick and
infirm.

Secondly, the remedy he fled to for his recovery, fasting and weeping: Whilst
the child yet lived, I fasted and wept.

Thirdly, his resolution after the child was dead: But now being dead,
wherefore should I now fast? can I bring him again?

Fourthly, a meditation on his own mortality, He cannot come to me, but I
shall go to him.

First of the sickness of David's child. It Is a certain truth which Seneca
does urge out of the Poet, De brevit. vitae.
Exigua pars est vitae, quam nos vivimus. It is a very small part of our life,
which we live free from sickness. And, as the same Seneca says, Omne spatium,
non vita, sed tempus, All the space of our days is not life, but time: so with
a little alteration may I say, with as much truth, Omne spatium non vita, sed
tristitia, All our time is not life, but sorrow. What Tullie said of old age,
may be as well spoken of the whole life of man: Senectus est ipsa morbus.
Cic^de senect.
Vitaipsa morbus est, Life it self, without the addition of any other pain,
is a disease. That which the Prophet Esaias says of our Savior, the Head, that
he was Vir dolorum, a man of sorrow; we may derive in a qualified sense upon
all his Members, they are Viri tristitiae, men of sorrows, compastabout with
infirmities. Esai. 1.6
The whole head is sick, the whole heart is faint, from the sole of the foot
even to the crown of the head, there is no soundness, but wounds, and
bruises, and putrified sores. Our wounds have not been cured with the infusion
of oil, like the man's that lay betwixt Jericho and Jerusalem; they have not
been closed nor bound up, nor mollified with ointment, Ibid.
as the same Prophet speaks in a spiritual sense, and we find it true in a
literal. I know that in my self, says Saint Paul, there dwells no
goodness; we may alter the words, and say, we know that in our flesh dwells no
soundness nor health: it may sojourne or lodge there for a time, but for any
settled habitation or constant abiding, it has none: be we at what cost we
will for the entertaining of it, let us bribe our Physicians to the wasting of
our estates, they cannot preserve our bodies from ach and rottenness.
Sicknesses, and death, were the curses that God laid upon our first Parents
disobedience. Genesis 3.16.
To the Woman first, I will increase thy sorrows and thy conceptions: in
sorrow shall thou bring forth children. And then to Adam, In sorrow shall thou
eat all days of thy life; in the sweat of thy face shaltthou eat thy bread,
till thou return to the earth. Sin set the four elements in our bodies, and
the harmony of our temper at odds; their continual combat creates daily
diseases, so as we are still sick. And besides the malignity that sin
infused into the body it self, there are vitiating and infesting qualities,
diffused by the same sin over all the creatures that should nourish it: there
is a root of intemperance in our appetite, that sucks unwholesomenesse out of
these nourishments; that are in themselves good and conservative. Such a body
provoked by such an appetite, to feed on such nourishment, must needs make the
Physician necessary, and bring forth a large harvest of diseases. Nature is
corrupted, and therefore tends to corruption; the end of corruption is death,
the way to death is sickness. So long then as we have such a nature about us,
we cannot think it strange, if sickness do often seize on us. A corrupt
fountain cannot send forth sweet water, nor a corrupt nature maintain a
healthy constitution. The seeds of sickness are sown in our nature by our
Parents, when they beget us, and they lie lurking in our veins and bones,
waiting every occasion to invade our health, and to cut off the thread of our
life; though sometimes we perceive them not, yet in our flesh they are, and
will never remoove their seige until they have given us an overthrow. Colubros
in sinu fovemus, We carry scorpions in our bosoms. And as it was said of
Israel, perditio tua ex te, thy destruction is from thy self; so are we
authors of ours. The body of man is nothing but a congeries, a heap of
infirmities, as Martial said of Zoilus, Non vitiosus homo es, Zoile, sed
vitium. Thou art not vicious, but vice it self. So I say to the body of man,
thou art not diseased, but a disease it self: goodness, mercy, justice, do
not only belong to the nature of God, but are the very Being and Essence of
him: he is not only good, but goodness; not perfect, but perfection: so on the
contrary, it is not much improper to say, that we are not only miserable, but
misery; not sick, but sickness it self. Homo est animal aevi brevissimi,
Petrarch. Job. 14.2.
sollicitudinis infinitae. Man that is borne of a woman, is of short
continuance, and full of trouble: when we are in our best health, we are
Valetudinarij, weak and sickly; and (as the Physicians say) have only lucida
inter valla, perhaps one good day betwixt two aguish, a calm betwixt two
storms. Quid est homo? it is Seneca's interrogation, (and he answers himself)
a weak and frail thing, liable and exposed to all danger, impatient of heat,
cold, and labor; they are all diseases unto him. Seneca.
Imo otio iturus in tabem, and alimenta metuit sua quibus rumpitur. Ease
consumes him, and the bread which he eats to give him length of days, does
shorten them.

Our breath is corrupted, Job 17.1. Job 14.22.
our days are cutting off, and the grave is ready for us: while our flesh is
upon us we shall be sorrowful, and while our souls are in us we shall mourn.
Seneca.
Si velis credere altius veritatem intuentibus, omnis vita supplicium, If you
will believe the Masters of truth, all our life is punishment. He that by an
experimental trial, a serious observation, and a true contemplation, has
run through all sublunary and inferior things, though of the most
transcendent perfection, speaks less than a truth, if he says he found not
sickness, or (to use Salomons word) vexation in them all. When we come into
the world, we are thrown into a tempestuous Sea of trouble, and there are
beaten with incessant storms. Now the flood of discontent beats high, and
whirls our troubled heads into amazement, and now the ebb of despair sinkes
our barque even to the lowest hell: now are we in danger of this rock, now of
that; now this gulf, this shelfe, this gust, these quicksands do make us
fear, if not suffer shipwreck: so let us sail where we will, when we can, we
shall find no haven of rest but the grave. Epict.
Homo est calamitatis fabula, infaelicitatis tabula, Man's life is a story of
calamity, a map of misery: Job. 10.17. Job 10.1.
changes, and armies of sorrows are against us, and our souls are cut off
though we live. All our life is but a continued disease: when we begin to live,
we enter upon a lease of sorrows, entaild on us and our heirs. Ingressus
flebilis, progressus debilis, egressus horribilis. Our birth is mournful, our
growth is sorrowful, our death is fearful. Ecclus. 40.1.
Great travail is created for all men, and an heavy yoke upon the sons of
Adam, from the day that they go out of their mothers womb, till the day that
they return unto the mother of all things. Such is the weight of grief that
does depresse our hearts, that we may truly say with Job, If our grief were
well weighed, Job 6.2.3.
and were well laid together in the balance, it would now be heavier than the
sand of the Sea: sickness and troubles come upon us like Jobs unfortunate
messengers, one upon the neck of another. Finis unius mali, gradus est futuri.
Where one misery ends another begins, as one wave follows another: there is
the same undivided continuation in sorrows that is in waters, no intermixtion
nor interposition of any thing else. We have Bears, and Lions, and Philistims,
and Saul's, as David had, that successively assail us; and we have no sooner
ended the combat with this sickness, but another with fresh supplies attempts
our overthrow. Vita quid est hominis nisi vallis plen^^ malorum.
We dwell in Megiddon, the valley of tears: sighs and lamentations are our
companions: and, which is most miserable, our times appointed for rest, our
sleeps are full of disturbances. Job 7.13.14.
When we say our couch shall relieve us, and our bed shall bring comfort, in
our meditations we are frighted with dreams, and astonished with visions. A
little or nothing says the son of Sir ach is man's rest, and afterward, Ecclus.
40.6.
in sleeping he is as a watchtower in the day, he is troubled with visions of
his heart, as one that runs out of a battle. And lest you should think,
that he does only here describe the unquietness of the Reprobate, he tells you
immediately, that such things shall come unto all flesh, Verse. 8.
but sevenfold to the ungodly; which we have no way to prevent or extenuate,
but by fasting and weeping. And so I come to the remedy which David used for
his child's recovery, abstinence and tears; While the child yet lived, I
fasted and wept.

The people Israel, Pars secunda.
when they made intercession for the obtaining of any great blessing, or the
avoiding of any great danger, did always use this remedy of fasting and
mourning And the Prophets did ever enjoine the Church, amongst others,
especially to perform these two duties, when God threatened his judgments
against her: Turn to the Lord with all your hearts, Joel 2.12.
and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, says the Prophet. Let
the people and the Ministers of the Lord, weep betwixt the Porch and the Altar;
and let them say, Verse. 17.
Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine inheritance to reproach.
Sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly, Joel. 1.14.
gather the Elders, and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the
Lord, and let them cry unto the Lord. I dare alter our Saviors words, though
not his truth, Man lives by bread; yet with Solomon, I will pray against
plenty: Feed me O Lord with food convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny
thee. The empty soul sends to Heaven the most powerful ejaculations, the full
is dull and sluggish, and cannot get up with the same nimblenesse. yet I will
not fast too long: for too much abstinence effeebles the body, and by
consequence enervates the appetite to devotion: famine can kill as well as a
surfeit. Were I to receive the Sacrament, and found that abstinence would
disprepare my meditations, and unfit me for that purpose, I would eat, the
better to enable me for Gods service, but not too much: for that were to fall
into the other extreme, excess, more dangerous, more pernicious: I will so
eat, that I may be able to serve my God; and so fast, that I may do it
willingly. It was a mere Epicurean saying, Let us eat and drink: such a
temptation may verify the consequence in us, to morrow we may die. neither did
it savor of discretion: for the last meat to him that knows he must
immediately dye, can never be well relisht. Non siculae dapes Horace.

Dulcem elaborabunt saporem.
The most delitious fare, though helped with the best art of cookery, will be
distastefull: had not Gods blessing given a relish to Jacobs preparations,
Isaac had not taken such delight in eating his Venison. Abstinence sets dying
men more forward in their way to heaven; eating and drinking stops them in
their journey, and makes them fitter for rest, than a progress. If mine own
knowledge did not, yet the Churches in junction should commend fasting unto
me, as a manifest effect of it, does at this instant. I presume it gave wings
to our prayers, in the late contagious and pestilent times, and prepared a
place for their well-come in the court of heaven. Fasting is a good preparation
to devotion, and ever strongly insinuates, and furthers a grant; I place no
merit in it, but it is an excellent preparative to devotion. And I shall ever
believe* those good men, that fast most. The best of men that ever were, upon
exmination of the Scriptures, you will find to be the greatest fasters; Moses
that talked with God, Elias that in a fyerie chariot went to God, Christ
himself that was God. I dare say, that the perverse humor of dainty feeding,
is as odious to God, as contrary to the laws of the Church: neither do I see
how men can more strongly make their belly their god, than by yielding more
obedience to their carnal appetite, than their spiritual Commander.
Presumptionis genus est tum manducare, Call. in Number.
cum debemus jejunare, tum gaudere, cum oportet flere. I equally detest the
ambition of the Papist, and the perverseness of the Puritan, and therefore
desire to bar the one from all thought of merit, and the other from the
opinion of licentiousness. Vitanda superstitio, servanda abstinentia. Hierom.
Let us fast, and it is commendable, if not superstitiously. Holophernes
intending the overthrow of his besieged enemies, diverts the course of their
springs, and cuts off the convoy of their provision. if we will conquer our
cross passions and affections that fight against us, we must weaken their
strength by fasting and abstinence. The institution of fasting, is almost of
the same antiquity that the world is: for, nequaquam comederis, Chrysostom. sermon. de
jejunio.
Gods prohibition to Adam, that he should not eat of the tree of knowledge,
was a kind of command of abstinence: the breaking of it brought all misery into
the world, the remedy is the practice of that which he in Paradise violated.
Physic does cure by contraries, there is no better receipt for a surfeit, than
fasting. Our first Parents gluttony has diseased our souls, and bodies, and
we cannot find a better means of recovery than abstinence: their riot drove
us out of Paradise, our abstinence will possess us of a better place. Quem
luxuriando provocavimus, abstinendo placemus. Let us humble those bodies with
fasting, which excess and intemperance has made rebels to their Creator. When
a man has committed a sin, he has incurred the wrath of God, and rendered
himself liable to eternal damnation, there is no way to take away this wrath
and punishment, but by repentance; and what is repentance, but a disavowing of
the sin we have committed, and being sorry that we have committed it, and a
wishing it uncommitted? Quem paenitet peccasse, Seneca.
pene est innocens, Hearty penitence does extenuate, if not annihilate the
greatest fault. And though sorrow, and tears, and affliction of the soul,
which should be used in fasting, are not things in themselves pleasing unto
God, yet because they are arguments that we hate our sin, and sincerely wish it
undone, and take a kind of holy revenge upon our selves for committing it,
they are acceptable in his sight, and if attended with servent prayers, motives
to accelerate and procure an absolution for it. The end of fasting, is either
to obtain some good that we want, or to escape some evil which we either
feel, or fear. Good is either ordinary, or extraordinary: ordinary good is
obtained by ordinary devotions; these can not be joined with fasting, because
they are to be daily. For extraordinary blessings we must use extraordinary
devotions, and, like Jacob, wrestle with God. Now evil is either of sin, or
punishment: we fast to escape the evil of sin, either by way of prevention
(as Saint Paul, when he said, I chastise my body) to keep us from falling into
it; or by way of remorse, and penitence, to move the Lord to help us out of it.
For the escaping the evil of punishment, if already inflicted, we fast to
move God to stay the procession of his vengeance: and this was David's case
here; he fasted that the Lord might spare the life of his sick child.
neither was it hypocritically, for my Text says that he wept also; and tears
are powerful invitations to draw God to mercy. They are the souls best
orators, and enter the gates of heaven, when our prayers are excluded.
Iejunando Deum oramus, flendo exoramus, By fasting we move our request, by
tears we obtain it, or if you will have it in the words of a Father, Bernard.
Orando Deum lenimus, lachrymis cogimus, prayers are petitioners, tears are
ravishers, and force a pardon from God. There is no voice louder in Gods ears,
than the sighs and groans of a weeping Penitent. Let our tears precede, and
Gods mercy will follow. Quo quisque est sanctior, Aug.
eo in fletu uberior. Plenty of tears do witness a full devotion, and the
more holy we are, the more we should express it in our lamentations. Prayers
often times receive a denial, but tears are bold petitioners, and will take
none: Ezekiah and Mary Magdelen had freer access to their God by their tears,
than prayers: when Peter's tongue had pronounced him a traitor, his tears
reconciled him to his Savior. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy: a
slight scattering and sprinkling of tears, will in the time of gathering
yield us a fruitful harvest of consolations. Away with the blood of Rams and
of Goats; if ye will bring an acceptable sacrifice, offer up the tears and
sighs of a contrite heart. No Epicure finds that pleasure in feasting, which
repentant David injoi'd in his banquet of tears: and therefore he was desirous
to make tears his meat, and his drink; for they are the best nourishment of
the soul unto eternal life. Fulg. Ep.
Quae ex compunctione cordis lachrymae manant, nob is donum laetitiae
triumphantis acquirunt. Our Savior Christ in the sixth of Luke, sets forth
their happiness that weep, Beati qui fletis, quia ridebitis, Blessed are you
that weep: for you shall laugh. When the tongue is ignorant what to say, tears
do argue and plead our cause strongly, Hi^^.
Loquuntur lachrymae silente lingua. They quench the flames of hell, and make
dull and rusty the edge of Gods avenging sword; they are the aqua fortis, which
eats out the hand writing, which sin has made against our souls, and give an
ease unto us, when we are weighed down with the burden of transgressions.
Expletur lachrymis, egeriturque dolor. These, like powerful Ambassadors, Ovid.
never return with an ungranted suite. Psalm. 6.
Therefore the Psalmist every night watered his couch with tears. And Jeremy
wished his head a fountain, Ier. 9.8.
and his eyes as overflowing channels. They that now sit weeping by the rivers
of Babylon, shall one day have their eyes dried by the Lamb that sits upon the
Throne. But if our tears be only super ficiall, Et habent arts, Ovid.
quaque jubentur eunt. and proceed not from a heart that trumournes, they are so
far from advantaging our souls, that they add to our condemnation: we must
not only weep, but mourn; cloth our hearts with sadness and affliction:
They are the wedding garments which shall welcome us on the feast day, when the
presumptuous guest shall be bound hand and foot, and cast into utter
darkness. It Is not the moisture that distills from the eyes, but the drops
that fall from the heart, that make the grace of God fruitful in us. I would
my head were a spring of tears, that I might powerfully teach by example, what
I labor to persuade by my words. O may the Father of goodness and mercy, give
us all tears for our sins, and grant that we may fast, and sincerely weep
for the prevention of his judgments: but if it shall be thy pleasure (Lord)
for our sins, to let them fall upon us, yet give us courage and patience,
meekely to suffer what thou shall inflict. And so I come to David's resolution
after his childs death: But now being dead, wherefore should I now fast?

Preventing grief is warrantable, Pars tertia.
nay necessary, but after a deed past help, effeminate, or (which is worse)
rebellious. Let tears precede, if punishment be feared; thankfulness follow,
when it is past. It Is good for me (says David) that I have suffered
affliction: Psalm. 90.
We are not to repine, when God shall please to lay his crosses on us, but to
welcome them as badges and tokens of his favor; and when they most torment us,
to say with Job, Though thou kill me, yet will I put my trust in thee. Job
13.15.
The sacrifice of tears which we shall offer to this innocent Hearse, is to
be lessened, if it exceed the measure of affection and nature; the overplus
is redundancie and superfluous, and must be cut off, or we are not wise:
excess of grief for evils remediless, has more affinity with stubbornness,
than use or profit; it may shorten ours, not recover her life, that is here
the sad spectacle of mortality. Facilius nos dolor illiadjiciet, quam illam
nobis. Unquietness and disturbance do ingeminate, and double the weight of
grief, not lessen it. Shall we punish our selves, because God has punished
us, I may rather say blessed us? for this blessed child is not lost but
preferred, her soul has exchanged a house of clay for a kingdom of glory,
and having broken prison, has left an unquiet habitation, to enjoy a
perpetuity of rest; she is gone thither, where the Sun shall not burn her by
day, nor the Moon by night, nor lying slanderer shall blemish her unspotted
cleanness, nor base calumny make the truth of her worth questionable. She
needs not fear such enemies, who with damnable plots and falsities invade the
fortunes, (if they can) the lives of innocents; her happiness has removed her
from their reach. No cunning Courtier can make crimes, and beg her forfeited
patrimony, foreign preparations, and the danger of invasion comes not near
her thoughts; nor earthly villainy, nor vexation, can disquiet her happiness,
she prays for ours* she is now there blessedly arrived, whence nothing can
force her, nothing can fear her. Why then do the honorable parents of this
happy soul mourn so excessively? Can they think to call her back again? If
they could, I presume they would not, from this state of bliss. If she were
dead, and imprisoned in the cold earth, it might something trouble them; but
now they know she lives, and triumphs in heaven, shall they not rejoice?
Immature moritur senex, mature puer. Fulg* Epist.
If we love our children, we desire their happiness; and can they have greater
than to be in heaven? and shall we grieve because they have it sooner? Bis
dat, qui cito dat, a quick and hasty giver augments the value of his benefit,
whereas tardy blessings are lessened by their stay. Is it not written, Job.
1.21.^
that the Lord gives and the Lord takes? and shall I grieve because he
calls for his own? for, to speak properly, she was lent to us, not bestowed
upon us. Unwillingness to pay a debt, lent without interest, argues an
unthankefull disposition. God might have sent his messenger Death to receive
tribute from us, let us be thankful that he did not, and not grieve that he
demanded it there, where it might be more easily paid. The thought of this may
something moderate our impatience, what we had in her was delicate, and sweet;
what we lost, frail and mortal: judge how unreasonable it is extremely to be
moved that we enjoi'd her not long, and not to rejoice that once we had her:
we should rather be thankful for the donation of her, than be sorrowful for
her loss; for the one argues our love to God, the other to our selves. Let us
weigh onewith the other, and we disfavour our selves, if the state of our joys
does not equally poise that of our grief. God, that meant not to lend us her
longer, gave her suddenly that perfection, which others before a long time do
not own; she had that sweetness in the bud, in the April of her age, which
blossomed, and well-growne flowers do seldom afford.

Such and so frequent are the precedents of mortality, that we could not
think she should live ever. If the care of our safety had not this last
Summer hurried us from the city of affliction, we might have seen near five
thousand such, a week. Tota vita, Seneca.
says the Philosopher, nihil aliud est quam ad mortem iter: It Is then a kind of
impudence, and unjustnes of claim, to challenge that unto our selves which is
denied to all. and in this universal necessity of death to desire a
dispensation for us, and ours; as if, when we knew a universal flood of
destruction should over-streame the whole world, we should hope our houses
might be exempted. Let the thought of this be our comfort, she has but
pledged that cup, which all our ancestors began unto her, and at last we that
are here present must taste of the same. Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 35.
Etsi senex aliquis, etsi adolescens sit, morti tamen in qualibet aetate
vicinus. All must die, God set this period to her days, else she had lived;
and why should we be against the ordinance of the most highest? Ecclus. 41.4.
Since she is irrevocably gone, why should you so violently desire her? But
such is the nature of us, that we love nothing so much as that which is removed
from us, never to be had again; nay, we less esteem those that survive,
through the inordinate desire of them that are dead. It would mitigate, if we
would but consider Gods mercy in his punishments, his Manna in the desert of
our affliction. Bern. de trans. Mal.
Pium est defunctum plangere, magis pium congaudere viventi. Have you not many
surviving comforts for one single loss, friends of as great eminency and
place, as much graced and favored by their King, loved by their country, as
ever subjects were? Have you not a large series, and catalogue of the Nobility
your kindred? and two daughters yet alive? Pereat contristatio, ubi est tanta
consolatio: Aug. de verb. Dom. sermon. 35.
forget your sadness in the midst of such joys.

But will yet yet grieve? cannot these consolations dry up the fountain of
your tears? suppose her to be only absent, that will help: for we do not
grieve for those which are absent, and must continue, if we know they live;
with that opinion you may cousen your grief, and be fafe. But, make the worst
of it, she is but sent before, you must follow. Aug de verb. Dom. sermon. 34.
Scias eam non in aeternum relinquere te mansurum, sedpraecedere secuturum.

But you will say, she was my only joy, my only delight. This argues you loved
your self, not your child. If for her sake you wish her life, then wish her
there, where her life shall be longest and happiest. If God should take our
children in the midst of their sins, then it might justly moove us; tears
would then become our cheeks, whereas now they are inexcusable. The tearing of
our hair, the rending of our garments, the beating of our hearts, the
lamentations and outcryes of our voices cannot awake her: sleep she will, til
the Trump at the last day, Aug de verb Dom. sermon. 44.
or Christ call her Mortua est, quantumlibet pulses, quantu^libet vellices,
quantumlibet lanies, non expergiscetur; Christo dormit, cum dicet surge,
surget. Impatience is a crime, when Gods hand occasions the accident.
Undutiful murmuring may incense him, and for our sins perhaps he will take away
the rest of our children, who for his own pleasure, and their good removed the
first. When God is angry, and smites thee on the right cheek, with patience
submit thy self to his pleasure, and turn to him the other also. If servants
(by S. Paul's injunction) may not expostulate with their Masters, shall the clay
ask the Potter why he did thus? Take heed of lamentations, and waywardness,
lest, as mothers do their children, God whip you so much the more for it.
Jesus the son of Syrach pronounces a woe against them, that have lost their
patience, and by way of interrogation tells them in what a miserable plight they
are: Ecclus. 2.15.
What will ye do when the Lord shall visit you? And Jesus the son of God
pronounces, I may say gives a blessing to the patient, an inheritance of joy
and comfort: Luke 21.19.
By your patience possess your souls. Will you have an example to move you?
He was led as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before the sheerer is
he dumb, so opened he not his mouth. Nay, I Will come home to you, and instance
in the same kinds. When Anaxagoras heard of the death of his own son,
without fainting, or vain exclamations against the Destinies for their
cruelty, he said, Scio me mortalem genuisse, I know the issue of my body could
not be immortal. Livia lost her son Drusus, a yongue Prince of admirable
worth; no mother could exceed her lamentations for the death of a child, Nec
plus doluit quam aue honestu^ erat, aut Caesare, aut aequo maius. Sen. ad Mar.
yet in the same grave with him she intombd her sorrows, neither afterward was
she more troubled, than became a Caesarean and discretion: and without tears
afterward she could repeat his virtues, his excellencies, and those did best
please her that did most remember him. As no man went beyond Sylla in cruelty,
so not in the love of a son; yet the sad story of his fatal end was almost as
soon forgotten, as related. But what need I go for a precedent beyond my
Text. Now the child is dead, why should I fast? says as tender, as loving a
father, as the Scripture can show us. But some there are more stoically
obstinate, than wisely courageous, Aug. de verb. Dom. sermon. 35.
which bar a discreet man from the least impression of grief Potest non
dolere cor humanum defuncto charissimo, melius tamen dolet, and sanatur cor
humanum, quum non dolendo sit inhumanum. I will easily believe, that such men
were never owners of a jewel of this prize, or if they were, so they are
still; otherwise the loss would have humbled their hauty confidence, and have
forced a confession of what they deny. Reason has done her part, if she has
cut off and defalcated the luxuriancy, and overplus of grief; in great
detriments it is stupiditie and dullness, not to lament at all; as the excess
is madness, the mean is safest, and will gain you the opinion of a discreet,
and well-tempered mourner. Permittantur itaque pia corda charorum de mortibus
suorum contristari dolor sanabili et consolabiles lachrymas fundant condition
mortali, Aug. de verb. Dom. sermon. 34.
quas citoreprimat fidei gaudium, qua credunt fideles quando moriuntur paululum
a nobis abire, and ad meliora transire. I will allow that the floud-gates of
your eyes may be open, but not too wide, nor too long; and I will give you
leave to sigh from the bottom of your hearts, but not too often, nor too much.
No man shall persuade me but they are Gods children which silently suffer, and
with patience endure his correction, humbly, and contentedly submitting
themselves to the wisdom of his proceedings. Especially in this case, when
that, which we take to be a punishment, is a blessing; for they that dye in the
Lord (as Saint Bernard says) ab omni peccato, and labor, and periculo
liberantur, are freed from all sin, Bern. de trans. Mal.
labor, and danger of either; but these, that survive, are not, and at last
must dye. And so I come to David's meditation on his own mortality, I shall go
to him.

Turn over the whole book of nature, Pars quarta.
and you shall read mortality in every page, every character is written in
dust, and the hand of Time wipes it out, and sooner in this later and decrepit
age of the world, than heretofore. We cannot now say with Jacob, The days of
the years of our Pilgrimage are 130 years; Genesis 47.9.
but we may conclude with him, Few and evil are the years of our life; we
have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of our Fathers in
the days of their Pilgrimage. When first we begin to live, we begin to dye.
^or.
Nascentes morimur, or (to use Saint Ambrose his words, which excellently
express our condition) Vitae hujus principium, mortis exordium, Amb. l. 8. de
voc. Gent.
nec augeri^^^jus, quam minui incipimus. If death make a thrust at us, we have
no defense; if she assault us, we cannot find a place of security to protect
us. Ille licet ferro ca^tus se condat, and are: Mors tamen inclusum protrahet
inde caput. Whither can we go from the presence of death? take we the wings of
the morning, and fly whither we will, wheresoever we settle our selves under
heaven, she will be sure to find us out. And as she is unavoideable, so is
she unpartiall: it is not greatness, nor height of place that can privilege
any man from her attempts. The Scripture calls Kings gods of the earth, but,
least they should flatter themselves with the hope of immortality, it
immediately follows, They shall dye like men. Could any get a Patent for
eternity, these are they; but a late example fresh still in our memories, tells
us they have it not. Where are the great Commanders of the world? where are the
Rulers over thousands, and 10000, the Princes and Potentates of the earth? are
they not dead? Go search the grave, and you shall be no more able to
distinguish betwixt their dust, and the meanest beggars, than Diogenes was to
find Phillip the King of Macedons bones. Intervallis distinguimur,
exituaequamur. Life makes a difference betwixt us, death none, neither in the
means of dissolution, nor the ruins after; she can make a weapon of the
least of the unlikeliest of things to destroy them, a needle, a fish-bone, a
raysin-stone is sufficient; nay, two great Princes, one of India, the other of
Rome, were slain by a hair. A great Duke of Brittanny was pressed to death in a
throng. Aemilus Lepidus, and Aufidius, great Romans, died with a stumble, the
one at his own threshell, the other at the senate house. Etia^ cibus and
potus, and sine quibus vivere non possumus, mortifera sunt, Mors aequo pede,
etc. Hor.
and no less to them than us. She does as well besiege the palace of the King,
as the cottage of the Beggar: as they have the same sun, the same clymate, the
same seasons with us, so have they the same infirmities, the same ages, and not
unequal deaths: If there be odds, the advantage many times lies on our sides.
If travel, or gold, or watchings, or the industry of the best of Physicians,
could have given life, this curious piece of mortality had not been yet
defaced. Let this visible argument (a stronger I cannot use) rectify the truth
of your frailty. If you desire a confirmation from Gods Word, I can give it.
All flesh is grass, Esa. 40.6.
and the glory thereof as the flower of the field. Here is set down the
condition as well of the noblest, as the common sort, their glory fades as a
flower, the other dies like grass, all meet in the dust.

The causes of the necessity of death, which are laid upon all men, are three:
first, the decree of God, Statutum est omnibus semel mori, which, as the law of
the Medes and Persians, is unchangeable.

Secondly,

Thirdly, the sin of our souls, is the true, Non mors homini accideret nisi ex
paena, quam praecesserat culpa. Aug de verb. Dom. sermon. 34. Steriles dominantur
avenae. Virg.
real, and radical cause.

God in our creation sowed in our bodies, the good corn, the wholesome grain
of health and soundness; sin and disobedience came with an aftercast, and
sprinkled tares of sickness amongst the corn, and they grow up together with
it, and in some grounds they prosper so well, that the weed overgrowes the
corn, and the days of sickness are more than the days of health, and the
end of them is death. Gods sentence cannot be recalled; a lease for our lives
we may have for a certain time, but not an absolute pardon. The difference of
the elements within us, cannot be composed; a truce they make with each other,
not a peace. And sin will not loose the possession of our souls; we may curb
her power, but not take it away; we may sin less, but not not at all: for
the best man sins seven times a day; Romans 6.23.
and the wages of sin is death: how soon we shall receive them, we are
uncertain. We know not how suddeuly we are to travel into another country,
let us therefore be ever readily furnished for our journey; let neither youth,
delight, nor honor so rake up our thoughts, that we forget the maine
business of our life, to dye well. We cannot plead minority, if we are now
unprepared: we were of full age long since to sue out the liverie of death;
and, if we live until we are decrepit, our soul is like our bodies, if we
think not every minute may be our last. The Poet will give no man above a
day, Horace. Job 7.6.
Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremu^. Job little, or no time at all. Man's
days are swifter than a weavers shuttle: Job 14.2.
He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down, he flies also like a
shadow, and continues not. Let us then so live in these houses of clay, as if
we were tenants at will, and might be thrust out of possession every moment;
not as if we could not be remooved, until the expiration of ninety nine
years, or had a lease of three lives in them. The edifice of our mortal
selves is not erected upon a rock, a foundation of stone, but on sand, so as
when the sea and tide beat, and the wind rages, it is in danger continually
of an utter overthrow. Horace.
Quid brevi fortes jaculamur aevo Multa? Why then in this uncertainty, do we
make a preparation, as if we should live unto the third and fourth generation?
He is wise that can dislodge at an instant, and when death knockes at his
door, can unaffrightedly let her in, and has then so dispacht all his
affairs, that he has nothing to say, but come Lord Jesus, come quickly;
nothing to do, but to deliver back his soul to his Creator. Whereas miserable
is his condition, who is marrying a wife, or giving in marriage, or
banqueting, when the inundation of an unresistable flood is ready to over
whelme his unfinisht arc of himself. History tells me of a miserable
complaint, one made against Death and Destiny, that they should cut him off in
the midst of his work, when 'twas half finished; worse is their case who are
taken away in the midst of their sins, nay, if it be in the midst of their
repentance. Si maneant opera imperfecta, Virg.
minaeque Murorum ingentes. If the tabernacle of their hearts be not thoroughly
finished, and seasoned with repentant tears, if they are not perfectly and
wholely reconciled unto their God. May no agency keep us from negotiating for
our souls health against the day of death, that with more truth than
presumption, we may say with David, we shall go to her, to that Heaven where
she is, to those Saints and blessed souls, that are her companions, to the
Spirit of truth, the Son of mercy, the God of glory, who crowned her with
immortality, and infinity of happiness, to reign with them for evermore.

Thus have you heard of the sickness of David's Child, Application.
his behavior before the death of him, his resolution after it, and his
meditation upon it. Of which I must say, Romans 4.23.
as the Apostle does of Abraham's Justification: Now it is not written for him
only, but for us.

As David's Child was sick, so was this yongue Lady, sick of a long and
lingering sickness, but patient and quiet in her sickness, as if she had not
been borne to dye, but suffer: and even at her last gasp, she carried such
cheerfulness in her countenance, as if she had been sensible of the neerenesse
of her glory. Death did not appale her, but the fresh vermillion of her cheeks
(had she been of riper years) might have seemed to witness a joy for leaving
the world so soon. She was of no robustious constitution, but of a fabric and
making so delicate, that as in your neatest watches, the Artificer breaks a
wheel or two, before he can work one out: so nature was so curious in the
workmanship of this Lady, that she was apt upon the least occasion to be out
of frame. She lived to spend her flesh, as if she had thought it too good for
the worms. When there was nothing almost left but bones and skin about her,
she desired to be in her nurses arms, as if she had known that nearer
heaven than her bed; and then to be in the cradle, seeming to intimate it best
resembled her grave; where presently into the hands of her Savior she
delivered a spotless soul. that she was dead, they found, but when, they knew
not. Her breath, unobserved, stole away, like Noah's Dove out of the Arc; it
went forth and came in, it went forth and never returned again.

Now as David's Child was dead, Optima prim fere manibus rapiuntur avaris,
Implentur numeris deterior suis. Ovid. Hor.
so is this sweet Lady, and, like the minute she died in, never to be recal'd
again; so have I seen the sweetest flowers cropped in the bud. Impube corpus
quale possit impia
Mollire Thracum pectora.
Such was her delicacy, that the loss of her would even force a tear from a
Barbarians eye. God thought this jewel of too great a price for man's use; he
showed it to testify his richnes, and presently took it again for our
unworthiness. She was the finest thread, that ever was spun to make up frail
nature; which time and age would but have sullied and made worse: I never saw
flesh and blood of a purer complexion. Her soul was not blotted nor scribled
with black and foul thoughts, her hands were not polluted with any action of
evil, she was never out yet, but like a good Musician, tuning her pipes, and
organs, against she came to bear her part; her tongue she had put almost three
years to school to learn to speak: and, if I look into her conditions, I
can see, through less then three years, a most ingenuous, and sweet
disposition toward: so good, as if she were too good to live to sin, and so
God took her; she had but that one sin, we are made of, Original; toward
the expiation of which when she came first into the world, she baptized her
self with her own tears, and that little remnant of days she lived, she
did perpetual penance, and now has undergone the last, Death.

Now me thinks we should stand all like Belshazzar when he saw the
handwriting upon the wall; Dan. 5.5.
our countenances should be changed, our thoughts troubled, so that the joints
of our loins should be loose, and our knees smite against one another to think
upon this harmless innocent, that here has suffered for one sin, and that
sin none of her own; to think now that it is we that are dead, and yet she is
to be buried. The multiplication of our years, has been but an increase of
the reckoning, we must make for sin, and runs us further still upon the
score. We have put off our innocence long since with our infancy, the elder
we grow the worse we are, as our first parents were in their clothes of
figge-leaves. It may grieve us to see the happy estate we have outlived, and
put us in mind of the fitness of a reparation. We may live until we are old,
and old men are twice children, but this last is a childishness of impotencie,
not of innocence; of such was this Lady, Mrs; of whom I cannot speak the
full truth, but that I make an argument against mine own purpose, which is to
settle David's resolution in you to bear this loss with patience.

As David then resolved when his child was dead, to fast no more, so let us to
weep no more; let his reason be ours, it is a good one, We cannot bring her back
again. Me thinks the thought of this should allay the impetuousness of our
sorrow, that it does not profit her, whose life we desire, but hurts ours. If
grief could do her good, every night I would wash my bed with weeping, and
wish my head a fountain of water; nay, had I but one tear to spend after
those for my sins, she should have it. But Seneca, a mere Heathen, has
taught me to hate unprofitable grief; Quae amentia est poenas a se
infoelicitatis suae exigere and mala sua augere? what madness is it to revenge
my crosses on my self, and wilfully to augment my grief? Is not my sorrow
weighty enough, but with a fresh supply of tears I must increase the burden
of it? But why so violent now? you could not but perceive long since that thus
it would be. Could you imagine that such perfection could be of continuance?
Things sublimated of a superusuall goodness, take a sudden flight from us.
The brightness of the fire argues a vicinitie to extinction; it is of longer
durance, when it feeds on dull and gross matter, as it is less quick and
agile; so children the more forward and spritely they are, the less hope they
give me of a long life. But that which we grieve for in this Lady, is her
blessing: we toil and are full of sorrows, and must dye; but she does rest
from all labor, without which with the Saducees you will deny a resurrection.
Cesset igitur dolor compassionis, ubi oritur fides resurrectionis. I would not
have you ignorant brethren concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow
not, even as others which have no hope; for if we believed that Christ Jesus
died, and rose again, These. 4.13.14.
even so all those which sleep in Christ, will the Lord bring with him. Could
this young Lady speak, she would bid us not weep for her, but for our selves:
for she is not dead, but, Matt. 9.24.
like the maid in the Rulers house, she sleeps. Therefore comfort your
hearts, drive sorrow far from them: for sorrow has slain many, and there is
no profit therein, Ecclus. 30.33.
says Jesus the son of Sirach. Let us not for the greatest loss grieve too
much, lest we make our friends grieve for the loss of us: for through
immoderate sorrow death can find an easy passage to destroy us. And now to
end with my Text, let us with David from hence take up a meditation of our own
mortality, let us think on death, but not occasion it. let us assure our
selves that we shall go to her: but let us not through immoderate grief send
our selves before God calls us, lest we dispossess our selves of the place
where she is. Let every occasion be a memorandum of our mortality. I like the
custom of the Egyptians, who at their festivals and times of mirth, had ever
at the last course a deaths-head served in, which was a silent insinuation of
the frailty of their nature. A frequent iteration of this would make us
understa^d ourselves better than we do. O may the God of light unseal our eyes,
and make us see and know how subject we are to die* good God imprint in our
memories the thought of death, bestow on our hearts a preparation to welcome it,
grant that with Job we may wait all the days of our appointed time, until the
Son of righteousness appear, and then be exalted into an everlasting mansion in
heaven, there to reign with him for evermore. To whom with the Father and the
holy Ghost, be ascribed all power, etc. Amen.

FINIS.

