The.vii. shedynges of the blood of Ihesu christ.

Jesus nazarenus rexiudeorum
Jesus on a cross

Here begins a contemplacyon or medytacyon of the shedynge of the blood of
our lord Ihesu Christ at seven times.
WE ought oftentimes to remember devoutly many and grievous pains that our lord
Ihesu christ suffered for our redemption / that our love may be the more fervent
to him. And we seeing his great love and kyndnes / may for his love pacyently
suffer tribulacyons and dyseases in this world / lest we for our unkindness
be cast from his face in to everlasting pain. Among his grievous pains he
shed his precious blood for our love vii. times the which should often be
considered of us. But when we shall consider his pains or when we shall pray
/ if we will have comfortable feeling of devotion in our soul. At the
beginning of our prayer or contemplacyon we must withdraw our mind and
wits fro all outward things and besynes as much as we may. And think on
that thing that our co^templacyon or prayer is of. As if you will devoutly
remember his circu^cysyon / thou may thy^ke as if thou might se before the our
blessed lord Ihesus in his chyldhode / that is to say a fair little babe a
meke and a sweet la^me so clean / so pure / so pleasant to behold and look
on his blessed vysage / so amyable his favorable eyes / so full of grace his
Innocent hands and feet / so pretty and louesom so fair and white very god and
man borne of a virgyne pure. And than have pity and co^passyon in thy heart
that so fair and favorable a babe / so sweet and blessed Innocent that never
did amysse / should suffer so grievous pain as he suffered for the / when his
tender flesh was cut with a knyfe made of stone when he was but. viii days
old. Take heed how pyteously he wepeth in his moders arms for anguysshe and
pain / and weep with him if thou can. For you art the cause of his weeping /
for he suffered gyltles such pains for the love of the / and so while the
matter is fresshe in thy mind / thou may begin thy devotion.

THe second time that our lord and savior christ Ihesu shed his precious
blood for us / was in the mou^re of Olyuete / where he seeing his tedyous and
horrible pains of his bitter passion drawing nere / for great anguysshe and
pain swette water and blood. Here may thou think as thou saw him
knelynge on the ground holding up his holy hands lyftynge up his face to
heaven with the most pyteous chere and rufull cost tenaunce that thou can
ymagyne. Think as you saw verily his eyes swollen and reed for weeping / and
al his face changed with a meruayllous countenance of heaviness. And think as
thou saw and herdest him sobbe weep and syghe full heuyly / and how
mournyngly he prays to the fader of heaven / how plentefully he wepeth to ye
fader of heaven / how thycke the teeres ran down by his chekes / how he
wepeth his eyes and face washed with teres / how his body is wete of it / as
it were all bathed with sweet and blood and water. Thou may well think he
suffered grievous pain inward / that swette outward on his body water and
blood. And the pains of his passion were grievous sith the thinking thereof
caused him to sweet blood and water. For the which pain desire thou as
hertely as thou can to weep with him / for thou art the cause of his grievous
pain. And while thou haste this fresshe in thy mind faye thy devotion.

THe third time our savior shed his precious blood for us / was wha^ he was
bound to a pyller and with scarpe scourges was cruelly beten. Here may you
think as you saw him verily before the naked bounden to a pyller / and how
cruelly and fyersly the cursed tyrau^tes pyncheth or smyteth him without mercy
with whyppes and rods / so that no hole skin is left upon him. Thing as
you saw the stremes of his precious blood rennyn ge down on every side after
the grievous and smarte lasshes of the whyppes / and that you see the bare and
naked bones / the flesh rent fro the bones with many and fell strokes of the
knotted scourges dyed with his precious blood. Think also that thou herest him
groan / quake and tremble for anguysshe and wonderful pain / how pyteously he
casts his look toward heaven / and that with the strokes of the scourges a
part of his blessed flesh or a drop of his precious blood falls or
droppeth on thy face or on thy clothes / this pain suffered he for the love of
the / therefore you ought to have more pity on him. And with as good devotion as
thou can / lift thy heart and mind to him / and say thy prayer.

THe fourth time our blessed lord shed his precious blood for our redempcyon
/ was as he was crowned with a garlond of sharp thorns. Here may thou
think / as if thou see him sitting before the his hands bound behind him
/ and the boystous tyrauntes setting a grievous garlonde of sharp thorns on
his heed / and pressynge it down with so great vyolence / that the sharp
thorns perced in to his brain. Take heed and behold his rufull and heavy
countenance / how pyteously he shrynketh his neck in to his sholders for the
great anguysshe of that great and horrible pain / and how pyteously he groneth
for grefe of that horrible pain / how pyteously the stremes of blood renneth
about his heed yt is to torn in every side. Behold his blessed vysage yt
sometime was so pleasant / so gracyous / so amyable is now made so reed with
blood and all dysfygured with sorrow and heaviness / his eeres and his nose be
stopped with blood. Behold and se how pacyently he that was god and man and is
/ suffered to be scornefully mocked with rybaudes and caytyues: and his blessed
face to be foiled with their loathsome spyttynge / and all for the love of man /
therefore man ought to have thereof great compassyon.

THe fyfth time our savior shed his precious blood for us / was when his
clothes were taken fro him after his scourgynge. Here you may think as you
see him as before with a full heavy countenance gronynge pyteously with many a
deep and profou^de sygh coming from his heart rote. And the tyrau^tes pulling
fresshely of his clothes yt clyued fast with dry blood to his tender body /
for in pulling away his clothes the skin and the flesh rent fro his body
yt cliued so fast to his clothes with dry blood / by the which he was all to
rent / all to rasshed / and all to torn and stremed all with blood / and so
he bledde new again. I trow this pain was more grievous to him than his
scourgynge. Remember how he shrynketh trembles and quaketh and stoupeth low
down in all his body in pulling of his clothes for the bitter anguysshe of
that grievous pain. Behold how rewfully he is arrayed like no man but more like
a thing that were new slain without any skin / if you can not remember
the anguysshe of this pain / thou may pynche thy finger or some other part
of thy body / that by the feeling of thyn own little pain thou may the
better remember the great pain that he suffered for the which thou were cause
of.

THe syxth time that our lord shed his precious blood / was when his blessed
and Innocent hands and fete were nailed to the cross. Here may thou think
as if thou see him / the fyers cruel tyrauntes and tur mentours of our
merciful lord hale and pull his blessed arms / some the one and some the
other / so sore / that it may seem to the that thou herest his Joints to
crack and the senewes to braste in sondre. Than may thou think that you
see him drive that is dryuer of the great nails in to his holy and sweet
hands and feet / and that thou beholdest the dryuer of the nails and see
him without any ruthe or pity smite in every nail with many mighty / and that you
see the blood spring out at every stroke / than see our lord shrynke and
quake for hydeous pain and smarty^ge of his tender flesh new cut at every
stroke. This may you think first on ye one hand and after on that other and
also on the feet. Than you may behold with ruthe and compassyon how pyteously
and how grievous and hydeous pain they spoiled his clothes / his flesh all to
rent and to torn hangs bledynge on the cross / having no thing as I
suppose to sustain the weight of his body ne to rest him upon but the hard
nailed fyxed within his tender flesh / this was to him a double pain / the
which were to him both grievous and hard to suffer the great akynges and
anguysshes both in his arms and hands and feet. Another pain of sore
smartynge in his hands and feet oppressyd hard with the nails fyxed in the
quycke flesh. Both this pains horrible were caused by the weight of his
precious body. Beholdynge also the ryuers of blood flowynge out of his hands
and feet. Thou may think also yt his ly^mes quake and tremble for pain /
and that for werynes and anguysshe of his intolerable pain he sometime shakes
his heed rufully and heuely / sometime casts it upon his right sholder /
sometime upon his left sholder / and sometime lyfteth it up full pyteously as a
man swounynge and half deed / leteth it fall down to his breast. Than may
you behold ye dole full countenance of his face / how pale it is. And you may
think ye among all these pains and sorrows he lytteth up his eyes and looks
upon the in token of love. As who says I love the so much yt I wylfully
suffer this pain for the / and am ready to suffer more if it be put to me. And
that you sholdest remember what he has done for the.

THe.vii. time that our merciful savior shed his precious blood for us /
was when he hanged on the cross and was smyten in to the side with a spear. Here
may thou thy^ke as if you see the body of our merciful lord after yt he
for our trespass has suffered pacyently many outrages and exceeding pains
hynge deed upon ye cross all pale and wanne or like to be a be newly slain
for he spared not his own blood / but gave it wylfully for our redempcyon.
After that you have with pity and compassyon beholden well how pyteously his
visage sometime most beauteous and amyable ha^geth inclined down all wanne and
pale of color his precious body / also yt excedeth all other in beauty and
fayrenes hangs all to rent and torn. Thou may behold how the spear
re^neth through his side with great vyolence and renneth through his heart / and
thou may think how you herd the sown of the cruel stroke entering in to
his side / and that you see blood and water yt was ready to run hastily out
to wasshe away thy fylth and make the clean / flowed out at the terrible
wound of his side / and ran part down on the spear and part down on his
side. O sweet Ihesu how pacyently how mekely suffrest you so unkindly to be
entreated / so cruelly turmented / so rufully arrayed for the love of man. O
tender and merciful lord that after that you have spent thy blood of thy body
to death / would after thy death for the love of thy servant spend all the
precious blood of thy body and heart. After if pity and compassyon would suffer
ye thou may look in at ye wound of his side and behold how his heart that
was free and kind to the is rennen / torn and smyten through with the spear.
And with devout prayer and compassyon desire that he suffer thy love never to
depart fro him / but that thou may be ready for the love of him pacyently to
suffer pain and aduersyte of this wretched world / for he suffered gyltles
mekely and pacyently much pain and anguysshe for the love of the. Because the
devout memory of the bitter passion of our savior expels temptacion and
excyteth many times the devotion of the true lover of our lord. Thou may
think and ymagyn on that our merciful redemer complayneth and not without a
cause / for the great Iniurye and unkindness of the Jews / and says to them
in this wise O ye mine own / how may ye find in your hertes so vncurteysly to
entreat me / sythen I have chosen you before other / and brought you fro
strange nacyons and put you in my delectable vyneyarde. I have create and made
you like unto my self / and ye have labored to destroy me / and have caused
me gyltles to be put to shameful death on the cross like a thief or a
mansleer. I chase and preferred you before people of other nacyons / and ye
have done to me great vilany and made me obieccyon and derysyon of people. And
I by many miracles in correccyon of your adversaries of Egypt losed you from
captyuite and brought you out of their subieccyon. And by falls accusacyons and
excitynge and sterynge of the people against me / has caused me without
trespass to be nailed and fastened to a tree / and gyltles to dye. I mynystred
to you light wha^ it was derke / that ye might escape sauely the danger of
your adversaries: and ye came against me with light of lanternes swerdes and
staves as I were a thief / to take me and put me in many diverse pains and
dyspyteous death. I fed and nourysshed you.xl. year in wilderness with
delycate manna / and for you caused water to run out of the hard stone. And
ye caused me to be fed with bitter aysel and gall / and caused the blood and
water to run out of my side. I gave to you laws by Moses according to
reason / and ye have caused me against reason without trespass to be
condemned to cruel death. I by correccyon of your adversaries led you in to
the land of promyssyon / and put you in to my sweet and delectable vyneyarde /
where often I gave you the vyctory of your enemies. And ye not satysfyed with
derysyon and mocking me with many grievous and cruel pains that I have
suffered / to lead me to torn and all to rent with strokes to put me upon the
cross. I have exalted you above all other people / and ye have mocked me and
caused me to be punysshed with syn^ers and trespassours what thing have I done
unto you / or what unkindness have ye found in me that ye entreat me so
ungently have not ye found me merciful and gracyous to you in your needs. I
have chosen you and ye have refused me. I have brought you forth and
nourysshed you as my children / and ye have despised me. O how unright wise and
unkind these rewards be / to reward evil for good / shame and vylany for
worship and good and dygnyte malice and enemyte for favor and frendshyp /
trouble and vexacyon for peace and tranquyllyte / grievous and bitter pain with
aduersyte for pleasure and prosperyte / cruel and shameful death for
prosperous life.

AFter thou have with devotion behold our blessed savior and considered well
his cruel outragyous pain / turn the than toward his sorrowful mother / and
behold well her heavy chere and sorrowful countenance / and se how pyteously
the teeres run out of her gracyous eyes and dystayne her beauteous vysage how
dolefully she sobbed / how pyteously she wryngeth her hondes with many a
sorrowful syghynge coming from her heart replete with sorrow and heaviness / how
she falls often in swounynge her tender heart like to be braste for pity and
compassyon of her child that was and is very god and man / how she sometime
among her swounynge and grievous pains with countenance dysconsolate /
casts up her eyes for pity and love upon her sweet sone and blessed child /
and anon for pity and moderly compassyon she fell down in swounynge in more
grievous pain and sorrow than she was before.

O good lady mother of pity no marvel though you were heavy and sorrowful to
se thy blessed and merciful sone suffer gyltles so many grievous pains.

O blessed lady the mother of mercy how full of sorrow and anguysshe was thy
heart / to se thy blessed sone his heed perysshed with sharp thorns which
thou were wont to lap full tenderly.

O lovely lady queen of heaven and example of honest how heavy was thy chere and
countenance to se ye favorable face of thy blessed child yt was and is very
god and man foiled with the spyttynge of rybawdes and caytyues.

O sweet lady the flower of chastyte / how deep and how sorrowful were thy
syghynges to se offered bitter aysell and galle to thy child to drink / to
whom thou were wont to give sweet virgyns milk of thy blessed breast

O gracyous lady the perfyte myrrour of virtue and goodness / how full of sorrow
were thy sobbing to behold the Innocent hands and feet of thy blessed child
that never did trespass nailed hard to a tree / the which thou were wont to
dress and wasshe reverently.

O benygne lady well of mercy and grace / how copyously did thyn eyes shed
out flodes of bitter teeres / when thou beheldest the blood flowynge out of the
hondes and feet of thy deresone / the which thou were wont to lap and
swadell full moderly.

O glorious lady the tree of life / how ferefull were thy swounynges and how
pytefully were thy wryngynges of thy blessed hands / when thou beheldest the
blessed fruit of thy body all to torn and rent / hanging deed upon the
cross that thou had brought forth and nourysshed tenderly upon thy lap.

O merciful lady the mother of pity and compassyon how grievous was thy pyteous
and tender heart wounded with the sword of sorrow and compassyon / to se a spear
to ryue his side / yt had chosen to dwell within thy blessed sides / and made
his holy tabernacle not far from thy heart.

O blessed lady I know well that thou sholdest have dyed before him or with
him if thou had not had steadfast believe and hope that he should live
again. Here thou may apply thy self to sorrow and mourn with thy careful
and heavy lady / for it besemeth not well that so glorious and so virtuous a
lady wasshe her face with teeres and thou a kaytyfe and a sinner depart a
sinner with dry eyes sith he suffered these pains for love of the / it is not
according that so noble and prudent a lady sobbe / syghe and swoune for thy
lords death / and thou that art subgecte like an unkind servant / leave him
without pity or compassyon / sith he dyed for the love of the.

AFter this you may ymagyn and think that what time the body of our lord and
blessed savior is take down from the cross / our blessed lady hastes her
toward it with heavy chere / and enbraseth him in her arms and gives
sorrowful kyssynges meddled with bitter teres / and that she beholdynge his body
and blody wounds wepeth so pyteously / that ye sanguyn teeres meddled with his
precious blood run down on ye deed body in mourning and sorowynge the
pyteous death of her dear sone / says to him in this wise. A my dear sone my
lord and sovereign / my socour and comfort / my Joy and my pleasure and my
felycyte / thy sharp tourmentes and Innocent death perceth my heart with sorrow
and heaviness and wou^deth it grievously. O ye vnky^de and hard herted people /
how might ye for pity punysshe him that never offended / how ye might fy^de in
your hertes to beat your sovereign maystre that taught you the way of virtue /
how could ye for pity slay your conning surgyn the which heled by miracles
the blind / deef / and lame / why would ye slay your wise physycyen that gave
life to the deed. O ye unkind scourges nails spear and thorns / how durst ye
perse the flesh of your maker and lord. O thou strong and sturdy tree / for
unkindness also I may accuse the / why dydest thou not leave and put away thy
natural styfnes and bow thy branches to favor and ease my dear sone all
weryed with sore pain and tourmentes.

O how fortunate be ye chaste virgyns chylderles and honest wives and wydowes
also / that have your children to comfort you and glad you in your sorrow
and disease. But alas for sorrow and pite my blessed sone that was my Joy and
comfort that never did offend / lies before my face slain causeles / and I
have no moo. O holy angel Gabryell thou saluted me with words of great Joy
and gladness / but now my Joy and gladness ben turned in to great sorrow and
heaviness. Thou saydest I should co^ceyue and bring forth the sone of god / and
that his kingdom and reygne should ever endure / but behold now and se the
blessed fruit yt I conceived through thy words cruelly slain. Thou called me
full of grace and said / our lord was with me / but se now how hard grace I
find in the unkind people that has taken my lord fro me / and put him to
shameful death. Thou call me also blessed in thy salutacyon / but how may I
be blessed sith my dear sone my lord / my Joy and my bliss is refte fro me
with unkind people and robbed of his life. Behold cosyn Elysabeth how rufully he
is arrayed / at whose presence thy sone John^ Joined in thy womb. O mine own
dear sone at thy natyuyte holy au^gelles song songs of peace mirth and melody.
And now again thy death the ungentle people made a noise of great trouble /
sorrow and heaviness / cryenge with malycyous voices. Crucyfye him / without
ruthe or pity. At thy birth also kings of far countries assembled together
and led by yt light of a sterre did to the much worship and reverence / and
now thyn own neighbors blind with hateful malice have gadred them against
the with dysceyte and falsenes to condemn the to death. O ryghtwyse Symeon /
se how he is vnryghtfully slain whom thou desyrest sore to se or thou
sholdest dye. Now feel I the sore stroke of the sharp sword of sorrow and
heuines that you faydest should thryll my heart. Behold blessed baptyst how
pyteously that meke down is put to death on whom you saw the holy ghost
descend when that you baptized him in flom Jordan. Behold how that immaculate
lamb lies Innocently slain that you saydest / should take away sin and
wyckednes. O dear sone / how shall I cease of sorrow / there is no remedy but
only in the / therefore blessed child sith I am thy mother have pity and
compassyon on me / and other turn to life again or take my life fro me for
my sorrow sweet sone I se none other remedy.

The holy order of au^gelles I beseech you to help me that glorious angel
that is my keeper and counseyle be in my keeping as thou thynkest most
profitable to my soul and to present my prayer before the throne of the
glorious trynyte. And I thank the blessed angel which art my keeper to keep
me yt I may euerlastyngly love the and thank the in the heueuly Cite.

The second order of aungelles I beseech you that I may have by your prayers
and help reuelacyon from the trynyte of such things as ye would I should do
his pleasure / and with assystence of his grace to do them.

The third order of pryncypates I beseech you so to help thy prelates and
princes in gouernynge of the people that they may live in rest / and truly
serve their lord god / and that at the hour of death ye be present to deliver
our souls from danger of the devil / and bring us to the endless Joy of
the celestyall paradyse.

The fourth order of potestates I beseech you to repress my ghostly enemies /
yt they never prevail to hurt me bodyly ne ghostly / and to deliver me fro yt
falls cautels by the which they entende the destruccyon of my soul.

The fyfth order of virtues I beseech you for to pray that I may have strength
in body and soul to execute the works of that virtue and that my memory and
reason may be more apt to receive and understand by your help and prayer.
Also the gifts of nature be made more parfyte to the use and virtue and to the
pleasure of my lord god.

The syxth order of domynacyon I beseech you that by your help and prayer
that my soul may have parfyte domynacyon upon my body / to rule it according
to reason and to the will of my lord god / and that I may have vyctory in
temptacyon of mine enemy / and parfyte pacyence in all trybulacyons.

The.vii. order of thrones I beseech you yt by your help and prayer I may
execute the works of mercy the which perteyneth to the ryghtwysnesse of god
and of my neighbor / and at the hour of death when I shall receive Judgment
for the deeds of my life / that by the merytes of you I may find my lord god
my merciful Judge.

The.viii. order of cheruphyn I beseech you pray my lord god yt I may have
the gift of wisdom to know the goodness of my lord god and kyndnes which he
has showed me. And to know tho things which be to his pleasure and that I
may do them / and tho things that be to his dyspleasure that I may have grace
to feel them.

The.ix. order of seraphyns I beseech you to pray for me that I may have the
gift of fervent love in my lord god / and the swetnes of devotion in his
service with holy meditacyon / that my soul be enflambed with love of the
glorious trynyte / and endless Joy of his most blessed presence. Amen.

Here ends a medytacyon of the.vii. shedynges of the blood of our lord Ihesu
christ.
Enprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the son / by wynkynde
word. The year of our lord god. M. ccccc. ix.
Wynkyn.de. Word.
printer's or publisher's device


