MOTVS MEDI-TERRANEVS. OR, A TRVE RELATION OF A FEAREFVLL AND PRODIGIOVS
EARTHQVAKE, WHICH LATELY HAPPENED IN THE ANCIENT City of COVENTRIE, and some
other places of the Kingdom, to the great amazement of the Inhabitants.

With a touch of some other occurrences, as well Foreign as Domestique.

LVKE 21. and 11. Great Earthquakes shall be in diverse places, and Famine,
and Pestilence, and fearful things, and great Signs shall there be from
Heaven.

Printed for HE: HOLLAND. 1626.

To THE WORSHJPFVLL MY worthy Friend, T. S. Esquire, of B. in Hertford-shire.
SIR,
IT is not many Months since you accepted from my hands, at the second hand,
my mournful Meditations compiled in the late memorable Mortality of the
Plague: And heretofore for this good while, I have constantly sent, and
imparted unto you, all manner of Foreign News and Novelties of moment;
whereof you have been, and are desirous and studious, and the rather because
of your sedentarie life at home, and seldom or never stirring abroad, for
diverse years past; So now, I pray, give me leave to impart unto you this
domestique News, and most true Relation of a fearful Earthquake, which
happened lately in the City and place of my Nativitie: within a few days
after I had been there, to visit nay nearest and dearest friends; who now are
witnesses of the same, from whom (as also from others) I have the certain
information of it. I doubt not but you received the several Pamphlets I lately
sent you by your trusty servant R. H. And, it being your condition now to be
so far remote from London, (in a fresh Air and sweet soil,) where Novelties
are the more welcome unto you; It has rather induced me to Inscribe unto you,
at the first hand, this small Pamphlet of a prodigious Accident: For other
matters, I hope I shall not forget still to send you, knowing your earnest
desire after them: and I cannot mervaile thereat, considering, Est natura
hominis Novitatis avida: I must leave to enlarge my self further unto you by
way of Epistle, because the thing it self is, I say, but a Pamphlet: Only,
With your pleasant situated Place, I wish and pray for your health and welfare
in soul and body: And so I take my leave.

HALLELVIAH.
To the Reader.
SIR, If you be courteous, you will give me the publisher hereof thanks for
my pains, and think your two pence or three pence, at the most, well
bestowed: But if you be censorious, you will happily object at the Introduction,
and say, it is larger than the Relation it self: If not with the introduction,
then happily you will find fault with the Enlargement, application, and
conclusion: To both which, I must beforehand answer you; It has been the
laudable custom in all Ages, upon the publishing of any Prodigy, or
extraordinary work of God, not to let it pass without Introduction and
Application, to the end, that men may be stirred up the better, to make good
use of the Almighties handy-workes: which are never sent, but for our
Instruction, And for the truth of the Relation it self, I trow no
understanding man can, or will make any question, when he has read the
Contents. And so farewell.

A TRVE RELATION of a fearful and prodigious Earthquake, etc.
OF the natural causes of Earthquakes many Philosophers, both ancient and
modern have written largely and learnedly: and of those latter Writers, the
Pair of most learned Germans, viz. Bartholomew Keckerman and John Magirus,
Keckerman de Terrae motu. Magiri Phys:
in my judgment (yea, it is the judgment of the learned) have written best
and most profoundly: and therefore it shall suffice me to write but a word for
the better understanding of the common reader, as follows: In the caves and
concauities of the Earth there is some times conceived and bred, a vaporous
Wind, which searching to break forth, doubtless is the first natural cause
of Earthquakes, etc. But our Savior Christ (TRVTH it self,) in the Gospel,
when he speaks of the Signs before the last judgment Day, and better
informing us than all the Philosophers in the world have done, Luke 21.
He tells us, We shall hear of Wars and Seditions; Nation shall rise
against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom: and with Famine and Pestilence,
and other fearful things and signs from Heaven, he tells us plainly we
shall have great EARTH-QVAKES, and those in diverse places, etc.

Now, that we that live in this latter and sinful Iron-Age of the World may a
little awaken and rouse up our selves from the Cradle of Security, wherein we
have been long rocked asleep: has not God caused the whole Christian World
to ring a loud Peale of Wars and Rumors of Wars? Matthew. 24.6.
witness fertile France, spacious Germany, the Netherlands, Bohemia, Italy,
Valtolin, Switzerland, Sauoy, and what Country, Kingdom, or State witnessing
not the same? Yea, and though we in this facrie Island, through the admirable
blessing and long-suffering of God, have not the sounding of the Trumpet, and
beating up of the Drum in our ears, further than for ex^cise and preparation:
and blessed be God for his Mercy our Peace, and his Lieutenant, our gracious
King and Peacemaker. Yet, we are not I say without those Rumors of Wars
abroad, and have a fellow-feeling of our Neighboring Countries Calamities
therein, and we are already engaged in their just Quarrels, for our own
better security and safety. Amongst other signs and forerunners of the
latter day, I remember our Savior tells us of false Cprists, false Prophets,
and Heresies that shall arise, where, without doubt he includes, false
Professors of CHRIST: And are we without such? how comes it then to pass,
that each Head of the Hydra-headed balefull Beast of Heresies, and Schism
strives, of late, so much for superiority; amongst us here in this Nation, to
go no further than our own: Certes, the ugly Head of Papisme has striven for
place; the rotten Head of Arrianisme has also striven for place, the
misshapen and ill-lookt Heads of old Pelagianisme and new Arminianisme have
labored to be reconciled, and Ianus-like, to be joined together, and so to
take place: It is not my purpose to meddle with the small Heads of Schism,
they being easily suppressed: They are those four Heads before-named, that
trouble the Peace of the Church: the two former; they do openly disclaim the
Doctrine of the Church; the two latter, a little more cunningly; they
(forsooth) would intrude themselves into our Church, that so they might the
better afterward bring in the whole body of the BEAST her self: Tit. 3.11.
But leaving these Heads of Heresies to be suppressed, cut off and damned, by
GOD, and the King, with the help of his Reverend Orthodox Clergymen: And not
to enlarge my self further in the Introduction to a small Relation, hear and
understand as follows:

About the midst and Center of this Land, is situated and stands the
ancient City of COVENTRIE, a County of it self, though within the compass
of Warwickshire: And in this City, on Monday the twenty seventh day of March
last past, 1626. about one of the clock after dinner, unlooked for, and on a
sudden, happened this fearful and prodigious shocke of Earthquake, to the
great amazement, and almost astonishment of the Inhabitants; which was
sensibly felt and observed throughout the City, shrewdly shaking the Houses,
making the glass windows about the houses, the Pewter and other materials in
the Houses to clatter: the Beds (wherein some lay sick) to shake under them,
and all in a most terrible manner; and to make it more strange, fearful, and
prodigious, it yielded forth at the instant an hideous noise and roaring, as it
were, in the Air: which noise and roaring was like betwixt the noise of
Thunder, and the roaring of the Sea: The Inhabitants and beholders hereof,
(especially the better sort) betaking themselves to their best meditations and
devotions, and humbly submitting themselves under Gods hand and handie-workes:
Though, blessed be Almighty God, there was no great hurt done thereby
throughout the whole City: albeit therein are many goodly Houses and buildings,
S. Michaels Trinity
two large and fair Churches about the heart of the City, and with those
Churches two lofty Pyramidall Spire-steeples of stone-worke, and not far
from them a Cross of stone also in the Marketplace: either of which three
Monuments will hardly yield inferioritie to any others in the Kingdom.

Now, that this Earthquake or Prodigy, did not contain it self in Coventrie
alone, but by credible information, it was also sensibly observed in diverse
other places of the Country, even as far as Bristoll: And what this
prodigious Accident may portend, in the Counsel of GOD, I must leave it: But
thus much I dare be bold to say, and pray, GOD grant us quietness upon the
Land, for doubtless the Earth was much shaken within.

If any list to be so censorious, as to make question of the truth of this
fearful Earthquake, let them repair unto the publisher and printer hereof,
who has diverse Letters from sundry grave, learned, religious, and judicious
people, for confirmation thereof: which shall be produced, if need require: And
if this late Earthquake seem strange or incredible unto them, I wish them
have recourse unto that more admirable work of the Omnipotent, even in ours
and our Fathers remembrance, in Hereford-shire: and recorded by our best
Historiographers: when as, In the year of Christ Jesus, Speed, in his
Geography. page 49
1571. Marcley Hill in the East of the shire, rowzed it self out of a dead
sleep, and with a roaring noise removed from the place where it stood, (for
ought we know, from the Creation, or the Deluge at the least,) and for three
days together travailed from her first Site, to the great amazement and fear
of the beholders. It began to journey upon the seventh day of February, being
Saturday, at six of the clock at night, and by seven in the next morning had
gone forty Paces, carrying with it Sheep in their coats, hedge-rowes and
Trees; whereof some were ouerturned, and some that stood upon the Plain, are
firmly growing upon the Hill, those that were East are turned West; and those
in the West, were set in the East: In which remove, it overthrew
Kinnaston-Chappell, and turned two Highwayes near a hundred yardes from their
usual Paths formerly trod. The ground thus traveling, was about twenty six
Acres, which opening it self with Rocks and all, bare the Earth before it,
for four hundred yardes without any stay, leaving that which was Pasturage in
the place of Tillage, and the Tillage ouerspread with Pasturage. Lastly,
ouerwhelming the lower parts, mounted to an Hill of twelve fathomes high, and
there rested her self, after three days travel: Job 28.9. Isay 40.12.
remaining His Mark that so laid his hand upon this Rock, whose Power has
poysed the Hills in His Balance.

But leaving Hereford shire and Marcley Hill, where God has now placed it, and
not to speak of diverse other inferior Eearth-quakes; which since and before,
we and our Fathers may remember, and our Chronicles make mention of them: And
to come more near to these present times, (though somewhat further from home,)
We may remember, that about the very time of the Apparition of that most
memorable Comet or Blazing-Starre, which appeared in Aarctophylax, Anno 1618.
In Italy, a Town called Pleurs, was by a fearful and prodigious Earthquake,
(the ground opening it self,) clean swallowed up, Houses, Inhabitants and
all: not one soul in it left alive, nor so much as any Monument of it
remaining to be seen: 1619. Gallobelgieus B. of Londons Sermon at the Cross.
I. Leech his Military Sermon.
And a while after the subversion of it, diverse neighbors that repaired
thither, would needs attempt to dig into the ground, that they might see what
they could find: Among other things that they found, GOD directed them to a
Stone, which when they had taken up, they saw something written upon it in
Hebrew Letters, as if (like the Tables of Stone that were given to MOSES in
Mount Sinay) it had been graven with Gods own singer. Miraculous it was: and
the writing this; (Read and tremble; Read and wonder,)

Thus says the LORD; My Word is like fire, and like an hammer breaking the
Rocks: Go out of Babylon, and every one look to the saving of his own
soul. Let none wink at his sins, for the vengeance will come, and all shall
be rewarded according to their wickedness. Immediately after that most
memorable Prodigy, followed the Death of Great Princes and Potentates; to wit,
the Emperor MATTHIAS and Empress his wife; his two Brethren, Maximilian.
Albertus.
both Archdukes of Austria; then, Queen ANNE of Great Britain, his Sacred
Majesty's Mother, (of famous Memory:) then PHILIP the third, King of Spain,
(and since that, King JAMES, of blessed Memory:) then also began the Broils
and Wars in Bohemia, the Palatinate, and other places, the woeful
Consequences whereof we daily see and hear of; In so much, as that we have I
say, (as our Savior Prophesies) Wars, Seditions, and almost nothing but
Rumors of Wars; Yea, I may further say the RED HORSE of WAR, has and does
trample all over Christendom, with a fearful and most lamentable havoc,
embrewing his feet especially in the blood of Saints, the professors of the
Gospel: And to pass from War: Has not God caused the BLACK HORSE of
PESTILENCE to play his part more near us? yea, even here amongst us in and
about this famous City of London, where he has trampled to death since this
time twelue-moneth above 55000. souls, besides what have died in other Cities,
Towns, and places in this Kingdom: And now for the LEAN and Pale HORSE of
FAMINE, although we must thankfully confess, that God has wonderfully
restrained him, yet other Countries have felt and do feel his weight, with
cleanenesse of Teeth and emptiness of Belly: yea, and we our selves have had
a fearful Glympse of Him: and how soon God may permit him further to appear
amongst us, for our manyfold sins, we know not, but may doubt, and ought to
pray against Famine.

To draw to a conclusion; If Wars and Seditions, Pestilences, Famines, and
Earth-qvakes, be special Signs and Forerunners of the last Judgment, as
our Savior CHRIST has prophesied they are: and certes, Heaven and Earth shall
pass, Matthew. 24.35.
but his words shall not pass: It behooves us, except we will be wilfully
blind and stupid, to take the Premises into consideration, and not slightly
to pass by without observation, and good use making of this Earthquake; such,
being I say (once again) one of our blessed Saviors Signs of his coming to
judgment. And however, he in his wisdom have concealed that Year, day, and
hour; that he will come, (though some too to pragmatically and petulantly
have gone about to define the Year, to be nigh at hand:) yet it much behooves
us to meditate thereon; and prepare therefore, that so we may take all these
forerunners to be so many fore-warners of us particularly to turn to God by a
true Conversion: whereupon will ensue all other Graces needful for Salvation:
And the rather we ought to take all Gods judgments to be warnings unto us of
the last Day; because, be it whenever it shall please God, every particular
man's death is unto him as the day of Judgment; for as we die, so shall we
rise: Now, what is more certain than Death? and what more uncertain than the
day of Death? and it being so, what manner of men ought we to be? Good Lord,
therefore give us grace to turn unto thee by true Repentance, that so we may
say ingenuously, and heartily wish, Thy will be done; And, Come Lord Jesus, Come
quickly.

HALLELVIAH DEO VNITRINO GLORIA. Amen.

FINIS.

