ANTISIXTVS. An oration of Pope Sixtus the fifth, upon the death of the late
French King, Henry the third. WITH A Confutation upon the said Oration,
wherein all the treacherous practices of the house of Lorraine, are largely
described and laid open unto the view of the world, with a brief declaration
of the Kings death, and of many other things worthy the noting, which never yet
came to light before.

Translated out of Latin by A. P.

LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1590.

An Oration of Pope Sixtus the fifth upon the death of King Henry the third, in
Rome in the full assembly of the Cardinals.
COnsidering oftentimes with my self, and applying my whole understanding unto
these things, which now of late by a just judgment of God, are come to pass:
I think I may with right use the words of the Prophet Abacuck saying: I have
wrought a work in your days, and none will believe it, though it be told
them. The French King is slain by the hands of a Friar, for unto this it may
fitly be compared, although the Prophet spoke of an other thing, namely of the
incarnation of our Lord, which exceeds and surmounteth all other wonders and
miracles whatsoever: as also the Apostle S. Paul refers the same words unto
the resurrection of Christ. When the Prophet said a work, his mind was not
to signify by it some common or ordinary thing, but a rare and notable
matter, and a deed worthy to be remembered, as that of the creation of the
world, The heavens are the works of thine hands: And again, He rested the
seventh day, of all the works which he had made. When he says, I have
wrought, with these words the holy Scripture is wont to express things not
come to pass by casualtie, fortune, or accident, but things befallen by the
determined providence, will, and ordinance of God, as our Savior said: The
works which I do, ye shall do also, and yet greater, and many more such
like wherewith the holy Scriptures are replenished. And that he says that it
is done in times past, herein he follows the use and order of the other
Prophets, who for the certentie of the event are wont to prophecy of things to
come as if they were past already. For the Philosophers say, that things past
are of necessity, things present, of being: and things to come only of
possibility. For which certainty the Prophet Isaie long before prophisying of
the death of Christ, has thus spoken: He was led as a sheep to the slaughter,
and like a dumme lamb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth, etc.
And this whereof we speak at this present, and which is come to pass in these
our days, is a famous, notable, and an incredible thing not done or atcheiued
without the particular providence and disposition of the Almighty. A Friar
has kilde a King, not a painted one, or drawn upon a piece of paper, or
pictured upon a wall, but the King of France, in the midest of his army,
compassed and enuiconed round about with his Guard and Soldiers: which truly
is such an act, and done in such a manner, that none will believe it, when it
shall be told them, and perhaps our posterity and the age to come will
account and esteem it but a fable.

That the king is dead or else slain, it is easily to be believed, but that he
is killed and taken away in this sort, is hardly to be credited, even as we
presently agree unto this that Christ is borne of a woman, but if we add unto
it of a woman virgin, then following natural reason we can in no wise assent
unto it. Even so we lightly believe that Christ died, but that he is risen up
again from death to life, it falls hard unto man's understanding, and
therefore not lightly digested. That one is wakened again out of a sleep,
ecstasy, or a sound, because it is not against nature, we naturally believe it,
but to be risen again from death, it seems so incredible unto the flesh,
that S. Paul desputing in Athens of this point, was nushked greatly, and
accused to be a setter soorth of new Gods, so that many (as S. Luke witnesses)
did mock him, and many for the strangeness of the doctrine said, We will
hear thee again of this thing. Of such things therefore which befall not,
according to the laws of nature, and the ordinary course thereof, speaks
the Prophet, That none shall believe it when it shall be told them. But we
give credit unto it by consideration of the omnipotency of God, and by
submission of our understanding under the obedience of faith, and service which
we owe unto our Savior Christ. And by these means this that was incredible by
nature, comes credible by faith: therefore we that believe not after the
flesh that Christ is borne of a virgin, yet when there is added unto it, that
this was done supernaturally by operation of the holy Ghost: then truly we
agree unto it, and faithfully believe it. So likewise when it is said that
Christ is risen again from the dead, as we are flesh only we believe it not,
but when it is affirmed that this was done by the power of the divine nature
which in him was, then without any doubting we believe it. In the same manner
when it shall be told us that such a mighty King was kilde by a poor,
simple, and a weak Friar, even in the midst of his arnne, and environed with
his Guardo and Soldiers, to our natural reason and fleshly capacity it will
seem incredible, yet considering on the other side the great and grievous
sins of this King, and the special providence of the almighty herein, and
by what accustomed and wonderful means he has accomplished his most just
will and judgment against him, then most firmly we will believe it. Therefore
this great and miraculous work I may but only ascribe it unto the particular
providence of God, not as those that refer all things amiss unto some
ordinary causes, or unto fortune, or such like accidentarie euentes, but as
those who (more near observing and looking in the course of the whole matter)
easily see that here in this befell many things, which could in no wise have
been brought to pass and dispatched without the special help of God. And
truly the state of Kings and kingdoms and all other such rare and weighty
affairs should not be thought to be governed of God rashly and unadvisedly. In
the holy Scripture some are of this kind, and none of them can be referred unto
any other thing, but unto God the only author thereof: yet there are none
wherein the celestial operation more appears then in this whereof we speak
at this present. We read in the first book of the Machab. the 6. chap. how
Eleazar offered himself unto a certain death to kill the king that was an
enemy and persecutor of the people and children of God. For in the battle
espying an Eliphant more excellent then any of the other beasts, whereupon it
was like that the king was with a swift course casting himself in the midst
of the troops of his enemies, here and there making a way perforce, came to
the beast at last, and went under her, and thrust his sword in her belly and
slew her, who falling with the great weight of her body pressed him to death,
and kilde him out of hand. Here in this we see some things not unlike unto
ours, as much as touches the zeal, valiantness of mind, and the issue of
the enterprise, yet in the rest there is no comparison to be made. Eleazarus
was a Soldier, exercised in weapons, and trained up in wars, set in battle,
embouldened with courage, and inflamed with rage and anger: this a Friar not
in-ured to the fight, and so abhorring of blood by the order of his profession,
that perhaps he could not abide the cutting of a vain. He knew the kind of
his death, as also the place of his burial, namely that he should be intombed
under the fall of the beast, and so buried in the midst of his triumph and
victory. This man did look for death only, and expected nothing but unknown
and most cruel torments, and did not doubt before, but that he should lack a
grave to rest within. But in this are yet many other things that can suffer no
comparison. The famous history of the holy woman Judith is sufficiently
known, who took counsel with her self, that she might deliver her City
and the people of God (no doubt by the inspiration of the holy ghost) to
murder Holophernes chief Captain and Prince of the enemies forces, which she
also most valiantly accomplished. Wherein although appear many and most
manifest tokens of heavenly direction, yet far greater arguments of Gods
providence, are to be seen in the killing of this king, and the delivering of
the City of Paris, far more difficult and harder to be brought to pass,
then was the enterprise of Judith, for this holy woman disclosed part of her
intention before unto the Governors of the City, and went not without great
commendation of young and old, through the gates of Bethalia, and by the
watch, in sight and presence of the Elders, and Princes of that place: and by
that means was not subject unto their examination and searching which is
always used so strictly in time of siedge and war, that a fly can hardly
without examining get by. She being come to the enemy, through whose camp and
watches she was to go, and now oftentimes examined and searched, being a
woman, carrying no letters nor weapons about her, from whence any suspicion
might grow, and yielding probable reasons of her coming there, and abandoning
of her country, was easily discharged. As also for the same causes, and for
her sex and exquisite beauty being brought before this lewd Prince whom lust,
wine, and good cheer had rockt a sleep, might lightly perform that which she
had determined before. But this religious man had undertaken a matter of
greater weight, and also performde it, which was compassed with so many
impediments, difficulties and dangers, that it by no earthly means could have
been brought to pass without the manifest ordinance, and special aid of the
almighty. First letters of commendation were to be procured from the enemy,
then was he constrained to go through that gate of the City, which directly
went to the enemies camp, the which without doubt was so narrowly kept and
watched in the extremity of that siedge, that every trifle bred suspicion, and
none were suffered to go forth without curious searching before, touching their
letters, business, and affairs they had. But he (a wonderful thing) went by
the watch unexamined, yea with letters of commendation unto the enemy, which
if they had been intercepted by the Citizens, without delay and further
sentence he should have been executed presently, and therefore this is a
manifest argument of Gods providence.

But this is a far greater miracle, that he without searching went also through
the ennemies camp, by diverse watches and sentinelles, and, which more is,
through the guard of the Kings body, and finally, through the whole army, which
was compacted almost of none but Hugenotes and Heretics, he being a religious
man, and apparelled after the order of his profession, which was so odions unto
them, that they killed, or at least greatly misused all those friars, whom
they found in those places, which not long before they had taken perforce about
Paris. Judith was a woman, and nothing odious, yet examined oftentimes, she
carried nothing about her that might have turned to her danger or destruction.
This man, a friar, and therefore hated, and most suspected, having also a knife
prepared for that purpose, not put up in a sheath, (which might have made his
excusation probable) but bare and hidden in his sleeue, which if it had been
found about him, presently without any further judgment should have been
hanged. All these are such clear arguments of the particular providence of
God, that they cannot be denied or disprooued: and it could not be otherwise,
but that God blinded the eyes of the ennemies, so that they could not see nor
know him. For as we have said before, although some absurdly ascribe this unto
fortune, or unto some other such like accident, yet we think good to refer
all this to none else, but unto the holy will and ordinance of God. And truly
I could not believe this to have been done otherwise, unless I should
captive and submit my understanding under the obedience of Christ his doctrine,
who had determined by these miraculous means to unset and deliver the city of
Paris (which as we have heard has been in great danger and extremity) and
justly punish the heinous and notorious sins of that king, and take him away
out of this world by such an unhappy and infamous death. And we truly (not
without great inward grief) have oftentimes foretold, that as he was the last
of his name and family, so was he like to have, and make some strange and
shameful end of his life. Which, that I have oftentimes said it, not only
the Cardinals Ioiosa, Lenocurtins, and he of Paris, but also the Orator at
that time here resident, can sufficiently witness and testify. We will not
seem to call here to affirm our words, for those that are already deceassed,
but the living, and some of them at this time present do yet well remember them:
yet notwithstanding we will not vnrippe all that we are able and forced to
speak against this unfortunate king, for the most noble realm of France it
sake, which we shall prosecute and foster hereafter, as we have done always
before with all fatherly love, honor, and affection. This therefore which we
with grief have spoken touches only the kings person, whose unhappy and
unlucky end depriueth and exempteth him also of those duties and honors
which this holy sea (the tender and gentle mother of all faithful, but
chiefly of christian Princes) is wont to offer unto all Kings and Emperors,
which we most willingly would likewise have bestowed upon him, if the holy
scriptures in this case had not altogether forbidden it. There is, says S.
John, a sin unto death; I say not that any should pray for it, which may be
understood, both of the sin it self, as if he should say, for that sin or
for the remission or forgiveness thereof, I will that none should pray, because
it is not pardonable. Or else in the same sense, for that man who commits
such a sin unto death, I say not that any should pray for. Whereof our Savior
himself has spoken in S. Matthew, saying, that he that sins against the
holy Ghost, shall not be pardoned, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come. Where he sets down three sorts or kinds of sin, to wit, against
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and that the two first are less
heinous, and pardonable, but that the third is altogether unpardonable, and not
to be remitted. Al which difference proceeds from the destinction of the
attributes, as the divines teach us, which severally are appropriated unto
every several person of the holy Trinity. And although as the essence of all
the three persons is but one, so also is their power, wisdom and goodness, as
we have learned in the symbol of Athanasius, where he says, almighty is the
father, almighty is the Son, and almighty is the holy Ghost: yet by
attribution, power is ascribed unto the Father, wisdom unto the Son, and
love unto the holy Ghost, whereof every several as they are termed
attributes, so are they so proper unto every several person, that they can not
be attributed and referred unto any other. By the contraries of which
attributes, we come to discern the distinction and greatness of sin. The
contrary to power, which is only attributed unto the Father, is weakness, and
therefore that which we do amiss, through infirmity of nature, is said to be
committed against the Father. The opposite unto wisdom, is ignorance and
blindness, through which, when any man sins, is said to sin against the
Son, therefore that which we commit through natural infirmity and ignorance,
is more easier forgiven us. The thirds attribute, which is the holy Ghostes, is
love, and has for his contrary ingratitude, and unthankfulness, a vice most
detestable and odious, which causes men not to acknowledge the love of God,
and his benefits bestowed upon them, but to forget, despise, yea and to hate
them. Whereout briefly, and finally proceeds, that they become altogether
obstinate and impenitent. And this way sin is committed against God with
greater danger and peril, then if it were done through ignorance and
weakness of the flesh, and therefore it is termed, a sin against the holy
Ghost. And because such sins are seldom and difficultly pardoned, and not
without great abundance of grace, in some sort they are said to be
unpardonable: whereas altogether through unrepentance only, they become simply
unpardonable. For whatsoever is done amiss in this life: although it be
against ye holy ghost, by repentance it may be wipt out and defaced before
death, but they that persevere therein til death, are excluded from all grace
and mercy hereafter. And therefore for such sinners and sins the apostle has
forbidden to pray after their decease. Now therefore because we understand,
not without our great grief, that the said king is departed out of this
world, without repentance and impenitent, in the company, to wit, of
heretics, (for all his army was made almost of none other but of such men)
and that by his last will he has commended and committed his crown and
kingdom to the succession of Navarre, long since declared an heretic, and
excommunicated, as also in his extremity, and now ready to yield up his
ghost, desired of him, and such like as he was there standing by, that they
would revenge his death upon those whom he judged to be the cause thereof.
For these and such like most manifest tokens of unrepentance, we have decreed
not to solemnize his death with funeralles, not that we would seem to
conjecture by these any thing concerning the secret judgments of God against
him or his mercies, who could according unto his good pleasure in the departing
of his soul from the body convert and turn his heart, and deal with him
mercifully: but this we have spoken, being thereunto moved by these external
signs and tokens. God grant therefore that all, being admonished and warned by
this fearful example of heavenly justice, may repent and amend, and that it
may further please him to continue and accomplish that which he has mercifully
begun in us, as we do put our trust in him, to the end we may give
everlasting thanks to him, to have delivered his church from such great and
imminent dangers. Whereof when his holiness had spoken, he brake up the
Consistory, and having given his blessing, let them al depart.

ANTISIXTVS.
THe ages past have seen many that unnaturally have rebelled against their
country, and with violence defiled their hands with the blood of their princes
and parents: but none yet that ever approved or commended the fact. But now
of late, and in our days a notorious murderer is come forth, the B. of Rome
knows the cruel and bloody crime, and reprooueth not the offender, but
prayseth him. This therefore is false, Sixtus, although it be an old saying,
that villainy and mischief is more easier committed then excused: whether I
compare thee with Papinian, or rather with Caracalla, both notable tyrants,
yet it will hold in none of them both. With right then may I say with thee,
fact um est opus in diebus nostris, there is wroght a work in our days, to
the eye and ear most detestable and grievous, and horrible to be remembered and
spoken of. The greatest and mightiest king of Europe lies overthrown and
slain by the treacherous fraud of a friar. But do thou term this a work
only? Nay, rather thou should have called it a most heinous, execrable, and
cruel act: and therefore the more heinous, that not one of the common people,
but thou the ruler of christendom, Christ his vicar, the gate of heaven, have
been the advocate, defender, and commender of this great offense. Truly, who
can suffer the hands of priests, which by their laws should be harmless, and
undefiled of all christen blood, although most guilty, to be embrued and
stained with the blood of a prince? Who should not curse and detest the bloody
butchar of the father of his country? Have not the incensed and angry people,
reason then to cry, torture, torture, and all things else wherewith such
cruel monsters are to be punished? Yet this is but small, Sixtus, and that
which thou think to be the greatest part of this villainous act, is the
least. Thou with it only art to be charged, because thou alone art sound that
commendest priuse murderers, and praisest manslaughter, and not only give
license, without punishment to destroy, not a citizen, but a magistrate, not a
magistrate, but a king, but do also most impudently defend the deed, and
teach this to be the readiest and speediest way to heaven, with poison,
sword, fraud and treason to kill Kings, that are the majesty of mankind, the
true pattern of Celestial power, and the lively Images of the King of Kings.
And this is it, I think, Quod vix credat quisquam cum narrabitur, That none
will believe it, though it shall be told them, because the like was never
heard amongst the Turks. And the Tartarians, and barbarous nations when they
come to hear it, will for the straungenes thereof, presently shake and tremble.
Is not this then great, cruel and execrable, great truly it should be, if
yet greater did not follow after. Why do thou quake Sixtus, can there be
said any thing more haynouser: I truly, we are fallen in those days, in the
which the abundance of wickedness, makes us destitute of words, and in the
which it is scarce counted trespass, which in times past hat been most justly
executed as hie treason. So it is I say that the destinies of our age have
brought forth a villainous deed, not the like read or heard before. No time
ever has seen a king slain by like treason, yet in the murder is something
that will rather frette thee, then make thee to marvel. Why should not the
casual hand of this enraged murderer accomplish the like, that the
premeditated and forecast counsel of the traitor has performed? There have
been some whom the wild boar has slain, some whom the stagge bring
entangled in the nets, some died by the unskillful cutting of a vain, some
with the stroke of a horse heel, and finally if we look narrowly unto it, we
shall find almost so many kinds and sundry deaths of kings, as there have
been princes. And therefore, I tremble not so much at the strangenes of this as
at the example thereof. I will not say, that thou the father of kings in
Christ, (for so thou love to be termed) have been grieved, mourned, wept,
and called upon God, the strong revenger of all iniquity, for this most heavy
chance, and misfortune of thy first begotten son, but (setting aside all
piety and natural affection) to have undertaken voluntarily and without
compulsion the defense of the murderer, maintained with thy authority,
arguments, and laws, the nocent innocence, of this accursed cut-throate, and
in remembrance of thy son, to have most cruelly inueighed against his dead
body, and this it is, Sixtus, which I cannot hear, read, or remember, with a
quiet and untroubled mind. Good God, I see in one crime, two offenses, two
heinous murderers, him first who most treacheroslic has assaulted his
natural Prince, then him who reuengeth not the destroyer of his son, but
excuses him, and is not contented to excuse him, but defends him, and does
not only defend him, but praises him, yea by a most exquisite and singular
comparison, canonizeth him amongst his Saints of Heaven. Avoid, avoid
therefore hence, all natural affection, Sixtus has banished these out of the
Roman Empire. As long as he reigns go visit the Tartarians and
Muskouites, and other more barbarous nations if there be any, here are none
that will intertaine thee, no not receive thee without thy peril. But O ye
Frenchmen, it were not manfully done, to leave unrevenged the death of your
most Christian King, who will suffer them to triumph with proud orations,
over the treacherous murdering of your prince? Let me be nothing esteemed
off, if I revenge it not, and requite this unto thee, Sixtus, give ear only
unto me, and that our posterity may know thee, and thy vile and bloody
excutioner, and al those that were of this conspiracy first hear in short and
true words the chance of this mighty Potentate, that by the greatness of the
murder, all our succession may judge him guilty hereof, that did defend it.

The Historiographers have written diverse causes of the original of the civil
wars, in the time of Charles the ninth, according as they were led with love,
and hate which they did bear unto the Potentates, and Nobility of France, yet
it is known to every man, that after the departure of Henry the third into
Polonia, the house of Guise chiefly the two brethren Frauncis and Charles,
Cardinals, through a desire of reigning, have corrupted first their own, and
then all the counsel of the Realm. For Empires first of all must be troubled,
and shaken before they can be overthrown and subverted. And from thence all
these civil wars have taken their beginning. At that present the Kings
house, was yet mighty and strong, with diverse brethren and kinsemen: unto whom
the Crown without contradicttion after the decease of the King belongs. And
unless they were all dispatched, the Guises knew very well that their hope was
but vain. Amongst the Kings kindred, Lodowick prince of Condy was most
feared, as one indewed with singular graces, and alone sufficient to sustain
all their attemptes, and to break and bring to naught all their desperate
enterprises. Who whether he now long since has left this world, to the good
or bad fortune of this Realm, through the popes authority, and ancient Roman
religion, having followed as they say the better, (for at that time there was a
great talk over all christendom, of a reformation of all heretical errors
and opinions) I know not. But first they set upon him accusing him of heresy,
and corrupting of religion, which then was a difficult and heinous crime, and
having him first sued in law, as an enemy of the apostolic Sea, presently
after persecuted him with sword and fire. He on the other side not disprouided
and destitute of courage, friends and help, (the new religion now being spread in all cities of France, and every day the number of his increasing, being
likewise aided by the counsel of the chiefest and best of the Realm, who
detested and hated the Guises great ambition, and suspected their power) did
valiantly withstand them. And here out is first come the unhappy distinction of
the names of Catholics and protestants, and the deadly and mortal division of
this Realm, which I fear me, can never be agreede again, unless by a long
peace, and great love, all causes of ambition, he removed and quite taken
away: broils now being raised every where, which the^ might have been easily
repressed, unless the fatal destinies of France had let it, the Guises
proclaim open war ayainst ye prince of Conde and al heretics, and easily
persuaded thereunto the king himself, and his mother, a very desperate and an
audacious woman. And now seeing that they could bring his M. to consent unto al
whereunto the thought good themselves, for the small experience which he dad,
caused presently all those whom they thought were adversaries unto their subtle
dealings, partly through fear and accusation of the like offense of heresy,
to void the court, and by all means sought to stir up the rest to civil
iarres with a hope of spoil and such like novelties. Call moreover Philip King
of Spain, and thy predecessor Sixtus, unto their aid. Promise unto the king
then occupied in the Low Countries, that France should nothing hinder or
molest him: and unto the Bishop of Rome an everlasting war against the
enemies of the holy Sea. For they persuaded unto themselves that their intent
could never, or hardly at the least be brought to pass, as long as the common
wealth flourished with peace and quietness, but it being once troubled and
with seditions, disquieted, should make it easy, and this their thought was
not amiss. For the Princes of the Royal blood being all dispatched, the
strongest and mightiest of whom, was now assaulted with open war, they hoped
that the rest should either die in war or for the affinity which they had
with the Prince of Conde in hope of the Crown, would soon depart from the
Court, and finally that then, Charles and his brethren but children, might be
without labor conuayed away and murdered. And to that effect they began
war, and with these torches have kindled first the fire of civil discord in
France: but the last destinies and extreme calamities of the Realm were not
yet come, for as in our bodies a dangerous disease is oftentimes long felt
before, and with diverse pains and grieves the forces thereof are assaulted and
wearied before they are broken and overcome: even so the like befalls with
Empires and kingdoms. But both the brethren departed first out of this world
before they could accomplish and make an end of their long practiced
enterprises. Francis died at the siedge of Orleans, at the threescore and three
years of his age, having left behind him three sons, Henry Duke of Guise,
Charles Duke de Main, and Lodouick a Cardinal not yet come out of their
childhoods. But in whom as there appeared sparks of domestical prowess, so
in them seemed to be no fear of vice. Unto whom he left not only good store
of treasure, and great revenues, but also a hope of a large Empire, his
damnable practices, and sparkles (...) war. But in the mean while the king
and his brethren grew in age, before the Lions whelps were capable of their
fathers ferocitie, and so France turning her former mind, began to worship,
honor, and obey her Princes, now come to full age and full of courage and
magnanimity, whom she never before had seen but children. But chiefly
respected Henry, whom comlines of body, perfect age, and valor in arms
commended and advanced to the government of outlandish Nations. And thus by
little and little their vain ambition has been repressed, but in tract of
time other occasions of evil were presented. Charles dies, whether by destime
or poison it is uncertain. And I have no leisure at large to discourse upon
this point, and to rehearse from the beginning this tragidie: but yet this is
most true, a little before his departure out of this world, seeing his estate
greatly weakened by the tediousnes of war and cruel murders and massacres every
day committed upon his subjects, and the treasure of this Reamle consumed and
spent, Italy and Spain laughing at it, inuaighed with sharp and threatening
words against the authors hereof, and this was peradventure the occasion of his
untimely death. Henry the third succeeded him, whom whether Polonia has
suffered with greater grief to depart from thence, or France received him with
more joy it is doubtful. He warned by his brothers example, as soon as he had
set and established the affairs of his realm in good order, gave his mind
wholly to the study of peace, knowing very well that riuill broils are
always good for them that affect crowns and kingdoms, but naught to them ye
reign and wear the^. From hence is come the first original of this mischief,
for thou and thine Sixtus would never commend the kings most wholesome counsel,
thy drifts tending to nothing else but by sword and fire to confirm thine own
sauegard, little regarding by what law or with what condition one rained so ye
those perished together with their crowns whom thou did hate and could not
abide. And so by little and little the remembrance of so many victories, and so
many bloud-sheds, committed for the Sea of Romes sake, grew stale, and
presently after envy began to swel in the peoples minds dasly corrupted by the
seditious fermons of Friars, not delaying only ye most godly vow of their
Prince, but infecting it. And so it was easy to make an entry for mischief
to follow. The Duke of Guise in ye mean time with his two brethren increased
in age power and favor by the Catholics, as their father was before, and at
the first commended themselves sundry ways unto them, and having prospered
reasonably under Henry being not yet come to ye crown, saluted courteously
every one that met the^, although one of ye simplest amongst the common people,
spoke to them, and left nothing undone to steal away the hearts of the
commontie, all true signs and tokens of an ambitious mind practicing and
attempting some novelties. Spread abroad false reports, to raise privy grudges
and displeasures amongst the Nobility: and finally Francis the kings youngest
brother being now departed out of this life either by sickness or fraud, ietted
to and fro through all cities beraied yet with the blood of those of the
reformed religion, fearing for their massacres a just revenge. Lamented the
common misery, and unless there should be looked unto in time, affirmed that
after the death of the king (which too true they said should be ere long) they
all should become subjects again of an Heretic, and endure all bondage,
misery, and flauery whatsoever. But that they would display their power
against it, and the promised and ready succor of Spain and Italy, to defend
and protect by it their liberties, and the Catholic religion: these things are
known unto every man, and the king himself has bin advertised of the^ by
diverse spies since the year 77. and yet for lack of punishment, as it is
often seen, grew marvelous strong. Let therefore the posterity judge whether
this is come to pass through too great a clemency, or by some fatal
negligence of all French men.

In the year 1585. Ianus temple being shut up in France, and a happy peace
flourishing in all the realm, no external or domestical enemy once known,
the Duke of Guise withal the house of Lorraine having conspired together, take
the weapons in haude, the only cause thereof was a crown, their cloak and
probable occasion, piety and religion, a care for the realm, now ill
governed, a pit to see the commontie with exactions pould and oppressed, and
an intent to reduce all things in good order. They having put this vizard upon
their rebellion, by their first writings published in their names, complained
of the public calamities, of the weakness of the kings friends, of the
Realms treasure wasted and spent, notwithstanding the daily increases of
tallages and tributes, and that the people were altogether unable longer to
endure this beauie burden. Besides nothing. Something by the way as concerning
religion and Heretics. For undoubtedly they would not that so many ennemies
should be raised up at once, thinking that the king had drawn hatred and envy
enough upon his head by the government of his realine, and that therefore
they had sufficient matter and occasion of war. It is most evident truly
through the private grudge which they did bear unto their king and the Duke
Espernon, that some small and casual trisles of anger have been the first
cause of these last troubles. In revenge whereof so many dead bodies, so many
murders, and finally the death of the king himself, and the ruin of the
whole Realine, have all scarce suffised. But warned by a Spaniard who milli^^ed
the order of making the accounts of the Realine, as also by thee Sixtus, that
looked for no benefit to fall unto thy share by this wars, but by the
overthrow of the Heretics, they change their Ensignos, and proclayme open
war against those of the reformed Religion.

Heereuppon presently the Pope sent his thunderboltes, whereby he excluded the
king of Navarre (at this present ruling in France) and the Prince of Cond^,
unheard; innocent, and thinking nothing such, from his Apostolic blessing:
but hereby may easily appear, that God and none of the Apostles were present
at the rash judgment of the cause. They now having turned their long, spoke
nothing more of the king, or his government but only in his singular
commendation. Extolled the prime of his age, admonished him of his former
valor and prowess, and with exquisite words showed that the memory of so
many victories, wherewith he had so ostentimes repressed and abated the courage
of the Heretics, was yet recont and fresh. That his time of rest was not yet
come, and that unto such a valiant and strong Prince the victory of the
battle, and the slaughter of a whole nation belonged. Moreover, they laid
before his eyes his (...) and want of children, and their miseries wherein they
were like to fall, if after the desease of such a most Christian king (with
dissembling wise they said that they greatly seared) they should be forced to
submitt themselves under the yoke and bondage of an heretic. Finally desired
his Majesty, that it would please him, to appoint Charles of Borbon Cardinal,
being weakened with age and sicke^^^^ haste unto the Crown rejecting Navarre:
And breaking the alliance and treaty of peace, with the heretics, should take
arms against them: which if he liked and would perform, they never would
refuse any due obedience unto him their lawful prince. Showed besides that they
had their swords ready, and sufficient wealth and aid, wherewith they might
not only revenge themselves ^ppon the Heretics, but also upon their
favorers. The duke of Guise having spoken thus, not farrying if the King would
further determine hereupon, having gathered forced for to assault those of the
reformed religion, made them indeed to march against the King himself,
dispossessed him partly by force and partly by policy, from such Cities as
he could, where the name of Luther or Calvin had never been heard, robbed
their treasure, imposed new tributes upon them, and finally where no ennemy
was, exercised all hostshty and eruchresse. The king in the mean time
destitute of courage and good counsel rather then of force, distristed
himself, for his corupted friends told him wonders of the Ginses power and
army, and feared him that and the catholics should but once hear the name of
Heretics, they would presently all retire, and go back from him. That he
should linger therefore a while, until he had heard the counsel of his
nearest friends, who with all speed if need required would soon provide all
necessaries for the war: and ouercom by the counsel of his mother, who
always had favored the contrary side, and fraighted by the Jesuits vain
superstitions was not brought but drawn thereunto. And so the articles of
peace were agreed upon, and concluded between him and the duke of Guyse, and
war intended against those of the reformed religion, unto whom by general
proclamation was commanded to depart at the appointed time out of the realm,
otherwise to stand to the adventure and hazard of their lives.

About the end of the same year great forces were raised up and enrolled, the
duke de Maine was ordained chief over them, and being sent into Guyan or
Aquitane, returned next year again with little good success, recalled, as
they say, by his brother, who impatient of all delays was (...) alike with
envy, anger, and ambition, cried, that the ennemie was not for to be sought
for, that he was at hand, and stood before the door, that the head of a
Prince only grieved him, and hindered his enterprises, and finally, that he
only was to be assaulted, emitting and leaving the other. And so rises again
against the king, being occupied in other wars: and that he could not
obtain by his first rebellion, by this he forces it. Complains, that his
brother was forsaken in Aquitane, frustrated, and destitute of men, money, and
munition: as also that he was not sent sooner against the enemy, before all
the treasure of the realm was spent for to lack nothing. That these were sure
arguments, that the Catholics were betrayed, that his Majesty's mind was
corrupted by ill counsel: and those whom he should love and embrace, that he
hated and despised them, and that therefore it could not be but he had
intelligence with the Heretics. And finally, if he rejected and disherited
not the king of Navarre, and the Prince of Condy, and openly would appoint and
declare a successor, that there was nothing remaining, that all good and godly
catholics should any longer commit their lives and safety unto the protection
of a dissembling Prince, who did all things with delay, and proclaimed war
with his tongue against them, and called for peace with his heart. This was
spread abroad, Soldiers are taken up, and again a new contracte of Peace
was to be made for agreement. The King at one time cumbred with two enemies,
thought it necessary, that with one of them an appoynment was to be concluded,
gave care again unto his mothers counsel: and again, by her means agreede
with the Guyse. He demeth him little, delivers unto him the demanded
Cities, and commands new forces to be taken up, to invade Aquitane the
dwelling place of those of the refournied Religion, and publishes again new
and cruel Ordinances and Statutes against them.

The Guyse now having obtained his purpose, and thinking that he was crept
far enough in the peoples favor, to undertake and enterprise whatsoever
pleased him: and that the Prince was brought into sufficient hatred, that all
things were set in a hurly burly, that the hearts of the Communaltie were
dismayed, and that now but little hindered him to come unto his pretense,
watched for a fit opportunity to bring to pass his long devised practices,
when Fortime almost dashed and threw him down unawares. For report was
spread, that a great army of high Germans was come already into the frontiers
of the Realm, to the aid and assistance of the reformed Religion. And
moreover, how the king of Navarre having repulsed and driven back nine armies
in the spare of two yearus, and overthrown the Duke of Ioicuse, made haste for
to go meet the Germans with his chrefest and chosen forces. Which report
made the Duke, his alies, and conspirators not a little amazed, fearing that
the king now better advised, and having gotten a fit opportunity to revenge
himself upon their pride and arrogancy, might turn both the armies upon
them, insufficient and altogether unable to resist and wythstand so great a
power, as also that they might be discomfited before, ere ever they should
perceive it. And their sear was not vain altogether. For at the same time the
King of Navarre had sent his Ambassadors unto his Majesty, requesting him to
use his, and the German forces against the common ennemie of the Realm. But
here it manifestly appears, that the King was never more betrayed then at
that present. Here sure tokens are to be seen of his corrupted and disloyal
counsel, which, if he had used the benefit of the time, should have without
any danger recovered altogether his former liberty, restored his realm to
her former grace, and established an everlasting peace amongst his Subjects.
But God had otherwise appointed it.

The Duke of Guyse at this time was forced to rest and pawse a while, but soon
after encouraged again, by the counsel of his especial friends, whom he
had always about the kings person, and who were privy unto all his secrets,
setting aside his fathers practices, had recourse unto his mothers policies.
He writes Letters unto his Majesty, and with an humble style, indeuoureth to
prove his mind to have bin gentle and tractable always, and never repugnant
unto any contract of peace. Further prays him to impute rather all things
past unto the destinies, then unto the malice of men, protesting also, that he,
and his, were always minded to honor, aid, and assiste their Prince, whose
death they feared therefore the more, because his successor was unknown, and
like to be far inferior unto him, and if they were resolved of one doubt,
that his Majesty needed not to doubt, but that all things then should prosper
and succeed according unto his own wishing. Promises him also a strong aid
against the inuading and approaching Germans, and with many words declares,
that the ancient enemies of the Realm were to be driven out, who heeing once
put to flight, they were like to enjoy an eternal and a joyful peace. This is
easily persuaded unto the king, his greatest friends about him, and especially
his mother stopping up the way always unto good counsel.

And by these means the King of Navarre his advice most profitable unto the
Realm, being rejected and neglected, an entry was made again unto all deceit
and disloyalty. The king assembleth a great army together, and with his
presence does encourage it, sends the Duke of Guyse before to stop the
passage unto the Germans, and if he could not bring them to a battle, should
at the least weary them with continual I kirmishes and invasions. The king
remained in the mean time about the river of Loyre. The German sorces marched
forward, and were come into the inward parts of the Realm without any
resistance, to the great fear and terror of all the country. When the same
fortune, which not long before had almost overthrown the Guyse, presents
unto him a far brauer occasion luckely to proceed in his enterprise. For the
ennemy being brought by some cross luck between the Loyre and the Seine,
and wearied with a long winter, continual floods and raines, want and
distress of al necessaries, were forced for their better safety without delay
to go over the river to join themselves with the king of Navarre his forces.
But the Duke of Guyse prevented and surprised them upon a sudden in the
night, made a great slaughter amongst them, and killed about twelve hundred of
them, takes many, and puts the rest to flight: and if Monsieur Chastillion
had not been there at that present, all this great army should have been
scattered and overthrown in one night: yet not wythstanding the weak remnaunt
marched forward. And the King jealous of the victory, commits one part of
his forces unto Espernon to pursue the ennemy, and himself followed not far
behind. But having understood the Germans shameful yielding, returns
again to Paris.

All storms of fear now ouerblowne and past, the duke of Guyse imboldened
with this unlooked for and good success, thought good not to seek herehy so
much praise, as thereby to procure all hatred and envy unto his Majesty. To
that effect secret reports were spread abroad, whereby this new conquering
Captain was exalted and lifted up unto the sky. The German spotles, to
wit their horses, weapons, and all other array were led and carried in
triumph through the Cities. And when the people were flocked together in
great troops, to see this new sight, there were always certain declarors and
tellers of the battle among them: The number of the dead persons and
ensigns, was augmented, the manner of the fight was made very difficult,
bloody, and dangerous for ye conquerors: and most of this was falls, for it is
well known that ye companies of Colonel Donon now heavy with wine and sleep,
were surprised and oppressed, where they had no place to fight, or to escape.
And that not one of the duke of Guyses soldiers were found wanting. Besides
after the great overthrow of so mighty an army, that such small remnants have
been able to overcome so many distresses, and come in safety to their iournies
end: that it came not by any fault that might have been in the duke of Guise,
but by the kings and the duke Espernons negligence and small care, unto whom he
had left the chase of the weak remnand of pages and scullions only, having
achieved himself all the difficulties of the war, and either slain or
taten the chosen and valliant Captains and soldiers thereof, And
notwithstanding all this, that by their means they were al safely arrived to
the king of Navarre, to deprive the victory of her due honor and praise, and
to hinder therewith the more the good commodities that might have ensued herby
unto the whole realm. That they at the first followed then for very shame, but
so slackely, that they that were already vanquished, might easily escape
without running. And now when they saw, that the hurt, weary, and sick men
could not fly away or escape, who should have al been put to the sword, or at
the least imprisoned, by the laws of arms and ordinances of the Realm, to
have given and granted unto them (for a counterfaite yielding and submission
only) their life's, horses, and furniture, therewith to invade the Realm
again, and moreover unto some of them all their goods. By these devises,
hatered and envy, being procured and provoked: the ill advised Prince, but to
late, acknowledging his error, in vain began to wish for this most fit and
neglected opportunity of reuengement, yet being come to Paris, spends the
rest of the winter in repayring and renewing of his forces, publishing an
expedition against those of the reformed religion, which he himself prepared
the next Summer following, either by these means to draw again unto him the
hearts of the commonalty altogether affectionated under the coullour of
religion unto the Guyse, or that he had determined to do it, importunated
thereunto by the Jesuits continual outcries, assuring him daily of certain
arguments of Gods wrath against the Heretics, and in brief a happy end and
issue of all his wars against them.

In the year eighty eight, which was feared should have been fatal unto all
the World, the Guise takes new advise and counsel, how to come to a happy
end of his long continued hope, and to enjoy the fruits thereof. Complains
that so oftentimes civil wars have been moved in daine against the king of
Navarre, whereof the issue was doubtful, the profit uncertain, or to late at
the least. That his Majesty could not be deceived, but could be oppressed,
and ye one of two ennemies once being dispatched, that with less labor the
other was to be ouerthrown and vanquished. That he had al things ready to
suppliant the first, and then afterward would fall upon him who was yet
remaining. That it was to be hastened, and not to be slepte upon. Begins
therefore now no less to hate and envy the King, then before he had done the
Heretics. That Fortune had offered him this good opportunity, which if he
should let it slip by, he might wish afterward for it, when it was past
recovery. Moreover (the Germans now repulsed) that nothing was remaining
that might cause him to fear. That al hope of out landishe aid and assistance
was cut off unto the King of Navarre, by whose fault all Germany and England
did cry out, that so great an army, so many Nobles, and such number of
valiant Captains and soldiers were discomfited and slain. And that the king
himself was sore wearied and broken with long during wars, and although
Conqueror of many battles, yet had lost notwithstanding all the chiefest of
his soldiers, and those that were escaped, either for want, and need, or for
a desire of quietness, wished only for peace. And that with them therefore
he should have but little to do: hereupon thinking most expedient not to make
any further delays, furiously takes now the third time the weapons in hand:
message is brought unto his M. and reports every where spread abroad, not as
before, that Cities are surprised, that the people rise in arms, that musters
are taken, and such like signs of mischief yet far off, and to be prevented
diverse ways, but that the Duke commueth in person himself. And no sooner was
it spoken, but he was seen in deed, arriueth in Paris very troublesomely
(where the king was at that time) where he had laid long before ready and
trusty ambushes, partly for the mutinous minds of that common people, as also
for the great number of conspirators in that City: as it is most certain that
no where kings and princes can be more easier oppressed then in their
imperial Cities. But the first night of his arrival he was quiet, wearied
(God having so disposed it, for the Prince his safeguard yet altogether
unprovided) that all things were not yet current and ready. But next day
morning sounds alarm, puts the kings garrisons to the sword, and marches
directly to the Louure his Majesty's palace, with the mutinous and bloody
people to besiege their sworn Prince. The king amassed at this sudain accident
and vpror, unto whose honor it stood not to fly away, not to his safety to
expect his enemy we disadvantage in no indifferent place, yet we the lord
chief Justices soldiers, and with his guard of Switzers resists their
assalts for a day or twain. But seeing ye people to arm themselves against
him, and al things to go backward we him and no hope of any help or succor,
escaped safely among the enraged clamours of the desperate multitude, crying
nothing but sword and fire, and came to Lions. The welminded and affectionated
subjects unto their King, could not brook and bear such an outrageous
injury. Their hearts turned therefore upon a sudden, and the case now
altered, do pity their Prince. The pillars of the Realm, the nobility, the
commons, and the better and sounder part of the clergy came in post unto his
Majesty. They exclaim all against the house of Lorraines great presumption,
and said that punishment was to be done which should equal, or rather exceed
the greatness of the offense. They pronuse unto the king all aid and
furtherance, if it would only please him (giving over all other, yea rather
the heretics themselves who never dared the like) to ouergoe this grief. The
king subject unto his destiny, seems to be tourhed with this readiness of
his affectionated subjects, but yet is nothing moved with it. But thanketh
every one very soberly, as if he had had no need at all, answers quietly
unto them, that he wanted neither courage nor force to revenge his private
injuries, and that it was not needful to sustain two civil wars in one
realm, where one sufficed, and was rather too much. And herwith sent the^ al
home again, intending again reconciliation. If the posterity will believe one
telling the truth, let it without doubting believe this with me, that nothing
more touched and moved the hearts of Frenchmen, then to see their Kings great
patiency, not despising, but scarce approving the most ready minds of his
subjects, in the reuengement of the public and common shame and dishonor. Let
the posterity also upon my word, holdly say that Oueene Katherine his mother,
was the only cause of his deadly sound and vnsensiblenes, unto whose faithful
help and aid, the Guyse took his refuge, as soon as he perceived that his
matters would not forge, and that the common people were altered for this (...)
done unto the king, and that the Nobility, and the chiesest of his began to
be discomforted, discouraged, and draw back from him. Now this third time
Henry gives place unto his mothers advice, and hearkeneth unto her counsel:
now this third time an agreement is concluded with great joy of all the
conspirators, who thought it to be no small favor thus easily to have escaped
deserved punishment for their mutiny and rebellion. But the wise yet feared in
general that this wound could not be closed up and healed without a foul
searre remaining, or that he who had once presumed to beat his Prince out of
his Imperial City, should not want audacitie to attempt some further matter.
All things now pacified, a Parleament is proclaimed and published, generally to
determine upon the common affairs of the land, upon an agreement of the
administration of the Realm, for assurance of succession of the Crown: and
finally that these small tinnults and iarres (for so the conspirators of the
kings overthrow and sworn his bane termed it only,) might have an end and
rease among the Catholics, that a mortal war should be intended and
concluded against the Heretics. But the king and the Guise, had far
different and contrary meanings: the Prince his intent was, now having
recovered again his authority, to bridle the common enemy of France
condemned by full Parleament. But how difficult and hards this was to do, and
how full of trouble and danger, the event and issue thereof has taught it
unto us. The Guise on the otherside to exclude the king of all government by
the authority of the whole estate, that unto him only (Navarre and the rest
of the blood royal supplanted) the administration of the whole Realm might be
committed. And so far he had almost brought it, none being come to this
general Counsel, but those that were of the conspirarie.

And so the Parleament was kept at Bloys, where the king showed at large in the
face of the full assembly, his great affection toward the Catholics, his
benefits sundry times most largely bestowed upon them, how many victories be
had gotten upon the Heretics, how oftentimes he had altogether discomfited and
put them to flight, how many thousands of them he had sent to Hell, being in
manner but a child: and now a man that he had no less stomach and courage
then he had in his younger age. And that he never was minded to suffer in his
realm any religion, contrary to the service of God. But that he had been forced
through the peoples great misery and want, wearied, and discoraged with so
many civil wars to dissemble his desire and meaning. And to delay all
things till a fitter time and opportunity, which could not have been urged
at that instant without great danger. But that he had also learned by sundry
tryalles, and long experience, that by peace and general quietness, the
corrupted minds of the inconstant people were with less labor drawn unto
godliness, then when by the sound of war once noysed abroad, and by the
brightness of swords and armours once seen and perceived great liberty to al
licentiousnes, was given to mutinous and seditious heads: that the church was
not to be reformed and purged by villainies, wherewith all wars were for the
most part infected, but chiefly the domestical and civil broiles: But that it
was to be done, by godly manners, good examples, by the preaching of the word
of God, by humility, and fervent prayers. That this has been his only mind,
even when the Guyse in the year 1585. took first the weapons in hand, troubled
the people and common peace, whereunto he was not yet altogether repugnant: but
forced for the general welfare of his subjects, that he armed himself full sore
against his will, and that nothing now was remaining which was not consumed and
wasted by wars. He reckoned them the armies since the time of 3. years, and how
much money there was spent in: and that it grieved him very much, that so many
valiant soldiers were destroyed, so great a tresure consumed in waste, wherewith
a great kingdom might have been joined to his. But thus far more, that he had
in the mean time received more harm and damage by his friends, then ever he
had done by his enemies, and that the issues of his wars and victories had bin
rather hindered and stopped by the ambition of some, then by the forces and
power of the enemy prevented. That he was notwithstanding fully determined not
to lay down the weapons, before he had overthrown and quite rooted out all the
rebels, although they all should stand against it, and should be feared that
it might turn to the utter ruin and destruction of the whole realm: that at
the least this cloak and coullour being taken away, he might be able to hold
and keep every man from hence forward in their duty and obedience. That
therefore they should determine by what means, what money, and soldiers this
might be done most commodiously. That they were called to that intent. As
touching the other affairs of the realm, as the reformation of the Clergy,
of the treasure, easy subsidies, tributes, and fallages, sets down
ordinances and causes thereof writings to be made. The Commissioners and
assigns barken unto the Kings doubtful Oration with a merry and gnatonical
countenance, and with many flattering words having praised him in whose
overthrow and undoing they were assembled and sworn, demanded a certain time
to determine upon it. And in the mean while ye this was a doing not without
the great expectation of all men, ludos hominibus dens facit, they feed the
king only with fancies.

The Guise fearing that the Prince (provoked with so many injuries) would not
suffer long these delays, and that he would seek, and find means for
revenge: and seeing that all had bended their eyes upon him, and expected for
some greater things which should far exceed the first: that Naua^^e without
justice and law unheard and not to be heard (...) rejected and condemned: that
nothing was wanting but to dispatch the Kings simul ardet and audet, both most
(...) desires it, and dares it.

He charged every man being of the conspirators to provide, and prepare the
rest. This charge he undertook himself, this burden he laid upon his own
shoulders: And thinking ye now the time was come to make a happy end of his
fathers before, but now his enterprises, calls the chief of the conspiracy,
amongst who^ were Ledonick the Cardinal his brother and the Archbishop of
Lions the chiefest. Unto them and unto some few other he declares and shows
in what state his matters stand, says that al things are brought to some
effect, that nothing is obstant but the Prince only, besides that he was driven
to such extremities, that either he or the king must perish. That they
therefore should see, whether he were to be dispatched, or until such times
imprisoned till all things were confirmed and established for a new
government. And that there was no other mean or medium to be found. They cry
all that this is not to be delayed, that fetters and prison are altogether
unprofitable, that no cave or den how deep soever, were able to keep close
so great and mighty a potentate, as long as he lived would always thirst
after revenge, but as soon as he should be dispatched, that new devises should
be practiced, new counsels taken, and that every man would rather fall again
to their private, present, and sure commodities, then to attempt old and
dangerous enterprises. But contrariwise if he were kept prisoner, it would
seem cruel and strange unto the common people, and altogether intolerable.
That they of late after the kings flying away from Paris, had found and learned
by experience that pity prevailed more then favor. Finally that hereupon
they needed not long to beat their brains: but that he was to be conuayed
away and dispatched out of hand, Hereunto they all condescend. Now upon the
death of their Lord the servants determine, the anointed of the Lord and
reuerented of so many Nations is bequeathed unto their bloody swords. The day
now appointed, and their desperate wickedness sealed with an oath, they all
depart. It was not needful to have any bewraying hereof, for it was not
unknown, but unto them which were removed into the utmost parts of Europe,
that this was the Guises pretense, and had been long since. To what end tended
else the arming of his rebellious bands, so often against his Prince? But
certain it is that he was advertised by the Duke de Main yet living of his
brothers ungodly practices with these words: that his Majesty should take heed
of a furious and desperate mind. And one of the conspirators (as it is most
always seen in suchlike actions) moved in conscience, disclosed unto his
Majesty the whole conspiracy, the day appointed, the tokens, the conspirators
themselves: but in so short a time, that he had scarce opportunity to escape
this imminont danger. The king now destitute of al means of deliberation, and
beaton with his own rod, ouerthrowed not the conspirators, but prevented them
in one day.

There was hope that this burning fire of civil broils should have bin
quenched, seeing that the flaming torches of these tumults were now
extinguished. And it pleased God, Sirtus, that France should now enioie peace,
but not thy Holiness. Hereupon the conspirators, who were not the better, but
the greater part began to hang down their heads, to seek holes to hide
themselves, and through fear to run to their holds and places of defense.
One part gave over their enterprise, and brake their faith given. But shortly
after when they saw, that the Prince by some fatal and disasterous leuitie,
used no further rigor against them, that he was satisfied with the punishment
of two only, that he had but imprisoned six, and had sent away the rest
untouched: and that the siege of Orleans which he had begun to batter but
slackely, was raised by the coming of the Main. Then suddenly they began to
run as mad men, began to strike alarm, to surprise Cities, to slander
the name and credit of their Prince, with diverse outrageous speeches: To
disanull and abolishe the Laws, the Magistrates, and all that was royal in
the Realm, all that was sacred and ancient, and to induce new, strange, and
intolerable ordinances. Finally, driven with a senseless fury, to exercise
tyranny and cruelty against themselves: insomuch, that almost no City or
town has escaped, their own Citizens massacres, robberies, banishments,
proscriptions, and yet far greater cruelties then the enemy himself could
have imagined. And this through a just judgment of God, justly taking
vengeance, for so many murders, sheading of innocent blood, and innumerable
villainies by them committed. And by these moanes, a more desperate, and bloody
war then ever was before, is now renewed. The Main who a little before had
been the bewrayer and accuser of his brothers treason, is chosen chief of
these enraged and desperate companies. When upon suddenly the whole Realm
begins to rebel. And truly (freely I would have it to be spoken) by the
kings own fault, who ever had rejected al good, wholesome, and profitable
counsel, before he was driven to these extremities. Parts gave unto the rest
an example of rebellion, as it was reason, she being the first, enriched with
sundry gifts of kings, and the imperial of the Realm. All the rest followed,
few only excepted. And as they were before striving who should be more
affectionated unto his prince, so now they contend who shall exceed in
outragiousnes against him. And to the end that nothing should be wanting to the
fulness of their treachery, they require and seek for thy authority Sixtus,
for the judgments, of the divines, for the consent of the clergis, and al was
presently at their command. Urban, one of the Magistrates in Paris, demanding
in the full assembly of th^se of the Sorbonne, Whether the Frenchmen could be
godly and honestly released from their other made unto the king. Answer was
made, that they could. This answer is brought unto the Magistrate, and with
drawn swords is commanded to approve the same. The Senate flatly denies such
a wicked act to be lawful and worthy of the ancient loyalty of France. And
sitting a little upon it, the mutinous people brake open the gates of the
palace, and self not upon one or two of the Magistrates, but upon them all,
and cast the whole bench in prison, the only majesty of the Realm. Presently
a new Counsel is chosen, which approouing the answer of the ungodly divines,
discharges the people of their oaths: thrust the king out of his kingdom. The
Clergy commends this new counsel, and presently hereupon the noise of the
Popes thunderbolte is heard, rolling from the high Capitol, and threatening
foorthwyth, as they said, the overthrow of all the principal mountains of
France.

In the year 1589. the king being at that instant at Blois, tidings was
brought unto his Majesty, that Paris, Roan, Lions, Toulouse, and the cities of
the Realm were all revolted, and that not one was remaining which was not
insected with some notable treachery. It was told unto his majesty also how
Brisac, Boidaulphin, and the lord Chastre, whom he had suffered to go home
untouched upon their oaths upon the Guyses death, had broken their promise so
solemnly confirmed, and were revolted to the enemy. Moreover, that the
Spanyard, the Italian Princes, the Dukes of Loraine and Sauoy, together with
the enraged and furious people had sworn the Guises reuengement. That he was
not in safety in Bloys, wheresoever be turned himself, that all places were
surprised, and untrusty. That at the one side the conspirators did press him,
at the other side the king of Navarre with a great power came to invade the
realm, being already at Samure, and had taken all the cities thereabout.

The king thus crossed with so many troubles and adversities at once, pensive
what to do, and put aside from al other hope, is forced to apply the uttermost
remedy to an extreme fore and disease, and that which he had neglected in the
full prosperity of his wealth, power, and government, craves now voluntarily,
being almost dispossessed of his crown and kingdom. Calls (not without gods
appointment) to his aid the king of Navarre his mortal enemy, but his most
necessary and profitable friend, if long before he had used him. He, although
greatly-iniured and offended, although so oftentimes at the Guyses request, by
him assaulted with war: presently unlooked for, comes to the king his
brother, with a chosen army, not only great in number, but also in valor, so
that every common soldier might have supplied the room of any officer. A
great change is now again to be seen: for at the arrival of this mighty
prince and unlooked for army, the hearts of all the good, being herewith
encouraged, and of the conspirators terrified: de Maine himself (to repress
and stay by his presence the common report of the people, complaining already
against the intolerable insolences of the soldiers, and feeling a dearth of
all manner of victuals and necessaries, commonly the only causes of vproares and
sedisions in great cities) is constrained to return again to Paris, with his
mutinous companies which he had brought from thence into the territories of
Tours, to place them every where in garrisons. His departure was not unlike a
cowardly running away, the K. of Navarre following him so near upon his
heels, that he put all the hindermost of the^ and all straglers to the sword.
His majesty in the mean time fortified with a power of Switzers, and incoraged
with some good success against the rebels, comes in person in his camp,
and marches directly to Paris with all his forces, to punish them for their
treachery and rebellion. Help comes to him from all parts, his bands
increase daily in number, fame, and power. The state of the realm thus suddenly
changed (as the hearts of men are commonly inconstant and wavering) the chief
cities begin to entreat upon peace: the German and Italian Princes, to send
ambassadors, to wish well to his M. to promise him money and men, and some of the
first conspirators also through despair fly to his mercy. All things
finally, fall contrary unto the Guises expertatio^s, now out of all hope to
look any more, as long as the King lived, for any condition of agreement, or
surety of life.

The conspirators all begin to tremble at this new and sudden chaungement
doubtful what to do, or to undertake: yet the ringleaders of the rebellion
assemble together in counsel, to determine upon the extremity of their
affairs. One among the rest, whose name shall be known and spread abroad by
his execution, declares the danger wherein they live, what they have in
France less trusty. That the minds of the nobility were mutable and
inconstant, falling always on fortunes side. That the fearful Cities could
not be kept faithful unto them, unless they were partakers of the like
rebellion and treachery, and if liberty were given unto them, that ere long
they would reuolte to the king again. That the clergy was covetous and never
did give but little of their own unto their kings, that therefore there was but
small hope that they would give more unto them that could and might but
entreat for it. That this was their case at home: from abroad less hope was
to be looked for. That the Spaniard was old, and careful for the quietness
of his own family, unto whom it was more surer, that France were troubled,
then usurped by any, but himself. That the Italian Princes were circumspect
and wise, and those of Germany covetous and misers. That the Pope was subtle,
crafty, and inconstant, greedy for his own gain, and turning with every blast
of Fortune. That therefore all his hope stood in himself, if they had any
good success that they should want nothing, but otherwise, that they needed
not to look for any help and safety but in their heels and flight. Finally
that by the death of one King all their affairs might be repaired, and that
only was to be intended and labored, how and by what means the Prince was to
be dispatched or murdered. That there was no other remedy for the redress of
their distressed estate Hereunto they apply all their wit and industry, and
there are not found wanting some, who offered themselves to be ministers of
this villainous treachery. Many are solicited and provoked thereunto by great
promises, according as they had a quickness of hand to perform such an act,
and a desperate audacitie of mind to dare undertake it. Amongst them al,
Sixtus, is found Clement the well-beloved, a Friar Iacobin, fit and ready for
such a treacherous enterprise, yer trusting not so much upon his own
boldness, wherein not withstanding he greatly did excel all his
fellow-friars: then knowing that Friars, but chiefly those of his order, had
always had a free acces unto his Majesty, where other very seldom were
admitted but at certain howrs. This from his youth of having been brought up
in the monastery very-poorely, has given oftentimes notable tokens of his
ungodly inclination and vilde disposition (which many have heard out of the
Deanes own mouth) and for his lewdness, by their order of discipline has
been often diversely punished, yet nothing to his amendment, was most often
taken in stews and whore houses, oftentimes assaied to run away. No
godliness, piety, or learning he had, no not so much as the knowledge of the
French letters, which any ways might have commended him. Which I think good to
be spoken of this accursed murderer, that our posterity may judge, whether thy
words are worthy of a sacred mouth, that does not make God only himself privy
of manslaughter, (pardon I crave O Iehoua) but farther do presume to say,
that he has communicated unto a desperate bloudshedder the gifts of his
spirit, and such motions of the mind, which have been granted only unto his
Prophets and Apostles. This Friar now sent out of Paris, goes directly to
the Camp, upon this prouiso notwithstanding, that all those that were
suspected to be of the Kings side, should be kept fast within the City,
whereupon his life did stand altogether. Those whom be met first, sold them,
that he brought letters and writings from certain Parisians who were greatly
affectionated and known unto the King, that they contained matters of great
importance. And that he besides had other things, to be disclosed unto none
but unto his Majesty: heruppon was brought unto the king with like facillity,
as all the rest of his order were before. Greeteth the king but risen, and yet
scarce ready, and at such a time, as he was wo^t to be alone, delivers the
letters, the which when his M. had perused, demanded him what news he brought.
The Friar falls upon his knees (the king at that present sitting in a chair,
and inclining his ear to hear what he would say) stabbed him with a knife
which he had made and poisoned for that purpose. The prince hereuppon cries
out, the Lords presently come running into his chamber, after many wounds slay
this cursed and most miserable wretch Clemens, as also him that came with him,
although the king did most earnestly forbid it, for to learn by them, the
order of the conspiratis, the signs tokens, and conspirators, who if they were
known, as no double they shall be yet hereafter: I can not tell, Sixtus,
whether^ thou shall be able to shake from thy soldiers the suspicion of this
bloody crime, or at the least to have been the inuentor of this ungodly
counsel. But the author of truth has kept it to himself till the time of thy
punishment. Great heaviness and sorrow was seen in all the Camp, but great
joy among the ennemy, whose rejoicing voices were heard at that instant,
demanding one of another whether the Friars knife was sufficiently sharp or
not. The King thus wounded was laid in his bed, where he yielded by his ghost
unto God the next night following, having before made his will and set al
things in good order.

Here have you heard the end of this mighty Prince, and here may you behold
as in a looking glass, the overthrow of a whole Realm. I see many things in
it to be lamented: Wheresoever I turn my self, I can perceive nothing but a
dreadful horror, a cruel, and blouddy spectacle, yet nothing more heavily
does present it self before us, then thine Oration, Sixtus, an overplus to the
common grief. Far be such a shame from us (let it suffice us, to have
lost a good Prince, and that by our own fault and negligence) as to suffer
the name of the dead to be slandered and defamed, and the Monuments of so many
worthy acts destroyed. Therefore I demand first of thee Sixtus, by what laws
that I shall contend with thee? With Christian laws? But what have thou to do
with Christ, whose birth and burial thou ^landerest with a most detestable
murderers comparison? With the laws of nature? but by what bands of nature
can be vpholden the maintainer of wilful murder? How then, with the civil
laws? The statutes of Princes and the civil laws have enacted diverse and
severe punishments unto those that offended but by chance: but unto those
that revenged their private quarrel by their own authority, fearful
torments. What punishments do they alot then unto those who violat and
overthrow the welfare af a common wealth, truly almost incredible. But I see
that I am constrained to seek out new laws to deal with thee, I am ready for
it. Thou the author of new offenses, shall be my law and witness, Europe the
court, and the Heavens the Judges, and upon these equal conditions I will
plead against thee. Come then and hearken first unto this, It seems very
strange unto me, and therefore make me somewhat better acquainted with it,
that thou so oftentimes vsurpest the word of Gods judgment. Could not this
suffice thee, to know God to be the best of all goodness? but to say that he
willed such a detestable and wicked act. In deed we see every where his
wonderful judgments: and we know that Princes the larger their government
has been, the greater accounts they have to make. Besides if kings had
committed any offense, that not only themselves did smart for it, but
sometimes all their subjects felt the punishment thereof. Both is to be seen
in the holy Scriptures. I will not deny, but that this prince has suffered
deserved punishment, if thou do regard God only, in whose eyes all things
are corrupt, naught, and crooked, nothing entire, or undefiled,. But leave the
judgment hereof unto God, not unto thy self, Sixtus. How know thou whether
this is in steed of a blessing and benefit, which thou think to be a curse,
and a punishment. Did not Josias also die an untimely death? does not God most
often call them first unto him whom he loves: Are tirants not seen oftentimes
to reign and live longest? and good princes seldom come to great age?
Superfluous, nay too curoius it were, Sixtus, to search and examine these
things, and more impious to judge them. But let it be so, I grant this unto
thee. Shall therefore the excuse and cloak of Gods judgment, protect and
defend ye cause of a murderer? the king of France for his offenses has
deserved some heavy punishment at Gods hands does it follow therefore ye he is
to he accounted godly, great, famous, happy, and worthy the title of an
Emperor, whosoever of the common people the most abject and vilest, shall have
murdered his Prince? Then with thee that son shall be accounted innocent,
that is a revenger of his fathers offense by his fathers death: and the
indignation of those children esteemed just spilling the blood of their
parents in Gods quarrel. What? is he worthy any longer to be reverenced and
honored with the title of a father, who likes the example of natural
affection violated and quite extinguished? Herewith thou art touched Sixtus,
but wherefore art thou so soon afeard, thou have no cause yet to tremble, these
are but toys and trifles, come but near, for to hear that which shall not
make thee pale, but altogether senseless. Let first the laws of blood and
nature, which are the sacred bands of human society depart and go aside,
for as long as they are present I have no reason to speak any word at all. I
grant again that it is lawful by thy laws to kill parents condemned by
judgment, and an executioner not to be wanted in the city, as long as ye
offenders son is found present. Let thy judge then pronounce sentence and
say, That lawfully the son may kill the father, but let him add unto it at
the least, accused, noted, and condemned of a notorious offense, as an enemy
unto the common wealth, that by these means the private laws of a family may
be disanulled, by those which concern the public utility. But contrariwise
if thou destroyest the public commodity by a public offense, away with thy
laws, for they cannot be exogated with the welfare of a common wealth. Let us
now see then: Here lies wallowing in his blood, not the father of a private
family, but he of a great kingdom: not the grief of one household, but the
heaviness and sorrow of a whole realm most trecherously procured. And yet
do thou commend this? and say that he is murdered worthily? Well let it
be so, so that he for whom we mourn be too worthy for to die after such a
manner. But what was the offense in the revenge whereof, the divine, the
civil, the common, and private laws did cease and loyter? Thou say that he
has commanded Lodouick the Cardinal, the Guise his brother to be executed,
whose consecrated head was not to be touched but only by full authority from
the Bishop of Rome. Thou cruel beast do thou say that it is not lawful for
a King, ruling only by Gods grace and authority to punish traitors against
his Majesty, and convicted so oftentimes to have troubled the public peace?
and that it is permitted unto a graceless Friar to stabbe a Prince, for to
have justly executed a Cardinal? What say ye to this O ye Princes of Europe,
upon whose necks this cruel and bloody Lion treads. If he were to be
punished, it was not to be done after that order, witnesses were to be
produced, the offender was to be heard, judges to be chosen and no have was to
be made upon the execution of so great a Potentate. As if he wanted witnesses,
by whose ambition now 3. years together France has been disquieted with
civil wars: but his execution was to be delayed, to what end? To the
troubling of good men, to the murdering of his Prince, and to the ruin and
overthrow of the whole realm, all which but a day before was prevented. But
hear sirrah, by what law do thou exempt thy disciples of common justice more
then any other? Forsooth that the laws should show rigor against every poor
wretch for every small trespass, and that it should be lawful, unto Priests,
Bishops, and Cardinals to commit great and heinous crimes without offense? That
Princes ordinances should have no jurisdiction over them? If they offended that
they should make laws for their own purpose? The example pleases me, and
verily I think it to be so altogether, after the saying of the Evangelist,
that we should flollow the words but not the works of those that sit in the
cheer of Moses. But he, Sixtus, that was both God and man, thy better and
greater, scorned not to appear before the tribunal seat of an earthly Judge,
and being brought into judgment, complained not of the Judge. James and
Andrewe Apostles, and Saint Stephen a Martyr, have submitted them selves under
the laws, And Saint Paul being imprisoned defended not his liberty by the
preeminence of an Apostle, but by the title of a Citizen of Rome. But I know
what thou will answer hereupon that Christ and his Apostles had not so great
a liberty, as the Church has at this day, it is true: Well, seeing that the
blind and ignorant ages have ordained this, let us bear the burden which our
ancestors have laid upon our shoulders, let the Clergy rejoice in her
freedom, but let them exercise their liberty of offending only between and
upon themselves, and let Princes and their subjects be safe from their
audacitie, and the common wealth void of treachery and such like devilish
practices. If not, hear our laws and the severe ordinances of our Kings, who
have exempted always from your privileges, public crimes and offenses of
treason, and such other like conspiracies which might turn to the damage of
the common wealth. Hear the words of thy predecessor Innocent. Qui de
Ecclesia aliquem exemerit, vel in ipsa ecclesia, vel loco, vel cultui,
Sacerdotibus, and ministris aliquid iniuriae importauerit ad instar publici
criminis and laesae Maiestatis accusabitur, and conuictus seu confessus
capitali sententia a Rectoribus prouinciae puniatur. What do thou answer
hereupon, art thou not yet convicted, do thou demand examples to confirm
it. Peruse the monumentes of thy Predecessors, and then yield some reason
wherefore it be not as lawefull unto a king to do the like in his Realm,
which was permitted unto Nicholas the fifth in the Church against Porcarius and
Sarra, both famous knights of Rome, unto Plus against Carrapha and Rebiba
Cardinals, against Palian and Alphius noble Earls of Italy, which unto many
other? Whose steps are yet to be seen in diverse places: nay unto thy self?
that have seen Rome slowing with running streams of blood, and many Noble
men's heads to stand upon poales upon the gates of the City. But lo yet once
I am mistaken, and now the third time I confess that thou have right.

Without doubt it was a heinous offense for a King to have punished a
Cardinal, although a rebel, a traitor, laying ambushes to murder his Prince,
tempering poison to dispatch him, heyring villains to perform the deed. All
these are purged and quite washed away with the sacred oil of Chrisme,
wherewith whosoever is anointed is set free for ever from all authority and
secular power. He therefore that shall have touched but with his least finger,
one sealed with this noble and worthy caractar, I affirm with thee, that God
himself is not able to deliver him from danger. But likewise grant this unto
me, Sixtus, that all these offenses, slanders, and accusations, wherewith in
great heaps thou chargest the king, are contained and included in the death
and execution of both the Guises, and this only excepted, him to be altogether
blameless and innocent: which if thou do grant me, I demand of thee
likewise, wherefore did thou not only foretell long before the doleful kind
of death of this Prince, but did wish for it. Wherefore call thou Ioiosa
and Lenocurtius Cardinals, and him of Paris witnesses of thy vnluckly
south-saying: what curse of thee had the poor Prince deserved, at that time
when thou did see Ioiosa and Lenocurtius? At that time the Guyses were not
yet executed, Navarre was not yet sent for, no truce was made with the
Heretics: for what occasion then, as a dismal and filthy Owl did thou
foreshow an unaccustomed and shameful end of his life? Did not he proclaim
war against the Heretics in the year 85? Was not the Guise made chief of
the whole army, to the ruin, and overthrow of the whole Realm? Were not the
German forces discomfited? what was there omitted? because he would not
forsake and be deposed from his crown, and go to prison, because he would not
commit the government of his realm unto the Guyse, or unto the Spaniard:
only therefore by a pretty allusion thou have destinated him to an extreme
punishment, as the last of his name and family. Thou scorner and mocker of our
grief, come hither: will thou go about with nightcrowes to mollify thy
words, and hinder with a subtle eloquence the deserved rigor, and punishment
due to a heinous offense? By these means thou defilest most filthely the
remembrance of him, whom so long for his descent, for his worthy acts both
done at home and abroad, the destinies of this Realm have advanced to
imperial dignity and promotion, and so thou requitest him with slanders, by
whose grandfathers and ancestors thy sea has been ouercharged and laden with
innumerable benefits. Heyda Sixtus, thy advice pleases me, and thy wit
worthy only of such a high Bishop as thou art. But here I appeal unto all
these Princes that are living at this time, and also unto them that shall
hereafter come to read these our writings, that they may acknowledge with me,
the wonderful judgments of the Lord, and the mockeries and changes of
fickle fortune. The mightiest Prince of Europe is murdered: and live he
should yet, if long agone he had not norished his bloodshedders with his own,
and with the blood of the whole realm: and whose lives, manners, and exercises
he loved more then his own welfare, by their fraud, sword, and treachery he
is deprived of his life. He is gone (oh horrible) by their means, whose
safety, when only he intended, neglected his subjects and his own welfare.
And besides are not yet ashamed to say (but too too bold) that by their
devises the Realm falling to decay, might have been repaired and supported?
His ghost is accused but by him, whom he has defended with all carefulnes,
being upon this world, whom he loved most dearly, and whom he reverenced above
measure far more then he was worthy of. The doleful monuments of his love and
loyalty toward thee are yet extant, whereof I would to God that the remembrance
could be extinguished and quite defaced. To what end tended so many civil
wars, so many massacres, so many proscriptions which France has suffered,
then only that thy wealth might remain untouched, and all thine might live in
everlasting security. And yet funeralles, and the last home of the body is
denied him. Moreover, from yearly prayers (from whence no enemy ever has
been barred) he is excluded, and by those at whose request we have seen him so
oftentimes humbly, but not Princely walk barefoote, without Scepter or
Crown, and his sword downewarde. For whose dwelling and abiding places he
complained that his kingdom was not great enough, for whose welfare he
himself has not only prayed most oftentimes, but has emoyned unto his
people to do the like. I will now make an end in one word. None could meet
him that were as welcome unto him as Friars, none loved the order of Priests
more entirely then he: and of him no body was more esteemed of, reverenced,
and honored then the bishop of Rome. And unto him his destinies have procured
a friar to be his murderer, priests his deadly ennemies, and the Pope his
accuser. I crave pardon of thee, O natural affection (if it be lawful to
argue upon the death of my Prince in a public grief) if this be the argument
of my meditations.

I will come anon unto thee Sixtus, when I shall be resolved of this point:
wherefore do thou deny unto a dead Prince the gift of a little dust, and
comfortable prayers unto his soul? What? Art thou so obstinately angry and
offended with him, as to show extreme cruelty upon his ashes? Leave his body
to be torn at pleasure unto thy bloody butchars, let his soul enjoy at the
least eternal rest: to desire that both be cast away, is too unnatural,
rigorous, and cruel.

Can the high Bishop not be appeased with less punishments? I demand
whether this be godly and christianlie spoken, O ye Princes of the earth give
ear unto me.

The holy Bishop of Rome denounces by Apostolical authority, that he has
opened the gates of heaven to James Clement, for to have murdered the most
christian King of France, and that unto the dead body of the King worthily, the
pomp of funeralles, and the honor of burial may be denied; yea, that less
is, prayers and songs. For to have denied unto the Guyses the goueruement of
the Realm at his request. Therefore what King soever, whether he be an
Heretic or Catholic, if presently he disposes not his Crown at the
pleasure of the high Priest, to give it unto him, unto whom it shall be
commanded him, let him look for no better end in this life, and in the life to
come. And whosoever shall have oppressed, by sword, or poison, secretly, or
openly, valiantly, or by deceit, any Prince, Emperor, or Monarch, not obaying
our sacred thunderbolts. Let him as a star with a new shining light, increase
the number of the stars in the firmament. This is the will of Christ his vicar.
The successor of S. Peter and S. Paul Apostles.

What need have we of thee (O Christ) if eternal life can be obtained not by
thy blood, but by that of Kings and princes, if not by a cross, but a knife
the way of heaven is opened unto Friars.

Let the ghosts of Luther and Calum come to hear this, that by these joyful
news and tidings they may ease at the least, and mittigate the grief of their
pains if they suffer any. But now I come from the footepath unto the high way
again. It seems but a matter of nothing unto Sixtus, to dally with the
accusation of a most heinous offense, under the couller of Gods judgments,
and under a counterfaite and fained authority drawn from the holy Scriptures:
but he does add examples thereunto, to the end the accursed traitor might
become famous for ever, and not common only, and of such sorts of persons,
but by whom the acts of Alexander and Caesar might be illustrated and
commended. I let pass willingly that which he has rehearsed of the
conception, death, and resurrection of our Lord, ungodly to be spoken and
shameful to be heard. I must pause a while before I can give an ear to
hear such horrible blasphemies. First he praifeth Eleazarus his notable act
in stabbing the beast. Whereupon he thought that Antiochus was, and little
regarding his own life, so that he with the fall of the Eliphant, might kill
the rider and himself together. He praises the manly audacity and courage of
Judith, not respecting her own welfare and honesty, so that she might with the
ennemies head, preserve the lives, goods, and chastity of the Citizens of
Bethulia. He extolleth both their zeal, constancy, and magnanimity, but so as
the Poets did Hectors and Aeneas triumphs and victories, that the conqueror
thereby might reap the more praise and glory. He comes presently unto his
son Clement whom he exalts so hie that he seems to repent himself to
have produced these unfit and unequal examples, and to be angry that for want
of better, has been forced to use but weak comparisons. By these means let
the noble fights and combats of Sampson and David give place (Sixtus being
judge) unto Cain, Ioab, and Judas their infamous treacheries. Let there be no
difference then whether one kills, villaniously or valiantly, a tirant or a
king, an enemy or the father of his country? Let the Captains who are famous
for their prowess, and renowned through many victories be equaled with a Friar
but crept out of a cave. And finally let the constancy of Martirs be commended
by the audacity of a murderer. If this will stand for good, why do thou not
establishe statutes and ordinances, and like as we use Gregorians and Gratians
laws, that we may have thine also Sixtus, to deprive virtue of her due praise
by them, and vices of their deserved shame and punishment: for none are or were
ever to be found, that would have undertaken the defense of this act, thou only
excepted. Besides is not contented to use a common praise, but to make the
foolish people more astonished, shows mirakles whereby the divine power is
argued to have assisted and furthered this treachery, He tells therefore how
Clement went through the gates of the City being so narrowly besieged, and
through the watches of both the Camps not marked, or as one should say
invisible, he speaks this as a wonder, the like whereof Judith is not able to
bring forth, although she be so highly exalted with sacred poesies, that she
was a woman, that she had opened her pretense unto the Magistrate and the
Elders of the City, and that in their companies she went by the Sentinels of
the City without danger, and then afterward was brought before the watch of
the enemy, and lastly before the chief of the army, and that by the
exquisite beauty of her face she easily bewitched the heart and senses of the
Prince which were overcome already with wine and lust, and that therefore all
things were ready and easy unto her. But that all things crossed the Friar,
that in every thing was great trouble and travel, but yet more danger, that
he alone (surely without any bodies help or induction) had conceived secretly
the boldness of this desperate enterprise. That he had not only to go through
the watches of the ennemie, but by the Citizens straight wards and Sentinels:
and if his face, his words, or his pace, had bewrayed there any token of
inconstancy, which oftentimes is seen in those that do attempt high and
great matters, he had to look for nothing, but for present death and
destruction. Here if the letters had been found about him, he had no less to
fear the like of those that were ignorant of the matter and being besiedged
were afeard of every trifle. So that (as Homere says) as Aeneas was carried by
the help of Neptune out of the battle, even so Sixtus leads this Friar
through the City, and the Camp covered with a cloud that he could not be
seen of any body: I marvel that he has not set him upon the wings of
angels, to carry and bring him in safety to the kings tente. I appeal unto
your authority O honorable and reverent antiquity: what is become of
shamefastness? Who thinks now a days a lie to be a discredit? Come to hear
a history and not a fable. Clement by a great sum of money, by further hope,
and by a notorious harlot was solicited, takes counsel with the chief
conspirators of the kings death, and it is known now, who were present at that
instant, who were the cou^sellers, and who were the furtherers. It were
injurious that our posterity should be deceived and deprived of the memory of
this cruel act, and (as I hope cre long) of the example of the execution
thereof. They did counterfaite letters from certain prisonners unto the King,
bewraying some great matters to be declared by the mouth of the Friar, the
which when he had received, takes the knise which he had made and poisoned to
kill the king withal: and goes out of the City, but first having lest
charge that all those that were suspected might be kept within, that by these
means the life of a bloody murderer should be in safety with the danger of
thousand innocents, if he should have fallen a live in the enemies hands.
This is the first part of this miracle, these are the divine motions, this is
the celestial inspiration, and this the infallible argument of the present
assistance of Gods power. He comes in the kings camp no man letting him, and
at that troublesome time, when Friars only were free, and had only safe
conduct to go where they would themselves. But why go I about to spend my
time in confuting Sixtus his lies, where so many blasphemies do offer
themselves before me? All these are toys of the common people. Let every man's
virtue separate and distinguish him from the common sort: but the Bishop of
Rome let him be known by his notorious and extraordinary villainies. It is an
old saying, where lawful things are only permitted unto governors, there
they command by entreaty, a Priest does not differ from a Layman, but only
in liberty of offending. It is says he (speaking of the murdering of the
Prince) a most famous, and a memorable act, and not achieved without the
particular providence and disposition of the Almighty (pardon me Oeuerlasting,
holy, and omnipotent God, pardon me Opietie, and natural affection, rehearsing
words which are impious and full of blasphemy) what Sixtus if thou had
only said that this befell by his permission, unto whom it is casie to hinder
all things, although it be true, it were not godly, and less godly for thee
to affirm this that know not all things that are present, and therefore
the more that thou call in witness and defense of thy villanyes, him whom
thou call good and almighty. Hei thou Doctor in Israel art thou ignorant
of this, that all good things are ascribed unto God only, and that all the rest
is attributed unto our selves? Who can suffer then that unto the same God who
is good only, only omnipotent the bloody offense of an outcast from all man
kind is referred? And yet thou do esteem it but small to say that the
King was slain, not only by thy knowledge, but by thy counsel, not
dissembling at it, but commanding it, and having set a side all celestial and
infernal care, that it has been thy will only and procurement that at thy
pleasure such a heinous and execrable murder was committed in France. Do the
heavens hear this and suffer it? for whom are the gulphes of the earth, the
unlucky rocks, and the fearful whirlpooles and deepes of hell reserved?
Lightnings and thunderbolts should be wanting if no part of these villainies
were left unpunished. Now long agone my ears are hardened and acquainted with
these execrable words. And what is all this which I have said? but vulgar and
common, nothing worthy of high Jove his anger, nothing notorious, nothing
pontificiall. I would willingly follow childrens fashions when they are to
drink a medicine: they invent delays, they leave nothing undone, they turn
the cup, and oftentimes put it unto their mouth to taste it, then they shake
their heads as if they were angry, they ask for sweet things to overcome or to
mitigate the bitterness of the potion. But finally they being wearied with the
continual cryings of the standers by, turning their head aside, and stopping
their nostrels, do not drink the medicine but power it in. The like happens
unto me at this time: I would if I might, Sirtus, pass by thy horrible
blasphemies and impious words, wherewith thou have polluted by an abominable
comparison of a most villainous offense, the holy mysteries of our Sauiors
birth and burial. I would to God that Christian ears had only hard it, who
are deeper grounded in religion and better persuaded of faith, and who never
would have given credit to thy impious Dration, if it were unknown to the
Barbarians Heathen, and Turks: who will hereafter make a mock of the true
Christian doctrine, by thy authority, Sixtus, and example. Art thou not
ashamed, that thou, being the Pastor of the redeemed flock, by whose guiding
it draws the water of life out of the holy well, whose words should have
sounded nothing, but that which was saint, pure, and godly: that thou the
lively interpretor of the written law of God, and the severe punisher of
blasphemies, and of those that falsefie and corrupt the sense of the holy
Scriptures, and moreover of those that abuse, or use too freely words taken
out of the book of GOD: I will not say have deluded the Prophets and
Apostles, have called in doubt the truth of the history, have corrupted the
holy Scriptures, wrested and falsefied them by a false interpretation, by godly
examples have coulloured impious offenses, and have protected them by thine
authority, (these are but small things because they are usual unto thee) but
to compare the eternal counsel of the redemption of mankind, which only was
committed unto the second person of the Trinity, only of him suscepted, with
the ungodly and detestable conspiracy of the murdering of a Prince? And to
equal the cafuall audacitie of an imaged and bloody butther unto the
reverend miracles of our Lords nativity, death, and resurrection? Anoyde
impiety, avoid blasphemy, infect not the holy Lamb with thy poisoned
breath. What have thou left untouched, whom have thou spared? what has not
Mahomet now to object unto us? what has the Jew any longer to hold his
peace? Loc ye Christians: if the Sarrisins, the Indians, and the Barbarous
people of Calico, inueigh most bitterly against you, they have borrowed it of
the Bishop of Rome. Did thou lack profane examples, Sixtus, to compare
them unto thy villaynie that thou had a refuge unto most holy and divine
comparisons? I am glad, sir Bishop, that the world has been void until
thine age of such heinous and public murders, and that both were reserved
unto thy time, to wit he that durst attempt such a detestable act, and he
that was not ashamed to command it. Come forth all ye, whom the religious
antiquity has separated from the world to be adicted unto celestial
meditations, whom the son never saw but throw some narrow ristes, bring
shutt up in high walls and iron doors. Arise I say and come forth Sixtus
calls you unto villennie, to the murdering of Kings and princes, now the
gates are kept no longer by a severe and frowning porter. And those bars and
doors that kept you from the friendly imbrasing of your fathers, and the sweet
kisses of your affectionated mothers, are now freely removed and opened unto
you, to shed by treacherye and treason the blood of your parents, and dearest
friends. I was determined Sixtus, to leave thy lies, surmises, and false
accusations untouched: But I am provoked to the contrary through thy
impudency, which deserves no small indignation, as those may easily judge that
are somewhat acquainted with our estat and affairs. Do thou say that Monks
and Friars were killed, or at the least ill used in the Kings Camp? I would to
God it had been so, if it be lawful and godly to desire it. But at the least I
wish that all this idle and unprofitable cattle should have been pounded and
imprisoned: then our Prince should live yet, worthy of a longer life, and then
as a fearful hare thou durstest not tread upon the body of the dead Lion, and
deride our grief and mishappe. As if all the world knew not that unto these
slaves he never was hard, where as oftentimes, he was unto his most familiar
friends severe. Truly his untimely facillity, has hurt him, having had as
yet no experience how much hypocrisy and deceit there lay hidden under a
Friars hood. As if thy self did not know that he always had with him two
Friars in his army, whose help he always used in his divine service. Let me
be undone and cast away, if I would not have wished a Friars weed, and forsaken
my counselors gown, if by that means I could have persuaded him to the
best. Truly none were so mighty in the Realm, whose welfare and commodity, nay
not his own, he esteemed not less then these peoples delights and pleasures
only. Thou have no luck, Sixtus, with thy lie, it will not forge, thou
mightiest more easier have made the world believe any thing else. The enemy
himself dare not say, that Friars were ill used as long as he lived. Here I
would make an end if I were but certified of one point. Resolve me, Sixtus,
of this, I inquire no further causes of the murdered Prince, it suffices me
to know that thou have commanded it, thy will shall stand for a law. But
wherefore do thou persecute his shadow, wherefore do thou accuse him of
obstinacy, impenitency? unthankfulness, and to have sinned against the holy
Ghost? Why do thou compare him with Cain and Judas? By what justice or
equity can thou do this? when he lay upon his death bed did he doubt
of Christian faith? Did he deny the everlasting Son of the eternal GOD?
Has he neglected the ancient customs of the Church, and the most
comfortable Sacraments unto those that he in their extremity? Yet once again
herein thou art a notable lier. Why do thou force me so oftentimes to
repeat the remembrance of my bitter griefs? It is certain that the godly
Prince, as soon as the Physicians and Surgeons had bound up his wound and
had laid him upon his bed, having a little slepte upon his pain and
grief, that he pronounced with his own mouth his Prayers, and with a loud
voice, made confession of his faith, and of the feeling which he had of his
redemption: adding thereunto these words unto GOD. If it be to thy glory, O
GOD, and the commodity of my people, grant me I most humbly desire, first
pardon for my sins, and then some longer days of life. But if it be
otherwise, I thank thee most highly, O Father, that thou do bar me hence
forth from the thraldom of sin, whereby we most oftentimes procure thy
wrath against us. And therefore I am ready most willingly to come where thou
call me. Having made an end of his Prayers he sends for his brother the
King of Navarre, and for the chiefest of his army, and unto his brother he
commends the charge of the Realm, and the government of his subjects, the
Laws of France, importing as much: and repeted oftentimes these words, whereby
he charged him to have a special care to keep Christ's flocks in unity and
concord: and as he was heir unto the crown, that he likewise would be heir
to godly and ancient institutions. Desiring this most earnestly at his hands
with a solemn protestation, showing that this had bin his only desire from his
childhood. They al depart very sorrowful, whereupon he confesses his sins in
the ear of a priest, and having craved pardon of God for his offenses, he had
a sensible feeling, that they were forgiven him for Christ's sake. And now
ready to communicate of his sacred body openly that al might hears it, that
grace which he had freely received of God in the forgiveness of his sins, that
same he frankly imparteth to al his enemies, nay to them that had been the
conspirators of his death, and his murderers. And thus having received his
last due and farewell, departed joyful and glad out of this world, not without
the great grief of all the standers by, bewraying ye inward sorrow with
outward abundant tears. Here Sixtus, I see no tokens of desperation, no signs
of impenitencie. And I think not, that thou art so far void of al reason,
as to compare a most Christian prince unto K. Saul. But let him be compared
yet to him, so that he hear no bitterer words, and suffer greater torments.
Behold with what words Gods indignation upon this impious king is expressed.
The spirit of the Lord is gone from Saul, says the prophet: And in another
place the Lord speaks unto Samuel, saying, How long will thou lament over
Saul, when I have cast him off that he shall not reign? Does he say, that he
is miserable, unhappy, and worthy of eternal damnation? God forbid. When the
scripture speaks of his death, mark the most christian words of David,
directed unto the unlucky yongman, who boasted, but falsely, that he; with
his own hands had slain the Prince in the battle: How wast thou not afraid
to put forth thy hand, to destroy the anointed of the Lord? And in many other
places, who shall stretch forth his hands upon the Lords anointed, and shall
be innocent? Answer Sixtus, is not thy oration crueller whereby thou
commaundest wilful and public murder, in praisnig it: or say, that this
example is not to be followed, and to be abolished by thine authority. Saul
was slain in the battle, an Amalekite his enemy had done it, here is nothing
that was forbidden by law, yet the Lord has revenged the death of his
anointed. See further what the holy Chronicles tell of Ioab, and Ammon, being
murdered, although ungodly kings, authors of abominations, and hated of God.
See, read, and peruse all the sacred and profane histories, and thou shall
find, that not only the law of nature, of men, and above all Gods
ordinances, but also the severe and horrible examples of the punishment thereof,
debar impious and bloody hands, from the anointed bodies of kings and
Princes. Rome fertile always in all villainy, has feene of twelve her
Emperors, eight murdered with the sword, but none unrevenged. He, Sixtus,
therefore that succeeds shall be, I hope, the revenger, and that which thou
have now long agone known by other histories, thou shall come to learn it ere
long by thine own. Avoid therefore, thou Bishop, and be proud with this
answer: Go unto the Indians, or in some other corner of the world, a just
punishment is reserved for thee under some greater ennemy.

FINIS.

