FOUR BOOKS of Offices: ENABLING PRIVATE persons for the special service of
all good Princes and Policies. Made and devised by BARNABE BARNES.

LONDON Printed at the charges of George Bishop, T. Adams, and C. Burbie. 1606.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY LORD, JAMES by the grace of God King of great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
And in him, Barnabe Barnes (the most humble and loyal Subject of his
Majesty) wishes the very perfection of all spiritual and temporal
felicity. Blessed Sovereign.
A Just King (which like a single eye fixed in the righteous scepter of God, and
by divine ordination sent as a bright Angel of his worship to govern amongst
the children of men) is hyeroglyphically represented by figure of the sun. For
as a virtue which vertueth other inferior Stars, it holds the golden
bridles of the day: whose seat is therefore by pre-eminence esteemed most
noble, because as a just Judge placed in the midst, it equaly distributeth
light to those other Planets, giving grace to Saturnes gravity, might to
Jupiters majesty, fortitude to the force of Mars, benevolence to the beauty
of Venus, pith to the persuasion of Mercury, with constancy to the Moons
mutabilitie by the royal government of his equal power and divine sapience,
which moderateth all unstayed perturbations of his people, as the Moon does
(by noble influence from it) restrain all turbulent and outrageous billows of
the violent seas, being through domination of this seventh sphere so
metaphysically kept within their bounds, that they cannot transgress nor
usurp upon earth. The Suns Chariot also (representing the judgment seat of
imperial authority) drawn by four horses figuring the four columns of
royal majesty, deciphered in these ensuing offices, leads him through the
Zodiak of the twelve Moral virtues; in and through which he reigns and
governs upon earth in comfort, peace, and plenty, blessing the four
mightiest Princes of this world with the light of his countenance: as in
ministering fire to Vulcanus, ^to Pallas the gray morning and balmy verdure of
Air, which repurifieth her understanding with knowledge; to the great towering
Goddess Ops that motherly fruitfulness, which crowns Ceres, Bacchus,
Minerua, Pales, with corn, wine, oil, and milk; lastly, to Neptune and
Thetis, that infinite seed engendered and multiplied of them in the waters: so
that those foresaid Elements (out of whose virtues all creatures living and
vegetant are by divine ordinance composed) receive life, and influence from the
Sun. This kingly Planet likewise holds dominion over the torments of hell;
which should seem to be made out of the excess and poison of those four
Elements; as is evident by those angels which fell from the three hierarchies
for their sins in pride, disobedience, Barth. Cassan. in (...) ter^ partis
catal. g^or. mundi.
sloth, wrath, envy, lechery, and gluttony: for by the divine music of
Orpheus, these furies and torments were appeased, so that he brought thence
his wife Eur^dice. For Phoebus is by the philosophical Poets mythologically
called, the God and Patron of Music, Prophecies, and Chirurgerie: which was
to life expressed by that holy King David, who (being both a blessed Prophet,
and divine in lyricall music) had by force of his melody charmed that evil
spirit, wherewith King Saul was possessed. Only the chyrurgeries wherein true
Princes are principally skilled, appear in the sac^ed notice and cure of those
inward diseases and griefs that infect and macerate their flocks, which they
like good and fatherly Shepheardes should heal with good Laws and Discipline.
And yet your Grace, has that oil of grace and comfort powered upon you more
then your fellow-princes, to cure all mischievous and infistulated impostumes
which GOD smites upon the jaws of his people, to make your glories the more
in healing, and his glories infinite by those blessings bestowed upon your
anointed hands (which diseases are otherwise remediless) being a divine gift
from above to that holy King Edward your Majesty's antecessor, and after him to
the rest of his sanctified seed by sacred direction legacied, as has formerly
been to the Kings of France also. Wherefore your Highness (being Vnctus in
regem and sacerdotem cum vnguento laetitiae super omnes terrae reges socios
tuos) fitly resemble this bright Planet in his cleerest Majesty; even as that
most sacred Psalmist King David also, both for your Poetical faculties, as in
respect of your divine Priesthood, and chirurgerie, having by good experience
(more then any man living ever did) tasted of the wonderful wisdom and love
of God; who by such strange ways surpassing humane reason, has wrought out
your Graces fortune in the weal of us your loving and loyal subjects, far
beyond all the wily machinations, plots, and imaginations of men, which have
(as your Royalty well knows) been manifoldly frustrated; that it might be
performed which God had ordained and promised by the mouths of diverse
soothsaying Augers, to perfect and establish in your seed the true tryumphant
and universal Christian Monarchy. Howbeit as no man living can have a sweeter
taste or cleerer declaration of Gods unspeakable power (beyond all the soundest
counsels and resolutions of our mortal Princes) then your Grace has had in all
actions; considering the strange means that has been wrought by God through
the plots of men destined to other purposes, to make your name glorious, and
that your royal seed might inherit this Empire: so need we not doubt but
that like a good Physician, your Majesty (as it has already graciously begun
the cure of some small diseases in this kingdom, which God only left unto
your gacious wisdom, that the whole body might be kept clean and at ease)
shall auspiciously continue the same, to be the same under the golden rod of
your right royal posterity forever, by strong purgation and correction of the
proud, chollerick, and melancholic humors thereof, which is the true method
of a kingly Physician, and shall doubtlesly bring the head and whole body to
perfect peace, and health.

Against the Sun (upon which no reasonable creature can steadfastly fix his
mortal eyes, least they be dazeled, infeebled, or blinded with the precious
cleeretie thereof (being another type of sacred Majesty) that imperial bird
soueraigning over the swift fethered creatures of the air by nature opposes
his sight: as Orus Apollo writes in his hieroglyphiks, how the Sages of Egypt
and Chaldaean Priests (when they would signify divine power, humane Empire,
pre-eminence, blood, or victory) did pourtraict an Eagle. What miracles he
finds through his steadfast, sharp, and penetrating inspection within that
sanctified Orb of bright virtue, may be referred to those mystical
naturallists, which in the Metaphysicall cards of their reason have obscurely
shadowed those things, that by mythologies are out of many curious heads from
far shot at, by some near hit, and by very few truly touched. Caius Iul.
Caesar (to whom this Land with others contributed) gave in his ensign of
gold, a black Eagle perpendicularly mounting: which Pliny notes in the
nature of that bird. For it is written, that over Caesar's Hoasts when he
marched to fight, diverse Ravens and Vultures did houer, and that two Crows
prodigiously with their wings and tallons eager in combination, struck at his
Beuer; whereupon auspiciously came an Eagle which (combating against their
violence) slew them both; and then immediately perched upon his imperial
crest. This ominous prodigy by the Augers was interpreted sinisterly, that
Caesar's ensuing government should be tyrannous: since which time the Roman
Emperors have always borne in their ensigns that royal bird, with which
fortunately spreading his wings against their enemies, the Romans did
generally triumph in many victories, and conquests. This Eagle also viuely
represents unto us, your Majesty's person, being only your Highnesses
scepter-bearing bird, with silver feathers; which with his auspicious wings
shadoweth the crowns of this Britain Monarchy with peace of soul and body
rooted in your blessed posterity for ever. Upon earth next to the Sun and
air, that aufull Magistrate (if of his Majesty men may so term the Lion,
bearing the scheme and figure of magnanimity, which has dominion over
foure-footed beasts) is another portly representation of a perfect Prince: for
he despises dangers, reme^breth and observes him that shall wou^d his body,
though he be impaled with millions of men; the^ he mercifully spares which upon
his pursuit prostrate their bodies; women and children (unless upon extreme
hunger) he will not hurt. Vigilancie (being another right royal garb of a
careful prince) was portended by the picture of alyons head; for so much as that
beast only sleeps with his eyes open: Qui tanquam sol patenti igneoqueoculo
Bart. Cassan. 78. consid. 12. partis catal. glor. mundi.
terram conspicit. This noble creature in the person of fortitude upon the
right hand supporteth the royal Escucheon of your imperial crown, assisted
in our late dear sovereigns, and your Majesty's famously remembered sisters
government with prudence and vigilancie, portended by the Dragon; and since her
death (if it may be so called) with temperance, not exchanged; but as with the
perfections of all virtues relieved, or revived rather in your Highness
Unicorn: of all these your blessed Majesty royally participateth, as in the
person of a true virtuous, and sanctified king upon earth. Vile is that
wretched analogy, which the corrupt Florentine Secretary Nicolo Machiauelli
servant to Duke Petro di Medici, did in his puddle of princely policies produce
betwixt a true Prince and a mixed monster; resembling him (by the Il. Prencipe
cap. 18 comm^ se debbe osseruar la feed.
example of Achilles who was instructed by Chyron the Centaure) unto a lion and
fox, importing his strength and caution in all affairs: whereas it is well
known, how no true prince can aptly be compared to that unsavory curre, if the
very royal mind (which amply possesses every just King) be respected. For
why not much more fitly might the comparison of Kings with Eagles then with
base Foxes have sorted, if that imperial bird which in opposition with his
eye-brightnesse amiably looks into the sun, can search, and penerate into the
perfection of wisdom and knowledge, being figurately shadowed in Phoebus or
Apollo, bearing also with him the thunderbolts of Jupiter (who mystically
reueileth sovereign Majesty) to grind, burn, and consume into powder the
violence of his enemies? semblably me seems, that there should not be found
any such difference in the state and condition of Princes, which the subtle
Italian Sanazar made of a Pope in his time; that he was Bonus Princeps and
malus vir: because he knew well how to govern, and did rule the people well,
having no proper faculty (by moderation of his own appetites) to be good
unto himself; for as Cicero cites it out of Ennius, Nequicquam sapere
sapientem, qui sibiipsiprodesse nequierit: (being intended there by the mind
only) so certainly cannot any Prince be verily good unto himself, if he do
not govern his flock (which is the greater part of himself) in the fear of
God and exercise of Justice: whence it was that Homer termed Agamemnon in one
place, (...): and in another part (...): as well for the pastoral charge, as
for the prudent counsel and assiduitie required in him toward that function.
Sanctity and Justice therefore (as I first said) by the propagation,
corroboration, and aeternization of all crowns and Monarchies, are the two
maine pillars of principality; being those inseparable adjuncts of your right
royal Majesty's lawful and victorious quadruple crown of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, composed of the 4. cardinal virtues, which in this
ensuing myrrour, framed out of the 4. immediate ministers or columns rather of
kingly Majesty, with all humble duty subiecting the^ impolished as they be,
to your princely eyes, I present to your royal hands, under a special pardon
for my boldness in daring as a poor unlearned Scholar (which offers his
ignorance in some rude exercise unto his learned Schoolmasters) to trouble
your sacred Majesty with these imperfections. Howbeit, as every man which
writes ought to rest upon and lean unto the grace of his Patron; so can it
not choose, but that having chosen so gracious a Patron, far exceeding all
other in goodness, I shall find more true grace and beneficence out of your
royal nature, for this one Caracter of my bounden duty respected by such a
Sovereign, then by the benevolence of any subject And therefore I presumed to
your high Grace, being the Castalian spring head (which the Greek Sages did say
to be patronized by that bright Lord of wisdom and Poetry) thinking there
(after my labors) to refresh my troubled senses: where though unworthy to
taste, yet shall I receive some ingenuous alacrity, by seeing that pure and
preciously-purling current. And that I may the more to my consolation
contemplate the royal sunshine and serenitie which enuironeth your sacred
temples (though your Grace lay not apart the beams of your Majesty) yet
vouchsafe I beseech, with your divine anointed hands to anoint these eyes of
your humble subject with the balmie dew of your gracious benevolence, that I
may be the better enabled to look upon that consecrated Orb of true
majesty; for had I been so timorous or faint, as in the regard of the
unworthiness of my Book protected the same by some private friend: then had I
somewhat withdrawn from worth of the matter, which (howsoever the method and
disposition thereof deserves) does also merit a royal Master, and had
miscarried in the manner of my proceeding also: thinking that because these
four ensuing estates immediately ministering under all crowns in every Common
wealth, are protected by royal soueranitie, your Grace was fittest also to
patronize these my simple studies wholly conuersing in the properties and
attributes of those Offices; which shall be most highly honored by the
maiesticall protection of such a virtuous King, to his poor subjects exceeding
comfort. My consideration therefore was, that your Highness out of the
Princely nature, which God with your Essence has infused, would deigne so
simple present of a poor Scholar, with the benevolence which your Grace
natiuely does extend to learning: and that being hereafter published under that
high Title many learned eyes, and curious fingers (not so much for the matter
and form of the Treatise, as for the Majesty patronizing it) would peruse
these young rules in this imperfect accedence to government, and percase bear
them through diverse of your Majesty's Kingdoms.

I have also through my whole discourse (as occasion served) in diverse places
made a continual Apostrophe to your Majesty, which I beseech your Highness
(eue^ as it is in sincerity) so to refer it unto the true meaning of my most
dutiful and immaculate heart toward your Grace, and not to any vain
singularity, nor presumption in my self. The God of al true light continue
that illumination, brightness, and wisdom, which appears in your true graces,
by that figure of the Sun; confirm that piercing inspection, apprehension, and
prenotion of all princely devises, wisdoms and practices, which may be bent in
opposition to your Majesty by foreign kings, decyphered in that imperial Eagle;
and corroborate that true fortitude to the confusion of Gods and of your
Highnesses enemies, which is expressed in the royal Lion; so that your kingdoms
being sustained, amplefied, and conserved by Justice, prudence and fortitude
from posterity to posterity through many generations, so long as it shall
please God euenly to sustain this earth in her own place within the
firmaments, such serenitie may beam forth from your gracious wisdom; as
forever may move the peoples hearts of these your Kingdoms, of all your
confederates and contributories, to dance inwardly with praise and
thankfulness unto God, for that blessing which through your Graces special
goodness infinitely succeeds to Gods people under your imperial Scepter.

Your most high Majesty's most humble and obedient Subject. BARNABE BARNES.

To Master Barnabe Barnes, this Madrigall upon his Book.
IF all the world were sought from Malta to Moan,
From candid Gaul, to black-brow'd Calicute;
No frame more various might have been made one
In every joint, or point like absolute:
For as some Spirits while they have been attent
On states of Princes, and on earthly right,
Have followed the wordly side, with that intent;
And yet unmindful of the highest Sprite.
Others again (too much I ween yblent
With heavenly zeal and with Religion)
Have for the same the Secular forwent:
So if a mean there be (as mean but one
To twine the Crossier with the sword atone)
O let me then (with license) to avow,
It Will, right Paladine, be by only you.
W. Percy. MVSOPHILYS. Spes calamo occidit.

In honor of the Author by Tho: Campion Doctor in Physic* To the Reader.
Though neither thou do keep the Keys of State,
Nor yet the counsels (Reader) what of that?
Though thou art no Law-pronouncer marked by fate,
Nor field commander (Reader) what of that?
(...) not this Boo^ for if thou mind'st to be
Virtuous, and honest, it belongs to thee.
Here is the School of Temperance, and Wit,
Of Justice and all forms that tend to it;
Here Fortitude does teach to live and die,
Then, Reader, love this Book, or rather buy.
EIVSDEMAD AVTHOREM.
PErsonas proprijs recte virtutibus ornas
(Barnesi) liber hic viuet, habet Genium,
Personae virtus vmbra est; hanc illa refulcit,
Nec scio splendescat corpus, an vmbra magis.
To my singular good friend Master Barnabe Barnes.
Grave Architector of a Commonweal,
Well trauail'd in the mysteries of state,
Vouchsafe me room, among the rest some deal,
Thy lofty frame to view, and wonder at:
And where the workmanship does please mine eye,
To say, it was wrought with painful industry.
That Is every where, for all does merit praise,
The form, the firm foundation, and the frame.
The form Quadrangular, most meet to raise,
A Palace sacred to eternal fame,
Founded on wisdom, builded up on high,
With goodly laws, and Christian policy.
Up held with four strong Piles, whose bases ar,
Sage Counsel, awful Justice, armed Might.
Abundant Treasure, sinews of the war
These make it strong to last, and fair to sight.
Where sour such pillars do the bulk sustain,
What fear we thunders, t^pests, winds, or rain.
Here may thou fix with bold Al^mena's son,
NIL VLTRA, as the farthest continent,
That wisest statist ever yet did run,
Within this world of civil government.
And as the work, so does the style excel,
That of Boterus, Bodin, Machiauell.
Tho: Michelborne.

R. H. In commendation of the Author.
Some uncouth Muse which mountes upon the wings
Of silver fountains, or sweet breathing winds,
Chaunt out her notes when she divinely singes
To dignifie the state of these four kinds:
Which Treasurers to moderation binds.
And gracious prudence to grave men of State,
Where Themis rules of sacred Justice finds;
Where fortitude does swordmen animate,
O let some potent muse, these great designs relate.
And let bright fame whose worthy spirit pearceth
The worlds whole center and those heaueuly speeres,
Assume this task for him, which here reherseth
These moral Offices of States and Peers.
And thou that soundest in the prudent ears
Thy golden trumpet of rich Oratorie,
Gracious Thalia, let these learned Queares
Be graced as thou do, each gracious Story,
That BARNES may live by them, in everlasting glory.
Robert Hasill.

John Forde in commendation of his very good friend the Author.
Not to adorn, but to commend this Frame,
Drawn by the curious hand of judgments art;
Nor to commend, for this commends the same;
But solace to thy labors to impart:
A work of thanks, out living term of fate,
In brief prescriptions of a formal State.
Great were thy pains, but greater is thy fame,
Locked in the Iewel-house of precious treasure;
Which does by Counsels wisdom rear thy name,
In equal Justice of well-ballac't measure;
Thou teach soldiers discipline of fight,
And they again defend thy merits right.
Write on rare Myrrour of these abject days;
Thy good example others will advise:
Thy subject values love, thy Studies praise,
A president to youth, life to the wise:
So ever shall (while times and Empires last)
Thy works by thee, thou by thy works be graced.
Verba, decor, grauitas, confirmant, denotat, ornat,
(...) lepidum, re, grauitate, manu.
Johannes Forda Encomiastes.

Barnabe Barnes his Preface to the honorable and discrete Reader.
I Have apportioned my four books of Offices (wherein certain special
qualities and principles are expressed for general government, and the choice
both of civil and martial ministers in every Commonwealth) unto the four
virtues cardinal. For as much therefore as royal treasure (being the
maintenance of every state, without which no principalities can consist, or
augment) ought to be mistically couched within the divine treasure Temperance
(which is the moderator and guide of her other three sister virtues ensuing) I
therefore have placed Temperance in this first Parallel, considering the
resemblance which it should have with a Princes treasure, so well in the manner
of getting and leuying, as in the saving and disbursing of money by discrete
moderation; which office of Treasurers possesses the first book of these
offices.

Prudence the substance of my second book (deciphered and figuredin the secret
counselors office) participateth of that reasonable moderation, which is
expressed in the first. Also Tempera^ce the treasurer with a gracious mildnes
and motherly decency prudently pondereth and examineth all her actions, which
are right noble and many, with her passions. Yet is it contrauertible whether
temperance be passionate or no; though one of her sweetest graces governs in
patience.

My third book comprehends Justice, which is in all causes seasoned with a
requisite moderation and taste of ingenuous temperance, and prudence:
temperance being of it self an indifferency void of extremity, viuely
represents Justice, being incorporate with equity and prudence: because with
a certain provident circumspection it justly weighs all things in the
balance of reason.

My fourth book (in the same rank containing certain qualities of a true
soldier) heroically represents Fortitude; which with Temperance expressed in
her patience, with Prudence in her foresight, and actions of honorable peril,
with Justice in the execution and maintenance of right, without any tolleration
of public violence sisterly combineth: whereas semblably temperance in her
bridling and restraining of inordinate appetite, prudence in her stout and
constant equabilitie, Justice in her severe and firm equality (being merely
pure from all blemishes of fear and affection) are all in themselves a
fortitude.

This is a divine harmony representing mentally by due distribution of humane
charity, the sacred unison of man's soul sanctified with God. This is that
mystery which Hermes, Solomon, Pythagoras, Solon, Plato, Socrates, and
Aristotle, have all of them oracularly shadowed in their eternities of
wisdom: and by these four are all blessed Monarchies, Kingdoms,
Commonweales, and policies sustained, governed, directed and protected, that is
by Temperance, Prudence, Justice and Fortitude, shadowed as I said in the
Treasurer, Counselor, Judge, and Soldier: for they be moderate, wise, just,
and valiant alike; that not any difference of their places is discerned, which
of them may be greater or less then another.

To this harmonious consent or concordance (whose ground in v^ison consists
of a medium, which is the moderator or nauel-string of this unspeakeable
music, representing the concealed and mystical accord of the numberless
stars and planets contuning by the ineffable power of the most Almighty God
in number and Symphonie; by which sacredforce he works his will in all
creatures: from fat all influence of which divine torches of light, by the most
miraculous power of the most mighty mouer, all worldly chances happen; which
some not well advised have called the wheel of fortune) there are extremes by
the most metaphisicall disposition ordained preuaricating or transgressing
those four divine centres, or moderators, which I do thus denominate, define,
and distribute.

To Temperance therefore my first countertenor, one base, and one alie: for out
of discords with the countertenor (being moderator) is the concord composed of
perfect harmony. The base hereof is covetous and unnecessary penury when
ability does sufficiently reabound; the triple or alteis raised from extreme
profusion or excess, making a shrill and riotous confusion of all: one of
these extremes continually conuersing in baseness and the other in
haughtiness throughout; as in the rest ensuing.

To Prudence which is my second countertenor or moderator, the base falls
into folly; the triple or alte lifts it self into malicious wiliness and
calliditie. Herein does folly participate with the first being covetousness,
in that it wants a reasonable discretion to make use and comfort of Gods
blessings bestowed: In extreme opposition thereof malicious craft or wiliness
accords with the first alte, that in public and private affairs, it is a
secret consumer; as extreme profusion or prodigality wastes both public and
private treasure; the persons quality being considered.

Thirdly to justice which is my next moderator, the vile base is dissolute
indulgence or secure lenity, when honesty by the couin of iniquity lies
mortally wounded, and iniquity scaping punishment receives honor and
support: the triple or alte, extreme cruelty. Dissolute lenity therefore in
this consents with the first base which is called covetousness or
unreasonable sparing; for as much as contrary to reason, it coueteth a
confusion of other men's estates by sparing the wicked; as couctise does of
other men's possessions by saving of her own, herein alluding to the second
base which is folly: because such kind of foolish pity or mercy (as some
men ter^e it) cannot have any taste of discretion or charity. Likewise
extreme cruelty consents oppositely with the first alte prodigality thus;
by being so lavish and prodigal of blood as that other is of treasure: and
with the second alte being crafty wiliness; that in the prodigal effusion of
blood, or in the tragical end of impious, nefarious and barbarous treasons,
conspiracies, and murders, malicious craftiness from cruelty differs not.

Fourthly to fortitude (which is the last moderator) the base is baseness of
spirit or pusillanimitie, proceeding from inordinate sloth, fear, and
luxury, which is a subjection, or rather mancipation of the mind to slavish
and brutish affections, passions and perturbations, when appetite tyrannizeth
over reason: the triple or alte audacious temeritie. Pusill animitie therefore
in this consents with miserable and auaricious sparing (which is the first
base) that it is as fearful and miserably parsimonious of a little harish
blood, when honorable causes sommon it like a judge in skarlet justly to
defend his own with the guard of his heroical spirits, and to contend for
right; as that other baseness is of treasure when special reasons do most
require a liberality: and with the second base being folly thus; that there
can not appear any more foolishness, then when people timerously and basely
without resistance damn themselves voluntarily slaves to the tyrannous galleys
of their own inward and outward enemies, whereas with a little pains and
knitting of themselves up together they might restrain or vanquish them both:
also with the third base, which is secure lenity: for what weakness and
abiection of mind can be discerned in one more then in another? for lenity
wilfully confounds every private and public estate; whereas baseness or
softness of spirit or pusillanimitie (the persons quality being respected)
does the same. Furthermore audacious temeritie, which violently without reason
does precipitate it self into perils herein oppositely concordeth with
prodigality being the first alte; that it is more profuse (if possible) in
effusion of blood, in rash partitipation and abbarretting of mutinies and
quarrels then that other excess is of treasure, of unreasonable and
inconsiderate expenses riot and surfeits: and with the second alte which is
malicious wiliness and calliditie; that whereas wrath and the venomous desire
of revenge does in a kind of desperation and temeritie, rush into the turbulent
seas of danger: so does malicious wilines by the secret labyrinths, snares, and
curious traps of mortal villainies make up the mouth of mischief to bring
about her devilish designs; both of them being alike deep in blood: and with
the third alte or triple (being cruelty which is the ^ast consent in
opposition with audacious temeritie) herein appears the final concord of
these discords even that which reason and nature teaches us; how no greater
cruelty can be showed then that a man either upon mere malice or some other
hellish and fiery passion of wrath or blind affection (as a principal in the
murder of himself (should rashly, violently, and irremediably croude into the
spearepointed troop of perils, as Curtius and Decius, one mounted in arms on
horseback to satisfy the wrath of the gods, upon the maine carriere entered and
was swallowed up in the fiery gul^e, which prodigiously did exhale sulphurous
and unquenchable flames: the other being consul, armed in a Roman lack or
brigandine (as Liuy records) did single on the same fashion run with full
speed in gallop amid the battles of his enemies the Latins: and sacrificed
himself for weal of the Roman host; where he thrasting his life into the
very throats of his enemies choked them that swallowedit.

So that to conclude with this consent of discords; being the certain
confusion of every the most flourishing state where it tragically noiseth; as
the first harmonious concordance of the sphoericall virtues is the
corroboration and amplification of every kingdom which is formerly noted: so
do I say that Temperance is valiant, just, and wise: Prudence is temperate,
valiant, and just; Justice is wise, temperate, and valiant, valor is just, wise
and temperat. In opposition semblably because the geometrical and analogicall
harmony draws these other rebels, excrescents, or excrements of virtue
rather, to this universal muster, that they may be precisely viewed and
measured by the cube of reason; receiving pressed and wages answerable to their
natures and qualities: also for as much as it may be misconstrued by such as
are more learned, or some that percase louen opposition, I will leave this as a
Paradox, whether auaritious misers be foolish, unjust, and timorous, whether
timorous persons be miserable, foolish and unjust, whether unjust men be
timorous, miserable and foolish, and whether fools are unjust, timorous and
miserable. In opposition likewise ex diametro, whether prodigals in their
actions generally be not audacious, cruel, and crafty: whether crafty knaves
to fet^h about their diuises be not prodigal, audacious, and cruel: if cruel
fellows in their hopes or rather fears be not crafty, prodigal, and
audacious: and if audacious persons in their distracted humors of desire,
revenge and collar prove not cruel, crafty and prodigal. For a man (if he
would perfectly know the secrets of government) must warily search forth these
infestious leprosies of States; considering how there is not any good or bad in
mankind, which is not contained in these oppositions: the causes of which
evils being perfectly known, and presently removed, all their effects of
danger must of force presently be drawn away with them. And he which cannot
skill of this my concatenation, my wheel, or rather the true love knot, and
labyrinth of virtues with their opposites (though in other matters he vainly
think himself wise) yet shall undoubtedly misiudge of other men's conditions,
attributing and adiudgeing improperly good and bad qualities to people contrary
their depraved or native inclinations: nay moreover I dare affirm, that he
which shall perfectly learn and practice this Lesson shall soon attain the
true knowledge of himself.

To conclude therefore, least I stand upon these points more curiously then
acceptably, I say that those kingdoms or Commonweales are blessed and
victorious, whose Treasurers are valiant, just, and prudent; whose counselors
are temperate, valiant and just: whose judges are prudent, temperate, and
valiant, whose captains are just, prudent, and temperate: such as for example
Marcus Cato whom Liuie magnifieth for his excellent quickenesse and dexterity
fit for all noble offices; as in the whole course of his life temperate and
decored with moderation; as in his admirable wisdom and sagacity to counsel
and direct in the most serious affairs of his country; as of his Justice and
skill in the laws, which was incomparable; with his great courage and valor in
the wars, which was invincible: al which I mentioned in my second book. And in
such accomplished magistrates which by these instructions here ensuing are made
absolute is contained the whole moral force of a most gracious and ample
monarchy.

These my beneuolent (though simple) Elucubrations, recommending heartily to
your honorable constructions, I wish your welfare as mine own; which if you
with good Aequanimitie shall take favorably, then have I won the largest
stipend of my studies that I could either travail or wish for. But if persons
of vnindifferent censure and judgment (as amongst many, there be which may
more then saltly tax my labors) shall show some severity more then
critical, their malignitie cannot prevail; because I shall account no time
misspent, which tending so much to the common benefit of our young country men is
bestowed upon such moral considerations.

Yours resolved and assuredly B. B.

The first Book of
ALbeit Anniball for scoffing at the most profound and learned Philosopher
Phormio, because he began abruptly to prescribe a form for the order and
instruction of Battles, was by some very wise men condemned of extreme and
very barbarous pride; as in repining, that any man being shadowed at home
amongst his books, should attain that Saturn and the Moon, but that I were
worthy to be rebuked and canuased, if either I should write these offices, as
instructions for noblemen, and sage Counselors of any Commonwealth, so far
exceeding my skill and judgment as there have years passed betwixt the date
of Phormioes death and of my wretched life: or if I should bewray such
stupiditie, by teaching men equal in degrees and arts with my self that which
they can as well or better relate than I: or to be short, if in the Leuin of
arrogancy I should presume to talk of things surreaching the scope of my
apprehension. Yet having collected

The first and chief place in all civil government under princes and
Commonweales, Office of Treasurers.
according to Dion Cassius, Francis Patricius, Barthol. Cassanaeus, Hyppolito,
Furio Ceriolano, with others, which have by their books opened the forms of
counsels, concerning the state of any kingdom, remains to the Quaestores a
quaerendo, because they did seek how to magnify, corroborate, and amplify
the Commonwealth by lawful and honorable means, for the special weal of
those states and princes under whom they did administer; and also did
faithfully conserve those riches to their trust committed. Hence is it that
Dion terms, Quaesturam primum Lib. 52.
gradumin Senat^: howbeit Iustus Lipsius, not wholly suffragating to that
opinion, Cap. 16. de Mag. Romanorum.
says, Quod inter magistratus fuere quaestores ordine primi, dignitate vltimi.
Which office (being auntiently derived from the Greeks) was first erected
amongst (...).
the Romans in the first bud of that Empire, after it was grown to some
height; when the societies of those people, lovingly knit and assembled,
Quaestores or Treasurers, which were famous amongst them for their Justice,
valor, moderation and prudence, that had the tuition thereof, keeping their
office in Aede Saturni. This institution of Treasurers Tacitus would have
amongst the Romans, when the Consular estate was first established, Anno 23.
after their kings were abolished: some think they were first ordained, Anno
Vrb. conditae 269: But it is not so doubtful, as needless, precisely to stand
upon that point: only this, the place of Treasurers being first amongst the
civil magistrates (as at this day in France; where Les generalx des Barth.
Cass cons. 13. 7. partis cat. gloriae mundi. Geo. Bened. in Repet. cap. Rayn.
in verb.
finances, and les presedents des accomptes, have a prioritie not only before
both the Counsels strict and at large; but also before the four Primiers
Presidents in that realm; as our Lord high Treasurer of England has also:
whose place with us is highest next unto the Lord Chancelour in civil
reputation) gives me some cause to digest the same into my first book of
Offices; being as I may term it notvnfitly that liver wherein the blood
(which possesses the moving life of every commonwealth) is contained. For even
as moneys are fitly called the sinews of war, so may we likewise properly
term them the blood of peace: and therefore that state or kingdom, whose
treasure is exhausted (though it be most ample, populous, and puissant in other
things) may be called bloodlesse and languishing, Nobilitas sine diuitijs pene
Bonus de curtili.
mortua est, tanquam corpus exangue. Riches therefore may be properly termed
the blood of peace, that entering the veins or conduits of the liver, which
may semblably be likened to the Treasurers office, and reflowing thence,
benignely disperseth it self into the members of the whole body, resembling
analogically the Commonwealth, for the general sustentation and nurriture
thereof. It is the bone of that strong arm, by which the kingdom is in time
of peace strengthened against all hostile attempts. It is the marrow by which
that bone is seasoned, soupled, and confirmed: or rather that arm which is
strongly nourished, enabled, and knit with those sinews, veins, blood, bones,
and pith; wherein

The charge of Treasurers consists in the receiving, keeping, and disbursing
of the prince his money, consisting in the revenues of his Empire; amplified
by the tributes of his subjects; supplied by the subsides, fines, and
forfeitures of cities, societies, and malefactors; relieved with the tallages
and customs of merchants Titus Liuius writes: Munera Quaestoris sunt pecuniae
publicae acceptio and expensio; signorum militarium Lib. 4. and 7.
ex auro, vel argentoin aerario asser^atio; praedae venditio and subhastatio;
legatorum exceptio and deductio; hospitij assignatio. All which were most
honorable attributes peculiarly permitted to the Treasurers: and (as Lipsius
notes it) such was that ancient honor of those Quaestores, that amongst the
Romans of old Cap. 16. de Mag. vet. Pop. To.
it was permitted unto them to make laws and decrees, to subscribe unto
suites, motions, and petitions, being both keepers and presedents of the Laws
and of Justice: which power is with us and in France deuolued unto the Lords
Chancellors, Vin^ent. Lupan.
state, the king takes advice, as of some oracle: so that when any rescripts,
edicts, or decrees contrary to law, be by the king either upon misinformation
or negligence granted, the Chancellor has ex officio power to cancel or
annullate them, whereupon was first devised the name Cancellarius; which office
in Venice has the most secret particulars of that state in managing, and yet
is not so powerful in his authority. Likewise the French, Generalx des
finances, upon the like considerations, and respects may cut off, or curtall at
their pleasures the kings gifts and bounties, issuing out of his Treasuries,
Lands, or Revenues (if in their Cancellarij, because they Tanquam Tutores,
limit the kings mind intra rationis and moderationis caucellos. This counsel
of Treasurers conuerseth in the exportation of such commodities, as every
Commonweal out of her friendship, or abundance exchangeth or ministers;
having equal respect unto the induction, or reinuection of such other
merchandise, as their people need and covet most: Likewise in all treasures
under ground, as in mines and minerals of gold, and silver, copper, tin,
lead, and iron; the richest commonly belonging to the prince of that soil,
where such treasures are opened; and others either bygraunt or otherwise,
according to legal tenure of Frank Charter, or of other immunities royal in
tenure of such subjects, as accordingly Quaestores at twenty five years,
according to Tacitus. Which green age could not amongst us have Annal. lib. 3.
had that maturitie of judgment, and foresight in these times, that is
required in a worthy Treasurer: although amongst those Romans in that golden
age of nature, we may by circumstances find, that young noble men were in all
the parts of their life generally, temperate and frugall, with a certain
specious appearance of liberality; yet did not in the^ appear that precocitie,
which is in many for places of reputation in their country, by suppressing
many lusts, motions,

The Lord high Treasurer of England his office is in the Exchequer, erected by
king William the first, for safe custody of his crown lands, and of those
records which may concern them. To which Queen Marie joined the Surueyors
general, the court of Augmentations and revenues of the Crown, with the
first Henry the eight. This office is called Scaccarium, of a certain large
square table, which according to Geruas of Tilburie, cited by M. William
Camden, has a chequered cloth brought and spread upon it, in the term of
Easter, as a place or table of just proportion, account, or judgment; in all
causes respecting the royal treasure or revenues: where all civil causes
betwixt the prince and his tenants are indifferently decided. Judges in this
court are, the Lord high Treasurer of England, the Chancelour of the Exchequer,
the Lord chief Baron of that court, with other four Barons assistants, the
Remembrancer, Engrosser, Controller, Clearkes of the Pleas, and of the
Pipe-office; Auditors with their Arist. in Polit.
when people and nations were necessarily constrained to require supplies Just.
Lipsius writes: another of brass or copper, which the Cap. 1. de re Pe^.
Plin. lib. 18. cap. 3.
Romans therefore called Pecunia quod esset nota pecudis signata: of which
coins diverse under the Romans here in Britain, as well of copper as iron
William Camden in his book of Britain antiquities. Silver amongst the
Romans was first coined, Anno, ab vrbe cond. 484. F. Pictore and Qu. Oculeio
Coss. The coin of gold 62 years after the silver, Plin. lib. 1.
C. Claudio Nerone, and Marco Liuio Salinatore Coss. The beginning and end of
coining was for commerce, as by pieces of some value for exchange of other
commodities to people of other nations: by whose diverse and several stamp^s
Cicero, Expetuntur diuitiae cum ad vitae vsus Lib. 2. Oss.
necessarios tum ad perfruendas voluptates. Dilectant enim magnifici apparatus
vitaeque cultus cum elegantia and copia quibus rebus effectum est vt infinita
pecuniae cupiditas esset. A Treasurers prudent care and whole study therefore,
leuelleth at all such honorable means and just occasions as may serve to
bring in diverse sums, and how to maintain a continual harvest of getting,
to sustain those infinite burdens of necessary disbursement; how to levy
for the Commonwealth with good discretion, and nothing without urgent cause.
Unto which contribution, that it may be more liberal and cheerful, is
required, that the people be generally well affected both toward the prince
and unto that common necessity which importuneth the same: for the better
effecting whereof, some plausible and effectual declaration published unto
them by their Sovereign, readily prepares their hearts, moving in them a
more benificent kind Vt omnes intelligant Cic. 2. O^.
si salui esse velint necessitati esse parendum. For being persuaded, that the
general safety depends thereupon, you shall find the covetous, readiest to
contribute. Moreover it adds very much unto the love of people toward their
princes, and to their good opinion of his grace and meekness unto them
correspondently, when he by suit seeks that which his regal authority might
exact.

The respects are great, and those necessities important, which should urge a
prince to violence in those cases: yet a good Sovereign can never have cause
of compulsion: For when the king which has authority to constrain, uses a

For this office therefore, all honest and needful means of getting are to
be carefully studied and provided: toward the true maintenance whereof it
highly benefiteth to forbear all superfluous damnable and intolerable
subsidies: for if such public businesses in a Commonwealth oppress the
prince, which according to the best judgments being great and multiplied, do
through prudent Etenim qui rempublicam gubernabunt consulere debebunt, vt earum
rerum copia sit quae sunt necessariae. Which if they do Cic. 2. Off.
carefully respect, sildome or never shall any vehement cause happen to them of
exaction. And therefore that good and charitable Emperor Traiane utterly
disallowing, and detesting all compulsion and privy pinches in those cases,
Fiscum lienem vocauit, quod eo scilicet crescente artus reliqui co^tabescunt.
Howbeit, that In vita Iuliani.
sentence in some cases to me seems more verily physical according to the
letter, than morally philosophical, answering to the sense. And therefore
partafrugaliter tuendo, many such inconveniences are prevented, Magis etenim
dedecus est parta amittere, qua^omnino no^ paruisse. This treasure therefore
ought to be cherished, Salust. bell. Iugurth. lib.
the cherishing whereof is principally found in cutting off all idle and
superfluous expenses: for therein it does as well increase by saving as
receiving. It likewise augmenteth by the bold and industrious valor of them,
which make great and honorable adventures, as well by land service, as nauall
for their countries glory: returning after a long, laborious, and chargeable
voyage, laden with treasure and commodities. So did the noble Roman Aemilius
bring from the Sir Francis Drake, so much remembered and acknowledged through
the whole world (which he compassed) for his noble skill and industrious
fortitude, who did both much benefit and magnify the state Elizabeth brought
much coin, and bullion of gold and silver unto the princes treasures, somewhat
out of hostile spoils from the Spaniards, taken by that ever renowned Earl of
Cumberland in his nauall voyages. To whom at this day we shall find few
comparable George Clifford.
for their painful adue^tures, equiualuable with the travels either of Crist.
Colombo, or Hernando Cortez; if you will superadde thereunto that excellent
fortune and native valor, which always accompanied and winged their heroical
enterprises. I might speak here of Sir Thomas Candish, and of Sir Humfrey
Gilbert: Francis Drake, in him is comprised so much as they could deserve.
Diverse other gallant gentlemen, borne here in England amongst us, which being
yet young and alive, have percase some fortunes in store, to make them as
glorious in such services, as any that ever travailed. My meaning is not here,
that by the direptions, piracies, depredations of cities or nations
confederated and united (which is merely dishonest and unprofitable) to farce
Lucius Mummius (Colleague in Censorship to Paulus Aemylius aforesaid) brought
from the state of a most opulent and brave city: by which atchieuements,
Cicero notes in his Offices, that Mummius was not a penny the wealthier in his
own private purse than before. Add hereunto, not unlike in magnificence,
though their fortunes were unequal, the condition of that sometimes right
noble and unfortunate Lord of good memory, Robert Earl of Essex, after his
expedition to Cales: By which example in himself he made known to the
covetous captains of his time, and unto those which had heard of his
victories, that true glory was merely the subject and substance of his
service, which he shared with his country: treasure the meede of his
military men, which he Hunc enim maxim Cic. Off. 1.
populus admiratur qui pecunia non mouetur: quod in quo viro perspectum sit,
hunc dignum spectatu arbitramur, etc. Such princes therefore undoubtedly win a
general good opinion and admiration, in seeming to despise those treasures,
and

This Office amongst diverse otherwise to weaken it, is laid open to those
massy charges which the prince undergoes in his wars: and from the
fountain thereof all inferior Treasurers of armies, garrisons, nauies and
provinces, with such like, are continually served. It is therefore most
reasonable, considering so many rivers are supplied therewith, that diligent
circumspection be required defect of the slenderest vain branching from it,
penury succeed, being a

A curious eye with vigilant regard must be bent upon the Collectors,
Receivers, Auditors, and other inferior ministers belonging to this office;
least in exactions, or by fraudulent devises they satisfy there private
avarice with a kind of extortion or cruelty. For avarice is an inordinate lust
of having, whose appetite is infinite, whose acquisition immoderate, whose
possession unlawful, whereby the prince undoubtedly may be brought into
danger. It is like that Hydra which Poets talk of, that though the stroke of
Justice execute upon it continually; yet will it miraculously revive again: it
forces not either Salust describes it a beast ravenous, cruel, and
intolerable: where it haunteth, huge Cities, Fields, Churches, and Houses are
laid wast: Heaven and Earth profanely mingled; Armies and strong walls cannot
restrain the violence thereof: It spoileth all mortal people of good Report,
Modesty, Children, Nation and Parents, etc. So does this brightness of gold
bleare men's outward senses, so fuming in their heads, and fastened in their
hearts, that they fear not any mischief which can accompany Lucre. Such
wicked, unjust, and ravenous officers, eating the people as bread, are to be
squeezed like sponges full of water. Great caution therefore must be used
against the violence of officers in such extortion, least the Henry the eight
in the second year of his reign did most politickely provide, in his
proceedings against Sir Richard Emson and M. Dudley, late inward and of
counsel in such cases unto his sage father, king Henry the seventh. By good
example of whose punishment others might upon the like inconveniences suffer.
For if the people find not redress upon their complaints, then will they rise
(as at that time it was feared) in open hostility: which if the blood of those
extorting officers can expiate without some humane slaughter sacrificed to
ten hundred scpulchers, then is it happy: but such general hurts have
commonly no compensation, without a general confusion.

The peoples payments ought so to be disposed therefore, that all men according
to their faculties, by due discretion of good and honest sworn officers in
every shire or province, may take such reasonable days, and times of payment
limited, as they may without any grudging or disease contribute heartely.
Moreover, that such (as are in special affairs of their prince, and for the
Commonwealth employed; having by such occasions largely spent of their own
private for the common good, as every good man will in such cases) be for
examples sake, for the good encouragement of others, precisely exempted from
all kind of burdens and impositions. Also such as have formerly done much
Barth. Cassan. 32 Consid. 6. partis Catol. glor. mu^di.
excepted in time of peace from all collections, tallages, gabels, exactions,
customs and impositions whatsoever, which others are tied unto: likewise in

Dispensation of these tributes and subsidies must be to the general, and not
any particular use: for no man will stick at a little charges employed to
public behoof, if it once appear, that the prince do not consume his
Richard the second, and king Henry the sixth, with other princes, upon the like
occasions. Such gettings therefore as proceed from

That most prudent and worthy Lord Treasurer William Cecill goodly well
approved over all causes, and in all business either public or private,
during the late and most dear mirror of good government, Queen Elizabeth, of
most renowned and everliving memory, did leave behind him a lively pattern
and precedent of his singular care and excellent wisdom, to the great
increase of that stock, committed then to his charge, as may serve
everlastingly to them which yet are or ever may be credited with that office,
to get

The treasure therefore may not be wilfully wasted or exhausted for
satisfaction of any prince in his private prodigality. Vera enim and simplex
via Oration Philippi in Senate. ex Salust.
est, magnitudinem animi in addendo, non demendo reipublica ostendere. For
persons of lavish humors and exorbitate affections, think not that there is
any true fruition of treasure without profusion. Diue deep therefore into the
bottomless danger thereof by manifold and most manifest example and
observation, as in Archigallo king of the Britains, who was deposed by the
people for his extortion, after he had reigned five years, and then upon his
Edward of Carnaruan, king of England, Edw. 2.
when he by such means lost the love of his commons, by listening unto
flatterers, and wilfully robbed himself of the fealty of his nobles, which
opened his sepulcher for other matters more securely. Men of such profuse

From hence likewise brauncheth another special rule of moderation, that no
leuies surmount the princes occasions: for if it tend not to the subjects great
benefit, being very necessarily dispensed, it dishonors any Sovereign to
strain them in so small a matter. And such impositions must also be sildome,
that the people grow not weary with them, being fashioned more or less
according to their plenty or poverty: for such princes are haunted with the
furies of a lamentable infamy, whose treasuries devour the subjects labors,
Philip le beau and Charles the fifth, kings of that realm, had set upon the
wines and salt, caused the men of Gascoyne and others in the days of Henry the
second, king of France, to rebel, which was a great prejudice and danger unto
that state, albeit now by custom a special part of that crowns revenues (at
which no man, by reason of the long continuance in these latter times,
repineth, but willingly submits himself to the burden) depends upon them
and the like Monopolies. Good princes also will take heed of that pernicious
desire, which in prosperity fills up the still gaping mouths and purses of
parasiticall Elizabeth, which abusing her high grace, extended toward them out
of her mere royal nature, compassed such things as were both preiudicall to
her reputation, and to the Commonwealth in some sort: such persons as these
cannot be truly called servants, but unto their own intolerable affections;
neither will I give instance of them, namely, being so generally known, and
fresh in our memories; as also for many more reasons of modesty which inhibite
it. It is therefore most certain, that all newly denised monopolies usurping
upon the subjects trades and travels, are odious, and commonly dangerous: such
as amongst other Vespasian took of Vryne, Titus seemed to mislike thereof) told
him, that though the subject was unsavory, yet the accident was sweet. And
what a beastly Monopoly or monthly tribute is that, which is at this day taken
into the Popes treasuries in Rome and at Bologna, from those curtisans and
whores, which by profession prostitute their bodies for gain. Which the very
Gentiles and Atheists as Lampridius writes in his Histories, did prohibit,
That any tributes issuing from harlots or bauds, should be received into the
sacred Treasuries, but reserved in another place for the disposition of the
Ediles Curules toward the furnishing and setting forth of public plays and
shows, as also to the reparation and mending of bridges, ports, and high
Alexander Seuerus taxed all sorts of artificers, drapers, glasiers, skinners,
masons, plasterers, shoomakers, with such like, in a moderate order; the Roman
Empire being then grown up to that height, which could not easily permit
insurrection or mutinies. Only this according truly with the state of princes
in such cases, Vectigal optimum est parsimonia: for by being frugall of his
Claudius Nero, thought his tyrannies and oppressions of the people had
purchased him a general and mortal hatred amongst them: yet devised this one
way, (Quasi pulcherrimum donum generi mortalium daturus) to free the Romans
Cor. Tac. lib. 13. Annalium.
during his time from all tributes, and thereby to wash out of the peoples
remembrance all infamous notes of his own misgouernment: howbeit, the Senate
told him, That it would be the subversion of his state in posterity, that those
fruits by which the imperial state was sustained, should be taken away. And
certain it is, (if there be many Monopolies in the Commonwealth) that diverse
good princes will either remit or diminish them; which Charles the eight of
France (as Lupanus writes) had done, but that death otherwise prevented his
beneficence. Howbeit, in all affairs concerning the conservation or
amplification of any Commonwealth: Regis Aerarium est Ioh. Tilius lib* ^m. de
rebugall.
aerarium populi, and aerarium populi mutuo regis est aerarium. And therefore,
when little or no public cause of exhaustion impendeth, frugalitie most
honoreth a prince, by keeping a due proportion betwixt the treasure got and his
disbursements, according to the square of necessity.

In leuying of Subsidies it must be specially respected, that equality without
any partial or affectionate passion in the collectors and officers be
precisely respected: that the contribution of Cities, Societies, and
Husbandmen,

It is very commendable in a prince to be reputed liberal, which some curious
Nicolo Man. il preu. cap. 16. De liberalita and miseria, etc.
should appear in the people frankely to contribute toward the conservation
and encouragement of that peace by which they were enriched. He may not make
the people fearful of his liberality with grievous and unneedful
impositions; but only sparing his own, using their beneuolences to their
general comfort, with a covetous kind of liberality: which being with good
cunning and discretion exercised, the people will with all honor to the prince
embrace it lovingly: for he which is virtuously liberal, according to Salust:
Annius ferox praua via ingressus (vbi consueta non suppetunt) Ad Caes de Rep.
ordinanda.
fertur accensus in socios modo, modo in ciues: mouet composita and res nouas
veteribus acquirit, etc. Such a course therefore sometimes will undo both the
prince and subject, being a very dangerous kind of liberality. What must he
therefore do to maintain a good opinion of that virtue without peril? First,
let him not fret in wardly, though he be condemned of parsimonie, so closely
smothering avarice, that he be not reputed covetous: for admit that attribute
be black stone, yet is the subject thereof bright gold: for a prince cannot
make safe use of liberality, neither hold his own sure without danger. Titus
Flaminius purchase amongst the Greeks, which upon the overthrow of king Philip
of Macedon, enfranchised all the cities of Greece from tributes by public
proclamations in every place. Likewise Pertinax granted unto all that
exercised tillage and husbandry, frank intermission from ten years
tribute. Howbeit, if princes have laid a firm thereby. To princes militant
also profuse liberality much avails, if Cyrus, Caesar, Alexander: for that
both retains and augmenteth their reputation, if the general burden be not
carried out of their own cofers. Let this only be considered of prodigality;
That it is a great vessel bottomless, a big chest locklesse, a vain
profusion careless. And if I should paint that strumpet to life, I would place
her in great and jolly pomp, variably plumed, marching betwixt a notable
fool, and a singular braggart, serving for two villainous weak supporters: and
seconded at an ynch also by two forlorneslaues; one of them a miserable beggar,
and the other an vnpittied penetentiarie. Me seems it a fit comparison
betwixt the viper and princely prodigality: Actaeon, when after the murtherous
pleasures and concupiscence of his eyes and flesh, he was transformed into a
fearful beast, excellently shadowing that pusillanimitie which through excess
of sensuality deprive him of a reasonable creatures shape and faculties,
leaving

Temperance therefore is a virtue which subiecteth pleasures to the yoke of
reason, limiting all things within moderation: Cicero defines it to be the
constant and moderat domination of reason, restraining us from lusts, and from
other violent imperfections of the mind. Plato with Aristotle consents, that
Temperance is most speciously seen in passing over, and as it were fearfully,
Sophrosune, being the conseruator of prudence, signifying a moderation or
frugalitie: for if fleshly concupiscence or inordinate pleasure subject the
noble part of man, then will they forceably banish all reason and moderation,
manacling and fettering him within the mazie wilderness of secure sensuality:
so that neither foot nor hand shall have power to discharge their natural
functions in any due proportion, but are sopped and steeped in the dregs of all
riot and profusion, which dragge along with them (as I said before) rapacitie,
shame, and beggerie. Wise princes and potentates therefore, to whom God has
imparted treasures in abundance, and common to all creatures having life, or
from some inwardly conceived Seneca writ, That there be delights with which
temperance dispenses, and others also which she does hate and banish:
considering therefore how nature is nourished and supplied with a little, and
that temperance by the direction of reason prescribes a necessity to nature,
that it may live within a mediocritie: these pleasures of excess in diet,
ornaments, and of all luxurious appetites, Cicero divides temperance into
three parts: first into Continence, by which desire is restrained under the
government of counsel, and which in all corporal diet and ornament keeps a
mean. Unto which Abstinence is annexed as a part thereof, and manifested in
binding men's hands from rapine and theft: next into Clemency, which is a
mental temperance, when there is power and sufficient means to punish and
revenge, or rather (as Seneca terms it) a lenity discending from the
superior Cicero defines) is a continent moderation or cohibition of lusts,
moving and reuelling in the mind. He likewise says, That honest modesty
through shamefastness does retain a noble and Lib. 3. ad Heren.
constant authority. Adiunct to this is the fear of shame or disgrace, as by
the Lib. 2. de innent.
philosophical definition of Verecundia should appear, which Tully semblably
calls ingenious timiditie, with a reverence expressed unto men: whereas by
the natural inclination and property thereof it will not hurt any man; but is
that true comeliness or decency which the Philosophers call (...), perfectly
Plato in his dialogue of temperance cites or faineth a saying of Critias to
Charmides, a beautiful young man disputing with him concerning a medicine or
charm for the headache, That te^perance would cure that disease, with all
grieuances of the body likewise: and dema^ding of Charmides, whether Plato
faineth, Genas eius rubore suffusas gratiore^ specie^ oste^disse, pudore^
etenim eam atate^ decuisse. This affection albeit Philosophers Plato. lib. 20.
Charmides sieve de temp.
do not call a virtue, yet is annexed thereunto. Whence it was, that Diogenes
termed it the tincture of virtue, proceeding from thence and from a native
ingenuity; modesty being a decent seemlinesse and good order in all things,
co^uerseth in moderating the perturbations and motions of the mind, by the
retaining of a concordance

The parts of modesty be lowliness or humility; so forceably depressing
insolence, that by how much the more worthy men be, so much the more humble
they may show themselves. Which lesson our Savior Christ commanded us to
learn of him, considering, that in us, as of our selves, nothing can be decent
or commendable, but only proceeding from the precious gift of God. This lesson
teaches us the fruition of that Oracle, Nosce teipsum;

The second part of modesty should seem to be the desire to learn and be
taught: which is seen in men, that recognizing their ignorance, are studious
and desirous of instruction.

The third part of modesty does speciously declare it self in pleasantness
of speech, alacrity, comitie, and affability. This ought to be well known
and practiced by wise courtiers: for these qualities grace them amongst persons
of the best quality: And this is reputed a kind of moderate and well tasting

The fourth and last part is moderation in apparel, and in other corporal
ornaments; being the mediocritie betwixt riotous curiosity and slouenrie:
showing, that all garments should be neat fit for the body, and agreeable to
the sex which should wear them: in worth and fashion correspondent to the
state, substance, age, place, time, birth, and honest custom of those persons
which use them. To conclude therefore I say, that Temperance is a virtue, than
which nothing is more powerful, toward the repressing of affections, nothing
more fit for the good composition and confirmation of men's manners, nothing
more effectual toward the attainement of Gods favor,

It follows needfully, that I speak somewhat of intemperance, and of Cicero,
is such a kind of obedience unto lusts, merely repugnant to Lib. 3. Tusc.
the right mind, and unto all prescription of reason, that the private desires
can neither be governed nor contained in any moderation; and thereof are two
parts: one which excessiuely nuzzleth it self in delicacie, and another which
does not. By violence of the first, men unreasonably gallop into the perilous
gulf of pleasures, by spurring upon their libidinous appetites against reason:
That other, which is called (...), is a kind of saluage o^ senseless hardness
or dullness in despising all pleasures, honest and dishonest whatsoever. Of
which temper we shall not in this our age find many; Seneca Voluntariam
insaniam. For thereby nature is weakened and corrupted, the keen edge of the
best understanding rebated, wrath without reason kindled, lust without measure
incensed, secrets of greatest moment disclosed, words to particular persons,
and sometimes to the Commonwealth, offensive uttered. Wonder it is therefore,
why men should voluntarily drown themselves in excess; a little is
comfortable and that Proverb, Nequid nimis, very medicinable, if it can be
willingly disgested. Rapacitie being adiunct to incontinence, hurts many,
proceeding from riot and immeasurable expense: when princes and noble persons
impose grievous burdens upon their subjects and tenants, to maintain that
excess; or when they put

Opposite to mercy (which is the adiunct of Clemency) stands lentitude; or
foolish pity, being the part of a blockish magistrate, as I will partly note
in the Morals of my third book. But cruelty does not only resist temperance

Against modesty (which is the third and last part of temperance)
contumaciously stand impudency, being a most detestable vice in the presence
of God, or of all good men, which contemns or neglects all decency, with
honesty of life, opening a large and easy way to vicious conversation,

Carelessness and negligence likewise, being the qualities of sluggish dolts,
and persons assotted with curiosity, (which is the inordinate diligence or
desire to learn arts unprofitable, evil, and unnecessary) stand Aristotle)
oppositely Lib. 2. and 4. ad N^chomachum.
stand against civil and ingenuous speech, discourse, and affability.
Howbeit, the witty, well seasoned, and discreet sayings of prudent and sage
persons, with a decent alacrity, which minister no cause of offense, (but may
be with reasonable and plausible modesty converted) is very commendable and
praise-worthie. For such as abhor ieasting, are deemed dull, clownish,
unsociable, and Stoicall after a fashion. Which sort of people, to toward and
ingenuous persons is more odious than the bitter

There is likewise another sort of people, which in countenance, speech,
action, gate, and gesture, grossly counterfeit a kind of gravity, to conceal
their foolishness: whose adulterate sapience to men of sound judgment is most
absurd and ridiculous; and others which in princes courts (to make the nobler
sort laugh) practice (though not so cunningly) the parts of Tarleton: by
simulation deeming in themselves, how that show will be thought somewhat
contrary unto their own natures, which are more than half the same: and
these fellows at unawares palpably fall into some foolish and odious
affectation of civility: whereas (indeed) in

Howbeit, these qualities (though herein somewhat I have digressed from the
subject of my matter) are more fit for the knowledge of Palladines and
Courtiers, which I refer to Baltasar Castiglion, and Duro di Pascolo, in
their discourses upon Court-ship: Only this which Plato cites in the person
of Socrates, our outside and inside must be the same in all. Contendendum est
enim potius vt sub legitimis institutis temperati efficiamur, Plat. lib. 20.
quam vt sub dialecticis rationibus de Temperantia disputemus: quandoquidem
summa quadam difficultute cognoscitur; and cognita sine vsu non modo nihil
prosunt, sed and obsunt quamplurimum: quodque magis est nisi re ipsa
possideatur, perfect cognosci nequit, etc.

The fourth and last extreme of Modesty does consist in excess of apparel,
Semper etenim in ciuitate qu^us opes nullae sunt bonis inuident, malos Salust.
in con. Cat
extollunt, vetera odere, noua exoptant; inopia suarum rerum mutari omnia
student. This profusion therefore next to the vice of gluttonous surfeit,

But thus much in brief as I could, expressing the adjuncts and members of
Temperance, and of her opposites, subalternately respecting the purse: now
somewhat concerning the beneficence and liberality which befitteth potentates.

It is not thought fit, that princes should precisely stand at utterance with
true liberality being of it self merely virtuous: but that they shun a
general largess or profusion rather, which most Kings affect most in the
beginning of their reigns, considering that there are many (whose services
having long expected recompense) which should be seasoned and encouraged in
their faithfulness and honesties with some secret taste of royal Munificence.

This consideration in some proceeds out of a magnificent heart, most
liberally garnished with true virtues; and in others, from ambition, and a
vaineglorious desire of somewhat more than ordinary, cunningly couched in
their own heads. Princes therefore shall so much, or more Cicero Officiorum 2.
Stultum est quod libenter facias, curare vt id diutius facere non possis, For
how can a man properly, term that a benefit bestowed which is a mere
malifice to the bestower; and hence is that Proverb of Hunius fitted to this
purpose, Benefacta malelocata malefacta arbitror. Yet if God have so provided
that a Prince must surely fall into the choice of those two damnable extremes
(both which all Princes should hold detestable as snakes) of the two
mischiefs, I would he rather did incline to couetise: for wealth gives some
shadow to shame: albeit our wise men and all Philosophers Alexanders
resolution and necessity loose the same, but that they may with moderation and
upon good cause exceed rather in liberality: which the seldomer used, may be
the richer when it happens: and if it come often, then so much the shorter
and sweeter.

There is another fashion of Liberality peculiar to princes, which may which a
wise prince in his justice, may by good discretion very commendably Henry the
eight used (when the Chaunteries and religious houses, to the value of two
hundred pounds yearly, and under, with all lands and goods belonging them,
were by Parliament granted unto him in the seven and twentieth year of his
reign) by Lincoln Shire, York Shire, and in other parts of this Realm,
under the color of a dislike, upon a new size of Subsidy to be levied, were
so quickly quieted by the gentlemen, principal heads in those disturbed parts,
whose very countenance amated the seditious commons, which once and again
stirred to disturbance and subversion of the present quiet; being (as it was
thought) first kindled at the fire, which M. Thomas Cromwell, then Lord privy
Seal, and Vicegerent general of the Spiritualties, brought with him, to make

For Treasures of princes, noble men, and private persons, by their gifts to
gain a good opinion amongst good men of their true liberality, these three
cautions are required: First, a respect unto the time; secondly, to the
quantity; thirdly, to the person: when, how much, and upon whom they will
bestow: the time limited, when it may stand them in most steed which be
rewarded, not preiudicing others to maintain the same, according to the saying
of Cicero, Ab hoc genere largitionis, vt alijs detur alijs auferatur aberunt ij
qui rempub, tuebuntur: As in granting of Monopolies to the pleasuring
Sycilian; who with money that was none of his own, but lent unto him as in
trust to be restored, upon demand bought all the iron out of the yronmongers
Syracusae: and when merchants had from diverse places repaired to that city,
this Ingrosser furnished them with that commodity, not greatly raising the
price thereof: yet so, that for the disbursement of fifty talents he gained
an hundred; which was a double use: for a Talent Atticke amounted to six
hundred crowns: in so much, as by bestowing thirty thousand crowns, he
gained clear threescore thousand, and had a quick return of his money. But
the bruit hereof being brought unto the tyrant Dionysius; albeit the money was
not taken from him, (which many miserable tyrants would have done) yet was he
banished from Syracusae. Which punishment was so much the less, by how much

These and such like Monopolies (where many businesses are handled for the
Commonwealth) are only fit for princes, and not to be diuolued or unadvisedly
bestowed upon merchants or other subjects: for so much as they procure a general
malice of the people for a private man's thanks unto the prince: and some
princes get not so much as thanks. The quantity likewise ought to be measured
by the rule of their own faculties which bestow them: the persons upon whom
it is bestowed respected according to their worth and quality, taking good
heed that they benefit not their friends by preiudicing strangers, or oppress
any to maintain the report of their liberality, breaking that bubble of vain
glory soon puffed up with emptiness, which allureth babes Suum namque cuique
in Cic. Off. 3.
commodum ferendum est potius, quam alterius commodus detrahendum. In giving
therefore, respects are had unto the qualities of those persons benefited, not
to their fortunes, Melius est enim apud bonos quam apud fortunatos beneficium
collocari Off. 2.
(says Cicero): all eminent tokens of good knowledge and virtues in people
must be cherished and encouraged with beneficence: such as love them much,
should be rewarded with much; which is intended by the interior and not any
exterior speech, as for mere affection only, not benefiting flatterers which
entirely love for lucre, considering how the cares of this frail honor with
the deceitfulness of riches and fleshly lusts, enter the thoughts of such
Sicophants and choking the divine grace within them which is made unfruitful:
also they that by such deceit seek riches, undoubtedly fall Mark. cap. 4.
into temptations, snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts, which
drown men in perdition. Tim. 1. cap. 6.


They therefore that in giving use these respects, resemble fruitful grounds,
yielding much more grain than they received; when in a charitable respect and
for necessity sake some be rewarded, that have not any manifest tokens of
desert or virtue requiring it: which in such good and sound discretion
consoundeth melodiously with the giuers virtues and dignities. Yet for so much
as the number of people craving and wanting is infinite, relief mutually done
and received. Which observation likewise seems in Salust, Vbi Romani virtute
pericula propulerant, socijs atque amicis I^coniur. Cat.
auxilia portabant, magisque dandis quam accipiendis beneficijs amicitias
parabant.

Malicious parasites and pick thanks, the canker and rust of just honor and
riches, must be blotted out of the books of your beneficence, as the most
ungrateful vipers of nobility: for if they find your inclination to their
subtleties, then will they never cease, like a Northeast wind, till they have
blasted all before them, both stock and reputation. Malitia namque praemijs
excercetur; vbi ea dempseris nemo omnium gratuito malus est. By Ad Caes. de
Repordinand.
these means likewise may circumspect princes aucupate the services of Ne
praediorum quaerendorum proposita spe ad calumniandum impellantur: sin autem
delatoribus praemia eripiantur, vix est vt Job. ^d. de Rep.
vlla peccatorum vltio sequatur. We have here in this our Commonwealth much
like order observed: as that any man preferring just information against
private persons, transgressing the statutes penal, shall have for his meed
half the forfeiture and penalty limited: which if in other matters capital,
and of more moment, it were permitted, would be a sure and undoubted means,
to restrain many crimes, and heinous transgressions of

There is likewise a kind of Liberality most expedient, which Cicero calls
beneficence; being as it were a willing habit, or inclination, moving men to
do good. This goodness he defines by the similitude of them which will not
restrain the course of a river freely running, as not maliciously crossing
another preferment, when it withdraws not one mite from their own, but
further, or advance it rather. The contrary to which is very rife in every
princes court at this day. Likewise it is held a kind of Liberality, to give
sound and honest counsel from a well-willing heart to the best of their
cunning, unto such as will consult with them: this Dilige bonum servum vt
animam tuam, and tracta cum vt fratrem tuum. Good Princes therefore will show
their beneficence unto good Counselors, being absent, present, alive, or dead:
even in aduauncing their children to those offices after them, if they be
found worthy. Which truly royal beneficence has won so many good
counselors hearts, that not only they have left all their lands and
possessions at their death unto the king; but some of them have most joyfully
sacrificed their lending and dutiful repayment is very needful and
commodious, being Vir iustus liberalis est and mutuum dat; declaring, that
lending is a member of Liberality; which undoubtedly tends to the
conservation of humane society.

Thus much (least I should weary my self or the Reader with matters too
vulgar and generally known) I think sufficient for this Office. Howbeit,
there are many things which I would and may not set down: and much also which
I cannot, though I would most gladly; because I want means to attain unto the
knowledge of some special secrets in this Office of Treasurers: howbeit,
finding my force unworthy such mysteries,

Finis Libri Primi.
The second Book of
IT is a most chargeable burden, heavily leaning on Office of Secret
Counselors.
princely shoulders, to govern by the compass of sapience, to minister
justice with equabilitie, to bridle the boldness of vice, to give a lively
spirit to the desire of virtue, to maintain a due proportion in all Offices,
and to win the constant love of a Commonwealth with excellent prudence and
desert: yet without these either in the prince, in him that counsels, or in
them both, no Commonwealth can flourish: for the natures of men's wits are
threefold; that which is principal Israel, he threatened to that nation, how
children should bear their scepter, and feeble persons direct their public
counsels. Which kind of feebleness is attributed not unaptly to foolish and
ambicious counselors, whom Salust in one Oration to Caius Julius Caesar
resembles unto the superfluous ballase of a ship, which as things
unprofitable, minimique precij (upon the sudden violence of any tempest) the
masters and Officers, competent knowledge also: for as it suffices not, to
keep the body in Solomon, or stronger by three degrees than Hercules; yet
does experience in nature teach us, that a necessary necessity requires this
election of approved Tacitus, No man is so naturally prompt, or has that
dexterity to deal in his own cause, which he shall find in himself;
soliciting for another. And in another place, Grauissimi principis labores
queis orbem terrae capessit egent adminicutis: The most serious labors of a
prince (by which he wins the whole earth) stand in need of helps. For they
to whom much business and many people are committed, have much need of
counsel.

Every good Prince which did formerly govern, was attended with as many
Counselors, as he was with eyes, ears, and hands: Caius Caesar with Hyppol a
coll. de Cons. and Consili.
Quintus Paedius and Cornelius Balbus; Augustus with Mecoenas and Agrippa;
Adrianus with Celsus, Saluius, and Neratius; Marcus Antoninus with Scaeuola,
Mutianus, and Volatianus; Seuerus with Papinianus. And to be short, our late
Princes of most fortunate and blessed memory, Queen Elizabeth, and your
Majesty, with Sir Nicholas Bacon, Sir Walter Mildemay, Sir John Cheek, Sir
Francis Walsingham, William Lord Burghley, Robert Earl of Leycester, Robert
Cecyll Earl of Salisburie, Sir The. Egerton Lord Elesmere and Chancellor, Sir
Tho. Sackuylle Earl of Dorset now Lord Treasurer, with diverse others. And
hence is it, that Cicero notes, Not with swiftness and bodily strength great
In Cat. Ma.
matters are ordered, but with counsel and authority. Likewise Salust, With
much reading and hearing I find, that all Nations have been prosperous, so
long as just counsel prevailed with them: but being once with partiality,
fear, and pleasure corrupted, presently their wealth wasted, their Empire
vanished, and sla^erie tyrannized upon them. And as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus
writes, the cause Lib. 2.
why Rome so long flourished, was, That the governors of the Empire were
directed by Counsels of the Senate, not following their own opinions: for by
the assembly of wise Counselors, the princes wisdom is increased. As
Capitolinus writes: Bonus fit si bonis amicis vtatur: That Prince which makes
use of In ^it. Alex.
good friends, is made a good Prince. By their Counsels likewise says Otho
Tacitus is the goodness and wisdom of princes opened: Lib. 2. Annal.
also Salust calls, Prosperitatem regis famam Consiliarij: The kings
prosperity to depend upon the Counselors fame: and so by good inuersion, the
fame of a Counselor to depend upon the kings prosperity. But it is needless

A Counsel therefore, according to Bodin, is a lawful congregation or
assembly of choice persons, which advise the king in times of peace and war
how to govern the Commonwealth: and as Furio Ceriolano defines them
Counselors are apt persons chosen for fit business, in whom there is required
good sufficiency toward the administration of all matters debated in
Counsels. Demosthenes therefore calls consultation, The chapter and
constancy, the base of all virtues.

I will particularly speak in my third book of Offices somewhat concerning
Charles the eight added seventeen councelours spiritual and temporal. After
whom his successor Jews the 12 superadded one prelate and two more
counselors fulfilling the number of 20 besides two secretaries, whereof one
did serve in place of an actuarie: it being Vine. Lupan. de Mag. Franciae.
further ordained, that these should keep six months continually together in
council betwixt seven and ten in the forenoone and after dinner betwixt three
and five hours. This Senate therefore (which the French king does by peculiar
demonstration call his own council from which by the edict of Philip le beau
no persons of that Realm can appeal, because the king himself which
acknowledges no superior in his dominions under God, is the chief thereof)
conuerseth in all public affairs of the Commonwealth, respecting the king
and government, which is advised and directed thereby. Albeit the king be judge
of this Counsel, and of the Parliament, yet is he subject to the laws
thereof. Nam Parliamentis secundum deum rex solus Imperat, qui absens aque in
Parliamenti ac in priuati Consilij decretis loquitur: Ioh. Til^ in Com. de
Rebus Gall.
For (as a God) the king himself only rules in the Parliaments: who (though
he be not present in the Sessions) yet has his voice royal assenting or
dissenting both in the Parliaments and private Counsels of state: Albeit the
Parliamentall jurisdiction surpasses this Counsel. Neither is it permitted,
that any President, Marshall, or other principal magistrate shall (during the
time of his authority) retain his place, or give a voice in that Office; but
is sequestered or suspended from entermedling in those secret consultations upon
very reasonable and needful respects: because certain expostulations may be
concerning some negligent, indirect, or corrupt dealings in Charles the eight
instituted, that the Lord Chauncelor should be present, who (being directed by
the true rule of Justice, should take the rites and suffrages of those other
Counselors by just number in any serious causes. King Philip le Long ordained
of this Counsel twenty Noblemen: whereof six were of the blood, two
Marischals, Malo, with the Chauncellor of France, and nine others. These had
the determining of all great causes; ordering (as in their wisdoms was
thought fit) the families of the King, of his Queen, and of his children: also
to take account each month of the Treasurers, and to reform any thing which
needed help in that Office. In which (as in our Counsel chamber of England)
there is a register or Diarie book kept of all special causes there handled
and debated, which deserve monument. And this Counsel is therefore fitly
called the Commonwealths heart; wherein the knowledge and understanding is
placed, being properly termed, Dux and Imperator vitae mortalium: The
Captain and Commander Salust in one of his Orations: Patres consilio valere
debent, populo superuacanea est calliditas. The Fathers and Senators should
exceed and prevail in their Counsel: Calliditie becomes not the
Commonaltie*

Them therefore that serve in such Office, it behooves to be very well skilled
in princely cunning being with diligence employed in affairs of state, and
politic matters, narrowly respecting government. This Counsel especially
conuerseth in civil causes; as in punishing of Rulers, Deputies, Justices of
peace, Generals of armies, Coronels, private Captains, inferior Counselors of
the prince civil or martial, concerning their just dealing or iniquity in
execution of their Offices. In whose doom it rests, whether they shall be
discharged or retained in their places, which persons are to be thought
serviceable, and which not. This Counsel likewise provides, that there be no
falsehood in paying of wages and provision for victual used by the treasurers
and prouant

Those secrets of a State, which commonly fore beyond the vulgar apprehension,

In choice of this most honorable Senate it is very needful, that the prince
show great prudence and discretion: as in that sufficiency which must serve
the mature expedition of all causes committed to the administration thereof: so
that Election (being as it were a frank action of the mind, which in choice of
g^things accepts the best, and in doubtful evils auoideth the worse) wholly
belongs the prince. Likewise noble industry (being a ceaselesse and sincere
cogitation, and meant all lucubration for the just and inviolable honor of his
Prince and of the Commonwealth) is the true cognizance of a good Counselor:
and these two qualities in them both are apparent and true tokens of both their
wisdoms. The worthiest choice that a Prince can make for such a Senate, is
the casements of their couetise, with the lazy wings of their wealth, but
enter Louis and Charles the fifth, French kings, which by their special edicts
cautioned, that in their dominions no magistracies or Offices might be sold
and bought, but frankely bestowed upon prudent, learned, continent, and honest
persons, to the best of their good fame and skill respectively: for such
dinundation of dignities (as Heliog abalus and Vespasian used, and which was by
the just Emperor Alexander Seuerus refused) is most corrupt, odious, and
pestilent in any Commonwealth, according to M. Bodin in his book of
Commonwealth: In omni genere ciuitatum tarpissima ac perniciosissima honorum ac
praemiorum (quae virtuti debentur) mercatura. Iacet etenim and sordescit reipub
gloria cum indignis honores tribuuntur: For the glory of every such
Commonwealth (where honors are unworthily Ioh. Bodin.
distributed) is thrown down and defaced. Such virtuous and worthy
Counselors therefore by the princes sacred discretion (as it is in his
Majesty's Realms of England and Scotland) may be chosen out of those
Principalities or Provinces which bow to his scepter. For if wise men of
approved goodness and sufficiency for that place find themselves and all of
their nation Hyppol. a (...).
malice, dangerous and odious conspiracies and machinations, with inductions of
foreign princes, break forth imediately: raising rebellions, and arming
subjects against their natural Sovereigns. Ex rebus namque leuissimis Ioh.
Bodin.
discordiae saepe nascuntur, quae velut scintillae slammas excitant; ac
postremo bellorum ciuilium Maxima incendia totam rempub. peruadunt. For out of
most weak beginnings are discords many times bred: which even as little
sparkles break that point. To conclude upon this therefore a prince without
great impediments Diodorus; which in open accusation either by word Lib. 2.
bib. histor.
and if any man scandalously lay some notable crimes unto their charge, which
cannot be proved; he which so maliciously wounds any good man's fame,
deserves in all rigor to be severely punished. Those accusations which are
exhibited against any of them, must be willingly and graciously received,
heard, and remitted (if it be requisite) to just inquisition and judgment.
This ancient custom was observed amongst the Romans, in election of their
magistrates, by which their Commonwealth gallantly flourished: and when that
course declined, their State so much inclined, that it was miserable, and
ruinous in short ti^e. Not Philip Valoys called Le Beau, who published an
Edict, That every third year inquisition should be made into the manners,
state, and behavior of the secret Counselors, administrng in the Ioh. Tilius
in Com. de Reb. gall.
French state.

In this form of trial therefore great judgment and good heed must be
Thomas, not crediting further than his eyes and hands have seen and felt. For
honors and Offices are either bestowed upon men for desert, for favor, or in
respect of their power. He which in this choice has inspexion only to the
first, shows wisdom and virtue: but they that simply standvpon power and
favor, differ little from the touch of tyranny.

A fit Counselor therefore a little after his election should have adoption by
the prince into that society, before his noble and immediate ministers of
Justice; where, to him must be showed, that for his wisdom and honest Cicero
terms it) a religious affirmation, must be ministered unto him in presence;
which will summon his conscience to wary circumspection and faithfulness in
that Office, arming him with honest constancy, when partial respect of blood
or Salust says, How Counselors should in their difficult consultations set
apart all hatred, friendship, wrath, and mercy. Haud etenim facile vera
prouidet animus vbi illa officiunt: neque quisquam omnium libidini simul and
vsui paruit: For hardly can the mind foresee the truth where those offend,
neither did ever any man become subject at once to his lust and commodity. And
(to make it the surer) an oath is most available with honest and ingenuous
consciences and natures, which Cicero likewise adds to the charge of a
magistrate. Neque Officiorum 3.
contra rempub. neque contra iusiurandum ac fidem amici sui causa vir bonus
faciet: nec si Iudex quidem erit de ipso amico: A good man will not enter into
any action either against the Commonwealth, or contrary to his oath, for any
respect of friendship: no, though he were the Judge in his friends cause. For
every noble magistrate which respects honor, will only do those things,
Quae salua fide facere possit: Nullum etenim vinculum ad astringendam fidemiure
inrando maiores arctius esse voluerunt. For our Elders were of opinion, that
there could not be devised any firmer bond to retain a man's faith, than his
solemn oath.

If Princes therefore will hold this course in planting Counselors, many in
their education) naturally contend to become absolute, and with some experience

In my judgment that was a very strange and politic provision of former
times in France, which did so work in the fantastical spirits of those
Noblemen: For Vincentius Lupanus notes, That they did abhor as a quality
base, barbarous, and disgraceful, that their gentlemen of the most liberal
birth and nature, should be learned in the liberal Sciences and in
Philosophy: providing only, that their education should tend to good skill in
horsemanship, in hunting, and in the practice of arms. In which opinion it
seems to me, that they were formerly confirmed, and animated by the Frauncis
the first, some threescore and ten years past, at what time God graciously
visited the most parts of Christendom with his spirit of all true knowledge
and literature; when the most Sola namque virtus vera Nobilitas est. For very
Nobility is composed of virtue only. And certain is it found in all
kingdoms, That if the Prince delight in hunting, Poetry, Music, Arms,
Astrology, etc. not only those nearest him in court, (Qui maioribus suis
virtute praelucent: Which give more light of virtue than their ancestors) only
by this rule: so that his house or Court shall soon become a Schoole-house or
College of sapience and virtue.

This likewise in the election of a Counselor is one exceeding Principle, That
every Prince in the beginning of his reign, without very weighty Lewis the
eleventh, the French king: who being ready to depart this life, commended to
the trust of his son Charles the eight (then ready to succeed) the
fidelities of those Counselors which instantly did serve him; intimating to
him in this caveat, That he by good experience in himself had formerly felt
the Charles, that he lived in such happy state amongst his Peers and
Counsel, as that in grief conceived of his death, two of his Officers about
his person, then in service, suddenly died also. This Charles was so beloved,
as has not been mentioned in the French histories of any king like him,
except of the Emperor Titus; before whom (for his humanity, lenity,
liberality, goodness, and virtues) he was much preferred.

Unto the making up of this politic body, the profit, ruin, honor, and
shame of the prince and subjects are surely fastened. It behooves therefore

Hereupon depends also, that secret Counselors (in weighty matters by the
Prince to them concredited) keep counsel and secrecy: for (it being deemed
most odious, when a private person dispaleth the secrets of his friend Salust
inueighing against Cicero, did object, That he did Cum Terentia vxore consulere
de Republica: That he did Terentia concerning State-matters. Certainly, such
Counselors (if a man may so term them, because they cannot keep counsel,
but lay that open to the great harm which is delivered unto them in trustiest
secret for the general good) are for the most part basely disposed, vicious,
laden with heinous crimes and nefarious practices, vain, audacious; which
glory (to their own shame) having no power nor moderation in hand, tongue, or
heart: such as Quintus Curious, who communicating with a noble Roman strumpet
called Fuluia; the treasons of Lucius Catiline (wherein he was a vigilant
partisan and principal Sergeant himself) even in the very forge of their
treasonable practices, subverted himself, with all his complots Papirius,
(when upon the importunacie which his mother used, to learn out of him the
Senates seerets) that he devised a ridiculous bait, which tempted her with
other Ladies verbally to prostitute their shame in the Senate; wherein they
made manifest their own intemperance: but concerning this, being so common and
notable, I refer them that list, to the History. Of the like nature was
Sempronia, of whom Salust says, That it could not be discerned, whether she
were more prodigal of her own good fame, or of her money: Sic enim libidine
accensa fuit vt saepius viros peteret, quam peteretur: quae sibi fidem
prodiderat, and creditam abiurauerat: For so vehement was the fire of her lust,
that In coniur. Cat.
she did much more desire men's companies, than men did hers: who did betray
the trust of those that reposed in her, and perfidiously deal with those that
credited her. It is not unknown what civil calamities in the Realm of
France, both amongst the royal brethren and princes thereof, happened upon
participation in the great Counsels of that State with the late Queen mother
Caterina di Medici, daughter to the Duke of Florence: and it cannot but be
fresh in their remembrance through Christendom by them of this late age;
because no Commonwealth, but has in some one or other thing suffered
extremities, when this Cath. (as a President to both the Counsels of France)
steered the helm of that Commonwealth, which she misguided

Upon diverse considerations by that law Salique (which king Pharamonde made in
his own patrimony near Xantoigne, called Salique, whereupon Ioh. Tilius in
Com. de Reb. gall.
that denomination first was) women were exempted from many privileges. And
Gaguinus notes of king Lewis the eleventh of France, which in Lib. 10.
his last Testament at his death amongst other things entreated his son the
good king Charles to commit no council of trust unto his mother Charlotte the
Duke of Sauoyes daughter, which scarcely did live one whole year dowager after
her husband: peradventure he doubtfully fantasied, that she had unjustly or
wickedly dealt with him in his estate or life. But I will not insist herein,
submitting my self to them which are the fathers of wisdom and experience,
and can discreetly tell how with honor and constancy to bridle their
affections in such cases; having by good example of others more power in this
virtue to perform, than the most wise and valiant of mortal men, king Solomon
and Sampson had before; whose prudence and fortitude were scandalized Plutarch
writes was sometimes in France: Cum Celtarum In tractas. de mulier, etc.
mulieres Consilijs publicis interfuissent, in quibus de pace and bello tract
abatur: At what time the French women were always present at their public
Counsels; in all matters civil and military. For he says in the said
Treatise, how such articles of confederacy were betwixt the Gauls and
Hanniball, that the Carthaginian Magistrates should order all wrongs done unto
them by the Pharomonde of his law. But sure it is, that many women have
worthily governed heretofore in diverse places: And diverse very learned and
politic women, such as Aspasia, whom Pericles loved, and with whom Socrates
did often consult. Howbeit if Counsels of the state in these our days should
be referred unto them. I think neither the time nor date of their continence
and experience would permit the same again in France. But that I may conclude
upon this point of secrecy: for by that peculiaritie Diodorus Siculus, how the
Egyptians did ordain, That he which opened the secrets of Biblioth. Histor.
cap. 3. lib. 2.
that Commonwealth to his trust committed, should have his tongue rooted out.
Those sixty learned Areopagites of Athens did carefully provide against this
crime also. Moreover, it is instituted by the civil laws, that they which
diuulge secret Counsels of the public state, shall be burnt at a stake,
Transf^rit. de (...).
or hanged upon a gibbet.

It is required in persons of so worthy place and nobility, that to this
faithfulness they superadde fortitude and honest constancy toward the
defense and maintenance of justice and truth both in giving, receiving, and in
concealing Sardanapalus, the thirtieth and last Monarch of the Assyrians; who
through his sensuality, pusillanimitie, lack of grace, and of true fortitude,
was within his huge city Niniuie besieged by Arbaces, captain of the Medians:
through whose power, and in Diodori Siculi lib. 2. Bib. Hist.
piece of the cities walls (that made passage for the Medians, and struck him
with such a present terror) he thus feebly consulted and resolved with
himself, upon a flaming pyre, destined to that end, together with his
concubines, eunuchs, and treasure, to cast himself, leaving all the spoils
and relics with that Monarchy to the Medians. In the Prince therefore
principally fortitude is required, and next in his secret Counselors, whose
virtues should animate him.

There is one most excellent note of true fortitude, remaining unto such
honorable Counselors, by the example of Scauola, viuely manifesting a valiant
Sylla with multitudes of men in arms had entered the Senate, implacably
thirsting after the destruction of Marius, whom he would have had by the
Senators then present, denounced a common enemy to the state: only Scaeuola
refused to give voice against him, even when Sylla with most truculencie
threatened him to the contrary, saying: Albeit thou dare me with these
heaps of soldiers, with which thou distressest this honorable presence,
although thou breath forth death against me, yet will not I condescend (in love
of my blood, which is both aged and little) to denounce Marius our enemy,
through whose valor and honesty my conscience attesteth, how the city Rome,
and Augustine writes, Through fear or affection in concealing the verity,
they seem more to respect the creature than the creator. Epist. ad Casul. ^6.


Unto this faith and fortitude there are opposites, to which diverse in their
deliberations and resolutions are vehemently subject, viz. fear, being a
certain pensive heaviness for some mischief future or remote; and affection,
which is a partial respect of certain persons beyond the lists of reason.
Such people therefore are not deemed wise and prudent, which fear more than is
fit, considering that indissoluble accord which is betwixt Prudence and
Fortitude, Solomon, A wise man is valiant, and a learned man strong.
Notwithstanding the weak opinions of diverse which Prou. 24.
have argued in my hearing, That wise men cannot be valorous, for so much as
they sum up with the counters of reason in the audit of prudence, all
chances and perils which may come in, by circumstances and deriuations of
matters: According to that of Salust concerning Iugurth; Quod difficilimum
imprimis est, and praelio strenuus erat and bonus consilio, quorum alterum ex
prouidentia Bell. Iugurth.
timorem, alterum ex audacia temeritatem plerunque afferre solent: And that
which was most difficult, his stoutnesse in war, and his soothfastnesse in
Counsel exceeded: the last of which commonly (by reason of that providence, if
we stand betwixt two dangers, let us with firm valor adventure upon that
(being a fearful and horrible deiection or consternation of a mind base and
abject) converted into rash courses; even as rash men are by their temeritie.
Furthermore, it is common in the nature of things chiefly to fear dangers
most imminent, being more appalled at present perils than is requisite; but
valuing mischiefs future and remote more carelessly than they should: because
hopes by times or chances may promise some redress for them. But this is both
sure and notable: Vbi bonum publicum Salust. de Repord. ad Ca. Caes.
usui est, id dubitare aggredi socordiae atque ignauiae est: It is the part of
a Bomilchar: Qu^ cupidus Bell. Iugurth.
incepta patrandi, and timore socij anxius omisso veteri Consilio nouum
quaerere noluit: Who being earnest to perfect his beginnings, and standing in
doubt of his faint hearted fellow, would not alter his own first determination
for any second resolution. In blaunching these dishonorable blemishes of fear
and affection, the Counselor gives a clear light and perfect view of his
love and worship unto the Prince and Commonwealth. It is worthily Frederick
caused to be curiously written with golden letters over the Duro di Pascolo
Autic. Polit.
ports of his palace at Ratisbone, That such as were thither appealed to
consultation, should leave without those gates all dissimulation and
hypocrisy: Marks, where they leave all private affections and peculiarities
behind: for the foundation of perpetual fame and glory composed is of
probitie, faith, and severe equality; without all which it out-rangeth the
purlues of prudence, being mere vanity, false-hood, and a kind of wily
iuggling. The part of a Senator therefore is uprightly to discharge a good
conscience: and he that restrains truth in fear of any man's hatred,
deserves not his place in this Counsel. Which Seneca to this effect
approoueth: He that fears malice, cannot any skill of government. A notable
example remains of Priseus Heluydius: Qui sola bona quae honesta, mala quae
turpia, Potentiam, Nobilitatem, Cor. Tac. A^. Lib. 20.
cateraque extra animum neque bonis neque malis annumerauit: Who did esteem
only those things good and evil which were honest, and filthy, power,
nobility, with such other things as were corporal, he did only deem
Vespasian interdicted the Senate, he answered, That it rested in him, being
Emperor, to remove him out of his place in counsel; yet until he were
formally thrust out, he found it lawful for him to sit in that society: yea,
said Vespasian, but be silent then. Nay, then I must speak, replied Priscus,
if you prohibit it. To which the Emperor reioyned, I must ask sentences and
thine opinion amongst the rest, but it shall cost thee thy life, if thou make
answer: yet Heluydius to this peremptorily surreioyned: I am a mortal man,
Emperor do thy will: I shall perform my duty, doubt it not: It is in thy
power to take away my life, and my part to die without fear. A Counselor of
such valor, faith, and constancy may worthily sit in judgment with highest
Emperors: and desperate is that prince his hope which contemns sharp
counsel, being most healthful and profitable in effect, though it import some
present trouble: for they that fear to deal plainly with their princes,
prefer their own shame and sluggishnesse before honor, if grief and
vexation of mind accompany the same: and mark it, that the lives of such,
commonly conclude in perdition and obloquie. Now to remedy Counselors which
are timorous and doubtful in their determinations

The general good qualities, which like so many precious stones, as upon ^he
breast plate of Aaron, magnify the thoughts and hearts of a noble Counselor,
are in brief; to be covetous of commendation, and liberal of coin: Animum
habere paratum ad maximum and pulcherrimum facinus aggrediendum; non super
fortunam animum gerere; neque per ambitionem simulare probitatem, quia
difficile est illis in potestatibus temperare: To bear a mind prepared to
enterprise any great and laudable attempt; to fashion and attempe^ his mind
with his fortunes equally; neither a^biciously to counterfeit himself honest:
because it is most difficult, that such persons should bear any good temper in
their authority. These be the men which worthily spend the virtues and good
faculties of their life in rule and magistracy, which live in the sight of
many. These are they whose actions are recorded in men's hearts, and though
Hystories should fail, would remain by tradition in the memorials of
posterity. If therefore they be noble by birth, let them bear hearts free
from superstition: if their learning purchase for them reverence, the greatest
fortunes have least liberty, they will avoid all appearance of evil,
concealing it from the vulgar. I mean in special those vices of pride and
perturbation; as malice, hatred, and apparent anger; which are in mean men
though a little noted, yet not long remembered, but in persons of their rank
and authority misconstrued,

There are besides all these, diverse other notable qualities, many of which
are included in this breuiat, and required to the complete force of a
Counselor. First, and above all other ornaments, his wastcoat and secret
armor private to the soul, from whence all his virtues flourish, and his robe
of sincere honor in highest counsels and judgments, must be made of zealous
holiness, which is the most venerable defense of such a reverend Counselor.
He must therefore be studious of Theology: for where impiety banisheth all
fear, and feeling of sin; and for as much as all Counsels of the 1. Corinthians.
cap. 2
mystery, being a concealed wisdom, and determined by God before the world
for our glorification. This wisdom springs from the root of Gods Job. cap.
28.
fear, which gives us understanding to depart from evil; which makes a
cheerful heart, yeeldth a joyful crown, and prolongeth man's life in
gladness. It is a sacred knowledge, yea, the ineffable perfection of all
goodness: Only fools despise wisdom and instructon, presuming in weighty
causes Eccl^siasticus 1.
and consultations to succeed well without that sacred spirit of heavenly
wisdom, which should direct them. But such as are wise fear that unspeakable
power filially; which is with a kind of heart-longing love: and unto such alone
and assuredly has his divine omnipotency prepared that, which clear
sanctity, and it is full of the power of love and mercy: which love of
Solomon calls honorable wisdom; it being accompanied with fear and
reverence: which is of it self a sacred knowledge, by virtue thereof is man's
heart justified: honor and long life are the branches of it, fastened in the
sacred root of wisdom by faith, which vanquisheth sin and death, faith and
meekness attending it. This heavenly love illuminateth, and almost
transubstantiateth our hearts of flesh by the power of God, which our Savior
Christ (speaking to the woman of Samaria) calls a spirit, saying, That such
as worship God, must do the same in spirit and truth. They therefore will
learn, taste, and love that sacred word and knowledge, which is the pure
fountain of true wisdom, the sweetness of which (alas) I neither

The next care immediate after the knowledge of God, consists in his skill of
government and study to maintain the Commonweal: which weal Cicero says,
Vt vtilitas sua communis vtilitas sit: vicissim and ^que communis vtilitas sua
sit: That his private weal may prove the common weal, and that
correspondently the Commonweal may become his proper weal. Which Plato most
commended in a Counselor: for to this day no state has either been amplified
or conserved, but by men of that quality, even as it was said by Salust to
Caesar: Firmanda Respublica non armis modo sed (quod multo magis, In Orat. ad
C. C^s. d^ Rep. Ord.
m^ltoque asperius est) bonis pacis artibus. The Commonwealth must not only be
munited and fortified with arms, but with good cunning and skillful arts to
make and maintain peace, being a mystery of much more force and difficulty.
It is written of Calicratides, a captain of the Lacedaemonians, that (in their
wars at Peloponesus, when he without any loss to himself might have saved
the whole Navy, and declined the war, then instant against the Athenians) he
refused to do so; saying, That the Lacedaemonians after the loss of that fleet
might furnish out another, but that he could not without grievous inustion of
shame and dishonor turn back from them. Whereupon that whole navy, to the
irrecouerable loss of the Lacedaemonians, became a spoil to their enemies. But
Qu. Fabius the Roman General held a contrary Anniball, then triumphing in
his many victories, that he wrought out his countries liberty, with oppression
of the Carthaginians by those means. Calicratides (having lost the day) lost
likewise his country, life, and honor, being for the reward of his folly
named in their Annals Calicratides Temerarius. Fabius who by cunctation had
given life and honor to his country, was for his actions of valor, and in
perpetual glory thereof cannonized in their immortal Hystories by the title
of Maximus. And hereupon this as a certain Calicratides more prize their
private glory than the public weal) are enemies to the general state; and
such undoubtedly (like flatterers) if time should so serve, would not stick
(to the end they might endanger the Prince thereby) to say, That all the
peoples wealth is his. By which example we viuely find represented unto us the
wary circumspection of a good Commonwealths man in the person of Fabius,
studying the preservation and honor of himself and of his country, together
with the rash and foolish negligence of a vainglorious hypocrite, like
Calicratides; which so slightly valued the conservation and weal of his own
Nation. In this love and care of the Commonwealth is required a due
consideration, how Britain, France, Ireland, Spain, Castile, and Portugal:
or as the Empires of the Turks and Moscouites, but more remote: or if an
Aristocracie, like Venice; wherein are four Counsels, besides the Senate and
gentlemen of that state. The first called Consilio de Saui, which prudently
deliberate and deal in all Consilio de Saui, appertaining the Admiraltie:
Consilio de deci, and Consilio de setti. Upon which last seven, the whole
burden of that Commonwealth and of the Seignories thereof is amply reposed.
Like unto which, sometimes we read how the state of Sparta was: or if a
Democracie, like the present state of Swizzerland: or if the government thereof
be referred to the King, and to his Nobles, as now in Denmark, and in other
ages at Rome, when the kings reigned, until the Tarquines: or to the King and
to his Commons, as in Persia: or to the Nobles and people together, as at Rome
after their Kings were cried down; at Athens Florence, Siene, with other free
states of Italy: or to the King, with his nobles and people respectively; as
is common in Germany, Poleland, Arragon. When he has entered into such
knowledge, then is it fit that he consider by the diseases, and by the causes
procuring them, which form is good, and which bad: for if this life (which I
term to be Hyppol^ ^ll.
Counselor should play the part of a wise Physician, by purgations, diets,
vomites, bloud-lettings, or other remedies, to medicine and rectify the state
of that body, where such policy labors. After such notes let him measure
by what several forms these or any such principalities were conserved and
lost; by what laws and magistrates they were and must be succored in
troublesome times. If he be wanting herein, how shall he give advice unto
the Prince or State in any troublesome or difficult seasons, toward the cure
of any desperate diseases or wounds happening unto the Commonwealth? Or
without this knowledge, how shall he direct

In this my Counselor, I would require much readiness, and quickness of wit:
for moderate sharpness and dexterity compose the heads, bodies, and fect of
all good actions. That light therefore, which beautifieth every noble and
excellent wit, must be divine, singular, and unusual. Howbeit, a political
wit, (if I may so term it) Quasinatum ad congregationem and societatem: As
instituted to congregate, and advn^ people: as Freigius defines the same, most
excellently magnifieth a Counselor: for thereby does he refer all things
unto the common society, to the conjunction, union, or collection of people,
and companies; reforming and wisely preventing all civil and dangerous
distractions and divisions amongst the multitude. This Caelum non animum mutat:
He changes his nation, and not his condition: Because it teaches him the
forms, constitutions, augmentations, diminutions, mutations, laws, religions,
rites, and judgments of those nations, where he soiourneth. It is the true
guide and sweet companion of iourneyes and peregrination, according to the
saying of Socrates in Xenophon: Generosumest and omnifauore dignum ingenium,
cui sunt cordi disciplinae politicae: That wit is generous, and deserves all
favor, which takes delight in political discipline. The apparent tokens and
properties of such a wit are, when in answering they seem prompt, sound, and
short; in apprehension, wit never walks in ways vulgarly frequented, never
speaks after the Seneca: Et magna quae sunt ingenia aegre serunt iniuriam:
Mighty Epist. 39. lib. 5.
wits cannot easily brook injuries: according to Salust. Other garbes and
attributes are likewise observed in these wits: as in the entertainment, In
bell. Iugurth.
which proceeds from such ingenuous persons, being performed with a liberal
and most cheerful courtesy, and sweetly seasoned with a gracious and
plausible discourse. Such a wit turns and looks into good and evil,
embracing and extolling the one, rebuking and eschewing the other by good
discretion, Quippe secundaeres sapientum animos fatigunt. Such a wit should
seem was in Scipio Africanus, whose business seemed most great, when his
action was least: Nec Cic. in Amicic.
vnquam minus solus fuit quam cum solus esset. Prudentissimus etenim quisque
maxim negotiosus est: Neither was he ever less at leisure, than when he was
alone Salust: Non enim votis nec supplicijs multebribus, auxilia deorum
comparantur, sed vigilando, agendo, been consulendo prospere omnia cedunt. For
God does not send his succors to men only because they do with a broken
spirit observe strict vows, and make prayers: but he does admit a general
good success to them that are vigilant, industrious, and verily prudent. Such
wits sweetly flourish in youth, and plentifully fructify, resembling (as Plato
compares it) a fruitful meddow. They be the grounds of all knowledge, being
studiously tilled and manured with liberal arts and moral philosophy: for as
great burdens (which cannot be lifted by the strength of many Salust
luculently describes in the person of Catiline. In illo vis eximia facetiarum,
and ratio quaedam adumbrata virtutum, facilis ad comprehendendum omnium hominum
familiaritates: His force in pleasant and witty ieasting did exceed, with a
certain kind of reasonable counterfeisance, and adumbration of virtues; being
prone to comprehend, and aucupate the familiarities of all degrees of persons.
This is a lively resemblance themselves with their own weight, retaining no
mean, nor moderation: of Seneca may be said: Grave pondus illum magna
nobilitas In Troade.
premit: Great Nobility, being a grievous burden, did oppress him. Howbeit,
such a wit as magnified Marcus Cato may be commended undoubtedly, whom Liuie
describes ^it for any business which he would undertake in these words: His
knowledge was absolute both in vrbanitie and husbandry. Lib. 39.
Some have attained place on the seat of honor by their learning in the
laws, others by the gift of eloquence: some by the glory rebounding from
their many victories, and martial trophies. But his wit was so pliant unto all
properties at his pleasure, that men would say, Nature without industry did
institute him; he did all things with that facility: in war most valiant,
in many battles victorious, and then by degrees advanced, was a most renowned
Emperor. In time of peace (if it stood upon cases of right and equity) his
knowledge exceeded: in declaming or pleading of a cause, passing eloquent.
Which pattern of noble Cato, represents unto us (as in a true Myrrour) the
very life of a divine wit.

From this sweet fountain honorably flows the purple stream of eloquence;
which is none of a Counselors mean graces: for in this Office he shall
happily be commended by the prince into foreign countries, either to counsel,
dissuade, accuse, defend, commend, disgrace, congratulate, condole, or to such
purpose. It behooves him therefore to be richly furnished with Hermes, has
power to calm the seas, quiet the winds, and pacify the rebellious earth,
when it is most out of order. So that in the Ciceronian inuectiue against
Salust (magnifying this golden gift of eloquence, which was imputed to Tully
Putant quidem fa^ (...) ^sse ascriptam ha^ orationem in Sa ust^m. Ea demum
magna, etc.
for a vice) it is written: An vllum existimas ciuem egregium qui non hijs
artibus and disciplinis sit eruditus? An vlla alia rudimenta and incunabula
virtutis quibus animi ad gloriae cupiditatem aluntur? What? art thou persuaded,
that any Statesman can be renowned, unless he be disciplined in these arts,
and rudiments Tacitus writes: Eloquentia nihil in ciuitate nostra vel ad
vtilitatem fructuosius, vel ad dignitate^ amplius, Cor. Tac. in Dialog de Orat.
vel ad vrbis famam pulcherius, vel ad totius imperij atque omnium gentium
noticiam illustrius excogitari potest: There is not any thing can be found or
devised in our Commonwealth, either more fruitful, if you respect the profit,
or more ample, in regard of the dignity thereof, or more extending to Hijs
namque artibus sieve apud infestos, sieve apud cupidos, sieve apud inuidentes,
sieve apud tristes, sieve apud timentes dicendum habuerit, tenebit habenas
animorum: Cor. T^c. in Dialog. de Orat.
For by this art of Rhetoric, an Orator (if he shall deal with dangerous
persons, or with men covetous, with envious people, with such as are afflicted,
or with any persons which are distracted through some kind of fear) yet shall
he prevail in qualifying and moderating their several affections and
passions. For he which can speak copiously with prudence, is much more
excellent than those which meditate upon grave and wise considerations, in his
sapience: if therewithal he season the same (as it were) with a Macrobius:
Copiosum in quo Cicero, breue in quo Salustius: siccum quod Frontoni, pingue
and floridum quod Plinio Lib. 5. cap. 3.
secundo, etc. The copious wherein Cicero, the brief in which Salust, the
dry, through which Fronto, the full and fruitful for which Plinius the second
were famoused. Any of which being ingenuously practiced, without affectation
or sophistry, carry with them great force of reconciliation. Much eloquence
is found in those letters which king Philip of Macedon did write to his son
Alexander, and in those Epistles which Antipater and Antigonus did write unto
Captains, persuading them by benign and favorable terms Cicreo specially
notes: Oration quae in multitudinem cum contentione habetur soepe vniuersam
excitat gloriam: Those Orations or speeches, which in Offic. 2.
audience of the people are delivered with a vehement and stirring spirit,
commonly move or procure a general glory: being intended here unto the
speakers, proceeding from the auditorie. Observing always that Philosophical
decency which prohibiteth him. Tanquam luculentum suem cum quouis volutari:
non enim procacitate linguae vitae sordes eluuntur: Like a durtie sow which
walloweth in any puddle: for the dishonest touches of a man's conversation are
not washed out with saucy taunts or speeches. Such like was that luxurious
kind of procacitie, for which Salust and Cicero were both grievously taxed in
their verbal eskairmouches, together misbeleeuing the prudent tongues of
gravity. And therefore Tacitus specially well describes that excess of
eloquence thus: Eloquentia luxuriosa, alumna licentiae, In Dialog. de Orat.
comes sedicionum, effraenati populi incitamentum, sieve obsequio, sieve
seruitute, contumax, tomeraria, arrogans; quaeque in been constitutis
ciuitatibus non oritur, etc. Luxurious eloquence is the nurce of license; the
companion of seditions,

The well speaking of many languages may be mustered amongst the rest for one
special and most needful quality: in special, the tongues of those are well
spoken and understood. This is a comfortable benefit, when foreign

It must be noted also, that few men interpret perfectly, many more satisfying
their own humors, than the precise meaning of the parties, adding or
substracting somewhat always. What if under pretext of interpretation a
referendarie be foisted in, upon whose secrecy the whole weal and honor of a
king with all his Soueraignetie depends? Admit the matters so require, that
no delays without danger will serve to dispatch present answer to the Prince:
is it not then a double shame and offense, to make inquiry Alexander, Caesar,
and of others infinite, being special attributes of their government, gave
infinite matter to noble wits in those Empires continually to write such
excellent dignities and exploits, as their native country men had borne away,
with much honor and renown, both in peace The multitudes of those books
(through the greatness of these Monarchies) Thalmudistes, Alcumistes, and
Caballistes, surreaching the common apprehension and use of Counselors and
Statesmen. Hereupon a question may be proiected unto me, Why then these
Greek and Latin languages might not serve (instar omnium) to fulfill all
meanings and purposes by good and faithful understanding amongst princes and
nations in their treaties, consultations, Rodolph the Emperor) is little or
not at all practiced in these days. Besides, what a shame it were concerning
certain honorable affairs and that excellent Greek tongue, which former
writers have used, and which is tanto preclarius, and viro vere nobili dignius.
For the time may come in any Christian Empire, that some necessities, or other,
shall require and importune the knowledge of those tongues.

One special point remains, wherein I would for our own nations glory An
Exhortation to make famous and precious our English language amongst (...)
parts of Christendom.
wish, that all our countrymen would be very studious, and according to their
faculties forward and ayding, that is, to labor how they may copiously devise
and add words, derived from the Latins, from the French and Dutch languages,
fitly fashioned unto the true Dialect and Ideome of our vulgar. For considering
that the Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, and Germane tongues grew famous,
copious, and ample by the commerce and intercourse Edward the third (after
whose victories had in France) the peace and foyson of this land gave some
first Glanuylle and Bracton, were first writ^en in French) diverse did write
some Books, Pamphlets, Rymes, Romances, and Stories in barbarous English; some
of which were translated out of other tongues: Howbeit, either for their own
private use and practice, or for the mere benefit of our countrymen only,
to little pleasure, and less profit of after times: which being then as a
garden, wherein were some good herbs and simples of our own, and from other
parts and countries brought and confusedly planted, has yearly since then
from time to time been bettered, increased, and reduced into squares, knots,
and curious compartements, Gower and his Scholar Chaucer, in the times of King
Richard the second, and King Henry the fourth. One Lydgate, a Monk of
Edmo^burie, succeeded them in that work: most of whose patterns were taken
and translated out of Latin, French, and Italian, intermingled with some other
excellent inventions of their own, not including any great matters, tending
unto government and morality. Diverse of whose words, by times continuance,
and the choice of better being antiquated (like herbs withered from the root)
have been Horace.

Multa renascuntur quae iam cecidere; Cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula. In art Poet.

Many words long time out of use renew,
And th'after age our best words will eschew.
For words (he says) like leaves yearly wither and renew. Toward this Henry
the ^ght, and of his son king Edward, was translated into the vulgar: also
certain Chronicles, Treatises, and Translations of that time have added much
light to the former darkness. But since the days of blessed Queen Elizabeth
(whose happy reign more exquisite and polite translation than before: after
by the books of Monuments, Philip Sidney, that divine star of sweet wit and
invention, has so much honored the language of this nation, in that his small
hyue of all excellent humanity, inueloping under the true Poetical vine
leaves of his labors such excellent sweet clusters of Philosophical grapes
and inventions, both moral and natural, as have mightily benefited toward
this rich vintage of our English

Let us therefore with cheerful consent imitate those other great Empires,
that our wits, learning, and inventions, by divine benefit equalling the best
of theirs, our books and languages, with our men and marchandizes, may
lovingly be received and embraced amongst them also. Then shall this our
puissant little Monarchy, like a sweet fountain, (which the further it
flows, imboketh into the more spacious and deep channel) be more and more
magnified, Cum ingeniorum is it torpor and ignauia, When this drowsy
slothfulness of our wits cannot be found amongst us, but that we still study
to become famous in our vulgar, as those ancient Greek and Roman Caesar in
his wars; or in his peaceable affairs, so much divine, moral, and natural
Philosophy by the Solomon of our nation: then shall we find substance for
Liuie, and pleadings for the books of Cicero: Seneca shall have his place
again, but in a glorious Sunshine, and fill this new Monarchy with his
sage considerations. I write this therefore, often and again iterating it, that
many Liuies, Senecaes, and Ciceroes shall flourish under our Caesar, if we
will work out the fruit of our virtues by such virtuous contemplations and
exercises, as may much dignifie their countries.

It is most certain, that ingenuous natures and virtuous spirits (whose divine
rational ought to be fixed upon perfect glory) are in a continual combat
and civil commotion within themselves, if they do not employ their
cogitations and studies in moral contemplation, still laboring like a woman
Gloria namque industria alitur vbi eam dempseris ipsa per se virtus, amara and
aspera est Salust.
etc. Industry is fostered by glory: take away glory, which is the reward of
virtue, and the taste thereof is harsh and bitter. When therefore the virtuous
Prince himself, and those noble arches of his Monarchy, shall perceive this
their towardness and travail in virtues, little doubt is there, that the
reward of their studies and virtues shall not encourage posterity more and

The knowledge of Hystories is another quality most concerning a Counselor:
as with notable attention and diligence to peruse and mark the Records,
Annals, and Chronicles of all ages, people, and princes, together with the
written stories of friends, neighbors, and enemies. History is a viue
experience of matters, the parent of Philosophy, a collection of all things,
in all ages authorized by good trial and practice of many men. This is it
which Diodorus in the Proheme of his Hystories does affirm, Will teach us,
what ought to be the principal scope of our desires and detestations. This
which beneuolent. This is it which aged time only nourishes, when it eats
Aristotle in his Politickes writes, how the skill of actions and Histories of
deeds done most import a Counselor to learn, because things future are like
their parent which came before them: upon which all events of actions commonly
depend. He therefore, which in noble History shall contemplate and meditate
upon the life of a good Prince or Counselor, may find somewhat always worth
his own observation and practice; according to that saying of Seneca: Aliquis
vir bonus elegendus est nobis, ac semper ante oculos habendus, vt sic viuamus
tanquam illo spectanti, and omnia faciamus tanquam illo videnti: We must
propose some Alexander and Caius Caesar; escape in many conflicts, as Anniball
and Cato; receive so many wounds, as Scipio and Scaeua; triumph in so many
victories, subvert so many cities, devise so many stratagemes, consult upon so
many leagues, and truces, enterparley with so many princes, spending the full
glass of his time during those years in magnificent actions, and noble
consultations only, like Cirus Themistocles, Epaminondas, Cimon, Fabius,
Pelopidas, and infinite others, Liuie, Plutarch, Diodorus, Thucydides,
Polybius, Xenophon, Dion, and some few more, (which have eternally recorded all
the memorable actions and virtues of them all) open more unto him without
bloudshead (if he will studiously confer, and reasonably remember) than ever
the service of many more years, with the slaughters of Myriads of soldiers,
could express. The knowledge of all persons, the meaning of all matters, the
depth of all secrets is locked up in History. In it we find that inestimable
treasure of the Laws, by which Commonweales were first ordered and instituted,
in the sentences of sage and prudent men; confirming societies in peace, and
magnifying them by Domitian, and of Nero, which may be read in Tacitus, has
power to terrify princes from those vices which are recorded of them: when
also they peruse the lamentable stories of Caligula, that Fax and fex hominum:
That firebrand, and filth of men. When they reuolue the monstrous obscoenities
of Heliogabalus, who was amongst the people a Cannon by word, scorn, and
obloquie: when Maximus his life; than whom, no man was a more cruel slaughter
man of his country, finding what horrible epethites, denominations, and
attributes, were worthily thrown, or (as it were) spit into the black legend
of his bloody government, being called in diverse places Busyris, Phalar is,
Typhon, what better precedent can remain in detestation of vice? Contrariwise,
the blessed and peaceable reign of Octauian, the goodness and gracious
condition of Traian, of Pertinax, of Titus, and some others, are vehement
prouocations, to confirm and encourage Princes in justice and honesty. For
even as women (which curiously fashion and attire their heads and bodies by
their glass, which represents unto them all indecent and comely guizes) will
presently show themselves abroad amongst the people, finding their bodies by
that myrrour pleasingly garnished: so Princes by the like resemblance find in
the glass of hystories, that which gives spurs to their virtues and policy.

The case is lamentable, and I have many times with heaviness thought it, how
few be the Chronologiers and Historians of our age, how doubtful and
unfaithful much of their matter, how fearfully and vainly seduced by
misprizion and affection. Sure I am, that infinite actions remain worthy the
pen of hystories: nay, that which men write of their own princes and nation,
tends less to truth than unto vainglory: but that which is written by men
of foreign princes and people (such as Mercury Gallobelgicus falsely
proclaimed in his Annals of the world) is both uncertain, fallacious, and
strongly sauouring of malice, blind zeal, and partial motions of the mind.
Whereas if men would faithfully search out by the true records and memorials of
realms and

If a Counselor therefore, having understanding requisite, accustom himself

Prudence is one special gift of God, attained by prayer and the due fear of
his Majesty, which (as the wise Solomon says) is the beginning of all
wisdom. Cicero writes) what honest and profitable things (with their
contraries) we should desire and detest. It is likewise a kind of cunning,
which with a mystical, honest, and profitable dissimulation myneth into the
depth of causes and actions. And in another d^finition, Est bona animi affectio
and habitus indagandi quod verum sit: It is a good affection, and Cic. in R^or.
ad Herenn.
habit of the mind, to sent out the truth. Prudence is either large and
universal, which we may term heroical prudence, or a virtue strict and
distinguished, that (being composed of consultation, cunning, opinion, and
sagacitie) opens the truth in all actions: and therefore it is imposed as an
everlasting jewel and endless victory both in peace and war, for any
prince to wear near himself. Duo sunt qua ab egregijs principibus
expetuntur: sanctitas domi, in armis fortitudo, vtrobique prudentia: Two
properties are required In vita Vlp. Traiani.
in excellent good princes: in his Realms sanctity, in his wars fortitude;
in both places prudence. The substance of prudence is truth; by which humane
reason should entirely be governed. Truth is the Medium which is a kind of
habit, to speak a truth in all public and private causes, without any
fraud, arrogance, or dissimulation. Toward the knowledge of truth (by lore of
Philosophy) five virtuous qualities are required. The first is Science, being
a sure and infallible knowledge and apprehension of any thing, which may
proceed out of the causes thereof, either by natural instinct, or some other
reasonable demonstrations: as in Theological and Mathematical practice: for
so much as the learning contained in those Sciences, teaches such things as
cannot easily be wrested otherwise by reason. the corruption and perfectest
apprehension of man: and amongst others David unto the kings of this earth, as
a monition or exhortation, it is delivered: Understand, O you Kings: serve the
Lord with fear, and rejoice in him with trembling, etc. And therefore if
religion were nothing but humane policy (which the damned and execrable
Atheists imagine in their foolishness) yet must we certainly know, that if
the fear of God above were not, men would contemn all laws and virtue:
imagining, that all men had free leave in their own corrupt natures (which
they most impiously would make their God, and be by the same directed) to do
their own hearts lusts. The Mathematickes also (Quae sunt quasi comites and
administrae viri politici: Which are as it were the companions and agents of a
Politician: and Plutarch places in the soul of man, as being a part of the
Theorique In Moral.
or contemplative faculties) are arts likewise, which cannot otherwise be
wrested. And hence is it, that Science is called, Habitus demonstrandi per
causas: A habit of demonstration by reasons. The second means toward the
knowledge of truth, is art: being a kind of mental habit or experimental
skill to perform and perfect things by such means, as without them they
otherwise may be done; and as Tacitus writes: Apud maiores virtutis id
praemium fuit, cunctisque ciuium (si fiderent bonis artibus) licitum petere
Magistratus: Lib. 11. Annal.
It was proposed to our ancestors, and unto all citizens for a reward of their
virtues, and as a thing allowable, to sue for reputations and offices, of
habit, moving the mind, enclining and yielding it self constantly to things,
which cannot be by demonstration perfected. It is likewise a Metopius the
Pythagorean Philosopher) are judgment In lib. de virt.
and contemplation, both of them issuing from reason. The fifth and last part
of truth is Sapience; being a most absolute and perfect knowledge of such
things as are contained within the limits of humane apprehension, as well in
metaphysicall as in natural causes: howbeit, especially leuelling at divine
matters, according to the definition of it: Quae est rerum diuinarum amplissima
scientia: Which is a most ample skill had of divine matters. Only that which
regards humane policies or affairs, is more properly termed Prudence: which
(as Aristotle says) is the cause, means, or procurer of Lib. 1. cap. v^t.
Ethicorum.
Sapience. But of this last part of truth I have spoken more at large elsewhere.
Unto prudence therefore, as companions, are assigned Intelligence, which is (as
I said) a perfect understanding of matters: Science a just apprehension of
causes; Art a true demonstration or ensignemnt of things: and Sapience
Aristotle attributes to prudence three parts: the first, (...), which is a
kind of power or faculty, to give good counsel in time of need: then (...),
respecting a mature deliberation and perfection in doing of business: thirdly,
(...), or intelligence; which is a providence, cunning, or expert judgment to
put that in execution, which has been by right counsel preconsulted and
determined. It is likewise the part of a prudent person, to know much in
general, and in particulars, to keep in readiestore and memory, things long
before done and past if they be notable: to see darts, arrows, and all
se^ious accidents of good hope and danger, long before they come; by which gift
they may prevent

The difference likewise of persons, and of their qualities, by the respects
had

Moreover, prudence disperseth her force and virtues into three parts: first,
into the condition monastical (if I may so term it) which appertains all
particular persons in their peculiar estates severally: the second, into the
state Oeconomicall, which respects the administration of each private
Xenophon terms the art of dispensation. The third and last being the best
and right excellent part (wherein prudence shows most force) is the state
political always employed in civil causes, generally working for the
Commonwealth, being a true kind of science to which those of this counsel
must be first bound apprentises, before their adoption into this society.

He therefore, that would be a good master in his own family, must first by
good demeanure and conversation amongst his neighbors hold himself up, that he
may purchase a general good opinion, witness, and commendation of his
integrity; being by those excellent deserts made fit for the this principal
Office under the King or Commonwealth: for if he cannot Cic. in partionibus
Orator.
are specially directed and guided by Prudence, I will therefore in brief
declare, what the learnedest Philosophers have noted concerning them.

(...), which is the form of house-gouernment, respects the good Adam,
Enoch, Noah, with diverse even to the time of Joseph the patriarch: who did
govern the kingdom of Egypt, establishing it with new laws. Amongst these,
Melchisedech named a king, and Abraham, who (though in foreign countries he
were a stranger) yet joined with kings, governing his family by political and
Oeconomicall Plato: secondly, that the father unto them and to his servants
show benevolence, and be tractable. His family must be disposed in decent
order: food, cloth, maintenance, with house

Let them take heed of exceeding sumptuousness and ouergorgeous magnificence
in building, above the proportion of their lands and revenues, enuironning and
answering the same: for it were better, that large demesnes required mansion
houses, than that glorious manors should want means to support and furnish
out their magnificence. Concerning familiar maintenance Qui enim domum aut
villam extruit, eamque signis, aulaeis, alijsque Cic. 2. Off.
operibus exornat, and omnia potius quam semet visendum exhibet, non diuitias
decori sed ipse illis est flagitio: For that person which builds a house or
town, and garnisheth it with arms, hangings, and other works; making Tacitus
to prove this, writes, That the old Germans, when coin was first used
amongst them, did only love it for commerce and exchange of Etiam quod
argentum magis quam aurum sequebantur nulla affectatione Cor. Tacit. lib. de
moribus Germa^.
animi, sed quianumerus argenteorum facilior vsui est promiscua and vilia
mercantibus: Even because they did more desire to have silver than gold: not
for any vain affectation of their mind, but because the number and value of
their silver coins was more fit for their use in buying and selling of diverse
cheap things of sundry natures. Semblably, those trades of adulterat
merchandise and traffic in buying or selling of wares (which are enriched by
perfidious brocage, leasings, and such dishonesties) be very contemptible.
Panders likewise and brutish baudes, the ministers of licencious
voluptuositie, with mercenarie Players, Buffones, Fiddlers, Iugglers,
Flatterers,

Let that therefore, which is the fountain and profession of maintenance to
them that are house-holders, be just, honest, and profitable: that which is so
gotten also, let it be frugally spent and husbanded, as it is commendably
gained: that every man according to his place, apport, and quality, may
maintain that decent state, which shall best answer to the glory of his own
country, where he breaths. But if O Domus antiqua might in Ciceroes what
may be said of those pompous buildings at this day, which have armed iniquity:
Liberorum tam in sanitate totius corporis, quam in singularum partium
concinnitate diligens conser^tio: The parents diligent conservation of their
children, both in health of body, and in a general cleanely propernesse
through all parts. And in this sort also Ciantor, the scholar of Xenocrates,
has distributed man's life: the first part to be bestowed in virtuous
contemplation and practice; the second, in recreation and exercise for
corporal health; the third, for honest pleasures; and the fourth for the just
acquisition and collection of treasure. So that the first threescore years
have reference to the education, as well for particular as general government
(whether Oeconomicall or Political) the second provides in arming himself
for trade, his apprentises must be well used, and diligently taught his science
and Solomon and blessed Paul have divinely and luculently declared, as is read
in holy scriptures, That if strength serve, she give suck to her own children
her self: for as much as all Philosophers hold it the most natural and best
course of nourishing infants: that she teach unto them frugalitie, reserving
and increasing her husbands stock with her own huswiferie. In brief (as
Freigius in his Oeconomicks notes) that she be modest, stout, just, and silent.

In like sort, that children should be brought up in the true knowledge,
fear, and worship of God, in obedience, love, and honor, to their parents,
Plato with most vehemence and principally Non posse genus humanum absque
gubernataribus vel honest viuere, vel foeliciter gubernari: That the children
of men can neither live honestly together, nor be governed happily without
Masters and Rulers. Lastly, the duties required in servants, are subjection,
fidelity, promptness, attention, assiduitie, with obedience unto their
masters frugalitie, moderation in diet, and apparel, truth in matters
concredited unto their truth, patience, and facility: howbeit, I will (as
before) refer my self in this true morality unto the spirit of God,
speaking in those Oeconomicall precepts and commandments, which were
delivered by the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul in of fathers, wives,
children, husbands, servants, and of all other magistrates in

Whether it be lawful for Christians to retain slaves, to whom the Gospel
has granted liberty: such as in diverse parts of Christendom (under the
Popes Supremacy) be tolerated and used, being in part natural, and partly
legal slaves, as you shall find in the imperial institutions, Sub tit. de
seruis. I refer my self to the learneder opinions of Divines, Cannonists,
and civil Aristotle. Lib. 7. de Rep. cap. 11.


As every family composed is of several persons, so does each Commonwealth or
city consist of many families. This assembly being thus associated in the
tutelage, combination, or communion of one Empire and Law, out of his own
proper force can maintain, protect, and govern the state of his affairs by
policy, being the third part of prudence: which (as Plutarch defines in his
Moses; proposing an example to posterity, from whence many most behoofefull
precedents toward the administration of Kingdoms, Estates, and Seignories may
be taken: by this is the Prince himself directed, as by some divine caball,
according to his capacity, and to that grace which God has poured into the
hearts of his secret counsel, how to govern all the people of this earth. For
even as to the Pylot his course and compass, by which he capeth and wendeth,
even as health to the Physician, and victory to David, the figure of our
Savior Christ, used: for he did amplify the realm of Israel both by peace
and war; adorning it with laws, judgments, treasure, arms, and power,
encouraged and advanced the studies of learning, instituted the Levites,
Doctors, Musicians, and other professors of good arts. This civil prudence
does (as it were) prescribe unto citizens their actions, conuersing in the
maintenance of civil societies, by the uniformity of religion, universality
of justice, and unanimity in virtuous contemplation, and practice; whereby
Aristotle makes this difference betwixt the Commonwealth and a private family:

Bodin writes, that there are two sorts of Empire or Soueraignetie: Vnum Lib.
(...) (...)
summum; alterum legitimum: illud legibus ac magistratuum imperio solutum, hoc
legibus obligatum: summum autem magistratus est proprium, legitimum Maiestatis:
The first is highest, freed from the strain of laws, and from any subjection
unto magistracy; the second legitimate and obliged unto the laws: but the
highest rule is proper to magistrates, and the legitimate peculiar unto
Majesty. We must consider also, that the king is not only a parent and
author of the laws, but a most studious and diligent conseruator, and steward
of justice. For in the Commonwealth a Prince is placed, as upon a stage, whose
words and actions the people (under and about him) observe: him if they find
just, and of good demeanure (as I touched in the beginning of this Quales enim
sunt in Repub. principes tales reliqui solent fieri ciues: For such as be the
Princes, such are the people in every Commonwealth, says Plato. Howbeit, kings
in respect of their Empire, are superior to the laws and customs of their
realms; which they may co^mute, antiquate, and abrogate as they list, unless
such as have voluntarily restrained themselves in some particulars to the
consent and suffragation of their Peers and Commons: for so much as kings are
the ministers and deputies under God: to and from whom they must yield account,
and receive punishment, according to their administration to them committed, if
they do abuse the same, (...).
world has not seen his peer in towardness. But just Princes will not
commonly commute, annihilate, or qualify those laws, by which their people
may be prejudiced: for such Laws and Statutes as concern them, are enacted by
their own consents, not by royal prerogative only. The second good State
depends upon that government, which is referred to a competent Moses unto
the days of Eli: under whom the arc of Gods covenant was lost, and the
Nestor in Homer: Non multos regnare bonum, rex vnicus esto.
Vnius imperium, cui Jupiter aurea magnus
Sceptra dedit, iussitque suis dare iur a tuendis.


It is not good, that many kings should rule at once over one people: let

The third good estate of government rests in the discreet gubernation of the
Commons, which is named a Democracie: such as governed Athens in times past,
and the like amongst the Cantons of Swizzerland, at this day.

Those other three remaining, and framed out of the excess or outrage of these
other three good states predefined, consist in tyranny, by which the prince,
according to lust, and beyond the limits of reason, law, or honesty, Tyranni,
qui vi and armis imperium arripiunt: Which with force and in arms bereave
others of their Realms and Crowns. Such was Cirus Agathocles, and others
infinite, which maintained their spoils and rapine by ravening and spoiling.
These are they which despise justice, laws, and equity; these which forsake
the Commonwealth to multi^lie their own A tyrant then reputeth himself most
rich, when he has robbed the Commonwealth

The second evil part of government is called Oligarchie: which is when the
Commonwealth or Universality be forceably yoaked under the violent lusts and
empire of a few Nobles: as at Rome in the government of the Duumuirate and
Triumuirate: and in Anarchie, when the people confusedly by libidinous instinct
and auaritious desire, make havoc of all under their government; Multitudo
namque malis artibus imbuta, Salust in Orat. ad Ca. Caes.
deinde in arts vitasque varias dispalata; nullo modo inter se congruens,
parum idonea videtur ad capessendam rempublicam. For a multitude which is first
disordered and evil affected, and then dispersed into diverse professions and
fashions of living, discordant within themselves, are not meet to take any
charge or tuition of the Commonwealth. For the vulgar are neither wise nor
Demosthenes, a most learned and euer-renowned citizen of Athens, through the
perverse and unjust sentence of the barbarous Athenians, being banished (after
the loss of his country liberties) to cry forth in the bitterness of his
spirit: O Pallas, Pallas, quae tribus infestissimis belluis delectaris, noctua,
dracone, and populo: O Pallas, Pallas, which take pleasure in three most
pernicious beasts; in an Owl, in a Dragon, and in the people. Which kind of
government is not improperly compared to the weltring and unconstant billows
of the sea.

The Roman policy, when their kings were abolished, was by the Senate managed
a long time. After which the people retaining a Democraticall state (being
attempered with the moderation and authorities royal, and with the Patricians,
as appeared in the Consular estate, and in the Senators) did carry with them
the fasces and pre-eminence, until the reigns of Julius and Augustus Caesar's.
So that out of the Sovereign rule of a kingdom, being revived in the Consuls;
out of the government Aristocraticall, represented by the Senators; and out of
the Democracie, manifested in the Plebeian Tribunes, a firm and absolute
Commonwealth was fashioned.

Those Monarchies which are esteemed most perfect and excellent at this people
generally: by which means their wealth and peace may be multiplied

For as much therefore as every Commonwealth consists of a multitude (which
should live in unity together under one God, one king, and one law) I will
speak somewhat of the incorporation and harmonious union of

The first and best form of government and empire is, where one king
moderateth and rules all nations under his dominion united, according to the
true spirit of virtue, which domination is properly termed by the sages of
wisdom a monocracie: for it represents the perfect ordination of nature, by
which every multitude and deformity submits it self to some one Herodian
in his history writes, that Darius upon a consultation, how the Persian state
might be best established as a paranymph by the lively force of a most eloquent
oration defended the form of a monarchy: which the Persian senate did also
with one voice applaud; declaring and proclaming him their king thereupon. The
like part did Mecanas defend against Agrippa before Octauius Caesar, and
prevailed: both Dion. lib. 52.
their copious and effectual orations are yet extant in Dion Cassius. To
confirm this both by divine authorities, and humane nature, the blessed
Apostle there is one head, one spirit, one lord. And it is written in the
prophet Ezechias, My servant David shall be their king and only shepherd oner
them all. Ephesians. 4. cap. 37.
Also we find in the government of nature amongst bees, one chief; one guide
amongst cranes; one emperor or king amongst nations, united in obedience to
the righteous scepter of one; and one judge or president over every province.
When Rome was first builded, it would not endure the government of two
brethren equal in empire. And in sacred monuments we find, that Jacob, and
Esau disagreed in the very womb of Rebecca. Vnum etenim arbustum non alit duos
Erithacos: One bush will not admit two ruddockes at once Genes cap. 25.
upon it. Neither can the Empire or kingdom of any, brook two Phoenixes

In a Monarchy therefore, and in the whole course of every good policy,
Moses and Aaron, and after to the blessed Patriarchs, then to the divine
Prophets: and lastly, by the blessed mouth of Christ Jesus his son our
Savior unto the sanctified Apostles, without addition, or diminution, our true
Religion Catholic, being the virtuous baulme of our mortified souls and
bodies, wounded with the darts of sin and death, and extracted out of the
most precious and inestimable substance of our salvation is

The second, one king, who semblably (without any competitor or associate
coequall in his authority) does represent in himself the very person of
royal justice, according to that excellent verse of the Poet:

Nulla fides regni socijs: Omnisque potestas
Impatiens consorti^ erit.
There is not any trust to be reposed betwixt fellows in Empire: for each
power is impatient of a competitor. The pa^ts of a true prince (as Plata
defines) Ex lege and more regere: To rule by law and custom. H^ being thus
placed in the throne of royalty, shows Go^ high favor and dear love to
that people, whom he graciously governs by those wise and godly rulers,
which under him sit on the throne of Justice: wherein likewise the king shows
his own excellent prudence, that can by good discretion make choice of such
excellent magistrates. Hence was it, that Queen Saba did magnify king Solomon
above all the kings on earth in these words: Blessed be the Lord thy God, which
loved thee, to set thee on the throne of Israel, becaus^hee loved Israel 3.
reg. ca. 10.
for ever, and made thee king^ to do righteousness and equity, etc. In the
King therefore is comprehended the power and vigor of those humane laws David
says: Give thy Judgments to the King, O God, and thy Psalm. 72.
^teousnesse unto the Kings son, that in Righteousness he may judge thy
people and the poor in Equitie^: The mountains and hills shall bring peace to
thy people by Justice. For which special and singular glits and virtues of
Righteousness, Concord, and Justice, Kings and Princes were first ordained:
whose institution was divine and heau^nly, and by the most bountiful and
gracious ordinance of God, appointed for the weal of his Deioces amongst the
Medians; of Samothes amongst our ancient Britains, and amongst the Gauls;
of Minos in Crete; of Numa Pompilius, the successor of Romulus; who being
absent, was chosen king of the Romans, vehemently persuaded and urged to take
upon him that Soueraignetie, which he most peremptorily refused a long time:
for a true king is the viue pattern and Idaea of all virtues, reverenced
amongst his people, subjects, and vassales, as a god

The third, one people including the Commonwealth, which also should
acknowledge one only God and one king, considering the corporeal resemblance
which is betwixt him and God; both of them soueraigning over our souls and
bodies in ecclesiastical and civil laws: for so much as we be naturally
borne under that obedience, as those other two former by their proper power
bear domination over the nations of this earth, God having his virtue of
himself, infinite, omnipotent, and limitlesse; the king holding his authority
by the deputation, grace, and sufferance of the most high God, as his immediate
steward, to direct, and to see them instructed in his holy Scriptures and
commandments as also with his own civil and politic sanctions estate is
divided into the nobler sort, including as well ministers and magistrates

The king governing and preserving in peace and good order those nations and
people, which are by Gods blessed ordinance laid under his scepter, is properly
called the head of this body, being the noblest member thereof, and placed in
the top, containing that rich treasure of all the senses, exterior and
interior: as of imagination, understanding, memory, and common sense; whereas
all other members, being subject and obedient Aristotle and Auicenne, accord
herein, that all sense and motion begins in Solomon, become perfect in all
sapience and prudence. This match is made by tranquillity: for so much as the
zealous care and study to purchase peace, makes every king blessed and
reverend, and in the presence and sight of God, and of his people. Out of which
the glorious renown, honor, and good memory Solomon, and Octauius Augustus
were; whose glory shall endure with this worlds memory.

O what a comfort then may rest with the royal spirits and divine senses
Encouragement unto peace.
of your mightiness, when all these blessings shall be plentifully poured down
from God upon your gracious head with that oil of gladness, and upon the
body of your kingdoms, with that Angelical Manna of spiritual goodness
which was proclaimed at the birth of Christ Jesus, in the blessed days of
Octauian, when all the corners of the earth were in a long and deep silence as
after a strong sudden tempest: which excellent food of peace your blessed
Majesty has in your sapience from God preserved with grace and amity to
distribute amongst all the nations and princes of Christendom. And (...) these
you^ Majesty's heavenly studies and contemplations for the weal and happiness
both of your own and of other Christian p^es; your brethren

The heart which contain^ that spirit of moving and life, by me formerly
compared to the form of government being also the sea^ of sapience and of
intelligence, according to the Physical saying, Corsapit: and that of Solomon,
Da seruo tuo cor intelligens, vt^sciat discernere bonum a malo: Give unto thy
servant an understanding heart, to discern or judge betwixt good and evil: by
correspondent faculties governs next to the head in sense and sympathy: The
immed^ virtue of the sc^le: upon which man's dignity depends, if it be surely
fastened in reason, that mind being as Philosophers write, pure, liquid, and
divine. Wherefore the heart being the precious casket or receptacle thereof, I
do resemble to the body of this secret counsel: for as at the time of
conception it is infused, and has his principal residence in the heart: and
with it the sovereign lady, which is the quintessence thereof (being the
immortal soul) conioyneth with it in this mortal tabernacle: so does the
form or state of the Common wealth with religion establish themselves by the
sapience of this counsel. The members (...) (...) ^it (...) (...) lege
intellectus regitu^; a corporal god governed by the law Baldus in ^uth.
of understanding. Which understanding (as I said) is contained in the heart.

Successively the liver, being nurse of that blood, which from thence in great
Cogit enim amare iecur, For the liver procures love in creatures. And even by
how much the more blood increases in Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia
crescit: The love of money does as much increase as the money does.

Also the lungs I compare unto laws; because from thence, as Auicen and
Hippocrates write, all organes of the voice are drawn, according to the
saying, Pulmo loquitur, The liver gives speech: for the law is not improperly
called Oraculum Reipub. lying next unto the liver and heart of the
Commonwealth: which ought to be kept incorrupt, because it is so full of pipes,
as by the least contageon and putrefaction therein, the same will infect and
endanger the whole body: and when those pipes are stopped, the spirit of life
and moving is extinct, Architas the Pythagorean: Bonum non semper Lib. de morum
doct.
beatu^est, quando quide^ non in possessione virtutis, veru^ in vsu beatitudo
cernitur, etc. That which is good attaineth not a blessed end always, because
beatitude is not discerned in him which has the possession of virtue, but in
him which

Out of that head, this heart, that liver, and these lungs, are composed those
liberal Artists and Philosophers, which in and by them are cherished in every
politic body, such as are instructed in Schools, Colleges, and Academies.

The loins and thighs I resemble not unfitly to the true Nobility; upon
bestowed upon persons in testimonial of their virtue, or an external token of
the Princes, or of the peoples good opinion of him that is honored: being
Essential and Subiectiue, in respect of the person which imparteth honor;
Material and Obiectiue, regarding him that receives honor.

The ribs, bulk, and other baser entrails may be likened to the folk and
meaner yeomanrie, which guard and impale those estates, being called

Lastly, the two legs which support the whole substance of all this little
world, are honest merchandise, and tillage, or husbandry. Merchandise
consists in honest traffic, and barter, in exchange, in exportation, and
Mercurius with wings at his feet, whom they term the God of guile and
merchandise.

There are three kinds of commerce: Mercature, Usury, and Mercenarie
mysteries: the noblest of which is Mercature. Of Vsur^e, I have heretofore
Aristotle. Poor merchants In (...).
in every State are dishonorable, no more fashioning out a good Commonwealth,
than a small weak leg graceth a great body. And therefore Cicero says:
Mercatura si tenuis sordida putanda est, si magna and copiosa multa Off. 1.
vndique apportans, multisque sine vanitate impertiens; ac etiam si satiata
questu, vel contenta potius, videtur iure optimo posse laudari: Mercature being
poor is odious; being great and copious (traffiquing and bringing in
commodities with and from many nations, and imparting again to diverse
countries many accounted noble and very honorable as Bartholomeus Caepola
writes, and in 18. opin.
without all doubt, if it be not insatiate, mercature is the surest leg of a
Commonwealth, specially to Maritime nations, Islands, and free cities: such as
this kingdom of ours, and that one very rich state of Venice; at this day
being in comparison of others such a concised seignorie: and therefore one
Lacon answered a vaineglorious merchant which boasted in his many ships sent
out to diverse coasts of the world for choice of sundry commodities very wisely
thus. Finis est lucro praescribendus propter varios fortunae event us.
Merchants must limite a term to lucre; because fortune is variable, least in a
moment they loose that gain for which all their life time they labored: and
so be driven into that infamous disease upon the very desperate conceit
thereof, which the Cicero bitterly snuffled Marcus Antonius in these words.
Tenesne memoriate pratextatum decoxisse? Patris (inquies) ista culpa est:
etenim est pietatis plena ista defensio: illud tamen audaciae tuae, quod
sedisti in quatuordece^ ordinibus cum esset lege Roscia decoctoribus certus
locus constitutus: Phillippic. 2.
quamuis qui fortunae vitio non suo decoxissent. Remembrest thou, that being in
thy roabes of honor and magistracy, thou did deceive thy creditors,
percase thou will reply that it was thy fathers fault, and in that excuse
forsooth thou shall show great piety: but was it not audaciously done of
thee, to take Roscia there is a certain place limited to banckrupt persons:
albeit they did break by some accidental misaduenture otherwise, and not by
their own negligence or vice?

And herein appears how vile and odious this was amongst the Romans,
insomuch as if a gentleman which had dealt with merchants in their stock or
cash, and broke in credit or promise, the merchants did presently protest
against his credit, and proclaim him, fallen into the shame of Decoction, In
rubric. cap. negotiatores ne militent. and vlpian lib. 3. fforum decrimine
stellionatu^. Cap. 38.
of which Lucas de Penna. But (that merchandise or mercature is a principal
and most needful state in all cities and policies) it appears as well by
continual Plato in institutione reipub. writes how merchants and agents in
traffic are most behoouefull in every good city. The difference betwixt them
according to the legists, is that a negotiatour or agent is he that buieth
commodities, selling them again without alteration of their property: such
are they which transport and batter for tin, copper, iron, raw silks, wool,
or woollen-clothes; with such like which they sell again in the same nature.
Those are properly called merchants which buy these commodities, selling them
altered into certain instruments, or implements: as ordinance, belles,
vessels, stuffes of silk, clothes, and garments; with other ingenuous ^tol.
and Ale^ander in apostill.
needements for use of people; by their mechanical trades learned, taught, and
allowed by the wardens and masters of those trades and mysteries in the places
where they reside or dwell.

Husbandry being that other support or tressle of this politic body (which
consists of pasturage or tillage) may be worthily thought the right leg:
Cicero specially commends this exercise both in his book of old age; and in
his first of Offices, saying, that it is the fruitfullest and sweetest of all
temporal labors which yield benefit, and best befitting an honest man. And
likewise to Pomponius Atticus. Nihil ad sapientis vitam agrieultur aproxime
videtur accedere, habet enim rationem cum terra quae nunquam recusat imperium;
nec vnquam sine vsura reddit quod accipit. I will not stand upon this being so
much writ upon, and known: only that honor and reputation (which was
anciently given unto it) is notable. For foam Roman Emperors with their
victorious hands, did hold the plough; Cincinnatus, Serranus, Portius Cato.
Also the Fabij, Lentuli, Cicerones which had their names of pease, of beans,
and pulse in sowing of which grain, each of them or their auncesters had
exceeding knowledge: albeit, most renowned warriors. Cicero likewise writes
of Martinius Dentatus, who did triumph over the Sabians and Samnites, and yet
contented himself with a little land, and some few cattle. Gaudenti terra
vomere laureato, and triu^phali aratore. The land rejoicing in a laureate
plough, and in a ploughman which had borne triumph from the wars. Semblably
we read that Deiotarus king of Armenia was a most diligent husbandman, and
Xenophon observes in the life of Cirus, how painful he was in tillage and
rusticall labor. For it is manifest that out of such folk very strong and apt
soldiers are chosen and enabled for the wars, because through laborious
exercise, their bodies are better knit and confirmed in health and strength,
then either merchants or artificers which dwell in the walled towns. And hence
was it that the Romans erected without the city, those temples to their saint
of Medecin Esculapius, constantly believing and Chares, Parius, Hesiodus,
Apoll^dorus, and Lemnius in the Greek language, amongst the Latins, Cato,
Varro, Columella, Virgillius, etc.

And in this order according to my weak invention and judgment have I
fashioned, and appropriated the politic parts and members of a Commonwealth:
having also given soul and life unto it. Now for as much as it behooves
needfully, that these members under one head, and of one body, should
harmoniously converse and consent in love and sympathy (which nature teaches
in our own bodies, by the compassion and succor that one unity which God out
of his infinite benignity offers and teaches unto us

The laws of nature as I said teach us how pleasant and consonant it is with
the spirit of life, that all members accord in affection and mutual aid one
toward another. Since therefore it has pleased the true wisdom and
omnipotent grace of God, to make of these two kingdoms one body under one
head: meseemeth it should not stick in any man's opinion, how the same can any
way prove unfit or unprofitable. Which diverse, more upon perverse opinion,
than any reasonable consideration, impudently seem to believe. But the wiser
sort (which though fewest in number, are soundest in judgment) In magna namque
repub. multa and varia ingenia sunt: For the wits of people in a great
Commonwealth be variable and many: Yea, such as are of repugnant opinions:
considering therefore, that by nature every body has one head only; like one
root, from which many branches united in one tree, do spring (if it be not a
monstrous body) so semblably should each head have but one body: for how
deformed and horrible were it in the sight of nature, that one head should have
two bodies: especially, whereas they be knit by nature from the beginning, as
these kingdoms both in one root, being all members of one body, from the
first united, then severed again by the great and most mystical providence of
Omne regnum in se diuisum desolabitur: Every kingdom divided in it self
becomes desolate. And if this should happen, against which all good men
should make their deprecations, that God might auert the calamity, which would
impend it. Doubtlessely, the same cannot but proceed from our own
maleuolence, and perverse distortion, according to that true saying of Salust:
Vbi boni mores, nunquam discordia nec auaritia: vbi auaritia, nunquam boni
mores nec vera concordia, etc. Where good manners, and honest fashions are
used, neither can discord nor avarice be found: but where avarice reigns,
you shall never find good manners, nor

Turn we therefore with joyful unanimity one toward another, and let
Firmanda sunt igitur concordiae vincula, and discordiae mala expellenda: Let us
Orat. ad Caes. de R^p. Ordinand.
therefore make strong the bonds of our concord, and expel the mischiefs of
discord.

For it has been our ancient honor and the Britain glory, recorded of
this Nation by Cornelius Tacitus: Commune periculum concordia propulsandum
cognouere Britanni, in vit. Iul. Agricolae. The Britains by their mutual and
intestine concord knew well how to repel all common dangers to themselves.
Unite we therefore cheerfully: for according to Socrates, this union of a
Commonwealth is the very work and scope of friendship: and such as are true
friends, Ettam ^b vehementiam amoris cupiunt connasci, and vnum ex duobus
fieri: Desire even in the vehement heat of their love to be borne together
again, and one entire to be made out of two bodies. Which union or communion
of the laws and liberties, with other emoluments, answerable to the rule of
need and decency, is confirmed by discipline, and discipline comprehended in
the Laws, and in Philosophy.

When England and Scotland were separated, yet were they brethren: for in one
Proverb they did consent, That England was the elder, and Scotland the younger
brother. And of late years their accord was so natural, prognosticating this
indissoluble union, that to the breake-necke spite of our enemies, our late
peace of Englands dancing in spiritual consolation, fed upon that counsel
which the divine Psalmist uttered, Ecce quam bonum and quam iucundum est
fratres habit are in vnum. And in the days of our fathers, when any iarres
happened betwixt us, they were such cauils or emulations rather, as commonly
fall amongst brethren: which though they be much violent for the time, yet
they continue but a little time: and now the title of brethren is Hengist has
married with Scota, even as Henry your Majesty's royal father, the son of L.
Matthew Stuarte, and of Lady Margaret, who married with your mother Mary
(daughter to king James the fourth, and to the Duchess of Longueuille) after
the death of her first husband king Frauncis the second, grandchild by the
first ventre unto that good prince of renowned memory, king Henry the seventh,
as your Highnesses father was by the second ventre: so that it may most fitly
be said concerning that blessed conjunction of those two fair and peaceable
planets. Nuper ex atrocissimis bellorum ciuilium vulneribus paulisper
respirantem amplexi sunt libertatem huius insulae, Iacobus quartus and
Margareta Scotorum coniugio sociati, etc. Out of the late most bitter wounds of
civil wars, James the fourth and Margaret (being knit in wedlock together)
have embraced the liberties of this Island, even when it began to faint and
draw a weak breath.

This happy marriage of those two beneuolent planets portendeth the Henry and
Queen Elizabeth, is this match made betwixt Hengyst and Scota, more firm than
ever at the first, when Brutus reigned over them, before their separation in
the persons of Locryn and Albanact: Iam non sunt duo, sed caro vna. Which
sacred circumscription was figured and stamped in a piece of coin of your late
royal parents, upon their union, figuratively presaging this union also.

Since therefore these nations thus coupled in one body, be both of them knit
up in your Majesty's royal person and posterity, there is not any doubt, but
that they will live, love, and accord in sincere unity together, perfecting
and accomplishing that general peace of conscience, which was begun and yet
continued from the first of your Majesty's late dearest sister her beginning in
reign, even to this instant, of your gracious government: your Highness
representing the person of this ancient Britain, comprehending the new
spouse Scotland within your princely body (though your royal residence be
kept with us, as in the bride-groomes chamber) has that vbiquitie by God
granted you, touching the civil supremacy which his omnipotency retains
better for them, that they never had knit in that nuptial band together: for
Nam vtrumque per se indigens, alterum alterius auxilio indiget: For both of
them being single, and standing in some need of succor, may stand one the
other in steed with their own succors. This if we ponder with frank and
honorable accord, and shall joyfully rouse up and unite our noble spirits,
together with all heroycall obedience and true magnanimity, Neque orbis Sal.
ad C^s. de R^p. Ordinand.
terrarum, neque cunctae gentes conglobatae mouere aut contundere queant hoc
imperium: Neither the whole world, nor all the nations and people of this
earth, assembled in hostile troops, shall have power to shiuer or batter down
this our Empire.

Hereof let us prudently consider, being a matter of such high consequence: Nam
de futuro nemo omnium satis callidus prudensque est. Let us therefore prudently
consider, and it shall appear, how both these kingdoms (which were so long
severed heretofore) have been from the first remembrance which is remaining of
this Island, since it was first inhabited by Brutus, (who shared it amongst his
sons) and after him long and many times made one body: and how stands then
the present state of them in comparison? Even as one ancient tree lopped off
from the bole: wherein by process of time, diverse old Danish, Saxon, and
French graffes have been planted, which take their virtue from the root of
that ancient Salomons forests: which shortly by transportation or inoculation
of their sprigs into other kingdoms, may bear rule and pre-eminence in all
the goodliest gardens of the world. Neither can any difference be found in a
well seasoned palate, betwixt that taste which the fruits of these graffes
yield, saving in a little relish, which I compare to the dialect of their
languages, not differing at all, if you suite them both, where the bride and
bridegroom do lovingly repose themselves together: Salomons Canticles) saying
with cheerful hearts: Behold King Solomon, with the crown where Cantic. cap
3.
with his mother crowned him in the day of his marriage, and in the day of the
gladness of his heart. For though the bride be black (as her name imports)
like Sco^os.
king Salomons beloved, yet is she amiable, and full of comeliness, her riches
is in concealed treasure, and her beauty glistereth within; which shortly to
the comfort of them both (through the great grace and goodness of God, is like
with glory to be discovered into Christendom. Besides, what a rich dower was
legacied to these happily coupled nations by God himself, even in that Cestus,
or loue-girdle, which encloseth them both: wherein by the omnipotent great
workman (as the sacred Psalmist says) innumerable things creeping are
wrought, both small and great: in which are placed multitudes of ships
militant and merchant, that (like so many precious stones of special virtue)
decore and garnish the same: some having the power attractiue to draw benefits
and commodities unto them from all foreign parts of the world: others
distributive, which impart with a reciprocal benignity, the fruits and
blessings of this Island: diverse defensatiue, in the good cause of their
friends and colleagues, which confeathered together, as feathers all of one
wing, join in one fleet Salust writes; ^ell. Iugurth.
Quod difficilimum est inter mortales gloria inuidiam vincemus, si concordes
and vnanimes fuerimus: That which is not easily seen amongst mortal men, our
glory shall triumph over envy, if we concord, and unite together. For
neither strength in battles, nor huge heaps of treasure, can verily support
and maintain the states of kingdoms; but friends and faithful countrymen,
whom neither arms can compel, nor any gold conciliate, faith alone Monarchy
was brought unto us by that justice, which our right royal Mysipsa dying,
spoke to Iugurth his unnaturally fostered son on the behalf of his own
natural children, Adherball and Hyempsall (whose honors and inheritance he
most ungrateful tyrannously did usurp) Concordiaparu^rescrescunt, etc. Small
matters are increased by concord. But hereof we need not (under the protection
of God) make doubt: for that which is a most comfortable assurance to the
people of this Nation, the knot which our Sovereign has already knit, is
like to prove indissoluble. Anne, that comely turtledoue of Denmark, long
since brought forth unto the blessed bridegroom diverse right royal
branches of this united kingdom: which serve as faithful pledges and
witnesses of their inviolable love and unity. Nay, she has sealed it upon
the lips of her husband with a kiss, which kiss can never be forgotten.
She has kissed his lips already; from thence has she sucked honey and
my^rhe, proclaiming, that her beloved is hers and she his. She shall
therefore like a new wedded spouse, forget her fathers house and name, and be
called after Psalm. 45.
her husband: who, because he will have a paritie correspondent in all
meekness, ass^eth to himself the name of Brutus, from whom as from their
great Hengyst and Scota were delined. This ancient name is the true name, and
the nobler title, because it is more ample; and yet a new name, and of late:
for what is it in the course of Nature, Which is, and has not been, or has
not been, and shall be? As Solomon in that sense so sagely sentenced: for one
generation passes, and another comes. The righteousness hereof shall break
forth as a light, and the salvation which comes thereof, as a burning lamp.
And as the Prophet Esaias divining of our Savior said: so may we not improperly
apply the same to your Highness, being not his steward only, but the
constant and faithful champion and defender of his Gospel: The Es^ 62.
Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory: and thou
shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of the Lord shall name thee:
thou shall also be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal
diadem in the hand of thy God. And unto Scota thus much for her comfort: She
shall be no more forsaken: neither shall it be said any more to that land
desolate, but thou shall be called Hephzibah, and thy lands Beulah, for the
Lord delights in thee, and thy land shall have a husband: for as a young man
marries a virgin, so shall thy sons marry with thee: and as a bridegroom
is glad of his bride, so shall thy God rejoice in thee, etc.

This is that blessing which has been so long prediuined and promised: so
that our ancestors in many fore-passed ages have heartely longed to see Envy
succeeds our first glory: that we make not foes of our fellows, and
fellows of our foes. Accord Qui eodem igne and fumo vtuntur, etc. Let us like
those ancient noble Romans dilate and propagate our honors by sociable
amity, rather than to repine at any just and profitable equality, to the
pernicious confusion and ruin of our estates in general. Thus shall we
stirie up our discont^nted spirits, if in us any such wild^e of ambition
reign, to maintain, to protect, Cantic. (...)
some frivolous opinions have cast out, that it cannot long and easily brook
your Majesty's absence: as if according to the vulgar proverb, the chief
person of majesty being out of sight, should be banished out of her loyal
mind also: for (as I said) they might know, how the divine spirit does not call
kings by the name of gods in vain: for so much as this royal vbiquitie
disperseth their sovereign power, laws, and authority through all the parts
of this world. For we know, that France, which is much larger, had not many
ages past diverse great and free principalities contained within her bounders:
which by match and union, as this of ours is, and through the disobedience of
some ambicious Corduba, Gallicia, Andelosia, being all of the^ little
kingdoms, were severally Philips Crown. All which principalities and
provinces are governed in peace by Presidents and Counsels established in them.
There seems then no reason to the contrary, why Scotland should not contain
it self, and continue loyal, shadowed under the royal curtain of your
gracious authority by that sapience, which in your divine policy is and shall
be dispersed amongst them. For they cannot be such impious, barbarous, and
unthankful creatures, as to forget their faith and allegiance unto him, that
from his cradle was and is so dearly affied in them, and which has since the
first spiracle of his reason expressed such mildnes, and governed amongst them
with such moderation and benignity. Moreover, the nobles and

Shall any man then amongst the people of your Majesty's Nations be so Rex
Angliae est monarcha in suo regno, a cuius fforumde Off. prat. lib. primus,
prout Baldus in cap secundo, cum venissent, etc.
sententia non appellatur, quia praefectus multorum pralatorum est sui regni.
Much more privilege then is included in your Highness, in whom is justly
planted the sovereign right and inheritance of both these kingdoms, now made
one Nation.

Since therefore this head including your regal grace, being prudently busied
in continual contemplation, premeditation, and conference of things past,
present, and to come, (which are noted to be the very faculties of prudence)
does with a zealous and pastoral care tender unto the heart, being the
iewellhouse of understanding and sapience, the weal of this political body,
which it by mature deliberation disgesteth for the chief good thereof: even as
the liver with blood, the vocal organes and arm of justice by pronounciation
and distribution of the laws, and every part in his particular function is
ayding toward the preservation hereof in health and tranquillity: so should
this head, with all these mental faculties, and that body with all his members
conioyntly Solomon: by this the heart receives vigor and courage, the liver a
long life; the lights, which are indeed the very lights of this politic body
receive illumination and power: for out of the mouths of very Daniell. By this
the hands are made strong, and the fingers ^ght to break a bow of steel: this
covers the body with fatness, girdeth the loins with gladness, and
pours marrow into the bones: lastly, this makes the feet of that body like
Hearts feet, swift and lively, for transportation and inuection of all
commodities and earthly blessings, making the whole body strong and lusty,
like an Eagle. This is the consummation and perfection of all the first and
last of Gods blessings in every kingdom, to preserve the soul, being the true
religion, spotless, and without schisms or heresies, so near as the princes
wisdom can. Which your sacred Majesty, to the most high pleasure of God,

Since therefore God has prevented your Grace with the blessings of goodness,
and has set a crown of pure gold upon your head: since he has granted unto
you long life even for ever and ever: since your honor Psalm. 21.
is in his salvation only: since this worship and glory is imposed upon your
Highness: since he has given you everlasting felicity, and made you glad
with the joy of his countenance, because your Grace his anointed did put your
whole confidence in him: Certain it is which he promised by the spirit of his
kingly Prophet, That his boundless mercy shall not suffer you to miscarrie:
even when so many shepherds of his people were first delivered from the spirit
of God in the Patriarks and holy Prophets, Vinum fugiens, which is already
spent unto the lees. Since therefore your most royal Majesty reuiueth in your
own person and posterity this old Britain league as a second Cadwallader,
but doubtless under the joyful and propitious comfort of the Gospel like to
be most fortunate in your domination, unlike to the first Cadwallader, who was
the last and unfortunate king of great Britain, that reigned before your
Highness, and Arture, king of the great and less Britain, who was a most
zealous captain in the cause of Christ, that a little while before the
consummation of the world he should come again, Carl. signifying Charles,
(which Ioh. Tilius, lib. 1. de rebus gall.
interprets nobleness and magnanimity) is one of your Majesty's names, well
according with your most gracious and heroical nature; so does your Gird then
thy sword unto thy thigh, O thou most mighty, according to thy worship and
renown. Good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on, because of the word
of truth, of meekness, and of righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach
thee terrible things: for thine arrows are sharp, and will subdue those
people that are thine enemies, thy seat is everlasting, and thy scepter
righteous: for thou love equity, loathing iniquity, therefore has God
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. Hence is it, that
thou art fairer than the children of men: hence is it, that thy lips ouerflow
with grace, because God has everlastingly blessed thee. Then with a valiant
courage, and divine spirit from above, we may live to see your blessed Grace,
aduauncing your self in the name of God like Judas Maccab^s in his holy wars
against Gods enemies: which arose, and like a giant harnessed his breast,
fitting himself with all his martial furniture Maccab. 1. cap. 3
to fight, and over his battles brandished victory with his own sword.
Where it is also written, That he like a Lion demeaned himself in the
conflict, or as a Lions whelpe roaring after his prey. What a glorious
appearance shall it be to the poor militant members of Christ's Gospel, when
they shall see your Grace like the Sun in his glory rising, and as a
bridegroom, with a countenance like the Cedars of Lebanon, coming out of his
chamber amongst them, to be their victorious guide, sent from God, to give them
victory in battle against the enemies of his anointed: who though France
be called most Christian, and Spain the most Catholic king; yet is our
Britain Lord the anointed of our holy one of Israel, the valiant and most
faithful champion, Gog and Magog, which as the soldiers of Satan and Lucifer
scomefully subsannate the blessed names and mysteries of our sweet Messiah,
the God of righteousness: or like a divine David against the proud
brazen-headed Philistine of Gath, who reviled the host of the living God: The
flesh of which reprobates Reg. 1. cap. 17.
shall be cast out to the fowls of the air, for their names are not written
in the book of life. Howbeit, your Grace, united with a continual peace
Octauian Augustus (upon the birth of our Messiah) the voice of a blessed Angel
was heard singing, Gloria deo in excelsis, in terris pax and cum hominibus bona
volunt^s: so in the conclusion of this Christian age, which seems very near
her end, your Grace may live to see that happy time of our deliverance, as the
second and last Octauius, but manifoldly more blessed in this Evangelical
treasure than he was: for what can these great and fatal conjunctions of the
Planets, and those wonderful eclipses (which happened immediately before

Certain it is to be thought, that some strange mutation is at hand, either by
grievous wars in some parts, or by diuolutions or dissolutions of empires,
but if by wars, then I beseech Christ, that I may most auspiciously augure
against the enemies of his Gospel: or if in happy peace, then that it may to
your Majesty's endless glory continue, which your Highness has already so
fruitfully and confidently labored and effected amongst all Christian princes.
Which blessed league, if it shall hold, what hope then remains, but that the
golden time of our glorification is come to the door: when this our bridegroom
and bride (as I said) shall come with the virgins that be her fellows, three
wise virgins, whose lamps are full of oil, and lighted: to who^ it shall be
opened Paul says) is the lawfulfilled, and through her are multitudes of ^om.
cap. 13.
misdeeds covered, etc. Which being sweetest of the three sisters, will
doubtlessely conduct your Grace by the right hand, because through her, the
peace and union, amongst all that profess themselves the members of Christ, is
fruitfully wrought and continually sought by your Highness: so that upon this
second great Sabboath, bringing with it a general rest from all our earthly
labors, and a perpetual consolation in our endless praises and thanksgiving
unto God: when Gloria shall be sung in Excelsis again; Pax also shall be
Terris; and that author thereof under God shall be brought into the melodious
chamber of that all good, all great, and all holy bridegroom, mentioned in the
blessed Gospel, presenting before him a flock well washed, clean, without
infection, and sanctified, ready for glorification, that they may with their
faithful shepherd sit at the Lambs supper in the holy city new Jerusalem,
where shall be no more night, neither light of the Sun: For the Lord Ap^. 19.
gives them light, and they shall reign for ever more. Happy shall they be
found, which watch, and blessed, that are accompanied with those three wise
virgins: Apoc. 22.
for your Grace like the true Lion shall be found with your eyes open to wait
and attend upon that King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the Lion of

I have spoken (my private condition considered) sufficiently, to make known
the just and godly grounds of this union: fearing, if I should meddle further
with some cautelous and captious positions, suppositions, or oppositions in
these cases, not only to be condemned of arrogant presumption, (which is most
detestable in all good judgment and knowledge) but also to be venemously
scourged with the malicious snakes of envy. Modesty therefore enioyneth me
to restrain my forwardness in further discourse hereof: howbeit, in a man
that sits on the seat of Magistracy, this were honest fortitude, to
maintain vijs and modis quibuscunque, without any fear or show their
eloquence and virtues impulsive, in laying open to the son that Alexander
himself could not, if he were alive, break; being once surely knit in our
hearts by a general and faithful consent) might be made tributarie to this
Monarchy, if the Britains would continue their love so long toward God, and
amongst themselves: then must it have followed upon necessity, that the chief
temporal weal of your Majesty's people, and a special mean unto their
spiritual consolation, might be locked up in this mystical union. So that
some in their love toward God; others in regard of that glorious calm at
home; diverse in desire and hope of more reputation and riches, even all of
them for some one or other special affection or passion in themselves, which
they would have satisfied, might joyfully give to this union (by your Highness

Now turning to the Morals of Prudence, where I left, I would speak somewhat
summarily, respecting the conditions of magistrates, soldiers, and artificers
in a Commonwealth. I deem him worthy to be reputed a good Commonwealths man,
that being garnished with civil virtues (as with justice and fortitude, which
are in themselves moderated with prudence and temperance) can as well in
foreign places, and in the wars, as in domestical and civil affairs,
perform the parts of a noble citizen and countreyman. All a vigilant eye be
cast upon them, to discern of their behauiours and honesties Cicero writes,
Est Reipub. ornamento, homines externos hospitalitate in vrbe nostra non egere:
It is a grace to our Commonwealth, when forrainers are not destitute of
entertainment and hospitality within our city. And lastly, that their whole
care and study be bent to maintain the reputation of that Commonwealth,
where they govern under their prince. And for as much as it is one special
part of Prudence, and of good policy, that even in the most peaceable times,
military those persons which are most able for military services; and that a
strict account C^sar, Vegetius, Frontinus, Aelianus, Polienus, with

Imprudence (being ignorance, or a want of power and counsel to make a
difference Scipi^ Aemilianus found at the service against Numantia, whom he by
fresh practice, discipline, and instruction restored to their native valors,
formerly forgotten. Calliditie and malicious wilines is that other extreme,
which oppositely withstandeth prudence, by which unadvised people Cicero: Non
placuit maioribus nostris astus: Our Elders were not pleased with craftiness.
For in those times no less then with some of our honest persons in these days
guile was held most odious and abject, eradicated Ratio namque postulat ne quid
insidiose, ne quid falenter, ne quid simulat? For reason requires us to do
nothing which may be treacherous, fallacious, or counterfeit. Subtilties
therefore in private causes which do not concern the Commonwealth, should
specially be suppressed in all honorable Counselors, and all such
hypocritical malice as counterfeiteth prudence to life, distanding so far
from it, as a man may shoot a rouing shaft of reason: for he (that with all
his strength labors to do good) may retain the name of a very wiseman, and
become innocent, in respect of himself, Calliditas sapientia perfect a non C^.
3. Off.
est, nec honestas, quanquam species honestatis and sapientia esse potest, etc.
That calliditie is no perfect sapience, nor honesty, although it seem both
wise and honest. We should therefore take great care, least those vices
deceive us, which in outward appearance resemble virtues: for the least wavering
either to the right or left hand is vicious; let us therefore ponder our selves
in the midst. Ignorance in this, and in the knowledge of the limits, lists,
and bounders (within which virtues and vices consist) seduceth very many,
bringing them into the number of those idiots, whose reason is adumbrated. Nam
mala sunt vicina bonis, errore subillo Ovid.

Pro vitio virtus crimina saep^ tulit.


For it is a near step from virtue to vice; and under that mask of error
has virtue been so deceived, that she has tolerated heinous faults, by
mistaking them for small vices.

And hence grows that general mis-conceit, preiudication, and weakness of
discretion, which cannot rightly measure men's natures by their passions. For
example, when they call him a coward which desires peace: if a man be subtle
headed, then is he traiterous: if simple, and a slothful dastard, dealing
man, whose mind and tongue (though both abominable) accord Proprium enim
virtutis est conciliare animos hominum and ad suos vfus adiungere: For it is a
virtuous quality, to conciliate men's minds, and to make his proper use of
them: if he can apprehend the plain causes, which move most honor and
admiration in their hearts toward any Magistrates: if he can wisely discern
the Springtide of Justice, Prudence, Fortitude, and Temperance

Peregrination of countries is another chief ornament in a Counselor, in
special the realms and provinces of his prince, his friends, his enemies, and
neighbors. In such travails behooves his care, prudence, diligence, and
consideration: not to pass like those gaping and wavering fools, in fayres
and markers, which only come to busy their eyes without benefit. But his use
of travel must be, to know how such countries are governed in peace and war:
what revenues ordinary out of his own lands, and extraordinary by
contribution of the people, belong to the prince; how the realm is munited;
Honorius and Theodosius, Emperors, supposed, that men ought not to diue into
the secrets of a foreign state: yet he which (upon the dispatch of any
legation) returns into his own country, shall be deemed prudent, if he can
observe and open (when occasion is offered) such secrets as by being showed may
profit his own country. Amongst other things, if he be commended by the
prince to perform any great embasie, the special subject of his heart under
God must be the renown of his prince, and the chief organe and directorie, by
which he must square out his business and work, should be by the king,
through heat or some angry passion, somewhat more sharp Tobias and Lot)
received Angels into their houses: how to grope men's minds or meanings, whether
they be friends or enemies; and according to the state of his business he
shall accommodate himself to the time, and unto the state of his prince,
having good note of all occasions, oportunities,

A sound knowledge and apprehension of the princes strength whom he serves,
with the power of his confederats, neighbors, and enemies, is likewise
adjoined. This shall teach him how great their several revenues are, either
ordinary, or extraordinary, from whence, by what means, and when they be
gathered: what forces his prince can levy, and how long maintain them; how
aeque fortis ac prudens, both wise and valiant: executing the laws of arms (as
those Roman Emperors, of whom it is written) That in castris they did agere
iure summo, domique ex aequo and bono: That in the wars they did use martial
law, and at home in peace administer equity.

When a Counselor can with sound knowledge like a good Physician heal the
diseases of his country, providing how to prevent them, before they can take
hold thereof, he magnifieth his wisdom vehemently: he should therefore hear
every man willingly, favor all indifferently, yet so, that most respect be
fastened to the just cause. A stranger in his good dealing and right ought to
be preferred before a neighbor: wherefore if he were a Jew borne, or
barbarous Heathen, if he were a Turk, or of what odious offspring soever, let
his cause, not his quality be respected, and in equity let him hold the
privilege of nation, cognation, country, city, blood, and family with a
neighbor,

Justice and goodness is no little estimation in a Counselor, when his
sayings soothly consound with integrity, virtue, and verity: here and there,
in mouth and heart all one, in word and deed plain, reprehending faults in
others with all mildness and benignity. His actions are thoroughly seasoned
with benevolence and courtesy: he will not withhold his good counsel from
any man: a patron toward good persons, severe against malefactors, in all
places zealous of virtue, enemy to calumnies, detesting lies and vanity: no
dissembler, no double-tongued person, no referendarie: for never was any
delator of men's conditions and manners faithful, but abject and base minded.
Moreover, a just man will not rebuke one, being absent, for his faults, if he
may have him present: that which neither Tacitus, That Adulation is an
everliving evil; and with Curtius, who writes, that people of such nature
devour and wast the princes treasure much Constantine the son of Constantius,
that he called those flatterers and enuches of the court, which wast the
Commonwealth, and yet are always murmuring, mothes and water rats: like those
dogs of which the blessed prophet says, That they run grudging and grinning
about the city for meat, until they be satisfied, whose gluttonous appetite
is bottomless and insatiable. Nero who was brought up in temperance and
sobriety, through flatterers became cruel: through them Caesar lifted his
arm against his own country; from them aspired the tyrannies of Rhoboham.
But it is needless to produce foreign example, being well furnished with
domestical testimonies: for we read and know, that the Edward of Carnaruan,
and Richard the Black princes son, one and the other were deposed and
confounded by the fruit of that viletie which they sucked from flatterers. A
sage and honorable Council therefore will fence his ears against the
subtilties of them, least Sinon enter with the Troiane horse, and there unrip
his pack of parasites, which wildly seizing upon his heart will tyrannously
usurp upon his soul also. This is a whoorish danger, which first allureth,
then binds, and being once tied, it is almost impossible for the captiued to
get loose. They therefore that respect their own quiet with the princes
honor, will esteem more of one Clitius, than of six hundred Aristippi; for
they present unto such noble magistrates in precious vessels, that potion
Seneca. Venenum in auro bibitur, expertus loquor.


I speak by good experience, that vile poison is drunk out of fine gold. In
Thyeste.
Such Counselors therefore, as are possessed of justice and goodness, will
avoid these monsters especially, living in peace with all men, contented with
their own; they be not any covetous money-mongers, they live justly and

Liberality likewise is a very gracious ornament, seemly befitting a
Counselor: this, since I did handle in the first Book of these Offices,
entreating of Treasurers, I will speak less in this place: only this, it is
a principal bait to take people, because above all things they love to sport
themselves in those reputation: for certain it is, that more credit comes
by one ducket present feeds bad Counselors, till they be so fat as porkes,
ready to be served to their masters table: as Aeneas Siluius fitly compares.

Charity with bounty (such as Polybius prescribed to Scipio) magnifieth a
Counselor, to make so good use of his going abroad at all times, that he
benefit some before his return home: for even as covetousness is the root
Corinth. 1. cap. 13
when prophecies, tongues, and knowledge shall cease, and be consummated, can
never be consumed, but lives immortally: of those three sweet sisters Paul,
covetousness Romans cap. 13.
and malice are her open and professed enemies. Let a wise man therefore Prou.
10.
resist them, for they being vanquished in him that held out in force against
her, leave a beautiful port triumphant for charity to come in with her
gracious train of blessed virtues to take possession of her ennobled heart. It
is written of Marcus Crassus, that he was magnified in five things: in his
great Plutarch. lib. 4. Conui^al.
Nobility; in his marvelous Eloquence; in his excellent sound knowledge had
of the Laws; that he was Archbishop, and the richest of all the Romans Sylla.
But all these virtues and bounties of fortune were stained with the corruption
of avarice, and with the want of charity: such Counselors little Plut. in
Apotheg
regard their charge, so they may gorge up their own coffers. Woe to the
shepherds of isrdel, which only feed themselves, dispersing their flocks
negligently without food, as the Prophet threateneth. Immoderate riches in a
vile auaricious person engender pride, even as unexpected spoil and victory
does in a vainglorious captain: as was noted by those letters which Philip
dispatened to Archidamus, after his victories had at Cheronaea; who taxed him
with proud and bitter terms, uttered from a spirit swollen and puffed up with
fe^citie of his good success: but Archidamus in answer to the same, advised
Salust says: Quibus neque modus contenti^s Con^. C^l.
inest, vtique victoriam crudeliter excercebant: Such as do not retain any
moderation in conflict, but exercise their virtues with cruelty. And for so Et
quanquam domi sint potentes (as Salust says) apud socios tamen magis clari
sunt (...). Iugurth.
quam honesti: Albeit they be powerful in their countries, yet do their
country men esteem them to be more in authority than in honesty. This
greedy pestilence subuerteth all faith, all honest conditions, and good arts:
in stead of which it raises pride, erueltie, false-hood, contempt of God, and
authority. Quam neme sapiens concupiuit, which no wise man has coueted, as
says Salust elsewhere, (being as it were composed or compounded of venomous
mischiefs and evils) effeminateth and cowardizeth a man's mind and body, being
always infinite, never satisfied, which neither is with plenty nor poverty
wasted. But of this vice I have sufficiently spoken in diverse other places
more at large.

Beneficence being a promptness to deserne well, is (as I said before) a kind
of liberality required in Counselors: which consists in the advancement of
the Commonwealths profit; in admonishing, commending, reprehending,
comforting, procuring, defending, not only requiring aid and benevolence,
Cicero notes) Benignitas est Reipub. vtilis redimi a seruitute captos,
locupletari tenuiores, etc. It is a benignity commodious to the Commonwealth,
Off. lib. 2.
that captives be ransomed from bondage, and that the poorer sort may be
relieved with riches. Such was that virtuous beneficence of the Emperor Titus,
who when Rome for three days and three nights continually did burn, and that
a grievous famine with mortality chanced amongst the people, with his own
private purse relicucd multitudes of them; to many sick persons Vlpius
Traianus was called Pater Patriae: qui per exquisita remedia multis
pestilentia, incendijs, and fame affectis est opitulatus: The father of his
country: who did I^ vita vlpij Tr^.
(by most excellent good means and remedies) relieve and restore multitudes of
his people, which had been afflicted with pestilence, fire, and famine.
Likewise, to minister stipends, relief, or corrodies to maimed soldiers, old
seruitors, forlorn sailors, poor scholars, distressed corporations and
societies, did in my first book) so do I necessarile record it again in this
part, that base Elizabeth could never endure, but upon any complaint approved,
did cause to be severely censured. It is likewise a gracious beneficence, to be
merciful and charitable toward Churches, Almeshouses, and Hospitals;
encouraging such as are virtuous and commendably qualified with good testimony
given of their virtues and good parts unto the prince; and in furthering of
their preserment at his hands. Such a counselor protecteth justice, defends
the people, guardeth the nobility, patronizeth his countrymen, adorneth the
By such Counselors therefore, every prince and every state is strengthened

What strong enemy was there to this our public state, that in the later
days of the late dear Sovereign of our happiness, Queen Elizabeth, feared
not the valor and fortunes of Robert, then Earl of Essex; until such time as
through his own credulous imprudence, he wilfully wounded himself with his
own intolerable appetite. Of whom I will only say that which I might
worthily cite out of Cicero, then written to the good fame of Caius Marius:
Nemo vnquam multitudini fuit carior: No subject ever was more dear off. 3.
to the multitude; and (which was lamentable to them that depended upon his
greatness) not Fortunes deareling, but her babie, nay, rather Fortunes babble,
whose fairest spectacle is like a momentanie bubble; as appeared by those great
hopes, reports, and opinions, which the people had of him: but Non minus
periculum ex magna fama, quam ex mala: But the danger of a Tacit^ in vita
I^lij Agricola.
great same, is altogether as great, as that which proceeds from a bad report.

What open or close enemy was he that lived in any foreign part of Europe,
which was not amated with that divine care and wisdom, with that industrious
circumspection and foresight of those two most worthy Senators William
Burghley, Lord Treasurer, and Sir Francis Walsingham, sometimes principal
Secretary to that good Queen: which sitting quiet in their studies, wrought
so many wonders in Spain, France, and Italy, for the confirmation and
fortification of this Realm, against the tyrannous enemies of the Gospel, and
of that our ever renowned Empress of England? The first died very rich, in a
most healthful state of soul, and in honor of his country; which was for
many years sustained, comforted, and protected by his prudence: the second,
both in true piety, justice, and glory, respecting God and the Commonwealth;
honorable, and truly rich, which was in mental perfections, and in the love of
this Commonwealth

Much therefore behooves it Counselors, that in all their actions, counsels
and consultations they become prudent and valiant, taking up a place in the
midst betwixt the zealous and true worship of God, upon the right hand, with
his vigilant and tender care of the Commonwealth, upon the left, respecting
them both with fear and fervent affection: and above all courtly pestilence,
to take antidotes and preservatives against the contagious breath of
flatterers, which has corrupted and ruined more princes and noble gentlemen in
time of peace, than the sword has many times done in bitter battle. Such were
they that trecherously mined into the noble nature of that renowned

This mu^ne disperseth it self through the Courts of many Princes, infecting
and eating up whole families; like pestilence the devouring Angel

There is one virtuous condition which must inseparably be fastened, placed, or
rooted rather in a Counselor; and it is a pure will, godly zeal, and joyful
promptness to give sound and wholesome counsel, (of which I spoke somewhat
before) as when things be by mature deliberation consulted, before they be
peremptorily resolved upon, and all the causes (with even hand) first weighed
in the balance of justice. A Senator therefore (which retains so reverend
and honorable office) must respect the ground of his authority, which does
best and most to life anatomize a magistrate. Sudden and doubtful counsels do
digest more happily with them, that are sildome vexed with troubles and
difficulties; or with ambitious persons which only respecting their private
glory, fear least time of deliberation will grow scant unto them; then

There is likewise one excellent part in wise and complete Counselors
required, which is to give good ear and attention to the sayings of all men
uttered unto him; and in special to those of that society, which though
inferior or superior in their places speak before them. Herein a Counselor
must muster his wits together, and remember those arguments wherwithall they
confirm and corroborate their several opinions, that (when his turn
inuiteth him to speech) he may not miss a mite in recapitulation Pericles
(convening with Sophocles his fellow Praetor concerning State-businesse (upon
Sophocles his commendation of the beauty of a very fair Boy passing by)
earnestly replied: It is not only fit to withhold your hands, but to withdraw
your eyes from such vain objects in these serious cases.

For these respects Lycurgus inhibited all manner of pictures from the chamber

Deliberation also (being a diligent and prudent meditation of things future,
doubtful, and contingent, remaining in our power; by which choice is made of
the best means to good and happy success in any thing that may be done or
spoken) is one special type of a Counselors prudence. Which some compare to
the Mulberrie, that flourishing last of all trees, yields ripe fruit before
others: for after sound consultation matters are with expedition acted. Neither
may counsel be proffered, before the king require it, like a vain physician,
which

If memory likewise do not by nature richly supply to the Counselors
reading: for so much as it is fitly called the Register of eloquence, and
mother of the Muses, it will be much behoofefull, that a Counselor study to
reform himself by that art industriously, which by maps, characters, or
Hyeroglyphickes may be best placed.

Knowledge in the studies of Moral and Natural Philosophy, being first well
grounded with Logical rules, that he may probably discourse and dispute wisely
(when any question upon good occasion requires) is needful also. Plato
defines in one of his Epistles, is constancy, faithfulness, and sincerity.
Which tripartite kind is by the Morallists called the art of Sapience: for it
teaches us the knowledge of God, it reclaymeth us to fortitude and modesty;
which illuminating our minds, consumes those mystie vapors of ignorance and
dullness, that oppress our reason; so that we may clearly behold things above
us, about us, and beneath us: it rooteth out vice, harrowing the mind, and
making it fit to receive the seed of all good knowledge; without which man's
nature is wounded, and miserable. They which study these arts, are properly
called Prudentes: For Philosophy is by interpretation the study of knowledge,
being the perfection of all humane Cicero writes: Philosophia est fructuosa,
nulla pars eius inculta atque deserta: Philosophy is fruitful, no part of
which is unmanured, Offic. 3.
or desert. The most profitable part whereof, consists in mental Offices and
Morals. Only by the Physickes we learn the nature of things, the Caelius
thinks: for they be certain degrees or elements, by which higher matters
are attained. Hence was it, that Plato did Lib 5. cap. 4. in ^e.
call it, Acumen cogitationis, The quick apprehension of man's thought: because
it heaueth up the mind, and sharpeneth that edge of intelligence, toward the
apprehension of divine causes; and therefore Fr. Patricius supposes, Lib. 2.
de Instit. Reipub.
that this quadripartite art of the Mathematickes, (including Arithmeticke,
Geometry, Music, and Astrology) best befitteth a civil magistrate: of the
two first, Iacobus Faber writes thus: Inter eas arts (qua Mathemata
Graecivocant) dua Arithmetica and Geometria praecipuum sibi vendicant Locum;
quod ad caeteras assequenda^ viam sternant: Amongst those arts which the
Greeks call Mathematickes, Arithmeticke and Geometry be principal: for so
much as they make easy passage unto the rest. For he which is ignorant in
Arithmeticke, can never proouea skillful Musician; neither can any man which
has not attained the knowledge in Geometry, prove perfect in that inspectiue
of Astronomy: for upon these two first parts those other couple depend. The
reason also that Plato gives (wherefore he would have princes In Repub.
skillful in the Mathematickes) is, Quod sint quasi comites and Administrae
viri politici: Being the companions and agents of a political person. First
therefore concerning Arithmeticke; which helps him to make up his accounts of
receipt and disbursement, when the bills and audite of the Treasurer and
Exchequer are referred to his counters: of which art I shall have some occasion
in my fourth book to speak somewhat; and in this knowledge Pythagoras was
said to have far surmounted all the Philosophers of the world, according to
that which Ovid the Poet writes concerning him: Mente deos adij:, and (quae
natura negauit
Visibus humanis) oculis ea pectoris hausit.


Being in effect thus much: By force of his mental faculties he did attain a
divine knowledge, and with the eyes of his understanding did perfectly
comprehend that which was by nature concealed from mortal eyes.

Geometry likewise conuerseth in the magnitude and proportion of things,
wherein the famous Mathematician Archi^edes was so skillful; and by the help
of those Geometrical engines which he did devise, a long time restrained
Marcellus the Roman Captain from victory, when he besieged Plutar. in vit^
Marcelli. Sap. c^p. 11.
that city. And hence is this saying of Solomon, How God did dispose of all

Music (according to the course whereof the Pythagoreans did imagine that the
world was composed; and the Mythologicall poets, that devised nine Muses,
because of the musical consent of the eight celestial spheres, Harmony,
which includes the vermes of those other eight) is very profitable and
pleasant. Howbeit, in my weak judgment, it may be better spared in a
Counselor, than her other three sisters, serving more for ornament, than
government; albeit we find, that it keeps a proportion by notes to delight
the mind.

Astrology (being the fourth and noblest Mathematical sister) is bipartite,
according to Isidorus: in part natural (when it is limited by courses of the
^log. 3. ^p. 26.
Sun and Moon, or according to those certain and infallible motions of the
stars and times) or superstitious, Quam mathematici sequuntur, qui in illis
angurantur, quique etiam duo december coeli signa per singula animi vel corporis
membra disponunt, sidereoque cursu natiuitates hominum, and mores pradicare
conantur, etc. In which the Mathematicians take delight: for from them they
derive their Auguries, disposing or placing through all the members of humane
bodies the twelve signs of heaven, and endeavoring to make known the
natiuities and conditions of people, by course of the stars. Both Divines and
Philosophers consent, that this inferior world is (according to the discretion
and disposition of God) governed by the heavens: so that these inferior bodies
are ruled and moved by power of the superior. And hence is that saying of
Aristotle: Necessario mundum hunc inferiorem superioribus motibus esse
contiguum, vt omnis eius virtus inde gubernetur: It must of necessity be, that
this inferior Augustine holds opinion: Corpora haec grossiora regi atque
moueri per corpora subtiliora: That these our grosler bodies be ruled and
moved by force of those bodies which are more subtle. This art, as well for
the rule of Navigations (which proceeds from knowledge of the celestial
bodies) as for those other secrets, issuing out of the mystical indicials of
the Mathematicians, is more precious to them that have it, than any worldly
felicity: for so much as they commonly (which are possessed thereof) contemn
all transitory pleasures and glory. Wherefore, that noble Poet Virgil

Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, (...).

Atque metus omnes, and inexorabile fatum
Subiecit pedibus.
Being this in effect. Happy is he that comprehends the causes of things,
and does by divine power subject all fear and inexorable fate. Also Iuuenall
the Satyrist (concerning the benevolence of the ascendent toward certain
persons, at certain times, under his subjection) writes: Plus etenim fati
valet hora benigni
Qu^ site Veneris commendet epistola Marti.


For the good hour of a beneuolent fate avails more with all persons, Venus
could ever have prevailed with Mars. Howbeit, those that will certainly judge
of ensuing chances (though they be most studious and learned in this mystical
part of Astrology, which is called the superstitious or Metaphysicall a^) be
many times deceived in their own curiosity; according to the saying of Thomas
Aquine: Licet corpora coelestia habeant inclinationem, non tamen imponunt
necessitatem: and licet home inclinetur secundum dispositionem corporis ad
aliquod vitium, tamen per rationem arbitrij, potest aliud facere: Albeit the
celestial bodies have a kind of inclination to somewhat, yet they do not
impose a necessity thereunto: and albeit persons incline (according to their
corporeal disposition) to some vice, yet Socrates excused the Philosopher,
which (according to Physiognomie) condemned him of incontinence.
Notwithstanding, sometimes they will (upon their coniecturals) divine very
near and oftentimes truly: for the confirmation whereof, I will cite one
notable thing, which I did read in Cassanans the Burgundian. To whom, being
at In 10 part Catalogi glor. mundi consid. 52.
supper with the Confallionere di guisticia in Milan (upon occasion in
discourse) it was for a mere truth by diverse affirmed, That a famous
Astrologer in that city had presaged to Giouanni Galliaceo maria Viscomi, the
fifth Duke of that State, how he should be mortally wounded by some vassale
about him: whereupon My death must be public, by the fall of a piece of
timber. But the Duke willing to prejudice or antiuert the fate (by some other
sudden death denounced against the Mathematician) gave peremptory sentence,
That he should loose his head, because he had entermeddled with the
calculation of his nativity. And as he was conducted to the place of
execution, from the port of a Tower under which he passed (called Le Dome)
suddenly the top thereof fell down, and he with a piece of timber had his
brains crushed out: a multitude with the Confallioniere, and other executioners
in the company, were by that ruin slain also. Likewise, the Duke himself
that same year upon Saint Stephens day San Stephano in Milan, was by one of
his slaves bloudily and cruelly butchered in the presence of many Noblemen, and
others.

And now to conclude with the Moral force of Philosophy, which as Plato did
esteem, was the chiefest blessing in any Commonwealth; When Philosophers were
Kings, and Kings Philosophers: For it reaches the difference betwixt virtues
and vices, what are the extremes of good and evil, how to rule private
families, what authorities and offices belong to fathers, husbands, and
masters; the difference betwixt instruments, having life and liuelesse; the
maintenance of private persons, the virtues and discipline of magistrates, the
best Cicero does (in admiration and great love thereof) proclaim in his
questions Tusculane. O Philosophy, the rule of life, the touchstone of
virtue, and antidote of vice? But hereof have I spoken more at large in the
morals of Manna) shows himself the same in all parts of his life, contemning
worldly treasures, Tacit. lib. 4. hist.
abiding faithful, appearing valiant in the Guard and loyal maintenance of
truth, and armed with constanc^, defieth fear; and these are the very fruits
of Philosophy: such a man is not altered by time, dejected by necessity,
infected with insolence, nor wearied with the bad dealings of reprobate
persons: such a counselor does live well, and understands well, which is a
sure sign of sapience, he consulteth well, which is a principal point of
prudence; and gladly would have all well, which is a true token of justice,
add hereunto his own doing, which is a manifest mark of perseverance. Such
persons

There remains one special Caveat after all these observations for
counselors (which through their worthiness and virtues have attained a
singular love and affiance of their Prince, to be credited and used in all the
most serious and important causes of the Commonwealth) which is; that, neither
the great grace of their princes, nor the multitudes of honors and
superiorities heaped upon them; neither any vain gaping upon the popular air
(after which men

This horrible and unnatural appetite, is called, Rabies quadam remerariae A
vehement, and patheticall dehortation from all kinds of treason.
ambitionis, sitiens immodicae gloria, prorsusque inflammata perpetua quadam
and singulari (...) dominandi. A certain woluish rage of rash ambition,
immoderately thirsting after undeserved glory, and violently flaming out in all
parts, with a kind of endless and singular greediness of domination and
empire. Many noble natures (adulterated with this counterfeit of honor) have
been falsified and corrupted with diabolical furies, which though that p^dent
Consul Salust, calls Vitium virtuti propius, A vice cosen germane to ^e; Yet
seems not saving in hypocritical sense, for so much as that Aliud clausum in
pectore, aliud promptum in (...) habere, To conceal his meaning close within
his heart, and to deliver a co^rary matter with his tongue. This pestilent
fever of the mind, proceeds from riches in great abundance allotted unto
men, Quibus neque (...) neque modestia cordi est. Which take no pleasure either
in mediocritie, or modesty. tanquam vmbrae, like shadows wait upon their
dishonorable actions: their minds are deceitful, subtle, variable,
hypocritical, and covetous of other men's goods, prodigal of heap tumult upon
tumult, hurliment upon burliment) are coparteners Catiline, diue into the
natures, humors, and inclinations of noble young gentlemen, liberally and
prodigally disposed; for some according to their delights they provide whores,
for some horses and dogs; arms for these of a more heroycall condition, and
hawks for those; using all vile means, and abusing their own fortunes and
modesty, that they might draw young Gentlemen unskillful and of tractable
natures, into their horrible actions, to ruin themselves in the oppression and
confusion of their Country. Such was the nature of Coesar Borgia (whom
Nicholas Machiauell remembers upon the like terms) when he conspired against
the Orsini and Colonnesi. Those therefore that would live magnificently or
delicately, with such as delight in hazard, and they that prefer war before
peace, are for these actions. The first action of conspiracy therefore
commonly tends to the cutting off, and extirpation of those by whom the
Commonwealth and public peace is sustained: as Piso and Autronius,
quiparabant in Capitolio Lucium Torquatum, and Lucium Coitam Coss. interficere.
Which were prepared, and resolved to murder Lucius Torquatus, and Lucius Cotta
the two Consuls in the Capitol. So did Brutus and Cassius with others oppress
Caesar, with their short daggers in the Capitol. So did the mutinous Guysians
deal with that noble Admiral of France, Gaspar de Coligni: An. 1572. In hist.
gall.
For the first signal or watch stroke to every seditious commotion or
insurrection, is the slaughter of some one notable good man in great
authority; as Caius Cornelius, and Lucius Vargunteius noble patricians,
villanously combined in that treasonable conspiracy with Catilyne. Constituere
cum armatis hominibus (sicuti salutatu^) introire ad Cicerone^, ac de improuiso
domi suae imparatum confodere: They were provided with men in arms, to come
into the chamber where Cicero was in his own house, under the color of
salutation, and instantly to stabbe him before he could suspect them; Cethegus
being appointed captain of that guard, which should have attended without the
Cicero, Externa libentius hac in re quam domestica recordor: In these cases I
more willingly record foreign then domestical examples. For the conference of
causes, and heads of groans and outcries; with the mortal lamentations of
fathers, men, old wives, women, and children. Behold here the bloody scene of
sedition, which even nature abhors to behold, and reason shuddereth to
consider; can any thing be more flagitious upon earth, then to bestow that life
which our own country breathed into our bodies, by the sufferance of God unto
the ruin and calamity thereof utterly repugnant to the will of God? or can
any thing be thought of more abominable, then to devise the torture and
servitude of them whom the same laws and fashions of life have included within
the same limits, liberties, and houses with us? Certain it is therefore which
Cicero notes out of Dicaearchus the Peripatetike. Homines hominum impetu
plures deleri; id est bellis and seditionibus etc. quam reliqua calamitate.
More men by the violence Homo homini lupus, homo homini Deus. A man is a wolf
amongst men: and a god unto men. For in a noble and good action against
foreign oppressors of our friends or of our liberties, it is a dutiful piety
that contrimen combine in arms: howbeit to rise up in rage one against another
is more then brutish; and therefore Cicero concludes thus, homines hominibus
plurimu^ prosunt, and obsunt. Men are very beneficial, and offensive unto men.
If into any such impious and horrible practices, or coniurations (either by
faction, fear, or affection) any noble counselor should Cicero writes) to
deliberate in such cases, whether they should wittingly become honest, in
avoiding that which they know to be reasonable; or whether they should wilfully
become wicked in the top of traytorie. For they be deemed impious and
abominable which make a question thereof: In ipsa namque dubitatione facinus
inest etiamsi ad id non peruenerins. For in the combat or doubt O^c. 3.
within a man whether he should commit treason or not, there is a foul sin:
although the plot thereof take not effect. And herein is the very thought of
conceived treason (though it be not put in practice) made heinous and damnable,
Non modo facere; sed ne cogitare quidem quicquid audebit, quod non audeat
praedicare. Not only dare not put in execution: but also dare not harbor a
thought of such things, as stand not with his safety to speak openly. For if
he were possessed with that ring which Plato mentions, by which Gyges going
invisible became king of Lydia, having power to do what he list: yet would his
wisdom and honesty restrain him from all violence. And therefore Cic^ro uses
this sentence, Honesta bonis viris non occultapetuntur. Good men delight in
open honesty, not in hidden practices. But I deem how no truely-noble nature
can be so far debauched or corrupted, unless by flatterers and malicious
minyons, to whom for the he shall presently find their conditions: Magistratus
namque virum indicat. Salust. Difficillimnm est illis in potestatibus
temperare, qui per ambitionem sese probos simulauere. It is very difficult for
men to bear good temper in authority, which (to further their ambition) have
counterfeited themselves honest.

Diverse men of Nobily likewise have through some melancholic suggestion, by
reading of of Hystories written to good purpose and example, fallen into these
extremities: Omnia namque mala exempla ex bonis initijs orta. For all bad
examples are bred out of good beginnings. When wicked men (seeking to attain
sovereignty by the oppression of good sovereigns) perueit the good example of
true, renowned, and virtuous Princes; which more coveting their countries
liberty, then their private dignity, did suppress tyrannous Henry du
Bourbon, the French kings late pardon unto the royal Bastard of Au^ergne, who
was confederated in treason with the Marischall Byron: For to cut off many
Nobles together (after the head be taken away, when any good hope of ensuing
grace remains by the rest alive, as some men think) were merely snperfluous;
but of this point I purpose to speak somewhat in my third Book, as occasion
will offer. Yet in these cases, Princes should prove very circumspect
Philosophers, in sounding and measuring the natures and inclinations of their
ministers, rewarding, cherishing, disgracing, and disliking those, and these as
upon good grounds to their wisedoms shall seem most fit; and when Operam
strenue dare ne quidrespublica detrimenti capiat. Stoutly to labor, that the
Commonwealth may not be by those means prejudiced. Whereas the very best way
to cross, and convince all ambition and sedition is by their contraries, which
are good arts, true virtues, and apparent justice: and these (if any noble
Magistrate shall exercise them) will clearly purge all those pestilent and
contagious humors. It is written in the life of the Emperor Titus: how when
diverse which did conspire his death, with the confusion of that Empire, were
brought prisoners Videtisne potestates fato dari? fr^straque facinus tentari
patrandi spe, vel amittendi metu? Perceive you not now that principalities and
powers are fatally distributed? and that mortal men, in vain attempt heinous
practices, either in some hope by the effecting of them; or in a fear of
failing or miscarrying in their ensignements? For sure it is, that traitors and
seditious rebels, are provided by Gods ordinance as his rods and scourges of
discipline and indignation, to work out his will amongst many Nations and
people; but more certain it is that they cannot afflict, torture, or prevail
more then is permitted by that hand which directs them: but most sure,
certain, and true this is; that commonly these sharp rods of rebellion, are
made of thorns and brambles, destined to such end as hangemen and condemned
persons, which are made executioners of others. Needful has God in his
wisdom seen, that there should be treasons, but woe be to those that execute
them: it had been good for them, that they never had quickened in the seed of
man. For no sooner has the father punished his children with

There is one ambitious rule, which the Machiuilian politics have taught Vide
cap. 17. princ. Nic. Machiauill.
to color their wickedness, according to that saying out of Euripides cited
by Cicero from the mouth of Caius Caesar: Nam si violandum est ius, reguandi
gratia violandum est: alijs rebuspietatem colas. For if men will violate
justice, the violation thereof ought to proceed from the hopes or fruition of
soueraignetie, which may depend thereon; in all other things (saving in matters
of Empire) let a man Aecius the Comoedian concluded how few princes were honest
and faithful, either because no princes in his time did bear any
soueraignetie but tyrannes: or else because he deemed in his vain opinions,
that without some sinister and crooked means, kings could not retain their
principalities; which Cicero to this effect distinguishes, as if the Comoedian
had only meant Offic. 3.
it by licencious, and tyrannous kings whose ends are commonly like their
gouernements. Greece that durst not come abroad out of their palaces; least
some good man in killing of them might emancipate the Commonwealth. And hence
was it which we may read of Thales Melesius, who deemed it impossible, that
tyrannes should live until were old, according to this of the Poet Iuuenall.
Ad generum Cereris sieve caede and vulnere pauci,
Descendunt reges, and sicca morte Tyanni.


Few tyrannous kings end their lives naturally; but by slaughter, wounds,
commission of the most highest; who justly calls many princes to sit upon
Numa Pompilius, and Heluius Pertinax have voluntarily renounced and resigned up
their estates: according to that saying of Cicero, Multi sunt and fueruut qui
tranquilitatem Offic. 1.
expetentes a negotijs publicis se remouerunt; and in hijs nobilissimi
Philosophi, principes, hominesque seueri. Many great Philosophers, princes, and
grave persons are and have been; which in their love of tranquillity, resigned
all their public reputations, and offices.

But to proceed in my discourse, certain it is as I said, that men naturally
be so much the more ambitious or ready to take hold of that poison, how much
the more they be fortunate: only malicious flatterers, such as have put upon
their hearts that vicious habit of speaking and soothing men up in all things
plausible unto them; ytching their ears with painted hopes; kindling
coffeehouse in them against other great persons and fellow counselors near
their sovereign, hatch ambition in the hands and hearts of them which have
always been busied in mighty matters; ministering some salt cause of
insatiable heat and thirst of revenge against their peers; upon some imperfect
grounds plotted and leuelled by their turbulent and malicious heads and hearts.
And this out of their spightfull humors (tending entirely to the alteration,
ruin, and spoil of their countrymen) is set abroach, as in a late counselor
and peer Salust in b^ Iugurth.
sedicious, full of discord, covetous of innovation, and enemies to peace and
Scalliger adds his suffrage to this opinion very fitly in these words. Qui
pendet ab errore and opinione vulgi
Pendet magis, at que arbore qui pendet ab alta.


He which depends upon the error and opinion of the vulgar, holds more
nicely then he which does hang ready to fall from the highest branch of a tall
tree. Most of which (being enraged with a lust of Innovation) would willingly
strangle themselves in the throat ofthe Commonwealth: and though themselves
most forward in apprehension, and punishing of him and of his Catyline, so long
as his treasons took good head: but when he grew weak and remediles;
Mutatamente Catylinae consilia execrari; Ciceronem ad caelum tollere ceperunt.
The case being altered, they with execrations condemn the counsel of
Catyline; extolling Cicero to the heavens. It is therefore found great
weakness in wise men, to trust unto the rude, ignorant, and undisciplined
multitude; and he which is instructed in moral Philosophy, will never put
affiance in them, unless it be where their Captain is the best man in field,
and where they must either fight like men, or die like dogs without resistance.
For by Philosophy men are taught (as I said before) to know themselves, and how
to measure and master their own force. Example of this is recorded of the
Gracchi, and of Spurius Melius. For though it be (as was before said)
Agathocles the Sycilian, Syracusians, first to be made their Praetor: and after
(through help of his friend Amilchar, General of an army which then served
in Sycill, with whom he conspired) hunting ambitiously for the sovereign power
of that State, at a signal given, diverse armed persons suddenly rushing out in
a chamber, where the principals under the pretext of serious consultation were
assembled, slaughtered the Citizens and Senators, whereby he became prince of
that State. After that precedent, Olyuerotto di Fermo by treacherous murder of
his Uncle Giouanni Fogliani, and of the Fermanes, became prince of Fermo: who
by the Command of Caesar Borgia, then General of his father Alexander the
sixth, his forces by train under the like trust of consultation with Orsino,
Baglioni Prince of Perugia, and others was imprisoned and strangled. Lodovik
Sforza Duke of Milane, by usurpation having impoisoned his Nephew Giouanni
Galliacio, did aspire to that principallitie which some did suppose, was a
great cause of the ruin and servitude of ^alie, with infinite Francis
Guicciardine writes, happened upon it in Christendom; whose whole race was
extinct not long after.

I will not omit that which is yet f^sh late Chronicles; and has been many
times represented unto the vulgar upon our English Theaters, of Richard
Plantaginet, third son to Richard Duke of (...) who (being eldest brother
next su^iuing to King Edward the fourth, (...) he had ^naturally made away his
elder brother, George Duke of (...) ((...) he thought a grievous eye sore
betwixt him and the mark (...) which he leuelled) did upon death of the King
his brother, take upon him protection of (...) Realm, under his two Nephews
left in his brotherly (...) both which London: which ominous bad lodging in
memorial thereof, is to this day known, and called by name of the ^dly Tower*
Hereupon, this odious Uncle usurped the crown, but within li^le (...) two
years was deposed, and confounded in the Battle at Bosworth in Leycester
shire: 1485. by King Henry the seventh, sent by God to make resti^ of the
peoples liberties; and after so long and h^ble a sh^re of civil blood, (...)
send a golden sunshine of peace, closed up in the p^ely leuies of that sweet,
and modest Rose of Lancaster which being wo^e in the (...) bosom of Lady.
Elizabeth the daughter of King Edward, (late mentioned of the Family of York)
dispersed those seditious clouds of war which had a long time obscured
Margaret, the firstflower of that conjunction; and great Grandmother (as I
declared) to our Sovereigns Majesty, in these happy bodies reigning over us:
whose blessed reign, I beseech God to lengthen as the days of heaven.

Henry Duke of Guyse, father to this young Duke now living in France, aspiring
covertly to that greatness, which neither his birth nor conscience (albeit
well guarded by the Church of Rome) could assure him; fell in the very bowels
of his ambition under that guard, which if he could, should have been Charles
du Lorreyne, likewise i^ke du Main, and brother to that Duke of Guyse (after
that he had many years waged war against his natural Sovereign Henry of
Burbo^, now the fourth French King of that name; and had usurped the titles,
coins, crown, and royalties of that Realm, which he then miserably tortured,
holding his liege Lord at the pikes point in most hostile defiance, was at
length shamefully put to flight: in restoring of which ungrateful Duke to his
office of Le grand Chambellane du France (though it was done by mighty means
and mediation) the king living has declared much clemency, The late success
of Marischall Byron in France, for practizing against the crown and life of
his Soucraigne,

Neither those ambitious conspiracies of the Earl Gourey in Scotland, against
England, against his anointed Majesty; whosemercy does yet appear much
great, as were their treasons. By these and other examples, infinite of that
nature appears how needful it is, that Magistrates in such place have great
care and fear of falls, when they seek to scale flipperie promotions beyond
their reach: which are only bestowed by divine providence, and not any ways
disposed by humane policy: This also did the divine Scalliger observe in his
advise to such ambicious firebrands, which after th'eruption of a few
turbulent sparks, soon and on a Certo (...) (...) and tua metire probando:
Ne scande Locos equibus inde sit vuendum.


By good proof and experience learn to moderate thy self: seek not to clime
unto such places from whence thou must have a fall.

Beware therefore of this fearful elation of the spirit, toward corporal
promotions and benefits: and if grief or coffeehouse upon good ground seize
upon us, let us arm our selves with constancy to bear and to convert Francis
Guycciardine, that counselors in weigtie matters show deliberation and
slownesse of tongue and foot: the cnstome of their service fed with the bitter
herb patience (which brings peace at the last) should so far prevail
with them in most causes; that the more wrongs they receive at their Princes
hands, the more patience and duty they should declare.

This, least I become more tedious then pleasant or profitable to the Reader, I
think sufficient concerning the principal qualities and offices in a
counselor: Salust, Multa vari^que sunt arts animi quibus summa claritudo
comparatur: Herein, not presumptuously nor over weaningly, to limit men in
wisdom and authority, so far beyond my censure and above my degree, to such
things which proceed from my weak and unripe opinions; but to give a
methodicall taste of my judgment, grounded upon the sound opinions of men
prudent and very learned, consorting in sweet Harmony, with the Lawgiuers,
Commonwealths-masters, and prudent Philosphers of former ages. In both
instructed better, and reformed in any point, which their wisdoms shall deem
expedient herein. To conclude therefore in opposition to them Magnae namque
curae magna merces est: The reward is great which appertains to a great
charge: as Salust in his Oration to Caesar. This care and zealous desire to
dignifie that Nation which gave the first light to his life, is the perfectest
token of a good Counselors virtue. Virtutique perfectae nonfiet condignus
honor; Perfect virtue cannot be sufficiently honored; says Aristotle. And
according to Patricius; Ethicor. 8. Lib. 3. de insti^. re^pub.
Virtus semper secum comitem habet honorem; velut corpus vmbram, laudataque
crescit: Virtue is continually accompanied with honor; as the body is with a
shadow, and florisheth by good fame. Nay, the most kindly milk which
nourishes virtue is honor. And as Aristotle writes in another place; Homines
dij dicuntur propter virtutum excellentiam etc: Men (in respect of their he
which kills with the sword, shall perish therewith: (which is meant by
murtheres* that either fall under the spiritual or civil sword of Gods
justice, or of the Kings) so certain is it, that he which studieth innovation,
disorder, and confusion (through the secret rage of his own ambitious malice
and greediness) shall utterly be confounded.

If therefore we should endeavor to recount the numbers of them, that in this
f^ious spirit of Lucifer have perished; it were infinite, and impossible. Saul
fro keeping of Asses, to be king in Israel. Regnu^ 1. cap. 9.
What was it which raised David the youngest of Iesses eight children, from
keeping of sheep to sit upon King Saul his throne? was it not his verruous
disposition and inclination; as it appeared when God spoke to Samuel: saying,
that he had found a man after his own heart: commanding the Prophet to raise
Vide Ioseph^ lib. 6 Antiq. Tit. Lyuiu^* hist. lib. primus. and Val. lib. 3.
himself and anoint David, for that was he? By verue Tullus Hostilius, a
poor Neat-heard, of obscure and unknown parentage, reigned over the Romans.
By such virtue Ventidius Bassus (in high favor with Cayus Caesaer) who was a
poor man's son, and had been a muletter was first made Tribune of the people,
after that Praetor, then Archbishop, and lastly Consul: whereupon that libell
was cast out in spite of virtue (which has always many persecutors) mulos
qui fricabat, consul factus est; in my judgment wholly tending to the honor
Gellius lib. 15. cap. 4.
of Bassus; and unto the perpetual glory of those noble Romans which (with
out any superficial respect unto the shadow) precisely look into the
substance. So did Telephantes, first a wheelewright become king of the Lydians.
Petrus Bergo ^usis lib. 14 Cr^. etc.
Tamerlane of a neat-heard made in short time Emperor of the Turks and
Persians. Valentinianus (whose father was a ropemaker) elected Emperor of the
Romans: semblably Darius, Archilaus, with others infinite private persons and
Philosophers were in regard of their virtues preferred to kingdoms

It rests now that I declare the bodily tokens and complections which are
observed by some special writers in choice of a counselor: for as in all
weighty matters, it is evident amongst wise men, that great judgment and
observation is used; so should it appear much rather in a matter of such
special importance as this is; for so much as upon these counselors the
wealth and health of princes and principalities depend. By these exterior
properties, much may be Ceriolano thinks) albeit they do not hold generally
certain; for coniecturals are as notes or signs, which may sometimes deceive;
and yet not to be rejected neither: For (as Aristotle and other Philosophers
write) their are marks and accidents or signs in men's bodies figuring their
private affections. In some beautiful persons, there is a kind of venerable
majesty. A comely countenance and pleasing face, greatly graceth a counselor;
yielding good correspondence to his dignity. Hence was it that Socrates did
prefer before all others beautiful persons to the studies of Philosophy;
supposing that this outward pulchritude did represent to life the picture of
divine beauty. And albeit sometimes Cicero does ascribe unto dignity and not
to comely color: considering how the true pulchritude is interior; whereas in
effeminate and affected beauty nothing is absolute. For if we consider it,
Nature her self being provided of a competent force, places her most art and
studies in fashioning of the brain, which (as I admiration and honor: and
therefore was great Alexander despised by the Queen of Amazons, because in so
puisant a prince she found not so pleasing Saba did Solomon, who was
angellicall both in exterior and interior pulchritude. The complexion
therefore of such a magistrate should be temperate, either sanguine, or
chollericke: for such persons commonly be sharp witted; of a sound judgment,
and durable quick memory: they be just, affable, faithful, beneficent,
magnificent, magnanimious, strong, valiant, and well attempered with alacrity,
agilitie, and health of body; if their natures be not with bad custom
depraved or corrupted. The spirits of persons melancholic are dried up, and
earthie; rude, heavy, vain, detesting David was; as, fair and ruddie with a
comely countenance, and body well shaped; and of a mean stature. Howbeit, we
find that he many times through those concupiscenciall motions was excited to
sin: yet had God so blessed him that he did not loose that habit of virtue
Pliny) it was observed that no man under thirty years of age should be
permitted to consult in principal causes of the Commonwealth, nor men very
aged, as after the term of sixty years according V^rro. Which Seneca
likewise confirms, limiting the service of soldiers to fifty years, and of
Senators to sixty: Per legem annariam. For according to that Law, the Romans
well knew when they might in respect of their years sue to be Tribunes,
Quaestors, Dictators, Consuls, or in other offices, as it was limited appearing
by this of the Poet Ovid.

Finit aque certis
Legibus est atas; vnde petatur honos.
That age, (by which men may sue for honors, or promotions) is confined

For if in respect of their experience by many years old men be regarded, it
must be respected that by course of nature they be timorous, suspicious,
incredulous, covetous, and so much more froward and fearful as they be more
wasted in years; impatient of labor and pain, obliuious (by which defect
diverse occasions are neglected) talkatiue, and obstinate in opinion, their
understanding dull, their heat (which is the spur of action) wasted. Young
men are likewise void of experience, much subject to vicious affections and
pleasures of nature; to passions and perturbations of mind, so distracted with
heat of youth, heedlesse temeritie, and surcuidrie that they cannot observe any
Seneca writ: Iuuenile vitium est, regere non posse impetum. It is a vice
naturally graffed in youth, not sufficiently to bridle I^ Troade.
appetite. Men therefore of middle age are to be chosen, whose humors are
plausible and temperate; whose inward affections are delayed with some
experience and discretion; which can dispose, remember, and execute matters
with a proportionable strength, courage, and gravity; whose memory will
richly serve them for things past, whose understanding to judge of things
present according to truth, and whose imagination participating of them both,
can presage or provide things to come; such men are importuned with John
Whytgift, late Archbishop of Canterbury; and the right sage, and euer-worthy
Lord Treasurer, William Cecill declared long after the term of sixty years,
even to the last period of their breath. Such young towardly plants as are like
by the gifts of nature, and pleasantness of their wit to prove fit in time for
such service, must first be diligenly taught in Schools, Cicero writes: Prima
est adolescenti commendatio ad gloriam, si qua ex bellicis rebus compa^ari
potest. O^ic. 2.
The best honor of a young man, proceeds from his perfection Plato, Liberum
hominem maxine decet armoru^ disciplina Lib. 21. Tac^ de for^du.
and equitatio etc. Martial discipline and horseman-ship, most honors a
Gentleman. By these means having well broken the inordinate heat of youth,
with some manly moderation and experience, they may be chosen (if the Prince
think it fit) into counsel; employed in public affares of policy till
sixty years be past, and then let them take leave of their Prince, returning
to their quiet: for the better purifying and rectifying of their consciences,
seeking after their souls health; studying how to die a blessed death, and
having their honors and revenues enlarged (by the Princes great been ficence)
toward them.

The Sovereign (which is the fountain of these counsels) needs not Qua^
difficile atque asperu^ sit consiliu^ regi aut imperatori Sal^ in (...). ad c^
(...).
dare, postremo cuiquam mort alium cuius opes in excelso sunt: quippe cum and
illi^ consultoru^ copia sunt: I know that it is difficult and harsh, to
minister counsel unto a King, or Emperor, or to any mortal man, whose riches
are huge and honorable: because such persons are plentifully furnished with
choice of counselors. Only this in brief, the respects importing his
princely care are these. First a ripe demurrer in weighty causes: wherein is
required his circumspection that he trifle not away the time of his action in
unprofitable delays; or waste the days of his business in vain words: next
that he lend a judicious care without pertinacie to them that consult upon any
serious matter concerning his weal: hearing all their opinions beneuolently,
but warily Tunc demu^ elucet regia maiestas, cum potest qua cuiusque sententia
in senatu melior, non numero sed pondere dijudicare. Royal majesty Nihil est
(...) in imperio pernicio^us, quam ex alio sapere. And as Tilius writes in his
Commentaries of Lib. 1. in Chylderici primi vit^.
France: Videant principes ne munera sua ^egligant: sed procurent ea ex mandato
dei, nec incumbant toti in alienam fidem. Princes should have a most vigilant
and circumspect care unto their offices: which they should execute according
Tam etiam beneficij quam iniurae memor esse debet: He must remember a benefit
as presently, as a wrong done unto him. Semblably, true munificence (as I said
before in my first Book) is most worthy the royal Majesty: Armis nempe
regem, quam munificentia vinci minus flagitiosum: The dishonor of a king is not
so great which is gotten by his overthrow in wars, as by his want of due
munificence. Etiam and hosts huic aequiores quam alijs ciues sunt: Even
enemies are more favorable to such princes, then subjects are to those of a
contrary condition. Which that moral Tragoedian witnesses in many places;
though his Scholar would never learn that Lesson. Qui vult amari, languida
regnet manu:


He (that would be beloved amongst his people) must punish with a languishing
Seneca in Theb.
hand.

Moreover, every wise prince will have his Court furnished with store of
reverend Bishops, and Noblemen of port; as well for his own more fame
pacification, and tranquillity. The reputation and ancient offices of a prince
Spartianus in vita Antonini and Casiodorus lib. 6.
give directions unto the Senators: to deliver the law, to constitute
guardians, for wards and orphans in pupilage; to make free men of servants: to
dispose and bestow the public tribute. His means to conciliate the peoples
love is the fame and opinion of liberty, beneficence, justice, faith, and of
other qualities apperteining his royal apport in manners and facility: for in
just and good princes (in and from whom no deceits nor injuries appear, nor
proceed) the people franckely repose all their fortunes, wives, lives, and
children: as they did here in your most excellent Majesty, upon the decease of
our late dear Sovereign Elizabeth: which how firm a kingdom that is, cannot
but be with much comfort known unto your highness: Cum multo tutius sit
volentibus Salust in orat. ad Cas.
quam coactis imperitare. Considering that it is a fafer course to bear rule
over such as are voluntarily, then those that by constraint are subjected. This
happiness has justice and prudence wrought in and for your grace, that no
people can be more frank hearted in loyal allegiance, and reverend affection
toward their Sovereign; then your subjects of England. For as we find that
men for many reasons subject themselves voluntarily to princes (some upon a
good opinion conceived of their justice and prudence; others in hope of benefit
to be gotten at their royal hands; some for honor, a multitude for other
preferments of diverse natures; and peradventure not a few which stand in fear
of some disadvantage if they should not subject themselves under the^, whose
Parua namque res tantum ingenium atting ere nequit. For such a mighty wit is
not apprehensible of small matters. Such infinite blessings has the God of
righteousness powered into your graces head and heart; having girded, impaled,
and fastened the one in constancy with those graces of wisdom, within your
royal crown: it may be verified in this (which was spoken unto Caius Caesar)
Prius defessi fuerint homines laudando facta tua, qua^ tu laud digna facienda,
etc. Men shall first grow weary with speaking of your glorious and
prayseworthie deeds, before you desist from doing such things, as most highly
deserve commendation. Thus has your Majesty given unto us a golden and a
blessed kingdom, not only by adding unto your inheritance of England the
crown of Scotland, but by bringing in with you as your inseparable companions,
peace, prudence, magnificence, justice, clemency, with diverse other princely
virtues amongst us, for our imitation; which (by the true meede of honor)
propagate all dominion and sovereignty, confirming that golden sentence of
Seneca: Habere regnum casus est, virtus dare.


The possession of a crown is the gift of fortune, the gift of a crown is the
In Thyeste.
meede of virtue. So that in after times the like may be recorded of your grace
which the Romans left engraven in perpetual honor of their Emperor Heluius;
who (being constrained by the Senate and people to take upon him the empire)
was therefore called Pertinax. Pertinace imperanti securiviximus, Hist. August,
in vita Helu^i Pertinaci^.
nemine timuimus: patri pio senatus, patri omniu^ bonoru^, etc. During the
Empire of Pertinax, we lived in security, fearelesse of any mortal man: this
therefore we consecrate to the godly father of the senate, to the father of all
good

The best means of acquisition and preservation of soueraignetie being
declared (as my fashion is) I deem it needful to show by what courses it is
suddenly subverted. In opposition therefore to the peoples love stands their
hatred and fear of their prince his feueritie. Malus etenim custo^ diuturnit
Offic. 2.
atis metus: quem etenim metuunt oderunt: quem quisque od^ perijsse expetir.
Ennius in Cicero. It is therefore impossible for him to reign long amongst
those people whom he does oppress with violence and tyranny, consenting with
the sage Morallist.

Violenta nemo imperia continuit diu,
Moderata durant, Seneca in Troade.

Quoque fortuna altius euexit ac leuauit humanas opes,
Hoc se magis supprimere foelicem decet,
Variosque casus cernere metuentem deos
Nimium fauentes.
No king can rule long time with violence,
But princes temperate reign many years.
For wise men which by fortune are advanced,
Their power and passions so much more will curb,
And they that fear bad fruits of too good fortunes,
Can perfectly discern the choice of chance.
He likewise is not rightly called a king that fears any subject, as Seneca
writes in Thyeste. Rex est qui metuit nihil.


He is a true king which does not stand in fear of any thing: and in another
Quos cogit metus
Laudare, eosdem reddit inimicos metus.
Such people as in fear constrained love kings,
By the same fear are made their enemies.


Nay true kings (as I said before) whose true firmament, is only justice) are
known by two special things by which they retain their kingdoms in In
Thyeste.
their voluntary subjection of themselves unto the laws by which they govern
the nations on earth. Hence was it that Caelius did write of a grave, a just,
and a learned, prince which answered a certain hypocritical and dangerous
flatterer (who did affirm that all the means and proceedings of princes
concerning their estates generally were just and honest) on this Lib. antiq
lect. 12. cap. 46.
fashion: Omnia per Iouem non sunt honesta, and iusta, sed barbaris tantum.
Nobis vero ea honesta quae honesta, and iusta quae iusta; and illud possumus,
quod de iure possumus. I call Jupiter to witness, that all things are not
honest and just, but amongst barbarous kings and saluages. But of us those
things (which Neminem dici posse, se posse aliquid quod honest non potest and
salua dignitate. It cannot be said of any man, that he may do anything, which
impugneth Text in leg. nepos (...) de verboru^ and seru^ signif.
his reputation or honesty. Tyrannes likewise are known in two special
things: by which (according to the observation of some curious heads) they be
noted to preserve a tyranny. But in my judgment the members of those two
means are the likeliest to demolish any state whatsoever: the first kind
barbarous, and the second crafty.

Upon the first expendeth the cutting off and extinguishing of the mighty
ones, the abolishing of conuiuiall meetings and good fellowship in intercourse
amongst neighbors, the subversion of Churches, hospitals, schools, profisco.
The dispersing through all places of the Commonwealth privy whisperers and
informers, for the secret groping and mining into the peopels hearts; and to
supplant the states of private gentlemen and persons of good quality: the
sowing of factions, sedicious slanders, and discentions amongst

Upon the second means consists a counterfeit and hypocritical care, or
pretense to cherish the Commonwealth: th'exaction of tributes under the pretext
of necessary wars; and of oeconomicall occasions: to counterfeit a reverend
graee and plausible majesty, both in person and countenance: to Caligula,
Domitian, and Maximus: which being continually wounded, stabbed, and tormented
with the bodkins, and furies of their mischievous and impious actions and
devises; as Nero was, who (neither sleeping nor waking could rest alone, from
horrible and fatal visions and apparitions; and being in company stood in
sear of every man about him) lived in a most miserable hell amongst men. The
like Richard the third amongst us, whose nefarious practices, and bloody
crimes were unspeakable. Whereas if we should in contrary compare them with
those virtuous and blessed Princes, whose gracious eyes inspired peace and
plenty to the Commonwealth where they governed: it shall appear, that like
Angels upon earth (with a comfortable remembrance and motion of their goodness
and beneficence generally dispersed) they seemed in comparison of those other
tryranous devils. But I doubt least, I rest upon this point more then fitteth,
and therefore I will be so short, as I can in the rest.

First therefore, a good and wise Prince may not maintain any combat managed,
and taught to turn at hand furnished fit for his service, with saddle
Alexander, when upon his great headed horse Bucephalus, all the kings of the
world saluted him as their mighty sovereign. And lastly, let that serenitie
which should shine from the divine temples of a true prince, so generally
dispo^se it self amongst all people, that nothing repugnant to prudence,
justice, fortitude, and temperance, appear in his actions and consultations:
for they should be th'inseperable counselors and companions of all crowns.

Now to conculde in the foot of my second Book, with the Prince, who is
Consilium priuatum (as Vincentius Lupanus writes) Quasi secretius, interius,
selectius, and sanctius dixeris: As if you should say the most secret, inward,
choice, and holy counsel. Which kind of counsel we find was instituted
amongst the Athenians in their Commonwealth: Sine cuius consilio quicquam
decerni, Solonis lege prohibitum erat. Without the advice of which Senate it
was cautioned by the Laws of Solon, that not any thing of moment in the
Athenian Commonwealth should be discerned. I therefore say, that to be a
Prince is the great gift of God: for so much as he is chosen Gods Vicegerent or
Steward, either good or bad for the weal or punishment of his people: but that
prince which studieth, Est enim illud imperium diuturnum, and immobile; quod
fulcitur gloria, and beneuolentia popularis societatis: For that Empire is
durable and constant, which is supported by the report and benevolence of the
popular society. Which made our late dear Sovereign, that most conspicious,
auspicious and peace-breathing bright Planet of Christendom, so sacred in her
domination to that heartbreaking wonder of her enemies: which (having
spightfully belched out in her life time the vomit of more honor then ever
Octauius, Antoninus Pius, Pertinax, Titus, Traiane, or S^ ad C. Cas^.
any prince that ever reigned in most happiness: considering that sage
sentence. Imperium facile ijs artibus retinetur quibus initio partum est. It is
easy to retain a kingdom by the same means, through which it was attained.
Being now maintained (even as it was gotten) in joy, justice, love and lenity:
which are the true tokens, and infallible affections indeed of a very blessed
Sovereign. For according to Fr. Guicciardine the sweet name of a just prince
is as dearly tendered amongst all loving people as the remembrance of a
tyranne odious, abject,

Finis libri secundi.
The third Book. Office of Judges.
WHen that most glorious and euer-renouned Emperor, Flauius Iustinianus, had
(through his incomparable virtues, and travels indefatigable) subjected the
stubborn necks of savage Barbarians, under the victorious yoke of his far
stretching dominions: and with maine power (in much dust and bloody smoke) had
forced all Afrike, being victoriously seconded with numberles Provinces of
other nations, in homage and tributarie service with fear and trembling, to
make remonstrance of her obedience under his conquering sword. After Pacem
reduci velle victori expedit. Seneca in Here. Fur.



It is expedient for the Victor, to study the restitution of peace. In which
beneuolent purpose with all humbleness, under the propitious assistance of God
(to which he did with most zealous sincerity first appeal) by the studious
care of Tribonianus Theophilus and Dorotheus men (of most excelling prudence,
nearest him of his secret Counsels, and the learnedest Sages of the Pandects
out of Caius his Commentaries, and others, into four Books of Institutions.
Which that sacred Emperor (great honors and reueneues being proposed to the
Proficients in those studyes) did by his imperial Edicts warranting the
promulgation of that Book, cause to be generally read in all his dominions for
the better establishment of his many kingdoms,

First therefore justice (being as Cicero calls her) Omnium virtutum domina
and Regina: The Lady and Queen of all othervertues. By the imperial Iusticia
Ci^ 3. Offic.
institutions is thus defined; Perpetua and constans voluntas, suum cuique
tribuens: A perpetual and assured will to give every man his due. And derived
as I suppose from Ius, which is right, tanquam Ius stans, and immobile,
veliuris statio: As a sure, immovable, or implanted right being the same in
effect with the definition of justice.

Iuris prudentia (which I call the knowledge how to discern of any cause
aright.) Iurisprudentia.
Est diuinarum humanarumque rerum notitia, iusti atque iniusti scientia: A
notice of divine and humane affairs: a science which makes a true difference
between right and wrong: Comprehending Sapience, which by Philosophers is
defined to be the science of divine and humane matters: S^pientia.
and therefore Judges and Interpreters of the Laws, were anciently called
Prudentes and Sages. Hence proceeds it that Ius, by the difference that I can
make in our vulgar is termed, every thing that is thought and done aright. For
Iuris definiti^.
according to Master Bodine, it differs a lege; Quoniam sine i^spect at ad id
In Repub.
quod aquum and bonum est: lex autem ad imperantis maiestatem pertinet. Because
it (without motion or coaction) is wholly employed in righteousness and
goodness: whereas Laws have reference to the Magistrates majesty. The
substance of justice is compounded (as it were of three principal elements of
the Iustitia parts. Probitas Innocentia. ^tas.
mind: of honesty, which is a plain and cleanly perfection of the mind;
constantly: conuersing in just dealing and decency: of Innocence, which
comprehends toward God* and our zealous obedience unto the laws of his holy
Scriptures: with the perfect duties and true charity which every well-affected
person exhibiteth toward all sorts of people in their degrees: and of Equity,
which in my judgment is (as it were) a perfect Law truly written in our
hearts with the pen of godly reason. Or as it is otherwise defined; Equitas
virtus est, qua quis recte legem in multis instantijs deficientem corrigit and
moderatur: Equity is avertue by which the law (failing, or wanting in many
principal, vehement, and urgent points) is corrected and moderated. This is
the same law which rules in his Majesty's Courts of Chauncerie, where the
bitter censure and C^ia Cancellaria and oequitat.
rugged Letter of the Statute is qualefied mitigated or rectified by the
merciful Legis Custos: and quem penes est ^am cancellatio, quam interpretatio
and modificatio sententi^m velrerum in legibus aqu^ magis acerbarum: The
Treasurer of the Laws; in whose power it rests: to cancel, interpret, or
qualify sentences, and causes somewhat sharply censured by the strict Letter
of the Laws. And this Equitas est quasi cor Iustici^: Equity is as the heart
of justice. The first of these concerns our own persons in particular; the
second belongs our neighbors in special; and the third respects all
degrees of people in general.

Ius, which I call right (being a percept or prescript of the King, tending
unto Ius publicum and pr^tum.
the weal of his subjects, committed to promulgation and administration, and
formed according to precise reason and upright conscience) is two fold, being
either public as appertaining the whole Commonwealth and state, or private
concerning every peculiar person in Commodity.

Private right, is either that which is by nature: Qualege omnes vbique terra
Ius ^atum est aut natural^ aut nation^e.
rum principes obligati sunt: By which Law all princes whatsoever upon earth
stand bound and obliged; being common to all creatures living. From whence the
conjunction of male and female, wedlock, procreation and education of children
proceed (as I touched in oeconomie before) Or that which is national, and
generally belongs all people: for in such case (upon constraint) nations made
laws; whereupon wars, captiuities, and slaueries ensued, repugnant unto the
right of nature, which has made all persons free. From which national right
all contracts and bargains, comerce, or intercourse of Merchants from one
place to another, location or the letting of any chattels, goods, or
commodities for hier, conduction or the undertaking of any work Emption, as
when men receive any thing of others for a price agreed upon betwixt them that
deliver and those that receive, selling, borrowing, and lending with such like
have issued.

Civil right is that by which every Commonwealth is governed. Even as those
ancient laws which King Pharamonde and Gombaldus king of Burgundy made, which
were said to be the civil Laws of France. One of them being that kind of
masculine law which they term Salique; first written in the Germanetongue, and
instituted Anno Christi. 422. So called of the people of Salij, dwelling in
Franconia near the river Rhyne, to which lists at that time the borders of the
French Empire stretched. And the other called Gombet, England, which we call
the Statute Laws as of the Commonwealth (from whence the modification and
government of the peoples natures and of the Commonwealth proceeds) is the
same in and to all effects and purposes, with that which is called the Civil
law, respecting this Realm and Commonwealth generally. And such were the laws
of Solon and Draco, unto which the people of Athens (that had during the Greek
monarchy been a free State, and royal Commonwealth) were subjected in
particular. For as these our Statute Laws of England, are States, by consent
of all the free Citizens, and thereupon called civil Laws. Legem pati, quam
tulerant: Undergo their own Laws. So that no man has power in himself, to
appeal from the Laws of his own native Country: because it is presupposed
that each Commonners vote (upon sound and deep deliberation and consultation)
has already passed in Parliament. And this is the very reason which includes
every good Prince also within the limits of his own Laws; being Per
necessitatis legem ligatus: Bound by the Laws of necessity, to make good his
own act; least through his refusal he give the first scope and light unto
the vulgar, to contemn Justice and magistracy. Hence was it, that Xenophon
Cambises, speaking; Nonne statuunt imperatorem; ad omnia tollerantiorem and
legibus magis astrictum qua^ subditos? is it not decreed that he which is
Emperor should tolerate more difficulties, and be more straigtly bound unto
the Laws then his own subjects? For sure it is, that he labors to make a
Tyrant of him, which would exempt any king from obedience unto his own Laws.

The right of Nations differs from the Civil in this, that it is general
Ius gentiu^.
and observed traditionally by natural reason amongst all persons: whereas

Civil Right, is either written, or by prescription. That which is written Ius
civil.
does consist in Laws, in Folkemots, in the Senators Institutions; in the
Prince his Plees, in Edicts of Maiestrates, and in sage sentences.

Law which is, summae potestatis iussum: The precept or commandment of the
highest power. Or rather as I deem: Summum ius. Extreme right. Lex.
Because many things were more severely committed to the Laws letter, then by
the Law-sages and reverend Judges did seem needful with extremity to be
executed (and some prudent sentences also delivered in such mystical Oracles,
as might be wrested, mollified, or hardened, as should be thought most fit Rule
of Reason, the Empire of the prince, and duty of the subjects. For all the
Laws both divine and humane, have reference unto the true worship of God, and
to the sincere and perfect concord of people amongst themselves: the virtue
whereof appears in commanding, prohibiting, permitting and punishing of
matters and persons. Iamblicus calls the Law Rectamratione^ and reginam
omnium, quaerecta and iusta iubet, vetatque contraria: The true reason and
Queen of all causes; commanding persons to do right, and justice, and
prohibiting the contrary: Which is in effect the same with Iustum, being that,
Quod cuiquam secundum praeceptum and pr^scriptum domini fit: Which is done to
every man according to the king or of the prince be put in execution; (which
prince represents unto the people the lively figure of Almighty God in his
royal person) it must of necessity Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore,
Oderunt peccare mali formidine poenae.


Good men stand in fear to commit offenses, through that love which by divine
grace they bear to virtue: wicked men are loath to do wickedly because they
stand in fear of that punishment which is limited by the laws.

Moreover man's only fear of the laws cannot purge his conscience clean from
sin; but merely takes away from him the license by which he does offend.
Leges enim possunt delicta punire, conscientiam munire non possunt. For the
laws may punish offenses, but have no power to corroborate or munite the
Conscience. And so much in brief concerning Lex generally: which was
instituted likewise (even as in those places aforesaid) amongst the Romans of
ancient ages past, at Rome upon the request of a magistrate Senatoriall being
(as it were) Proconsul for that time.

Plebiscitum which I call Folkemot (because this word has been ancient in
Plebiscitum. Folkemot.
our laws) was that which the magistrate or mouth of the Commons, upon
Folkemot as it might be taken by th'interpretation of that ancient Saxon word
imports some base assembly or conuention of the meaner sort of people,
making and instituting laws after their own lusts: for in my judgment that
might be called a Folkemot where the base commoners and inhabitants in any bad
ordered Commonwealth (as not acknowledging any lords or superiors) should make
laws or choose magistrates upon their own improper opinions, and
indiscretions; as I touched in the morals of my second book, entreating
Folkemot) that happened in the days of King Henry the third after the
conquest: when a multitude of the baser Commoners assembled at Oxford; where
those blockheads of that time exempted the king with his nobles and all others
that had knowledge to read and Plebiscita, and Folkemot. Hereof (being so well
known to diverse professors and students of our commonlawes in this Realm) I
will not speak Folkemot (according to my translation) is by the imperial
institutions thus discerned. This word Plebs or Folk to the baser commons; and
unto private persons of mean condition is only proper: whereas Populus or
people includes Pl^s and Pop^lus.
nobles and all others their inferiors generally.

Plees of Princes, or such mandates as only proceed from the kings will and
pleasure (to whom the people have ascribed all soueraignetie) consist in
letters, (...) Princip^.
mandatorie, missiue, or in writs of diverse natures: as in the privilege of
our princes according to form of our commonlawes of this Realm: or by decrees
awarded upon his highnesses own knowledge; or out of any of his Placita
principum in our common laws of this realm in cases of treasons and felonies
of diverse natures being called Placitacoron^, Plees of the crown: or by the
kings proclamations and edicts bearing the same force that laws parliamentall
have, which by the Romans were called consttiutions. Anno 3^. Hen. 8. chap. 8.


Edicts of magistrates were called the laws of honor, because by those noble
patritians and honorable magistrates which made and caused them to be Edict^
magistratuum.
publicly proclaimed that title was by the Lawfathers and Consuls permitted

To such edicts may those orders, warrants, precepts, inhibitions, and acts of
the like nature (awarded and subscribed by the secret counselors of our
princes in these days) be fitly resembled: semblably those metropolitical and
^piscopall mandates and promulgations within their several provinces and
diocese concerning Church discipline; as all other writs and precepts
proceeding from other special magistrates of the commonwealth of what nature
soever as from justices in th'eclesiasticall and civil commissions; either for
causes criminal or for the peace, and from Majors, Deanes, and Chapters,
aduanceme^t of justice) are not improperly called Edict a magistratuu^.
Setenti^ p^dentum.


Sentences of prudent persons, were opinions of certain Sages of the Laws
chosen to decide weighty matters in controversy betwixt parties. And these
Law-fathers or Judges did enucleate diverse difficult points thereof, by reason
and conscience. These through permission of the Emperor did interpret all the
Laws, and were called Iurisprudentes; or the learned in the Laws: from whose
opinion being once confirmed, no Judges might in any Cases have appealed. Like
unto them is our reports of Lawcases, and the iuridicall sentences of our
learned Judges in matters of long suspense and ambiguitie; which have depended
many years in suit at our Commonlawes of this Realm, betwixt persons in
certain cases of right; and at length have been finally determined, after
infinite proof and long discussion by the full consent Sense^tiae prudentum
(being th'opinions of men learned in the Laws) had formerly. Howbeit, they be
vehement motives, inductions, and guides unto Judges in such Cases, to lean
unto the like opinions. For considering that it has been diverse times seen
in a case contrauertible after it has been commended unto legal trial, that
the Judges of the Kings bench of the Common plees, and of the Exchequer, have
all of them differed and dissented in their opinions, delivered Exchequer or
els-where, to conclude upon any weighty case (ambiguously depending in the
Courts, either for the Prince, or for any subject of what condition soever)
should with a francke consent

Civil right unwritten or customarie (being approved with long use and Iu^
scrip^* and non scrip^.
consent of the people embracing it) retains equal force with the Laws. The
Lacedaemonians used those customarie Laws altogether; and the Athenians from
whence certain learned in Antiquities suppose the ground of our English
common-lawes to be derived, and brought hither, first in the Greek Egyptian
laws were by Orpheus out of Egypt into Greece: Di^d. Sicul^ lib. (...). (...).
(...)
which are said to be the true grounds of all national and ciuill-lawes at
this day through the world. And these Laws were all of them written and
preserved as Records in Books.

This is the difference betwixt the right of nature, and of civil right; that
Ius personarum and (...).
all crimes and trespasses be perpetrated, punished, and redressed in Justice
and equity, concerns either persons or goods.

The course of our English laws holds in erection of Courts, which
Ceriolano terms Counsels; and these are either Ecclesiastical or civil. The
great Court of Parliament consisting of both; deuiseth laws most behoofefull
Zaleuchus, Char^ndas, Onomacritus, Philolaus, Draco, Pittacus, Androdomas did
before: most of whose Hystories are extant, adding unto them Lycurgus and
Solon; eternally famous for teaching methods of excellent government.

These our Parliament laws like lively blood dispersed through the members and
provinces of our whole Commonwealth are executed in time, and upon needful
occasion as is fit; ministering matter for all other inferior courts, which have
jurisdiction over all causes needing present succor. No laws are in force
against these Parliamentall acts or institutions. The causes there handled
Canterbury and York, unto whom all the Byshopricks of England and Wales
suffragate. In special such general courts as answer to this Synod are the
Canterbury by the Chancellor for the Diocese, the court of peculiar Deaneries
appertaining th'Archbishop, and yet belonging unto diverse Bishoprics, unto
which

Civil courts hold plees either in cases of right dealing, or in civil causes
betwixt the prince and his tenants. But of the Exchequer, where those causes
betwixt the Prince and his tenants are decyded, I did speak somewhat in my
first Book.

The Duchy of Lancaster by grant from King Edward the third, to John of Gaunt
was exstinct by union of Possession, with the crown in person of King Henry
the fourth, by whom it was severed; and so continued the Henry the fifth, and
King Henry the sixth: then united by Edward the fourth, which being separated
again by King Henry the seventh, remains yet accordingly.

The Court of Chancerie wherein ought to be the seat of equity, which
mitigateth or morderateth the Law; or as Aristotle calls it, (...) Tanqua^
sine fuco, without guile or subtle hypocrysie, should seem to distribute and
execute the Law of nature and conscience, being corrected by reason, but
confirmed by Religion. It is that (...) of the soul, or that natural faculty
with persuades the good, and diswadeth that which is evil: and therefore (as
I said elsewhere) Equity should seem to be that Lambert.
facts, and by colorable arguments moved to frustrate the good meaning of the
Statute; then our recourse in England is made unto the Chancerie, being so
notable and common, that in other Courts through the corrupt levine and
covetous malice of some Lawyers, right is many times perverted. For diverse
wily Sophysters arguing with subtle insinuations, and heaping up authorities
enforce the Letter of our Statutes, that they may be thereby accomodated to
their own corrupt purposes: so that the violence done by aequum and bonum,
aequum and iustum, aequum iustum: Intimating righteousness and goodness,
right and justice, and indifferent justice: for even the laws themselves
require that they may be governed by truth, Et vt leni, facili, ac benig na
interpretatione Lambert.
temperentur: vereque dicitur, nullus recedat a Cancellaria sine remedio: Let
no man depart from the Court of Chancerie without remedy. The judgments
delivered in this Court of honorable grace cannot be (but 4. Hen. 7. 4.
by the Court Parliament) reuersed: the special proceedings in Chancerie are
by petitions, trauerses, and showing of right. In this Court the Lord
Chauncello^ Monstran^le dr^t.
is judge with the master of Rolls: next under them the masters of the
Chauncerie, the six Clerks, and cursitors. Adjoining these is the court of
requests. All those civil courts prementioned hold plee betwixt subject and
subject either in trial of land causes, as the kings Bench, so far at it
deals in matters of debt, assumption, actions upon the case properly
belonging to the court of the Common plees; or in the Common plees begun by
king Henry the 3. Likewise in the matters of Marshallsea within the virge,
limited (...) 9. Act. 21
to twelve miles near to the kings house and no more: where the steward and
Marshall are judges, or in marine causes determinable in the Admiraltie; which
court was erected by king Edward the third: all of them being general

There are also diverse base courts, which (as it should seem) were first of
any that we can read begun by Moses, who did establish Judges: These ruled
Tribes, Hundreds; Fifties, tenths; to whom he referred the decision of small
causes, reserving to himself matters of most importance. These courts Vid^
D^t. 1. cap. and Ex^d. 18. N^b. 11. cap.
were continued amongst us in example by king Alfred the Saxon and a Christian
king, who divided his realm, First into lathes, rapes, ridings; and them into
wapentakes, hundreds; and those into leets, court Barons, tithings, piepouders.
Secondly, into Sherifes turns, and hundreds. King Henry the second divided
this realm into six parts, unto each of which he did assign three justices,
called Itinerants by Bracton and justices in eire by Britton, Roger Houeden
describes to be like our iuridicall circuits at this day: and so much in
general touching the forms and nature of our Ecclesiastical and civil
courts in this realm, which master William Camden our most learned Britain
Antiquarie did very commendably set forth in the last edition of his book. Now
somewhat concerning the laws, but in special touching our own nation.

It is said, that Brutus (upon his settling in this Island) did write a book of
laws in the Greek tongue collected out of the Troiane laws 1103. years
before Christ's birth, which Greek laws the Druides first administered in this
land being solemnly by vows inhibited to promulgate them to vulgar
understanding. From these Druides (according to Caesar) being found out amongst
Lib. 6. (...) gallici*
frequent and reciprocal commerce and trafique betwixt the Galls and
Britains in those times, like to be by covenant or deeds ratified according
to those Greek laws, by which both the nations were governed, should seem
(as Str^bo thinks) to confirm so much. Molmutius Donwallo instituted two
Lib. 4 Geog*
statute laws and the common laws. After him Mercia Proba the wife of king
Guinteline, another book called Merciaes laws. King Afred also gathered
diverse which (being into one volume compiled) he named a breuiarie drawn from
diverse laws of the Trojans, Greeks, Britains, Saxons and Danes. Also
Sigibert king of the East Angles published a book called the Institutes of
Laws. Edward the Confessor next king before William the first, amongst the
diuinest and worthiest lawyers may be registered, which out of those infinite
volumes of British, Roman, Danish, and English laws made a choice Rapsodie
which he did entitle the common law: as by the words of diverse diligent and
faithful Antiquaries appears. After these princes king William Geruas of
Tilbury writes. After whom his son H. the first surnamed Henry Beauclerke
(of whom Henry of Huntington, who lived in his days records much) being a
very learned and politic prince abolished certain of them, restoring diverse
of the former, which he thought were more behousefull for those times. And
Henry the second a prince of much mildness and humanity compiled another
volume divided into the laws of this Commonwealth and the statutes royal
entitled. But in Edward Coke to those books of Lawcases by him lately
compiled. And so much briefly touching the precise care and studies of former
princes in ordeining and collecting the laws: the necessity whereof being so
vulgarly known, needs no confirmation by further example, considering how
fresh it springs in our memories (omitting the most sage and prudent
provision of that Numa of England king Henry the seventh for the Commonwealth
by good and politic institution and administration of laws) that our late
sacred sovereign Elizab. (whose very name imprinteth a reverend remembrance in
my heart) instituted many divine laws, by which the miraculous peace of this
Commonwealth Augustus Caesar) made him so great and eternal in the golden
memorials of time so that for the correction and promulgation of laws in his
own name, and for his sumptuous and many buildings, it was truly and
triumphantly spoken of himself, Vrbem latericiam reperi, relinquo marmoream.
These were the bulwarks which protected the peace and honor of his Empire:
and those by which the superabounding tranquillity of this Nation has been so
long cherished and conserved,

It was recorded in the Roman Annals and memorials, as a notable happiness in
Antoninus Pius, that through his justice, prudence, and fortitude, there arose
not any wars amongst the Romans for 23. years together: which happens
generally by the due distribution and execution of justice and equity. What
then may be said in our Chronicles of that our late gracious and auspicious
planet of Christendom Queen Elizabeth; whose beams

It is sooth, and well answers to the lore of wisdom, that all policies
States, or Commonweals are most corrupt, wherein there be many laws
established: for so much as it is presupposed that where multitudes of crimes and
vices predominate of strange and diverse qualities, diverse unusual and Gens
humana ruit in vetitum nefas: For Adams children naturally lust after the
forbidden fruit. Not many Books which confound men's memory with heaps of
words and matter, but few substantial and necessary: referring all petty
things, not being nefarious, to the censure of venerable magistrates (which
will not suffer a spark to make a flame) and not to the written Letter of
Poenall Laws; considering how the mean ministers and executioners of them
which search out, inquire, and inform of such offenses, do commonly more
prejudice then benefit and honesty to the Commonwealth: For we know that by
Gods

The reports and causes of our common-lawes and judgments have appeared in two
points that the former Kings of this Realm, as king Edward the third, Henry
the fourth, Henry the fifth, Henry the sixth, Edward the fourth, Richard the
third, Henry the seventh with prudent inspection found that necessity, which
required a luculent interpretation of the difficult points in our Common-lawes:
whereupon they by the faithful conference of four most reverend and learned
Judges in the Laws, following the sage example of that most wise and
victorious Emperor Iustinianus before mentioned, did each of them in their
several reigns cause the genuine and very sense by good; having digested them
into nine Volumes of the Laws, wherein the

For So Much as concerns humane Laws which are ordained by nature, and
published by the prince (which by them governs the Commonwealth to relieve
and rectify the same) they must be just and possible, needful and profitable,
plain, prescribed not to private but to public use and benefit, consenting
with time and place, according to the nature and custom of the Country which
should be moderated by them: such as are our statutelawes of England. Upon
these thus ordained and provided against faults, a knowledge showing the
difference of crimes and vices depends: As whether the nature of the^ consist
in impiety by violation of the first table of Gods heart. For if gravity
should not appear in all his judgments, then shall he

It is therefore principally to be considered, that they (which sit upon this
Cap. 1. Anno ^eg. regis Edw. 3. 15.
who shall otherwise give judgment or sentence of and against them. The King
himself also which is head and judge of the Laws, shows great goodness and
equity through the world, in showing his royal assent and contentment that
these judges substituted under him shall give sentence according to differt a
rege Tyrannus: for nothing more then this does to life express a true kings
glory. The kings of our nation to confirm this perfect honor of a just
prince, in one act of Parliament ordained in the second year of king Edward
the third, are limited: That although Cap. 8.
they command by their great, or priute seals to delay any cause in judicial
dependence proceeding by course of law; yet shall the judges proceed with
mature expedition according to justice, notwistanding any precept from them
directed. For what can be said more to the disgracing and disrobing of any
king, then that which Freigius in the latter end of his political questions
cites out of a certain oration of Scattaius against tyranny. Tu iusticiam
imperabis and interim tamen iniuriam alijs facies? tu officium commendabis and
ab officij religione deflectes? As if he should say: Why would thou be king
to command men to deal justly, giving in proper person example of wrong done
to others? How can thou commend men for doing of their duties and offices,
when thou thy self transgressest thy functions and duties?

Thus if princes or judges should preuaricat but a little, the^ their laws
(which ought to be the judges of every just prince) will restrain and reform
them. And if those laws be dissonant to the spirit of charity, truth and
equity; the^ the divine power and sapience of God (which are the very judges
of all laws, princes, and judges on earth) will correct and punish them with
their ministers. Let therefore no partial respect of power, neither private
affection, nor inexcusable ignorance of those laws which any judge stewardeth,
blemish his judgments. For if he be partial let him consider with himself
that it proceeds from affection or corruption which both are incorporate; and
that it cannot be hidden from many men amongst infinite which behold and hear
him from Salust) aequos bonosque fauere debet vt eius benefacta reipub. Bell
Iugurt^
procedant, he must favor men which are just and good, that he may declare
himself beneficent toward the Commonwealth. And if he be led by affection,
let him consider how fallacious a passion it is, oftentimes opposite to reason
even in the men of honestest natures and constitutions, showing a kind of
charity for the most part, where it falsefieth the virtue, pulling down of a
mountain to raise a molehill; and to satisfy his affected, commonly to deiect
and make ruinous such adversaries which percase even in a worse case descrue
much more affection. Lastly, but specially let him have a special care to his
prince; the zealous duty which does by nature inuit him to study Salust
thinks. Plerosque non ijsdem artibus imperiu^ petere and postqua^ adepti sunt
gerere; primo industrios, supplices, modicos esse, dehinc per ignauiam and
superbiam at atem agere: That many princes differ in their acquisition and
government of a kingdom: because upon the first they show themselves
industrious suppliant and temperate, afterward in sloth, idleness and pride
pass their lives. Every king, judge, and ruler of the people therefore, ought
to ponder with

They therefore that are fit and worthy to sit upon the throne of equity,
ought sincerely to be good men, severe, incorrupt, obdurate against flatterers,
impatient of smooth tales, and secret detraction, unmerciful to them that are
remediless, inexorable in weighty causes of judgment, and such as will not
transgress the precincts of justice in any case: for according to the
discretion Aulus Gellius they must distribute to the king and beggar equal
measure without inclination or passion toward any man's estate or person: as it
Lib. 10. cap. 4.
was most divinely shadowed in that mystical order of the Areopagites being a
counsel in Athens, consisting of sixty citizens which successively through
all offices and degrees of honor at length attained place upon the seat of
justice to deal in affairs of state, and in tempestuous times to provide that
the Commonwealth should endure no prejudice. These in the darkest season of the
night would decide causes in judgment, at such time as they might hear and
Cicero says, Vir bonus ponit persona^ amici cum induit iudicis: A good man
lays apart the person of a friend when Offic. 3.
he takes upon him the place of a judge. And therefore judges, as says that
most reverend Emperor Iustinianus must sacrifice pure and vncorrupt hands to
God, to the kind, and to the law: least that curse fall upon them which our
Savior Christ denounced against the Pharisees; Woe be to you interpreters of
the L^we, for you have taken away the key of knowledge, you did not enter in
your Luke 5.
selves; and them that would have entered you forbad.

Amongst other politic Laws in Deutronomie, delivered from Gods mouth to the
sacred prince his servant Moses, it was commanded that in all the parts of
their people and nations assembled, Judges should be constituted which might
justly judge the people, poising the balance of equity with even hand and
briblesse; for so much as bribes bleare the sights of sage men, making
contreseit the words of just magistrates. And hence was that prohibition either
of acceptance or exception for or against any sorts of persons. It is a
notable sentence left unto Judges by that most religious and honest king
Iosophat highly worth the consideration; Look unto it you that are Judges, for
you do not execute the laws of men, but of God, and according to your
innocence and equity so shall your judgments be rewarded. For these and such
indifferent respects, Justice is fitly resembled to the helm in a ship which
being misguided, endangereth the vessel, pilote, officers, and sailers;
representing the realm, prince, magistrates, and people.

Upon this misrule, or misguidance of the Commonwealth by corrupt judgment or
iniquity, whereupon the devouring tempests of injuries, contumelies, and
deceits arise, Kingdoms (by Gods just judgment and indignation) are
translated from one nation to another, royal families extinguished, and the
prince with his people oftentimes subverted, as is verily frequent unto

I will now speak somewhat touching their administration of Justice in civil
matters, which is either declared in causes litigious brought before them, for
the trial of lands and goods; or in penal cases for transgressing Laws in
some one of the three parts of justice which they violate: wherein the
conscience of the Judge with the causes of equity, should make the true
balance of right. Penal cases for private transgressions be semblably
referred in form (though not altogether in substance) to the Judges discreet
conscience. This only should remain ever green in his memory, that all
judgments in civil causes be well attempered with a merciful benignity, if
the nature and qualities of the faults and delinquent permit. First therefore it
is to be weighed, the fountain or habit of justice. For the judgment of all
just and ^iust Salust, Quibus pro magnitudine ^perij, Bell. iugureth.
ius and iniurias omnes curae esse deces: To whose care (according to the
limits of their Commission or circuit) all rights and wrongs are referred.
Which right and wrong is twofold according to the Laws, consisting upon
accusation and defension; which last depending upon lawful maintenance is
thought by the Law-men to be more laudable then the other.

These principles thus considered with the qualities of the persons and
offenses, the reverend Judge shall find it engraven with the true pen of
dinine judgment and reason in his own conscience in what sort, to whom, and
when to show clemency. Certain it is, that mercy most graceth the that has
mercy is blessed says Solomon. Prou. 14.
And in the 19. Chapter of the same, the Lord will exchange his mercy for his;
intimating also that he will have mercy, and not sacrifice: Forasmuch as his
mercy reaches from generation to generation of those that fear him. If Luk^
1.
therefore Judges will graciously consider the form and glorious fashion of
Gods mercie-seat (which besides many gorgeous and most specious ornaments, was
by Gods special direction and commandment, compassed with a most precious
crown of finest gold) it shall be comfortably showed unto Exodus 25. and 36.
exalted above his seat of judgment. They should therefore show mercy with
cheerfulness, as Saint Paul counsels the Romans, For he which waters
shall be refreshed with rain: according to Solomon, Nothing so much Chap. 12.
beautifieth the gravity, person, and majesty of a Judge, as when his severe
justice is Prou. 11.
delayed with clemency. Which Vulcatius Gallicus calls a kingly quality:
and he which would conciliate peace, love, and obedience amongst men, must
govern with a languishing or unwilling hand to strike home, as grieuing or
repining at the punishment. Hence is that saying of Cicero; Nihil quod crudele
vtile: est Offic. 3.
enim hominum naturae (quam maxim sequi debemus) maxim inimica a crudelitas;
Nothing cruel can be profitable: for the greatest enemy to nature (which
Caius Caesar: Neque quisquam te ad crudeles p^nas aut acerba iudicia invocet,
quibus ciuitas vastatur magis quam corrigitur; sed vt prauas arts, malasque
libidines Salust. ad Caes. de repub. ord.
ab iuuentute prohibeas: Let no man provoke thee to inflict cruel, or award
over severe sentences, which rather confounds then corrects any
Commonwealth; but only to restrain Youth from wicked courses and lusts. Judges
therefore should so punish, Vt metus absit, charit as retineatur: To keep out
fear, and retain love. And therefore those Judges and rulers of the people
which pinch and gird them extremely, sequestring or abrogating their liberties,
with more Cicero most sagely censureth of that point, Acriores sunt morsus
intermissae libertatis qua^retentae. A liberty intermitted biteth nearer the
Offic. 2.
bone then a restrained liberty. It behooves them therefore in their judgments
Antoninus Pius the Emperor used to say that mercy was it which adopted Coesar
into fellowship of the gods, and only mercy which consecrated Augustus
amongst men. Howbeit, I do not in any case wrest unto that excess of lenity,
which the Philosophers call Lentitude, being a vice of the mind which breeds
an exceeding security with dissolute manners and behavior in men. For he that
upon the former considerations would severely punish some vices in certain
persons, should not admit when times are dangerous a small fault to escape
unpunished; but provide so that it may be with moderation and clemency
chastised, punishing nefarious and heinous crimes with due serueritie for
examples. And so much concerning mercy

It is not permitted that a Judge should command and prohibit what he list
himself without legal warrant, albeit it might rest in his arbitrament: yet
whereas all articles cannot be severally comprised in the Laws, and for so much
as many circumstances breed doubts, in such cases men are referred to the
conscience and religion of the Judge, nearly to determine by course of justice
according to sincerity: further scope then this is not permitted unto any,
being by that benefit freed from peril of punishment though he give sentence
against the Law: for the case not being thoroughly discussed yields Cicero
says) Paulum nonnunquam de suo iure decedere. Lib. Offic. 2.


In administration of civil causes also, there is one most commendable part
requisite in a judge, that he withdraw his hands from the rewards of private or
poor persons, which would gladly give somewhat for favor in their just and
honest causes. For judges of that nature are blinded with avarice whose lege
Clodia were prohibited to take any rewards of persons in suite. In special all
such rewards and gratifications as are given either to further a good or a bad
cause (saving the fees lawfully limited to the judges and pleaders, in regard
of their salaries and pains) are dissalowable; and if any be tolerable then
only such as are taken by them of great princes which reward their pains in
advancement of justice only: For such as sell justice and truth are
abominable, and so bethose also which take gifts of any man to further a
faulty: for in that false participation if he further him, then does he
manifest

Now somewhat so short as I can, concerning the knowledge and studies required
in judges and judicial magistrates. The due reverence and fear of Gods
omnipotent virtue which illuminateth his understanding, perfecteth his wisdom,
amplifieth his majesty, refreshes his spirits, and corroborateth all his
judgments, must above all things before and after judgment, and continually
with a zealous and effectual prayer from a soul blessedly breathing after
spiritual consolation, be principally retained. And therefore it is written by
Moses, that judges should be men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly,
loathing avarice. And for this cause the Prophet David calls them Gods
saying, Exodus 18.
that all the children of the most high do right and justice unto the
fatherless, poor, and needy. His ordinary studies therefore for pleasure and
ornament are Psalm. 82.
best approved in the sweet concord of moral Philosophy which will enable
and confirm him in his profession and conversation: this teaches him how
justice is a virtue yielding every man what is his own, and willing all men to
discharge their duties. Cicero calls her the Queen and mistress of all the
other virtues; because she takes perfection from the rest being as it were a
Aristotle terms it an affection of mind enabling men to do justly which
kinaleth in them a zeal or fervent desire of equity. It is according to M.
Bodine a kind of Geometry, Lib. 5. Ethicoru^.
which being disanulled drowneth the concord and societies of cities: it
teaches Lib. 6. cap. 6.
the difference betwixt honesties and their contraries, it points out the
extremes of good and evil, it directs how to rule private families, it
shows what authorities and offices are proper to fathers, husbands, and
masters, it declares the maintenance of a private state, it instructs
persons in the virtues and discipline of a magistrate, it describes the form
of a Commonwealth, it prescribes the true means and knowledge to sustain
cities which are in danger of subversion, it deuiseth excellent laws and
statutes to rectify them; conclusiuely the surest and firmest foundations of
Empire are good laws moderating and measuring out all liberal sciences and
good arts. Which good laws (as Freigius calls them) are the mistresses of
virtue commanding people in their living to demean

Justice according to some learned moralists is known by these attributes or
qualities: first she will not challenge any thing which is not her own; then
she does neglect her own private lucre in respect if she may thereby further
the common equity. There be six kinds of Justice according to some very
learned philosophers, and they should seem to be very certain: one justice is
legal, being a kind of voluntary affection to do and desire just things; and
by this legal justice are men wholly bentand inclined for the benefit of their
country. The second a moral justice which I prementioned out of the imperial
institutions being a constant and perpetual will, yielding each

This virtue principally respects the benefit of others more then her own,
which as Aristotle says is not so specious in her fellow virtues. According to
Valerius and some other Philosophers, there are two parts of justice: the first
Quae in tribuendis honoribus and reru^inter ciues communium aequa diuisione
seruatur: Which equality is kept in distribution of honors, and in equal
division of things amongst Cicero defines the law which is derived from
justice to be reason graffed in humane nature: unto this all laws and
institutions, customs, edicts, estatutes (which further the conservation of
Commonwealths) have reference: And in observation and violation of them justice
and injustice are opened. There is no diversity betwixt law and virtue, saving
that virtue by words and promises benignely persuades whereas law commands,
compels, and inhibiteth. The distributive part of private justice cheefely
concerns magistrates, consisting in rewards, punishments, just government,
teaching all sorts of people to know their offices, places, mind depraved and
corrupted, by means whereof men in dignity and magistracy

Out of the whole substance of justice (according to Cicero) these branches or
properties are observed and found; Religion, piety, duty, verity,
vindication, graticude, mercy, liberality, magnificence, friendship: all
which fasten themselves to the lists of reason. And herein are three sorts of
Laws comprised: one natural, not derived from opinion, but from a certain
force in

Therefore against true religion, I plant hypocritiall superstition, with
precise curiosity, being the vain and unprofitable service of God, fashioned
after the newfangled humors and schismatic fancies of nice green heads:
From whence flows that detestable plague, impious profanation of Gods sacred

Against piety stubbornly marches fourth impiety, being a want of due
benevolence, obedience, or charity toward magistrates: as when we contemn
or calumniate rulers, which is prohibited by Moses. A singular of example 22.
E^od.
of which heinous contempts or contumelies, remains to us in the person Paul
the Apostle, who being appealed before the high Priest Ananias for his divine
and most eloquent exordium of his Apology Viua voce, saying that he had to
that day served God, was maliced or emulated rather by the Judge; which having
dispiteously interrupted his period, commanded a soldier then present to
strike him, who did accordingly buffet his face: whereupon Paul in anguish of
spirit moved, said to the high Priest; God will smite thee, thou painted wall:
for thou sit to judge me according to the Law, and command thou me to be
smitten contrary to the Law? then certain that stood by told him that he did
not well to revile the high Priest; which he presently acknowledging in
ignorance, as not having considered what magistrate he was, said: It is
written, thou shall not rail upon the Judges Acts 23.
nor speak evil of the ruler of the people. From hence matureth the
disobedience of children and people toward parents, magistrates, and toward
their Country: from whence, issue scornfulnesse, contempt of reverence and
duty. Principal actors in this Scaene of devils, are parricides, traitors to
their Sovereigns and country, murderers, and trecherors unto their masters,
with others, such as are of the venomous spirit of Cayne.

Duty being by disobedience confronted, herein loses his prerogative, that
stubbornness (which takes root in pride) contumeliously rejects it. Hence
is that sottish selfe-doting, loving and ouer-pleasing of men, with
hypocritical obedience exhibited unto true virtues, and a ready willingness

Immanitie with lenity combat against just vindication, specified in these
two properties: when the correction is greater then the fault, and therefore is
the Proverb, Cupido and irapessimi sunt consultores: Lust and wrath are the
worst counselors: and specially wrath is to be vehemently suppressed in a
Judge, least he stain his hands in innocent blood, which is a thing so odious
in the sight of God and man, as nothing can be more abominable: Hence was that
saying of the noble moral Tragoedian; Iudex futurus sanguine humano Senec in
Horc. furen.
abstine: If thou will be a Judge, abstain from humane blood.

Lies, calumnies, fraud, hypocrisy, dissimulation, and arrogancy stand at
defiance with verity; what enemies these be unto the soul of man, and unto
public government, I refer to men's private consciences. For calumny
praises vice, rebukes virtue: hypocrisy does foolishly, maliciously, and and
some of good desert, which in the politic Courtier of Duro di pascolo, Petro
de Vineis, Aluaro de Luna, Giacobo Cord, Christophoro Colombo, Philip de
Comynes, with other very wise and honorable Counselors, even of our fathers
times and of our memories, which did in such cases miscary: neither is it safe
or behoofefull that I particularize. This is a kind of injustice and close
malice, necessarily to be sisted being wholly composed of diabolical wiliness.
Wherefore they cannot be very noble, that foster in their rancorous hearts such
maliciousness: and if there rest in Cicero, that Nobiles sivirtute valent
magis aemuli quam inuidi bonorum sunt: Noblemen which are possessed of virtue,
do rather emulate then malign good men. And albeit this Offic. 2.
vice of emulation rests amongst Nobles and Paladynes which is most glorious
being applied to virtuous and honorable purposes, as in contending to become
most just, valiant, temperate, learned, active, or excellent in any such manly
qualities then the rest; yet to malign others for their perfections and better
properties should seem most unnatural, base, and brutish: and therefore
elegantly Cicero citing the same out of Crisippus resembles them, to Qui
stadium currit eniti and contendere debet quam maxim possit vt vincat:
supplant are cum quocum certat aut cubito deppellere nullo modo debet. Sic in
vita sibi quemque petere quod pertineat ad vsum non iniqum est; deripere ius
non est. He that runs a race, ought to work and contend with all possible
means to win the wager: he may not in any case supplant him with whom he
contendeth, or strike him back with his elbow. Semblaby, that is not unfit
which a man necessarily craves for the sustinance or support of his life, but
forceably to take away from men that which is theirs, is mere iniquity.

There is a Lesson which Cicero vehemently moves and urges, and in *
truth without adulation, that it has seemed doubtful to wisemen, whether he
were in Proborum defensitationibus, quam in sceleratorum accusationibu^ magis
acer: more vehement in his Apologies for good and honest men in their good
causes, or earnest in his inuectiues or informations against nefarious and
wicked persons. For such ought to be the care of just Judges as Cicero writes,
Vt iuris and iudiciorum aequitate suum quisque teneat: That through

I speak this as a necessary caveat or monition against calumnies and envy,
which has been the devouring caterpiller of so many virtuous and gallant
princes and Commonwealthes men, that have thereby perished, because that
restless hagge malice commonly does more mischief then fortune: and therefore
if men which are set upon the stage of honor and reputation can find out a
sovereign preservative against her venime; then do they show great wisdom
possessing this world in quiet. For sure it is that Viuos interdum fortuna,
saepe inuidia fatigat. Fortune some times toyleth living creatures, but envy
vexes them often.

Gratitude being another branch of justice is ungraciously wounded with
unthankfulness: nothing vanishes sooner then the remembrance of benefits
received; for if you multiply them, they shall be retributed and retribled to
you with infinite malefices, considering that he which neither has heart Fr.
Gulc. Italia. in vita Alex. 6. pont.
nor faculty to requite commonly forgets or vnderualueth your munificence;
disdayning in himself the very remembrance of that necessity, which being
either with your mercy mitigated or delayed in case of justice, or by your
charity supplied in compassion of his poverty, should have enjoined him to
thankful requital for such a benefit, which people commonly so soon forget
as taste. This have I found by good experience both in particular, and by some
private respects of my self and others most near unto me; John, being now set
free from fetters toward the last times; and amongst wise men so detestable
and odious, that by their often repetion it became a proverb generally
delivered, if you call me unthankful, call me what you will: for nothing can
be more disgraceful or infamous. And as it is used to men of that unthankful
nature, an unthankful dog: for as it is odious in a dog, a snake, or any
wild beast, which is cherished

Mercy confounded is with hardness of heart, uncharitableness,
unconscionable actions, strangeness amongst brethren and societies, being both
pernicious to the soul of people, and contagious to the peace and unions of
all civil states and policies.

Liberality perishethin these extreamities, in avarice which cannot endure the
thought of giving, and in prodigality dishabling the power thereof. These are
guarded with infinite vices, of which two mischiefs, prodigality more helps
in repayring many, whereas covetousness will not relieve any.

Vain ostentation being indecently slubbered up, and neighboring avarice, is
opposite to magnificence: there is likewise a proud immoderate and unseasonable
kind of riotous magnificence accompanied with excess: the dangers, of both
are much like to the perils issuing from the extremes of

Friendship being the navel or vp-shot of all justice, Etiam and habitus vere
and perfect diligendi alterum proper similitudinem morum: Which is a habit of
perfect and true love betwixt men, resembling one another in conditions and
manners by natural sympathy, shall take place in the bottom, base and
groundworke of the rest, and it is thwarted with enmity which works in men's
hearts cruelty with hatred; whereupon patricides and homicides engender. It is
a common saying, that such a man has betrayed or deceived Salust, Per maximam
amicitiam maxima est fallendi copia; that where greatest friendship harboreth,
there has deceit most power and force to practice; but I am not of that
opinion how true friendship (if it be mutual and reciprocal) has any port
which can open unto the heart that could entertain falsehood against friends:
considering that true friendship is naked, pure and immaculate according to
the, definition before expressed. Howbeit there is a similitude of wicked
natures, which combineth men in a kind of fraternity which me seems may not
be called so properly friendship, being brethren in evil sacramentally tied,
and periuriously how the seedtime of each year present occasioneth the next
years harvest; ministering store of matter to gorge up the covetous bags of
some ambicious Lawmen, Aduocats

To the perfection of knowledge herein it is right behoouefull that they which
judge, be soundly read and practiced in all the laws Civil, Cannon, and
provincial consenting with the laws of those nations where men live, and also
the laws of all neighboring Commonweales politickely governed, whether they
be Christian or pagane, conferring them with the ground of all good laws
delivered first by God to the sacred prince Moses his servant in the
decalogue: as also that he studiously peruse all the books of Moses, wherein
the politic statutes and ordinances derived from the fountain of his
unsearchable wisdom are touched; as in the books of Exodus, Detronomie,
Numbers: likewise in the Judges and Kings. Nay let him peruse the whole volumes
of the new Testament; wherein he shall find the true forms and treasure of all
good laws and judgments. Likewise let him converse with the laws of the
ancient Egyptians which (as Diodorus records them) are like in Lib. 2. cap.
3. lib. hist.
nature to these our Britain laws; from whence together with the secret
mysteries of their gods, those ordinances were by Orpheus translated into
Greece:

It is also most commendable, and would add infinite riches to his judgment,
if he can by diligent reading attain the Laws of all principal States and
Kingdoms in this age established as in Spain, France, Portugal, the free
States of Italy, the Empire of Germany, the Cantons of Swizzer-land, the
Kingdoms of Poleland, Hungaria, Prussia, Moscouia, with such like: most of

This Science with the riches of that knowledge, which may be gotten by the
same together with the judicious conference of one with another, I cannot
sufficiently declare nor commend: neither, if it were possible for a man, all
other means being wanting thereunto to live until he had visited those nations,
and had soiourned in each particular country, till he were acquainted

In public judgments (which according to the imperial Institutions are so
called, because the execution of them is referred to any of the people) it much
imports him to be very skillful, co^ferring them to the benefit of his
private judgment with the public judgments, as in cases criminal of his
own nation. Of these some being capital and the rest not capital: those
which are, do punish with death or perpetual exile; as it was called by the
Romans, Interdiction from fire and water, by which was intended an exclusion
from all other benefit, or comfort of his native Country. Such were Freigius
defines; being persons cast out, or banished Quest. politic.
from all civil society: and they were called deportati or relegati, by the
Romans, to whom was this interdiction of fire and water, or the prescription
and abdication of people. Other judgments upon defamation proceed with
pecuniary mulct, which are also public and not capital.

Howbeit public judgments principally proceed in matters of majesty,
touching traitors against the King or Commonwealth, punished with Ad legem
Iul. maiestatis.
loss of life, and extirpation of their remembrance after their death in
attainder of blood, and destruction of their houses which should be demolished.

All criminal causes according to the form of our Laws, are either treasons
or felonies; and those courts in England which are ordained for trial of them
that stand appealed for such crimes, are the Kingsbench, or Jail deliueryes.
Which judgments are through all Counties of this Realm, once each year at
the least (and in some oftener) according to the greatness of the shire;

Treasons according to the laws of our Nation are crimes of such heinous
nature, as either concern the Prince in his life or State. As when a man
compasses or imagines the Kings, the Queens, or their eldest son his death;
the violation or constupration of the Queen, or of the kings eldest daughter
unmarried, or of the Prince his wife the levying of war against the King, in his
Realm, or abroad; the counterfeiting of his great or privy Seal, or of his
moneys; Edw. 3. An. 25. cap. 2.


Paricides, such as kill their parents openly or closely, and such as are
either accessaries or abettours, punished with extreme torture of death, Ad
leg. Pompei. de Paricidijs.
according to the imperial Laws. Howbeit, such as kill their kinsfolk or
allies, undergo the law provided against murderers.

Felonies are of diverse natures, including any capital injustice, as in life,
or living toward diverse persons: of which, some be murderers; others in theft
and robberies; and some in deceit appendant to that nature; but in a more
venomous degree. Murderers therefore, which with artificial instruments,
poisons, Ad leg. Iul. de de Sycarijs.
or sorceries take away the lives of people, according to the imperial laws
are punished with death. Thieves secretly stealing and purloyning public
treasure, or sacrilegious persons: yea, Judges themselves if having charge of
Ad leg. Iul. de V^ private.
any common treasure they should imbezill the same; with all assistants,
receptors, and abbettors are condemnable to death. Other thefts not of such
heinous condition are satisfied with exile. The rapes of widows, wives, or
virgins are comprehended herein by the same punishment.

Falsifying or counterfeiting of written Chartiers, Evidences, Records, Ad leg.
Cornel. de falsis.
Leases, or counterfeiting of seals, with such like of the same nature
punished with death.

Public violence which is done with weapon, or artificial instrument;
finable to the the third part of his goods which offends.

Petty thefts sometimes with loss of life, and in certain cases with lighter
Ad leg. Iul. peculatus.
punishment, at the Judges discretion.

The laws of ambition, of requiring a restitution of goods taken away, Ad leg.
Iul. Anno^oe, amb. terum repet.
with those that concern victual; etc. are all handled in the public
judgments, expressed in the imperial Institutions. For as much as concerns
the studies and ready knowledge of our own Laws, I have sufficiently spoken
before.

In judgments criminal, generally requiring the deepest and soundest Tacitus
no less sagely (though living in a tyrannous Empire) does confirm. Yet
for so much as it is no part of my profession (but in somewhat impertinent) to
declare the substance of all these causes criminal according to their natures;
I will pretermit and handle only such things, as are required of a Judge in his
general decision or execution of them.

Punishments therefore are either frequent, or rare: mitigate punishments
Salust, Vos sceleratissimis hominibus quiaciues sunt ignos^ere aequo animo
paterer ni miserecordia Bell. Iugurth.
in pernicie^ casura esset: I could be contented that great offenders should be
pardoned, were it not that such mercy would turn to mischief. Only this
should be regarded, that amongst many persons combined in offense a few of the
principals be cut off. Necem etenim paucoru^ aut vnius hominis calamitati
Porti^ (...) in Catil.
publicae maiores nostri semper anteponendam esse putauerunt: Our fathers
always thought it expedient to prefer the death of some few persons, or of
one man; rather then to permit a general calamity by the effusion of much
blood. It has been anciently customed (but I will not prescribe such dangerous
physic) to wash away the envy of bloodshed, with shedding the blood Richard
Emson, and Master Dudley, in the second year of King Henry the eight. To great
offenses therefore either presumptuously, or bloodily committed by great
persons of note, apply notable and exemplary punishments; that meaner folk in
beholding their executions, may be discouraged from the like attempts. Which
rule has been narrowly kept by that right noble, reverend and politic
Judge, Sir John Popham, by whose justice and severe integrity
(thunder-blasting desperate offenses) many grievous and contagious malefactors
have been oftentimes repressed. If therefore a man's life insist upon it, let
him not fear to give

Moreover, it must not appear to be done either in private, as by corrupt
bribes, violently to divert the current of justice out of his true channel, or
any malice or envy to parties, which is a kind of disease of the mind, which
grievously repineth at the good success or qualities of others. And many men
will sooner pardon the slaughter of their parents, then the loss of their
livings unjustly. Severity therefore in necessary punishments, adds a
majesty to the magistrate: for otherwise it happens oftentimes, that the
Prince may rebuke his foolish lentitude, in such terms as were objected by
Quintus Fab. Maximus in the Roman Senate against Scipio, whose soldiers
through his exceeding license and lenity revolted from him; that he should
have corrupted the state of civil government, as Scipio did the Roman
military discipline: upon which reprehension, Scipio reformed himself with
great reputation; whereas in regard of his former mildness, the first examples
of his severity were not imputed to his own nature. It is not meant here by
the example of Draco, who did write all his laws in blood for the Athenians,
to punish every small offense with death: but such as are either traitorous and
sedicious paricides, homicides, or others of like condition according to the
qualities of their offenses. There is a kind of grace and and mercy declared

Zaluchus (having made a Law to the Locrensians, that any persons of that
commonwealth, if they were taken in adultery, should loose both their eyes)
was forced to give sentence against his own son, which stood in that case
appealed before him: and notwithstanding that earnest intercession made by the
people for his pardon; yet in satisfaction of the Law, he caused one of

I will confirm this with a familiar example of common record in our English
Chronicles. Henry of Monm^uth son to king Henry the fourth (who did
afterward succeed his father) rushed unto the Kings Bench (the Lord

Sedition and malice being two pestilent and contagious diseases in a
Commonwealth should be severely punished in the beginnings without remission,
yet with such discretion handled, as it might seem rather to proceed from a
mind very loath, and grieuing to punish, but that constraint and the common
cause enforces it. Howbeit, somewhat must always be done for examples sake
considering the sentence, Panarum fructus omnium maximus pertinet ad exemplum.
The most fruit and profit which issues from punishments grows upon example.

There is great danger in ministering a more vehement medecin, then either the
nature or strength of the disease or diseased does require. Apply not any
corrosiues but upon extremities and causes otherwise remediless. He which
hatcheth vengeance in his heart, may not punish hastily but expect a fit
occasion for his own satisfaction, which will undoubtedly fall without any
combustion, note, or imputation of revenge. Those judges therefore I deem well
worthy commendation, which seldom using severity can attain and keep the
name of terrible magistrates: for by much exercise of bloody vehemently. If
therefore a Judge extend severity, let it be manifested especially, Cicero
writes; hominem naturae obedientem Offic. 3.
homini nocere non posse: That not any man which is obedient to nature will
hurt another man. Neither can any thing express the prudence of a magistrate
more to life, then the just conservation and maintenance of a man's life;
nothing decipher his cruelty more, then slaughter and effusion of blood. How
odious is the very name of homicide, by whose violence man which is the
goodliest artifice of nature is dissolved? Nothing therefore should in a

Next unto murder is that vlcerous and insatiable wolf usury, which like a
cancor consumes the flesh and bones of Prince and people. It is the extremest
stinking plague of any commonwealth. And hence was it, that Marcus Cato said,
How murder and usury were correlatiue. Which leprous botch (for I cannot give
it a term bad enough) the Romans punished more Salust likewise aduising Caesar
in one of his Orations says; Tollendus foenerator vt suas quisque res curemus:
Usurers must be banished, that every man may the better follow his private
business. Intimating those lets and obstacles which happen to the
commonwealth; where diverse principal persons are consumed and eaten up with
usury. Saying moreover, that all things would have good success in the
commonwealth, Sipecuniae (quae maxima omnium pernicies est) vsum atque dedecus
dempserit: If he would so practice, that the use and disgrace of selling and
lending of money Ad. Cas. de rep. ordinanda.
(which he terms the greatest of all harms) may be taken away.

There yet remains one principal respect and consideration for Magistrates
and Judges, which specially concerns the commonwealth: to take Francis
Patricius, in his book De institutione Lib. 1. tit. 8.
reipub. writes that they should Otij magis quam negotij rationem exigere: To
take more precise account of idle fellows then of laborers: which those naked
Gymnosophists that lived in India, did with all industry; for they were of
opinion that nothing could be more odious in any societies, states, or Cities,
Gymnosophists did always before meat examine their youth, how they had
employed that part of the day, and only permitted such to receive meat whose
exercises they did approve, thrusting such out of doors as had been found idle
or loyterers, that they might seek

Hence was that law amongst the Egyptians which Diodorus mentions Lib. 1.
bib. l^st.
that all the people were enjoined to make strict account unto the presedents
of every province, how they bestowed their times, and what arts they did
profess; each man's particular name and profession being entered into a book:
so that if any was found to give up a false account of his labors, or was
known to have loytered out his time, he received punishment of death; and this
was one of Dracoes bloody laws: for honest exercise and studies are a mean
to reduce, exorbitate, and prodigal affections to frugalitie: for sloathfull
and idle persons as Valerius writes, Mag is oneri quam honori sunt reipub:
Impose Lib. de tes^. cap. 2
idle fellows anciently amongst the Athenians were violently trayled into the
market place to receive punishment as grievous offenders. The like inquisition
was amongst the sage iuridicall Areopagites, which is in effect expressed by
Val^rius lib. 2. tit. de instit. antiq.
blessed Paul in one of his Epistles, that he which will not work, shall not
eat. These Areopagites whose offices were not unlike to the Roman Censors
took such care, that idle fellows should give strict account of their time
and profession employed and exercised. And this account of idleness was so
Valerius lib. 16.
great amongst our forefathers of former ages past, that they did not esteem
of any thing more shameful then idleness. For this cause therefore the
Philosopher Cleanthes carried water to get him bread: and this was it which made
Plantus that noble Comaedian to bake bread. Furthermore Sol^n enacted it that
the son was exempted from duty toward his father, if he by the fathers
means had not attained instruction in some science. The fruits or tokens
rather of this idle leprosy which drowneth, or rather as it were insensateth
the members of any Commonwealth, are luculently described by Salust in these
words: Dormire prias quam somni cupido est, non famem, non sitim, neque frigus
opperiri, sed ea omnia luxu anticapere: haec iun^tutem (vbi familiares opes
Coniur. Catil.
defecerant) adfacinora incendebant: To sleep before a man's eyes were heavy,
not to tarry till he were hungry, thirsty, or cold; but to prevent all
luxuriously: These disordered fashions when their own private wealth was
wasted, incensed, Salust in one other place says, Vbi socordiae te ignauiaeque
tradider is nequidquam deos implores, irati infestique sunt* It is in vain
that sloathfull and idle persons inuoke the gods, for they will be wrathful
and punish them. Wherefore all such vagrant and idle persons, as our statutes
have most prudently pointed out, are fittest for the galleys or banishment.
Nulla namque re alia improbi ab iniurio sa facinoro saque vit a magis
prohibentur quam prescriptionis mei^; quaeliberos ad egestatem perduca^: nam
male meritus publico exemplo ad terrorem malefactorum p^pertate laborare
cogitur: malefactors) are driven through extreme poverty to labor. Hence was
it that the noble Tragaedian writ, venit ad pigros canasenectus. Neither is it
fit that In Her. fur.
any idle fellows should live upon the commonwealths labors, unless their
labors be employed for the commonwealth; which even the course of nature in
little Bees teaches us, which will not suffer any Drone, or idle Be that
brings in no honey, either to eat out of their labors, or to live within
their wax.

I will not insist upon more observations, concerning the knowledge and
practice of Judges: desiring them that read this, not to impute my pains to
arrogancy in dealing with studies beyond my weak element, neither to any
other wants (which are manifold in it) considering that I have with
cheerfulness

The noble. Judges and Lawyers which have left unto us the knowledge of our
Common-lawes, having taken great pains for the comfort and benefit of this
Commonwealth, as is manifest by their written Books, and reports of the Law,
be Master Glanvile, Littleton, Fitzherbert, Brook, Dyer, Plowdon, and that
right worthy Lawyer of our time, Sir Edw. Cook, the Kings Attorney general.

The reverend Fathers and Judges in the Laws of our time, were Wray, Bacon,
Harper, Bromley, Manwood, Anderson, Egerton, and Popham: whose excellent

Diverse excellent men of great prudence, learning and hope for our own laws,
residing and studious in our houses of court, and otherwise dispersed through
his Majesty's dominions, adorn and beautify this Realm; whose names fit me
not here to insinuate. So that this Nation under Gods government, during good
Queen Elizabeth her reign, was enriched and roabed with the gold and purpure
of fortune and wisdom auspiciously combined together. And since her time with
his Majesty's high prudence, always studying

The Laws before King Edward the third his reign (as Glanvile and Bracton
record) and some which were established in the days of his father Edward of
Carnarvan, and of King Richard the second were written in Latin: but in the
first of King Edward the third his reign, who had, as it is known generally,
good and lawful right to the crown of France, and did retain diverse of those
Provinces in possession, were all of them written in French. Howbeit soon
after, to the end that the people might the better Anno 36. Reg. Edw. 3. cap.
15.
realm should be made in English, but entered and enrolled in Latin. And
so much in brief concerning the Legal counsel or court of Judges.

Finis libri tertij.
The fourth Book of Offices.
IT is commonly seen in the depraved condition of humane nature, that diverse
persons do vehemently desire to be reputed skillful, and excellently learned
in some commendable arts which they never attained. A vicious bindnesse
proceeding (as I deem) from pride innated, and from a certain dishonest kind
of sluggishnesse; when any man shall think, that he can buy the credit and
crave pardon for such omissions as will be found in this treatise frequently;

War being upon honorable grounds and with due deliberation undertaken, is
the constant and inestimable base of a blessed peace, rectifying, composing
Office of military Governors.
and perfecting all injuries, disorders, and imperfections in every state;
hence was it that sage Heraclitus did call war the father, king, and
sovereign of all creatures, reproving Homer for his ignorance, because he
prayed against (...) de (...) (...)
variance, and debate amongst gods, and men; holding opinion that the blind
Poet did (by so praying) curse the generation of all creatures, which according
to the grounds of our Philosophical reason does subsist of fighting and Lib.
1. In princ. cod ^ustiniani and in pro^. instit.
and laws together, arms have the first place.

Moreover, note it positiuely, that where military science and exercise is
frequent, there good laws are in most force and honor: for it maintains and
magnifieth every Commonwealth and state; without it, none have long flourished
or continued: and according to Thucydides, he that will not in tranquillity
Lib. 1. Conc. Cori^h.
of Tacitus. Sapientes pacis causa bellum gerunt; laborem spe otij ^ustentant:
nisi illam firmam efficis, vinci, an vicisse quid retulit etc. Wise men to
purchase peace levy war; they labor in hope of future ease: unless your
peace be firm, what avails it you to conquer or to be conquered. War is
therefore a multitude combined and assembled together in arms in one cause
united with a noble and needful resolution to resist and defeat all violence
which is opposed or urged against any king, kingdom, or their confederates.
Wherein first must be considered generally that which Salust writes. Omne ^ll*
Iugurth.
bellum facile sumi, caeterum ^gerrime desinere; non in eiusdem potestate
initium eius and finem esse: incipere cuiuis etiam ignauo licet; deponere vero
cum victores velint.

The foot or end of war therefore must be precisely looked upon, with the
top and occasion. For example, when it is soundly warranted by the Godly
wars.
which is principal being moved and assisted by divine spirit, against his
enemies: such as you shall find in ages not long past, which by the Emperor
(being confederated and united in force with the princes of Christendom) were
auspiciously stirred up ingenerall against the Turk, and against other
blasphemous opposites of Christ, and of his people: or in defense of the
Commonwealth, Nec^ssarie war^.
against all foreign invasions or impeachments of their natural liberties. As
it was in my remembrance provided by the dearly remembered n^rrice of this
Nation, Queen Elizabeth Pro aris and focis, against the puisant Armado of
Spain; which purposed a conquest of this Nation, and was confounded by the
spirit of God, moving in the winds and waters, against Tilburie, upon the
zeal and motherly love of Gods cause, and of the safeguard of his chosen people
under her scepter, as is everlastingly registered already with her soul above

Out of this brancheth a lawful kind of invasion upon foreign states, in
case of some honor or right which is unjustly detained by violent hand, after
Lawful wars.
that restitution has been peaceably demanded. As that which the right wise
and most renowned Prince, the beautiful president of peace, and the devouring
thunderbolt of war, King Edward the third (your Majesty's most worthy
Progenitor) breathed out against France: which martial lighttening was so
terrible that it devoured the disobedience of that people, and established him
in his right: which first was won with the weight of most honorable battle.
And those wars which the valorous French King Henry the third of France and
Poleland, against the Duke Du Main, great Chamberlain of France, with the
Duke of Parma and others; that resisted him in his hereditarie dominions,
until the Pope had restored him to the crown.

There is likewise a just war grounded upon charity, which undertakes Just
wars.
the protection of our friends or confederates. Such were they, which our
prementioned sovereign Lady lately levied to succor the Free-states of base
Unlawful warr^*
counterfeit grounds, and heads more fit for Turks, Infidels, or traitors,
then

The first and highest place of power and reputation in the field, the Prince
himself upon some principal causes in his own person houldeth; under whom
all other Generals and Captains are waged, and bear office. But for so much as
at this day few princes are seen militant in foreign countries, Elizabeth,
and provided against the invasion of King Philip Anno 1588. and for some other
particular reasons, I will pass over the particulars of his highest place in
martial Camp, referring my self to his commission; by virtue whereof, upon
ordinary terms of war, the Prince or Emperor deputeth his Lieutenant

The princes deep Judgment and discretion in electing of his Leiutenant
general, ought to be principally grounded upon good advice, and sure notice
taken of his sufficiency for such a place. First he should be a man of

The first is fidelity, rebounding from his dignities and noble education;
opposite to which stands infidelity issuing from avarice and malice: for
such as are covetous and malicious be faithless; and therefore by the laws
imperial not eligible to the place of Princes or Generals of Armies. Science,
(...) ind. verse. pro ^p. colum. 6.
the second garb of a noble Commander, conuerseth in the knowledge of hand
shall impose. By this he disposes of all advantages, which the places,
Coepola, be modesty, clemency, courtesy, ^uauitie, facility, temperance in
all actions accompanied with truth, innocence, justice, and liberality.
These honorable qualities amongst all soldiers conciliate unto the L. general
reputation or authority, Aeneas ha^teneth his soldiers languishing in their
extremities after Naufrage. Durate and vosmet rebus seruate secundis.


Intimating to them, that patience ingendreth prosperity, which (being the
Aenead. 1.
companion of counsel and reason, a precious gift of God, and the true
cognizance of divine favor; and not proceeding in any mean from humane
industry) may well suffragate with other gifts to the election of a General.

Besides all these, he must be known firm to the Prince and quarrel committed
to his decision: likewise he should retain that virtue in himself to give
life and courage to his battles, by the example of Valerius Coruinus, captain
of the Roman forces, then ready to join in conflict against the Sam^tes: who
wished them in his oration to repose every man in his own valor, Catiline
breathed upon his soldiers and companions (fainting in their former
resolutions) thus. None but conquerers will exchange war for peace: it were
madness in you to think that you can save your lives by sheathing those swords
which should defend you from the violence of such enemies, as pursue you with
slaughter; they which are in most fear stand in deepest danger: whereas
boldness is a brazen bulwark. But when I ponder your former actions and
resolutions (my brave soldiers) then do I make sure account of certain
victory, which is visibly presented to my spirit from your spirits, ages, and
honors proportionably: Add hereunto that present necessity which coyneth
courage out of Ca^e ne inul^i animam amittatis, neu captipotius sicuti pecora
trucidemini; quam virorum mod^ pugnantes, cruentam, at que luctuosam vtctoriam
hostibus re^quatis: Have a care that you loose not your lives unrevenged,
neither be taken prisoners like beasts destined to the slaughter; but that
fighting like valorous men you may leave unto your enemies such a dolorous and
lamentable spoil and victory, as may be bought to their cost. Such a kind of
adhortation, or vehement and impulsive persuasion does marueilously move and
spur forward the spirits of forlome soldiers upon desperate adventures: or
as that noble saying of Marius; animating his fellows in arms. Egomet in
agmine, in pr^ consultor idem, and socius periculi vobiscum adero; me vosque in
omnibus rebus iuxtageram. I my self (in the shock, and in the battle) will be
ready both to give you my best directions and advise, and to partake with you
fellowlike in all perils, and in all prosperous or desast^ous accidents, I will
personally share fortunes with you. Moreover it well sits with the grace and
good fortune of a General (after some good success, and victories attained by
his soldiers which will undoubtedly give great hartinesse and hopes to men in
arms, although their enemies much exceed them in number) to spur them
forward to noble battle by good example of that priest, by whose persuasion
the Israelites were set on fire with fortitude; and to banish fear,
faintness, and astonishment: For as much as the Lord went with them to fight
against their enemies, and to protect them. Howbeit the prowess of a General,
may not Deutron: 20.
only consist in gallant adhortation, fiery speeches, verbal blows, and
fierce menaces only; for such take more delight in the plausible volubilitie
of their tongues, then in the immortal valor of their hearts: but his
judgment also must be sound, and ripe, his valor noble, and perfect, his
wisdom divine, and vigilant; his assiduitie skillful, and profitable; his
heart frank and honorable, heroically despising earthly riches, as the very
corruption of all blessed minds on earth, and whatsoever tastes of this base
and humble putrefaction or mortality. For Generals which are blotted with
covetousness can never they shall find Alexander munificent, Caesar
magnificent, Cirus bountiful; and Scipio Africanus was a man that only
protested against the desire of money, and treasure, when (after his conquest
of all Afrike which he made tributarie to the Romans) he could not show any
spoils or booties of that war upon his return, but only the bare title of
Africanus, which enlarged and famoused his name. Good generals and captains
therefore should imitate such honor, as those two noble brethren Publius, and
Lucius Scipio, which were called the two thunderboults of war: for they
protested that neither the treasures of Carthage nor of all Asia could make
them auaricions; but that the riches (of which they were possessed, and had got
from others) did wholly consist upon emulation, Bonus Pauper, honorably
recorded in Plutarches histories: whose condition was to contemn riches so
far, that when certain Ambassadors from Philip King of Macedonia did present
unto him huge heaps of treasure, and kingly gifts, he did peremptorily
refuse them: the reguard of his own desert, nor the benefit of his children
(both which they did acknowledge unto him) would not enduce Phocion to receive
them: but out of his singular magnificence and magnanimity (dismissing the
legates laden as the came) answered them on this fashion. If my sons follow
their fathers example, this little land in my possession (which maintained me
in martial service Cirus, Alexander, and of other princes and commanders. In
like sort Marcus Curious after his triumphs over Pyrrhus had presented unto him
(sitting then to the fire) a great mass of gold, sent from the Samnites: but
his answer was, Cic. i^ Cat. mayor.
Non aurum habere praeclarum est, sed illis (qui aurum possident) imperitare.
It is not a glorious thing to be possessed of huge heaps of gold; but it is
most excellent to be lord over them which have it in possession.

Marius likewise gave all his spoils gotten at Vtica amongst his soldiers:
Salust cites it. Exparente meo and ex alijs sanctis viris accepi, munditias
mulieribus, viris laborem conuenire: omnibusque bonis opportere plus gloriae,
quam diuitiarum esse; arma non supellectilem decori esse. I have learned this
lesson of my father, and of other holy men; that curious and neat fashions are
fit for women, and that labor and hardenesse becomes men: moreover that all
good men should take more delight in glory then in riches; that armor and not
household furniture most decoreth and graceth a man. Likewise a general must be
constant himself in eager fight with incomparable valiancie; leading,
trayning,

The states and lives of princes and of their people may not be committed to men
exalted by birth or other desert and favor in those degrees only: but unto
men approved in these and such like heroical conditions. The knowledge (which
he must of necessity with all careful diligence and affection embrace) is
attained in judicious hearing, and observing of actions, from the true relation
of accomplished soldiers in their attempts, escairmo^ches, defenses, charges,
forms of battles, assaults, countermynings, sudden, close, and unexpected
camisadoes, fashions and ready forms of drawing themselves into squares, or
cubes,

The interior goodness and bounty (which accompanies him) is decently
garnished with temperance, innocence, faithfulness, gentleness, humanity,
prudence, and foresight; requiring a virtuous circumspection and doubt, as in
not committing any thing to the wheel of fortune, but upon inevitable
necessity, least his actions be racked upon it, as has been found in
Lamachus (who governing an Army) replied; that war might not permit one
fault twice. Temeritie therefore in martial actions, is both foolish and
unfortunate: howbeit, the General should always bestow himself in some
needful business being wholly governed in all his impreses by reason, without
any respect of fortune. For it is not in strength and audaciousnesse only,
whence victory must be derived, but in true courage and nobility: considering
that Omnis Offic. 1.
v^s nostrain animo, and corpore sit a est: alterum nobis cum dijs, alterum cum
belluis common: All humane force is planted in the mind, and in the body: by
the mental force we be fitly resembled unto the gods, by corporal strength
only to brute beasts: and you shall note it certainly, that those which put
most affiance in corporal strength, repose most in fortune and good luck, and
nothing in prudence. And hence was it that sapience is accounted as one
inseparable companion and captain over every General which directs him: for
those which trust in other force then that which is marshalled by sapience, be
like unto those of whom the Prophet Baruch speaks: And those Giants whom Cap.
3.
the Lord has not chosen perished, because they wanted wisdom. Whereupon
Trogus Pompeius says, Alexander victoriam obtinuit qui consilio gubernauit
exercitum: Lib. 11.
Alexander was a conqueror, because he governed his Armies by counsel. And
that excellent wise Poet Horace. Vim temperatam dij quoque provehunt. Lib. 3.
Ode 4*



And hence is it likewise, that the noble and true-sighted Poet Homer, in the
Lib. 2. Illi^d.
person of Agamemnon says; that he could with ease have sacked Troy, having
but ten such as Nestor, whose wisdom was the discipline of his war:
Considering how by sapience and prudent foresight, wise captains may with a
few handfuls triumph over many legions, and work out their honors in despite
of fortunes malignitie: which accords well with those common Proverbs:
Sapiens sibi fortunam fingit and dominabitur astris: A wise man will shape out
his own fortune, as he would have it, and will antiuert the fatal influence
of his Scipio was, whom Fabius therefore accused to the Senate, as a corruptor
of the Roman military discipline. Austeritie therefore procures obedience
toward Generals (although their severity be disliked) which being well
attempered with courteous behavior, wins grace and love. This by the
Leiutenant Anniball (which Liuie records) when his soldiers in pursuit of
the Numidians, had passed the great river Trebia, and being 2. belli Pun^i lib.
1. (...). 3.
wind which then in winter bet upon them, and partly with the water which took
them up to the breast) that at night before every Tent Anniball caused a great
fire to be made, and sent oil unto his soldiers to molifie their bodies being
aggealed with cold extremely: by which means, and presently with good
victuals refreshed and cherished (as it is generally noted throughout in the
care and prudence of Anniball) the next morning they became forward,
serviceable, and eager of battle. His tenderness toward them wanne that
love in their hearts, as being otherwise a man of severe discipline amongst

There is a needful kind of discipline required in generals and chieftaines,
which punishes private wrongs in their soldiers mutually done amongst
themselves: for otherwise they would fall to quarrels, disgraces, factions, and
mutinies. Insomuch as if they be well disciplined (what with experience, and
partly by good example grounded thereupon, namely when the Laws of Arms are
severely distributed, and executed upon such with death, with corporal
punishment, or pecuniarie mulct, according to the qualities of their faults
which either shall show disobedience toward those Officers under whose charge
they serve, or shall fight in Camp or within the precincts thereof,

Infinite of these examples in my knowledge and such as are vulgarly known
Diogenes, to beat the schoolmaster for a fault in the scholar, as Pausanias
did, who being a very beautiful youth in the court of Philip K. of Macedon
great Alexanders father did suffer, or was forced with violence of Attalus one
of the king his minions for the b^astly staunching of his unnatural lust: of
which filthiness having made hanious complaint unto the king (who did not
only neglect the punishment* but did afterward advance that preposterous
villain to the place of a presedent over some province) Pausanias gathering
with indignation daily more and more poison of strong despite upon such
apparent injustice, at the marriage of King Philips daughter with the prince of
Epirus, before the Alexander amongst a thousand armed persons of the guard he
desperately murdered him. Soldiers therefore as I said before, will through
the captains industry become serviceable and valiant.

Such therefore as propose honor for the meed of their travels are cold,
resolute, of a quiet and unbroken spirit, knitting up all their virtues in that
action to which the whole force of mind and body must be bent: not fighting to
win the girland for others, but principally proposing the wagers honor for
themselves: and hence happens that mercenaries cannot combat with that true
courage and martiall-alacritie which native contrimen will: for they fight only
for a little wages; and such venture of life, and hazard of themselves will not
serve Tullus Hostilius successor people; and through them attained conquest.
Likewise king Henry of Monmouth William the first, for his right in the Crown
of France, used his own English soldiers, and returning laden with triumphs
and victories obtained by them, that during all the days of his father, and
for thirty years space before had not worn any warlike furniture: whereas in
contrary, the French had been exercised in continual war against the
Italians, and assisted or oppressed rather with those hirelings of Swizzerland.
The best form of fighting in war was in making of great battles, being
composed of the most approved men in field for valor, placed in the maine
battle or middle body of the host: for men which being united fight
together in multitudes, be much more valiant by nature then in small companies
or handfuls.

Also the special thing which hangs upon the discipline and honor of the
General, is that the soldiers be duly paid their wages, and relieved with
victuals, which wins in them a dutiful kind of reverence and awful respect
of their governors. This love in them exceeds the force of gold, and the
power of all opportunities and occasions, which can happen by times or places.
For that which maintains wars commonly proceeds from contribution of the
people toward the common defense against foreign violence; and this lasts no
longer then they can be defended. Likewise all places naturally munited and
fortified are nothing without the willing aid of men valiant to defend them by
force: considering that treasure is won by the Petro de Medici to conserve
and augment, the empire which he would have had him have sought for, consist in
manning of the strong cities with soldiers, borne in the same provinces, in
conciliating the friendship and societies of neighbors, in planting colonies
for defense upon the skirts of their newly subdued provinces,

For some princes might under counterfeit pretext force men to defend their
own, pretending a right in some things not belonging unto them: The
mainten^nce whereof may give occasion unto them, which execute

There yet appendeth this discipline of soldiers, one principal respect of
the captains, that neither they crush nor excoriate the poor husbandman,
which I partly touched in the Morals of my second Book: for if it may be said
unto fraudulent mercha^ts (whose consciences are blasted with a covetous
lethargy) Whether O ye fools shall your souls travel? What then may be
spoken of such soldiers, that neither being contented with their stipend, or
wages, nor with meat and drink when they be faint with marching long iourneies

For the preservation of the weal, and security of Armies from fear and
Demetrius Poliorcetes, who having been a great friend and faithful anchor of
the Athenians, yet (being unfortunately vanquished by his enemies) Athens that
ungrateful Demetrius was more vexed then for the loss of his whole estate.
And likewise Pompey being vanquished by Caesar, fled to Ptolemie king of Egypt,
whom he some years before had restored, and planted in his kingdom: but for
such his goodness toward him, Ptolemie took away his life. Which if
ingratitude may do, Princes, and Generals should not think but that in
truces, leagues, confederacies, and pactions (which are but temporary,
conuentions, or accords, without any sufficient hostages, sureties, cautions,
or pledges delivered) if danger and loss of the whole army depend thereupon,
little hope will remain of keeping Salust against Catiline, Vict is nihil
praeter iniuriae licentiam eripiebant Romani: The Romans took nothing from
them whom they subdued, but a license or power to do them harm. If any
spoils were gotten, them they brought into the public treasury for
maintaining of the soldiers, and casing of the peoples tributes; so that the
Romans were enriched and bettered by their wars. Neither was it permitted
that any Consul (albeit he had in sundry noble battles and victories amplyfied
the Empire) should pass in pomp and triumph thorough the City, unless he
brought with him into the common treasury infinite spoils of gold and silver
also.

How soldiers ought to be resolved in battle, and to demean themselves by
direction of their captains, is spoken of sufficiently before: only this must
Quinctius the Consul used in his battles against the Volscians. For he finding
his soldiers incline in the vaward, cried unto them Why turn you faces in the
front (my good soldiers) considering that they which fight in the rear have
got the victory. Remember my good fellows your honor which is laid up (as
you know) in the bosoms of your enemies, from whence you must eagerly win it
with your weapons. This sudden speech of his did add such courage to them,
that with a valiant resolution uniting and knitting up all their forces
together, they became Lords of the field.

In the City Perugia there was a faction, betwixt the families of the Oddi Ni^
Macch. lib. 3. ded. scorsi sopra^ed. T^lo. Ly^.
and Baglioni, in opposition mortally divided; but the Oadi being more weak,
were banished by that State: howbeit in the nightime, by means of certain
their friends within the town, they got entrance privily, purposing with
their forces to possess the market place; and to that end had one to go

In such sort Iugurth seeing the state of his battles desperate, upon the
coming in of Bocchus, struck terror into the hearts of his enemies, by
speaking in the Latin tongue (which Language he had learned at Numantia) that
the field was his, that to resist his forces was in vain, that a little before
he had slain Marius with his own hands, and therewithal pretending that it
was brought from the slaughter of Marius, showed his sword yet smoking and dyed
Salust. Bell^ugurth.
with blood. Moreover, this ought specially to be noted in fight, that he which
can patiently sustain the first charge, and yield with calm temper to the
rage of his enemies (though they betwise in number so many) may spend

Likewise if the soldiers be discouraged in fight, either by some negligence
or other occasion loose the field: it is great wisdom in the General
religiously Julius Caesar did in his wars against the Galls, when he from a
faint thearted soldier that doubted of victory, did snatch a shield, where
withal covering Beleses a Babilonian, skillful of the Caldean auguries and
divination, who by the stars presaged a subversion of the Assyrian monarchy*
Arbaces and his soldiers (after that Sardanapalus had thrice vanquished him in
battles before) to persist and continue force against him with fresh
supplies: which he did, happening according to the soothsayers prediction; but
more as me seems through pusillanimitie which dejected the prince being then
fortified within Niniue, who feared an old oracle, which he thought was
fulfilled in falling of some part of the cities wall. And certain it is that
the force of religion will vehemently move soldiers to continue valiant in
assurance of victory, by diverse examples out of Liuie, when their estates were
most desperate and remediless; yielding a divine force and light unto their
actions, if the captains can by stratagemmes to themselves only known,
harden their resolutions to perform what they shall devise, Machabees:
Jonathan rent his raiment, and Lib. 1. cap. 11.
having be smeared his head and face with earth, fell to prayer, and then
returned unto the battles of his armies, and put his foes to flight. And as it
is written likewise in Exodus: When Moses lifted up his hands and prayed,
Israel had the better over Cap. 17.
his enemies. And they (which after such sacred preparations and resolutions
Judas Macchabeus, which all the nations of the world from those to these days,
even to the dissolution of this universal nature natured, shall most honorably
recommend and remember.

For the beleaguriag, surprising, taking in, and fortifying of towns,
bulwarks, castles, fortresses, sconces, and other defenses, I refer it
likewise to the knowledge of captains and soldiers experienced. Only this
for that we read it from the wisdom and sacred institution of God in
Deutronomie: Cap. 20.
that at sh'assiege of any city captains should first offer peace; and if
they that be distressed make peaceable offers, or offer peaceable conditions
they should have peace granted unto them, and be made tributaries and
servants unto their conquerers: but if they should in obstinate heart continue
war, then should the adversary maintain his siege: For says he, God will
deliver them into thyhands; then put all the male children to sword, reserving
the women and all other goods for thy service and commodity. Cut not down any
fruit trees, for they shall serve for thy comfort and sustenance; but of all
other trees which are fit to further the assiege and serve for fortification,
to make bridges, or to staunche moates and ditches.

The Romans in surprisall or taking in of cities, would not endure the Scipio
took in Carthage: or if with more time then they did use Vide Liuiu^ 26. Vide
Liuium lib. 5.
rams, engines, underminings; as the city Veij was won by raising up of
wooden frames or turrets higher then the walls from whence the soldier might
wound and distress with diverse darts, arrows, slinges, crossebowes and other
weapons, such as kept within the walls for defense and maintenance of the
city: insomuch as the walls being battered with rams, the

The course of winning such places (as before I noted) is by mixed force or
stratagemme; as also by secret conspiracies or confederacies, as in corrupting
(which is indeed the carcass of a kingdom) may not only be grievously
Vlissingen should have been taken in, Sir Robert Sidney Vicount Lysle
Governor, having had notice of the treachery by very strange means and
unexpected, by which the plots may be confounded. Certain places may be won
by train under trust: as Amiens was taken by the stratagemme of carts, about
nine years sithence. To stand longer upon such devises being so frequent and
well known to military governors and masters, were entirely needless,
referring them to Caesar, Thucydides and Liuie, whose Hystories are fully
furnished with matter of that nature.

In the assiege of any Town or Piece whatsoever being strongly munited, the
principal course is to begin with all violence, and to take away from the
besieged all future means and hopes of lingering and protracting succors. For
the procrastination or protraction of one day, or hour in such services
(whereby the distressed Citizens or soldiers might have been relieved in the
delay) may draw with it sufficient opposition to remove the assiege, and to
deliver the places from all danger. It is also most perilous in contrary to the
defense and fortification of any Town (being vehemently beleaguered by force)
to linger out in hope of succors, until they come to the very center of all
extremity; for then remedies and means of all sorts

In th'assiege of Zama, the Romans under Marius (as Salust writes) used Bell.
Iugurth.
this kind of fight (wherein is viuely set forth the true manner of those
ancient Romans in scaling of cities, or castles walls, and in defense of
them) Pars eminus glande aut lapidibus pugnare, alij succedere, ac murum modo
suffodere, modo scalis aggredi, cupere praelium manibus facere. Contra oppidani
in proximos saxa voluere, sudes, pilas: praeterea picem and sulphur taedam
mistam ardenti mittere; plero squeiaculis, tormentis, rebusque manu emissis
vulnerabant: Some of them from far fighting did throw from their engines
bullets or gun-stones, others succeeded, and sometimes undermined the walls,
and otherwhiles attempted to scale them with ladders, desiring to have them
brought to battle at hand. In contrary those that were within the town, did
throw stones upon them that were nearest within their reach; likewise they did
cast sharp stakes or billets, and darts; likewise balls of burning pitch, and
torches dipped in brimstone: diverse persons they did wound and hurt with
arrows, engynes, and other things throne by strength of arm.

In the conquest and surprisall of Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, or Castles,
the true touch of a noble General is seen, in his prohibiting and cohibiting
Scipio Africanus upon his surprisall of Carthage. For (having at the sack
thereof a captive virgin of incomparable Robert Deuereux late Earl of Essex,
Anno 1596. declared at Cadiz: where like a true Scipto both in valor and
discipline, he left the spoils of that town in special to his soldiers
reserving for himself as his own share inualuable, a right renouned and
infinite bruit of his victories, which upon that felicity like a cannon shot
suddenly battered and made a breach in the rebated spirits of Spain: the
report of which noble piece Philip the second An. 1588.) with another harsh
taunt more bitterly relished. By which means the fame of that noble warrior
grew so great, that our Sovereign (which had not been known to diverse
Potentates of this world) was by the bruit of his valor and victories made
famous, and immortal also. I cannot sufficiently set down what in my
judgment, and by the relation of very just and wise men of his secrets I have
considered and conceived of that noble warrior: Howbeit thus much as the least
of my just obsequies to so renou^ed a Lord, he Tacitus written as a position
infallible to be Quam formidolosum sit priuati hominis gloriam supraprincipis
attolli: Which might be verified also by the example of David, who (though
protected by the great providence of God) being but a shepherd (as I touched
in my second Book) to reign in Israel; yet was (notwithstanding all his
virtues, and honor in marrying king Saul his daughter) in danger to loose his
life, by many treacherous conspiracies and attempts of his unthankful father in
law. But that I may speak somewhat all noble natures: I say thus much, which
they (that wisely did know him) Salust describes Sylla, so did he become
precious in presence of his soldiers. From his childhood he was hardened
with exercise, taking pleasure and some travail and labors which other men
for the most part would have reputed miseries and calamities. office and
charge; and would not endure, if by any means, counsel, or engine Tacitus did
write of Julius Agricola: decentior quam sublimior fuit, nihil metus in vultu,
gratia oris supererat, bonum virum facile credideres, magnu^ libenter. He was
tall and in authority, yet was he more comely then lofty: in his forehead and
countenance much valor and boldness were imprinted and expressed, his looks
were very gracious; they that had iudiciously beheld him, would have easily
believed that he was a very good

First therefore let all conditions of peace or truce with any people besieging
Solomon says that in war prudence is principally to be required. And
Vergetius, he that can show many martial scarres and virtuous marks of honor
Lib. 1. cap. 2. in (...).
in his body, seems gracious and acceptable in sight of them that are truly
noble. It is likewise written, that Antipater of Idumaea which had served
^hist. Sc^olast.
in a captains place long, during the wars of king Herod's father was accused
of treason against the emperors person, and being appealed before him to make
answer, opened a loose garment (wherewith he was then arrayed) discovering the
skarres of diverse grievous wounds received in and upon his body with these
speeches. I will not with verbal excuses clear my self great Emperor, but
in steed of words let these wounds, whose mouths are extant, and now closed,
by signs declare my love and allegiance toward Caesar received him to grace,
and would not any further proceeding against his honor: and without doubt there
is no such glory to the renown of a soldier, as honorable skarres and
atchieuements of many battles, according to that noble saying of Marius: Non
possum fidei causa imagines neque triumphos aut consulatus maiorum ostentare,
at sires postulat hastas, vexillum, phaleras, alia militaria dona, praeterea
cicatrices aduerso corpare. Hae sunt meae imagines, haec mea nobilitas non
haereditate relicta, vt illa illis, sed quae ego plurimis meis laboribus and
periculis quaesiui; doctus sum hostem ferire, praesidia agitare, nihil metuere
praeter turpem fama^: hyemem and aestatem iuxta pati, humi requiescere, eodem
temporeinopiam and laborem tollerare: hijs ego praeceptis milites hortabor;
neque illos arcte colam, me opulenter, neque gloriam meam laborem illorum
faciam: hoc est vtile, hoc civil imperium. I cannot make true declaration of
the images, triumphs and consulships of my progenitors: but if need require I
can bring forth lances, and ensigns, caparisons, and other martial honors
bestowed upon me for my deserts in war, and wounds which I received upon my
body in conflict with enemies. These are my images, this is my nobility not
left by inheritance as other men have had their honors; but these my dignities
have I with my many labors and perils sought and attained: I have learned how
to wound mine adversary, to raise Garrisons, to stand in fear of nothing but
of bad report: to bear with patience, cold and heat alike, to sleep Marius
will hearten and encourage Generals and captains unto true discipline and
virtues.

These and such qualities of the like heroical nature made the Romans
victorious, inciting and pricking up their soldiers to pains and valor.
Neither would these renouned Roman Generals (as I have partly noted elsewhere)
oppress or deal extremely with any people whom they conquered, but they did
repute it to be their greatest majesty to prohibit injuries, and not is more
like to Latrociny then true war. Horsemen in confused troops without

And albeit the fortune of war consists always upon difficult and uncertain
terms, yet most certain it is that true valor mingled with absolute
discipline in soldiers, makes a tryumphant Monarchy. For what more excellent
spectacle can there be to them that are Lords and conquerors, through their
good disposition and government, then in the open fields to pursue

But for so much as true fortitude, which is lincked in the golden armelet of
other Moral virtues, and participateth with the rest is one and the noblest
Counselor, and executioner of all the worthy designs of a prudent General:

Fortitude is an affection or habit of the mind, which undergoing all
honorable dangers, labors, and mischieous hazards considerately, represseth
fear and wrath: the corporal enemies of it are sickness and poverty,
mental Seneca seems to witness. Quemcunque miserum videris hominem scias,
Seneca in Herc. furent.

Quemcunque fortem videris miserum neges.
Those that are vexed with miseries are men:
They that are valiant feel no miseries.


The extremes of fortitude are temeritie and timerousnesse: rashness
attempteth Horace the Poet excellently counsels in this case.

Rebus angustis animosus atque
Fortis appare: sapienter idem
Contrahes vento nimium secundo
Turgida vela:
Let courage and true strength appear in troubles: if in thy ships stern, a
stiff gale blow prosperously skanten thy sails. Herein prudence is fitly
joined Aristotle defines) depending upon fortune, when people Lib. 3. ad
Nichom.
become fearelesse through want of a due foresight and precaution of perils,
which sort of persons are ignorantly valiant: some there are which armed in the
strength and goodness of their cause and conscience do show good valor;
certain which heartened in a kind of fortitude by their skill, and use in
ready practice of weapons; others imboldened unto valorous exploits in hope of
victory, by their natural strength and artificial agilitie; many that in
regard of their often adventures and escapes are hardened; but very valor

Stoutnesse and magnanimity which undertakes and endures all difficulties
with patience and perseuetance, being the substance and essence thereof,

Stoutnesse is a steadfast confidence of mind, armed with assured trust and
hope in great and honorable actions. Audaciousnes contrarieth it without
consideration, judgment, and respect of honesty, violently and rashly
precipitating it self into perils: whereas stoutnesse attempted with reason,
wary respect, great boldness and moderation of the mind being inseperately
fastened unto virtue nobly works in the turbulent seas of danger.
Pusillanimitie which is a base deiection or rather desperation of the mind
opposes it, yet commonly pursuing temeritie, by the example of Philip late
King of Spain, which (amongst other his unadvised attempts, wherein the salt
of wary premeditation was forgotten) luculently, to Gods unspeakable glory
Elizabeth might in the terror of that overthrow Castillian courages, have
easily with a small power subjected that nation thereupon.

Magnanimity being the greatness of a mind invincible and mighty, the noble
strength and steadfastness in execution of great and weighty matters, does
support and corroborate stoutnesse. Know therefore that heart to be noblest and
most honorable in quest of all virtues, which is open, simple, without
hypocrisy, grave, modest, repressing pride, merely great, forgetful of
injuries done to it self, gentle, aiming at eternity, contemning terrestrial
benefits, readier to give then to receive, more studious of just praise then
profit. For this kind of nobility, contemns that greatness which the
profane and adverse chances when a man is not altered through either, but
endures

Haughtiness aspiring from a stubborn and fastidious spirit, and heart swollen
up with the poison of pride, which violently rauisheth humane reason, and base
abiection being the vileness and filth of mind are dangerous outlawes,
trangressing beyond the borders of magnanimity. From the first marches
braggerie, foolish boasting and ostentation which issues from fol^e blinded in
loving conceit and admiration of some worthiness which they misconceiue in
themselves; being a most ridiculous vice to be represented in interlude by the
person of Thraso, wholly repugnant to goodness and modesty, hateful in the
thoughts of all honest men, and acceptable to parasites Sardanapalus and Heliog
abalus did. Unto these already mentioned, add a desire of good fame; opposite
to which is ambition, and neglect of honest report, of impudency: but a
moderate desire of honor which is placed betwixt ambition and the contempt of
dignity merely proceeding from a mind that aspireth to the reward of her
virtues, is in my judgment laudable and ambicious: if I dare make a maxim
positiuely of Aristotle holds ambiguously for a paradox. But to conclude with
this virtue magnanimitic, Philosophers think it to be the rule how to desire
and seek for honor by due desert, moderating and directing humane appetite in
the acquisition of great and mighty matters: her sisters accompaning are
humility, patience, magnificence, and mansuetude, which is a calm spirit
interset betwixt wrath and indulgence: the means to restrain wrath and hatred
are, not to be covetous of vengeance, seldom though sometimes upon just cause
to be angry, to wrong and vex no man, for envy depends upon wrath.
Security and license of sin follows excessive indulgence:

Patience which is a virtue, fencing and preparing a soldiers mind against all
wounds inflicted in fight, teaches a General, and all sorts of soldiers, how
to strengthen, exercise, and encourage themselves in all commendable hardness
and difficulties; as noble Cato of Vtica did in Afric instruct his soldiers,
how to bear themselves amongst a swarm of mortal stings, and how to suffer
heat, hunger, and thirst, sickness; for this virtue fenceth and prepares his
mind against all wounds inflicted in fight: and Quintus Fabius likewise whom I
mentioned in my second book. That General therefore which is verily valiant,
will in the effusion and smoking current of his own blood (that the same. He
likewise that can with most ingenious fortitude discover, avoid, Vegetius
specially requires in the fanteries: if therefore this be considered,
Vtifortem animu^ gerant, quantoque sibi in praelio minus pepercissent tanto
tutiores fore: that they bear a valiant spirit, and that Cicero defines)
consist in suffering continual and voluntary toil, and hardness upon honest
profitable terms, which is a firm and constant toleration of humane affairs,
when with a mind and spirit unbroken, we bear all calamities which may happen:
this long sufferance of grief and travail must be grounded upon some honest
cause: for if under the reverend and demure roabes thereof, hatred, wealth or
honor, being riotous and ruffionlike companious be concealed, then is Patience
is victory: for in repressing his own affection, a man both subdueth himself
and his adversary; whereas in contrary being subjected and made a vassal unto
the scourge of his own appetites, he wilfully submits himself to that
brutish yoke, being provoked by wrath and desire: only let us neglect wrong,
and it is easily vanquished leaving vengeance to the benefit of time, and to
the powerful judgment of the great judge and avenger. For according to
blessed Paul, In having patience we do the will of Hebr. 10.
God, by which we receive the promise of salvation. And Solomon that oracle of
wisdom, confirming it in a parable, or wise concealed sentence, says, That
he which is slow to wrath, is better then the mighty man, and he that rules
the mind Prou. 16.
exceeds a conqueror of cities.

Moreover God himself, when he descended in a cloud to Moses, proclaimed his
mercy manifested in patience, when he cried before his face. The Lord, the
Lord is strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and full of goodness
and truth, reserving mercy for thousands; forgiving sin and iniquity. And
Exodus 34.
thence is it that holy Paul calls him the God of patience and consolation,
which ensues it, admonishing the Thessalonians in another place to be patient
toward Romans 15. Chap. 5.
all sorts of men. Patience therefore being a principal member of fortitude
gives us a conquest and possession of our own souls in peace, and comfort:
poverty, exile, loss of parents, friends, children, sorrow, reproach, contempt,
servitude, grievous sickness, blindness with all the miserable defects
Aristotle terms effeminate) I cannot hold to be verily valiant; whereas it is
the part of true valor to bear in equal balance of mind m^hiefe, and
prosperity; a sure token of cowardice and idleness also, to distrust, faint,
or filthily to be dejected in troubles. Impacience (which is the softness of a
mind echewing labor, and the tolleration of dolor) opposes it: such as are
afraid to take pains and to be grieved (thinking sorrows insufferable, which
patience teaches us to tolerate) are in this opposition: and such likewise as
cannot bear honors and prosperity with moderation (but become insolent
without measure) are in as much

Perseverance likewise is another branch of fortitude, being a constant,
perpetual, and considerate apprehension of reason conuersing in the former
perfections, repressing their contraries, and yoaking them to discretion: for
without constancy and equabilitie (which is the geometrical proportion, from
the center to the just circumference of fortitude) no man can be called truly
valiant. Lenity with a giddy disposition of humane affairs withstandeth it:
this either through effeminacie does unadvisedly yield it self prisoner to
troubles, and cannot endure the burden of them; or with pertinacitie (when
reason ought to change it) does arrogantly and contumaciously persist in a

Casar extolleth this noble gift of perseverance in a souldior, whereas in
contrary, Caes lib. 8. c^m. belli Gallic. G. Bened. in rep.
the coward and he which forsakes his colors is punished with death. Also
mutual love and charity should be dispersed amongst them, so that as they
partake in pains and passion they should likewise persevere, declaring
themselves companions in consolation; according to the saying of blessed Paul.
Military charity depends upon two special points; upon the ayding Corinth.
1.
and seconding of our fellow soldiers in extremities, and upon constant
perseverance in maintenance thereof, when truth and equity stand with their
quarrels. Lucas de Penna in L. fortissimi col. prim.


There be certain of the liberal Sciences likewise most needful, toward
the knowledge of all martial Governors: namely, the studies of Arithmetic
and Geometry. The first entreats of discreet numbers, and quantities very
behoofull for a Captain; and so requisite, as no merchants or treasurers of
Princes can in their places have more use of supputation then this required
Pithagoras (more then all other Philosophers) wondered at so much, placing it
in the mind of the mightiest God, when he fitted himself first to the
structure of those miraculous and incomprehensible works in the creation of
heaven and earth: he did verily believe and confirmed men in that his opinion;
how all creatures were made of numbers, showing many strange things by
mystical and hidden arts, which consisted upon the accrescence and decrescence
of numbers. Our fathers thought that, only man (all other creatures excepted)
was capable of number, for that he was wisest of all. This art consists in
conference of paritie with imparitie, in even and odd, the numbers either
equal or unequal together, or equal by separation, also superfluous
deminished and perfect. Livy, Caesar, Thucydides, Polibius, Plutarch, Euclides,
Vegetius, Frontinus, with such others as learnedly can explain and discourse
of these with sound judgment, and better

Geometry likewise orders and proportioneth forms, bodies, and their
dimensions by discreet lines: out of lines, the superficies or outward faces;
and from the^ these bodies which are called cubes. This art by measuring of
heaven and earth, leaves nothing unsearched which humane reason can apprehend
in that faculty: to this art are referred all linearie demonstrations, the
coherence or knitting together of elements, whether trianguler, quadranguler,
multanguler, or aspiring in piramidicall fashion. Hence was it that the
Egyptians did reverence as divine idols, the forms of Cubes and Circles, in
their superstitious ceremonies performed to those profane gods Osiris and Isis.
Plato caused this inscription to be set upon the gate of that Academie where he
professed: that, No man ignorant of Geometry should enter therein. And in all
the best and ancientest Schools of the Greeks and Romans the nobler sort of
youth and children after their first milk wear studiously taught in the
science of Arithmeticke and Geometry, by which the learned fathers of former
ages did illustrate and give light to all most difficult obscurities and hidden
reasons of causes: for by considering how this art does from a point or center
being indivisible, extend and draw forth lines circumferent, Rhombus,
Rhomboydes, Piramides, Spheres, and other strange forms in diverse analogies.
They did find how needfully this art served in fit proportion of harmony, for
uniting, fashioning and ordering of all Clitarchus) audaciousnesse is an
excess beyond the measure of humane strength and reason; yet he which
prudently respects his own end, will upon honorable grounds voluntarily
pursue perils, as I said before.

If therefore the General would have his soldiers ambitious of honor, and
victory, he must work out their resolution, and with virtuous example in
himself apparent encourage their actions. For if he will industriously
consider, and declare his true force (which is in most high reputation fixed)
he shall find it very possible for him to infuse power sufficient to his
soldiers, for performance of any reasonable action in their charge, working
first confidence Ad lacum regi^lum, did in their wars against the Latins,
and by that means attained victory: for the footmen are apt and ready for any
straitor sinuous place into which their horses cannot have passage: Lucullus
with a small battle of foot overthrew 40000. horsemen of Tigranes; whereof
diverse were cataphracts, which as me seems happened more by default of the
beasts, the^ of the riders, though both miscarried: and yet want of skill and
judgment in the rider is the next fault (in my judgment) to cowardice. The
fauteries there of being in principal place of service are to be cheerfully
cherished and disciplined above others.

There is also required in the General, one special point toward the
corroboration of his soldiers hearts. First to show religion in the observing
and performing articles and promises: secondly that upon the point of service
he declare unto his soldiers in honest and familiar words of comfort, the
readiest and easiest means of victory, wherein it behooves him to conceal
all impediments; or (if they be pregnant) then to extenuate them by some
cheerful and ingeniou excuse, which has in it a strong taste of a true
fortitude. These with some other heads, such as before and after are expressed
(as occasion offers) will generally renown the General, and further the
victory. There are some soldiers which have a virtuous boldness and
ferocitie C^sar with Tacitus and Liuie have noted in the nature and battles of
the Galls, being merely foolish and unprofitable. The third sort is of those
which are not possessed either of order, discipline, or authority; of that
kind are those Indians at this day, which answer in subjection to the King of
Castille: for it were impossible

This weakness in soldiers proceeds from pusillanimitie, being a base
abiection of the mind, or a foolish and faint de^ection of the will in ^ying
Hercules, and in this force are humane labors nourished. This teaches a
General what the state and condition of his enemies, and how to catch them:
which Epaminondas the Thebane reputed the greatest honor in a captain, by
winning Brutus and Cassius in the like case; these did not look unto the event
of their battle before it came to trial: for Cassius misconceiuing that
Brutus had been overthrown, and

From this florisheth out his diligence, patience, prudence, mildness,
sternenesse, subtlety, simplicity, wariness, promptness, liberality, with
many more branches of true virtue springing together, out of that one most
bountiful root. This also teaches him his knowledge concerning the
i^structions of battles of all fashions; for even as stones, tiles, beams, and
rafters of wood are by good order and disposition of the workman, knit,
confirmed and kept from putrefaction, in such case are armies. By this is he
taught boldness against enemies, favor toward friends, and reason with
counsel in oppo^tunitie. This makes a wise Captain to meditate with
Philopoemon Prince of the Achaeans, who did exercise himself in warlike
practice, specially Ephicrates to raise a rampire composed with a vaste moate,
when no danger or enemy could be feared, saying that it was a disgraceful
thing in a General (when need should suddenly require a defense) to say,
these accidents which are, were not premeditated.

But amongst all noble exercises in times peaceable (of most profit, pleasure,
and honor, and seemly befitting a prince) the knowledge of places and
countries is most requisite, which chiefly and most readily is got by practice
of hunting: for in following of the wild bore, the stagge, the fox, the hare
and such like beasts of game, certain martial accidents are resembled in many
things, according as Xenophon in the life of Cyrus (at that time when he
should hauel euied forces against the king of Armenia) describes him,
reasoning and arguing with his companions of that service which he was to
perform, and of all things accommodated thereunto; by resembling of them which
take refuge upon the mountains, to those that pitched toils and snares for
wild beasts, comparing them that eskairmouched upon the plains, with Salust
(writing somewhat concerning the exercise which Iugurth did use) commends him
Non se luxui neque inertiae corrumpendu^dedit sed (vti mos gentis illius est)
equitare, iaculari, cursu cum aequalibus certare: and cum omnes gloria
antecelleret omnibus tamen charus esse. Ad hoc pleraque tempora in venando
agere, leonem atque ali^ feras primus aut imprimis ferire, plurimum facere, and
minimum ipse de se loqui: He did not give himself over to be corrupted with
lust or sluggishnesse, but as the fashion is of that country, to ride, to
shoot, to run in race with his equals, and albeit he did exceed all of them
in glory, yet every one of them did love him. Moreover he bestowed much time
in hunting, he would be the first man or the surest man which gored, wounded,
or paunched the Lion and other wild honor of peace and war rests in his
person) the wise judgment of a Philip great Alexanders father said, That a
battle of Lions which were governed by a Stagge, could not be so good as an
host of stagges under the conduct of a Lion: for of Cowards (having able
bodies) a gallant General may with some convenient pains and good discipline
make victorious warriors; as Epaminondas and Pelopidas did of the Thebanes, by
whom Spartans; and albeit in regard of their long slavery some deemed them
unfit for military service, yet did these Captains so labor in disciplyning
of them, as they did prove soon after able, and vanquishers over them, that so
tyrannized over them before. In honor of which nation, and upon their good
success it was written, how not only the Lacedaemonians but even all other
sorts of people would become gallant fellows and victorious through good
martial instruction and practice, which ought to proceed at all times both in
peace and war. For men which are skillful in the practice and exercise of
Arms, will not stand in awe of their enemies, because no man fears to do
that, wherein he knows himself

It is also common in nature, that in laudable qualities (especially where
multitudes may be witnesses of their excellent readiness and resolution) men
loftily will perform the parts of their cunning with great hope, whereas the
rude and unexercised souldior is like a sheep exposed to slaughter. Hence is
it that Vegetius says, that use in war avails more then s^ength and
armor. 1^ cap. lib. de re mulitari.
The special companions of martial discipline and ve^tue which administer
honor and reputation to Captains and soldiers, are labor in business,
fortitude in perils, temperance in desires, indust^ie in doing, celeri^ie in
dispatching, counsel in providing. The greatest benefit in a General
Menander, that he which is not experienced in military discipline having
command of armies does bring ^oorth thousands of men for a sacrifice to their
enemies: if therefore the soldiers be negligent, idle, or unexperienced in
their service and use of weapons, or in keeping of their ranks, marches, or
forms, discipline is required with comp^tent severity, a^well toward
inferior Captains in their private transgr^ssions, by ^assiering them of their
charge (which is to some noble spirits much more great disgrace, and reforming
that loss and omission: and if they be slack in discipline Galba, so speeches
and Proverbs may pass curra^t of him in those armies where he governs Disce
milis are miles, Galba est, non Getulicus* which kind of austeritie was no
small honor to the noble Anniball, in exercising and instructing of his
soldiers: whom Liuy discribeth the worthy pattern of a right renouned
General, to this effect. Anniball served under Asdruball in the wars three
years, and there lived not a man whom Asdruball so much desired, for his worth
to bear command under him in martial affairs, if any thing valorous and of
force was to be put in execution: neither would the soldiers of his armies
credit any man so soon, or show such excellent courage under any Captain,
as at his command. He was very bold in giving charge upon perils, very wise,
and full of reaching consultation if he were distressed, in danger most patient
and indefatigable, contemning pains and travels, of courage undaunted,
careless of extreme heat or cold, temperate in diet, moderate in sleep,
vigilant and using his body to lodge hardly, many times has he been found
laid upon the cold ground covered with his mantle, which he did usually wear
amongst his watches and Centrenells, or at his corpse dugard. In any service
upon horseback, or foot, he was the first that gave charge, and last that left
the field: yet as there are not any virtues of such excellency but are
accompained, with some vices, so was he possessed of some souldier-like faults.
Thus far in effect Liuie, wherein behold the true description of a right
careful and noble General serving for a copy to the best Captains that ever
did or shall succeed him. I will add hereunto, because it is memorable one
example of discipline in a Geneall, Liuie likewise records.

Titus Manlius being Consul, and Leiutenant General of the Roman forces
against the Latins, when his own son had advanced forth (albeit upon most
honorable terms) in single duel to combat with a daring Latin, Decius the
other Consul according to the religious custom of the Romans in some
extreamities observed, after the performance of certain ceremonies which may be
read in Liuy, did (by rushing alone

Papyrius the Dictator gave express commandment against Fabius Rutilius
General of the Roman horse (who with good success and great valor had
encountered, and overthrown diue^s troops of the enemies) to be beaten with
rods; a strange and ignominious punishment worse then death, denounced Rutilius
seeking to stop the shame of that punishment, by secret means escaped to Rome,
whom the vehement dictator pursued in such fury, that (until not only
Rutilius had upon both his knees besought pardon for the same, and that the
whole Senate and people of Rome had inexorably mediated for him) the severe
Dictator could not be moved to repeal the sentence and execution, but would
have had his head cut off also.

Another kind of discipline is semblably requisite against captains and
fellows in arms which is for a certain vain stubbornness and proud
emulation Sergius and Verginius, when they did assiege the Veyans; Sergius
holding his quarter upon one side of the city, and Verginius upon the other,
it happened that Sergius (upon some advantage found) was suddenly charged by
the Phaliscians, taking in high scorn, though his forces were much weaker to
requireaideo. Verginius, hereupon being forced to fly with disgrace (though he
might with very good ease have rescued and repaired his honor) yet would not
Verginius sucour him, unless Sergius had first humbly required and sued unto
him for it; which fault few wise princes or Generals, but would have punished
with death: howbeit the Senate (which sustained the most

Having partly touched the discipline concerning captains and soldiers, Liuie
the true form of the Roman hoasts as they were ordered for present fight, and
divided into battles. Triarij; these likewise took larger space in ran^ks and
files, then either the first or second, being so fashioned, that one battelle
might for more strength and advantage draw it self into another, when odds or
any necessity did constrain, without disorder or confusion: to each of which
three Triarij so large as would admit them both upon necessity to their
ranckes without confusion: but when the Triarij have both received the pikes
and principals into their battles, then they forthwith close their ranckes and
with

Now for as much as it behooves to reason a little of martial stratagems
serving for camp or any place fortified, I will take occasion in this place to
may percase augment Empire with assured loss of honor much Anniball ad lacum
Perusinum used by turning face from the Romans his enemies, that the Consul
and his host by pursuit, might be brought into places full of danger. And
hereupon note by the way, that if thine adversary turn his back toward you,
pursue not in further heat and greediness of victory, but rather according to
the Proverb, Make him a silver bridge to be gone: least being constrained to
fight upon necessity they become desperate, of which there is infinite example
of diverse being pursued after the fight, which have upon that example finished
in much John Basilides the Rushian Tyrant spoke of the Moscouites and
Polonians: that these were too forward, and those over backward, which he by
long experience found in his armies.

Another excellent example of lawful stratagem in the Captain Annibal to
secure himself and his armies is recorded, by tying matches and firebrands to
the horns of cattle driving them by night a contrary way, to misguide Cymon a
Captain of the Athenians (which both Plutarch, and Diodorus Siculus record)
Pl^. in vica C^. Diodo: lib. 11.
put in practice, he perceiving that the Persian fleet houered too and again
near the Coast of Cyprus, with 250. ships of his Navy, gave fight to 340. of
the adverse; of which he through his good success and valor grappled 100.
the rest being sore shattered and broken in fight recovered Cyprus; which glad
of such harbor left their ships unarmed, marching a certain of leagues into
the land a foot. Hereupon Cymon possessed himself of Euribas where his
enemies were encamped brought in the Navy, his soldiers being attyred in
Persian habit with sur-coates and turribants found aboard them: their enemies
by this means mistaking the Athenians for their own soldiers, and knowing the
sleet, supposed them to be returned which had lately losed anchor from them
before, and so with quietness gave them leave to come in with their fleet into
the Havens mouth. Cymon therefore at the dead time of night, landing
himselfewith his soldiers in that falsed habit, slew them all which met him,
and made spoil of his enemies Tents; giving to Pheridates the Persian General
a mortal camisado, besides the loss of his and many Athenians with such
another cunning advantage, Clearchus surprised Bizantium. Pontius Captain of
the Samnites, Portius Cato, Miltiades, Themistocles, and others (of which
Thucydides and Diodorus make mention) but these shall suffice for copy.

There is yet another adiunct of wiliness sometimes used in war, which
rests in taking occasion upon good advantages to fight with confederates, and
then the mean to work it, is quarrelling or martially moving against some
other friend being with his confederate in confederacy; so that he must be
forced in honesty to partake and break truce with him that cunningly seeks
it, he giving the first signal to Battle, or declare himself false or
perfidious toward his friend and Client. Also there is a certain oblique
prudence (if a man may so term it) of another nature, yet not unlike the
former after Campanians; which (sithence their exceeding weakness would not
otherwise admit, but that they must necessarily fall into the danger of those
enemies upon whom they breathed defiance) presently put themselves into the
protection of some mighty prince of more force, to defend them and their
liberties: and this rule is generally certain that such people (as stand in
fear of oppression or tyranny, by some great Prince) will offer and send
voluntary succors with any comfort to the best of their power, to some other
more puisant prince, which may when good time shall serve collaterally protect
and assist them in their extremities against all violence and oppression of
others: as may be read in the Roman Hystories of the Massilians, Rhodians,
Hiero Siracuse, Massinissa, Eumenes with others, which had in the same case
aided the Romans in their wars. And as in our late English expeditions Anno
1596. and in Anno 1597. was sent unto us by the States of base Germany upon
our taking of Cales accosting Andalusia; and toward that service intended but
unfortunately crossed, when our Generals after ominous beginnings reconducted
us to the Islands, Tercaere, where they made very small proof, and far short
in fathom of their expectation.

What I have spoken here in particular respecting the office of a Leiutenant
general, may serve for other inferior Captains and Officers of war also:
Yet considering that it were semblably behoofull for me to declare what the

Next unto the L. Leiutenant General, which absolutely represents and uses
(for the time) the person and dignities of the Prince are these principal
persons of honor, serving as counselors and assistants immediate and under

The first place is assigned to the Lord Marischal; adjoining him the Coronell
general of foot, and he seconded with the Coronell general of horse; ensuing
them the Captain or Coronell of every Regiment or battle: after these the
Campe-master, next him the master of the Ordinance: successively the Treasurer
of the whole host; and lastly the Sergeant mayor general

There are Offices also deputing unto the former, and some others which are not
of such special reputation: as the Leiutenant to the Coronell of foot,
Leiutenant of the Coronell of horse, the Provost Marischall, the Muster-master
general, the Corporals of foot and horse, the Sergeants majors of every
battle or Regiment, the Scout-master, the Trench-master, the forrage-master,
the prouant master, the captain of the carriages, and the captain of the
Pyoners; most of which are in office and degree superior to private captains
of Companies.

The Lord high Marischalls office (upon which the whole charge of an Army
depends) is very noble, and commonly takes the second place of honor in the
field: it imports him therefore of necessity to know through what manner of
ground the whole army must pass; if in Champion, how the ways open for
rancks in co^panyes, or for battles; if in vallyes or lanes, how they be
straightened for troops and confused marches, having soundly considered of all
means which may give advantage against the enemy, by marching, incamping, and
disposing or ordering of his forces, noting with judicious and well experienced
observation all the disabilities which his enemies must have in meeting with
him; eskairmouching or giving present charge

He therefore causes first in audi^nce of the whole Armies a proclamation to
be made, aduertising what time the Lord Lieutenant General him made known
unto the Lord Leiutenant: and (that the Lord Marischall

Beatus Rhenanus thinks that Mariscallus is called of Marca, an old word
Budaeus calls them Marischals, quasi maiores, Judges sitting on horseback.
The office of Marischals according to Vincentius Lupanus is De mag. Fran.
castris locum eligere, ac milites in officio continere, in quos vitae and
necis potestatem habent: To choose a place for lodging of the Army, to keep
the soldiers in order and office, over whose lives and deaths they have power.
The knowledge and persecution of military crimes; likewise the doom of
punishment of out-lawes, and of such soldiers as without honest and lawful
leave depart the Camp, and are not present at musters, and times limited unto
them; also the defaults of scoutes, escurriers, espials, traitors, fugitives,
watch breakers, such as forsake the spoil, sack, havoc, with all actions
personal of soldiers in private quarrels, are censured by the Marischal in
our wars: Vinc. Lupan. de mag. Franc.
point fashioned like a Lilly.

The office of the Coronell general on foot, disposes his Armies by
direction from the Lord Leiutenant into competent battles according to the
gross number: he directs the Captains in their charge, what, and how many
long or short weapons in every Band or Company they should have, in what form
and order the armies must march, which the sergeant mayor (by direction from
him) sees performed. From him is a scroll sent to the governors of every
battle containing their several charges: he certifieth the remouals of
Camps unto them for the more readiness of soldiers by the themselves from
their colors without leave: that the stragglers, boys, s^uls,

The Coronell general of horse, receives from the L. Leiutenant a roll of all
the serviceable horse in field. His office is to direct and distribute the
Lances, light horses, Argolitiers, pistoliers, carbin^s, and such like into
troops ordered for battle; he signifies to the Corne^ of every troop when
any remouall is, which after the flourish of Trumpets, auance forth to march
when he commands; such of them as watch the first night, are first placed in
Camp, or Quarter. It is in him to send forth auant curriers for
advertisement; he places a strong troop of horse in the rear of all the
battles, and to fit himself by proportion against them all, and if percase his
power

The Campe-master receives a roll of the whole armies horse and foot: and by
the L. Marischals consent provides and limiteth the Camp according to the
multitude, dividing the ground into so many regiments or battles of foot and
horse, as is requisite, betwixt every battle making a large street or space of
80. feet breadth at the least. He places every General of each regiment the
Campe-master, as the foot captains do; the Campe-master himself is

The master of the Ordinance (after his charge received) must be provided of
all necessaries thereunto: first under him in office are a Leiutenant of the
Artillery, certain Clerks, a Master groom and his Mate, all of them in pay,
with all sorts of artificers needful, as Cannoniers for great Ordinance,
seruitors and laborers only for the Cannon, Armorers, Sawyers, Smithes,
Pistolmenders,

It is not to be thought that the Romans could have so boldly borne away many
victories, with daily triumph, if the devise of Cannon and gunpowder had been
known unto them: for these be grievous and almost dastardish impediments to
men's valors, which only by violence of those ensigns are taken away before
they can have space and opportunity, to make noble account of their heroycall
virtues; which example has been and is so general and common, as that it need
not be specified. The best use of them is for wise Captains, vain, and
difficult at execution: by good example of Na^rre, in a very so daine and
stiff resolution charged them in the fiery mouths of their ordinance, being
very many principal pieces of brass; driving the^ from their Tents and
munition, which they recovering became Lords of that days service also. Such
artillery must of force be well armed, either with walls, rampires, gabions,
and such like defenses, least a resolute enemy seize upon them. Some say that
the brazen artillery was known and invented many ages since, which Vin^ntius
Lupanus cites out of Robertus Vulturius* but more certain it is that a
ch^isticall Monck devised the same in Germany. The Venetians were said to have
the first use of them in their wars against the Genoueses Ann^. 1380. To
which pieces of Ordinance, diverse F^ulcons, Sacars, Muskets, Hawks, Basalisks,
Crocodiles, Salamanders, Lizards, etc.

The Treasurers office in Camp being so well known (as at home) needs not
to be stood upon; only this he keeps a muster-booke of the princes forces,
pensions, and allowances, distributing to the several offices and places in
the field according to their stipends which execute them; which I said in the
peaceable Treasurer before, must be well husbanded and stored; so that the
souldior in service (whether he pray upon his enemies spoils or not) be not
wanting of his wages, nor pray payment at the Treasurer for which he serves,
being so deerly bought with continual hazard of

Concerning the Sergeant mayor of the whole army, who disposes according

In the watch-Captaines, scouts, escurriers, rounders, and centrenels; likewise
in all sorts of private soldiers and military Commanders, vigilancie is
principally needful. How many surprisals of towns, castles, pieces, houses;
Vigilate and esto^ parati; ignoratis eni^ qu^ subi^ ^rit f^ris aduentus: For
enemies may fitly be resembled unto thieves, which by wily means and hidden
stratagemmes against all oaths, Macrobius captain of the Carthagenians used
the Assirians his enemies, whom (being drunk with wine, and mandragoras) he
most insidiously slaughtered: for had not that advantage encountered them, it
would have been very doubtful of the victory. And therefore as it is the
captains duty to direct and vigilantly to look unto the charge of his
watches; so does the soldier show no less honor in careful obedience for his
own security, next after the state of his prince and country; which (if the
captains do neglect) ought to be with due severity punished in them. We read
that Moses (who was a careful warrior against the Egyptians) did send out
s^outs, Joshua that divine and triumphant captain (purposing the destruction of
Ierico) sent espials which were lodged in Rhahabs Ios^ chap. 20.
house. When Saul had pitched in Hachilah before Ieshimon, David sent S^. 1.
chap. 26.
espials out of the wilderness, which brought tidings of his approach.

There is a kind of soldiers which are chief men of the nobler sort used
amongst the Frenchmen, which in that Realm are by common and ancient custom
in time of special service, to maintain themselves, and servants in those
wars three months; the Frenchmen call them Banne, and Retrobanne. Which as
Procopius says, Romani bannum, signum dixerunt, and bandoferum, ducis Lib. 4.
bell. ^andal.
belli signum ferentem: the Romans did call this word bannum, that which
Bandoferus him which bears the captains ensign* and from thence should
seem that anciently the name of ensigns were called banners; wherein certain
emblemes and armorie of the noble leaders and captains were known and
distinguished from others: also when any public edict was diuulged or
proclaimed it was called Bannire, and in bannum soluere, which signifies as
much, as to set it to the view and knowledge of the whole host. Likewise the
creation of knights according to their deserts after the wars, being many and
of diverse orders, I will not insist upon because they be so well known. The
creation of knights, bannerets (which is under the equi^es redubitati, twice
knighted, for their martial prowess: and such as in honor of war, and for
their noble atchieuments by military worthiness, attain knighthoods of
collers, such as the Cheualliers sans ^proch, devised by Lewis the eleventh at
Ambois 1469. of the first Institution being thirty six Nobles of the Realm,
and since more according to the Kings pleasure, and such Noble men his friends
of other nations, as for their valor in serving him in his wars are invested
to that honor at this day: Likewise the order of Saint George, instituted by
King Edward the third: the ceremonies whereof being so well known and
celebrated at Windsor, I let pass; with that Order of the golden Fleece, which
Philip Duke of Burgundy Dijoun in France, which King Philip of Spain and the
Emperor Randolph, by right of the Emperor Charles the fifth (whose mother was
heir of that Duchy) at this day retain, as their order of honorable
Knighthood: and all these noble Orders with diverse of like fashion first
devised as a reward and m^d of their military virtues: and in that respect,
the Romans Cicinius Dentatus received of the^ for his fortitude showed in
their wa^es, which were golden spurs and a sword, with the kings personal
embrace* as our (...) of honor are created at this day. The most famous and
best renowned soldiers that in our times have been noted, were Ambrose Dudley
the old Earl of Warwike, Thomas Ratcliffe Earl of Sussex, the three brethren
of that honorable race of Ricot, the two noble and unfortunate Earls of
Essex, both deceased, the father and Roger Williams, Sir Philip Sydney, who
sings in heaven crowned both with martial and civil girlands, Sir Thomas
Morgan: but there have been so many, and yet are of gallant heroical spirits
alive amongst us; that it were infinite to reckon, and would rather bring one
into suspicion of that fault (for which I detest to converse in the houses of
great princes) then any way^s answer to the worthiness, of them whom I
commemorate.

And here least I might unhappily seem too curious or tedious, will I knit
up my labors, satisfying my self with a little taste of some principles (...)
tables) is divided from the Indies) I will appeal by protestation: that, they
which lean upon vain hope and idle counsels, which threaten and disdain
sea-stormes, slouthfully wallowing in their warm beds at land, and which in
tempestuous that nothing can be spoken, which has not been first spoken: and
I will pray that my studies (being published) may not be forespoken with
i^enomed tongues, swollen too great for their mouths; but to them that are just
and truly

All Glory be to the blessed seed of all, in all immortal perfection of
incomprehensible goodness, everlastingly reigning in that inconceivable power
of salvation by miraculous faith inanimate, in the true charitable root of the
ineffable Trinity, mistically reueiled in omnipotent unity.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Adam Islip. 1606.


