THE Whipping of the Satyr.

Imprinted at London, for John Flasket. 1601.

TO THE VAYNE-GLORIOVS, the Satyrist, Epigrammatist, and Humorist.
MOst worthy Triumuiri, no maruayle though ye maruayle at my aduenterous
boldness, attempting beyond your expectation, and yet daring beyond my attempt,
notwithstanding moved by the lines and letters of such just Asses of Coram, as
I knew you to be, and supposing ye had sat af a commission, ad Inquirendum de
moribus, I endeavored to do you a pleasure, if it please you to accept of my
endeavor: for seeing our lives by your worships censured, our manners by your
censures controuled, our credit by your controlment impeached, I thought good
to solicit a Melius inquirendum, because yours, after some examination being
found false and forged, was at diverse and sundry sittings put down in the
house of office: for had ye gone forward with approbation, as ye began with
presumption, ye would shortly have proved as mischievous to the Inhabitants of
England, as Tyrone has been to the Frontiers of Ireland. For as Demosthenes
said to the Citizens of Athens, An accusing slaunderer is an evil full of
quarrellous sedition. It passes the infinity of thought to conceive, and the
apprehension of conceyte to understand the reach of your purpose: for the
courses of you three in that employment seem as wonderful, as the courses of
all the stars in the firmament, because (by all likelihood) ye intended to
begin some new Empire: for ye took upon you to tax all the world, like
Augustus Caesar, making every man subject to your censure. Indeed this was a
point of resolution, yet this resolution was not worth a point, because aiming
at too great a purchase of glory, ye sustained much loss of good will. For,
after the boldness of your speech had uncovered the baldnes of your conceyte, no
body took greater pleasure, then to take displeasure against you.
Notwithstanding, suppose you had as pregnant pates as Ulysses or Tullie, yet
misimploying their faculties, ye will prove (as Plato rightly affirms) so
much the more pernicious: so that it is better not to have wit to employ at
all, then not to employ well the wit we have, because our want of wit we may
often impute to nature, but the abuse wholly rests in ourselves. I will thus
argue therefore. He that wants discretion, is no more then a fool, and he that
uses none, is no less then an Ass, and he that is no more then a fool, is
too bad to teach others, and he that is no less then an Ass, others are too
good to teach him.

Notwithstanding I have not thought scorn to admonish you as friends by an
Epistle, because I am bound to love you as brethren, by the Gospel* and sure I
must needs commend you for one thing, and that is your magnanimious resolution,
in undertaking the censorship of this populous Commonwealth* wherein ye
behaved your selves very impartially* for ye neither spared the vicious for
favor, nor favored the virtuous for envy, but dealt so equally with all men
in their penal punishments, as though you had been borne under the very
Equino^ctiall line.

Notwithstanding, I marvel you would enter into such a Labyrinth of business
with so little a thread of discretion* but you had nothing to do, and therefore
would not be idle, as though idleness were, as the vulgar take it, to do
nothing* Nay, men are much deceived in the nature of it: for Scaliger Exercit.
6 text 9. Cessatio ab action, est quies, non otium: for he only is said to be
idle* Qui cum debet, and potest agere, non ag^t, as Scaliger also says.

Well, my good Countriemen, ye know, Humanum est errar^, and therefore
offenses should be borne withal, and injuries forgotten: why deal ye then
more unchristianly in reprehending our faults, then we inhumanely, in deserving
reprehension? It is ill to think of that which should be forgotten: worse, to
speak of that which should not be thought: worst of all, to write of that
which should not be spoken: Quod enim verbis palam fari non decet, scriptis
pa^^^ fieri non oportet. But what ye thought worthy of nothing, others think
worth nothing, and therefore it is no great matter. To omit this, it is not
long since that a friend of mine being merrily disposed, told me for great
news, that there were three persons in the Realm, had undertaken a notable
piece of travel, at their own costs and charges. Whither, said I? Marry,
quoth he, to discover a whole Island, and the manners of the people, bidding me
ge^se, who those three were. I, after a long ^^^urre, thought (God forgive me)
that the one should be Sir Frauncis Drake, the other Sir Martin Frobysher, and
the third Captain Candish: but then the remembrance of their deaths, was the
death of my opinion: at last I told him, I could not tell, demanding to what
Country they were bound, and who might be their Pilote? Faith (quoth he)
their Pilote is better for judgment, then ever Pontius Pilate was, and for
experience the best in the world. The devil as soon (quoth I.) At that he
smiled (unmasking the Jest) and told me, it was the devil indeed, that had
played the Pilote, in guiding these three ve^^els of iniquity, the Satyrist,
Epigrammatist, and the Humorist, to discover and lay open the infirmities of
their Country men.

But I fear I am ouerlargely troublesome, notwithstanding, since I write with
more affection of kindness, then affectation of tediousness, I presume on
your patience.

Now a word with you alone friend Satyrist, for I may not forget you in any
case: O mihi post nullos Satyrist, memorande sodales! By the Mass, and yet
that oath is unlawful* for since the saying of the Mass is put down, me
thinks* the swearing of the Mass should not be tolerable: by yea and by nay
therefore, you show your Countriemen great discourtesie, for whereas you should
salute them with an Aue, you threaten me with A-uae. Think you that foul
words can beget fair manners? If you do, I will not bate you an ace of an
asse^: for experience gives you the lie to your face.

But your affection ouer-rules your reason, and therefore you are as sudden of
passion in all matters, as an Interiection, and yet as defective in most cases,
as an Heteroclite: you gathered up men's vices, as though they had been
Strawberries, and picked away their virtues, as they had been but the stalks.

They shall not make me believe, but that you were the devils Intelligencer,
for there went not a lie abroad, but it was presently entertained of your ear:
and every sin kept under writing, for fear lest the devil waxing almost
six thousand years of age, should fail in his memory, and so chance to
forget it.

Beshrow my heart, if I think you not a very prompt and politic Gentleman:
Prompt, wanting no words to express your anger: and politic, using much
hypocrisy to conceal your malice.

So that if a man should blazon you aright, he must make your tongue passant:
your anger rampant* and your malice couchant.

As for you, Signior Epigrammatist, your head is troubled with such a rewme of
conceit, as I know not whether to wish you a better head to contain it, or a
better heed to guide it. For (hark in mine ear a little) the rankest
Raggamuffin, that ever swaggered in Shorditch, is not looser in his living,
then you in your writing: but yet there is time to amend, for nunquam sero, si
serio. I know you will note that, because its serviceable for your purpose, but
withal, Hic tibi pra^terea quaedam sunt graeca notanda: that is, (...).
temporize not therefore too long. But what a Gods name mean you to negotiate
in every man's matter? Doubtless you were super-fantastically infatuated, when
you skipt up and down from one estate to another, like a Squirrell on a tree,
and snapt at every man, as though he had been a venison Pasty. O, ye were as
busy as a Be, and as angry as a Waspe, the heat of your color euaporated
her imagination, and the liberality of your tongue mayntained most absolute
lies for the atchieuing of the whetstone. You made more reckoning of a Jest,
then a scholar does of a Maundy Thursday, or Cheshiremen of the Newfound
well, and yet when all come to all, was as blu^t as a Hob nail, which need not
have been, since (as I said) you might have had the whetstone for lying. The
whole Epigram does nothing but make way for the two last lines, which are
brought in like a piece of cheese and a manchet, to digest all that went
before. And verily you have greatly troubled your self in naming certain
particular persons. Such a one you call Fabius, and another, Felix, anon comes
me Rufus and Clodius, and such a company of Imaginary persons and invisible
Ideas, to hold your worship talk, as would fat a man with laughter, or fill
him with wonder. In the end, when your page has played the knave with every one
a little, you turn over a new leaf, and call for more company, with whom, lest
any should suspect you to be no great scholar, you talk of the Intellectual
Quintessence, Genius, and such great secrets of Art wonderful luxuriously. How
your tongue rioted in bawdery, I am ashamed to rehearse, only thus much I dare
say, that if you had lived in the time of Ovid, he would have given you his
daughter to wife, conditionally for some instructions, when he was writing DE
ART AMANDI. For, touching examples of Venerie, I think, you had gotten a
whole Sampler-full from Venus her self, so that you might well have a place
and applause above all others for that faculty: and as you were in these things
lascivious, so you are in each thing frivolous, in some things ridiculous, in
most things malicious, and in all things vain glorious. Now by your leave.
Monsieur Humorist, you that talk of men's humors and dispositions, as though
you had been a Constellation-setter seven years in the firmament, or had cast
account of every man's nativity with the stars: but if I were as the
Astronomers, I would call you into question for it, seeing you have so abused
their Art. But, had you been but so mean a Philosopher, as have known, that
mores sequuntur humores, you would questionles have made better humors* if it
had been but to better our manners, and not in stead of a moral medicine, to
have given them a mortal poison: but I consider of you, as of a younger
brother: you wanted this same multis nimium; and nulli satis, coin (a goodyere
of it) and therefore opus and vsus put you to such a pinch, that you made sale
of your Humors to the Theater, and there played Pee boh with the people in your
humor, then out of your humor. I do not blame you for this: for though you
were guilty of many other things, yet I dare say, you were altogether without
guilt at that time, notwithstanding I suppose you would have written for love,
and not for money: but I see you are one of those that if a man can find in
his purse to give them presently, they can find in their hearts to love him
everlastingly: for now* adays A^s in praesent^ perfectum format amorem. But it
makes the less matter, because I know but few but are co^^iuals with you in
the love of silver: so that if the question were asked, Quis amat pecuniam?
Experience would answer the voice with a double Echo, Quisquis. And indeed I
see no reason, why every true subject should not love the Q. coin. To
conclude therefore, if you demand why my Epistle is so long, and my book so
short: I answer* The first is for your credit, to show that you are no barren
subject: and the other, for my own advantage, that I might buckle the better
with you. My reason is intailed to the ground of this Axiom, Vis vnita
fortior: for a man gives a sorer blow with his closed fist, then with his open
hand: Whence I suppose the fist was called, Pugnus of Pugno, to fight, as
fittest for blows, and the palm, Palma, because the Palm is an Emblem of
victory and peace. Moreover, in doing much, it is hard to do well, and in
doing well, hard to do much: for the difficulty of an action consists in
doing well, in doing much, or in doing often. Nam agere recte, ^^ulta, aut
saepe, difficile est, says Aristotle, lib. 2. caeli. cap. 12.

Briefly, therefore, my book is brief. Nam frustra fit per plura* quod fieri
potest per pauciora. Thus wishing I were as potentiall to please my friends, as
I am optatiue to pleasure my foes, I bese^ch yo^ accept of a poor Pilgrims
devotion.

W. I.

Ad Lectorem.
ASpera succincto cantabit Musa libello:
Quae? lege: sic videas: Qualia? visa legas:
Pauca tibiscribo, scribens vt amicus amico.
Si cupias, capias: si capias, faueas.
Multis pauca placent, sed paucis multa placebu^t:
Multis quam paucis, me placuisse placet.
Si quis me nescit, ne sit me scire molestus:
Si mea quis poscit, possit habere mea.
W. I.

To his friend.
YOu that come by, and chance this book to see,
Peruse it well, and judge indifferently;
Yield him no more that made it, but his own,
And give him leave to reap what he has sown.
But if it chance to stand within the sight
Of any time-obseruing Parasite;
Or any vain obsequious Sicophant
Think with a bended front his Muse to daunt,
Him does this little little book despise,
And seems as flashing lightning to his eyes:
In this as in a glass, those men may see
The true proportion of their vanity.
Then view him well, that with impartial eye,
Dares scourge the Scourger of base villainy,
And ye shall find Wit, Poetry, and Art,
Each in his function play his several part.
I. F.

The Pilgrims Story.
Wandering I was unto the holy Town,
By which the waves of Iordans Cristall flood
With silver surge quietly wanders down,
Watring the suburbs that about it stood,
In Pilgrims weed, to do devotion
At the sepulcher of our Ladies Son.
But by the way I chanced to espy
Two twin-like sisters discontented sit,
Glistering with such celestial majesty,
As made me tremble in beholding it,
Supposing them as I did musing stand,
The Tutelares Dee of that Land.
From the Articke pole full fifty two degrees,
That land does lie within the temperate Zone,
Flourishing green with groves of goodly trees,
And from the world sequestered all alone,
Walled with the billows of the foming main,
Into an Island on a pleasant plain.
The pleasant fields enameld naturally
With Lillies, Cowslips, and the Violet sweet;
On which the beasts tumbled lasciuiously,
And purple Strawberries trodde under feet:
No Tygre, Wolf, Lion, or savage Bear,
Or any hurtful creature lives there.
The lofty hills did Limbicke-like distill,
The enclosed air shed down in Cristall showers,
Which through the verda^t valleys streamed still,
With silver waves playing among the flowers,
Whose gentle current did their beauty bless,
Pampring the playnes with fruitful pleasantness.
Then ran dispersed in shallow Azure brooks,
Befring'd with banks of shadie mirtild trees,
And pleasant palms, glazing their lovely looks
Over the trembling superficies,
Whose leafy locks, for more eye-pleasing view,
The heavens embalmed with Ambrosiall dew.
About the Cities and frequented towns,
The gowned people of that blessed Land,
Sat in their Orchards, decked with Rosed crowns,
Singing Eliza, and then clappe their hand,
Shrouded in bowres of shady wandering vines,
Embrodred all with fragrant Eglantines.
The pleasant rows of daynty Apricockes,
Quadrangle walks did Laborinth-like compose,
Richly adornd from their contiguous tops,
With damask hangings of the purple Rose,
Which the celestial Angels seem to dress:
So supernatural was their pleasantness.
There breathed the spirit of sweet Zephyrus,
Among the leaves whispring with still est voice,
And Cristal springs through silver pipes did gush,
Inuiting sleep with gentle muttering noise:
There sweetly warbled natures feathered quires,
Embow'd with shady bough-combynding briers.
Well, here I stayed gathering my wandering wits,
Rapt with this blessed sense-intraunsing sight,
And nearer straight went on by wandering fits,
To view that pair, shining like Angels bright:
But trembling fear withdrew my doubtful feet,
And back I slinckt me, thinking it unmeet.
Then musde awhile; straight, as resolved quite,
I trod the steps that I vntrode before,
Ost starting back at mine own shadows sight,
And every sinowe shiuering wondrous sore:
Now stood I listening, straight peerd with mine eye,
Spying about, lest any should epsy.
Then on I stepped, as soft as mouse could tread,
And e're two strides (me thought I went too fast)
Crouching me down, lest they should see my head;
And so crept on iollily near at last.
Then squat I laid, even like a timorous Hare.
So dear strange visions unto Pilgrims are.
Fearful through doubt, yet doubtful what to say:
(For fear is fostred by uncertain doubt)
Doubtful through danger that I thought was nigh:
(For danger is conceyu'd by fearful thought,)
Careful through both, and wary through my care,
I dare not stir, because I did not dare.
But at the last (for long I lent mine ear,)
I heard the younger say with heavy heart,
Sister, more crosses I am borne to bear,
Then tongue can speak, or speeches can impart;
Yet none has heapt such sorrows in my breast,
As those which now; and sighed out the rest.
Nay, said her sister, do not smother't so,
Impart it soon, if it import relief:
I prithee (sweet) communicate thy woe,
And let me share in sympathy of grief:
Seem not to be what it beseemes not thee,
So miserable of thy misery.
Then she replide, You know (I little doubt)
How I have brought up three, I know not what,
That viperlike would eat my bowels out;
Whom you baptized first, but after that,
They changed their names to fit their quality,
And so were taken changelings for to be.
Each to his name his disposition framed,
Sat. rough, severe: Ep. skip-Iacke iester like:
Hu. with newfangled neuterisme enflamed,
Al naught. The^ she her sigh-swoln breast did strike
And said, Their vice my voice fails to lament,
Spending my speech before my grief is spent.
But then her sister, with diuinest grace,
Opened her lips like glorious Cherubins,
Her eyes with tears threatening to drown her face,
Maiestickly at last she thus begins:
Often cause of grief proves comfort to the grieved,
And hope of comfort cause to be relieved.
And therefore, sister, be you ruled by me,
Though they neglect, do you your duty show,
And since I gave them Christianity,
Duty enioyn's me to join in with you;
For they are blessed, that labor to repress
The course of sin, and curse of sinfulness.
If my advice may sway your troubled mind,
Do not your heart with such vexation fret,
And seem not ouer-motherly inclyn'd;
What sorrow begets, reason must forget.
But take me Satyr, and with angry look
Sharply correct him, for the course he took.
But yet I think it far the better way,
That you procure some other in your stead:
For you will straight your tender heart bewray,
And fail to strike, and fall to stroke his head.
Provide you therefore some sufficient man,
That can perform, and will do what he can.
Then let him take the other two apart,
And show how lewdly they their time misspent,
Who being of a milder-moulded heart,
May happily in Christian sort relent.
Conceive you this? I (said her Sister) well;
But know no man dares practice what you tell.
At this I smilde, for fear enfranchised me.
When by their talk, this glorious pair I knew,
The sacred Church and Common wealth to be,
My fingers itcht at Satyr, to say true:
For I supposed some pains bestowd on them,
Would please God more, then on Jerusalem.
With this resolved, I went me soft and fair,
And with obeisance on my bended knee,
Began thus salute them, You celestial pair,
Though I be come, as it becomes not me,
Yet pardon grant, diuiner Powers ordained,
That I should hear to help what ye complained.
I will not tell you of this wonderment,
And gracious speech replide when it was past,
For they by miracles supposed me sent:
But to be short, I was the man at last,
They both assigned, and bade me straight provide,
To take up Satyr, and take down his pride.
My charge once given, lo, on my humbled knee
^ took my leave, and from the holy land,
Turned back unto a sinful Niniuie,
And here, my Masters, now before you stand:
God save ye all, I am a Pilgrim poor,
Expect not then, nay I am blunt, no more.
In Satyrum.
THe Satyrist now, like a masty dog,
Chayn'd in his ke^nell for to make him cursed
Lay grinning long, at last he broke his clog
But with his collar almost choked first,
And with full mouth, or rather foul-mouthed speech
He roared at all, or else he worried each.
What though the world was surfeted with sin
And with the surfeit dangerously sick,
And with the sickness had miscarried been?
Must it of force his filthy physic lick,
Who little knowing what it ought to have,
For purging pills, a pild purgation gave?
And seeming wondrous carefully inclyn'd,
Did L^pos-like pretend Arch villainy,
Mixing the poison of malicious mind,
Stead of a present sovereign remedy:
For we may think there is poison foysted in,
Because the world swells bigger sin with sin.
Behold, thou misconceyuing Satyrist,
The quaffing ale-knight has a reeling pace:
The Cobbler always shows a durtie fist:
Who lives a Smith, must needs besmere his Face.
Then know, thou filthy sweepe-chimney of sin,
The soil thereof defiles thy soul within.
O wonder great! Is it not villainy,
That one should live by reckning up of vice,
And be a sinne-monger professedly,
Inuoluming offenses for a price?
Yet by the same does purchase but the shame,
And blaming others, merits others blame.
O, is it not a work of wickedness,
To pick up sin, and pack up villainies,
To flesh ones pen with fat of filthiness,
And heap together men's iniquities?
Fearing belike, (but fearing it to show)
That some dear year of sin would soon ensue
Nay, you preserved them wondrous daintily,
As though they had been Pheps or Quinches all,
And in the closet of your memory
Kept them, as though against some Festival,
Then brought them out to us your Countriemen,
That we might all make merry with them then.
Thus you supposed the peoples hearts to win
By Machiuillian damned policy:
For seeing men inclined to such sin,
You feasted them with all variety,
And lest you should this vilde pretense reveal,
Did hypocrite it with a show of zeal:
As a blind beggar guided by his boy,
Stands in the way of some frequented place,
And cries, Alas, I do no sight enjoy:
For Jesus sake take pity on my case;
Bestow one penny; God your sight maintain;
The Lord in heaven will you reward again.
And still his boy (like a Parenthesis)
Comes in, For Gods sake help the poor and blind;
And leads him forward with a string, I wisse,
Spying about some Gentleman to find.
Then they poor souls make toward him a pace,
And both together plead their woeful case.
If he does pass, and does not pass for it,
The boy runs after with a ruthful cry,
Good courteous Gentleman, for Gods sake yet*
Here Is a three halfepence, but one halfepenny:
So your blind error by devotion led,
Wearies the senses of the Readers head.
Well, yet you show a noble confidence,
That with the force of your persuasion,
Durst undertake so notable pretense,
As drive the devil from possession:
Yet thus you prove as all men witness can,
No notable, but a not able man.
As lesser flame, the greater smoke we see:
As smallest treble is the lowdest found:
As baddest weeds the soonest grown will be:
As empty vessel gives the greatest sound:
As poorer purse, the prouder stomach still:
So weaker reason has the stronger will.
My spleen would burst, ere I could laugh my fill,
At that same combat that you late were in,
Whose Pigmey wit took up a Gooses quill,
Stead of a bulrush, to encounter sin:
And with a pen, as with a pikestaffe came,
To set upon the Devil and his Dame.
Faith, this will make the Chronicle to shine,
That in the year (it skils not for the day)
1 5 9 and 9.
A Satyr on the Devil made a fray:
And with a pen because you made the same,
Satyr-Pen-Dragon we will call your name.
O, it is a jest to laugh an Emperor,
I Will have the manner of the combat all,
Painted in colors by some Picturer,
And have it up upon my study wall.
Beshrow my heart else, I Will this cost bestow,
We Will put down George a horseback quite I trow.
Can you seem wise to any simple men,
That seemed so simple unto all the wise,
And fitter far to hold the plough, then pen,
Such incompt stuff you rudely Poetize?
Yet I confess, there is much conceit in it,
For you have shown great store of little wit.
Take me your staff, and walk some half score miles,
And I Will be hanged, if in that quantity
You find me out but half so many styles,
As you have made within your Poesy:
Nay, for your style, there is none can you excel,
You may be called John a Style full well.
A man may see, that has but half an eye,
The naked knowledge that is in you, God knowth,
Scraping acquaintance of Philosophy,
To filch some praise out of the vulgars mouth:
Indeed this sauers of some Sophistry;
Here Is a Fallacion from Simplicity.
But he that mounts into the air of Fame,
Must have two wings, Nature and Art to fly,
And that he may soar safely with the same,
Must take his rise low from humility;
And not with you, a Gooses quill to take,
Thinking with that, an Eagles flight to make.
Your stately Muse starched with stiffe-neckt pride
Dain'd it amongst us most imperiously,
With lavish laughter she did each deride,
That came within the prospect of her eye:
Despising all, all her again despise,
Contemned of foolish, and condemned of wise.
Could you have given her some good portion
Of wit or learning to maintain her state,
She might have purchased reputation,
While she by pride has but procured hate.
For who loves her, that is not in any part
Endued with virtue, or endowed with Art?
Your Readers tongue at every leaf does tire:
Then for a bayte of fresher breath does stay,
Each line he thinks a lane, and does desire,
It were as plain as Dunstable high way;
When I dare speak it, at the best man's table,
You deal as plain as any Dunse is able.
Plainly you speak; Plaine-lyes I would have said,
But that I thought I should have spoke too plain,
And by your playnnesse, plainly has bewrayd
The pride you take your playnnesse to mayntayn.
There Is no estate but vildly you impeach,
And lowdest lies report in lewdest speech.
Sure, some pot-furie did possess your brain,
For many holds a Poet should not write,
Till the Almighty bless his hopeful pain,
Or strong Sir Claret Bordeaux Redcrosse Knight
Dubs him a Poet. To such I say yet,
Water made wine once; but wine never wit.
No Iuie-bush, but laurel branch must be
The pleasing object of a Poets eye:
The tippling Potoque, Potaui and potus; titubo, titubaui. etc.
head has toppling feet we see;
He that cal's Hostess, cal's his enemy:
Wit waxes poor, when wine at pledge does lie,
For wine and wisdom are at enmity.
Why then in such a loving Trinity,
Do Mars and Bacchus and Apollo go,
In Vt sunt Diuorum, Mars, Bacchus, Apollo etc.
propria quae maribus so nie?
I Will tell you why: Bacchus was tippled so,
That Mars and god Apollo for good will,
Were feign to hold him up betwixt them still.
But some may say, Then I would gladly weete,
Why such quick wits in Poets find we may?
I answer, Cause a verse has many feet,
And therefore with ones wit runs quite away:
So that the heads of Poets often be
Carried away with feet of Poesy.
Had you been sober, as it had behooued,
Shame would have shriued your misdemeaned pe^,
E're it had such a deuilish Beldame proved,
Setting at strife your quiet countrymen.
He that accord by wrong would altered see,
He in a cord by right should haltred be.
Was not one hanged of late for libelling?
Yes questionless. And you deserve the same:
For you before whole volumes forth did bring,
And whom you pleased, did liberally defame.
For shall we his by right a Libell call,
That toutcht but some? not yours, that aimed at all?
Envy her self (me thinks) shames you full ill:
For always she some good thing feeds upon.
Evil is not enuide, but hated still.
You rauen'd on all vilde Abuscion.
Will you bestow worse diet on your mind.
Then Envy does? O be not so unkind.
Poets like Jewels should seem to men's ears,
Rare in themselves, and rich in others view,
Not peeuishly displeasing all that hears:
For that man seems no Jewel, but a Jew.
Hard-hearted Scribe, seek not with lawless pen,
To crucify the sons, but sins of men.
If speaking ill deserves the bell of praise,
Down with the Grammar, God be with In speech,
Rhetoric adieu, farewell sweet Tullies phrase,
These were glad tidings to a Scholars breech:
For what need they learn speaking well by Art,
Since praise is got by speaking ill by heart?
I cry you mercy, I had quite forgotte,
You were a Linguisht since you were but young,
And have the tongues full perfectly, I wotte,
The lying, slaundering and back biting tongue:
Indeed for these, I think you may full well
Have pearls of praise, for you have got the bell.
And I could wish, each honest minded man
Subscribe unto your commendation:
For you did spare no tongue when you began,
But dealt full roundly, using every one:
Roundly indeed, or some deceived are:
For I Will be sworn, you were much out of square.
There was no hoe, your tongue ran like a spout,
An extreme stream of flowing eloquence
Gusht from your mouth, and all your wit burst out,
There was that gathered, as they said from thence,
Whole maunds and baskets full of fine sweet praise,
That grew like Primroses, and went their ways.
I searched all Gallen and Hipocrates,
Learned Fernelius and Alexis to,
To know if it was not some strange disease
That troubled you, and asked Phisicions more.
O ^^su God! I cannot tell again,
What pains I took, and pleasures in the pain.
Now master Doctor, came I first to one;
Cut steps his man, and prays me for to stay;
There were some States within, when they were gone,
I should be served: but on I went streightway,
And peeped in, to see who they might be;
Faith, there the States in vrinalls I see.
Well, for his counsel him I questioned:
And presently he answers me again:
Gross humors do intoxicate his head,
Proceeding, as I take it, from some strain.
Why then (quoth I) it may be justly deemed,
He strayn'd his wit, because too gross it seemed.
Yet to be sure of this uncertain thing,
I sought another, who made this reply,
He has took surfeit of a Gooses wing.
Jesus (quoth I) you answer learnedly.
Nay, this (quoth he) requires no learned skill*
For see the print here of the Gooses quill.
Yet not content, I would some other try,
And asking one, he told me it was the spleen,
The next said it was the gowt undoubtedly.
It may well be (quoth I) for well I ween,
His verses feet to swell so sore begin,
That he is feign in sheets to wrap them in.
Forth to another went I speedily,
Asked him, What, is he loose or bound? (quoth he)
No Sir, (quoth I) he is at liberty.
But friend (quoth he) his body bound may be.
It may indeed (said I) but by S. Steven,
Both mind and body yet are loosely given.
Now weighing how they all did disagree,
I sought a famous Cantabrigian,
And brought a picture with me for a fee.
He hastily replied, Thou foolish man,
It is the flux of a luxurious tongue;
Give him a spoonefull of some new Cowes doung.
But hark, I hear the Cynicke Satyr cry,
A man, a man, a kingdom for a man.
Why, was there not a man to serve his eye?
No, all were turned to beasts that headlong ran.
Who cried a man, Nec vox hominis sonat: O fera certe.
a man then was he none,
No, but a beast by his confession.
Faith, Satyr, thou art overmuch severe:
For say, that we had brutish been indeed;
I shall make proof, and proof shall make it clear,
That brutishness to us small shame can breed.
An Englishman may better brutish be,
Then any nation in the world save he.
For does it us become a shame to stand,
Of our most noble Ancestors this day,
The valiant Brute, first father of our land?
Shall not we show of whom we come, I pray?
If we be brutish, you must it impute,
That we be so in memory of Brute.
I dare here speak it, and my speech maintain,
That Sir John Falstaff was not any way
More gross in body, then you are in brain.
But whether should I (help me now, I pray)
For your gross brain, you like I* Falstaff grant,
Or for small wit, suppose you John of Gaunt?
But be not proud, and I Will in courtesy
Prove yours a quick wit, if you think it meet:
For you are at your wits end presently:
Doubtless your head will far outrun your feet*
But wit will soon a time-torne Relic grow:
Your Muses wardrobe stronger stuff can show.
A rash conceit exceeding strong you had,
Tongue all of Say, subject to fretting sore;
A linsey-wolsey conscience very bad;
Mockado mouth, even such as Momus wore;
Freezeado love, belike the air was cold,
Perpetuana hate, that long will hold.
I prithee Satyr, do not chafe at this,
Because I think I shall provoke you more;
As once I served a friend of mine I wisse,
Healing his byle by launching of the sore:
I Will tell the manner, briefly for your sake,
Though for the matter it no matter make.
A Gentleman he was of right good blood,
To whom I said, Faith Sir, you are too blame,
Beside your wife, to keep one in a hood,
For your own pleasure, whom I well could name.
Wounds, blood, (quoth. he) prove who, or thou shall die.
Content your self, it is your Hawke (quoth. I.)
At that he paused, and knew not what to think,
For he was guilty of the deed indeed,
Hk. felt him galled and gulled too, yet did wink,
Judging my speech did of the jest proceed.
So if you be offended, it is best,
To be persuaded that I spoke in jest.
But all this while, we trewant but the time;
For you (perhaps) can Usher out your deed,
And I of spleen have charged you of crime,
That chid de but such as foul offenses breed,
That they might see, and seeing might amend
The faults they saw: This seemed the Satyrs end.
Well, list a while, if that you list to hear,
How he and I will wrestle for this fall:
I fear naught else, but that you think I fear,
Because he took the vantage first of all:
But come Sir Satyr, were thou Saturn now,
By Jupiter thou tumblest downefull low.
First by his choler I will take my hold,
For it was his impatient peevishness,
That was the whetstone for to sharp him bold,
And not the hate of humane wickedness;
For then he would have bridled so his pen,
As he might best have rid the vice of men*
The world grows old, and age grows froward still,
With gentlest speech it therefore should be won,
It Is sore with sin, and sin swell sorer will:
Yet stead of balm, he powers out blame thereon:
With filthy rancour still he vomits out
The poisoned malice of his spiteful thought.
O, is not this a vild praeposterous course,
To weane from vice, and win to vertuousnesse.
Our sins are ill, but his offense is worse,
That heapeth sin on heaps of wickedness:
As though that bitter evil slanderous speech,
Were fittest method virtuous deeds to teach.
Thought you the devil would have been afeard,
That fears all, and yet he none does fear,
When he your thunderclap of threatening heard,
As children are, that of a bug-beare hear?
Nay, if you thought, he would be scared so,
You should have sung, Come take him boggle bo.
Ho Oedipus, here is work for you to do,
Come riddle me, riddle me, what is this?
That when it goes, it lies, go to, go to,
I hold a crown, you know not what it is.
Hark in thine ear, and I Will the riddle show.
It is the Satyrs tongue, not speaking true.
I durst have sworn, but that I love not swear,
That some familiar made the Satyrs book,
For I espied the Devils method there,
Slanderous, accusing, whence his name he took:
Yet sure if it should a familiar be,
He would have spoken more familiarly.
Judge, has he not abused much his pen,
W^ose pen has spared no man to abuse?
Men can abuse themselves, what need they then
Care for abusing to a needless use?
Nay, if you will needs to abuses fall,
Let all abuse him that abuses all.
Thus have I closde with him, and kept my hold;
Now will I trip him in his own foul play;
He scourges villainies in young and old,
As boys scourge tops for sport on Lenten day;
So scourges he the great ^owne-^op of sin,
And puts his wits felicity therein.
Do not you know, long since I knew it well,
How he was made, for his brave deeds of harms,
Vicegerent to the great black Prince of hell,
And gives the top and scourge-sticke for his arms,
Tyron^ing it with such wild English words,
As hurts more men then the wild Irish swords?
A friend of mine, whom I must not forget,
Is grown a monstrous desperate swaggerer,
Proud, given to whores, a drunken beast and cet.
I hate this vice, but love the man full dear;
And think it fit to think of fittest course,
How I may teach or touch him with remorse.
At last I pend me all his vices down,
Lest I should not make reckoning of the least:
And go and cry them all about the town,
Setting him out for some strange manlike beast:
If chance I met him, as such chance may be,
Hear how I will salute him presently.
My friend, you are a vild whoremongring knave,
A lecherous Rogue, a brabbling Quareller,
A drunken To-pot, and a swearing Slave,
A selfe-exalting second Lucifer,
The very sucke-dugge of iniquity,
I all become that ill becomes thee.
You see my course; now say, for Gods sake say,
Whether you think this will reclayme my friend,
Or may not straight incense him, at that may,
To badder course, and I well courst in the end,
That in this bitter raging fit begone,
More like a fiend, then like a friend has done*
Thus with the world, her friend Sir Satyr plays,
Stately and stoutly dominering it;
Only this distance lies betwixt our ways;
I rayl'd of one but even a little fit:
He spits the venom of his bitter gall,
Not all at some, but rather some at all.
Malice did twist what discontent had sponne,
(For malice always doubles discontent)
Anger drew out what malice double twonne,
(For anger still unfolds bad intent:)
From discontent the malice did proceed,
And from the malice did the anger breed.
This trippe brings vantage: now have for the fall;
A ring, a ring, see who shall bear the bell:
What odds, my Masters, who bets ought at all?
The Satyrs play is parlous you can tell.
Well, let us go to now, we have breathed awhile,
I Will give the fall, or else I Will take the soil.
Our noble Princess (Lord preserve her Grace)
Made godly laws to guide this Commonweal,
And has appointed Officers in place,
By those her Laws with each offense to deal:
Well look the rowles, no office ouerskippe,
And see if you can find the Satyrshippe.
If not, dare you usurp an office then,
Without the license of her Majesty,
To punish all her Subjects with the pen,
Against the Law of all Civility?
I have him up, it is petty treason all,
And therefore fear to break his neck this fall.
I, but he sees the laws are broken still,
And cannot bridle men's licentious lives.
Well, if they cannot, yet his worship will,
And in these, Satyrship above it ^^^^ues,
Thinking (O heavens) his vild injurious speech
Will Princes laws, laws Justice ouer-^each.
O, here is a noble selfe-conceited Sir,
Climbed to the very pinnacle of pride,
That thinks his limbs ten ti^es sufficienter,
Then all the laws within the Realm be side:
As though the vapor of his windfull words,
Would blow up vices on their own accords.
Is It not a stout-tongu'd valiant Caualier,
That of himself dares menace such a land,
Pressing out all the roguish words there were,
For Jewish service that he had in hand?
When all was done, on him they turned their backs,
And serve now under General Ajax.
I muse what fostred his presumptuous thoughts,
Since railing shows the beggary of wit:
For if that foul-mouthed speeches merit ought,
I Will have an Oyster-wife with Palm to sit:
Fie, praise not men, like hounds, for cry of mouth,
Since words are wind, that is seldom in good South.
What? shall the Satyr then, that climbed so hie,
As he might ouer-looke both laws and life,
Come down so low from his Vsurperie,
As be inferior to an Oyster wife?
O, here is a fall, I told you he should down;
For joy I pray make bonfires in the Town.
In Epigrammatistam and Humoristam.
COme hither now, friend Epigra^matist,
And do not wring my words to wrong my speech,
Harken thou likewise, captious Humourist,
And hear that mildly, what I friendly teach:
For those that speak in love and charity,
Should both believed and beloved be.
Ye (God forgive ye) mock, deride, mis-call,
Revile, scoff, flout, defame and slander to,
Yet here is not the sum (but some) of all,
Ransacke your conscience, you shall find it so:
For to our eye it still reflects our ill;
Man may be bribed, his conscience never will.
Blush then, thou graceless Epigrammatist,
That troubled art in troubling other men,
To make thy glory in their shame consist,
Disquieting with thy grace-tempting pen,
Whom great Jehovah crowns with laurel peace,
As heirs apparent unto happiness.
O, who should then so mis-employ his wit,
To plod and plot against his native soil,
And cloak'd with zeal, to play the Jesuit,
Seeking a Trophee of his Countries spoil?
Which spite of spites, still like mount Sion stands,
In gowned peace clapping her happy hands.
No land for peace, no peace for happiness
Excels so, but ours it equal will;
No hap for joy, nor joy for pleasantness
Will equal ours, it so excels still.
Such peace, such hap, such joy, such pleasures slow,
As passes speech, and poseth wit to show.
Our gracious Prince with peace our laws protects,
Our laws protected, make good government,
Good government our peace with laws directs,
Our peace directed makes sweet content:
Our sweet content, thou seeking to prevent,
Hat'st Prince, peace, laws, and all good government.
Shameless of shame, how dare thou attempt
To pluck the plume of Englands happiness,
And broach the malice of thy base contempt,
In civil iarres bred by vnciuilnesse?
Woe worthy thou, that seek'st to dispossess
The blessed state of real blessedness.
I will not soothe our land in sinfulness.
No, God forbid, nay, God forbid the same:
It is polluted with all wickedness,
And vice deserves to be combe-cut with blame,
But not reviled with vpbraiding speech,
Malignantly men's credit to impeach.
You kept such revel with your careless pen,
As made me think you of the Innes of Court:
For they use Revels more then any men.
So what you do in any evil sort,
You may defend it, and buyld hereupon,
That you were taught by revelation.
Go to, go to, you are odd companions.
Mistake not odd; ye deal unfriendly then:
This odd makes even your commendations:
For still odd fellows are the wisest men.
My reason mounts above a likelihood,
Because the 7. wise men of Greece were odd.
You say, our Land is given to gluttony,
Epicurizing with such sumptuous fare,
As breeds a surfeit of Intemperancy:
But in this case you much deceived are.
For each rich glutton that too much does eat,
There Is ten poor beggars starve for want of meat.
So, if you speak it universally
Of this our Land, your speech is most untrue:
For go ye to the University,
And you shall there no sumptuous Commons view.
What? said I, None? Yes, yes, the truth to touch,
Their fare is sumptuous, for it costs them much.
I will not tell you, though their meals be small,
How they have certain beuers that they hunt,
Which stead of venison does serve them all,
Cause I imagine that you know their wont.
But they in wisdom know what best befits;
Since laden bellies make but leaden wits.
But for the vulgar, let them freely eat,
Because most of them, we most graceless see,
And never to have grace, but at their meat;
And therefore then best occupied be:
For though the most of them be rude and base,
Come they to meat, they will eat ye with a grace
Much pains you take in handling Lechery,
Lauishing out such vilde lascivious speech,
As would inuit one unto Venerie,
Disclosing things that never Bawd could teach.
I cannot I, express them, nor I will,
Since bawdy words, must be subaudi still.
If chance a woman smyles in company,
She must be light (forsooth) and loosely live;
If frown, she hypocryes her luxury,
And lists to take that others lusts to give:
If neither, then she seems an Innocent,
And may the sooner any way be bent.
But women take him for a simple Gull,
That calls a gallant Loue-alluring Dame,
A common queen, when she is a proper Trull,
And says, she is painted, when she blushed for shame.
Nay, men for painting we may more condemn:
For they are painted every day by them.
But I Am ashamed, that ye are not ashamed,
To craze the credit of your own good name,
And by defaming others be defamed,
Since loss of life is less then loss of fame.
How can ye then strain curt'sie to confess
Your shameful fault of shameless faultiness?
O, could ye look with an impartial eye,
Upon the fault of your offensive speech,
And by the Jury of your conscience try
The injury that ye have done to each,
The world might then by your confession know,
What shame will now by your confusion show.
Ye may be taken, and I fear ye will,
For Seminaries of seditious strife,
Who through devotion seek division still,
And the ^ubuersion of our quiet life.
Fie, do not think the Pope can pardon this.
Man cannot license men to do amiss.
Do not deny, that ye such persons be:
Men know back-biters, as they horses know,
Both by their mouths, your mark is yet to see,
Imprinted so, as few but can it show.
But learn ye this, a slaunderer at one time,
Injuries three persons by his hateful crime:
Himself that speaks it, payring his good name,
For he is after noted for a knave:
Him that he speaks it of, by his defame,
For he shall causeless ill opinion have:
Him that he speaks it to, deceived so,
For he takes it for truth, and tells it to.
A flatterer, whose supple-tongued talk
Soothes all in speech, but never speaks in sooth,
Yet of the two a better way does walk,
And shows no malice, as the slaunderer does;
Who spits the poison of his spightful heart,
The other does but wagge his tongue by Art.
Nature has parkt within an Iuory pale,
The tongue of man, for fear lest it should stray,
And made a goodly Lodge full round and tall,
Wherein the Keeper, Reason, watch it may:
Who when it is about to faune, should see
It range not out, and so miscarried be.
If then the tongue for fear of flattery,
Seems to require such circumspect regard,
Doubtless for slanderous makebate mockery,
Reason had need keep daily watch and ward,
Lest it should break out, as it often does prove,
From bounds of reason, or from bounds of love.
The ancient Greeks did not for naught adore
Harpocrates goddess of silence so,
Whose finger on her lips lay evermore.
The Romans had their Angerona too:
No idle Idol as they did suppose,
But such as showed that they should naught disclose.
For let us observe the tongue in parts of man,
Of softest slippery substance does consist:
And therefore by the nimble nature can
Give him the slip, ere his discretion wist*
Ye be examples, though ye be but bad:
Yours slipped away with all the wit ye had.
Bid god be with it, and so let it go,
The loss will never hinder you so much,
Because the profit benefits no more,
The bareness and the barrenness is such.
But what cared ye such profit for to raise,
So ye might suck the honie-sweete of praise?
But he does ill, if ye consider it,
That prostitutes before each careless eye,
The naked beggary of a threadbare wit,
To get an alms of commendations by:
For each should earne the price of praise indeed,
And doing so, not one should need to need.
But ye perhaps, as Satyr, argue well,
Yet sought not for reuersion of the praise,
But public good in taxing public ill,
And reprehending men's blameworthy ways*
Well, let that be, that seemed but your intent:
Yet I will it convince by Argument.
Were one endew'd with all celestial grace,
Had he the tongue of men and Angels too,
Should he remove the mountains from their place,
Could he alone what no man else can do,
Yet wants love, (as ye) when all is done,
Were he a Prophet, he could profit none.
Want ye not love, that with malignant spite,
Vncouer'd all the frail infirmities
Of your weak brethren, to the wide worlds sight?
Want ye not love, that all men do despise,
And would extort from others open shame,
Your famous glory and your glorious fame?
Either ye could and would not vanquish vice,
Or else, ye would and could not happily,
Or neither could or would in any wise,
Or else both would and could, and dare not try:
Or could, and would, and dared, but did not so:
Or could, and would, and dared, and did it to.
If could, and would not, then ye spightfull were;
If would, and could not, insufficient men;
If neither could nor would, ye both appear,
If could, and would, and dared not, cowards then:
If could, and would, and dared, why did not ye?
If could, would, dared, and did, no vice have we.
This needs must be the true conclusion:
Yet this will not a true conclusion be;
We shall resolve it by distinction,
True then in fear, in matter false we see.
For proof of which we all have vice to show,
True that it is false then, and false that it is true.
It seems your brother Satyr and ye twain,
Plotted three ways t^ put the Devil down;
One should outray le him by inuectiue vain,
One all to flout him like a country clown;
And one in action, on a stage outface,
And play upon him to his great disgrace.
You Humorist, if it be true I hear,
Against the book of Humors.
An action thus against the Devil brought,
Sending your humors to each T^eater,
To serve the writ that ye had gotten out.
Pasquils Mad-cap.
That Mad-cap yet superior praise does win,
Who out of hope even casts his cap at sin.
Why did ye such unchristian courses take,
As lothes the ears of the offended wise?
Can ye make sin against it self to make,
Or wring the Devil out by his own vice?
It Is past your power, to bring your will to pass,
Your vain attempting, but a tempting was.
Experience, the looking-glass of fools,
Shows much contention, little good affords,
And ye might learn this at the Gra^mar schools,
That man is wise, that speaks few things or words.
Much worth, more worthy is a quiet life,
Then strife in naught, but how to cease from strife.
Leave that ambition, that led ye away,
To censure men and their mis-gouernement,
Judging the world before the latter day,
As though ye would the Son of God prevent:
Leave it I say, and lay it quite aside.
How can men rise, since Angels fell, by pride?
Is It like, the air of three men's breaths at last,
Should purify the sincke of all men's sin,
When as their words, like loathsome vomit cast,
Not purifies, but putrifies within?
For, that your speech do most men's minds infect,
Some swears, more says, most thinks, and all suspect.
What will ye say? your end though good may be,
Ye meaned well, whatsoeu'r ye have done;
God grant ye did, and I will grant it ye;
Naught me contents less then contention:
But your good meaning little profits now,
Unless that ye in action do it show.
A good intent fair virtues hand has kissed,
And that is the most, which small avails us,
For virtue still in action does consist,
Else it were nothing to be virtuous:
Since ever the most Heroike purposes
Are easly thought, but are not done with ease.
If virtuous Esse then in action be,
Show your good deeds; but they are not to show:
And, though they were, they would not profit ye;
For doing good, is not sufficient now*
If this profound, or else profaned appear,
First hear my proof, then censure what ye hear,
In doing good, a man may badly do;
Because good deeds ill done do turn to naught;
For doing good, it must be well done to;
Good done, does no good, nor done as it ought:
One may do good, and yet do evil still;
For good must be well done, or else it is ill*
Since then ye see how far ye do digress,
Consider now what first deprau'd your mind;
It anger seems, mixed with vaine-gloriousnesse,
If trees by fruit, and fruit by taste we find:
The bitter nature of your speech is such,
And then the glory taken in it as much.
A fiery spirit of presumption,
An ayry vapor of soone-melted wit,
A watery humor of affection,
An earthie grosenesse of conceit with it,
Compounds your natures: as small palmistrie
May by the lines of your right hand descrie.
But humane anger is of triple kind;
As ancient Greek Philosophers say all.
The first, we still in choleric natures find,
Soon moved, soon pleased, who^ cholerik me^ we call,
Whose color will their choler straight bewray,
But lightning-like it flashes soon away.
The next is slower of conceyt then this,
But long remains steept in peevish thought,
And in the melancholic nature is,
So closse conceald, as few misdoubteth ought:
At last bursts out into some sudden ill,
Or mitigates by phisickes sovereign skill.
The third most cruel, soon vsurps the mind,
And never dies till it revenge does see,
Which in depraved sanguines we may find,
Who vndispleased still most pleasant be:
But vex them much, and Lion-like they will rage,
Their blood will rise, and scarce with blud will swage.
But Phlegmatike slowest to wrath of all,
Cause their cold humors quench their heat of blud,
Rather displeased, then angry we may call,
Of later kind yours, then is understood;
Thirsting revenge in most mischeeuous thought,
Til with your pen you had your purpose wrought*
Now Jesus God, how swiftly did you scour,
With Hue and Cry, for apprehending vice;
Your tongues ran after twenty miles an hour,
No Irish lackey dare it enterprise:
Many like posts do follow after ill,
That should like pillars stand by virtue still.
But all this while we have employde our speech,
To bring to light the works that light do shun,
And what ye did, we did but only teach.
Now I'^e advise you what you should have done:
See then my love, and think of what you see,
Beholding it, for it beholding be.
Not so profane, with unprepared mind,
Polluted lips, unsanctified heart,
Teach humane kind, in such inhumane kind,
As not belongs to a Christians part:
But have bewailed the worlds unhappiness,
First drowned for sin, now drowned with sinfulnes.
What heathen-hearted Saracene could see
His native Countriemen loue-sicke with sin,
Espouse their souls to foul iniquity,
And not with grief have euerwhelmed bin?
Who to their foes could more unfriendly do,
Or to their friends have been a greater foe?
Or if ye would not for your countries sake,
(Whose love should be the supreme of your breast)
Yet it behou'd a Christian care to take
Of your own selves as sinful as the rest.
For if this Land be Sodomiz'd with sin,
It Is not your lots to be at Lots therein.
Accept in love what I with grief unfold,
Hold that in mind what ye accept in love:
Try that in proof what ye in mind do hold:
Use that in life what ye in trial prove:
That life through proof, and mind through love may choose,
What it accepts, to hold, and tries, to use.
That is, to change your mis-employed course,
And weane your wit from sucking still of shame,
To feed on purer substance of discourse,
That it may manage deeds of endless fame;
And not disgraced so ignobly lurk,
Deprived of good, deprau'd by evil work.
Long not to be, what ye too long have bin.
Rare is the tree that fruit in Winter bears*
O sacrifice your sorrow for your sin,
And bathe your cheeks with deaw of timely tears*
Procrastination breeds but future sorrow;
Then to repentance never bid good morrow.
As many days as in the year there be,
So many years each day to me will seem;
As many hours as in the day we see,
So many days each hour I shall esteem;
As many minutes as each hour does spend,
So many hours each minute will extend,
Until I find, what yet I cannot see,
Your words less evil and your deeds more sound;
Until I see, what yet I doubt will be,
Your love more deep, your malice less profound:
Until I hear, what yet I cannot know,
Your ill to good, your good to better grow.
But Jesus God, I have forgotte me much,
My hope is bootlesse thus dispent on ye,
This gentle dealing will ye little touch,
Proud-stomackt graceless Rake-hels as ye be.
Few minds their faults, and fewer mends the same,
Till punishment supply the place of blame.
Come on your ways, I Will ye no more reprove,
But what your friends bad, that perform I must,
Correct ye sharply, not for hate, but love;
Stand not on points, then they must be untrust:
Parate vos, dispatch, content your mind,
Ye hear before, what ye shall feel behind.
Yet soft awhile, and first the causes see;
Inprimis you have played the trewants, I can show,
Spending your time on lewdest company.
Item, you said In speech, not one word true.
Item, you brawl'd and quarreled from your place,
And so forgot the Concord in that case.
Nay, ye are grown to all ungraciousness,
Mocking and flouting still at every one:
Your happiness is in unhappiness,
The world cries out of your abusion:
So that to spring to growth of any grace,
The case is clear, you are clear out of case.
Not one a venial scourge escaping crime,
Each more deserves then I Will inflict for all;
And yet of one I thought not all this time:
That is, because your betters ye miscall,
Nicknaming all your fellows, there is no hoe,
But tag and ragge, and cut and long tail to.
I, if ye meet a Noble man or so,
In stead of reverence (as becomes us)
Ye will abase him and abuse him to,
And so forget Cede Maioribus.
Come on your ways, the reckning is come in;
To make a purse, now I must flay your skin.
Yet if I saw one spark of grace in ye,
The kindling hope would melt my anger clear;
Well masters, ye may thank God heartily,
This Gentleman is busy reading here:
For whose disturbance I must keep the peace,
And cease to strive, or rather strive to cease.
Down on your knees, though in humility,
(For time deposes such as pride exalts,
And ask the world forgiveness instantly;
I did recount, do ye recant your faults.
Now I have done: say, do no verdicts grutch;
Whether enough, too little, or too much.
Too much, if bad; not good enough, if much;
If good enough, then here is too little here,
To whom it is little, it is not bad to such,
To whom it is much, not good enough I fear:
If bad and little, then the less your pain,
If good and much, why then the more your gain.
FINIS.

