SPIRITVALL PRESERVATIVES against the Pestilence.

OR SEVEN LECTVRES ON the 91. Psalm. First Printed in Anno. 1593.

And now reuised, corrected, and published, as generally for the instruction of
ignorant people: so specially for the confirmation of the weak servants of
Jesus Christ; describing the most divine and most sovereign Preservatives
against the pestilence.

By H. Holland.

Hereunro is added a sweet Prayer of M. R. Greenhams, never before published.

Leuit. 26. 25. I will send a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of
my covenant, when ye are gathered in your cities, I will send the Pestilence
among you. LONDON Printed by T. C. for John Brown and Roger Iackson. 1603.

The Contents of this Book.
1 Q. What benefit, comfort and rest Gods peop'e receive by faith against the
Pestilence. 2 Q. Wherefore the Lord smites his people with the Pestilence. 3
Q. How the wicked spirits are Gods special instruments in the Pestilence. 4 Q.
That a good conscience is a special preservative against the Pestilence. 5 Q.
How graciously the Lord preserues his people by his holy Angels in the
Pestilence. 6 Q What wonderful communion there is between Christ and his holy
members, best known to Gods people in afflictions. 7 Of the visitation of the
sick in all diseases.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR ROBERT LEE, LORD Mayor of the City of London, and
to the Right Worshipful Sir James Pemberton, and Sir John Swinerton, Knights,
and Sheriffs: and to the Right Worshipful the Aldermer their brethren: H. H
wishes all graces to be mul^plied by Gods holy spirit, as for the government
of the said City, so for their own everlasting salvation in Jesus Christ.
THe Almighty God (Right Honorable and Worshipful) in all ages of the
woride, has ever reclaimed his people Psalm. 105. 45.

Deuteronomy. 28. 47.

Ps. 78. 10. 17.

Ps. 81. 13.


from their sins, by sundry his most just indgements, and correstions: and
warned them by his manifold mercies, and blessings, says the holy psalmist,
To walk uprightly in his statutes, and to observe his laws.

There is no nation in all Europe, freed from the bondage of Antichrist, and
professing the bolie Gospel of Jesus Christ, so entreated both ways for many
years as we have been. The Lords mercies and blessings cannot be numbered, take
a short view of his chasticements and fatherly corrections upon us. He has
put us in mind of our disobedience often by the pestilence, which is one
special revenger of his covenant. And for many years past he Ann. 1588

Ann. 1589.

Psalm. 107. 18.

Psa. 78. 37

An. 1592


never left pleading with us by wars, famine, or by pestilence: but in all
evils, when we cried unto him, he soon called back his anger, and did not
stir up all his wrath against us. Now again when we thought all our sorrows
to be paft, and that our blessed King should seal up and conclude our peace
with God and man: yet still the Lord proclaims his wrath against us, For we be
not upright with him, neither Psa. 78. 37

An. 1593

Anno. 81.

An. 188.

Ioachim. Camerar. synopsi de peste. pref. Eusebius. in chro.

An. 254 Act. and M. P. 74.


are we faithful in his covenant.

Sundry stories have recorded, how in all ages the Lord has swept away
multitudes with the pestilence.

In the year of Christ, 81. when Vespasian was Emperor, and again in the
year of Christ 188. in the days of Commodus the Emperor, there d^d daily in
Rome of the pestilence no less then 2000.

Again in Anno. 254. there were fifteen provinces of the Roman Empire,
Incredibiliter exhaustae (says one) wonderfully wasted Lauathr se^ de peste.
with the pestilence.

In the year 530. in Justinians time in Ann. 530.
Constantinople and there-abouts, there died 5000. every day, interdum etiam
december Eusebius. lib. 9. cap. 8. and 8. cap. 16. sub fine, and 7. cap. 21.
millia, sometimes 10000.

And in an other part of Greece it is said, the plague destroyed so many, that
there were none living to bury the dead.

The stories of the Church speak often of most grievous plagues upon the
Pagans for afflicting An. 540.
Gods people: for this cause Anno. Euagr. lib. 4. c. 24. and. 2. c. 6.

An. 1359


540. there was an universal plague 50. years together, which most grievously
consumed and tormented (says Euagrius) all the world. And in Italy, it is
said, that An. 1359. the pestilence destroyed so many that Anno. 1521. Act.
and. M. P. 682.
there scarce remained 10. of a thousand. And in Rome where the son of
perdition sits as God in the Temple of God, was a plague Ann. 1521. that
consumed above an Anno. 1576.

Anno. 1577.

Ioachim. Camerar. insynopsi de p^e.


hundredth thousand people.

And since the Gospel began to shine forth in Germany and other parts of the
world, the Lord has consumed and wafted diverse Cities in the Popes dominions
in Italy again, as Millan, Padua, Venice, and many more, about the year 1576.
and 1577. with a most grievous pestuence, which destroyed a hundredth thousand
in a City. And it is thought the Petrach ex millenis qui busque hom. vix. 10.
super essent.

Number. 25. 9.

Psalm. 106.


little kingdom of Bohemia lost no less then 300000. of the plague about the
same time.

In the elder Church of the Jews, the Lord often in a short time destroyed
thousands and millions: as for the sins of his people with the Moabites, the
plague burst in upon them (says the psalmist,) and smote There was avehement
Pestilence in England.

Anno. 348. Act. and M P. 484. and. Anno. 1314. Anno. 1591. Anno. 1592.

O^diseases. 8351.

An. 1593.


24. thousand. And in David's time, in three dates 70000.

When we consider this hand of God so mighty in consuming thousands in great
wrath, both in the Church and without, both in elder times and of late years,
both in foreign nations, and otherwhiles in this land, and in this Honorable
City: how is it, that we do not extol the most admirable lenity, and
fatherly forbearing hand of the Lord upon us in these days? for we shall
seldom read or see such gleaning of a few, with such patience and long
suffering as the Lord has done with us.

Many have a brutish fear and worldly sorrow, and as it seems, because of
the loss of their long peace and prosperity? but some again on the other
side, are so foole-hardie, that they Carnal and irreligious fears presumption
and security
fear nothing, and think these loving warnings of the Lord to be but
ordinary and therefore not to be feared: and neither regard as Christians any
amendment of life, nor as good Citizens good and wise orders appointed for the
preservation of this honorable City, and the health of the Lords people. The
greatest sort fly always from the Lord as in the lesser evils, so in this
great calamity to all the natural helps that can be found, and yet receive
small benefit (as we all see) in the end, because they seek not in the first
place to those most precious spiritual preservatives and helps which the Lord
offers us against the pestilence. Reason, physic, and daily experience can
teach us, that some secret causes work in this plague more then in any other.
For this cause (R. H. and W.) and to satisfy the request of some friends, I
was content this Treatise (containing I trust some comfortable spiritual helps
against the pectilence) should be published for the benefit I hope of some of
Gods people.

Now my humble request unto your Honor and Worships is, that as you be wise,
provident and circumspect, and very careful to remove all natural causes
which seem to breed, and do indeed give strength unto this venomous
contagion, by obser^ation of politic orders in all the parts of this
Honorable city, so you would also be as vigilant, and strive with strong hand
to remove the spiritual causes of the same; I mean^ that you should pare away
all the rotten proud sins of this city (which are corrigible by good laws)
as much as in you lies with the sword of instice. ^our will is good, and has
been (I hear for many years) for to cast down the devilish theaters, the
nurceries of whoredom and uncleanness: they are Cupids and Venus temples,
they are Bacchus and Satan's palaces, they corrupt the youth of your city
intollerably: all eyes can see, and all chaste ears can witness, and some of the
masters of these evil arts (when the Lord had humbled them by some great
terrors) were driven to confess the same in extreme passions and pangs of
death.

In all ages God and his Church has ever abhorred these wicked abbominations:
let one man speak for all. Tertul showing how Gods people differed from the
Pagans in his sweet apology for the Church against the gentiles, he says:
Nihil est nobis dictu, visu, aud^, Abolog. c. 8.
cum impudicitia theatri. We cannot abid^ to speak, to see, or hear any
thing of the shameless and unchaste wantonness o^ your theaters. They replied
upon you in t^ city often, as elsewhere with authority and (...) censes,
^euer allowed by the almighty. T^ idle drones greatly profaned, as in all the
la^ so specially in this city, the Lords Saboth, and carried away great
flocks, or herds rather of blind people from the holy worship of Almighty
God. But our gracious King seeing the greatness of this impiety, has already
by Edict reformed this evil: The Lord will not be unmindful of him, for being
thus mindful of his holy Saboths. Lord open thou his eyes to see the manifold
impieties that as yet remain in Church and Commonwealth, and giuc him a wise
heart to reform thy sanctuary, according to the divine rule thy most holy
word. As for natural preservatives the learned Physicians can best direct you.
Yet give me leave only to put your Honor and Worships in mind of such helps
as some of the learned have greatly commended, and many godly wise men, have of
ten wished for the benefit of this city.

The first thing to be desired is, that God would stir up your hearts and
others to provide more new burials for the city, where the dead might better
rest from the living, and the living better avoid the contagion of the dead.

The second thing to be wished is, that many Leu. 13. 46 2. Kin. 15. 5
houses were provided (as in elder times for the contagious leprosy, and many
cities in other countries and kingdoms have at this day) where the sick of
infected houses (if they desired more liberty) might have more freedom of
air and benefit of the place for diet keeping, etc. For such as be pind up in
their own houses in the city, as birds in their cages, are often greatly
plagued, the rich with want of air, the poor with famine. The last thing is
this, that the sick be committed to the custody and cure of such selected and
chosen men, merciful men, men fearing God men of judgment and knowledge,
meet to minister helps both corporal and spiritual to ease the grieuances
of Gods people both for their souls and bodies, and that such be well provided
for, and encouraged with a most competent and sufficient salarie.

The Lord guide your hearts and spirits by his almighty spirit, and grant you
such spiritual courage, wisdom and judgment, as that ye may faithfully
execute the Lords judgments in this Honorable City, to the glory of God, the
good of his Church, and the everlasting comfort of your own souls, through
Jesus Christ. Anno. 1603.

Your H. and W. to command and to use in the Lord, Henry Holland.

THE EPISTLE TO the Reader.
WE may well say (good Reader) of the men of this age, as Christ and his
Prophet spoke of the people of their times: their eyes are shut and see not,
their ears are heavy Mat. 13. 14. 15.

Esa. 6. 9.

Fat things want sense and feeling.


and hear not, their hearts are fat and feel not. Ignorant people swarm^ in
all places, having eyes and cannot see how the Lords judgments are threatened,
and otherwhiles most justly fall upon them: They stop their ears from the
Gospel, they can at no hand be charmed to any sincere obedience to it, such
effeminate, delicate, and itching ears, as will not hear the charmer, charm
he never so wisely. Their hearts are fat, they cannot understand how leave their
souls are, and how empty of all good graces, and how stuffed and farced full
of rotten and unsavory sins in town and country. What ignorance and
blindness, what insidelitie and profaneness, what pride and idleness, what
gluttony and drunkenness, what whoredom and uncleanness, what deceit and
lying, what blasphemies and all cursed speaking, what riot and all manner of
excess, do reign in most places?

For these sins and the like, many judgments are fallen, and we have yet
escaped them. The Lords hand strives to chasten us, and not to consume us:
miserable people ca^hear when their bellies speak, but cannot hear when God
does speak. Your sins cause the pestilence, the pestilence in time will breed
famine, great wants and penury among you. The Lord give you eyes to see, ears
to hear, and hearts to understand.

Make have to reform your selves first, and then to your families. Teach and
correct your unruly servants, keep them from theaters and other abhominatio^s,
bring them to sermons more carefully, teach and correct your children for
lying, swearing, and blasphemies. Teach al your family the holy grounds of
religion, the fear of the Lord, for so ye are bound to do: if ye doubt of Deu.
6. 7. 8. 9.

Genesis 18. 19

Exodus 12. 26.

Josh. 24. 15

The godly tremble to hear and see your children and servants in the streets


this, ask the Lord and he shall tell you. But alas, most of you miserable
people, neither can teach, nor will learn any good: Nay, it is to be feared,
you teach your wives, children and servants, all the evil you see, hear, and
know, every where practiced in the world. They learn of you to swear horribly,
their wicked mouths are full of oaths: they learn of you to walk
inordinately: for their lives are ungodly and profane. Families are the
fountains of al commo^-weals, purge the fountains and the streams shall be
clean, Wherefore I warn, such as fear the Lord, love Gods people, regard their
own welfare in this life, and everlasting salvation in that which is to come,
teach, instruct, correct, and by all good means reform your families: for
assuredly our sins call for many judgments from the Lord upon us.

Purge your families I say, of unclean persons, Ps. 101. 7.

Genesis 35. 2.

Ep. to Phil. Deuteronomy. 21. 18. 20.


as did David and Jacob, not sparing even your own children in their
disobedience, riotous and luxurious life. And humble your selves (in this and
the like calamity) in abstinence and prayer: For so have the people of god ever
done in sundry afflictions, when they sought for any great blessings for
themselves, or for the church of God, Hest. 4. 16. Nehem. 1. 4. Act. 10 30. And
so did David and his good people in the pestilence, they rested not crying unto
the Lord, and then it is 2. Sam. 24. 25.

Sic exoratus est Jehovah terrae.


said: The Lord was entreated and appeased toward the land, and the plague
ceased from Israel.

Here I offer thee christian Reader, some spiritual helps and co^forts, both
against the pestilence and many other evils: if thou shall receive any benefit
by them, give God the praise and glory. Farewell in Christ, the year of our
salvation. 1603.

Thine in the Lord Jesus. Henry Holland.

SPIRITVALL PRESERVATIVES against the Pestilence.
THE 1. LECTVRE.
Psalm. 91. 1. Who so rests in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the
shadow of the Almighty.
THIS Psalm is a very precious Jewel, containing most sweet doctrine, and
heavenly consolation. It is most like to be written when Yet the Jews think it
to be a Psalm of Moses.

Three daie^ 2. Sam. 24. 16. (...). 25.


the Angel of God in David's kingdom slew so many thousands, in that short
time throughout all Iewrie. At which time the Lord moved to mercy by the
instant prayers and continual supplications of David and his people, the
Angel was commanded to hold his hand, as from Jerusalem, so from the whole
land. Considering therefore all circumstances, this Psalm may very well be
referred to that time and people. A short view of the whole Psalm may thus be
given thee. They have a most sufficient protection, as in all evils, so in this
of the Pestilence, whom the Lord hides in his secret place, comfort in his
almighty shadow, and covers as with his holy wings. And this he does to all
them which assuredly rest by faith in him, and hope in him, which have Gods
word and holy verity for their shield and sword, which do watchfully wait upon
him, in all reverence, in all their ways, which wholly hang upon him, as upon
their Almighty Father in love, in faith, and fear, which call upon him in all
their troubles. These men he protecteth fatherly, he preserves mightily by
his good Angels, and comfort sweetly by his holy spirit, as in all troubles,
so in the dreadful time of the Pestilence.

The parts of this Psalm may be these.

1. The first part is a proposition: verse 1. The parts.
for this general doctrine is here first propounded: that who so rests by
faith in Gods providence, reposing himself in all afflictions, sweetly as in
his fathers bosom, that man has assuredly an almighty shadow, and protection
against all evils of this life.

2 The second part is a confirmation, verse 2. by an argument drawn from the
Prophets own experience: it may be set in this form.

What I find true touching my faith, by mine own spiritual experience in my
self, Gods faithful may find true by the like experience in themselves.

But I find, and must ever profess it, that the Lords almighty shadow is my
best protection against all evils, and my sovereign preservative in the
Pestilence.

Therefore Gods holy people, if they do by their precious faith repose
themselves in Gods bosom, they shall find as an almighty protection against
all evils, so a most sovereign preservative against the Pestilence.

3. The third part is an application of this sweet doctrine unto all
belceuers, to stir them up to embrace it: from the third verse to the
fourteenth. Where we be to observe:

1. How with many words, and sweet promises, he desires to cheer and confirm
the hearts of the faithful, that they may rest by a particular, victorious
faith on God in the Pestilence.

1. ver. 3. Surely he will deliver thee. 2. ver. 4. He will cover thee. 3. ver.
5. Thou shall not be ^fraide. 4. ver. 7. A thousand shall fall at the sid^, and
it shall not come near thee. 5. ver. 13. Thou shall walk upon the fierce
Lion. etc.
Secondly observe, how he calls upon the believer to cleave unto Gods
protection by a special faith: and to look well unto his ways etc.

1. ver. 4. He will cover thee under his wings when thou shall hide, or betake
thy self under his featbers.

2. ver. 9. 10. Because thou have set the Lord (which is mine hope) even the
most high, for thy refuge: there shall none occasion be given that evil may
touch thee.

3. His Angels shall keep thee, in all thy ways.

Thirdly, observe with what variety of names and arguments the Prophet sets
forth the nature and qualities of the Pestilence: for he calls it

1. The snare of the hunter. ver. 3. 2. The noisome Pestilence. ver. 3. 3. The
fear of the night. ver. 5. 4. The arrow flying by day. ver. 5. 5. The
Pestilence that walks in darkness. verse. 6. 7. The rewardf the wicked. ver.
8.
Fourthly, mark what means the Lord uses for our protection in the
Pestilence: for the Prophet assures us, that the holy Angels of God are sent
with a special charge and commission from God to preserve his faithful people
from evil spirits in the Pestilence.

ver. 11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy
ways.

ver. 12. They stall bear thee in their hands that thou hurt not thy foot
against a stone.

And thus far the application.

The fourth part of this Psalm is a conclusion, wherein the Lord himself
speaks (as it were) to the heart of the believer, feeding him with sweet
promises, and instructing him what duties he requires at his hands.

1. Gods sweet promises are these repeated.

1. I will deliver him. ver. 14. and 15. 2. I will set him up on high, that is
in a sure place of defense. ver. 14. 3. I will hear his prayers. ver. 15. 4. I
will be with him in troubles. ver. 15. 5. I. I will honor him. ver. 15. 6. I.
will give him long life. ver. 16. 7. I will show him my salvation. ver. 16.
2. God requires in his children.

1. Faith. Because he depends on me, or embraces me. ver. 14. 2. Love.
Because he depends on me, or embraces me. ver. 14. 3. Knowledge and
profession ver. 14. 4. The spirit of prayer. So soon as he calls upon me I
will hear him. ver. 15.
The 91. Psalm. verse. 1. Who so or dwells
rests in the secret of the most high, shall abide in the shadow of the
Almighty.
THE first verse contains the proposition of the whole Psalm, as is before
showed. The sense is this: That he which firmly stands by faith in the Lords
seeret Sense.
place, that is, under the Lords gracious providence and strong protection,
when tempestuous calamities fall upon the world for sin, he shall be graciously
preserved as in an almighty shadow.

Secret Latibulum.
a place of refuge whereunto a Tremell.
man runs from the violence and rage of his enemies: as wild beasts when
they are in chase before the hunters, make all speed into their dens and
holes for their defense. So much does the word in the original Beseter.
signific: And so in like manner the prudent man hides himself in Gods bosom,
when God smites his people with the Pestilence. Pro. 22. 3. shall abide in the
shadow: or as the best read, shall lodge all Iithloua^.
night in the shadow. Like as wearied travelers much spent with the heat of
the Sun and long travel, greatly rejoice when they come to a covert where
they may rest and refresh their weary bodies: So the spirits of the faithful,
much disquieted with the afflictions of this life, can find their sweet sleep,
when they can by a holy faith in Jesus Christ, repose themselves as in the
bosom of the Almighty.

Where first we are to learn, how lovingly ^bserue. 1.
the holy Ghost does warn us, to cleave unto God, and to persevere in his holy
worship in afflictions, in time of trial, wherein the wicked run to any of
the creatures, rather then to God, yea sometimes to Satan himself, before
they seek any refuge or comfort in the Almighty. Such as rest in the ordinary
creatures Four sorts of men in troubles diue^sly affec^ed.

I^b. 3. 16.


only, are mere Atheists; such as seek to Satan and his arts, are bewitched
Papists, Idolaters, and such like. Such as when all helps fail them, are
driven at last by their corrections (as Job speaks) to come unto the Lord,
are weak in the faith: Such as first seek reconciliation and peace with God
by Jesus Christ, and then desire a blessing in the use of the creatures, are
wise and good Christians. The Prophet says not, they have a sure defense in
war, which have many men, many horses, etc. in famine store of corn and good
provision, in pestilence good natural preservatives and curatiues: but that
such as have a strong faith in Jesus Christ, are then greatly blessed, and
shall be mightily preserved.

Some think it is a light matter to come to God by faith, and to lie down as
it were in his bosom confidently in afflictions: But this is one special
brand and mark of the faithful, and that which God most desires, and a point
without the gracious assistance of Gods spirit, which is not in the power of
flesh and blood to practice.

There is a notable story 2. Chron. 13. 18. of Abiah and his people of Judah:
of whom it is said, that they prevailed against their enemies, because they
stayed upon the Lord God of their father. And the like we have 2. Chron. 16. 7.
of Asa his falling away in his latter age, in his afflictions: first he is said
to have run from the Lord to Gods professed enemies, the Syrians, and to have
made a covenant with them to help him in his wars against the Israelites: at
which time Hanni the seer came to the King, and spoke these words: Because thou
have rested upon the King of Aram, and not rested in the Lord thy God,
therefore is the host of that King of Aram run away from thee, and thou (verse
9.) shall have wars again. And then the Prophet confirms his prophecy by
the kings former experience, in the victories the Lord gave him before by
faith, when he cried to God in fervent prayer, saying: 2. Chron. 14. 11. Help
Lord, for we rest on thee. The Ethiopians and Lubbims, were they not a greast
bost, with charrets and horse exceeding many? yet because thou did rest upon
the Lord, he did deliver them into thine hands: then he added this notable
argument. For the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, to show himself
strong with them whose heart is sound toward him. In the like manner he is
noted in his sickness not to have sought the Lord in the first place, but the
Physician. In all extremities then our first refuge must be by faith unto the
true God; for he will be, and must be (if we regard but our allegiance only we
owe unto his majesty) first sought for, and honored before the creatures.

I. Question.
What benefit, comfort, and rest Gods people may receive by faith, in the
Pestilence.

THe blessed faith of the Saints of God Heb. 11. 6

Romans 14.

Io. 6. 9.


is a wonderful supernatural grace, by the which we greatly please God, and
without it, we displease him in althings, without exception.

This great grace and gift of God, as it is most needful at all seasons and
turns, so most of all in extremities, for if it then fail us, we shall be
carried away as with a maine sail, from the Creator to the creature, and and
we shall fix all our senses upon them, and confidence in them, and forget the
great Lord and governor of all the host of heaven and earth. This virtue
greatly pleased Jesus Christ in his miraculous cures on earth, and does no
less doubtless please him now in heaven.

The faith of the Gospel, or Evangelical requires; 1. that you believe that
the Messiah is come: 2. that you believe that Jesus Christ the son of the
Virgin Mary is God and Man, or God manifested in the flesh, and that very
Messiah which was to come. 3. that you believe in him, for your perfect
redemption. 4. lastly it was required in these which resorted unto him for
miraculous cures, that they carried with them a particular faith to be healed,
that is a comfortable persuasion of heart, that he both could and would heal
them, and such afflicted persons as they prayed for, might be healed. This holy
faith I say, greatly pleased Christ in earth, and shall prevail with him in
heaven also for all mercies and blessings to the worlds end.

And the contrary sin did hinder many graces streaming sweetly from him unto
the Jews, and so does still to all unbelievers among the Gentiles. This the
Evangelists tell us, where they say, that when he camo to Capernaum his own
Country, He did not many works there, for their vnbeleefes Math. 13. 58.

Mat. 6. 5.

Mar. 16. 14

Luk 8. 25.


sake: And another says, He could not there do any great works for their
unbelief, and that he marvelled at their unbelief, We see then how
insidelitie may keep^ back from us Jesus Christ with all his riches. The
faithful ever returned from his Majesty both sweetly comforted with his
blessings, and graciously strengthened with his loving commendations. The
Centurion which came unto him in Capernaum, with a good heart and a sound
faith, Matt. 8. 10. 13.
first he received this blessing, Go thy way and as thou have believed, so be
it unto thee, and his servant was healed the same hour. Then followed this
comfortable commendation: Uerily I say unto you, I have not found so great
faith even in Israel. Again, the woman with the bloody Issue, she received
many mercies from Jesus Christ; first this comfort, he calls her Daughter;
secondly this blessing, the issue of her blood Matthew. 9. 22.
was stayed and healed; thirdly, this commendation, Daughter be of good
comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. Again, two blind men cry to be
healed: he asked them of their faith, Believe ye that I am able Math. 9.

verse. 29.


to do this? they said, yea Lord: and then he said unto them, according to
your faith be it unto you, and they were healed.

Of a Cananitish woman it is written, that she was most earnest with Christ:
and she is at last graciously comforted, first with this commendation: O woman
great is thy faith, be it unto thee as thou desire: secondly Matthew. 15.

verse. 28.

Mar. 10. 15

Luk 8. 50


with this blessing, Her daughter was made whole in that instant. The like
commendation and comfort received the blind men in Jericho, and Iairus when
Christ cured his Daughter: Fear not, believe only and she shall be made whole.

Here I demand whether Gods minister^ and good people now, may not receive as
great mercies and blessings, as well corporal as spiritual, by faith, as the
people of the Jews did, when Christ was conucrsant with them on the earth? We
know, his knowledge, his love, his mercies are not diminished or changed, his
power and might is the same, and more glorified. Surely then that which lets
the free course of his graces and mercies from us, must be in our selucs,
ignorance, hardness of heart, and great infidelity.

Cyprian says, in his time, he and his brethren did wonderfully convince
Idolaters, confound Satan and all his practices, cast out devils, and heal
the possessed, by faith, prayer, and fasting, etc. Et velexiliunt statim, vele
vanescunt gradatim, prout fides patientis adiu^at, etc. The wicked spirits
(says he) 4. Tractat de Idoloru^ vanitate.
either slye away presently, or vanish away by degrees, as the patients faith
helps, and as he which heals has grace to prevail with God. I know that
miracles are past, and that the holy word is sufficiently confirmed:
notwithstanding, the Lord cease not to bless his own ordinances, and to
grant many mercies to the faith of his holy servants, as hereafter in an other
question shall be showed.

Now, whereas we see often Gods good people in grace to be smitten with the
Pestilence, Leuit. 26.

Deuteronomy. 28.


this has troubled many, that these great plagues should light alike upon good
and evil without difference: this caused Jobs friends to account him an
hypocrite. First I will answer this in Cyprians words. Mouet quosdam, quod
aqualiter cum gentibus nostros morbi istius valetudo corripiat, quasi Sermon. 2.
de mortal.
adhec crediderit Christianus, vt and immunis a contactu malorum, noundo and
seculo foeliciter fruatur, and non omnia hic aduersa perpessus ad futuram
laetitiam reseruetur. Many think it strange that this mortality smites
alike our brethren with the Gentiles: as if a Christian did believe to this
end, he may with hearts ase in this present world be free from all evils, and
not rather, that after he has suffered here all sorrows, he might be
reserved for those toys which are to ^ome.

Again I say, Gods best children may fall into proud sins, as Lot into
drunkenness and incest, David into murder and adulteries, Peter into
blasphemies: And therefore the curses of Gods laws as crosses, are often
inflicted upon them. And as the Lord does chastise for sins past and present,
so he does prevent by great rods great sins whereinto we might fall, if we
were no^ greatly humbled. This may best be demonstrate by the holy presidents
of the Scripture. It is storied Luke 13. 10. that Christ teaching in a
Sinagogue of the Jews on (...) Sabbath day, there was there a woman which bad
a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was bowed together, and could no^
^ift up her self in any wise. When Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and
said: Woman thou art loosed from thy disease: and he laid his hands on her, and
immediately she was made straight again, and glorified God And the ruler of
the Sinagogue answered with indignation, because that Jesus ha^ healed on the
Sabbath day, and said vnt^ the people; there are six days in which men ought
to work, in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day.
Then the Lord answered him, and said, Hypocrite, does not each one of you on
the Sabbath day, loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away
to the water, and ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound
eighteen years, to be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day? Here thou
have a faithful daughter of Abraham tormented by Satan in a most strange
malady for many years. The like Math. 9. 2
we see in the good man sick of the palsy, indeed a most dangerous palsy,
commended for his faith, and such as carried him to be healed.

In like manner Gods children have in all ages been smitten with the Pestilence.
David has left unto the Church a Psalm of remembrance, that Gods people may
for ever learn instruction by his chastisements. The best Interpreters are of
judgment, Psalm. 28.

David smitten with the Pestilenee^


that he was sore afflicted with the Pestilence: the symptoms and signs of
this evil appear in his mourning: he says, there is nothing sound in his
flesh. 2. His wounds are rotten. 3. He is bowed and crooked with the pains.
4. His raines are full of burning. 5. He cries for the pain of his heart,
Where this evil flies (says Galen) like a Dragon. Lastly he says: His
lovers and friends stand aside from his plague. It is most like also that
Hezekiah was smitten with the Pestilence, 2. Kin. 20. Heb.
for he was deadly sick for the time, and then it is said, the figs healed
him of the bile or carbuncle.

Most grievous was the pestilentiall plague which Ioh had, and so noisome was
it, that as it befell David, his lovers and his friends (which were no
counterfeit friends, for they came indeed to minister spiritual comforts to
him) they stood aside from him seven days, and partly for sorrow, partly no
doubt for fear of contagion, did not approach near to any familiar
communication as they purposed.

Master Beza that blessed servant of the In the argument of this Psalm.
Lord, and light of Christ's Church, was humbled four times and his family, as
he confesses himself, with the Pestilence. Again, the plague of leprosy
was no less grievous and noisome then the Pestilence, for that it would in a
strange manner, pierce Leuit. 14. 37.

Number. 12.


into the stone walls, and very contagious was it: yet the good woman Miriam
Moses sister, was grievously chastened for her sins with this plague, seven
days together.

At Alexandria there was a very great famine and plague at one time, (for
famine may breed the pestilence, and pestilence brings famine, and wars bring
both). This plague consumed multitudes of people, and many good Christians; for
when the Heathens sled, the Christians in a wonderful compassion and mercy,
buried the dead, which otherwise were devoured and torn in pecces of dogs, and
so were many good people poisoned with that infection and died, as Eusebius
writes. Lib. 7. cap. 11.


Thus then we see Gods good children chastened in this present life, with the
same rods with the wicked. For like as the father in the family giving
correction to his servants, if any of his children more untoward and
disobedient then the rest, be near his hand, he will happily sinite him also
with the same rod, and yet love him as his child, and not as a servant: even
so the Almighty in the pestilence, and in a general visitation upon a City,
Town, or Country, he lays otherwhiles the same rods upon his dear children
wherewith he consumes the wicked. And yet all shall work together for the good
of them which fear him. Romans 8. 28. For howsoever our Lord and master in his
anger, otherwhiles takes up against us the same scourges which he has prepared
for the ungodly, yet assuredly he will give us but his fatherly correction, and
he will cause us to understand, that all the chasticements of this present
life, are not worthy the great glory, the sons of God shall receive in the
life to come. Here let us daily with Jeremy, in our visitations, cry with
open mouth; O Lord take me Ier. 15. 15
not away in the continuance of thine anger. The Psalmist says, he casts
forth signs of his fear, anger, indignation, and wrath, when he smites a
people with the Pestilence. Psalm. 78. 49.

And let us strive mightily to be comforted, and to rest patiently by faith in
Jesus Christ. First let us endeavor to receive by faith an answer from Gods
spirit, that our sins are covered and pardoned, and Psalm. 32. 5.

Luke 7.


this answer shall more revive and comfort our hearts, then all the cordials
in the world can revive the spirits or any parts of the outward man.
Secondly, let us mightily call for the confirmation of our faith, that Heb. 10.
35
we may have patience, The daughter of God, Patientia Dei alumna, says
Tertul: for Tertul. de patientia.
this is a sovereign preservative against this evil; for want of this,
unbelievers are like birds in lime or snares, which the more they strive to
escape, the more they are limed and snared. It is wonderful what comfort and
courage, faith by patience may Heb. 11. 3^ 32. 2.

Chron. 14. 16.


work in all true believers. This kept Asa when 20000. Ethiopians came about
him to devour him: he was greatly environed and had a strange deliverance. This
comforted David when he was ready to be stoned, God gave him great courage, He
comforted 1. Sam. 30. 6.

Hest. 4. 14


himself in the Lord his God, and received a wonderful deliverance. Likewise
Hester in her most dangerous attempt, for the preservation of Gods people.
Hannaiah Mishael, Dan. 3. 17
and Azariah, and all the Martyrs of God in the world, were ever encouraged by
faith patiently to bear for the truth sake Heb. 11.
all the tortures and torments which the world could lay upon them.

So let us in the like straites whatsoever, of wars, famine, and pestilence,
cast our selves by faith into Gods bosom, and desire that by patience we may
possess our souls 2. Tim. 1. 12.
in peace: and say with P. I know whom I have trusted.

Faith in Gods providence, and faith in the redemption go together. We can
never truly trust him with our bodies, if we trust him not with our souls.
And again, if we doubt of his favor in earthly things, we must needs much
more doubt of the same in heavenly things.

Trial of our faith in Gods Providence.
1. If we do not in the good day and in prosperity, attend well the mean, of
salvation, and store up on souls with comforts, we shall be empty in the
evil day when it comes.

2. If we be not sust persuaded that all evil inventions and corrupt
imaginations, either bred in us by our own corruption or iniected into us by
the malice and craft of men or Angels be grievous Ge. 56.

Pro. 12. 2

Io. 14.


sins before the Almighty: 2. if we do not mourn for our secret thoughts,
Act. 8.
and inward backsliding and falling from God: 3. if this holy mourning cause
not in us a holy hatred c Ps. 119. 112.
and detestation of all vain shifts, and wicked inventions of the world, we
shall not possibly stand in the evil day.

All profess an asfiance and trust in Gods providence, but unless they trust
in his word, their rest is vain, and will deceive them in the evil day. A man
must therefore with David; Psalm. 119. 114. say on this wise: O Lord thou art my
refuge and shield; that is, I rest on thy providence: but note the evidence of
this faith, and my trust is in thy word: for he that does not know, believe,
rejoice, and trust in Gods word, he can have no faith in Gods providence. God
promises things temporal and 2 miT 4. 7.
things eternal: his word contains general promises, and particular promises
for all wants of body and soul: general, as Ioh. 1. Heb. 13. 56. I will never
leave thee, nor for sake thee: The believer must answer in heart: o Lord thou
art my refuge, and my trust is in thy word: particular for wants, Ps. 34. 10.
They which seek the Lord shall want nothing that is good: To which Psalm. 56.
voice answer with a believing heart: O Lord thou art my refuge, and my trust
is in thy word.

4. If we have hope in Gods providence, we must take heed that we indent not
with the Lord for any thing, but simply give up our selves to him, seeking Gods
grace at al t^mes and with all our hearts, and let us ask other things as
pleases him: for when wegiue these outward things to the Lord, the^ will he
soonest give them to us again. Thus did David in his affliction 2. Sam. 25.
26. If the Lord say, I have no pleasure in thee, behold, here I am, let him do
to me as seems good in his ey^s.

5. We may not ask earthly things as signs of his favor, neither must we
esteem the want of these things as tokens of his displeasure.

THE 2. LECTVRE.
Verse. 2. I say to the Lord, O my defense and my fortress, my God is he in
whom I trust.
HEre the Psalmist speaks of his own sait^ and experience, desiring thereby
to teach and confirm others. The The second part, or confirmation of the
former doctrine by an argument of experience.
sense is this: Let the men of this life seek rest and comfort where they
please, I am thus resolved and have purposed, in all troubles, plagues, etc.
first to fly unto the Almighty shadow of gods most graciou^ protection. And
as I believe, so will I speak in my heart before God, and with my mouth before
men, that the Lord is my fortress: and the God in whom I will trust.

O my defer. e. The word signifies a place of refuge to shelter our selves in
a great tempest, q. a. I will seek my protection o Lord under thy wings.

And my fortress. The word signifies a place of defense in wars. Thus by
many metaphors the Prophet desires to assure us, what a sure refuge God is unto
his faithful people in all their troubles.

In whom I trust. On whom I set all my rest: and not on the secondarie causes,
or external means on which all unbelievers stay themselves, and therefore if
these fail them, they despair or be at their wits end. Ier. 17. 5. Cursed be
the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his
heart from the Lord. And continually. Ps. 40. 5. Blessed is the man that makes
the Lord his trust.

In this verse we may observe a good mark of a true believer to run to God,
when most men run from God, as in all extremities we daily see. It is a most
hard point to practice to divert from the common rode of the wicked in evils,
and to betake our selves to gods help and holy ordinance. The men of this
world live daily by examples, but we must live by faith, we must be resolved as
was Iofhua, howsoever other men make choice for Habak. 2. 4
their gods and religion, yet (says he) I and mine house will serve the Lord
And as David Chap. 24. 15.
here says: let the profane multitude of unbelievers, run to the creatures in
their necessities, forgetting the Lord of life, yea some to the means he
utterly forbids, and others not a few, to the mere professed enemies of
God, to Pagans and Idolaters, as often did the Kings of Israel and Judah; yea
to Satan himself, as all such do which run to the devilish faculties of
witchcraft and sorcery: as the Egyptians when they were smitten with sundry
plagues, they sought to their wizardly priests and coniurers, so the Chaldees,
Babilonians, Saul, Manasses, Nero, ^ulian, and such like in all ages. The
hypocrites judgment and practice is clean contrary to this holy canon here
taught us, for he thinks it never safe to walk that way which most men tread
not: of the way of the multitude, it is said, Many si^de it and like it, but
the end is destruction. Luke 1325

Mat 7. 13




The 2. thing to be noted here, is how he labors to teach others by his
example. Obseru. 2.


This is a singular good way for teachers to convert and confirm souls, by
speaking unto men of their own sense, and experience of their faith. I find
says he by most comfortable experience, that they be safe which are in the
Lords secret chamber, and under his almighty shadow; I mean such as make God
their castle and protection, and boldly cry unto him, that they depend upon
him, trust and rest in his almighty providence. This is the best way to teach
the ignorant, and to convert sinners unto God, by our own faith, feeling,
experience and practice: of this we have many sweet presidents in scripture.
This Prophet when he has received any spiritual comfort and instruction, he
is ever ready to communicate unto others, what graces he has receceiued, and
how to come by them. Having received inspeakeable comfort in the free pardon of
his sins. Ps. 32. v. 5. he says, v. 8. I will instruct thee and teach thee
the way that thou shall go. And Psalm. 51. he shows how greatly God is
delighted, that we Verse. 12.
should teach others, what benefits we have received. I will teach thy ways
unto the wicked, and sinners shall be converted unto thee. This manner of
teaching the Apostle thinks most effectual and profitable, and therefore he
uses often in his own example, to teach others great mysteries of religion:
as of the dangerous conflicts between the flesh and the spirit, Rom 7. and 8.
of the virtue and great ^fficacie of Christ's cross, death, and resurrection,
Gal. 6. 14. 15. 16. Romans 66 How greatly the faithful esteem of Jesus Christ
and his Gospel, 1. Cor. 2. 2. Phil. 3. 8. 9. And the Apostle thinks also this
way best to co^sort others in afflictions, for thus he writes: Blessed be God,
even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the f^ther of all 2. Cor. 1. 3 4.
mercies, and the God of all comfort, which comfort us in all our
tribulations, That we may be able to comfort them which are in any affliction,
by the comfort wherewith, we are our selves comforted of the Lord.

The use of this doctrine is this: every man to stir up himself to be
mindful of his brethren, to pe^orm spiritual duties unto them of instruction,
admonition, exhortation, etc. as their state and condition shall require. And
to this end, to beg of God as a loving and a merciful spirit, so specially
the spirit of wisdom and judgment, that we may know how to speak a good
word seasonably unto him that is wearied with his afflictions. Es. 50. R. v. 4.
Pro. 25. 11.

Verse. 3. Surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the hunter, and from
the grievous Pestilence. or Pestilence of sorrows, or m^st noisome.

The third part of this Psalm or application of the former docrine here begins.



Here the Psalmist labors to apply the general doctrine of the first
verse, and what he has spoken of his own says and experience in the second
verse, unto the present calamity which was upon the Jews in his time; and he
strives to persuade every one of the faithful, that they shall be delivered
from the flying Angel, which like a hunter raunged throughout all Jury,
destroying so many thousands with the grievous and deadly pestilence, if they
sly by faith, far above the secundarie causes unto the Lords providence, and
holy protection.

1. Here learn, how that we must endeavor with all our might to strengthen one
an others faith in calamities. Do thou believe? can thou believe? All
things are possible to him that believes. Will thou lie down in the shadow of
the Almighty, surely he will deliver thee.

2. The Pestilence is here called the snare of the Hunter, because the Angel
which was sent from the Lord, like a Hunter or a fowler, strangled and slew
many from Dan to Beersheba throughout all that kingdom with the Pestilence.
And it is not unfitly compared unto a snare, for that it catches suddenly, some
walking, some feeding, some sporting, some waking, some sleeping, as we have
seen by our experience.

The Pestilence is here said to be noisome, grievous, and painful. The word
noisome, or grievous, is in the original a word of the pl^n. and signifies
grieses. So the plur. n. is used for the superlatiue degree. q. d. the most
grievous pestilence: so it was in elder times unto David, Heze iah, and Job,
and so it is unto this day in such as are smitten, we see and know daily by
their complaints.

Verse 4. He will cover thee under his wings, and thou shall be sure under his
feathers; his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.
Here the Prophet applies unto the believers spirit and conscience, the same
gracious promise of protection, in other most sweet rearines, and familiar
speeches. When men are dulled with griefs, sorrows, and calamities, they will
hardly admit any consolation: for this cause the holy Ghost here so often
repeateth the same promise of mercy and comfort unto us.

The metaphor of the Hen covering her young with her wings and feathers, is no
less comfortable than familiar. Our Savior likes it, Math. 23. 27. The like
is also used, Exodus 19. 4. I have carried you upon Eagles wings, and have
brought you unto me.

The metaphor wherein he compares the truth of Gods promise unto a shield and
buckler in the wars, is thus understood: Like as the shield and buckler
covers our bodies from the strokes and darts of our enemies: so the holy
promise of Gods protection and deliverance received by faith, strongly
confirms our hearts to receive any calamities or plague, and to rest
confidently, as out of all danger in Gods almighty shadow. So is Gods promise
called, Pra. 30. 5. Every word of God is pure, and a shield to those that trust
in him.

Here note, that whereas before he said, the Lord to be the most sure
protection of his people, he ascribes now that protection here unto Gods
truth, that is, the revealed promise of God, because the Lord ca^ no other way
be found, but in the word o^ promise, neither can our faith receive him by any
other means. So then, such as seek^ him without his word, shall never find him
to their comfort. Psalm. 119. 114.

2. Question. Wherefore the Lord smites his people with the Pestilence.
THE Books of God give the Pestilence many names, some proper, some borrowed
and metaphorical, which may help us with some light to discern the causes of
this terrible destroyer of mankind. First, the most sit and significant name
in all the Scriptures, is given it in the third verse of this Psalm, Deber
hauoth (a) a Pl. n. for superlati^
plague of sorrows, or a plague of griefs and torments, for that it is both
most noisome and painful, as our experience teaches us. The same word is
used, Exodus 5. 3. where it signifies in like manner the Pestilence. But Exodus
9. 3. the murraine which fell upon the beasts of Egypt. Because the murraine
and the pestilence destroy both man and beast alike. Secondly, it is tropically
called, The hand of the Lord. 2. Sam. 24. 14. Iad Jehovah.

Because the Lords power and might more appears and is more manifested in
this I do not ground this upon the metapho^
great evil, than in any other. I think it not fabulous what I have heard
some report, that they have seen, as it were, the print of a hand upon the
arms and other parts of the body, of sundry smitten with the pestilence.

Thirdly, the Pestilence in this Psalm has sundry names, Pachadlaiilah, the
fear of the night, from the effect, for that it causes many seares in the
night. So David, Psalm 38. (2.) (b) Chets, an arrow flying by day, because it
strikes Mortalibus miserabile hoc imprimis est, impendentem tantam perniciem ne
odore quidem sentire nos posse.

Fernel. 14. c. 1

1 King. 8. 37.


suddenly, it is swift and deadly. (3) Verse 6. (a) Destroyer, again, walking
in dark places, no light can help us to discern this contagion this evil
spreds it self so closely, and so darkly. (4.) Verse 6. Kereb, which word
signifies again destruction or ruin, or as some say, the biting of a wicked
spirit. ve. 10. (5.) Negang, a plague, a scourge, a whip, because it is the
Lords great scourge for the correction of his people. (6.) It is named also, 2 Samuel 24 21. 25. Magephah, which signifies great smiting, and grievous beating,
of Nagaph, to smite and beat to death.

The holy Ghost in all his speeches concerning this sickness, seems to
desire to list us up above the secondarie causes, to look upon the Lord, and
to fix and fasten all our senses upon him. Thus David speaks, Let 2 Samuel 24.
14.
us fall now into the hands of the Lord, for his mercies are great. And the
Lord is said to Ezec. 14 19.

Leuit. 26. 25.

Number. 14. 12


send the Pestilence as it were a meslenger and executioner of his justice: And
to meet Exo. 9. 15.

Ezec. 38. 22. 11.


us with the pestilence. Exodus. 5. 3. And to smite with the pestilence, Ier.
29. 1^
and to plead against his enemies with the Pestilence, and to persecute with
the Pestilence. Whersore when, and whersoeuer we see this hand of God, let us
remember that the destroier is sent from God, to smite us for our good, if we
fly unto his mercies, for they be great, as David speaks, but for our just
confusion, if we abide still in our sins, and rest upon the creatures, for
now we must list up our selves to look on him which smites, pleads, and
persecuteth us for our sins most justly, as we have deserved, because we
would never acknowledge his hand, power and might, in his other ordinary,
fatherly, Causes of the pestile^c^
and gracious chastifements upon us. Now for the causes of the Pestilence, the
Phisitio^s (who ought to guide us in this argument) here some sweat much and
gain little; others either ouer-boldly fly up to constellations, or too
negligently ascribe it to secret causes. They all say, that it is an What the
pestilence i^
infectious poison, deadly enemy to the vital spirits, with all speed flying
into the heart the castle of life, but whence it comes, whereof it arises,
and wheresore it is sent, in these causes they confess their ignorance. First,
they say it is not bred of any elementall quality, cold, hot, dry, moist, but
Fernelius Lib. de abditi.

Sed a venenato inquinamento acrei infuso. (...) by quos s^pe dixi causam
occultam habere.


does proceed of some venomous pollution which is spread in the air. Again,
says he, These be the maladies I have said often, they have some secret cause.

And whereas some deem the scorching heat of Summer to be some cause of this
evil: he answers, first every hot disease (as the Plague) is more dangerous
and grievous in hot times then in cold. Secondly, that it is known by
observation, that the hottest Summers have bin without all manner of plagues,
and that sometimes it has Wherefore the plague is more grievous in summer than
in winter.
begun in Winter, and ceased in Summer or Autumn. Thirdly, if any say that it
is bred of rotten exhalations, which abound in unsavory places of great
cities, he answers, that it is found likewise to pester the people also,
which inhabit the most sweet and sauourie regions that can be, and in the
most temperate season.

Again he he says, Sunt pestilentiae semina vsque adeo occulta, etc. The
first causes which breed the pestilence are so unknown, so in^isible, and so
strange to all our senses, that we are altogether ignorant of them, and they
smite us when we think not of them, neither can they ever be espied but by
their effecies and events. Again, he speaks wittily of rotten and
unsavory airs. Ea Epidemio^ quosdam morbos infer solet, nunquam tamen sola
pestilentes: ad pestilentiam interdum confert, and incrementum addit, at non
illam excitare potest: sed causae altioris hoc opus est. The putrefaction of
the air (says he) which arises of unclean streets, etc. it may cause some
of the common and ordinary diseases among the people, but this alone can never
breed the Unsavory streets give strength to the Pestilence.
Pestilence. This gives greater strength to the contagion, and increases it,
but cannot beget this evil; the Pestilence is an effect of some higher power.
Thus then we see these learned Physicians to confess their ignorance in the
causes of this most grievous sickness. The most they can say is, that it is a
poison sent into the air, which poysoneth and kills men in a strange
manner: and it is not to be forgotten, that this man sends us above nature
and secondarie causes unto an higher power; that is, I think, to speak with
the Scripture, to the mighty hand of God, as we have before showed.

Where the Physician fails and cannot proceed to discover the causes of
strange and incurable diseases, it were no disgrace for the best of them, to
entreat the religious and learned Divine to reach sorth his helping hand. It
were happy in Church and Commo^-wealth if men were so linked together in
hearts and affections; for that Arts and Sciences liberal and common, are so
coniugated and tied together, that they have continual reference one to an
other, and can never well want the help one of an other.

Now to return to our purpose, these three questions may here be considered.

1. What moves Almighty God and our most merciful Father, to smite his people
with the Pestilence? 2. By what instruments he uses to smite his people in the
Pestilence. 3. To what end the Lord thus smites his own people in the
Church with the Pestilence: and what use we are to make of this, and of all
kinds of afflictions?
To come then to the Book of God: first let us learn I say, wherefore the
Lord has sent in all ages this destroyer into the world. And next we will in
like manner consider of the instruments and means whereby the Lord poysoneth
the Elements, and so smites man with the Pestilence. And lastly, to what end
he thus proceeds in execution of his fearful judgments.

The causes which move the Lord to persecute the world universally with the
Pestilence, are the intolerable sins of men: and in the Church these
special impieties and wickednesses which follow, as motives, and causes of
this evil, are offered unto our wise and godly consideration.

First I sinde, that ignorance, contempt, The first cause of the pestilence*
and negligence in the pure worship of God, causes the Lord to smite us with
the Pestilence. Moses says to Pharaoh, Exodus 5. 3. Let us go three days
journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice unto the Lord our God. Then he
adds this reason. Least he bring upon us the Pestilence or sword. Contrarily,
to the true worshipper it is said, The Lord shall bless thy bread and thy
water, and I will take away all sickness from the midst of thee.

A second cause is infidelity and rebellion against the word, and the holy
ministry Exodus 23. 25.

The second ^ause of the Pestilence.


of the same. Thus says the Lord, Number. 14. 11. 12. How long will this people
provoke me^ How long will it be ere they believe me? Here is the cause: I will
smite them with the Pestilence: Here is the effect.

A third cause is this, to trust to the creatures The third cause of the
Pestilence.
in extremities, and not in the Lord: as to men and armor in times of war;
this was David's sin, for it is said, Satan stood up against Israel, and
provoked David to number Israel. 1. Chron. Chap. 21. verse. 1. Here is the
cause: So the Lord sent a Pestilence, and there feli of Israel seventy
thousand men, verse 14. Here is the effect. Contrary unto this sin is the
patient resting of the faithful upon god in aducisities, to whom it is said,
Who so dwells in the secret of the Psalm 91.

Verse. 1.


most high, shall abide in the shadow of the Almighty.

A fourth cause we find is spiritual and The fourth cause of the Pestilence.
corporal whoredom, and all superstition whatsoever: of this cause Moses
writes, Number. 25. and David Psalm 106. 28. 29 They joined themselves unto
Baal-peor, and did eat the offerings of the dead: thus they provoked God to
anger with their own inventions: thus far the cause, the effect. And the
Plague break in upon them.

A fifth cause is blasphemy, and all the profanation of the most great and
glorious name of God, and the want of a due fear and reverence in his worship
according to his name, power, and majesty. If thou will not fear this
glorious and fearful The fifth cause of the Pestilence.
name of the Lord thy God. (Here is the cause, want of reverence of God, and
all that is contrary to this fear, all profanation of this great name of God)
the effect follows, Then will I make thy plagues wonderful, Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
and the plagues of thy seed, even great plagues, and of long continuance, and
sore diseases and of long durance, all the diseases of Egypt, every plague, etc.

A sixth cause, is the graceless contempt The sixth cause of the Pestilence.
of the holy word, and of the messengers and Ministers of the same. Thus says
Jeremy, to the Jews in Jerusalem, which would not be taught by Gods word, and
despised the Prophets of God, chap. 29. 18. I will persecute them with the
sword, with the famine, and with the Pestilence. Here is the effect first, the
cause follows, because they have not heard, I. obeyed my word, says the
Lord, which I sent unto them by my servants the Prophets, etc. In the seventh
place all the sins The seventh cause of the Pestilence.
of Sodom, pride, fulness of bread, want of mercy, idleness, etc. may be
numbered. These caused the famine, wars and pestilence in Zedekiahs miserable
kingdom. Ezech. 16. 46. 47. and Iere. 29. 17. 18 And the eight cause, is the
affliction and grieuance of Gods people, Tire and Sidon they shall be smitten
from the Lord with the pestilence, says Ezechiel, for afflicting Gods people.
I will Chap. 28. 23.

The eight cause of the Pestilence.


send her pestilence and blood into her streets, the cause is added, they
shall be no more a pricking thorn unto the house of Israel, nor a grievous
thorn. Eusebius speaking of the famine, wars, and pestilence in the East
parts under Maximinius, and at the same time in Rome and West parts under
Maxentius, he shows the cause in these words, Quis autem, sicausam tantorum
malorum inquirat, Eusebius. lib. c. 16.
persecutionem aduersus nos motam causae loco assignare dubitauerit, etc. Who
shall doubt to affirm, that the persecution or affliction of Gods Church and
people, was the cause of all the evils that fell upon the world under those two
Tyrants for ten years space, for when they gave liberty to the Christians
their plague ceased. To the same purpose he writes again in the same Dis. 9.
1. 7. 8.
story, showing how all the calamities which came upon the world, they are sent
from God, for the affliction of his people.

Let the ninth cause be the abuse of the holy Sacraments, as in general of
all diseases, so no doubt one especial of the pestilence. Thus the Apostle
speaks: For this cause, meaning the abuse of his Sacrament, first many are
weak: secondly many are sick: thirdly many are asleep, i. dead already. I.
Cor. 11. 30. This also is a general impiety, which has ouer-spread City,
Town, and Country: for Saboths and Sacraments be exceedingly profaned, by
reason of the blind ministry of the land. Christ is not preached, his divine
mystries be not opened to the people. The precious and the vile are alike
accepted to the Lords Table. The idolater, and blasphemer, the murderer and
bloody man, the adulterer and whoremonger, the usurer and oppressor, are
thought worthy men, to sit and feast with Jesus Chaist.

The tenth cause: the Lord Jesus says, the Pestilence is one of the messengrs
of his coming. These messengers some of them are long before, Luke 21. verse
12. as persecution for the Gospel, Before all these they shall lay hands on
you, etc. Some not long before, as famine, wars, Pestilence, earthquakes,
etc. verse 9. But after these the end follows not by and by, some shall be
even in his coming, verse 26 the powers of heaven to be shaken, the Sun to be
darkened, the Matthew. 24. 29.
Moon to loose her light, the stars to fall, the whole frame of heaven to
pass away with a noise, 2. Peter 3. 10. the element^ and the whole earth to
consume away with heat, and lastly, the great sign of the son of man shall
appear. The Plague then in these times is the sword of revenge, drawn forth
against all nations, when the Lord sends it for the contempt of the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, and to proclaim unto men, that if the execution of this
judgment cannot prevail against their security: the Lord himself comes
speedily to the general judgment, to sweep away all sinners from the face of
the earth, and to cast them into a place of torments: where they shall have
plagues, far exceeding the plagues of Egypt, not only in body but also in
mind, not for a day or two, but for ever. They shall have plagues without end.

The eleventh cause. If any yet would The eleventh cause of the Pestilence.
know wherefore the Lord sweepeth away so many thousands in the world among
Pagans, with this beesome of destruction, let him take a veiwe of the plagues
of Egypt, most terrible and dreadful, for besides the revenge of his people,
the Lord mentions often another cause, namely the manifestation of his power
and might, which he will have known, as by his mercies among his people, so by
his fearful judgments upon his enemies, Exodus 7. 4. and 5. By great
judgments the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord Chap. 9. 14. I will at
this time send all my plagues upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and upon
thy people, that thou may know that there is none like me in all the earth.

The twelfth and last cause, may be this again in the Church, and among Gods
people, the revenge of the covenant of the Lord, for where the Lords
Lieutenants and keepers of his covenant the magistrates are slow to draw forth
the sword of justice, there the Lord tells us he will draw forth his own
swords of famine, wars, and pestilence. Leuit. 26. 14. 15.

If ye will not obey me, nor do all these commandments, and if ye shall
despise mine ordinances, either if your soul abhor my laws, so that ye will
not do all my commandments but break my covenant, etc. verse 25. I will send
a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant: When you are
gathered in your Cities, I will send the Pestilence among you. Deuteronomy 28 15. If
thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep and do all his
commandments, etc. verse 21. The Lord shall make the p^stilence cleave unto
thee, until he has consumed thee the Lord shall smite thee with a consump^on,
and with the fever, and with a burning ague, etc. verse. 27. the Lord will
smite thee with the hotch of Egypt, with the ^rods and with the scab, and with
the ^ch, that thou can not be healed.

Now then condering the premises, may not we here out of the Lords book more
The conclusion.
certainly declare the causes of the pestilence than the learned Pl^an can do?
and let us not now think it strange, that the Lord so smites us in a short and
light plague, but rather let us admire and extol his mercies with all the
praises we can: for considering the gross ignorance, the great Atheism, the
beastly epicurisme, the profane blasphemies, These sins reign in every City,
town, and hamlet, and yet the watchmen are a sleep, the Lords covenant is
broken, the watchmen regard not, and therefore he will avenge the quarrel of
his covenant, by the Pestilence.
the wicked periuries, all the intolerable prophanations of Gods holy name,
the abuse of the Lords Sabbothes, the great contempt of Gods holy Ministry,
word and Sacraments, uncleanness, adulteries, incest, fraud, deceit, vsuries,
and all manner of oppressions, with infinite more sins amongst us, is it not
a most admirable and miraculous mercy that we be not continually consumed
with all the judgments of the Almighty? within these few years, the Lord
first began with a famine which sinote all the parts of the whole land, not long
after he made us al to tremble with the sight of a most bloody Nation which
came to devour us: now in the last place, he has called us by Pestilence, to
a sin^ere Anno. 1587.

Anno. 1588.

Anno. 1592.


obedience unto his Gospel. The first judgment was soon forgotten^ the
second has given us no instruction. The Lord grant this third and last of the
Pestilence, may open the eyes of his people.

Great plagues and judgments, argue great sins assuredly, and great sins
call for great judgments. I conclude this question with the wise man's golden
sentence, Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and God prolonge his
days, yet I know that it shall be Eccle. 8. 11. 12. 15.
well with them that fear the Lord, and do reverence before him: but it shall
not be well to the wicked, he shall be like a shadow, because he fears not
before him.

THE 3. LECTVRE.
Verse 5. 6. Verse 5. Thou shall not be affraide of the fear of the night,
nor of the arrow that flies by day.

Verse 6. I mean the Pestilence that walks in the darkness, and of the
Plague that destroys at noonday.


TO pass over the allegories, of which some are not unprofitably, nor unfitly
here understood by diverse of the learned Interpreters, I think it sufficient,
to commend unto Gods people that sense only, which the scope of the whole
Psalm^ leads me unto. I understand here therefore in all these sweet promises,
by all these metaphors, and borrowed speeches, that great evil which the
Prophet before, verse 3. in natural and proper terms has called Deber
hauoth, The grievous Pestilence: or the pestilence of griefs, that is most
grievous.

In the fifth verse, The Pestilence has two fit names, 1. The terror of the the
night, a metonymie of the effect for the cause, because this sickness breeds
many terrors and fears in the night.

1. Because the night is a sollitary time, and solitariness does increase
fears.

2. Because of the darkness of the time; for as all light brings comfort and
boldness, so all darkness works fear and discouragement in the sound, much more
in the weak, and now most of all when a man is ready to walk into the valley
of the shadow of death, where is wont to be always some agonies, and great
causes of fear, Psalm. 23. 3. 4.

3 The night breeds fearful dreams, which in time of the Pestilence
increase terrors. Job in his affliction cries out because he is terrified
with the visions of the night; When I say my couch shall relieve me, my bed
Job. 7. 13. 14. 15.
shall bring comfort, in my meditation, then fear thou with dreams, and
astonishedst me with visions, my soul choseth rather to be strangled, and to
die, then to be in my bones.

When the Lord minds to amaze his enemies with any terrors, he powers his
judgments upon them in the night season: Note what sundrv effects this fear
wrought in Phatoh and all his subjects.
when he would shake all Egypt, he slew one, even the first borne in every
house in Egypt, at midnight; and it caused a dreadful crying and lamentation
throughout the whole land, Exodus 12. 29. 30. 33. It was the night time when the
Lord slew 185000. 2. King. 19. 35.
in Senacharibs camp, that so he might beat down the great insolency of that
proud enemy of his people.

First, the Pestilence is called, the arrow that flies by day. So David called
it, Psalm. 38. For that it comes inuisibly, if me^ be not well sighted they ca^
hardly discern how it flies.

Secondly, for that it comes swiftly, a man can hardly avoid it.

Thirdly, because it strikes suddenly, as an arrow does when men think least
of it, sometimes in their mirth-making, feasting, gaming, etc.

Fourthly, an arrow if it come near the heart, gives a deadly wound; so this
evil if it come once near the heart, the Physicians confess it incurable.

In the 6. verse. The 2. trophes set down verse. 5. are expressed verse 6. He
delivers his meaning in plain terms, which he had uttered before, verse 3.
and 5. in metaphors and in borrowed speeches: The Hebrew has in verse 5. The
fear of the night, the arrow that flies, etc. then the verse 6. The
Pestilence, so that we may very fitly ad the word (I mean) or I understand,
the better to express the Prophets mind. It is said again, 1. that the
Pestilence walks in the darkness, 2. that it destroys at noonday. The
pestilence, as some of judgment avouch, is more violent in the night then in
the day, and at midday, then in any other part of the day. First for the
night, the air is made more gross and thick, with the coldness of the night,
and then the strong contagious poison spread in the air, being driven together
(as in the generation of meteors, thunder No wisdom in time of Pestilence to
walk in the aires of night.
and lightnings in the middle region of the air) it is made more violent and
deadly where it lights or smites any man.

Secondly, where it is said to destroy at noonday: the cause of this (they
say) is for that in the day, the pores of our bodies are opened, and then when
the Sun is in the highest pitch of the meridionall line, most open in all parts
and arteries. This time therefore are we most apt to receive any poison, and
this infectious vapor can soonest pierce into our secret parts.

And it is known by the experience of many years, that albeit the heat of
the Sun cause not this pestiserous exhalation, yet it may cause it to be more
violent, and that all winds that come from that part, breed putrefaction and
rottenness in all places.

This says one Aphorism of Hipocrates, Hypocrates Aphorism.
which is, Venti meridionales, hyemales, s^nt mortales: South winds in winter
do bring death or mortality. But I judge the simple meaning of the holy Ghost
may be this: That the Pestilence spares not where God sends it, but smites
down at all times, as at midnight, so at midday all alike: in saire weather
and in soul, in the mountains and in the vallevs, in the best airs and in
the worst, etc. And therefore when God shootes this arrow, men are warned here
to be in a readiness at all times and in all places. Watch (says our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ) for ye know not what hour the thief comes. Thus much
briefly for the sense and meaning of these two verses.

Now let us consider yet somewhat more carefully, seeing the Pestilence breeds
so many fears and terrors night and day, and is so great an enemy and
destroyer of mankind: what instruments and means the Lord uses for the
affliction of his people in the Pestilence.

3. Question. How the wicked spirits are Gods special instruments in the
Pestilence.
3. Surely he will deliver thee from the snare of the hunter. verse. 3.

FIrst here it seems to me very expedient, that we take a short view in the
book of God, how Satan and his wicked spirits come to this great Dominion and
principality upon earth among men, and then wherefore he so hunteth, and
strives by all means in all ages for the death and destruction of mankind.

The holy Ghost tells us that Satan and his angels, were created Angels of
light, and companions in grace with the elect Angels of God, commended and
blessed of God in that general benediction and commendation of all the
creatures.

But they continued not long in that love and obedience of God, (being made
mutable, and having a freedom of will, as all the rest) of their own accord
(God so permitting it, and denying in that instant the assistance of his grace,
and mighty hand of his holy spirit) they disobeyed and displeased Jude verse 5.
the Almighty, and so fell from that blessed light to extreme darkness, and
from that wonderful glory, to inspeakable and endleste consasion. Afterward
these 1. John 3. 8.
wicked spirits have never rested to blaspheme God and to d^stroy man by all
the means they can, for Satan is a murderer, John 8. 44
and ever has sinned with all his wicked angels from the Beginning.

He first began with our first parents, for he knew the roots once infected,
the whole body, arms, and branches are soon poisoned. And to the end he
might inuisibly deceive them, he first possessed the serpent, for this cause
the Scriptures Revel. 22. 9.

1. Cor. 11. 3.


call him that old Serpent Turtul Apoc. ca. 22.

Gene. 3. 1.


M^tum spiritualibus vir^bus licet, The Devil can do much by his spiritual
strength, says one. To be short, the holy Ghost shows it, how after this, by
certain degrees, he sought and had entrance into the woman. F^st, that lying
spirit persuades her most impudently, of the untruth of Gods law and holy
word, concerning the forbidden fruit.

Secondly, by long conference with that Long conference with Satan dangerous,
let him soon be packing.

Matthew. 4.


wicked spirit, the woman begins to doubt, and to call in qustion the
certainty of Gods love and holy truth. Genes. cap. 2. 17. cap. 3. 2.

Thirdly, as that holy light of God was emptyed out of the mind by degrees, so
Satan stepped in, for where that light is he has no entrance.

Fourthly, when Satan had once possessed her mind and blinded it, he then
soorthwith slipped into the heart, and there Matthew. 12. 43 44
wrought infidelity, first he blindes judgment, then he easily corrupts
affections.

Fifthly, when the heart was thus poisoned he easily filled it with evil
thoughts, unclean lusts, and wicked imaginations. Sixthly, wicked lusts of
the heart, being set on fire with the sight of the forbidden fruit, stirred
up the affections, the affections the will, the mutable will the endeavor.
Seventhly, from this inward corruption 1. Men's.

2. Cogitatio.

3. Affectus

4. Voluntas

5. Studium.

Genesis 3. 4. 5. 6.


and subscription unto Satan's sophistry and calumniation against the truth,
followed that outward rebellion and manisest apostacy and falling away from
God. Lastly, the woman bewitched by Satan, was the second instrument to
deceive the man, who yielded in all points by degrees as the woman, and so was
brought to the same most horrible condition of death and condemnation. And thus
began Satan in our first parents to exercise his spiritual jurisdiction and
kingdom upon earth.

Man is not able to express, how blessed and how glorious man then was before
he fell to this league and society with Satan. He was more beloved of God,
more dear and precious unto the Almighty, than all the frame of heaven and
earth, and all things contained therein. For that he was the end and last of
all his creation, provided, for of all necessaries before his Genesis 4. 26.

Psalm. 8. 84.


God in many beautiful graces, the glorious Lord and Emperor over all
creatures, Math. 13. 45. In mind beautified Col. 3. 10. Like his God in
righteousness Ephe. 4. 24. So that in regard, as of his first honor, so of
his last glory, which shall be yet more excellent, the Psalmist bursteth out
into this holy admiration: What is man! thou have made him little lower then
Angels, and crowned him with glory and honor.

Now then the Lord having enriched him with so many graces, and advanced him
to that imperial dignity, because he so shamefully subscribed and consented
to Satan's vntroaths, and conspired with the only enemy of the Almighty, his
sins were most dreadful, and drowned him in perdition with all his progeny.
And thus we are all become the subjects, vassals and unclean cages of wicked
spirits, which have an invisible acquaintance, society and spiritual
affinity with our spirits, before Christ come and bind that strong man: Luke
11. 21. before the Gospel and faith in Jesus Christ, make clean the heart.
Ioh. 15. 3. Act. 159. Before the mighty spirit transform and reform our
minds, hearts, and affections, Rom 12. 2. Ephe. 4. 18. This is Adams progeny:
Who can bring a clean thing out of silthinesse? There is not one. verse. 14.
What is man that he should be clean? verse 16. Man is Job. 144.
abominable and filthy, and drinks iniquity like water. Nay we are said
before grace to be the very seed of the serpent, Genesis 3. 15. Ephe. 2. 3. 4.
And the very children of the devil. Ioh. 84. And thus to conclude this point,
the noblest of all inferior creatures, is become the vilest and basest of all
creatures, and most abhorred of God, the wicked spirits excepted, in this life
subject to innumerable Thus we are ^ll by nature without exception.
curses and miseries; in the next to infinite torments, and everlasting: in
this life the soul Satan's vassal to invent, the body Ep. 2. 2. 3. 4
Satan's instrument to practice; and in the life to come, both companions of
his confusion.

Thus we see briefly how Satan became the god and prince of this world. And
this is he, who with great power and might continually rules and works in
all the sons of Adam, the children of disobedience, as the Apostle speaks.
Ep. 2. 1. 2. 3
And he works also so inuisibly, and so strangely, that till Christ come and
his spirit, the most wise in this world can never discern him: For this cause
one says thus: Suadent miris and inuisibilibus modis, perillam subti^itatem
suorum corporum, corpora De divine. daem. lib 1. cap. 3. 5.
hominum non sentientium penetrando, seque cogitationibus little, per quaedam
imaginaria visa miscendo, sieve vigilantium, sieve dormientium. They persuade by
marvelous and invisible means, piersing by reason of their ayrie thin bodies,
the bodies of men when they perceive it not, and so confounding and mingling
themselves by means of some imaginations conceived, with the motions of their
minds both waking and sleeping.

And thus he poisoneth so strongly the senses of men, as the best Divine is
not able to express the manner of his working How effectually and suddenly did
he possess Judas? How strangely did he surprise Ananias and Sapphira? Who can
express how he breathed such poison into their hearts, or iniected such
motions in their minds?

An other says, he works in his vassals with as great facility as the
beams Vtlamen solis penetrat aquam, nubemacre^, ita spiritus petrat omnia. P.
M.
of the Sun in any liquid or soft matter. Tertullian writes of this secret
power and working of Satan in the souls of men very learnedly, etc. Suppetit
illis ad vtramque substanti^n, etc. Like as blastes destroy fruits and trees
inuifibly and strangely, so (says this learned man) do wicked spirits kill and
poison the bodies and souls of men.

And Augustine speaking of this point, does notably teach us the blindness
and madness of men, who many times to excuse and cover Satan, they blame some
evil humor or distemperance in their bodies. Daemones (says he) quantum
viderin^ fidem in homine crescere, tantum ab eo refugiunt, si tamen in aliqua
infidelitatis part resederint, cum tempus inuenient, cogitationes subiscient
coraibus hominum, and ills nescientes vnde haec veniant suggestionibus daemonum
quasi animae suae sensibus credunt suggerunt ergo alijs occasion corporeae
necessitatis delicias sequi, aliorum iracundiam excusant per abundantiam
fellis, aliorum insaniam nigri fellis vehementia colorant, sed and stultitiam
quorundam ob phlegmatis multitudinem extenuant. The devils the more they see a
man increase in faith, the more they fly from him; but if they have any
residence in any part infected with infidelity, when they find opportunity,
they suggest many thoughts into men's hearts, and they not knowing whence these
cogitations come, they believe the suggestions of devils, as if they were the
motions of their own spirits. They suggest therefore unto some to follow after
their delights, by occasion of some bodily necessity, they excuse others for
their anger by abundance of choler, and the madness of some they color and
hide under excess of melancholy; and they lessen the folly of others also,
because they abound in phlegm.

And because this enemy so invisible, so mighty and so dangerous, can hardly
be discovered, great arguments and signs of his kingdom and habitation are
these by Gods light given us. The heartfull of By special evidences to discern
and discover Satan's habitation.
infidelity without any measure of faith, Act. 5. 3. 2. The mind full of
gross ignorance in the fundamental points of salvation. 2. Cor. 4. 4. Ephe.
5, 8 4, 18. Col. 1. 13. 3. To walk in the works of darkness, howsoever we
pretend knowledge. 1. Io. 1. 5, 6, 7. 4 Uncleanness of body or soul; Math.
12. 43. 5. A relapse into fearful sins, and to be worse after then before.
2. Pet. 2. 2. 21. Math. 12. 44. 45. 6. To see only into the bare story of the
Gospel, not to understand profitably any part of it. Luke. 8. 12. 7. To
persecute the word with blasphemies, Matthew. 12. 30. And with violence. Io. 8.
44. 8. To withstand the true Preachers of the Gospel with all subtlety and
mischief. Act. 13. 10. 9. To have Satan breathing into the heart continual
disobedience. Ephe. 2. 2. 10. To be as it were haltered and choked with cares,
riches, and pleasures. Luk 8. 14. All proud sins argue Satan's presence in
the wicked never humbled always, and in the believers when they fall into such
sins, till they for sake them by repentance. Diabolicibus est ebrietas,
luxuria, fornicatio, and Ierom. epitad Damasu^.
vniuersa vitia. Drunkenness, riot, whoredom, and all proud sins, are the
devils meat: that is, he lodges, feasteth, and sporteth himself where such
abominations are committed.

Cyprian shows his vigilancie and great strife to re-enter where he is once
dislodged: Circuitisle nos singulos, and tanquam hostis Cypr. de Iiuore and
caelo and Hell ser. 2.
clausos obsidet muros, explorat, and tentat, an sit aliqua pars membrorum
minus stabilis, and mirus fida, cuius aditr. ad interiora penutrat. The devil
compasses about every one of us, and as an enemy does beset our walls, he
searches and tries whether any part of us be weak and unsure, that thereby
he may have entrance into us again.

Finally, to end this point, and to come The (...) peace of Christ, the false
peace of Satan.
unto our purpose again, there is nothing we ought in all our lives to be
more careful of, then to strive to discern between the true, the blessed,
and most comfortable peace of Jesus Christ in our hearts and consciences: and
the false peace, and most dangerous and deadly sleep of carnal and benumbed
consciences, where Satan dwells. That if we have the one, we may with all
our might endeavor to preserve it: and if we be miserably deluded, and so
endangered by the other, we may with all speed come to the means appointed
in the Gospel of Jesus Christ for our deliverance. Great and deadly is the
sleep To. 15. 11.

1. Th. 5. 6.

1. Cor. 15. 34.

2. Cor. 2. 18.

2. Cor. 4. 34.


of all Atheists, hypocrites, and carnal men, before Satan's face by the light
of the Gospel be discerned. They are like men which have drunk some deadly
poison, they can but sleep and delight in sleeping, and yet persuade
themselves in this miserable security that all is well. Our Savior rendereth a
reason of this when he says: Satan watches them with all his strength,
munition, armor, and with all violence, st^uing to keep blind in this state
all he can to the Luke 11. 21.

2. Cor. 4. 4 1


day of death.

There can be no true peace before Christ by his word and spirit cast forth
Satan out of the minds and hearts of men: as long as men love darkness, and
hate Tit. 1. 15.

Ezech. 11 19.


light; as long as the sloni^, slintie, polluted heart' and conscience
remains, the peace and sleep is to be suspected to be Sathanicall.

Secondly, before Christ give peace, he must needs war with Satan, Luke
11. 21. In this warfare the prisoner that Christ takes which fought against
him, is the soul of man, etc. a man therefore must be captiuat, and so in
soul humbled under Christ before true peace in Christ's kingdom: that peace
therefore which is before humiliation, is to be suspected.

Thirdly, where Christ has overcome, there his goood spirit watches, for he
will not leese any that he has found. Io. 10. 28. Where that spirit is, there
he works true sanctification of soul, spirit, and body. I. These. 5. 23.
Where therefore true sanctification is wanting, the peace is dangerous, and to
be suspected. But of this more in an other question.

Now to return to that we purposed, let us consider briesly whether the
wicked spirits are Gods instruments and messengers to smite us with the
Pestilence. The Lord uses no doubt as in many other of his judgments, so in
this: the ministry of Angels good and evil: He makes his Angels like the
winds, and his ministers Ps. 104. 4
are like a flame of fire. It was (as it seems to me) a good Angel, which
with his sword drawn flew so many thousands 2. Sam 24.

1. Chr. 21 16.

Aug. in Psalm. 78.


in Israel in David's time. Howbeeit Augustine says, he can never remember
that the good Angels execute any judgments upon any good people. And it was
the Angel of the Lord that flew in Senacheri^s camp in one night 185000. And
they 2. Ki. 19. 35.
were good Angels which came to Sodom and Gomor, when it was destroyed with
Genesis 19.
fire and brimstone.

It was likewise the Angel of the Lord which smote proud Herod, that he was
eaten of worms, Act. 12. 13. Yet Josephus says he saw an Owl, or a Devil
in that Antiq. 19. 7 Bubonem supra caput suum funi exten to nisidente^
likeness over his head, presaging that miserable death. And he adds there
followed great torment^ in his inward parts. His grandfather was eaten of
lice, but this Tyrants death s^meth to be of some sore griping, and guawing
worms in his bowels: he was made worms meat, says Act. 12. 3.
Saint Luke. It may be he was tormented of lice without, and worms within.
But they were evil spirits and Satan's angels which plagued Egypt, Psalm. 78.
49. 50. Wicked sp^rits by sorcery filled their souls with errors destroyed
their body with the pestilence.

Malaki^ Ragnim.

Job. 1. and 2.


He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, indignation, and wrath, and
vexation by the sending out of evil angels: he made a way to his anger: he
spared not their soul from death, but gave their life to the Pestilence.

And satan is said to fill Iobes body all over with most pestiferous botches
and biles. One says, the devil gathers of the first seeds of nature, and
applies them to some matter, and so can produce strange effects, but how far
he can proceed in nature it is hard to judge. The devil is limited two
ways. First he cannot out-reach P. M.
nature. Secondly, the will of the Lord: so (says he) the devil can bring
pestilence, famine, biles, for he knows of what causes these evils do arise.
And an other reverend divine says: The wicked angels are Gods instruments in
the pestilence, Beza de peste. Ille spiri Daemoniacus de men^b. vestrie
aduersus nos araeliatur.

Tert. Apo^ 27.


working by natural causes.

So the devil is said to send the godly to prison, but by means of tyrants
Reave. 2. 10. and chap. 6. 8. 9. verse 1. At the commandment of God the winds
are in like manner sent forth by evil angels, from the which winds
doubtless it is manifest, that many infections of the air, and this infection
chiefly does arise. And Augustine upon the Psalm 78. he is of judgment, that
the good and evil Angels can use these visible Elements, and by them effect
many things. As men (says he) can use them, not only to sustain life, but
also according to the measure of their knowledge, most artificially both in
sundry supersluous trisles, and in diverse mechanical effects.

There be three sorts of maladies wher^by the wicked are plagued, and the godly
chastened of the Lord. The first kind is mere natural: the second is mere
diabolical: the third is mixed. Mere natural I call all those which have
their causes known in nature, discerned and cured not by rude Empyri^, but by
the learned Math. 8. 14. 15.
in the practice of Physic, as the ordinary common diseases among the people.
Mere diabolical I think we may c^ those evils wherein no cause appear^ to
the most perfect and learned Physician but some secret cause; that is, some
wicket spirit sent of God to distemper the body and to cause the natural
faculties and parts of the body, either not to be able to perform their
duties, or to benumbe the body, or to do far more, with greater strength and
violence then nature alone can effect: such were those the scripture calls
d^moniaci, possessed of devils, or holden of devils; or as some learned men
read, inspired by devils. In which most grievous affliction, Satan does most
commonly bereave the possessed of the use of common sense and reason, working
in them beside their ordinary course of nature strange effects, even such as
the most judicious both Physicians and Divines cannot ascribe to any other
cause but to Satan's effectual working.

There is great wisdom and heed to be taken in helping and healing such at
this day; for it is not done by coniuration or divination, as Popish Priests
profess and practice, but by entreating the Lord humbly in fasting and prayer.
I see no warrant we have to talk or question with Satan: for he is the Lords
executioner, he has sent him; what authority then have we to command him
to depart, where God has sent him. A Prince or Magistrate is offended with a
subject for some disloyalty, an Officer is sent to imprison him: shall he or
any other, charge the Officer in the Princes name to let him alone, and not to
touch him? Is it not their way only to pacify the Prince, and so the
Magistrate will command the Officer to surcease? even so where God sends
Satan his executioner to arest any person in any form or manner, in body or
mind: the only way no doubt, is to entreat the Lord to be pacified, and to
rebuke Satan.

Again, we read often that Satan tormented many in sundry most grievous
diseases, which I call the third and mixed kind; for by secret poisons he has
made them incurable to the best practitioners in Physic in all ages. The good
woman mentioned Luke 13. verse 16. she is said to be bound of Satan 18.
years, and to have a spirit of infirmity.

And such were many lunatikes, and may be to this day, they had a disease of
causes partly known, partly unknown, Matt. 17. 15. Master have pity on my
son, for he is a lunatike.

The learned derive the cause of this evil from the Moon as the name
imports, because they have observed, that such as are borne in the change are
thus pained, but note what the Evangelist adds, and we shall see the secret
cause of it, verse 18. Jesus rebuked the devil, and he went out of him, and
the child was healed in that hour.

Here then we see a disease in part natural, in part sathanicall. And master
Calvin he says, that experience teaches us how this disease does increase
and decrease according to the course of the Moon: yet this lets not, but that
Satan can put in his effectual working in the natural means.

Neque tamen hoc obstat quo minus satan naturalibus medijs suos impetus
permise uenit. The woman also mentioned Mark. 5. 25. laboring of an issue of
blood twelve years, may seem to be grievous on this manner, for some cause or
causes seen to be secret and unknown (such be satan's practices) for it is
said she had suffered many things of the Physicians, and had spent all she
had, and it auailed her nothing, but she became much worse; and this woman was
one of Gods elect, for she heard afterward these gracious words: Daughter
thy faith has made thee whole, go in peace, Verse. 34.
and be whole of thy plague.

Of this third and last kind I judge to be our common plague and pestilence
at this day. My reasons are: First it is partly natural; for if there were
here no natural

If any doubt of this, let him look into the judgments which were inflicted
upon Egypt and Job, by the ministry of wicked spirits, for so the Psalmist
speaks, they vexed and tormented Egypt with wonderful plagues.

They turned the water that was in the river into blood. They which can corrupt
one element August in Psalm. 78.

Angeli mali ex vtraque part.


for the destruction of mankind, can corrupt another, the water with blood, the
avre with the pestilence. But wicked spirits did the first: therefore they can
do the second: when and where God permits.

Again, they which can poison the water with frogs, may poison in like manner
the air with pestiferous exhalations: evil spirits did the first, ergo.
Thirdly, they which ca^ destroy beasts with the morraine, may as easily destroy
men with the Pestilence, the wicked spirits did the first, and therefore can
do the second, Exodus 9. 3. Fourthly, they which can breed scabs and blisters,
can breed the pestilence; cha. 9. 10. Lastly, the destroyer which flue so many
in one night throughout all Egypt with the Plague, can plague in like manner to
this The Lord will not suffer the de*
day, where and when he is sent, he was an evil angel (says David) he sent
evil angels, he gave their life to the Pestilence. In Jobs story we see
sufficient demonstrations for this purpose.

They which can bring down fire from heaven to destroy beasts, may in like
manner poison the air, and men with the pestilence, the wicked spirits did the
first, Ergo, can do the second. Secondly, they which can drive winds and
tempests together to beat down houses most violently, may be as fit
instruments to execute the like justice and judgments in the pestilence, the
wicked spirits, etc. Thirdly, they which can poison the souls of men,
suggesting and breathing most pestilent motions into the minds of men to their
destruction, can much more easily poison their bodies when. GOD sends them
for that purpose. But Satan did that first (we see) in the Sab^ans, and in
the Chaldeans, and in all the pestilent crewe of rebellious sinners at this
day: he drives them before him as men drive beasts, says August. Ergo.
Lastly, he that would plague that blessed Jobs plagu. and the plague of Egypt,
have one name in the original causes.
man of God, Job, with most grievous poison and torments in his body, can do
much more upon all the wicked enemies of God, and vessels of wrath, and the
like also upon Gods good people to this day: but Satan and his wicked Job. 2.
7.

Exodus 9. 11.

Deuteronomy. 28. 28. 59. 60. 01.


spirits smote Job with most pestiferous ulcers, or pestilentiall carbuncles,
or biles; scabs and sores most noisome. Wherefore these wicked spirits may and
do no doubt serve the Lord in the like judgments to this day.

And for this cause some of the learned Interpreters have said, these two
names used in this Psalm. Keteb and Deber, are the names of certain evil
spirits, which poison the air with pestilent and venomous exhalations. Of all
the premises let us conclude, that we must in this visitation of the Lord,
principally lift up our minds above the secondarie causes, Winter, Summer,
cold, heat, drought, moisture, all the elementarie qualities, and fasten our
eyes upon the mighty hand of GOD, who, when, and where it pleases him,
sends forth his raunging hunter, this old Dragon, these venomous Aspes, and
bloody Lions, Satan and his wicked spirits against us, as in the wars and
famine, so likewise in the pestilence, the Scriptures speak often that the
wicked spirits fly about, and do many evils: as Job 1. 7. 2. 2. 1. King. 22.
22. Matthew. 12. Luke 8. 31. To. 16. 20. 2. Cor. 12. 8. Ephe. 2. 2. 6. 11. 1.
Pet. 5. 8. 9. But how agrees these Scriptures with Saint Peter^ words: 2. Pet.
2. 45. we read that the Angels which sinned were cast down into hell, and
delivered into chains of darkness, to be kept unto damnation: so Jude verse
6. They are reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto judgment of
the great day. (A.) In the beginning God did so, but afterward for the
execution of his justice and will, he suffered some part of of them to sly
about in the air: but at his pleasure he can shut them up again in prison,
for proof Revel. 9. 1. 2. The bottomless pit opened by an Angel, and thence
come forth many evil spirits. This same bottomless pit is shut up by an
Angel, Reu. 20. 7. and Satan is bound a thousand years. Thus it appears now
and then they are shut up, and again loosed when the Lord will* therefore they
entreat Christ Luke 8. not to cast them into the deep in hell. Luke 16. 25. so
Matthew. 8. 24. James 2. 19. And thus far of the causes moving the Lord, and of
the isntrumental and secret causes which the Lord uses to smite his people
with the Pestilence. Now let us not be brutishly secure and senseless as the
ungodly be, but let us make a holy use, as of all the Lords chasticeme^ts, so
of the pestilence, comforting every man himself by the word of the Lord, on
this manner as follows.

First, I consider the Pestilence and the like calamities on Gods people, to be
Gods holy visitation, to call men to a serious and a public humiliation
before him, that their iniquity may be purged, and this is all Esd. 27. 8. 9.
the fruit he desires, even the taking away of their sin. He does not
punish willingly. Iere. Lam. 3. 33. And that this is all he desires when he
smites the Church with the pestilence, may appear; For the Prophet says,
that he contends in measure with it in the branches thereof, not simiting them
as he does the Gentiles. And this we shall sinde in due time true, if we
compare his lenity with us, and his fierce wrath upon many cities in the
Popes dominions. Confer Pet. 1. 14. 15. and 2. Chap. verse 12. 18.

Secondly, I consider the Lords chasticements, How to comfort our selves and to
make use of afflictions.
as effects of the great and certain decree of God upon me. Romans 8. 28. what
God has decreed must come to pass: God has deered to make the Saints through
afflictions, that is, all manner of chasticements whatsoever, conformable to the
image of his son Christ: The best beloved Son wanted not rods all the life
he lived upon earth, and therefore I must not otherwhiles want them. I must
bear many crosses on earth, before I shall be crowned with Christ in heaven.

Thirdly, I know Christ sees daily all my sores, all my griefs, all my pains,
all my troubles, all my tears, they are as well known unto him, as if they
were distilled by drops into his bottle, and the number of them by just account
set down in his register. Psalm. 56. 8. Thou have counted my wanderings, put my
tears into thy bottle, are they not in thy Register?

Fourthly, I consider all these greeuances of this life as undoubted seals of
mine immortality: for the Lord having decreed to bring me to immortality,
to bliss void of all misery, etc. The effects of his decree I know, and see
in my vocation, Justification, and sanctification: but the life promised as yet
I find not, because of my manifold afflictions: wherefore I shall undoubtedly
find it when this life is ended.

Eiftly, I learn in Gods book, that the diseases of the body, and all other
afflictions of this life, they are often sent upon Gods people and holy
servants, to work in them a more serious humiliation for the sins of their
youth, either because they were never thoroughly humbled for them, or least they
fall dangerously into the same sins again. Psalm. 25. 6. Remember not the
sins of my youth, nor my rebellions, but according to thy kindness remember
thou me, even for thy goodness sake O Lord. And Job complains, chap. 13. 26.
Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to possess the sins of
my youth.

Fifthly, I consider also that God would have us his children beaten The godly
are beaten for the confirmation of their brethr^ and for the instruction of the
wicked.
as for their own sins so also that he may awaken his enemies, and tell
them, that for their intolerable sins, their destruction sleepth not. 1.
Pet. 4. 17. Judgment must first begin at the house of God: if it first begin
at us, what shall be the end of them which obey not the Gospel of God?

Sixthly, I see and know the corruptions of mine heart to be so many, and the
dulnes and dimmesse of my mind to be such, that if I were not often by the
cross brought to hearken and to obey, I should neither understand aright the
Lords reueiled will, nor practice it with any sincerity in my life. Psalm. 1 19.
71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy
Statutes. Job. Chap. 33. verse 16. God opens the ears of men by their
corrections. Master Calvin, in his Preface on the Psalms says, that if God
had not exercised him with manv afflictions, he could not well have understood
many Psalms.

Seventhly, I find also another great comfort in all mine insirmities and
greeuance^: I have heard and known the faithful to confess Christ's presence
more familiar, sweet and comfortable in their adversity Good to have changes.
then prosperity: and this I find true in like manner. And the rather I
observe this, for that the Apostle speaks thus of himself, I will rejoice
rather in mine infirmities, Psalm. 7. 3.

2. Cor. 12. 9.


that the power of Christ may soiourn with me, therefore I take pleasure in
mine infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities, etc. And I find true that
prosperity breeds dangerous pride and carnal security: I said in my rest, I
shall never be moved, for thou Lord of thy goodness have made my mountain so
strong: but thou did hide thy face and I was troubled then I cried to thee, O
Lord, and prayed to my Lord. Psalm. 30. 8.

Eighthly, I gather also by afflictions experience, and this both works in me
a Christian sympathy and compassion toward Romans 5. 2. 3.

James 1. 2. 3.

Nonignara mali miseris su^curreie disco.


other men in their miseries, and teaches me how to comfort them as I have
been comforted of the Lord. 2. Cor. 1. 3. 4. Blessed be God even the father
our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of mercies and the God of all comfort, which
comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them
which are in any affliction, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God: for as the sufferings of Christ abound in us: so our
consolation abounds through Christ. We gather experience of Gods love and of
our weakness, Romans 5. 2. 3. James 1. 2. and strength to endure contempt.

Lastly, I consider death, whether by pestilence or otherwise, as the
complement of my mortification, for in mortification I am crucified and die
daily, but in death I shall find the full destruction of the whole body of
sin. The Physicians say, death is the last physician which ends the most
grievous pangs, and dangerous diseases by Physic incurable: so I know that
death shall put an end to all the evils that Satan, sin, and the world
shall bring upon me during this present life.

And thus far concerning Satan's kingdom, the service of wicked spirits
unto God in the pestilence, and how the Christians may be comforted, as in
that evil, so in any other.

THE 4. LECTVRE.
Verse. 7. A thousand shall fall on the one side, and ten thousand at thy right
hand, and it shall not come near thee.
HEre again observe how careful the holy Ghost is to multiply his promises to
comfort and cherish the true believers heart. As long as prosperity and health
lasts, we think always that we have Gods presence with us: but when
misery approaches, then if our faith fail us, our hearts soon faint within
us. Now this faith ever faints without the holy promises which are the very
food and nourishment of our faith. O then thou man of GOD, look often upon the
holy promises that thou may est believe, that so thy heart may not deceive thee
in the evil day. Remember there is no use of all these promises, unless by
faith thou can receive them.

Be not afraid, says the Prophet in this Verse, of that great destroyer the
pestilence, which killes so many by day an^ by night. No nor yet fear not (I
say) albeit The sense.
a thousand of thy neighbors or companions fall on the one side, and ten
thousand on the other side, for thou shall be free: only be strong in faith,
and watch wisely over thine own ways, calling mightily upon God for his
defense and deliverance.

Note here again, how careful the holy Obse^.
Ghost is to answer all objections, all arguments and circumstances which in
the pestilence may breed fear in us. There is nothing does so appale,
discourage and dismay us, as to see many dead men lie before us, thousands on
the one side, and ten thousands on the other side, as in wars often, and in
camps where the pestilence rages, as in Maximilians camp, when he besieged
Verona, twenty thousand dyed in one plague, and in David's time seventy
thousand in three days, there many great heaps of dead men might be seen on
both sides and in all places. The like was to be seen at Alexandria and in
many Eusebius. hist. lib. 7. 21.
other places, where the living were not able to bury the dead. There is none
of the other causes before mentioned, does so terrify the heart as this,
quick is the eye, and sends things seen very swifly to the fantasy and so
to the heart. How greatly were the Pagans in Egypt terrified when but one dyed
in a house thoroughout the whole land? The King and all his subjects rose up at
midnight, and strangely all amazed they trembled, fearing least present death
and destruction was come upon them.

Again, and again, I warn the faithful man of God to obsetue these holy
promises. Thou art precious and dear unto God among many thousands: he that
cares for the sparrowes, cares much more for us, that be redeemed by the
blood of his s^nne, and called to his grace and hope of glory wherein we
stand and rejoice: he that numbreth our hairs will not see Romans 5. 2. 3.

Matt. 6.

Luke 12.


one of us perish, he that will give us a kingdom, will not suffer any enemy
to hurt us in this life without his grace and comfort: yea, when they seem to
hurt us, they shall will they nill they, hasten our endless felicity. Here
before we pass, whereas the Prophet says, verse 7. The Plague shall not come
near thee: it may be demanded how this can be true: for that we read both
in elder ages, and see daily that the pestilence where it is sent, does not
only come near the godly, but also smites dead many of the righteous and
religious people, among the great heaps and troops of unbelievers.

(A.) The answer is this: that either they fail in the particuar faith in
Gods providence so much commended and required in this Psalm: or, they keep
not within the bounds of their callings: or, be not instant in prayers: or, the
Lord has some secret purpose best known to himself: yet he is their firm
consolation, that neither powers, nor principalities, nor life, nor death,
shall sever them from the love of God in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 39.

Verse. 8. Thou shall only behold with thine eyes, and see the reward of the
wicked.
THou shall see the Pestilence sweep away thousands on both sides: I say
again, thou shall but only see these calamities light upon other, and this
sight it shall do thee good, by the observation of the executioners of Gods
great and fearful judgments, thou shall (I say) see how the Lord does
chasten his children for the time, and confound and plague his enemies.

Note here how we ought to make use of all Gods judgments that we see, hear,
and know, for therefore does the Lord lay them before his children, and not
upon them. Frist, that they may see, and by seeing, learn to fear him, and to
believe in him, that they may consider, as of Gods mercy toward them, so of
his justice in rewarding sinners, that as by the one they are stirred up to
love him, so by the other they learn to fear him, that so they may have a
holy mixture of love and fear, and thereby sound hearts to walk in sincere
obedience before him. Secondly, they must when they see the Lords judgments to
smite others, be stirred up to compassion, and so to prayer for their brethren,
and even for their very enemies, for what heart can be forgetful in these
extremities, when they are presented before us, to labor in prayer to God for
our brethren: the practice of this we see notably in David, 2. Sam. 24. 17.

Verse 25.

We must show compassion on our brethren: in praying for them, in our
liberality toward ^m, in visiting them when they be sick: of which duty
see more in the end.


who never rested crying and calling unto God for his people, till the Lord was
appeased. Thirdly, the Lord would have us thus to behold the calamities of our
brethren, that we might show all the compassion that we can, as by our
prayers, so by showing our Christian liberality upon them; and by visiting
also such, as we are bound, by any bond of natural love, Christian society,
etc. For we must not be as David's friends, standing aside, and flying away,
when our dearest friends have greatest need of our help and comfort.

Verse. 9. 10. Because thou have set the Lord, which is my hope, even the most
high for thy refuge:

There shall none occasion be given, that evil Lo teunn^h.
may touch thee, neither shall any plagu^ come near thy tabernacle.


HEre the Prophet gives us an other reason of all the former security of the
faithful, making himself one of the number. His reason is this (as far as I
can conceive it) God will deliver them, and cover them, etc. for that they do
not only run to hide themselves under his wings for protection: but also
they do very watchfully attend to all their ways, that they give none occasion
of offense, and greiuance to his most holy spirit. Ephesians. 4. 30.

We see again the holy Ghost requires Note. A particular victoriou^ ^aith, a
special preservative against the pestilence, as before. q. 1.
in us an especial faith in these calamities. Before he spoke, verse 2. of his
own particular faith, that albeit all the world went from God in these
extremities, to many unlawful means, yet he would sweetly rest in God, and
seek for lawful means only: here he speaks of every other faithful
believer as of himself, that he also must have this particular faith. For a
man must not only have faith concerning Gods providence, as at other times:
but I must also believe, that God in this special visitation, has a most
special care of me, and has commanded his Angels to watch over me.

And for this cause all the promises are particularly applied to this believer
from the beginning to the end of this Psalm: verse 3. Surely he will deliver
thee from the s^are, etc. verse 4. He will cover thee with his wings, and his
truth shall be thy shield. verse 5. Thou shall not be afraid, etc. verse 7. A
thousand shall fall at thy side, and it shall not come near thee: verse 8.
Thou shall only see the reward of the wicked. verse 11. He will give his
Angels charge over thee, to keep thee. verse 12. They shall bear thee, etc.
verse 13. Thou shall walk upon the Lion, etc. Wherefore thou must strive to
have this particular and special faith in troubles.

The 10. verse seems unto me to contain this argument. He that with all
good conscience watches over his ways, and so endeavors with all his might
to walk with his God in sincerity of life, and soundness of heart: he shall
be deliue^ redin the Pestilence.

Thou art one of them which strive with all good conscience to serve the Lord
thy God, and Lo Teunnah.
do endeavor, that no cause be given, that thy father now in his anger shall
s^ite thee with the Pestilence: Therefore he will deliver thee.


THe Lord says in an other place, that when the days of famine come, he will
not famish the soul of the righteous: and to the true worshipper which serves
him in truth of spirit, he says: The Lord shall bless thy bread and thy water,
and I will take away all sickness from the mids of thee.

The Prophet here teaches us as the Apostle, that Gods children must avoid all
occasion of sin, or to speak yet more strictly as the holy spirit speaks,
all shadow, all likeness, or appearance of sin. So some godly Interpreters
understand 1. Th. 5. 21
that place.

The Psalmist as I judge, here compares us to wise and faithful children,
which are most watchful, least by any the least means, they give cause of
offense to their good parents. And surely all arguments of our heavenly fathers
love and mercy considered, in our election, creation, redemption,
regeneration, adoption, continual preservation, and everlasting salvation: we
are of all other the most foolish and unkind children, if we study not
chearefully to obey, and carefully to avoid the offense of so mighty, so
loving, so gracious, and so bountiful a father unto us. Again, if this
watchfulness must be found always in us: how much more even then, when our
almighty Father in the continuance of his anger (as Jeremy says) consumes
his enemies, and chasteneth Ier. 14. 15
his own people.

Therefore at this time specially all the wise sons of God, tremble to
displease him, and study to please him. Psalm. 2.

4. Question. That a good conscience is a special preservative against the
Pestilence.
A Good conscience, says Augustine very well, is the paradise of the soul,
and surely so an evil conscience is the very hell of the soul. And
Chrysost^me calls the good conscience the good countenance Hob. 4. 16
of the soul, because this conscience alone can approach boldly to the throne
of grace. Wherefore this good conscience is one of the greatest blessings we
have on earth. Now for as much as it is a thing most dangerous to be deceived
in our greatest Dangerous to be deceived in a good cause.
treasure, and to take dross for gold, good for evil, and evil for good: let
us therefore be the more circumspect and careful, first to know and learn
what this great grace 2. Cor. 13. 5
is. Secondly, let us wisely examine ourselves whether we possess it, and have
it in truth, or ignorantly be deceived, as most me^ be. Lastly, after just
trial and examination had of our own hearts, if we find it in our selves,
let us labor with all our strength to cherish it and preserve it; if we find
we have it not, let us never give our selves any rest, but contend in all the
means appointed, to come to Jesus Christ, that he may give it us, for he alone
can give it, and strength to keep it.

Conscience is described of some, to be a living law in our hearts, which
stirs, awaketh, and drives us unto good things. I suppose we may truly
describe the conscience first generally, on this manner: Conscience is an
inward remembrancer in our minds, and hearts, witnessing either with us, or
Definition
against us, of all our thoughts, words and works.

The cause wherefore the Lord has put this remembrancer in man is this: a
small light, and weak knowledge would soon lve hid, and be as buried in him,
by reason of the corruption of our hearts and affections: therefore the Lord
has left him this feeling, as a keeper and a watch to awake him, to mark and
epsy all his secrets, and continually to present him unto the judgment seat
of God, that nothing may be lost in oblivion, and this keeper men say to be as
a thousand witnesses to testify with us or against us, even of of all our
secrets: a great controller of Atheists, even in their secret chambers.

The seat of this Or the Lords handwriting.
remembrancer is the understanding, yet for that it is found sensibly to smite
the heart, therefore the holy Ghost ever seats him there: So Solomon notes
speaking to Shimei: Thou know all the wickedness (whereunto thine heart is
privy) that thou did to David my father. And the Apostle says, that the
great peace keeps the heart and mind in Christ Jesus. And the Author to the
Hebrews, Your heart being pure from an evil conscience. Eccles. 7. 24.

Lastly, that this witness or remembrancer will be with us, or against us, at
all times, and that in Gods presence, the Apostle testifies, Romans 2. 15. The
Gentiles show the effect of the Law written in their hearts, their conscience
also bearing witness, and their thoughts accusing one an other, or excusing
before God.

The first division of the conscience is this, the conscience is either 1.
Good. or 2. Evil.


1. Of the good conscience.
SAint Peter 1. 3. 21. says, that a good conscience is a quietness of mind
after we be persuaded of the grace of God in Christ, being then ready without
fear to present our selves before him. Heb. 10. 2.

The holy Ghost to the Hebrews calls it a conscience purged from dead Heb.
9. 14. Conscientia been actae vitae, multorumque beneficiorum recordano,
iucundissima est.
works to serve the living God. If the Heathens did so much rejoice in their
good consciences, which were but counterfeit, in respect of the consciences of
the faithful: how much more should we desire to know, and rejoice to find,
and endeavor to keep, and continually to possess a good conscience.

Thus then I trust, according to Gods holy verity, a good conscience may be
described. What a good conscience is.
A good conscience is an assured vnder^anding in the mind, a feeling in the
heart of the judgment of God, acquiting and discharging us from our sins, by
faith in Jesus Christ: and an inward witness testifying with us of our holy
endeavor to walk in all the commandments of God. Psalm. 119. ver. 6.

Here in this description I consider two things principally: first the feeling
Two things in a good conscience.
and finding in the conscience of that wonder^ull peace, which passes
understanding, as the Apostle speaks, by our free justification, and
discharge from all our sins in Jesus Christ Note:
Romans 5. 1.

Secondly, I consider the most iovfull inward testimony, and boldness which
we have, when we are assured that our actions are warrantable by Gods word,
sanctified by Gods spirit, and accepted of God in Christ. 2. Cor. 1. 12.

The first thing (I say) that gladdeth and rejoices the conscience, is that
peace, which is purchased by the blood of Jesus Christ, between God and us:
such peace as the merits of all men and Angels could never procure unto us.
Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Hebr. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart in
assurance The first peace between God and our hearts is by Christ immediately
only.

To. (...). 1.

Heb. 9. 14. 10. 22.

Io. 14 27.

Io. 8. 56.

M. 42.


of faith, our hearts being purified from an evil conscience. Of this peace
speaks Christ to his Apostles. John 14. verse. 27. Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you; not as the' world gives, give I unto you, let not your
hearts be troubled, nor fear. This peace most cheared and comforted Abraham.
John. 8. verse 56. Romans chap. 4. And this causes David to sing often, and to
stir up all the powers of his soul to sing praises unto God: All that is
within me (says he) praise his holy name: Ps. 103. 1. 3
the reason is added, which forgiueth all thine iniquity, and heals all
thine infirmities.

And because Christ is the matter and the only purchaser of this wonderful
peace: the Apostle cannot fasten his heart and affections upon any thing but
upon Christ. The things which were advantage unto me, the same I counted loss,
for Christ's Phil. 3. 7.
sake: yea doubtless, I think all things but loss for the excellent
knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have counted all things
loss, and do judge them to be dung that I might win Christ. This peace
therefore, whereof we speak, does more ravish every true believers heart, then
any earthly pardon or peace whatsoever can comfort his heart, which is adjudged
and condemned unto the most terrible torments that can be devised on earth:
the Apostle calls it rightly, the peace that passes understanding, Philip. 4.
7. the peace which can be felt, but cannot be uttered.

The second thing that cheareth our consciences, and brings a secondarie
peace The second peace between a man and his own heart and conscience.
unto us, is an inward assurance that our actions are warrantable by Gods word,
san^tified by his good spirit, and accepted of God in Jesus Christ, as the
works of his children: of this the Apostle speaks and rejoices, saying: Our
rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity 2.
Cor. 1. 12
and godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we
have had our conversation in the world, and most of all toward you. This
second peace is ever a consequent of the former, and never goes before, but
follows after, for that before we come to Christ, and receive a sweet
smelling ointme^^ from him, our best actions are altogether Tit. 1. 15. 16. 1.

Io. 2. 21 27.


unsavory and unclean.

Because there are many dangerous errors of conscience: observe well the marks.

The marks and signs of this good conscience which we have h^herto described,
are these following.

THis conscience alone has free access unto the throne of grace, to make Zac.
12. 10. 11. 20. 8. 16.

1. Io. 3. 19. 20.

The spirit of prayers a good sign of a good conscience. Spiritus ducit
oratione^ ad Deum, si spiritus reus ap^d se sit, conscientia erubescet, quomodo
audebit orationem ducere ad ala^re. ibid*


requests for our wants, strengthened by the spirit of prayers. We know that
we are of the truth, and shall before him assure our hearts, for if our hearts
condemn us, God is greater then our hearts, and knows all things: beloved if
our hearts condemn us not, then have we boldness toward God, and whatsoever
we ask we receive of him. Oration de co^scientia procedit. si co^scientia
erubescat, erubes^et oration. Tertul. de castit. Prayer does proceed from the
conscience; if the conscience blush, prayer will be ashamed.

2 This conscience does most glory in ^ope to see the glory of God. Romans 5. 2.
Heb. 3. 6. Luke 10. 20.

3 Another good sign is this, incomparably to love and esteem Christ: f^ such
have truly felt and known what peace is purchased by Christ.

4. An other special mark of a good conscience is inestimably to value, the
word of grace, the Gospel of Ephe. 6. 15.

2. Cor. 5. 18 19.

Psalm. 119.

Romans 10. 15


peace, that word of reconciliation, and the ministry thereof; for none can so
highly esteem of them, as they which by these holy means have bin reconciled
unto God. Note what honor the believers give the message and messengers
thereof. Romans 10. 15. Act. 10. 24. 25. Act verse 15 33. Gal 4. 15.

5 The Apostle ever chains and knits faith unfeigned, love out of a pure heart,
and a 1. Tim. 1. 5. 19.
good conscience together.

6 An inward care to live in all honesty of life: this is an inseparable
companion Watch ou^r thy conscience as over the apple of thine eye.
of a good conscience. Heb. 13. 18. Pray for us we have a good conscience, in
all things desiring to live honestly. When we have a precious pea^le, we
study and endeavor with all our might so to preserve it, as that we never
leese it, unless it be taken from us by violence.

7 To keep a good conscience we must be well To. 14. 5.
assured of our actions to be warrantable Act. 24. 16
by the word. Heb. 13. 18. We are assured that we have a gaod conscience in
all things. 1. Cor. 4. 4. I know nothing by my self.

8 Where this peace that passes understanding is the Apostle says it keeps
the heart, that is, the will and affections: and the mind, the seat of reason:
and the understanding the faculty of discoursing and judging in obedience to
Christ Jesus. Phil. 4. 7

2. Of troubled consciences.
THe faithful are disquieted often in their consciences.

An unquiet or troubled conscience is a wonderful grief of heart, conceived
in What a troubled conscience is.
the fear of Gods judgments, whereby the soul is pressed down, and
mourns, until it be comforted by ^auh in Jesus Christ.

The conscience is a tender ^eece (as the eye) and therefore we must take heed
how we offer any violence to it.

1 There does arise in all worldlings a most extreme sorrow, for the loss of
dignities, preferments, honor, health, prosperity and riches, etc. When the
carnal churl Nabal heard that his substance was diminished, his heart dyed
(...). Sam. 25. 37.

We have many Nabals in these days.


within him, and he was like a stone. This grief is no grief of conscience,
arising of the fear of Gods presence or judgments, but a sorrow which does
proceed from a fear of some worldly and external wants in this present life.
So in like manner many A^heists and profane beasts are driven, not for any
trouble of conscience, It is a common practice with P^pists and Atheists to
h^ng themselves.
but as that myser, by the spirit of covetousness, some by the spirit of
fornication corporal and spiritual, to hang and drown themselves because
they cannot obtain that which they purposed and desired, as we see in
Achitophel. Therefore these worldly sorrows must be wisely discerned from the
good sorrows of the troubled 2. Co. 7. 9. 10.
consciences of the faithful.

We must ever desire the light of Gods loving countenance, which we may be
assured of, if we keep faith and a good conscience: but if we make shipwreck
of these, the least thing shall greatly amaze us; yea, the shaking of a leaf:
but if we have this, nothing shall dismay us.

This pain is like to other griefs, and no doubt accompanied with many other
evils out of the body, loss of goods, name, honor, etc. In the body sundry
diseases go before and follow it, melancholy, etc. But if worldly sorrow
alone, turmoyle the heart, as for riches and goods lost, let these be
recovered, and all tears are soon gone and past: but the troubled conscience
is not so quieted. And as for melancholy and other pains in the body, they are
cured we see with medicines and good diet: but nothing can appease this evil
till Christ's blood be applied.

2 The grief of conscience smites the heart. Cant. 5. 6. My heart was gone
when he did speak, I sought him but I could not find him.

Again, Esaias speaking of this troubled conscience, says, I dwell in the high
and Esa. 57. 15
holy place, with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive
the spirit of the humble, and to give life to them that are of a contrite
heart. And David, A contrite heart O God thou will not despise. Thus then we
see this grief is in the heart, Psalm. 51.
melting it as fire does metals, in what measure it pleases the Lord to
humble his children.

3 This sorrow presses down the soul, so David complains: Why art thou cast
down my soul, and disqui^ted within me: wai^ on God. Psalm. 43. 5.

4 Lastly I add, the troubled consciences of the faithful can never find
ease but in Jesus Christ. There streams from him a most sweet living water,
as from a Zach. 13 1
fountain, daily to purge and wash our running sores, and to heal the pain
and grief of our hearts. By his stripes are Esa. 53. 5.
we healed. 2. The Saints ever sought to Christ and none other, to case them
of this pain. Psalm 51. 1. Cant. 5. 6. 7. 3. If by any other means the
conscience be falsely quieted, it will afterward rage far worse then
before: much like unto As in popery we see many gibbets to hang poor con
sciences.
Saul's spirit, which for some moment of time could b^e quieted by some sweet
melody, but when the music was ended, he fell into his old furious phrensies
again.

The troubled consciences of the faithful most appear 1. In their calling. 2.
After.


1 When God does separate his elect by the preaching of the G^spell, that they
may be sanctisied by his spirit, and come to the profes^ion of his faith. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 14. There must be then great and many perturbations in the
hearts and souls of such as the Lord effectually calls unto his grace: for
the heart before was chained and fastened to Satan, sin, and the world, and
this league and fellowship can not easily be broken. Secondly, the heart which
before was stony and slintie, must now be softened. Ezech. 11. 19. I will take
away the stony hearts out of their bodies, and will give them an heart of
flesh. Thirdly, examples teach this. Paul is stricken down from heaven, and
greatly humbled. The good hearers, Act. 2. when the Lord began to awake their
consciences, they were picked in their hearts, and cried saying; Men and
brethren what shall we do? Fourthly, some master sin, and inueterate custom
in sin, will breed great wrestling and strife at this time. Fifthly, some
enormious sins, will cause many to bleed at the heart and to despair.

2 After the Lord has vouchsaf^d to give his elect his spirit of grace, and
has Zach. 12. 10.
given them hearts to believe in Jesus Christ, and after peace obtained with
God in Christ, after access to grace, and the blessed rejoicing in the hope of
the glory of God: the old enemies may yet amaze, disquiet and cast down the
souls of Gods elect. David says, he felt some terrors and troubles of mind
even from his youth.

The reasons are; first, they have daily falls, and therefore their
repentance, humiliation, and sorrow must daily be renewed. Secondly, they must
otherwhiles again be humbled for their old sins, to proceed on in
repentance, and least they fall into them again. Psalm. 25. 6. Job. 13. 26.
Thirdly, God lays a grievous hand They are Gods enemies which through their
sins and infirmities take ^ccasion to blasph^me God.
upon them, when they give cause through great sins, that his enemies
blaspheme his holy name, for the example does much harm, it imboldens the
wicked, and makes faint the hearts of his children. Therefore has David
suffered more torments of conscience then any other. 2. Sam. 12. verse 14.

Remedies and helps for troubled consciences are these which follow.

FIrst pray earnestly for the restoring of the holy comforter. Psalm. 51. 10.
and for a clean heart. Ioh. 14. 16. Lu. 11. 13.

2 With prayer strive to join much weeping and fasting, if thy strength will
bear it. Psalm 69. 10.

3 With prayer and fasting comfort thy self with a meditation of the use of all
the afflictions of the faithful. Ioh. 7. 13. Psalm. 77. for thou have no
tentation nor affliction of conscience, but they have had the same, or the
like. 1. Pet. 5. 9.

4 When thine own cries and tears cannot find Christ, ask the watchmen and
the daughters of Jerusalem for him, and so never rest but by all good means
find him. Cant. 5. 6. 7. 8.

6 If all this will not help thee, seek to the Elders of the Church, and
acknowledge thy sins to one or more most discreet, wise, godly and righteous
me^, fearing God, that they may have compassion on thee: and the^ be persuaded
their cries unto God shall prevail for thee: Confess your selves one to
another, and pray one for another, for James 5. 15.
the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and if he has committed sin, it
shall be forgiven him.

So far for the good conscience of Gods children quieted and troubled: now
the evil conscience of the wicked follows.

AN evil conscience, is a conscience never What an evil conscience is.
purged by the blood of Jesus Christ.

An evil conscience is either 1. Living: or 2. Dead.


The first is the natural conscience of the natural man, retaining natural
sight and natural feeling, and this living conscience is ever 1. Accusing. 2.
Excusing.


The natural man has left in him sundry general motions of good and evil,
Nocte dieq: suum gestat in pectore testem. Iuucnal. Sa^yr. 13.
which are most crooked and corrupt rules being tried by the first Table of the
Law of God, but his knowledge is not so much darkene^ and corrupted in the
general heads of the second Table. This man, in all points that may bring him
to the kingdom of heaven is most blind, and counts all these holy means mere
foolishnes. 1. Cor. 2. 14. The wisdom of the flesh is en^tie Rom 8. 7.

This con^ence is a spec^ll present ue oral. com. w^ so^es or men.


against God, so the Apostle speaks.

The conscience, handwriting, or watchman in this man, is given him of God:
partly, to convince him because he walks not according to the general
motions and natural knowledge he has of good things: partly to bridle and
keep under his wild and disordred affections.

1 This conscience excuses ever falsely: because of ignorance, corruption of
the mind and all affections: as first, when it does excuse those works which
in the general are good indeed, but are sins in him and all natural men:
as Vzzas fact, mentioned 1. Chron. 159. Secondly, when it excuses and covers
any inward sin, and hypocrisy, by an outward false obedience. An example of
this we have in Mark 10 20.

2 This conscience first truly accuses and cites a man before God, for that
which is evil indeed: as 10. 9. the wicked accusers were accusea by their own
consciences. Many are thus cited and sent for, by this Parator, and confess it
with shame, as Saul did to David, and yet are never the better, a dangerous
sign. Secondly, this Popish consciences are thus much disquieted.
conscience cites a man falsely, for that which is not evil in it self, but
superstitiously thought to be evil: Col. 2. 21. As for the committing or
omitting of any thing against the superstitious traditions of men; Touch not,
taste not, handle not.

Thus much of the feeling conscience: the dead conscience follows.

A dead conscience is a heart and conscience, void of all natural sense, or
natural feeling.

This conscience of all other is most fearful and dangerous: and comes
after multiplying and heaping of grievous sins together: or long contempt of
the holy truth, or both. The Apostle Ephesians. 4. 19
speaks of some of the profane Gentiles: that first from vanity of mind
they come to blindness, from blindness they fall to hardness of heart, then they
become past feeling: and the last degree of evil is: they give themselves unto
wantonness, to work^ all uncleanness even with greediness. And of Antichrist
and his disciples he says, First, they depart from the faith: secondly, The
popish ^erisie.
they give heed to spirits of error: thirdly, to doctrines of devils: fourthly,
they give heed to such as speak lies through hypocrisy: lastly, their
consciences is seared with a hot iron.

Signs of a deadly, frozen, and benumbed conscience, are these.

FIrst, a dangerous sign to multiply sins without feeling. Ephesians. 4. 18. 19.
Romans 1. 22. 30.

2 A dangerous sign to regard neither the curses nor blessings of GODS law.
Deuteronomy. 29. 19. But to flatter himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace,
although I walk according to the stubburnnesse of my heart: so adding
drunkenness unto thirst: the Lord will not be merciful unto that man: This heart
is poisoned by the spirit of slumber. Romans 11. 8.

3 To make a mock of sin, and of the Ministry of Gods most holy Word.
Ezech. 33. 30. 31. 32. 33.

4 When vexation of spirit comes Mat. 27. 5.

Psalm. 55.

2. Sam. 17. 23.


to lay violent hands upon themselves: as to hang themselves with Judas and
Achitophel: to kill themselves desperately with Saul and many others.

Lastly, these are most fearful signs of a most wicked profane conscience:
to have some notable horror of mind, and trembling of body, when some of Gods
judgments appear: blaspheinies in great extremities and passions of death.
Nero was wonderfully terrified with visions, flashings of fire and terrible
dreams, Snetonvita Neronis.

Take heed ye Church robbers, to your conscience be-^ime: if your hearts
condemn you, God is grea^er, etc.

Dan. 5. 4. 5. 6.


after he had murdered his own mother. Belshazzar King of Babylon, having the
spoils of Gods Church, and in great contempt of the true God, sporting
himself and praising the gods of gold and silver, of iron, wood, and stone: at
the same hour appeared fingers of a man's hand, which wrote over against the
candlestick, upon the plaster of the wall of the kings palace, and the king
saw the palm of the hand that wrote: Then the kings countenance was changed,
and his thoughts troubled him, so that the joints of his l^ynes were loosed,
and his knees smote one against another.

And this trembling had Felix, when Paul disputed before him of righteousness
must appear before Jesus Christ in the Act. 24. 26.
end of the world, and receive a heavy sentence of condemnation.

The troubles of reprobates breed in them often desperation: the causes of
this are either secrt or open: Secret, Gods reprobation Hebr. 12. 17.
known to himself, and not to be searched: manifest causes, in the end
final impenitencie, and hardness of heart. Here it is wisdom to hope the
best of men (Crastinus dies ignoratur, we know 1. Ioh. 5. 16.

Matt. 12. 31.


not what shall be to morrow) if an open blasphemy with an abnegation of the
truth appear not. And thus much of an evil conscience.

Now to make in a word, some use of this sweet doctrine aforegoing, and to
apply it unto our present purpose: First in the time of pestilence and all
other calamities, wisely examine thy self, as is before showed. If thou
doubtest of thy conscience how it may stand in the evil day, make have to
purge it, least evil prevent thee. And if after sound trial, thou find thy
self to possess a blessed clean conscience well purged by Jesus Christ and
sanctified by his holy Spirit: then mightily keep watch and ward, as it were,
that no enemy may steal this pearl from thee, for it is of inestimable value
and surpassing virtue to preserve thee in the pestilence. I give thee here none
other counsel Pro. 4. 23.

1. Tim. 1. 18. 19.


then the holy Ghost has given us all. For it is written; Keep thine heart
with all diligence, for thence proceed the actions of life: and leese this,
thou shall make shipwreck also offaith, and spiritual understanding. And
Christ says, that unless the heart be purged and watchfully preserved and
kept clean, it sends forth evil thoughts, adulteries, etc. Job therefore was
very careful Mar. 21.

Job. 27. 6


of his heart and conscience, and very watchfully kept it: My heart (says he)
shall not reprove me of my days. And so was David: for as soon as he had
sinned, and gave occasion of that Pestilence, before the Prophet Gad came unto
him, it is said; David's heart smote him after he had 2. Sam. 24. 10.
numbered the people. And examine thy self also truly how thou stand in the
faith, and how Jesus Christ is in thee. Take heed of a false faith, as thou
beleeuest, so so shall it be done unto thee. For like as the true faith brings
many blessings to the believers: so a false faith breeds many evil effects in
the unbelievers. And as the heart chiefly must be regarded, so the outward
senses and parts of the body, must in no wise be neglected in this watch. The
eye is a dangerous sense and most quick, and suddenly does stir up Job 31. 1.

Psalm. 45. 12.


evil motions in the heart: we must (as Job) make a covenant with our eyes.
The ^are must diligently first heaken, and then consider how to believe and
obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

The tongue is a most dangerous member, and David here requires a heedie
Psalm. 36. 1.

Iam. 1. 12.


watchfulness: and Saint James says plainly, that all our profession and
religion is in vain if we neglect this part, and yet more fearfully. The
tongue is fire, yea a world of wickedness, so is the tongue set among our
members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of
nature, and it is set on fire of hell. And to be short Chapter 3. 6, Watch over all
parts.
for all parts, remember, watch, and so beat down thy body, as that thou may
be able to have it in subjection, and to bridle thine unruly affections, so
did the holy Apostle. 1. Corin. 9. I beat down my body and bring it to
subjection, least by any means after that I have preached to other, I my self
should be as a refuse, or as one rejected and forlorn. And that like, etc.
And the like is said of Hillari: Ego te asine (says he) non hordco sed palca
pascam, ne me post hac recalcitres. O mine ass (so he calls this body of
sin) I will henceforth feed thee with chafe and not with barley, least
hereafter thou kick or strike me with thy foot.

THE 5. LECTVRE.
Verse. 11. 12. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in
all his ways.

They shall bear thee in their hands, that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone.


HEre we have again, a new most A gracious preservation in the Pestilence.
comfortable doctrine, concerning the preservation of Gods children by the holy
Angels of God, as against sundry calamities of this present life, so against
the pestilence, the argument is thus formed.

They which have the custody and watch of the holy Angels over them, shall be
preserved from evil spirits, and comforted in the noisome pestilence.

But thou true believer, which hidest thy self by faith in Gods providence, as
in the bosom of the Almighty: which art so watchful over thy conscience, thy
heart, and all thy ways: thou shall be preserved by the holy Angels of God.

Wherefore walking thus watchfully in thy ways, thou shall be kept free frrom
wicked spirits, and comforted in the pestilence.

HE commpareth us in this Argument to infants, and the Angels to Nurses, most
fitly, and the scandals and offenses of this life, which hurt and hinder us in
our race to heauen-ward, unto stones which cause us to stumble in the streets.
And surely who so considers our weakness, the thorns and briers we pass
through, and the dangerous rocks we pass over, again, Satan's subtilties and
infinite snares: shall well understand this argument contains no hyperbole, or
fained speech, for assuredly we could not pass three paces in our ways
toward heaven, if that the holy Angels did not as it were carry us in the
air, and chase away wicked spirits from us.

Here we see, the Lord offers another spiritual preservative of wonderful
virtue, power and might, against the pestilence.

We have in these 2. Uerses; these three things most worthy our observation.

1 That all the holy Angels are under the charge and government of the Lord,
they serve and minister unto him, and where he will.

2 How that they have not only a general charge over all the faithful, but
in particular they must care for, and watch over every one: Keep thee, bear
thee.

3 How long their charge lasts: as long as the faithful walk uprightly and
soundly with God in all their ways appointed for them.

5. Question. How graciously the Lord preserves his people by his holy Angels
in the pestilence.
TO pass by all needless and curious As of the orders of angels.
questions of Jewish Rabbis, and others concerning the holy Angels of God, we
shall content our selves, when we have learned only those points which the
sacred Scriptures have recommended and revealed unto us, for our comfort and
instruction.

The first point needful to be known, as our Prophet here notes unto us, is,
that these holy spirits have no absolute authority of their own, but are
under, the charge of the Almighty, they come and go where and when they be
sent by him: and they do most faithfully and readily perform all service they
are commanded. So the Psalmist speaks: They do his com^andement Psalm. 103. 20.
in obeying the voice of his word. And we be taught, what their function and
ministry is, both by their proper and common names often given them in
scripture. For their proper names are ever significant, and show some part of
their service, for the performance whereof they are sent of God. The Angel sent
to the Luke 1. 19. 29.

Dan. 9. 21^ 8. 16.


holy Virgin is named Gabriel (and so he calls himself) this signifies the
strength of God, answerable to his message, which was to declare the great
power of God, as in the wonderful conception of Christ in the Virgin: so in
all the work of our redemption. The Angel sent to Esaias, is said to be one of
the Seraphins: he had his name of Zaraph, to burn: and fitly, for his service
was to touch Esays lips with a hot cole from the Altar. Thus the Lord
confirmed his Prophets both with his word and Sacraments. So Jeremy, so
Daniel. Iere. 1. 9.

Dan. 10. 16.


The Angel which came to Mancah, named himself Pelt, wonderful: he both
miraculously consumed the sacrifice with fire, and in the said slame of fire
ascended up and departed from them. The Angel which came to Tobias, is called
Raphael, Judge. 13. 20.

But that story is very Jewish and fabulous.

Col. 1. 16.


the Lords physic or physician, because he cured him, or was sent of God to
cure him. And in like manner their common names put us in mind of their service
and holy ministry unto God. They are all in general called, thrones,
dominions, principalities, powers, because the Lord does govern his empire,
exercise hi^ dominion, and show forth his principality and power by their
service. Again, they are said to be the Lords host, and the host of heaven,
because they are of a wonderful multitude, and God rules them, as kings and
Psalm. 103. 148.

1. Ki. 21. 22.

Reave. 19.

Dan. 7. 10

Psalm. 34.


princes do an host of men. Daniel says: Thousand thousands ministered unto
him, and ten thousand thousands stood before him. And Christ affirms the
same, saying: Think thou that I cannot now pray my father, and he will give
me more then 12. legions of Angels? Again, they are marvelous faithful and
ready in their service. Ezech. Ezec. 10. 5

Dan. 9. 21


and Daniel does see them flying: they have no wings, and yet are they swift as
the winds, and ^eadie to execute with all speed any thing they have in charge
from God. He makes his ministers spirits, and his messengers a flame of fire.
They do their Ps. 104. 4

Heb. 1. 7.

Mat. 5.


message faithfully, and will have no honor nor worship done to them, as the
evil angels, but all to be done to God. Re. 19. Iud. 13. 18. 19. 20. Their
faithfulness great service, and sincere, and constant obedience to God, is
notably commended by the Prophets, where he says: Praise the Lord ye his
Angels that excel in strength, that do his commandment in obeying the voice
of his word. Where note first, they praise God in their service. 2. They are of
wonderful streng^h to serve him. 3. They Luke 2.

Not as the evil spirits do.


do Gods will. 4. They do it faithfully according to his word. Thus far for the
first point.

The 2. thing to be known is their love to Gods Church, and great care over
the faithful members of the same. And certainly their love is great. For it is
said they rejoice over one sinner that repents and turns unto God: The
Psalmist Luke 15.
testifies of their love and care, when he faith: They pitch their tents
round about Ps. 34. 7.
them which fear the Lord, and desiuer them. Psalm. 91. 15.


And here it is said, they bear them (like as loving parents and nurces do
their children) in their hands and arms, to keep them from scandals and
offenses. And the Lord gives them in charge thus to do, faith this Prophet
here. And hence it is the Author to the Hebrews describes them to be
Ministering spirits, sent from their sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation.
And Heb. 1. 14.
as for their number we must not curiously search, how many each man has to
keep him: for the scriptures tell us, that sometimes many are sent to one man,
and again sometimes one Angel is sent for the deliverance of the whole
Church. To save Elisha against the king of Syria, the mountain was full of
horses, and chariets 2. K. 5. 17.

It may be this was Michael Jesus Christ.

Eze. 37.

2. K. 19.


of fire round about Elisha. But in Da^^els time, one Angel seems to be sent
for the protection of the whole Church. And in Ezechias time, one was of
strength sufficient to kill and destroy in one night 185000. of the enemies of
Gods people. And if yet we further desire to learn, what there causes, besides
that special charge of God, move them so to love us, affect us, and to
minister unto us for our protection and deliverance: the holy Ghost Col. 1. 16.
20.
with us of one body, which is the whole catholic Church, whereof part is
triumphant We are in communion with the Angels.
in heaven part militant upon earth. secondly, they have with us one spirit for
their Lord, as to convert and sanctify Job. 4. 18.
they have with us one Gospel of comfort: for the Angels says Peter, desire to
1. Per. 1. 12.
^or their confirmation: and our conversion and everlasting salvation. They are
present in the holy assemblies, and rejoice, no doubt greatly, to see the
Gospel of Jesus 1. Cor. 11.
Christ preached unto their ^retheren. Lastly, they have one head with us, even
Jesus Christ our Lord: this the Apostle speaks: Christ is set at the right
hand of the father in heavenly places, far above all principality, and
power, and might, and domination, and every n^me that is named, not in this
world, but also in that, that is to come, and has made all things subject
under his feet, and has given him over all things to be the head, to the
Church, which is his bo^y, even Ephesians. 1. 12. 22.
the fullness of ^im that ^th all things.

Here foolish Rabbims object, by occasion of the words of this Psalm. Of
bearing Objection.
in their hands, That the holy and elect are more worthy persons, and more
honorable then the Angels, because the Angels must as it were attend upon them
and keep them.

Their reasons are weak, and they Answer.
too too curious: for parents bear children, and yet the children are not the
^re worthy: the good shepherd fin^th the sheep which was lost, and carries
it home on his shoulders, and yet is not the sheep more worthy then the
shep^eard:

An other question is here demanded of their appearance, what lets it now
more Questi (...)
then in elder times?

They know now their visible appearance is both needelesse and dangerous.
Answer.
1. Needless for instruction, for they know we have now in the book of God,
all the counsel of God revealed unto us, so they Gal. 1. 6.

Io. 20. 31.

2. Pet. 1. 19


had not in the old times in that clear manner that we have. 2. Needless for
our protection, for they can do this inuisibly as well as in sight. Elishas
guard was as strong and as faithful before he saw them as after. Lastly,
their ^ppearance now is dangerous, since Antichrist has perverted Wherefore
Angels appear not.
many with the false worship and invocation of Angels: for since this Idolatry
crept into the Church, we know assuredly that wicked spirits have taken the
form of good Angels, and have been adored of miserable men, and so deluded
many. And the visible appearance unto men, would be more terrible in these
days, then it was to Manoab and his wife. Judge. 13. And thus far of their
love toward the Saints.

The third and last point to be considered, briefly is, how long their charge
lasts over us: the answer is, So long as Mat. 4.
they walk in their ways. This is that which Satan left out, when he made
assault against Christ: for he can both pare and An so do his members often.
shred the scriptures, and stretch them also otherwhiles to serve his purpose.
So he can heap up judgments to terrify and amaze poor consciences which are
humbled, and multiply mercies before such as stand, to breed in them dangerous
presumptions. By these words, Their ways; The Psalmist understands our
several 1. Cor. 7. 20.
vocations, wherein we must walk circumspectly, and not rashly run forth to
any unlawful means (as Satan would have Christ to do) for so doing we shall
tempt God, as Christ answers the devil in the second temptation.

Here then we are taught to walk wisely within our bounds, and not to use
unlawful means, or to neglect the good means given us of God for our benefit
and good. We must not ^lie in the air, for God has not given us wings to
fly, but legs to walk. We must not talk Siman Magus. Act. 8.

Deuteronomy. 8. 10. 11. 12.


of revelations, for God does not so teach us now, but by his written word. We
must not go to witches in extremity, to theft in poverty; for so we walk
out of our w^, and the holy Angels forsake us, (...) wicked spirits will
master us and Pro. 30. 9
confound us. The works of our calling, are called in scripture the way
wherein we must walk, desiring the Lord to bless them and all lawful means
appointed for us.

Now to make use of this doctrine briefly for our present purpose; no doubt of
all other spiritual preservatives, this of the Angels is one of the best
against the pestilence. For we may not doubt, but ^mly believe, they pitch
their tents, and ^et as it were an hedge about us, for our custody Psalm. 34.
and preservation as the devil con^esseth it of Jobs protection. Job. 1. 10.


So then consider evil angels are cruel, good Angels are merciful; evil
angels are old and subtle, good Angels are of ^ke years, and more wise; evil
angels are very expert to send forth venomous exhalations to poison the air:
the good Angels are more wise to purge the same: The evil angels have no such
power to dest oy us, as the good angels to preserve us.

Psalm. 103. 20.


the evil angels are strong and mighty, but they be fearful, and fear
abates strength: the good angels are more mighty and excel them in strength,
and void of fear, for that they be void of (...). To be short, look wherein
the eu^ ^ngels have any might to hurt us and annoy us in soul or in body, the
blessed Angels far pass them to preserve us and protect us in both. Now
blessed be God in this inspeakable mercy, for this wonderful honor and
glory, he gives his poor children here upon earth, that he accounts them
worthy the communion and fellowship of his most holy Angels. And yet he gives
them a greater glory then this, for they have his own presence most
comforable, for Jesus Christ walks with them in afflictions, as partly before
has been showed, and yet in that which follows, shall be more plainly
proved.

Here to conclude this question, forget not to make this use of this holy
doctrine. First learn by the excellency of these holy creatures, the great
glory of their creator. Secondly, learn by their love to conceive rightly of
the infinite love of thy God toward The use of the doctrine going besore.

Reu. 19. 22.


thee. Thirdly, remember seeing they be but our fellow-seruants they must not
be adored. Fourthly, consider often how much thou art bound to be thankful
^or this blessed protection. Fifthly, learn humility by their examples, they
take up poor Lazarus in their arms, and poor sinners often. Lastly, let thy
behavior be comely with all reverence, in thy secret chambers, and private
affairs, because of their presence. And so much for this question.

Verse 13. Thou shall walk upon the fierce lion, and the aspe, thou shall
tread upon the young lion and the dragon.
THis verse again contains a consequent of an antecedent set down in the
last verse aforegoing. And here hedoth amplify what he spoke before of the
Pestilence: well, I said the pestilence was like the snare of a hunter, like an
arrow, etc. I say yet further, let it be as fierce as a lion, as venomous as an
aspe, as terrible as a dragon, yet if thou can believe in Jesus Christ, and
repose thy self in the providence of the Almighty, in the Almighty, and
watchfully walk in thy ways, it shall go well with thee.

This reason is thus formed.

Such as have the holy Angels to preserve them, may walk safely amongst lions
and aspes, and pestiferous evils, such as the Pestilence is.

But thou that beleeuest in the Almighty, thou that watchfully walk in thy
ways, thou have the holy Angels to preserve thee.

Wherefore thou shall be preserved in the Pestilence.

Here we may well understand, first generally, by lions, and aspes, and
dragons, all the great dangers, secret and open evils, of this present life.

Note here for instruction and comfort, what the life is of Gods Saints on
earth. As Soon as thou have given up thy name to Jesus Christ, there will bend
themselves against thee, and beset thee, all the wicked The condition of Gods
children in this world.
spirits that can fly upon thee, and all the evil men of this world will vow
thy destruction, and like dragons, lions, and aspes will these ever bestir
themselves to poison thee, to sting thee, and tear thee in pieces.

But be no whit dismayed, this was and is the condition of all thy brethren,
and remember there are more, better, stronger, and mightier, with thee then
against thee, which thing thou might visibly discern if thine eyes were
opened. But we walk, and live by faith.

Again, I am of judgment that the Psalmist does here also in other terms
lay before us the plague, and the great danger thereof, as touching this mortal
life. For like as before, he calls the pestilence tropically: 1. The snare of
the hunter: 2. the fear of the night: 3. the arrow that flies by day: 4. the
reward of the wicked: so here, 5. he calls the same evil, a fierce lion, 6. a
venomous aspe: 7. a young lion, and lastly, a terrible dragon.

First let us see wherefore the plague is compared to a lion.
1 FIrst because of the ravenous cruelty of this beast, she teareth all our
beasts in pieces, especially then, when she has young: the she lion spares
(as they say) no pray, even so the pestilence spares no sorts of men.

2 For the invincible strength of this beast, there is none comparable unto the
lion. Even so the pestilence of all other diseases is most strong and deadly,
and brings P^. 8. lib. not. h. c. 15
down to the earth as well the strongest as the weakest.

3 The lion is a beast of a most hot and fiery nature: even so the plague;
for the infected complain much of their extreme burning.

Secondly, he compares the Pestilence to the aspe.
WHere the aspe biteth, his wounds be not great. But (like as they say) to the
pricks of pins or needles, but there follows his bitings, strange effects:
for such as the aspe biteth are smitten with a numnesse throughout all parts,
and there follows a wonderful coldness, Plin. h. n. lib. 8. c, 15 16. 23.
continual gasping, heaviness in the head, and after all this a deadly
sleep. There be diverse kinds of these serpents: Some breed dimnesse in the
eyes, pain of the heart, swelling in the face, and deafness in the ears:
some bring present death, and some kill within three hours space. We have
here then, not an unfit comparison, considering what like dangerous effects
the aspe and the plague breed in the bodies of men. Some by the Hebrew Peten.
word here used understand the Basilisco or Cockatrice. There is no^reeping
thing can abide the least hissing of this venomous worm. Such as be bitten by
this beast, are tormented with extreme heat and burning in their bodies, the
falling of the hair follows, and present death not long after. And some say,
it is death also to see it, or to hear the hissing of it. Surely, there are
some such lke symptoms to be found in the Pestilence: and the Physicians
counsel us not to eye them greatly which are infected; But I think our
sinful fears bring many evils upon us, which otherwise might well be avoided.

Thirdly, he compares the plague to the Dragon.
THis beast (says Pliny, and other natural writers) does not cast forth
poison, Lib. S. n. b.. 15.
but kills by violence, and tearing in pieces, as the lions do. For these
beasles have great sharp teeth, like wild sowes, with which they crush and
rend in pieces any thing. The P^stilence is compared to this beast by the
Psalmist, and by a man of wonderful experience and sight in naturals, because
they are alike dangerous, terrible, ^alen.
and of like poison and qualities together.

THE 6. LECTVRE.
Verse 14. Because he Depends (...)pon me, or (...)mbraceth me.
loves me, therefore will I deliver him. I will exalt him, because he has
known my name.
NOw the Lord himself speaks and The pa^
confirms, as it were to the conscience by his good spirit, all that his
Prophet has hitherto spoken both of Gods promises and of his own experience:
for it is but a small comfort only to hear the experience of other men, the
sweet promises of the Lord, in the outward ears, unless the holy spirit
speak also effectually unto the heart and conscience. But here observe how
first the Lord will have us to attend unto the experience of his Saints, Not
(...).
and the ministry of his word before he add his own effectual working.

The reason is thus framed.

He that knows my name, and depends upon me, and so rests in my shadow,
etc. shall be kept and comforted in the pestilence.

But thou know me and love me, etc. wherefore I shall preserve and comfort
thee in this Pestilence.

HEre learn how greatly God loves, favors, and deliteth in such as know
him, and hang upon him, as upon their almighty father in trouble. Fear not
little flock, says our blessed Savior, it is thy Luke 12. 32.
fathers will to give thee a kingdom: he that will give the greater, will
assuredly give the less: Thy father will give th^e a Kingdom, therefore much
more the transitory benefits of this life. It is our fathers will to give us
immortality in heaven: it is not to be doubted therefore, he cares for us in
a special manner in this mortality upon earth.

The word exalting is a Metaphore, borrowed from their manner of protection in
wars in elder times, they made their towers of defense, and their fortresses
upon high rocks, or high hills, that they might have the greater advantages
against their enemies. This then is the meaning of the holy spirit here. I will
set thee aloft, so 1. Ioh. 5. 18
as thine enemies the wicked spirits shall not touch thee with any mortal
wound.

By the name of God, he understands all the properties and proper adjuncts
or attributes of God, whereby he is discerned in his word from all the
creatures, most mighty, most just, most provident, most merciful.

By knowing Gods name, he means both to know, and acknowledge, and con^esse
the care, the providence and mer^ie of God in his deliverance, as Psalm. 1. 6.
God knows us when he acknowledges (...) to be of his number, and we know
Gods ^me, when by his good word and holy spirit, discerning the same, we
distrust in ^ll other power, and acknowledge his ^and only to be able and ready
to save us, and deliver us.

Note here how the knowledge and love of God, be inseparable companions. He
Ignoti nulla cupido.

We do not desire things unknown.

Mark. 4. 11.

M^t. 16.


that loves God, knows God, and is taught of God. As all spiritual graces,
they are not of, nor by nature, but by grace, so likewise this knowledge spoken
of in this place.

Verse. 15. He calls upon me, and I will answer him. I am with him in
troubles, I will deliver him, and glorify him.

With length of days will I satisfy him, and show him my salvation.


The Argument is thus set in form.

He that knows me, loves me, and calls upon me in troubles: shall be heard,
delivered, and comforted, etc.

Thou art one of that number, which truly know me, love me, and worship me in
prayer: wherefore thou shall be heard and comforted.

HEre the Psalmist commends unto us another singular preservative, which is
prayer. To stir us up unto this holy exercise, there are added sundry most
sweet and comfortable promises. First, God is ready to answer that man before
described in afflictions. Secondly, God is with him in troubles. 3. God will
deliver him out of this danger. 4. God will bring him to honor and glory. 5.
The Lord will satisfy him with days and years. 6. He shall see the
salvation of God.

First, here concerning prayer, note who it is that prays rightly and
profitably, to be heard.

The same man that is said the verse be^re to know God, to love him, and by ^th
to rest upon him, he shall call and shall ^e heard. Every man cannot pray to
be ^eard, for the carnal man here can do no^ing: for the faithful say: We
know not Romans 8. 26.
(...) to pray as we ought, but the spirit it self ^keth requests for us with
sighs and groans ^ich cannot be expressed. In the Law Mal. 1.
^o kinds of sacrifices were rejected: (...) lame and the blind sacrifice.
What ^crifices must now be offered? if we ^ke the Apostle, he will tell us
we Romans 12. 1.
^st offer up our selves, and our spiri^all service unto GOD. If then we be
^nde or lame, all our service displeases ^od. We be blind when we care not for
^e light of God: of such it is written, ^ouerb. 28 9. He that turns away his
ear And yet few so blind and so wicked, but they say they can pray.

Psalm. 141.

Eccles. 4. 17.


(...) hearing of the Lord, his prayer is abho^able. We be lame when any proud
sin ^gnes over us without repentance: and ^uch the Lord says, Prouer. 21. 27.
The ^rifice of the wicked is an abomination ^o God These men be fools (says
the ^lmist) and pray not at all, verse 4. the ^e says the Preacher, and
wills them to hearke^ unto God speaking, before they presume to open their
mouths before him, rude and untaught, not knowing how and what to speak.

2 He that will pray must first believe (says the Apostle) How can they call
upon him in whom they do not believe? And James Romans 10. 14.

James 5.


adds: He must be a righteous man.

And yet these holy ones cannot always pray, for how often come they to the
Lords gate, and yet have the repulse? how often mourns and roareth the holy
man of God, David, and cannot be heard? And Psalm 22. 1. 2.

Cant 5. 4. 56.

Psalm. 66. 18.


the Church cries after Christ mightily, and for a long time cannot find him.

The Psalmist se^meth to give a reason of this, when he says, If I If I
deligh^ in wickedn^s.
regard wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. A third thing
required in prayer, is a feeling of our wants.

A fourth point, is an earnest desire to obtain that we ask, as the widow.
Luk^ 18. 12. And a sist point, not to wax faint in prayer.

Now for the use and practice of this holy preservative, according to the
charge o^ God, Call upon me in the day of trouble, etc. The holy men of God
have ever used it ^n the elder Churches. Hezekiah being smitte^ with the
pestilence, first it is said, He turned his face to the wall. 2. he power forth
his prayer. O Lord remember now, I have labored to walk uprightly, and with a
sound heart before thee. 3. It is said, he wept sore: 4. I have heard thy
prayer and ^ene thy tears. 5. He received this comfortable answer, Behold, I
heal thee. David, in like manner when he was smitten Psalm. 38. 2
with the plague, he cries to God, saying; Lord thine arrows are light upon
me, and thine hand lies upon me: and so continues Some good Interpret^s so
judge.
amplifying and showing the greatness of his evils: and then he concludes no
doubt, having received comfort: verse 15. On thee, O Lord, do I wayt, thou
will ^eare me my Lord my God. And Job wept much and prayed, and used, the
mother of all good learning often, a sweet and comfortable meditation with
prayer let all the faithful fly to this; Christ spends mights in this
exercise, so the faithful in the Act. 2. 4. 13. 14. and Paul in all his
Epistles.

And I will hear him.

Here is the first promise, which is added 1. Promise.
unto this precious preservative of prayer. But does not God hear and see
always? Objection.
Answer. That is true: but by hearing in this place is meant, to like and to
grant his petitions, as else where often. David in the end of many Psalms,
adds that God has heard him, and granted his request: not that the Lord did
not hear from the beginning, but now in the end he feels an answer in his
soul that God has granted his desire. As Psalm. 69. The Lord has heard my
petition. 66. 18. 19. God has heard me, and considered the v^yce of my prayer.
Where note two things, if we desire to be heard, first that we have a feeling
of our wants, as here in troubles. 2. That we cry mightily, and continue, and
God in the end will hear us, as he did David, in the end always, and after
much crying.

I will be with him in troubles. This is the 2. promise. Some man will think
this no special promise for that God is both by his essence infinite (filling
heaven and earth) and by his providence, watchful, present and careful over
all and every one of the creatures in heaven and earth. And yet further, is he
not with his beloved children always in a more special manner, by his spirit
of sanctification and comfort, effectually also working by the Gal. 6. 14 15.
16.
^ath and resurrection of Jesus Christ to make them new creatures? All this is
true, both of the general providence of God, and of his special working and
grace in the Saints. But yet they are not always alike comforted. For the
Lord does otherwhiles more graciously show himself at one time then another.
For may not the King to those of his household more lovingly show his
countenance at one time then another, and frown at other times upon them, and
yet they be his servants? So is it with Christ and his members. The righteous
souls of the faithful sometimes eat and drink, and feast with Christ: yet
at other times, they cry much, they ask many watchmen for Reu. 5. 20.

Cant. 5. 5. 6. 7. 8.


him, and seek him with much sweating before they can find him.

And that the Lord Jesus does more familiarly show his face, and communicate
his graces unto his Saints in troubles and in their grieuances: the experience
of Gods people in all ages can testify: and this we have before partly vouched.
David cries: Hide not away thy face from me, for I am in trouble, and they
cried to the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered the Psalm. 69. 17.
out of their distress: O, that men would therefore praise the Lord. Master
Philpot says, to Lady Vane. Believe me (dear Lady) there Psalm. 107.

verse. 6. 13 19. 28.

Act and M. in M. Philpots letters.

2. Cor. 12. 9. 10.

Act. and M


is no such joy in the world, as the people of Christ, have under the cross.
These holy ones have often many desertions, and yet in the midst of their
agonies, Christ will suddenly shine forth as bright as the Sun after a cloudie
black tempest, as in Master Glouers story appears and many others. And this
blessed presence we speak of, make so many of Gods people so constantly and
so cheerfully to offer up themselves a living sacrifice, to be roasted, and
tormented with fire in smithfield, and many other parts of the world.

6. Question. What wonderful communion there is between Christ and his holy
members, best known to his people in afflictions.
Cant. 2. 16. My well-beloved is mine, and I am his verse 15. I will be with him
in trouble.

FIrst, let us here consider in what manner the holy Scripture speaks of this
great communion and fellowship between Christ and his members: Thus John
writes of it, first in his Epistle. That I 2. John. 1. 3.
say which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye may have
fellowship with us, and that our fellowship also may be with the father and
his son Jesus Christ. Again in his Gospel most comfortably on this manner: I
pray not for these alone, but for the^ also which shall believe in me through
their word, that they all may be one, as thou O Father art in me and I in
thee, even that they all may be one in us, that the world may John. 17. 20.
believe that thou have sent me: and the glory that thou gave me, I have
given them, that they may be one as we are one, I in them and they in me, that
they may be made perfect in one and that the world may know that thou have
sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me. And the Apostle speaks
of this communion when he says; Tempt your selves whether you be in the
faith? do ye not know that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be refu^es?
Because this blessed union, communion, and fellowship is spiritual and
mystical, the holy Scriptures do strive to help our weakness, to conceive
rightly the truth of it by sundry Metaphors and borrowed speeches, as John in
the sweet parable of the vine and vine branches: in 2. Cor. 13 4.

A parable is a speech comparing like things together, to stir up affection
to illustrate any doubt, and to show the effectual working of any thing by
most familiar and best known ^tudes.

1. Cor. 2. 9. Es. 5.


which place the whole comparison (if we make supply out of other places)
stands upon sundry most familiar similitudes, as to express the singular
love and care of God over his people, and the effectual power of the
Ministry of his holy word wo^ in them: so to instruct us of the VI separ b^
union between Christ and his holy members. 1. The heavenly Father, is compared
to the husbandman. 2. The ministers, unto the husbandmans laborers. 3. The
people and the Church of God, unto the vineyard, or husbandry. 4. Christ and
his members unto the vine and vine branch. 5. The spiritual union, li^e and
growth of the faithful in Christ, unto the natural conjunction, life and
growth of the natural vine and her branches. 6. Lastly, as the husbandman on
earth loves, cares for, and purges his vine with his hands and instruments,
his corn fields, etc. so the heavenly father loves, and purges his Church
and his people by his Spirit, word, and sacraments. etc. And like as wise
Princes commit their sons to the custody and instruction of wise and
faithful men, so the heavenly Father commends the education of his children
to his holy laborers, and by their Ministry he prepares such on eaith, as
he purposes to advance to the kingdom of his glory, to be fellow heirs with
Jesus Christ in heaven.

Again, all that heavenly and most sweet parable, the song of Solomon, tends
principally to express this inspeakeable communion: comparing it often unto
the holy union which is between man and wife, in that marriage which is in the
Lord: and so does the Apostle: and concludes ^that we are members of his
body, of his flesh, and of his bones.

3 And this firm conjunction which (...) in this mystical body is again
notably ^id before us, by the similitude of the natural body and the
essential parts of the same. 1. Cor. 12. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16.

Thus when we see by these few places how the holy spirit does demonstrate unto
us a most certain and real conjunction and communion betwixt Christ and all
the faithful here on earth. And yet here is no corporal commixtion of our
souls with his, or any conjunction of natures, neither is this a bare consent
of minds only but an inspeakeable conjunction is (...) by means of the words
of re^ation without, and the holy spirit of Christ within working effectually:
almighty in power to knit together things most ^arre distant, as one soul
bin^es head and ^eete together in one body. To be ^ort, the Lord to bring his
children to this high pitch of honor and dignity, does proceed with them in
this manner as follows.

First, the holy spirit singleth and seuereth them out of the world by the
^ound of ^is Gospel: (...) 15. 19. I have chosen you out of the world. And
receives them to his own house and ^amilie. Ephe. 2. 18. 19 Ye are no more
strangers and forreners, but citizens with the Saints of the household of Ethe.
14. 15.

^ere. 15. 17.

An vnderstand^ng ^eart o^ a ^ng heart.

Mat. 13. 15.


God.

The 2. effect is: He prepares our hearts by faith to receive Christ. And to
this end. 1. he renueth the mind. 2. he gives an understanding heart. Marc
4. 10. ^1. to receive Christ by faith. Ioh. 1. 11. To renew the mind his light
dispelleth ignorance, and brings in that wonderful doctrine which co^ue^teth
the soul. Psalm 199.

To renew the heart, 1. he sof^th and humbles it by the preaching of Gods law.
Ezech. 11. 19. 20. 2. he causes it with sighs and groans to confess, Rem.
826. There is no good thing in my flesh. 3. the heart hungreth after Christ,
and his righteousness. Mat. 5. 6. 4. Lastly, he works in the heart that
admirable work of God, John 629. Even a precious and victorious faith to
receive (as with a hand) Jesus Christ and his benefits. Ioh. 1. 12.

The 3. effect, and work of Gods spirit is: he gives them as a free gift
unto Christ. Ioh. 1027. 924. And Christ unto them again in like manner. Rom 8
3. 2. Ca^t. 2. 16. My welheloued is mine an^ I am his.

The 4. effect. The holy spirit does in a most wonderful and real manner knit
their souls and hearts unto Christ, and Christ ento them againc: so that
Christ become the head, and the believer the lively member of Christ. So as the
branches have not a m^re certain sap life, and growth by the vine, then the
true believer has life, grace and growth in all good graces from Christ. lab.
15. 1. 2. For this cause the Apostle says truly. We are mibers of his body, of
his flesh and of his bones. Ep^ 5. 38. 21

Fifthly, then Christ does communicate Gal. 2. 27 They receive by his
Iustificatition. Sanctification.
spirit the precious virtue of his death, which has a great ^fficacie to kill
sin. Rom 6. 6. Gal. 6 15. and the virtue of his burial to rot sin, that so
they may loath it as an vnsa^ carrion, being crucified and slain in them: and
the virtue of his resurrection. Phil. 38. 9. whereby they are made new
creatures. Gal 6. 15. 16.

3 Because of this communi^n we are said to be partakers of the divine
nature. And the believer may speak all this the Apostle speaks, in his own
person; I 2. Pet. 1. 4.
am crucified with Christ, but I live, yet not I any more, but Christ lives in
me, and in that I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the son Gal. 2.
20.
of God, who has loved me, and given himself for me. Insignis sententia
fideles extra se viuere: id est in Christo; A notable saying (says master
Call.) the faithful ^ue without themselves John Call. Com in Gal. verse 2. 10.
in Christ.

6 Lastly, when they are thus highly advanced into the communion of the holy
Trinity, all the holy Angels and Saints of God: they slay not then in one
stay, but they must have their daily confirmation by the said word and spirit,
that so they may have a holy growth unto a perfect 2. Pet. 3. 18.

Ep^e. 4. 13.


man, and unto the measure of the age, of the full growth or fullness of Christ.

And this growth is signified unto us, by the growth and increase which is to
be seen in the parts of any natural body. Ephe 4. 15. Let us follow the
truth in love, and in all things grow up to him, which is the head, that is
Christ. And again, Col. 2. 19. All the body furnished and knit together by
joints and bands increases with the increasing of God. Thus far briesly of
this holy communion.

The third promise; And I will deliver him. The Lord will have his children
wade through afflictions, yea sometimes to be smitten with the plague it
self: but he will deliver them: that is, he will restore him to health if
that be good for him, or else he will change this miserable and transitory
life, with the happy and immortal life, which is best of all. Blessed is the
man whom God corrects therefore refuse not thou the chast^ of the Almighty,
for he makes the wound, and binds (...) up, he Job. 5. 17. 18. 19.
smites, and his hands make whole: he shall deliver thee in fix troubles, and
in the seventh the (...) shall not touch thee.

The fourth promise. And I will bring him to honor. It is not to be doubted
but God has per^ormed this promise always to his children: whether we
understand it of an earthly ^anour or an heavenly, they which fail of this
one, are sure notwithstanding of the other, and sometime of both, Joseph and
Daniel of both after great adversity: Hezek^as, David and Job, of both, after
plagues and pestilentiall maladies. Yet Lazarus and many of his condition,
wanting this vain and transitory glory, have received the greater measure of
the heavenly.

Here again, I do not think, but that he puts us in mind of the glory of
our resurrection, and of our regeneration, where assuredly our glory begins. 2.
Cor. 1. 18. which while we consider (albeit afflictions for the present are
grievous) yet we must be wonderfully cheared and com^orted: for howsoever
here for a moment, our bodies be subject to many most grievous and noisome
diseases, for our correction and chasticement, and after to putrefaction: yet
in the end, they shall be ^illed with a wonderful glory, For they shall shine
in the resurrection as Mat. 13. 43
the Sun, and shall be like the Angels of God. Whereas the wicked shall ari^e
to a greater Dan. 12. 5.
shame then if they were filled with all the sores and plagues of Egypt. And
therefore this promise much comforted Job: ^or thus he speaks of it in his
great passions most chearefully: I am sure that my Redeemer l^cth, and he shall
stand the Job. 19.

verse 25.


last on the earth, and though after my skinn^, worms destroy this body; yet
shall I see God If Satan be sent to torment the body, remember Iobes comfort
in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none
other for me, though my reins are consumed within me.

The fifth promise. With length of days will I sanctify him. Here I judge
this promise, as that aforegoing, and the last which follows, concerns both
the life present, and that which is to come. The faithful then in that plague
looked every m^ment for death, and therefore they have this promise to comfort
them. An old age is promised as a blessing often to the godly, and they have so
accounted 1. Tim. 4. 8.

Prou. 5. 1. 2.

Pro. 4. 10. 25. 8.

C^itie bona, senio satur.

Pro. 16. 31.

Age nor honor make men wi^e, but the spirit of God.

Job. 32. 8 9


it. Genesis 15. 15.

Thou shall come to thy fathers in peace, and shall be buried in a good old age.
So Ged^on is buried in a good age. Judges, 8. 32. And David full of days,
riches, and honor. 1. Chron. 29 28.

Surely old age, and gray hairs is a Crown of glory to the righteous and
godly man. For thus the holy Spirit speaks: Age is a Crown of glory, when it
is found in the way of righteousness: but all things are turned into sin,
and accursed to the wicked and ungodly. Com. 5.


Again, Gods children are more satisfied here on earth with a few days, then
the wicked are with Nestors years.

And concerning long days in heaven, there shall be days continually and no
more nights. The heavenly Jerusalem has no need of the Sun, neither of the
Moon to shine in it: for the glory of Keue. 21. 23.
God does light it: and the Lamb is the light of it.

The 6. and last promise, I will show him my salvation.

This promise of all the rest is most comfortable. And here two things must be
considered. First, who see their salvation, or to whom it is showed. Secondly,
1 Who see their salvation.
where and when it is showed us, and seen by us. For the first: not every man
can see into this mystery, no not every professor of the Gospel: first he
must be, as he is described in this Psalm, a faithful man, a godly man, a
righteous man, watchful over his ways, a devout man, fearing God; the Lord
does assure such in time by his good spirit, of their election, adoption,
vocation, and everlasting salvation. Romans 8. 15. Ephesians. 430. All the faithful
ought to strive daily in all religious sear, to come to the knowledge, Psalm.
23. 6.
and the full assurance by faith of their salvation. Secondly, if thou
demandest when and where the faithful see their salvation: I answer, that
they see it both on earth and in heaven: first in earth they see it as in a
glass, two ways: ^st by says 2 Cor. 3. 12. 18.

Io. 8. 56.

Heb. 11. 1.


when they see Christ, and have the assurance of his benefits in their h^ts by
the holy spirit: secondly, by ^eeling, when they ^eele the power and virtue of
Christ working in them true mo^ficaton and Ephesians 320.

Ph^ 3. 8. 10. 19.

2. Cor. 13. 4.

Gal. 6. 14. 15. 16.


sanctification of life. Again they see their salvation in heaven, when they
come to the present possession of that crown which is purchased for them, then
shall they no more see darkly: for ^ohn says; We know that when he she appear
we ^all be (...) him, for we shall (...) as he is: and be with him where he
is. 10 17 (...). 24. 1. 10. 3. 2.


Note here (...) ^sts and Ath^sts till the Lord (...) your eye^ with his eye
^alue, you can never but doubt of your salvation, for he alone does show it,
whom, and where, and when he will. To be short, this is a most sovereign
comfort for all Gods people, and ever has been in all pains and griefs of
this present life, plagues, persecutions, and all evils whatsoever. Job
rejoices in his misery, saying: I am sure my redeemer lives, and I shall see
him, etc. Chapter 19.


THE 7. LECTVRE.
The seventh Question. Of the vis^ation of the sick, which duty must also be
^erformed, by some chosen, faithful, and discreet men, in the Pestilence.
James 5. 14. Is any sick among you? let him send for the Elders, etc.
WE have already showed very cord^all and precious preservatives both against
many evils, and specially against the Pestilence. And yet there is one more
which is given us of the Lord, no less profitable and effectual then the
rest. And this is that comfortable visitation of the sick, which contains
medicines of wonderful virtue, to be ministered by the righteous and religious
Elders or holy Ministers, unto Gods people: and by the wi^e and godly brethren
one to an other in all their maladies.

In the visitation of the sick, James teaches us what the sick or visited
must do.
1 He must send for the Elders, verse. 14. 2 Acknowledge his sins, verse, 16.
3 He must believe, verse 15. 4 He must pray with them, verse 16.
Secondly, what the visitors must be.
1 The Elders, verse 14. 2 The Elders of the Church. verse 14. 3 Faithful men,
verse 15. 4 Righteous men, verse 16. 5 Zealous men. 6 Merciful men. 7 Men of
one accord.
Thirdly, what the visitors must do.
1 They must come to the house of mourning, verse 14. 2 They must teach and
admonish the patient, verse 16. 3 They must strive in fasting and prayer for
him, verse 15. 4 They must pray tn faith, verse 15. 5 They must persevere and
expect a blessing assuredly.


Is any sick, let him send for the Elders.
1 HEre again with James we see that sickness (as all afflictions of this
life) is common to all the godly, with the wicked, poor and rich, strong and
weak in faith, there is no exception nor privilege here to free any man.

2. S. James would have the sick man to she^e his faith and love, by sending
first of his own accord for the Elders of ye church to instruct him and to pray
for him, and to comfort him: so the Elders seeing his desire, his love and
fear, shall be stirred up in a greater affection and compassion toward him
again.

3 We must here note also wherefore the holy Ghost sends us first to these
spiritual Physicians of the soul, before we call for the other of the body,
which must not be despised. And this he does, that these holy men may take a
view of the spiritual causes of our evils, and labor to remove them, for then
our natural griefs are both soonest helped, and most soundly cured: so Christ
begins his cure, Mat. 9. 2. by removing first the spiritual causes, Thy sins
are forgiven thee. And surely this we 2. Chro. 16. 10. 12.
find daily true by our experience, that when physic ^res without the Lord,
as it were, the sores and plagues of their souls become more dangerous and
incurable, for being nothing humbled, nor bettered by the Lords chasticements,
they walk more boldly in their old sins when they recover Note.
health the before.

Now l^ (...) examine with all diligence, what special points S. James
commends unto us concerning the visitation of the sick.

First he says, the Elders must be sent for: by these Elders, the holy spirit
understands elsewhere the holy Ministers chiefly, and with them the godly
brethren which were their helpers in their ministry and spiritual service
unto God and his church, men of knowledge, wisdom, experience, and godliness
without rebuke.

Secondly, he says not one, but many Elders, not one Elder: for here in this
spiritual service, as in many other corporal actions, that is true which the
Preacher says, Two are better then one. Again, the love, judgment,
experience, faith, feeling, Ecc. 4. 9.
and prayer of many, must here be more effectual and comfortable then of one.

And yet here cases no doubt may often so fall out, as that some one most rare,
most Job. 33. 23.
expert, and wise messengers of the Lord must be sought for, albeit as Job
speaks, we shall hardly find one such amongst a thousand.

Thirdly, he adds, they must be the Elders of the church, that is, such as
are best known to thee: thine own wise pastor, etc. which can best discern
al thy sores: or that minister which has been Gods most holy ordinance, either
for thy conversion, or confirmation.

Question.
But here now a question may be demanded, whether the same Ministers of God
which serve the Lord in their public ministry, and come to the holy
assemblies, are charged also in this place to attend upon the visitatio^ of the
sick in time of pestilence?

Answer.

TO this I answer with men Ioach. Camerar. in synop. depeste Ewich^s depeste.
of judgment, that it were very expedient, that at such times, there should be
certain special men chosen for this purpose, men known both for their
ministry, godliness, and sincerity of life; who should not neglect their
duty concerning either the souls or bodies of the faithful, which they could
perform, or cause any way to be done for their good.

Secondly, I answer, that I cannot see how the Pastor notwithstanding, can
neglect any of his slocke (committed of the Lord unto his charge) in any
calamity, or the pestilence. For the Apostles charge is so general in my Here
I desire to be taught by the godly learned, both how S. James must be
understood, and how ^he sick of the plagne may best be visited.
judgment, that it excludes all exceptions of persons., time, and sickness.
Any man may send in any sickness for the Elders of the Church.

But here let wise Christians be careful, as not to abuse the love of their
kinsfolks and friends, so to prefer the health of all the congregation,
before their own, and so to strive to content themselves, with the presence of
such as the magistrates have selected and appointed for this purpose. This
religious love and care for the church was in Boz:, who being sick himself of
B. de peste.
the plague at Lausanna, would not have M. Ioh. Calvin, and P. Viret to come
unto him, when they offered freely, and most lo^ingly to come and visit him:
because (says he) we must prefer the benefit of Gods Church, and the glory
of God, before our own comforts, and the preservation of our own life.

Fourthly, these men must be men of great love, mercy and compassion: for this
cause he wills us to take the Elders of our Church, that is, such loving,
known, merciful men, as can and will mourn with us, and for us. Psalm 41. 1.
Blessed is he that judges wisely of the poor, the Lord shall deliver him in
time of trouble. A notable example of this compassion is in Jobs friends: for
first they came to comfort him; secondly, Job. 2. 12. 13.
they wept greatly when they saw him; thirdly, their great grief is signified
in renting of their clothes; fourthly, their compassion, in sitting by him
seven days and seven nights in silence. This is the time when Gods children
must strive to show their affection, and brotherly kindness 2. Pet. 1. 7.
toward the Saints.

Fifthly, these holy Elders which visit the sick must affect one thing, be of
one mind, and of one accord: for the cri^s and prayers of such men be very
strong, and Romans 15. 6.
can soonest and best prevail with the Lord, according to his own truth and
holy promise. Uerely I say unto you, that if two of you shall agree in earth
upon any thing, whatsoever they shall desire, it shall be given them Mat ^8. 19
of my father, which is in heaven, for where two or three are gathered together
in my name, there am I in the midst of them. The truth of this promise is to be
seen in the practice and prayer of the holy Saints. The disciples which were
met together, to pray for the good success of the gospel, for spiritual
courage and boldnesle in their ministry, for the co^firmatio^ of their doctrine
by signs and wonders. I it is said of the whole multitude of the^ which
believed, and there prayed, That they were of one heart and of one soul. Ast.
4. 31. 32. They lift up their voices Omothumadon.

Ast. 2. 1. 4 24.


unto God with one accord. ver. se 24. 3. After prayer they obtained all that
they asked. For it is said: first that they were confirmed presently with a
miracle. The place was shaken where they were assembled together, and all were
filled with the holy Ghost. verse 31. 2. They received their second request,
spiritual Uers. 31.

Parresia.

Ephesians. 6. 19.

1. Chro. 28 20.


boldness and courage: for it is said, they spoke the word of God boldly, ver.
31. 3. Lastly, the Gospel was more glorified, and had a more free passage
daily. And the day of Penticost, when they waited together in prayer for the
gifts of the holy Ghost: It is said they were altogether Act. 2. 1.
with one accord in one place. And the holy Disciples which believed, they are
said, that in hearing the word in prayer, they continued with one accord daily
in the Act. 1. 46.
Temple. These Elders then of whom James speaks, must be thus affected.
Religious men, faithful men, devout men, righteous men, and such will not
lightly jar or disagree, but be most careful to keep the bands of love in
holy peace and unity, with heart and mind affecting one thing, Phil. 3. 15.
16.

To. 15. 16


and bearing with them of weaker judgment, till the Lord has revealed better
things unto them. These men thus having one heart and one mouth, may send forth
such cries unto the Lord, as shall be heard, and none other.

Sixthly, S. James requires that they be faithful men, righteous men, and m^n
of good feeling. They must have faith, for otherwise they cannot pray, as we
have before showed: ver. 15. of that 19. Psalm: they must be righteous men,
for otherwise they shall be rejected of God in this sacrifice which they offer.
Pro. 21. 27. and the sick can have no comfort in them. And they must have a
good feeling of the wants of their brother, otherwise their prayer will not
work and be effectual: so the promise is to be understood, the prayer of a
righteous man avails much, which is Verse. 15.
working, and effectual.

Seventhly, they must instruct and admonish the patient, and by mutual
conference, so stir him up to open and re^eale such sins and evils as most
grieve his heart and conscience. They must know his passions, his life, his
calling, his knowledge, his fear, his affections, his love, and all his
conversation and how long he has known Jesus Christ.

Again, here they must be wise to discern, Ephe. 6.
whether Satan has wounded him with any siery dart, and so has caused him to
doubt of his election, vocation, faith, repentance, etc. They must be provided
of examples which may show him how that other of Gods children have so been
smitten, and have languished long, and yet at last were graciously restored.
But nothing comparable to our own experience. Here let them pray earnestly for
the spirit of judgment for that Satan Esai. 11. 2.
has many strange and invisible delusions: and remember the proverb, That a
gracious speech heateth the passions of the soul. A Pro. 25. 11
word spoken in his place, is like app^es of gold with pictures of silver.

Eighthly, Saint James requires in the visitors of the sick, verse 15. a
prayer of Euchentes pisteos.
faith. They must be persuaded that all this sacrifice and service which they
off^r unto God in their supplications, etc. is accepted of God in Jesus Christ,
and shall return from him a c^mfort for themselves, and a blessing for their
brother, according to his holy promise in this place. This James tells us, in
the beginning of his Epistle, that if any C^a. 5. 16.
will receive any good (...) Lord, let him ask in faith and waver not: for he
that prays effectually, must be persuaded, his labor shall not be lost, but
that the Lord will consider it. Psalm. 66. 19. this ^aith our Savior:
Whatsoever ye^ Mat. 21. 22.
ask in prayer, if you believe you shall receive it.

The father of a lunaticke, which was vexed also with an evil spirit, came to
Christ, and spoke thus doubtfully: If thou can do any thing help us, and
have compassion Mat. 9.

Verse. 22. 23. 24.


on us. Christ answered: If thou can ^eleeue, all things are possible to him
that believes: and straightway the father of the child crying with tears,
said: Lord I believe help mine unbelief.

Arguments to confirm their faith in this instant are these. 1. The patient is
a brother and a professor of the Gospel, and therefore we must as feeling
members consider his case our as own. 2. If heretofore he never gave up his
name to Jesus Christ, now he is desirous to do it, as appears and is
signified by sending for the Elders, by confession of his sins, etc.

And thus both parts must strive that this prayer man be done in faith, and may
be working effectual.

Cyprian speaking how he and his brethren did much good in his time in the
visitation of the sick, says, that they pro^sper^d according as they and the
patient has faith to speak unto God. Prout 4 Tract. de Idol. vanit.
fides patientis adiuuat, aut grati^ curantis aspirat.

9 Saint James here requires also the humiliation and faith of the patient.

The holy Elders doing their enduour with all diligence; the brother which is
thus visited, must strive also to believe as all things generally concerning
his salvation: so also so that this particular action of these holy men shall
do him good, as for the free pardon of his sins, so sor bodily health so
far as shall be expedient for him. To this end the Apostle wills the sick
man to confeile his sins, and the elders to provoke him thereunto by their
experience, verse. 16. Confess your sins one to another, and pray one for
another. Surely the Lord Jesus in all his miraculous cures, even requires
this faith in ^uerie one of his patie^ts. Mat. 8 10. To the good woman which
had the issue of blood he says: Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has
made the^ whole. And so to all the rest, he asks always M^tt 9. 22.
of their faith, and how they are persuaded of his grace, love, power, and
might to do them good. And this is it that Cyprian notes, pro^t sides
patientis adiuuat: a^ the Patients says helps us so we preua^le with God, in
the visitation of the sick.

The 10 point and the last here to be remembered is, these me^ must have zeal
to persevere and continue this holy exercise in abstinence add prayer (...)
admonition and instructi^. etc. For (...) the Lord hears always the pra^ers
and supplications o^ his ^uants in the beginning: notwithstanding he shows
not always any full grant of them long after, because he would have his
children more carnestly to sue unto him, and to wait upon him. So the Apostle
charge that we persevere and continue in prayer, waiting Kom. 12. 12.
and expecting with patience a blessing from the Lord. And this our Savior
teaches Luke. 8. 1.
us sweetly by a parable. And Dani^l confirms it unto us by his own prac^ise
and experience: for thus he says: At the same time I Daniel was in heaviness
for 3. weeks of days, I ate no pleasant bread, Dan. 10. 2. 3.
neither came flesh nor wine in my mouth, neither did I anoint my self at
all, till three weeks of days were fulfil^ed. Here is a watchful continuance
in prayer, fasting and humiliation for 21. days, then he re^eiueth an answer,
Fear not Daniel, for from the first day, that thou did set thine Verse. 12.
beart to understand and to humble thy self before thy God, thy words were
heard, and Mat 2. 46. 47.
I am come for thy words.

Thus we see that albeit the Lord hears not at the first cry, yet he
delights to see our humiliation, and will grant our requests in his good time
and not fail us.

And thus far we have seen how the holy elders proceed in their spiritual
cure. These rules being followed with wisdom and judgment, I doubt not, the
holy men of God have, and may attain great mercies and blessings in the due
practice of them, in the visitation of the sick people of God. And if this
spiritual exercise be so comfortable and so profitable in common and vulgar
diseases, which come of natural causes only: how much more precious are they
in greater plagues in any, as Saint James speaks? and therefore in the
pes^ilence it is so also, which is no doubt a mixed evil of natural common
known causes, and spiritual. invisible and unknown as we have before showed.

Here I would and, but that I must first answer two sort^ of men, which oppose
themselves against the comely and comfortable ordinance of the Lord. For some
there are so hard hear^ed, and so void of all humanity, that they will not
have this holy exercise to have any place in time of pestilence. Again, there
are others ^o void of al good judgment, which without all difference or respect
of time, persons or place, frequent all houses, without any fear of contagion
or infection, and exclaim mightily against all departure or going aside from
the pestilence. For the first sort, I commend unto them these holy rules
following. 1. they must summon themselves unto the judgment seat of God, and
look on the plague as on the messenger of Gods wrath, which cannot be avoided
with change of places, but by repentance and amendment of life, etc.

2 Let no man go aside, nor tarry with a doubtful conseience, but when as he
shall have learned out of the word of GOD what his duty is, that commending
himself to God, he may continue constantly therein.

3 Let no man depart a hairs breadth, for fear of death, from the duties of
humanity, nor break any of the bonds of love, which are many as between man
and wife, between parents and children, masters and servants, between
kindred. between christians, neigbours and friends: For if we break these
bonds, I see not how humane societies may continue.

And here when the Lord shall change the life of any of thy good friends, be
not cast down, as they which are without hope: But remember Cyprians words:
No^ amittimus nostros, sed tantum premittimus: We have not loct our good
friends, but we have only sent them before us.

4 Let not him that is bound to any civil office depart, for such are bound,
by the laws of christian and godly policy in every common wealth to attend
upon their calling, function and place in their own city.

5 Lastly, the Pastors and elders (as here James speaks) may not depart, for
how then shall the sick be visited and comforted; which thing seems here to
be commanded and commended by the holy Apostle unto them.

The second sort make many obiectio^s which may be thus answered. First they
say, Gods decree is unchangeable: Frgo 1. Ob.
it is in vain to depart or to go any thing aside, for no man can escape his
decree, and so death when he sends it.

This argument is not good: for Gods decree does not take away ordinary and
lawful means to save life: no not When a man has received an answer from
Thus a heathen spaketh,
God to prolong his life: as in S. Paul, who was told of the Lord, he should
go to Rome, and yet the Apostle neglects Tam fatale est medicum adhibe re
quam conualescere. Delato.
no means of Gods providence to bring him thither. Act. 27. 143.

Again they say: Such as fly from death love not God, for death is the way to
him.

Yet again look on Paul's example: 2. object.
he greatly desired to be with Christ. Phil. 1. 21. 24.

And yet for his brethrens sake, Romans 9. 3. and Gods glory, he would not give
up his life to the enemies hands when they thirsted so much for his blood.
act. 25 11. And he gives God great thanks for his deliuerence. 2. Cor. 1. 5.
11.

They say the pestilence is an especial 3. object.
messenger sent from God, and therefore we must quietly abide it. So wars
and famine. And yet Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, flee and depart to those places
where they might best be relieved.

They say we have no christian example 4. object.
for this departure. This is no good argument. Is it not apparent in holy
scripture what every one has done? and we know that in many things, the
general rules of doctrine are sufficient to determine those things whereof we
have no commandment, nor any paricular example. They say, David sled not the
5. Object.
plague. That was a short time, and whither should he flee, seeing that
pestilence was spread all over the land. 2. Sam. 24. The christians in
Alexandria being among 6. Object.
the heathens, without all difference or respect of persons, time, or place,
did persorme all duties ofhumanitie and charity If any desisire to know more
of this, read B^za of the pestilence.
in visiting and comforting the living, and burying the dead Pagans: ergo, much
more should we do this among the Christians. I answer, such Christian
constanci^, and merciful humanity is to be praised and followed, so that a
general rule be not made of it: For Euse^us, does not say that every one did
Lib. 7. ca. 10.
so but that very many of the Cristians did so.

An admonition concerning the use of physic, and all natural helps which
the Lord may bless for our good, as in other maladies, so in the pestilence.
SAint James adds, that after the former spiritual comforts, the Elders of
his time did anoint the sick with oil in the name of the Lord: Marc. 6.
even as our Savior had before appointed, and his Disciples practiced in their
miraculous cures.

This gift of healing the Apostle speaks of, 1. Cor. 12. 30. showing it to be
a peculiar gift: are all doers of miracles? have all the gifts of healing? And
it ceased in the Church, when the Gospel was sufficiently confirmed with
miracles, even anon after the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists had finished
and ended their work, and when their time was expired.

Now then the gist ceasing: it is madness to retain still the sign which
went with the gift, that is, this anointing or anciling, and more madness to
make a Sacrament of it, as Antichrist has done, and most extreme madness to
give it unto them onelic which are a dying, which was wont to be given to such
as did recover health again. Wherefore as the holy visitors then did first
use their spiritual exercise, which is left for us to practice, and next this
extraordinary gist and means of healing: so let us carefully and wisely here
call sor in the second place the learned physician, the comsortable and
ordinary means which God has lest unto us in nature as long as the world
endures. This order that holy writer, the godly Preacher commends unto us
in these words. My son fail not Eccle. 38. 9 10. 11. 12.
in thy sickness, but pray unto the Lord and ^e will ma^e thee whole: leave
off from sin, and order (...) hands aright etc. and cleanse Ecclesi 8. 9. 10.
11. 12.
thine heart from all wickedness, etc. Then give place to the Physician, for
the Lord has created him, let him not go from thee, for thou have need of
him: the hour may come that their enterprises may have good success, for he
also shall pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper that which is given for
the prolonging of life. Whereas some object that in the pestilence natural
remedies of physic cannot benefit us, because the causes here cannot be
found or seen in nature: I answer with M. B. If there come into the
pestilence no natural causes, then these whom the plague has infected,
cannot doubtless so much as be eased, much less be healed by natural
remedies. But this second to be very false, experience and common sense do
daily tell us. Wherefore I affirm, that natural remedies must not be
neglected.

Again, whereas others do object, that physic here often is seen to have
but small good success: I answer, that we must not say of natural
preservatives, that because they do^ not benefit one or two, or three:
therefore they cannot help any at all. It is a badde conclusion: for consider
that God does govern natural causes and their effects as it pleases him, and
blesses them to whom he will, where and when he will.

And hence it comes, that the infection touches not every one that is in
danger of it, neither is it deadly to every one that is infected.

Others yet more fondly dispute against natural remedies in this sickness:
and they say that God has here a more special providence, and he will smite
whom he will to death, and therefore all remedies are to small purpose. These
men again want judgment.

I answer, that the Lord no doubt, when he sent a famine into Egypt, and the
regions there-about, he determined who should die in that scarcity: yet for
all this, cease not Joseph with most wise counsel, to provide for the
Egyptians, and Jacob for his family. The like did Paul in the sea with the
Mariners, when he had received an answer he should come to Rome safely: as
is before showed.

And Christ knew his time, and yet he went aside often from the enemies hand
till his hour came, using the ordinary means for his preservation.

And that no man may stand stiffly 1 Denature dcorum.
in his own rash judgment; Quid Temeritate fortius? says Tullie; What so
fool hardy, or so violent, as rash and hasty spirits?

Hear what that learned Father of blessed memory, Master Luther says of
this matter in his Treatise of the pestilence, translated out of Dutch into
Latin, and in English thus much:

God has created physic, and given us Of the plague in Wittenberge.

Ann. 1527


a mind and reason, that every man should have a care of his own body for
health and life: whosoever vvil not use these, when as without the hurt of
his neighbor he may, the same man betraieth his own life, and there lacks
little, but that before God he is made a murderer: for by the same reason he
may despise meat and drink, raiment and housing, and trusting too much unto
his faith, say if God will, he can preserve me without all these things:
then the which folly, this is yet greater, that he which after this sort,
casts off the care of his body, he may hurt and infect others also, and so
through his negligence he may purchase the blame of a murderer.

Some men do indeed as foolish men do in a common firing, which will not come
and help the city, but let the fire alone, that the whole city might be
burned: namely upon this trust, doubtless, if God will, ^e can without water
quench the fire.

But friend, thou ought in no wise so to deal: Nay, it is unlawful and
shameful which thou perswadest thy self: but rather use remedies and
medicines, and do whatsoever any way may help: perfume thine house, orchard
or street: fly the infested places, and so behave thy self as one willing to
quench and not to maintain this open fire.

Again, it follows in the same treatise. If Satan by the will of God,
either by himself or his Ministers, has wrought us this deadly infection: I
on the other side before all things will pray unto God, that of his mercy he
will take away the same from us: then I will put to my simple helping hand,
both by perfuming and clensing of the air, by using of medicines, and also in
sbunning the infection, where my presence is not necessary. Lest I might seem
my self to have neglected some thing, or to be cause of death unto other, who
through my negligence may take harm. But if God neuerthel^sse will have me
vi^ited with this sickness, or call me out of this world unto his kingdom,
yet I have done but that which was my duty, neither have I offeded^ ^n any
thing, either against my self or my neighbor, but where my service is
needful, there I will let pass nothing of all things which either can or
ought to be done of me. Behold this Note.
is that godly faith indeed which does nothing rashly, neither tempts God in
any thing.

Thus the^ I conclude, when thou shall have wisely considered and discerned the
causes of the pestilence: then turn to God (as the Prophet bids) with all
thine heart, with fasting, with weeping, and with Joel 2. 12.
mourning, and sly aloft by faith into the secret place, almighty shadow, and
blessed Conclusion.
protection of the Lord, and there rest patie^tly as under his holy wings, ever
praying for the increase of faith and patience, that thou may quietly want
and depend upon God, and for a good conscience, that so thou may avoid
false, foolish, vain, and wicked fears, and cheerfully standing in thy place:
and carefully call for the protection of the mighty, blessed and holy Angels,
and for the communion and presence of Jesus Christ: so shall thou chase
far*away from thee the wicked and unclean spirits which are sent of God to
poysen and to destroy men with the pestilence.

And lastly, when thou have used all the means before showed, for thy
spiritual help and comfort, thou must neglect no ordinance nor help of God
in nature, both for thy cure and preservation. The 1. Chapter 6. 12.
wicked indeed inuert and pervert this order, as did Asa, and therefore no
marvel if they receive often a curse in steed of a blessing; for if physic
give them health of body, their souls notwithstanding are never cured, or made
any better by their chasticements: but they daily gather more strength to
commit sin with greater boldness.

MASTER GREENEHAMS PRAYER.
O God most mighty, glorious and righteous: O Father most loving, gracious, and
merciful, which keep covenant and mercy in Jesus Christ; for all those
which receiving the first fruits of thy holy spirit, walk before thee in
uprightness of their heart: we thy unworthy children come unto thee in the
name of thy only begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord: beseeching thee to
renew and increase thy holy spirit in us, and to purify our hearts more and
more by faith, that we may have a clearer sight, and a surer persuasion of thy
fatherly goodness unto us, and that we may more readily perform our dutiful
obedience unto thee. For we do acknowledge and confess unto thy sacred
Majesty, that we have yet never hitherto worthily esteemed thy mercies toward
us, nor sufficiently expressed the fruits of our bounden duty toward thee:
but that still we remain ignorant, and forgetful of many good things, which
we ought, and might know. And we confess Lord, we are slack unto those things
which thy holy spirit offers to our minds, unapt to do them, soon weary of
well-doing; and wherein we please thee something, we please our selves too much.
Moreover we likewise confess, that we are ignorant of many evil things, that
we have done, do, or may do: forgetful of diverse things, which sometime we
have had knowledge and remorce of. And now the things which come to our
remembrance, and are in our sight, do not appear to be so sinful in any
measure as they are, and ought of us to be regarded. Yea we are beguiled or
ever we are aware with our present corruptions, and they cleave so fast unto
us, that we can hardly leave them, but most hardly be brought to true
repentance of them. We besee^h therefore thy sacred Majesty, to work in us by
thy holy spirit, a wise and careful searching out of and into our sins, that
by thy law we may be convinced of them, awakened by thy threatenings, rebuked
for them by thy judgments, executed upon the wicked, and exercised toward thy
children, servants, and friends, that so we may fear and tremble for them. And
by the serious premeditation of the uncertain hour, of a most certain death,
of the day of thy general, in^itable, and dreadful judgment, of the horrible
and everlasting pains of the wicked in the helles, and their loss of the
inestimable joys of the heavens, stir up our dead hearts to seek thee O
Father in thy Christ, and thy son our Lord and Savior in the Gospel. And
finally, we pray that we may be even confounded in our selves, by the
fruitful remembrance of thy blessed sufferings, the most precious
bloud-sheading and death of our Lord Jesus Christ, that so we may be humbled
after that manner and measure thy children should be: beseeching thee, that
we may so aforehand accuse our selves before thy blessed Majesty, that our
adversary may have no power hereafter to accuse us, so judge our selves, that
we be not judged by thee: so with shame, sorrow, fear, and trembling,
acknowledge the vileness o^ our sins wholely before the throne of thy
justice, that we find it to be a throne of grace and mercy unto us in Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Now O Lord, the searcher of the hearts and reins, thou knowing this to be the
humble and single desire of our hearts, we fly unto thee for refuge,
beseeching thee by thy holy spirit to work in us a clearer sight of the
wisdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby our minds may be further cleared
from blindness, and we have a clearer sight of the whole mystery of our
salvation in him; and grant us God a fuller persuasion of the discharge of all
our sins in his death, and of the imputation of his righteousness unto us,
in his resurrection: that the guiltiness of our conscience may daily more and
more go away from us, and peace of the same be confirmed in us; especially in
the time of our temptation and trouble, the day of our death, and the hour of
judgment. And next (most merciful Father) grant us a more powerfell
experience of his death, killing sin in us, and of his resurrection, raising
us up unto a new life, that daily we may be less sinful, and more holy,
righteous, and sober in this present life: that so also we may have a more
sure and steadfast hope in his redemption, and may more strongly resist the
vanities of this world, in false pleasures, profits, and glories: and more
patiently endure all manner of miseries of the same, which may befall us,
until his glorious appearing when he shall come to be glorious in his Saints,
and made marvelous in all those which believe in him, Amen.

Furthermore O Lord, whereas we are privy to our selves, or it is known unto
others, or unto thee, that thereby any sin or sins more strange in us
through our corrupt nature or custom, or the temptation of others, or of the
tempter; we beseech thee that there we may labor to find the precious death
of our Lord Jesus Christ more powerful in subduing the same: and whereas
through inability of nature, want of means, or grace, we are weaker in any
duties of well-doing, there we may strive to find the virtue of his glorious
resurrection more effectual in raising us up in means of life: so that our
familiar corruptions being cured, and our special infirmities being relieved,
we may be also endued, as with general graces meet for all Christians, so
with such peculiar graces as may be meet for our callings, and enable us to
glori^ie thy holy name, build up others in well doing, and treasure up the
fruits of a good conscience, for our selves at all times, and especially in
our need. And in this behalf the desire of our heart is, that thy holy spirit
work in us the renouncing of our reason so far forth as it is blind, and
the crucifying of our affections so far forth as they be corrupt, that so we
may offer them up with soul and body in sacrifice of humiliation: and that
having received these graces, we may also over them up in a sacrifice of
obedience unto thy gracious Majesty. And wherein soever we have, do, or
shall with thy graces obey thee, we desire to offer up thy graces, our
obedience, and our selves in a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and praising of thy
holy and blessed name, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen. All thy ways O
Lord, we acknowledge to be mercy and truth; we beseech thee therefore, give us
the holy fruits of all the good means thou have heretofore wrought our good
by: as thy holy and sweet promises preached unto us, red of us, meditated upon
by our selves, or conferred of with others, the prayers, thankesgiuings,
Psalms and Hymns of our selves, our friends, and thy church, thy sacred
Sacraments, the ministeric of thy holy Angels, the communion of thy Saints, and
admonition which has bin given us for our good: most humbly entreating that we
may have sanctified unto us the remembrance of thy former mercies bestowed upon
thy church, upon any member thereof, or upon our selves, either in benefits, or
in crosses: and albeit our nature is most impatie^t either of reproaches offered
unto us by our enemies, or any injuries by our friends, yet herein we fervently
ask of thy wise and merciful goodness, that we may reap a good fruit even
of such evil means. And because we grow to be acquainted with the pride of
ourspirits, and sloathfulnesse of our flesh, and few means are left us, and
many offenses (by our selves conceived; by others and Satan offered) do
already, and are daily like more to assail us: O Lord, thou which have been
our God, even from our first birth, especially since our new birth, be thou
the God of our middle age, yea of our old days, (if we live so long) until
thou finish the last work of our new birth begun and continued thus far in
us. To this end we ask of thee that we may vow (and receiving grace from
thee, we do vow) to use all these forenamed good means of our salvation,
more mercifully, then yet ever we used them; in using of them we ask more
fear of thy Majesty, faith of thy promises, pureness of our hearts, love
unto others, and withal, blessing and fruit more abundant, that our latter
works may be better then our former.

Woeful experience (O blessed Savior) teaches, and moves us to call upon
thee, as for these former things, so to be preserved and protected by thy
almighty and merciful grace, from our own corruption to come, from all
Satan's temptations and accusations, from all manner of contagion of the
ungodly in their injuries, reproaches, and in their benefits, praises, their
sorceries, enchantments, yea from any hurt of thy children (as they be not
regenerate) and from any hurt by thy creatures, so far forth as any of these
things may hurt our salvation. Former experience O mighty God and merciful
Father, ought not only to teach, but also to enforce us to give thee thanks,
praise, and glory, for thy former mercies upon us and thy Church bestowed: but
wherein thou have provided for us many arguments of strength, of faith: or
ignorance, forgetfulne^e, negligence, and want of reverence of thy mercies
received, minister just cause of humiliation: and therefore in some faith in,
and thankfulness for thy former merciful blessings, and yet in much
weakness, in the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord: with our whole heart, we
beseech thee give us a good portion of thy spirit, to call carefully thy
benefits to our remembrance, wisely to understand them, and reverently to
regard, and truly to be thankful for them, in mind, in heart, in word, and
deed, through Jesus Christ our Lord and only Savior. Amen.

We beseech thee most mighty God and merciful Father, to make partakers of
our prayers, and thankesgiuings, all the whole Church, and every member thereof,
especially where duty most charge, promise binds, necessity craves, and
thy glory chalengeth, etc.

LEt the rich seek for the godly, wise, and learned Physician, and take heed
of wicked, ignorant, bold empyricks, which kill many men, and yet fear
nothing, because they be not called to their accounts according to good laws
for this cause provided.

And let the poorer sort with good advise and counsel (if they can have any)
use May. Phaer of the Pestilence.
Master Phaers medicines, in his short, but learned Treatise of the
Pestilence, which he wrote of purpose for the benefit and comfort of the poor.

I have added a few medicines of Master Phaers, because of some empty pages:
they may serve at a need, and by Gods grace do some good when better counsel
is wanting.

A most precious Electuary against the Pestilence for the rich.
TAke Cinamome elect, one ounce, Terra sigillata 6. drams, fine mirre 3. drams,
Unicorns horn, one dram, the seed and rind of citron, roots of Dyptany,
burnet, Torme^tille, Zedoary, red coral, ana: dra^s two, yelow saunders four
scruples, red saunders, two scruples, white been and red flowers of marygolds,
ana, one dram, Iuory raced, Scabiouse, Betonice, Offininis tunicae appellatae
seed of Basile, the bone of a Stags heart, Saffron, ana two scruples, make a
fine powder, and add unto it, of Bole armoniake preparate two ounces, white
sugar three pound, and with a sirrup of Acetocitate citri make a goodly
electuary, and keep it in a glass.

Or this form with less cost and quantity.
TAke of the roots of Dictamu, tormentil, bole armeni prepared, (that is,
washed with water of Scabiouse) terra sigillata, ana Of every one like
quantity.
6 drams: of the root of Gentian, and of the root of butter-burre, of
Betonie, called in the shops Betonice tunicae. Ana, 2. scruples, red saunders
one scruple, Iuorie raced, the bark of Citrone, of red coral, of the bone of
a stags heart, of the root of Zedoary, ana, half a dram of most pure perles,
of both kinds of been, ana 2. scruples, fragmentorum quing, lapidu^
pretiosorum ana one scruple: amber, good Unicorns Let the Apothecary help you
to make this powder.
horn, ana hal^e a scruple, of gold and silver leaves three of each, mingle
all these, and make a fine powder.

If the Pestilence comes with great excess of heat, take one dram and drink
it upon Rose water and vinegar, but if ye feel it cold, take it in a draught
of wine, and cover you with clothes, so that ye may sweat as long as is
possible, for without doubt, it is a present remedy, as I my self have
oftentimes proved.

For the poor the best I find is this.
TAke the root called Petasites in Latin, in English the butter-bur growing
by the water side, dry it and make fine powder of it, give it the sick.

If the Pestilence comes with heat, take three drams of it in Rose water and
vinegar: but if it come with a cold, give it in a draught of wine, and cause
him to sweat as long as he can endure it.

To ripe the botch.
TAke Mallows, and the roots of holihock, and onions, as much as shall
su^fice, wash them and sees them in water, and afterward bray them in a mortar
with powder of linseed, and of Fen^greke, and a good quantity of swines grease
fresh, laying on the plaster every day once.

To break the botch.
SOme lay on it a plaster made of figs, sour leven, and reisins without
kernels, braied and incorporate altogether in oil of camomill.

To mundifie the botch.
AFterward mundifie the place with a salve made of yolks of eggs, fine barley
flower, and a little honey or oil of Roses.

Medicine for incarnation.
LAst of all, for the perfect incarnation, take the juice of Daises, and with a
little wax make a soft ointment, and use it: or ye may lay thereto any other
salve incarnatiue, as ye are wont to do in other clean sores.

FINIS.

