THE STRANGE AND DANGEROUS VOYAGE OF Captain THOMAS JAMES, in his intended
Discovery of the Northwest Passage into the South Sea.

WHEREIN THE MISERIES INDVRED BOTH Going, Wintering, Returning; and the
Rarities observed, both Philosophical and Mathematical, are related in this
Iournall of it.

Published by His MAJESTY'S command.

To which are added, A Plat or Card for the Sailing in those Seas.

Diverse little Tables of the Author's, of the Variation of the Compass, etc.

WITH An Appendix concerning Longitude, by Master HENRY GELLIBRAND Astronomy
Reader of Gresham College in London.

AND An Advise concerning the Philosophy of these late Discoueryes, By W. W.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, for John Partridge. 1633.

TO THE KINGS MOST excellent and Sacred MAJESTY.
Most dread Sovereign,
THAT my unskillful self was made choice of for this employment, and my
undertaking in it encouraged by Your gracious commandment; I must ever account
of for the greatest honor, that ever yet befell me. Many a Storm, and Rock,
and Mist, and Wind, and Tide, and Sea, and Mount of Ice, have I in this
Discovery encountered withal; Many a despair and death had, almost,
overwhelmed me; but still the remembrance of the Account that I was to give of
it to so gracious a Majesty, put me in heart again; made me not to give way
to mine own fears, or the infirmities of humanity. Your Majesty in my
employment (like a true Father of your Country) intended the good of your
Subjects: and who is not bound to bless God for your Royal care in it? Had
it, now, been my fortune, to have done my Country this service, as to have
brought home the news of this supposed and long sought for Passage; then
should the Merchant have enjoyed the sweetness of the hoped profit, and the
Subject have been sensible of the benefit of your Majesty's royal intentions
in it. I have done my good will in it: and though not brought home that news,
yet shall I here divulge those observations; which may (I hope) become some way
beneficial unto my Country. The Account of them, I here, in all humility,
offer unto your most Judicious Majesty. Your gracious acceptance of what I had
done, though I had not done what was expected, emboldeneth me to do so: and
since your Majesty was pleased to signify your desires, of having a Brief of
my Voyage presented unto you: that word became a Command unto me, to draw this
rude Abstract of it. Your Majesty will please to consider, That they were
rough elements, which I had to do withal: and will, with favor, vouchsafe to
pardon, if a Sea-mans style be like what he most conuerseth with. In the
plainness therefore of well-meaning, since your Majesty has been so
gracious to me, as to appoint me your Servant, I am now bound to vow you my
service: and it shall be my honor to be commanded it: and I shall account no
dangers too great, in the going through it. These are the resolutions of

Your Majesty's humblest Subject and Servant, THOMAS JAMES.

To my worthy friend and fellow-Templar Captain JAMES.
I Have perused your Iournall. To commend it, were to dispraise it; Good wine
needs no Ensign: Mos est faeda coloribus abdere: yet this I must needs say,
you have showed your self to be a Master of your Art. The Miles in acle
probatur Gubernator in tempestate dignoscitur.
worth of a Warrier and Pylot is never discovered but in storms and
skirmishes, and how many skirmishes of storms and tempests you have past, this
Iournall of yours does sufficiently manifest: Go on then, and as you have
begun well, so when any good occasion is offered, second your good beginnings
with suitable proceedings: and let not the cold entertainment you have had in
the frozen Seas freeze up your affections in undertaking other worthy
employments. So may you deserve, with Columbus, Drake, and Frobusher, to have
the remembrance of you smell sweetly in the nostrils of posterity, when you
are in the dust. Farewell,

From the Inner Temple, THOMAS NASH.

THe Printer desires to be excused to the Courteous Reader, if in an Argument
of this Nature, the Compositer, not thoroughly acquainted with terms of
Navigations, has sometimes, which he fears, and in some words mistaken the
Authors mind; as in flowed for stood etc. promising a future amends (if
Occasion profer it self) by a more exact Impression.

Farewell.
THE PREPARATIONS TO THE VOYAGE.
Having bin for many years importuned, by my Honorable and worshipful
friends; to undertake the discovery of that part of the world, which is
commonly called The North-west Passage into the South Sea; and so to proceed to
Iapan, and to round the world to the Westward; Being pressed forward withal, by
signifying to me the earnest desire the Kings most excellent Majesty had, to
be satisfied therein: I acquainted my much Honored friends the Merchants of
Bristoll therewith: who as ever they have bin Benefactors and Aduancers of them
that pursue the ways of Honor: together with the enlargement and benefit of
his Majesty's Kingdoms: did freely offer to be at the charge of furnishing
forth shipping for this purpose. And now being thus enabled, I addressed my self
to the Honorable Sir Thomas Roe, Knight (as to a learned, and furthest
employed traveler by Sea and Land, this day in England) who joyfully presented
theirs and mine own voluntary willingness, to do his Majesty's Service in
this kind: who most graciously accepted of the offer; and encouraged me by
many favors in my weak undertakings. Wherefore with all speed I contrived in
my mind, the best model I could; whereby I might effect my design. The
Adventurers moneys were instantly ready, and put into a Treasurers hand: that
there might be no want of present pay, for any thing I thought necessary for
the Voyage.

I was ever of the opinion, that this particular action might be better
effected by one ship, then by two consorted: because in those Icie Seas, so
much subject to fogs, they might be easily separated; I forbear to speak of
storms and other accidents: as that a Rendezvous in discoueries, cannot
surely, or without much hinderance be appointed: and that speedy perseverance
is the life of such a business. Wherefore I resolved to have but one Ship, the
Ship-boate, and a Shallop.

A great Ship (as by former experience I had found) was unfit to be forced
through the Ice: wherefore I made choice of a well-conditioned, strong Ship, of
the burden of seventy Tun: and in God and that only Ship, to put the hope
of my future fortunes.

The Ship resolved upon, and that in less time then 18. months our voyage
could not be effected: I next considered how our Ship of seventy Tuns in bulk
and weight might now be proportioned; in victuals, namely, and other
necessaries: this was all done, as contractedly as we could: and the number of
men it would serve, at ordinary allowance, for the forementioned time; was
found to be twenty two, a small number to perform such a business, yet double
sufficient to sail the Ship, with provident carfulness.

The Baker, Brewer, Butcher, and others, undertake their Offices upon their
credits; knowing it to be a general business, and their utter undoing if they
failed in performance, but truly they proved themselves Masters in their Arts;
and have my praise for their honest care: in them consisting a great part of
the performance of the voyage.

The Carpenters go in hand with the Ship: to make her as strong and
serviceable, as possibly in their understandings they could.

Every thing being duly proportioned, and my small number of men known; I
began to think of the quality and ability they should be of.

Voluntary loyterers I at first disclaimed, and published I would have all
unmarried, approved, able, and healthy Seamen: in a few days an abundant
number presented themselves; furnished with general sufficiency in marine
occasions; I first made choice of a Boate-swayne; and some to work with him,
for fitting the rigging of the Ship: and as things went forward, shipped the
subordinate Crew; and all things being perfectly ready, I shipped the Masters
mates, and last of all, the Master of my Ship, and my Liefetenant. The whole
company were strangers to me, and to each other (as by way of familiarity) but
yet privately recommended by worthy Merchants, for their ability and
faithfulness. I was sought to by diverse, that had bin in places of the
chiefest command in this action formerly; and others also that had used the
Northerly Icie Seas: but I utterly refused them all, and would by no means
have any with me that had bin in the like voyage, or adventures, for some
private reasons unnecessary here to be related; keeping thus the power in my
own hands I had all the men to acknowledge immediate dependence upon my self
alone; both for direction and disposing of all, as well of the Navigations, as
all other things whatsoever.

In the mean time, the better to strengthen my former studies in this
business, I seek after Iournals, Plots, Discourses; or what-euer else might
help my understanding.

I set skillful workmen to make me Quadrants, Staves, Semicircles, etc. as
much, namely, as concern the Fabric of them: not trusting to their
Mechannicke hands, to divide them; but had them divided by an ingenious
practitioner in the Mathematics. I likewise had Compasse-needles made after
the most reasonablest and truest ways that could be thought on: and by the
first of April, every thing was ready to be put together into our hopeful Ship.

In the mean space, I made a Journey up to London, to know his Majesty's
further pleasure; and to make known to him my readiness: who calling for the
forementioned Honorable Knight, I speedily after received his Majesty's Royal
Letters; with directions for proceeding in my voyage, and my discharge:
whereupon I had forth the Ship into the Rode, expecting a fair wind to begin
the voyage.

A Voyage for the discovering a Passage to the South Sea.
THE second of May, May 2.
1631. I took my leave of the Worshipful Merchant Adventurers in this Action,
in the City of Bristoll: and being accompanied with a Reverend Divine, one
Master Thomas Palmer, and diverse of the Merchants, with others of my kindred
and native Contrymen; I repaired aboard. Here Master Palmer made a Sermon:
exhorting us to continue brotherly love amongst us, and to be bold to profess
the true Christian Religion where-euer we should happen, in this our
perigrination. After they had received such entertainment, as my estate could
afford them; they departed for Bristoll. This afternoon, I made reuiew of all
things; as well of clothes, and other necessaries, as of victuals; and where
there was found any want, we were presently furnished.

The third of May (after Prayer for a prosperous success to our endeauours) 3.
about three a clock in the afternoon we came to Sail: and Stood down the
Channel of Seuerne, with little wind, but slowly got forward to the Westward
of Lundie; and then the wind opposed it self so strongly against us, that we
were driven to bear up and come to an Anchor in Lundie-Rode the fifth in the
evening; where we remained until the eighth in the morning. Now hoping the
wind would favor us, we came to Sail; but we were forced to put into
Milford: where we came to an Anchor about midnight. Here we remained till the
seventeenth in the morning; when with the first favoring wind, we proceeded
and doubled about Cape Clear of Ireland. May 22.
The two and twentieth we were in Latitude 51: 26. and the Blaskes did bear of
us North-east, about twelve leagues off: which Blaskes is in Lat. 52. 4. Here I
ordered the course that should be kept: which was generally West North-west, as
the wind would give leave: which in this Course and distance, is very variable
and unconstant. June 4.
The fourth of June we made the land of Groynland: standing in with it to have
knowledge of the trending of it; It proved very thick foul weather; and the
next day, 5.
by two a clock in the morning, we found our selves encompassed about with
Ice: and endeavoring to clear our selves of it (by reason we could not see
far about us) we were the more engaged, and struck many fearful blows
against it: At length we made fast to a great piece, (it blowing a very storm)
and with poles wrought day and night to keep off the Ice; in which labor we
broke all our poles. 6.
The sixth, about two a clock in the morning, we were beset with many
extraordinary great pieces of Ice, that came upon us, as it were with wilful
violence: and doubtless had crushed us to pieces, if we had not let fall some
Sail which the Ship presently felt. In scaping that danger, we ran against
another great piece, that we doubted whether our Ship had not bin stav'd to
pieces. But pumping, we found she made no water. The former pieces of Ice, had
crushed our Shallop all to pieces; wherefore I caused our long Boat speedily
to be had up from betwixt the Decks, and put over Board: by help whereof we
again recovered our broken Shallop; and had her up on the Decks, intending to
new build her. All this day, we did beat, and were beaten fearfully, amongst
the Ice; it blowing a very storm. In the evening, we were enclosed amongst
great pieces; as high as our Poope: and some of the sharp blue corners of
them, did reach quite under us. All these great pieces (by reason it was the
outside of the Ice) did heave and set, and so beat us; that it was wonderful
how the Ship could endure one blow of it; but it was Gods only preservation of
us, to whom be all honor and glory. In this extremity, I made the men to let
fall, and make what Sail they could; and the Ship forced her self through it:
though so tossed and beaten, as I think never Ship was. When we were clear,
we said the pumps, and found her stanch: upon which we went instantly to
prayer, and to praise God for his merciful delivery of us.

The seventh and eighth days, 7. and 8.
we indeauoured to double about Cape Farewell; being still pestered with much
Ice.

The ninth, 9.
we were in Lat. 59. 00. and we made account the Cape Farewell bare of us due
East, and some ten leagues off. The Blaskes in Ireland, is in Lat. 52. 4. and
Cape Farewell in Lat. 59. 00. The course is West North-west: and the distance
about 410. leagues: I know very well these Latitudes, courses and distance, do
not exactly agree with Mathematical conclusions: but thus we found it by
practice. The variation of the Compass in Lat. 52. 30. and 30. leagues to the
Westward of Ireland, is about 3. 00. to the Eastward; in Lat. 57. 00. about
310. leagues, West North-west, from the Blaskes, the Compass does vary 9. 00.
to the Westward: in Lat. 59. 15. some 40 leagues to the Eastward, of Cape
Farewell, the variation is about 14. 45. In this course I have bin obseruant
whether there were any Current that did set to the N. E. as some have written
there did, and that as well in Calm weather, as other-wayes: But I could not
perceive any. The winds here are variable; and the Sea of an unsearchable
depth. We have not seen from Ireland hitherto, any Whales or other Fish; The
weather, for the most part, was foggie and mistie, that wets as bad as rain.

The tenth, 10.
all the morning, was very foul weather: and a high-growne Sea: although we
had Ice not far off about us, and some pieces, as high as our Top-mast-head.
Our long Boat, which we were feign to Towe at Stern (by reason we were
building our Shallop on our Decks) broke away, and put us to some trouble to
recover her again. This we did, and made means to have her into the Ship,
though very much bruised: and that I had two men sore hurt, and like to be lost
in the having of her in. By eight a clock this evening, we were shot up as
high as Cape Desolation: for finding here the Land to trend away North and by
East, we certainly knew it to be the Cape. It stands in Lat. 60. 00. and the
Land from Cape Farewell to it, trends N. W. the distance about 40. leagues. The
distance from Cape Desolation, to the South end of the Island of Resolution, is
about 140. leagues: the course West, half a point North. The Lat. of the South
end of the Island, being 61. 20. some 12. leagues to the Westward of Cape
Desolation, the variation is 16. 00. In this course, we were much tormented,
pestered and beaten with the Ice: many pieces being higher then our
Top-mast-head. In our way, we saw many Grampusses amongst the Ice; and it
seems the Sea is full of them: The weather for the most part, a stinking
fogge; and the Sea, very black: which I conceive to be occasioned by reason of
the fogge.

The seventeenth at night, 17.
we heard the rutt of the shore, as we thought: but it proved to be the rutt
against a bank of Ice, that lay on the shore. It made a hollow and a hideous
noise, like an ouer-fall of water: which made us to reason amongst our selves
concerning it: for we were not able to see about us, it being dark night, and
foggie. We stood off from it, till break of day; then in again: and about 4.
a clock in the morning we saw the Land above the fogge: which we knew to be
the Island of Resolution. This last night was so cold, that all our Rigging and
Sails were frozen. We endeavored to compass about the Southern point of the
Island: for that we were so much pestered with the Ice, and blinded with a very
thick fogge. Here runs a quick tide into the Straight; but the ebb is as
strong as the flood; The fogge was of such a piercing nature, that it spoiled
all our Compasses, and made them flagge; and so heavy withal, that they would
not trauerse. Wherefore I would advise any, that shall Sail this way
hereafter, to provide Compasses of Muscouia Glass, or some other matter, that
will endure the moisture of the weather. As the fogge cleared up, we could see
the entrance of the Straight, to be all full of Ice close thronged together.
Indeauouring to go forward, we were fast enclosed amongst it; and so drove to
and again with it, finding no ground at 230. fad. 4. leagues from the shore.

The twentieth in the morning, we had got about the Southern point of the
Island; 20
and the wind came up at West, and drove both us and the Ice upon the shore.
When we were driven within two leagues of the shore, we came amongst the most
strangest whirlings of the Sea, that possibly can be conceived; There were
diverse great pieces of Ice a-ground in 40. fad. water, and the ebb coming out
of the broken grounds of the Island, amongst these Isles of Ice, made such a
distractio^ that we were carried round: sometimes close by the Rocks; sometimes
close by those high pieces: that we were afeard they would fall upon us. We
were so beaten likewise with the encountering of the Ice, that we were in a
most desperate estate: We made fast two great pieces of Ice to our sides, with
our Kedger and Grapnels, that drew 9. or 10. fad. that so they might be
a-ground before us, if so be we were driven on the shore. But that design
failed us: and now from the top seeing in amongst the Rocks, I sent the Boat
(for now we had finished her) to see if she could find some place of
security: but she was no sooner parted, but she was enclosed, and driven to
hale up on the Ice, or else she had been crushed to pieces. They ran her
over the Ice from piece to piece: and in the mean space, with the whirling and
incountring of the Ice, the two pieces brake away from our sides, and carried
away our Kedger and Grapnels: Then we made signs to the Boat, to make all the
haste she could to us: which she perceiving, did: the men being with much
difficulty enforced to hale her over many pieces of Ice. In the mean space,
we made some Sail; and got to that piece of Ice, that had our Grapnell on it:
which we again recovered. By this time, was our Boat come; and We put afresh
Crew into her, and sent her to fetch our Kedger: which she endeavored with
much danger of Beat and Men. By this time, the Ship was driven so near the
shore, that we could see the Rocks under us and about us: and we should be
carried with the whirlings of the waters, close by the points of Rocks, and
then round about back again: and all this, notwithstanding the Sail we had
abroad; that we expected continually when she would be beaten to pieces. In
this extremity, I made them to open more Sail, and to force her in amongst
the Rocks and broken grounds: and where there was many great pieces of Ice
aground. We went over Rocks, that had but 12. or 13. foot water on them; and so
let fall an Anchor. This Anchor had never bin able to wind up the Ship, but
that, (by good fortune) the Ship ran against a great piece of Ice, that was
a-ground. This rush, brake the Main knee of her Beak head, and a corner of
it: tare away 4. of our maine Shrouds, and an Anchor that we had at the Bow,
fastened into it: and so stopped her way, that she did wind up to her Anchor. We
saw the sharp Rocks under us, and about us; and had but 15. foot water: being
also in the sides way, where all the Ice would drive upon us: Our Boat we
could not see; which made us doubt she had bin crushed to pieces. In her, was
the third part of our company: but by and by we saw her come about a point
amongst the Rocks. She had recovered our Kedger; which made us something
joyful; With all speed we laid out Hawsers to the Rocks; and every one did
work to the best of his strength, to Warp her out of this dangerous place, to
the Rocks sides: where we had 3. fad. water, and were under the shelter of a
great piece of Ice that was a-ground, which should keep off the Ice, that
otherwise would have driven upon us. Here we lay very well all the ebb; but
when the stood came, we were assaulted with pieces of Ice, that every half
hour put us into despayrable distress. We did work continually, and
extremely, to keep off the Ice. At full Sea, our great piece of Ice (which was
our buckler) was afloate; and do what we could, got away from us, and left us
in a most eminent danger, by reason of the Ice that drove in upon us. But the
ebb being once made, this great piece of Ice came again a-ground very
favorable to us; and sheltered us all the rest of the, ebb. All night we
wrought hard, to shift our Cables and Hawsers; and to make them fast aloft on
the Rocks, that the Ice might the better pass under them. All day, and all
night, it snowed hard; and blew a very storm at West; which drove in all the
Ice out of the Sea upon us. In working against the violence of the Ice, the
flooke of our Kedger was broken; two arms of our Grapnels, and two Hawsers,
our Shallop being again very much bruised: whereupon to work we go on all
hands to repair it.

This tide, 21
the Harbor was choked full of Ice; so that it did seem firm and
immovable: but when the ebb was made, it did move. Some great pieces came
a-ground; which did alter the course of the other Ice, and put us on the Rocks.
Here, notwithstanding all our uttermost endeauours, she settled upon a sharp
Rock; about a yard above the Main Mast; and as the water ebbed away, she hung
after the Head, and heeld to the Offing. We made Cables and Hawsers aloft to
her Masts, and so to the Rocks; straining them tough with our Tackles: but she
as the water ebbed away, sunk still; that at length she was so turned over,
that we could not stand in her. Having now done all to the best of our
understandings (but to little purpose) we went all upon a piece of Ice and fell
to prayer; beseeching God to be merciful unto us. It wanted yet an hour to
low water: and the tide did want a foot and a half to ebb, to what it had
ebbed the last tide. We were careful obseruers of the low-waters, and had
marks by stones and other things which we had set up, so that we could not be
deceived. The Ship was so turned over, that the Portlesse of the Fore-castell,
was in the water: and we did look every minute, when she would ouer-set.
Indeed at one time, the Cables gave way; and she sunk down half a foot at
that slip: but unexpectedly it began to flow, and sensibly we perceived the
water to rise apace; and the Ship withal. Then was our sorrow turned to joy,
and we all fell on our knees, praising God for his mercy, in so miraculous a
deliverance.

As soon as she was freed from this Rock, we wrought hard to get her further
off. All the flood, we were pretty quiet from the Ice: but when the ebb was
made, the Ice came all driving again upon us; which put us to a great
extremity. We got as many pieces betwixt us and the Rocks, as we could; to
fence us from the Rocks. There came a great piece upon our quarter, which was
above 300. of my paces about, but it came a-ground. Thus did diverse great
pieces besides; which was the occasion, that this tide the Harbor was quite
choakt up: so that a man might go any way over it, from side to side. When it
was three quarters ebb, these great pieces that came a-ground, began to break
with a most terrible thundering noise: which put us in a great fear, that
those about us would break us all to pieces. But God preserved us.

This morning the water veer'd to a lower ebb then the last tide it had done,
22.
by two foot; whereby we saw Gods mercies apparent in our late extremity. That
flood, we had some respit from our labors; but after full sea, our hopes ebde
too. The great piece that was by us, so stopped the Channel, that the Ice came
all driving upon us; so that now, undoubtedly we thought we should have lost
our Ship. To work thereupon we go, with axes, bars of iron, and any thing
proper for such a purpose; to break the corners of the Ice, and to make way
for it to drive away from us. It pleased God to give good success to our
labors; and we made way for some, and fended off the rest; and got so much of
the softer sort of the Ice betwixt us and the Rocks, that we were in pretty
security. But at low water, those pieces that were aground, breaking; kept a
most thundering noise about us. This day I went ashore; and built a great
Beacon with stones upon the highest place of the Island; and put a Cross upon
it; and named this Harbor, The Harbor of Gods Providence. In the Evening, the
Harbor was fuller of the Ice, then ever it had been since we came hither: and
the greater pieces grounded, and stopped the rest, that none went out the ebb,
but the Ship lay, as if she had lain in a bed of Ice.

The three and twentieth day in the morning, 23.
with the flood, the Ice drove up amongst the broken grounds; and with the
ebb, drove all out (it being then very calm) except one extraordinary great
piece: which coming aground not far from us, settled it self in such a
manner, that we much feared him. But there came no more great Ice after him:
otherwise, we must have expected as great danger, as at any time heretofore. I
took the boat, and went ashoare upon the Eastern side; to see if I could
find any place freer from danger then this unfortunate place: where amongst
the Rocks, I discried a likely place. From the top of the Hill where I was, I
could see the Ship. It was now almost low water: at which instant the
forementioned piece of Ice brake with a terrible noise into four pieces: which
made me doubtful it had not spoiled the Ship; it being full half mast high. I
made what haste I could to the boat, and so to the Ship, to be satisfied:
where I found all well, God be thanked: for that the Ice had broken from the
Ship-ward. I instantly sent away the boat, to sound the way to a Coue that I
had found: which was a very dangerous passage for the boat. At her return, we
vn-moord the Ship: and with what speed possible warpt away from amongst this
terrible Ice. We were not a mile from them, but they brake all to pieces: and
would surely have made us bear them company, but that God was more merciful
unto us. We got about the Rocks, and so into this little Coue which I had so
newly discovered. Here we made fast to the Rocks; and thought our selves in
indifferent safety: which being done, I went ashoare again, to wander up and
down, to see what I could discover. I found it all broken Rockie grounds: and
not so much as a tree, herb, or grass upon it: Some Ponds of water there were
in it, which were not yet thawed, and therefore not ready for the foul; We
found not in the snow any footing of Dear, or Bears, but Foxes we saw one or
two.

We found where the Saluages had been; but it was long since. They had made
five hearths; and we found a few firebrands about them; and some heads of
Foxes, and bones of Foxes; with some Whale-bones. I could not conceive, to what
purpose they should come thither; for we could find none or very little wood
on the shoares side, and no fish at all; though we did daily endeavor to take
some. But it may be, the season was not yet come. I named this Coue by the
Masters name of my Ship, Prices Coue. The Latitude of it is 61. 24. the
Variation. The firebrands and chips which I spoke of, had been cut with some
hatchet or other good instrument of iron: from the top of the hills, we could
see the Islands that are on the South shore; and commonly called Sir Thomas
Buttons Isles: They did bear South and by East, half a point Easterly: some
14. or 15 leagues distant upon the change day, it flows here seven a clock
and a half; and the tide highest at most three fad. The flood comes from the
Eastwards, and thither it returns. I have been obseruant from the top of the
hills; whence I might descry the great pieces of Ice, 2. or 3. leagues from the
shore, drive to and again with the flood and ebb indifferently. Hence I
collected that assuredly there is no current sets in here, but that it is a
mere tide. Near the shore, the eddies whitle into twenty manners; when the
ebb is made: which is, because it comes out of the broken ground amongst the
Ice that is aground near the shore: Besides which reason, there be diverse
Rocks lying under water; on which you shall have now 30. then 12. and anon but
8. and then 20. fad. And these uncertainties, occasion such distractions. I
would therefore advise none to come too near those dangerous shoares, for
fear he lose his ship, and so by consequence all: The last night, we took
better rest then we had done in ten nights before.

And this morning being the 24. 24.
there sprung up a fair gale of wind at East: and after prayer we vnfastened
our Ship, and came to sail, steering betwixt great pieces of Ice, that were
a-ground in 40. fad. and twice as high as our topmast head.

We went forth of this Coue, upon the flood, and had none of those whirlings
of the waters, as we had at our going into it. We indeauoured to gain the
North shore; kept our selves within a league of the shore of the Island of
Resolution, where we had some clear water to sail through. In the Offing, it
was all thick throngd together, as might be possible. By 12. a clock, we were
fast enclosed, and notwithstanding it blew very hard at East, yet we could make
no way through it: but the hard corners of the Ice did grate us with that
violence, as I verily thought it would have grated the plankes from the Ships
sides. Thus we continued in torment, till the day, driving to and again in the
Ice; not being able to see an acre of sea from topmast head. This 26. 26.
was calm Sunshine weather; and we took the Latitude and Variation. The
Latitude is, the Variation we sounded, and had ground at 140. fad. small white
sand. I caused the men to lay out some fishing lines; but to no purpose: for I
could not perceive that bait had been so much as touched. The nights are very
cold: so that our rigging freezes: and the fresh ponds of water stand upon the
Ice, above half an inch thick.

The 27. 27.
there sprung up a little gale at South-East: and the Ice did something open.
Hereupon we let fall our foresayle, and forced the Ship through the throng of
Ice. In the Evening, the wind came contrary, at W. N. W. and blew hard: which
caused us to fasten to a great piece, to which we remained moord till the 29.

I am resolved, 28.
that here is no current: and that by many experiments which I have made.
Namely, by taking marks on the land; and noting our drift to and again, with
the ebb and flood, for many days together; as well in calm weather, as
otherwise. By all these experiments I found exactly, that the tide was no
stronger there, then that betwixt England and France.

This morning, 29.
there sprung up a fine gale at E. and the Ice did open something, so that we
did force the Ship through it with her fore-saile. By 12. a clock, we were
gotten into some open water, with a fine gale of wind at East, and so clear
weather, that we could see the Island of Resolution. The North end did bear of
us E. N. E. some 12. leagues off.

From this 29. till the 5. of July, July 5.
we sailed continually through the Ice, with variable winds and fogges, and
sometimes calm. The 5. at noone, we had a good observation, and were in
Latitude 63. 15. and then we saw Salisbury Island, bearing W. by N. some 7.
leagues off: with much Ice betwixt it and us: to weather which, we were driven
to stand to the Northward. Soon after, we saw Prince Charles his Cape, and
Mill Island: and to the North-north-west, (and in deed, round about us) the Sea
most infinitely pestered with Ice. This did grieve me very much: for whereas I
had determined to prosecute the discovery to the North-westward, I saw it was
not possible this year. We were moreover driven back again with contrary
winds; still closed and pestered with Ice: and with all the perils and
dangers, incident to such adventures: so that we thought a thousand times, that
the Ship had bin beaten to pieces.

By the fifteenth day of July, 15.
we were got betwixt Digges Island and Nottinghams Island: not being able to get
more Northward. There for an hour or two, we had some open water.

But before I proceed further, it were not amiss in some manner to describe
the Straight, which begins at the Island of Resolution, and ends here at Digges
Island. If you go down into the Bay, the Straight is about 120. leagues long;
and trends W. N. W. and E. S. E. generally. In the entrance, it is about 15.
leagues broad; and then on the Southward side, is a great Bay. About the
midst, it is likewise about 15. leagues broad: and then the Land opens
something wider: so that betwixt Digges Island, and Cape Charles, it is about
20. leagues broad. Betwixt which two stands Salisbury Island, and Nottingham
Island. If it be clear weather, you may see both the South and the North
shoares: ordinarily, the depth in the middle of the Straight, is 120. faddomes,
white sand. A certain tide runs in it, and no Current: The North shore, is
the straightest, and the cleerest from Ice too. Along the North shore, you
have many low small Islands: which cannot be seen far off from the land: and
in many places, the land makes as if it had small sounds into it. The Maine
land on both sides, is indifferent high land. And so much for discourse may
suffice: referring you to the Plot for the particulars.

Being now resolved of the impossibility to do any thing to the
North-westward, 16.
for the reasons aforesaid: I gave order to the Master of my Ship to Steer
away, W. S. W. to have a sight of Mansfeilds Island; which the next day by three
a clock in the afternoon, we had: having had so much dangerous foul weather
amongst the Ice, that we struck more fearful blows against it, then we had
ever yet done. This was the first day that we went to half allowance of bread
Flesh days: and I ordered things as sparingly as I could. Two of our men
complain likewise of sickness; but soon afterward recovered. In the evening
we came to an Anchor: and I sent the Boat ashoare to try the tides. They
brought me word, that whilst the Boat was ashoare, it flowed about some three
foot: and as we found by the Ship, and by the Ice; the water at that time
came from the W. S. W. and that the highest tides (so far as they could
perceive) it had not highed above two faddome: They found that the Saluages had
been upon it; by certain fires which they found, and heaps of stones, Tracks
of other beasts, but Foxes they could not find. The wind was so contrary, and
the weather so foggie; that we were feign to spend some powder to recover our
Boat again.

Next morning being the 17. 17.
the wind came something favorable: and we wayed. The shore being something
clear of Ice (though very thick all to the Offing) we stood along it S.
and S. by W. some 10. leagues. In the afternoon, the wind came contrary: and
we came again to an Anchor, within a mile of the shore: for to Sea-boord, was
all thick Ice, and impassable. I went ashoare my self, to be resolved of the
tide, and found whilst I was a shore, that it did flow two foot: and at that
time the flood came from the S. W. by W. I doubted it was an half tide; which
afterward I found to be true. I found where the Saluages had been upon the
Island; but could see little or no drift wood on the shore; no beasts on the
Island, nor fishes in the Sea. It flows on the change day, about a eleven a
clock. We saw some foul on it: of which we killed one, and returned aboard.
This Island is very low land; little higher then a dry sand-banke. It has Ponds
upon it of fresh water, but no grass: and is utterly barren of all goodness.

The 18. in the morning, the wind came something favorable; 18.
and we weyed and came to Sail: for the Ice was all comne about us. We
endeavored to proceed to the Westward; intending to fall with the Western
land, about the Latitude 63. 00. By twelve a clock, (having been much
pestered) we were comne to a firm range of Ice: but it pleased God that the
wind larged, and we stowed away S. S. W. At noone in Lat. 62. 00. by 4. in
the evening (having escaped dangerous blows) we were come (as we thought)
into an open Sea; and joyfully steered away West, and W. by N. although that
Joy was soon quayled. By ten at night, we heard the rut of the Ice: and it
grew a thick fogge, and very dark with it: nevertheless we proceeded, and
the nearer we came to it, the more hideous noise it made.

By three in the morning, the 19. we were come to it, 19.
and as it did clear a little, we could see the Ice: which were as thick
rands of Ice, as any we had yet seen. These being impassable, and moreover the
wind at N. W. we stowed along it, hoping to weather it to the Southward: but
at last, we became so blinded with fogge, and so encompassed with Ice, that we
could go no further.

The 20. in the morning (notwithstanding the fogge) 20.
we endeavored to get to the Westward; our Ship beating and knocking all this
while most fearfully.

In this wilfulness we continued till the 21: 21.
when being fast amongst the Ice, I observed we were in Lat. 60. 33. and then
looking what damage our Ship might have received, we could perceive that below
the plate of Iron, which was before her Cut-water, she was all bruised and
broken: the two knees she had before, to strengthen her, spoiled and torn: and
many other defects, which we could not by any means come to mend.
Notwithstanding all this, and the extraordinary thick fogge (that we could not
see a Pistol shot about us) we proceeded with the hazard of all.

Till the 27: 27.
which was the frist time we had clear weather to look about us: The wind
withal came up at South, and the Ice did open something: so that we made some
way through it to the Westward. In the evening, we were fast again, and could
go no further: the wind veering from the South to the East; and blowing a
fresh gale. This occasioned our griefs the more; that with a good wind, we
could not go forward: putting therefore a Hawser upon a piece of great Ice, to
keep the Ship close to it, we patiently expected for better fortune. Since we
came from Mansfields Island, our depth was commonly 110. and 100. fad. oozye
ground. Now the water begins to showlde: for this present 27. driving fast to
and again in the Ice, we have but 80. fad. ground as before.

The 28. and 29. we were so fast enclosed in the Ice, 28.
that notwithstanding, we put abroad all the sail that was at yards; and that
it blew a very hard gale of wind; the Ship stirred no more then if she had
been in a dry Docke. Hereupon we went all boldly out upon the Ice, to sport
and recreate our selves, letting her stand still, under all her Sails. It was
flat, extraordinary large Ice: the worst to deal withal, that we had yet
found. I measured some pieces: which I found to be 1000. of my paces long. This
was the first day that our men began to murmr: thinking it impossible to get
either forwards or backe-wards. Some were of the opinion, that it was all such
Ice, betwixt us and the shore. Others, that the Bay was all covered over: and
that it was a doubt whether we could get any way, or to any land, to winter in.
The nights were long; and every night it did so freeze, that we could not sail
amongst the Ice by night, nor in the thick foggie weather. I comforted and
encouraged them, the best I could: and to put away these cogitations, we
drank a health to his Majesty on the Ice; not one man in the Ship; and she
still under all her sails. I most ingeniously confess, that all their
murmuring was not without reason; wherefore doubting that we should be frozen
up in the Sea: I ordered that fire should be made but once a day, and that but
with a certain number of shides, that the Steward should deliver to the Cook
by tale, the better to prolong our fuel whatsoever should happen.

The 30. 30.
we made some way through the Ice: we heauing the Ship with our shoulders, and
with Mawles and Crows of Iron, breaking the corners of the Ice, to make way.
As we got forwards, the water shoalded apace: so that I believe it to be some
Island. At noone we observed through the fogge, with the Quadrant, upon a piece
of Ice: and were in Lat. 58. 54. our depth 30. fad. We put out hooks, to try
to catch some fish, but to no purpose; for there is not any in this Bay.

The 31. 31.
we labored as aforesaid: and got something forward. At noone we were in Lat.
58. 40. our depth 23. fad. It was very thick hazye weather; or else I think
we should have seen the land.

The first of August, August 1.
the wind came up at West; which drove us to the Eastward: where our depth
increased to 35. fad. At noone (by observation with the Quadrant, on the Ice)
we were in Lat. 58. 45. At six a clock this evening, we might perceive the
Ice to heave and set a little: which was occasioned by a swelling Sea, that
came out of the South-West. This did comfort us very much: hoping shortly we
should get out of the Ice.

The second, 2.
it did blow hard at South-West, and yet we could not feel the forementioned
swelling Sea: which did again quench the hopes we had formerly conceived.

The third, 3.
we did see a little open water to the North-westward; and did feel a
swelling Sea from the West: which does assure us, that there is an open Sea to
the Westward.

The fifth, 5.
we saw the Sea clear: but could by no means work our selves to it with our
sails: wherefore about six in the evening, we let fall an Anchor in 50. fad.
water; and stood all with poles and oars to fend off the Ice, and let it pass
to Leewards. We continued this labor all night.

In the morning, 6.
the wind came up at North-West, and we wayed with much joy, as hoping now to
get into an open Sea to the Southward. This by noone we had done; and were in
Lat. 58. 28. very free of Ice. The wind did large upon us: so that we stood
away North-West, to get up as high to the Northward as we could: and so to come
coasting to the Southward. We went to prayer, and to give God thanks for our
delivery out of the Ice.

The ninth, 9.
(being in Lat. 59. 40.) we came again to the Ice, which lie very thick to
the North: since we came out of the Ice, our depth increased to 110. and now
decreaseth again: So that I think we approached toward the shore.

The tenth proved very thick foggie weather; 10.
the wind contrary, and the water showlding apace, we came to an Anchor in 22.
fad.

The eleventh in the morning, 11.
we wayed, and made in for the shore; and about noone saw the land: our depth
being 16. fad. in Lat. 59. 40. The land to the North of us, did trend North by
East, and so made a point to the Southward, and trended away West by South,
which we followed: making it for that place, which was formerly called Hubberts
Hope. And so it proved indeed: but it is now hopeless.

Two or three words now, concerning the Bay that we have past over. It is from
Digges Island, to this Wester land (in latitude aforesaid) about 160. leagues,
the course West South West, the variation

The tides do set in the middle of the Bay, East and West, as we have often
tried by our led aground: but nearer the shoares, as they are forced by the
land; I am of the opinion that in the Ocean, or in large Bays, the tides do
naturally set East and West, and that this does give little hope of a passage.
The greatest depth we had in the Bay, was 110. fad. and so shoalding, as you
approach to land, we coasted round about this forementioned little Bay; which is
some 18. leagues deep in 8. and 6. fad. and in the bottom of it, we were in
two faddome and a half water, and saw the firm land, almost round about us.
Then we proceeded to the Southward six and seven faddome water; within sight
of the breach of the shore: keeping the lead continually going, and in the
night we would come to an Anchor. This night being little wind, we came to an
Anchor with our Kedger: but in waying of him, we lost him, having no more aboard
us.

The 12. 12.
we were in Lat. 58. 46. some two leagues from the shore. The variation is
about 17. degrees.

The 13. 13.
in the afternoon (it being something hazye) we saw some breaches ahead us:
our depth was 9. and 10. fad. and luffing to clear our selves of them, we
suddenly struck upon the Rocks: the Ship then being under our two Topsayles,
Foresayle and Spreetsayle: with a fresh gale of wind. In this fearful
accident, we struck all our sails amain; and it did please God to send two
or three good swelling Seas, which did heave us over the Rocks, into 3. fad.
and presently into three faddome and a half; where we chopped to an Anchor: and
said the pumps: but we found she made no water, although she had three such
terrible blows, that we thought her Mast would have shiuered to pieces, and
that she had bin assuredly bulged. We hoyst the Boat ouer-boord, and double
manned her: to go seek and sound a way, out of this perilous place. She was
no sooner gone, but there rose a fogge; so that we were feign to spend some
powder, that she might hear whereabouts we were. The wind duld something;
otherwise, it had been doubtful whither she could ever have recovered to us
again. After she had been absent two hours, she brought us word, that it
was all Rocks and breaches, round about us: and that withal, she had found a
way, where there was not less then two fad. and a half: and that afterward,
the water did deepen. We did presently way, and follow the Boat, and past over
two ledges of Rocks, on which there was scarce 14. foot water. Then it did
deepen to 3. 4. and so to 14. fad. then it shoulded again to 9. It being now
night, we came to an Anchor: where we ride indifferent well all the night. In
the morning, the wind came contrary; so that we could not go that way we
intended to clear our selves: and therefore we went to work; to fit our
holds, to splise our Cables; and made ready two shot, and so placed them in the
Hold, that they might upon all occasions run clear; the ends of them being
fastened to the maine Mast. We likewise looked to our Ankers, and fitted our
spare ones. We got out our long Boat from betwixt the decks; which was very
much broken and bruised. The Carpenter went to work to fit her, (for I
intended to tow the Shallop at Stern) and so to have the Boats ready at an
instant, either to lay out Ankers, or to be serviceable to what God should be
pleased to try our faith and patience withal: for in him was our only trust,
and our hope upon his favor, in our honest endeauours. At noone, in Lat. 57.
45. we could see the land from the N. W. to the S. E. by E. with Rocks and
breaches: and the Rocks that we came over, dry above water: whereby I knew it
flows here two faddomes at least. At noone, I sent the Boat off to sownd to
the Eastward: because the water shoulded, when we came to an Anchor. She
brought us word, the should water she had been in, was 7. fad. We intending
thereupon to way, the wind came Easterly: so that we could not budge: but lay
here the 14. all night, 14.
with a stiff gale of wind.

The 15. in the evening, 15.
our Cable galded off: by reason of which perilous and sudden accident, in
which we had not time to put a Buoy to it, we lost our Anchor, and were driven
into 4. fad. water, before we could set our sails. This when we had done, we
stowed South South-East, the wind being at East, but the water shoulded to 3.
fad. Then we stowed North north-east, and it did deepen by degrees to ten
fadd. and because it grew dark, we came to an Anchor, and rid a good stresse
all night.

In the morning the 16. 16.
the wind came up at North a fresh gale: and we wayed and came to sail. By
nine a clock, it grew to be a very storm: and we turned to and again, in 10.
fad. water. In the evening, the wind duld: and we stood South-west, to have a
sight of Port Nelson: which course we stood all night, by the Stars, being in
Lat. 57. 25. the variation, about 17. degrees.

The 17. in the morning, 17.
we stood South: and our depth decreased by degrees to 8. faddomes. At noone we
had good observation: being in Latitude 57. 15. and we make account, that we
are some 6. or 7. leagues of the Southern side of Port Nelson. Here the color
of the water changed: and was of a puddlelish and sandy red color. We stood
into 6. fad. and could not see the land from Top-mast-head: so night coming
on, and it beginning to blow hard at East by South, we stood off again into
10. and 12. faddomes: where the water was again of the color of the Sea.

The 18. as the wind and weather favored us, 18.
and the storm was broken up: we stood in again South, and came again into
thick puddlelish water: into 8. 7. and 6. fad. and then off again: for that
it grew thick foggie weather: keeping our lead continually going, night and
day.

The 19. being fine clear Sunshine weather; 19.
we stood in again into the thick puddleish water, into 8. fad. where we came
to an Anchor, to try the tides: For that from Top-mast-head, we could not now
see the land. We were at noone (by good observation) in Latitude 57. 20. and
the tide did set N. W. by W. and S. E. by E. It did run two knols and a half
in two glasses; I resolved, that this was nothing but shoalds to the land. In
the afternoon it began to snuffle and blow; so that we had much ado to get
up our Anchor. This being done, we stood East South East: but the water shoalded
apace. Then we stood East, and it deepened a little: In the evening, the wind
came up at West; and then we stood East South-east, into 10. and 8. and
afterward South-East, as our depth did guide us by our lead, and the color of
the water into 7. and 6. faddomes.

The 20. 20.
at 6. in the morning, we saw the land: it being a very low flat land. We
stood into 5. faddomes, to make it the better: and so stood along it. At
noone we were in lat. 57. 00. We named it, The new Principality of South
Wales; and drank a health in the best liquor we had to Prince Charles his
Highness, whom God preserve. We stood along it; and came to a point where it
trends to the Southward: near to which point, there are two small Islands. In
the evening it was calm, and we came to an Anchor. The tide set as aforesaid.
There we rid all that night, and the next day: by reason the wind was
contrary. There went a chopping short Sea: and the Ship did labor at it,
exceedingly leaping in Spreet-sayle yard, Forecastell, and all: for as yet we
had not trimmed her well, to ride. About nine at night, it was very dark: and
it did blow hard. We did perceive by the lead the Ship did drive, wherefore
bringing the Cable to Capstang, to heave in our Cable (for we did think we had
lost our Anchor) the Anchor hitcht again, and upon the chopping of a Sea, threw
the men from the Capstang. A small rope in the dark, had gotten foul about
the Cable, and about the Masters leg too: but with help of God he did
clear himself, though not without sore bruising. The two Mates were hurt; the
one in the head; the other in the arm. One of our lustiest men, was strooken
on the breast with a bar, that he lay sprawling for life: another had his head
betwixt the Cable; and hardly escaped. The rest were flung, where they were
sore bruised: But our Gunner (an honest and a diligent man) had his leg taken
betwixt the Cable and the Capstang: which wrung off his foot, and tare all the
flesh off his leg, and crushed the bone to pieces, and sorely withal bruised
all his whole body: in which miserable manner he remained crying till we had
recovered our selves, our memory and strengths to clear him. Whilst we were
putting him and the rest down to the Surgeon; the Ship drove into shoalde
water; which put us all in fear: we being so sorely weakened by this blow,
which had hurt eight of our men. It pleased God, that the Anchor held again:
and she rid it out all night. By midnight, the Surgeon had taken off the
Gunners leg at the gartering place; and dressed the others that were hurt and
bruised: after which we comforted each other as well as we could.

The 22. 22.
we weyed; and stood a little off into deeper water; expecting a better wind.
Which in the afternoon favored us. We stood in again for the shore, and
along it we proceeded. It is very shoald about four leagues off, and full
of breaches.

The 23. 23.
at noone, we were in latitude 56. 28. In the evening, the wind came contrary:
and we were feign to turn to and again. All this month, the wind has been
very variable, and continued not long upon one point: yet it happened so, that
we can get but little forward.

The 26. 26.
there sprung up a fine gale at West, but very thick weather: nevertheless
we stood into 7. and 6. fad. the water very thick and puddlelish. At noone,
it cleared; and we could see that we were imbayed in a little Bay: the land
being almost round about us. We stood out of it, and so along it, in sight;
till the 27. 27.
in the morning: when we came to higher land then any we had yet seen, since
we came from Nottingham Island. We stood into it, and came to an Anchor in 5.
faddome. I sent off the Boat, well manned and armed; with order in writing what
they were to do: and a charge to return again, before Sunne-set: The evening
came, and no news of our Boat: we shot and made false fires; but had no
answer: which did much perplex us, doubting that there had some distaster
befalne her, through carelessness, and in her we should lose all. We aboard,
at present, were not able to wey our Anchor, nor sail the Ship. At last we saw
a fire upon the shore; which made us the more doubtful, because they did not
answer our shot, nor false fires with the like. We thought withal, that it
had been the Saluages, who did now triumph in their conquest. At length they
came, all safe and well: and excused themselves, in that upon their coming
ashoare, it did ebb so suddenly, that a bank of sand was so presently dry
without them, as they could not come away, till that was covered again: and
with that they pacified me: They reported, that there was great store of drift
wood, on the shore: and a good quantity growing on the land. That they saw
the tracks of Dear and Bears: good store of Foul; (of which they had killed
some) but no sign of people. That they past over two little rivers, and came
to a third; which they could not pass: That it did flow very near three
faddomes, sometimes; as appeared by the shore. That it was low water at four
a clock; that the flood came from the North-west: and that it flowed half
tide; which both they and we had perceived by the Ship. At low water, we had
but three faddome, where we did ride. The wind began to blow hard at East,
whereupon we weyed and stood to the Northward till midnight: Then in again;
and in the morning we saw the land: and then it began to blow hard, and as we
stood off, it increased to a very storm; so that at length we could not
maintain a pair of courses; but tried under our Maine course, all day and all
night: sometime turning her head, to the Landward: sometime to the Offing.

The 29. 29.
in the morning, we made account we had drouen back again, some 16. or 18.
leagues: and in the morning (as it cleared) we saw a Ship to Leeward of us
some three or four leagues: so we made sail and bore up with her. She was
then at an Anchor in 13. fadd. It was his Majesty's Ship, and Captain Fox
commanded in her.

I saluted him according to the manner of the Sea, and received the like of
him. So I stood in to see the land, and thought to tacke about, and keep
weather of him, and to send my Boat aboard of him: but the wind shifted, so
that for that time I could not. In the evening, I came to weather of him, and
sent my Boat aboard of him; who presently weighed, and stood off with me till
midnight: and then we stood in again.

In the morning Captain Fox and his friends, came aboard of me: where I
entertained them in the best manner I could: and with such fresh meat as I had
gotten from the shore; I told him, how I had named the land, The South
Principality of Wales. I showed him how far I had been to the Eastward:
where I had landed; and in brief, I made known to him, all the dangers of
this Coast, as far as I had been. He told me, how himself had been in
Port Nelson: and had made but a Cursory discovery hitherto: and that he had not
been aland; nor had not many times seen the land. In the evening, after I had
given his men some necessaries, with Tobacco and other things which they
wanted: he departed aboard his Ship: and the next morning, stood away South
South-west: since which time, I never saw him. The wind something favoring
me, I stood in for the shore; and so proceeded along it, in sight.

This month of August ended with Snow and Hail; the weather being as cold, as
at any time I have felt in England.

We coasted along the shore in 10. September 1.
faddomes, and when it cleared; in sight of land. At length the water shoalded
to 6. and 5. fadd. and as it cleared, we saw it all breaches to Leeward: so we
hull'd off, North North-east, but still raised land. By night, we had much ado
to get safely out of this dangerous Bay. At midnight, the wind came up at
South, and so we took in our sails, and let the Ship drive to the Northward
into deeper water. This day, was the first time, the Surgeon told me, that
there were diverse of the men tainted with sickness. At noone, we were in
latitude 55. 12.

The second, 2.
we stood in again for the shore; but as we came in to shoald water, it began
to blow: the weather being winterly and foul; threatening a storm: wherein we
were not deceived, for that in standing off, we had a violent one. By midnight
it broke up; 3.
and the third in the morning, we stood in again: and by a 11. we saw it.
Here we found the land to trend South South-east and South: so that we knew,
we were at a Cape Land: and named it Cape Henrietta Maria: by her Majesty's
name; Who had before named our Ship. At noone, we were in latitude 55. 05. and
that is the height of the Cape.

From Port Nelson to this Cape, the land trends (generally) East South-east,
but makes with points and Bays: which in the particulars does alter it a
point, two or three. The distance is about one hundred and thirty leagues: the
variation at this Cape taken by Amplitude, is about sixteen degrees. A most
shoald and perilous coast: in which there is not one Harbor to be found.

The third day in the afternoon, 3.
we had a tearing storm at North; which continued till midnight, in extreme
violence.

The fourth in the morning (the storm being broke up) we stood in again, 4.
South-West. The weather was very thick, and we sounded continually: but by
noone it cleared and we saw the land. Here it did trend South by East, and the
tides did set along it, with a quick motion. In the evening, there came a
great rolling Sea out of the North North-east, and by eight a clock, it blew
very hard at South-east, and by reason of the encounter of the wind and this
great Sea: the Sea was all in a breach; and to make up a perfect tempest, it
did so lighten, snow, rain, and blow, all the night long, that I was never in
the like: We shipped many Seas; but one most dangerous: which rackt us fore and
aft: that I verily thought it had sunk the Ship: It struck her with such a
violence. The Ship did labor most terribly in this distraction of wind and
waves: and we had much ado to keep all things fast in the hold, and betwixt
decks.

The fifth in the morning, 5.
the wind shifted South-West, but changed not his condition; but continued in
his old anger and fury. In the afternoon, it shifted again to the North-west,
and there showed his uttermost malice; and in that tearing violence, that nor
I, nor any that were then with me, ever saw the Sea in such a breach. Our Ship
was so tormented, and did so labor; with taking it in on both sides, and at
both ends: that we were in a most miserable distress, in this so unknown a
place. At eight a clock in the evening, the storm brake up: and we had some
quietness in the night following: not one having slept one wink in 30. hours
before. If this storm had continued Easterly, as it was at first, without Gods
goodness we had all perished.

The sixth, 6.
the wind was at South-west, so that we could do no good to the Westward. We
spent the time therefore, in trimming of our Ship: we brought all our coals
(which for the most part was great Coal) aft: as we also did some other
things; and all to lighten her before. Others did pick our bread; whereof there
was much wet: for do what we could, we shipped abundance of water betwixt decks:
which ran into the hold, and into our bread-roome: for the Sea, indeed, so
continually ouer-rackt us, that we were like Jonas in the Whales belly: We
ouer-looked our Tacks and Shoots, with other Riggings of stresse: because that
henceforward, we were to look for no other but Winter weather: This evening
our Boate-swayne (a painful man, and one that had labored extremely these
two or three days) was very sick: swouning away three or four times:
insomuch that we thought verily, he would presently have dyed.

The seventh in the morning, 8.
the wind came up at South-east, and we stood away South-west, under all the
sail we could make. In this course, we saw an Island and came close aboard it:
and had twenty fadd. water, which was some comfort to us: for hitherto, we
could not come within four or five leagues of the shore, at that depth. This
Island stands in 54. 10. The afternoon, we stood away South-west, and in the
evening, had the shoalding of the Western shore, in 10. 8. and 7. fadd. but
it was so thick, that we could not see the land. It is about 14. leagues,
betwixt this Island and the Maine.

The eight was thick, 9.
foggie, and calm: which so continued till the ninth about six in the
morning. The wind then coming up at South South-west: (though very foggy) we
stood to the Eastward: keeping our lead going continually. In the evening, the
water shoalded to 10. and 9. fadd: wherefore we stood off and on, all night.

The tenth we made it: finding it an Island, 10.
of about 8. or 9. leagues long. It stands in latitude 53. 5. and about 15.
leagues from the Western shore. The part of it, that we coasted, trends West
North-west: I named it my Lord Westons Island; We stood still away to the
Eastward: it being broken foggie weather. In the afternoon, we discryed land
to the Eastward of us: which made like three hills, or hummockes: Toward them
we sail; keeping our lead still going: and very circumspect. At length we
also saw land to the Southward of us: whereupon we loofe up, and now make for
that: by course as we had set it in the thick dark fogge. We came in amongst
such low broken grounds, breaches, and rocks; that we knew not which way to
turn us: but God be thanked it was but little wind; and so we came to an
Anchor; Soon after it cleared; at which time we could see nothing but sands,
rocks, and breaches, round about us: that way only excepted, which we came in.
I sent presently the Boat to sound amongst the shoalds and rocks: that if we
should be put to extremity, we might have some knowledge which way to go.
This night proved calm and fair weather: and we rid quietly.

The eleventh in the morning, 11.
I went in the Boat ashoare my self: and whilst I was a land, I sent the
Boat about amongst the broken grounds, to sound. I found this Island, utterly
barren of all goodness: yea of that which I thought easily to have found:
which was Scuruy-grasse, Sorrel, or some herb or other, to have refreshed our
sick people. I could not perceive that the tide did flow here (ordinarily)
above two foot. There was much drift wood on the shore: and some of it drove up
very high, on the North side of the Island: whereby I judged that the storms
were very great at North, in the Winter. Thus I returned aboard; and sent many
of our sick men to another part of the Island, to see if they themselves could
fortunately find any relief for their griefs. At noone, by good observation,
we were in latitude 52. 45. In the evening, our men returned comfortless: and
then we weyed and stood to the Westward, coming to an Anchor under another
Island, in 20. faddomes.

The twelfth in the morning, 12.
it began to blow hard at South-east, which was partly of the shore; and the
Ship began to drive: it being soft oozie ground. We heaued in our Anchor
thereupon, and came to sail under two courses. Whilst the most were busy in
heauing out of Top-sayles: some, that should have had special care of the Ship
ran her ashoare upon the rocks: out of mere carelessness, in looking out and
about or heaving of the lead, after they had seen the land all night long,
and might even then have seen it, if they had not been blinded with self
conceit, and been enuiously opposite in opinions. The first blow, stroke me
out of a dead sleep, and I running out of my Cabin; thought no other at
first, but I had been wakened (when I saw our danger) to provide my self for
another World.

After I had contrould a little passion in my self, and had checked some bad
counsel that was given me, to revenge my self upon those that had committed
this error: I ordered what should be done to get off these Rocks and stones.
First we halde all our sail abacke-slayles; but that did no good, but make her
beat the harder. Whereupon we struck all our sails amain; and furdeld them
up close, tearing down our stern, to bring the Cable through the Cabin to
Capstang: and so laid out an Anchor to heave her asterne. I made all the water
in hold to be stau'd: and set some to the pumpes to pumpe it out, and did
intend to do the like with our Beer; Others I put to throw out all our
Coals: which was soon and readily done. We quoyld out our Cables into our
long boat; all this while, the Ship beating so fearfully, that we saw some of
the sheathing swim by us. Then stood we, as many as we could, to the Capstang:
and heaued with such a good will, that the Cable brake, and we lost our Anchor.
Out, with all speed, therefore, we put another: We could not now perceive
whether she did leake or no; and that by reason we were employed in pumping out
the water, which we had bulged in hold: though we much doubted, that she had
received her deaths wound: wherefore we put into the Boat the Carpenters
tools, a barrel of bread, a barrel of powder, six muskets, with some match;
and a tinder-boxe, fish, hooks and lines, pitch and okum: and to be brief,
what-euer could be thought on in such an extremity. All this we sent ashoare,
to prolong a miserable life for a few days. We were five hours thus beating;
in which time she struck 100. blows: insomuch that we thought every stroke
had bin the last that it was possible she could have endured. The water, we
could not perceive in all this time, to flow any thing at all: at length, it
pleased God, she beat over all the Rocks: though yet we knew not whether she
were stanch. Whereupon, to pumping we go on all hands, till we made the pumpes
suck: and then we saw how much water she did make in a glass. We found her
to be very leakie; but we went to prayer and gave God thanks it was no worse:
and so fitted all things again, and got further off and came to an Anchor. In
the Evening, it began to blow very hard at W. S. W. which if it had done
whilst we were on the Rocks, we had lost our Ship without any redemption.
With much ado, we wayde our Anchor, and let her drive to the Eastward amongst
the broken grounds and Rocks: the boat going before, sounding. At length, we
came amongst breaches; and the boat made signs to us that there was no going
further. Amongst the Rocks therefore we again came to an Anchor, where we did
ride all night: and where our men which were tired out with extreme labor,
were indifferent well refreshed. Here I first noted, that when the wind was at
S. it flowed very little or no water at all; so that we could not bring our
Ship aground to look to her: for we did pumpe almost continually.

The 13. at noone we wayed, 13.
and stood to the Westward: but in that course, it was all broken grounds,
shoaldes and sunken Rocks: so that we wondered with our selves, how we came in
amongst them in a thick fogge. Then we shapte our course to the Northward:
and after some consultation with my associates, I resolved to get about this
land, and so to go down into the bottom of Hudsons Baye; and see if I could
discover a way into the River of Canada: and if I failed of that, then to
winter on the maine Land; where there is more comfort to be expected, then
among Rocks or Islands. We stood along the shore, in sight of many breaches.
When it was night, we stood under our fore-sayle; the lead still going. At
last, the water shoalded upon us, to 10. fad. and it began to blow hard. We
tackte about, and it did deepen to 12. and 14. fad. but by and by, it shoalded
again to 8. fad. Then we tackt about again; and suddenly it shoalded to 6.
and 5. fad. so we struck our sail amain, and chopped to an anchor: resolving
to ride it out for life and death. We rid all night a great stresse; so that
our bittes did rise, and we thought they would have been torn to pieces.

At break of day the 14. 14.
we were joyful men: and when we could look about, we discried an Island some
2. leagues off, at W. by N. and this was the shoald that lay about it. Here did
run a distracted, but yet a very quick Tide: of which we taking the
opportunity, got up our Anchor, and stood N. W. to clear our selves of this
shoald. In the afternoon, the wind came up at N. E. and we stood along the
Eastern shore in sight of a multitude of breaches. In the Evening, it began
to blow a storm not sayle-worthy; and the sea went very high, and was all in a
breach. Our shallop, which we did now towe at stern, being moord with two
hawsers, was sunken: and did spine by her moorings, with her keele up, 20.
times in an hour. This made our ship to hull very broad; so that the sea did
continually ouer-rake us: yet we endured it, and thought to recover her. All
night, the storm continued with violence, and with some rain in the morning:
it then being very thick weather. The water shoalded apace; with such an
ouer-growne sea withal, that a sail was not to be endured: and what was as
ill, there was no trusting to an Anchor. Now therefore began we to prepare our
selves, how to make a good end, of a miserable tormented life. About noone as
it cleared up, we saw two Islands under our lee; whereupon we bare up to them:
and seeing an opening betwixt them, we indeauoured to get into it before night:
for that there was no hope of us, if we continued out at sea, that night.
Therefore come life, come death, we must run this hazard. We found it to be
a good sound: where we rid all night safely, and recovered our strengths
again, which were much impared with continual labor. But before we could get
into this good place, our shallop broke away (being moord with 2. hawsers) and
we lost her to our great grief: Thus now had we but the Ship boat, and she
was all torn and bruised too. This Island was the same that we had formerly
coasted the Wester side of; and had named my Lord Westons Island. Here we
remained till the 19. in which time it did nothing but snow and blow extremely,
insomuch that we durst not put our boat ouerboord.

This 19. 19.
The wind shifted N. N. E. and we wayde and stood to the Southward: but by
noone the wind came up at S. and so we came to an Anchor under another Island, on
which I went ashoare, and named it The Earl of Bristols Island. The Carpenter
wrought hard in repairing our boat: whilst I wandered up and down on this
desert Island, I could not perceive, that ever there had been any Saluages on
it: and in brief, we could find neither Fish, Foul, nor Herb upon it; so
that I returned comfortless aboard again. The tides do high about some 6.
Foot: now that the wind is Northerly. The flood comes from the North: and it
does flow half tide; The full sea this day, was at one a clock. Here, seeing
the winds continue so Northerly, that we could not get about to go into
Hudsons Baye; we considered again what was best to do, to look out for a
wintering place. Some advised me to go for Port Nelson: because we were
certain that there was a Coue, where we might bring in our Ship. I likte not
that counsel; for that it is a most perilous place, and that it might be so
long ere we could get thither, that we might be debard by the Ice. Moreover,
seeing it was so cold here, as that every night our rigging did freeze: and
that sometimes in the Morning, we did shouell away the snow half a foot
thick off our deckes: and in that Latitude too: I thought it far worse in
the other place. I resolved thereupon, to stand again to the Southward, there
to look for some little Creek or Coue for our Ship.

The 21. 21.
the wind came up at N. and we wayde: although it was a very thick fogge, and
stood away S. W. to clear our selves of the shoalds that were on the point of
this Island. This Island is in Lat. 53. 10. When we were clear, we steerd away
S. At noone the fogge turned into rain: but very thick weather; and it did
thunder all the afternoon: which made us doubt a storm: for all which, we
adventured to proceed. In the evening, the wind increased; and blew hard:
wherefore we took in all our sails, and let her drive to the Southward,
heauing the lead every glass. Our depth, when we took in our sails, was 30.
fadd. and it did increase to 45* which was a great comfort to us in the dark:
At midnight, our depth began suddenly to decrease; and as fast as the lead
could be heaued, it shoalded to 20. fadd. wherefore we chopped to an Anchor and
trimmed our Ship aft, to mount on the Sea, and fitted all things to ride it
out. There was no need to bid our men watch; not one of them put his eyes
together all the night long. We rid it out well all the night: although the Sea
went very lofty: and that it did blow very hard.

The 22. in the morning, when we could look about us; we saw an Island under
our Lee some league off: 22.
all being shoalds and breaches, betwixt us and it. At noone (with the help of
the windward tide) we attempted to have up our Anchor: although the Sea still
went very lofty* Joining all our strengths therefore, with our best skils; God
be thanked, we had it up: but before we could set our sails, we were driven
into nine fadd. Indeauouring thereupon to double a point, to get under the Lee
of this Island; the water shoalded to 7. 6. and 5. fadd. but when we were about,
it did deepen again and we come to an Anchor in a very good place; And it was
very good for us, that we did: for the wind increased to a very storm. Here
we rid well all the night, took good rest, and recovered our spent strengths
again. The last night and this morning, it did snow and hayle, and was very
cold: nevertheless I took the Boat and went ashoare to look for some Creek
or Coue to have in our Ship; for she was very leaky: and the company becomne
sickly and weak, with much pumping and extreme labor. This Island when we
came to the shore; it was nothing but ledges of rocks, and banks of sand: and
there went a very great surfe on them. Nevertheless I made them row through
it; and ashoare I got with two more, and made them row off without the
breaches; and there to come to an Anchor and to stay for me: I made what speed
I could to the top of a hill, to discover about: but could not see what we
looked for: Thus because it began to blow hard, I made haste toward the Boat
again. I found that it had ebbed so low, that the Boat could not by any
means come near the shore for me: so that we were feign to wade through the
surfe and breaches to her: in which, some took such a cold, that they did
complain of it to their dying day. But now it began to blow hard, so that we
could not get but little to windward toward our Ship: for the wind was shifted
since we went ashoare, and return to the shore, we could not, by reason of the
surfe. Well: we row for life, they in the Ship, let out a Buoy by a long warpe;
and by Gods assistance we got to it: and so haled up to the Ship; where we were
well welcomed, and we all reioyc'd together. This was a premonition to us; to
be careful how we sent off the Boat; for that it was winter weather already.
I named this Island, Sir Thomas Roes Island: It is full of small wood; but in
other benefits not very rich: and stands in latitude 52. 10. At noone, we
weyed: seeing an Island that bare South South-east of us, some four leagues
off; which was the highest land we had yet seen in this Bay: but as we came
near it, it suddenly shoalded to 6. 5. and 4. fadd. Wherefore we struck our
sails amain, and chopped to an Anchor: but it was very foul ground, and when
the Ship was winded up, we had but three fadd. at her Stern. As it cleared, we
could see the breaches all along under our Lee: holding it safe therefore to
stay long here; we settled every thing in order, for the Ship to fall the right
way. We had up our Anchor, got into deeper water; and stood over again for Sir
Thomas Roes Island: which by night we brought in the wind of us; some two
leagues off: which did well shelter us. The tides run very quick here
amongst these shoalds; and their times of running ebb, or flood, be very
uncertain: Their currants, are likewise so distracted, that in the night there
is no sailing by the Compass: wherefore we were feign to seek every night
some new place of security to come to an Anchor.

The 24. 24.
in the morning, it did lower, and threaten a storm: which made us with the
windward tide, wey to get nearer under the Island. It was very thick foggie
weather: and as we stood to the North-eastward, we came to very uncertain
depths: at one cast, 20. fadd. the next 7. then 10. 5. 8. and 3. and coming to
the other tacke, we were worse then we were before, the Currants making a fool
of our best judgments, in the thick fogge when we could see no landmarks. It
pleased God, that we got clear of them: and endeavored to get under the Lee
of the Island. This being not able to do, we were feign to come to an Anchor in
35. fadd. some two leagues off the shore: All this afternoon (and indeed all
night too) it did snow and hayle: and was very cold.

The 25. 25
we weyed, and thought to get to the Eastward: but as we tackt to and again,
the wind shifted so in our teeths, that it put us within a quarter of a mile
of the very shore: where we chopped to an Anchor and rid it out for life and
death. Such miseries as these, we endured amongst these shoalds and broken
grounds: or rather more desperate then I have related: (very unpleasant
perchance to be read) with snow, hail, and stormy weather, and colder then
ever I felt it in England in my life. Our shoote-Anker was down twice or
thrice a day: which extreme pains made a great part of the company sickly. All
this lasted with us, until the 30. of this month of September: which we
thought would have put an end to our miseries: for now we were driven amongst
rocks, shoalds, ouer-falles, and breaches round about us; that which way to
turn, we knew not; but there ride amongst them, in extremity of distress.
All these perils, made a most hideous and terrible noise, in the night season:
and I hope it will not be accounted ridiculous, if I relate with what
meditations I was affected, now and then, amongst my ordinary prayers: which I
here afford the Reader, as I there conceived them; in these few ragged and
teared Rimes.

OH, my poor soul, why do thou grieve to see
So many Deaths muster to murder me?
Look to thy self, regard not me; for I
Must do (for what I came) perform, or die.
So thou may free thy self from being in
A dunghill dungeon; A mere sink of sin,
And happily be freed, if thou believe,
Truly in God through Christ, and ever live.
Be therefore glad yet: ere thou go from hence,
For our joint sins, let us do some penitence,
Unfeignedly together. When we part,
I Will wish the Angels Joy, with all my heart.
We have with confidence relyde upon
A rustie wyre, touched with a little Stone,
Incompast round with paper, and alas
To house it harmless, nothing but a glass,
And thought to shun a thousand dangers, by
The blind direction of this senseless fly.
When the fierce winds shattered black nights asunder,
Whose pitchie clouds, spitting forth fire and thunder,
Has shook the earth, and made the Ocean roar;
And run to hide it, in the broken shore:
Now thou must Steer by faith; a better guide,
'Twill bring thee safe to heaven against the tide
Of Satan's malice. Now let quiet gales
Of saving grace, inspire thy zealous sails.
The first of October was indifferent fair weather; October 1.
and with a windward tide, out went our Boat, to sound a channel to help us
out of this perilous place. The Boat, within two hours she returned: and told
us, how she had been away where there was not less then 12. fadd. We
presently, thereupon weyed; but found it otherwise: and came amongst many
strange races, and ouer-falles, upon which there went a very great and breaking
Sea: As we proceeded, the water shoalded to 6. fadd. Well! there was no remedy,
we must go forward: happy be luckie; seeing there neither was any riding; and
as little hope to turn any way with a sail, but that there appeared present
death in it. It pleased God so to direct us, that we got through it: having no
less then five several, and all very uncertain depths. The water, sometimes
deepened to 20. fadd. then upon a sudden, it shoalded to 7. 6. and 5. faddomes:
so we struck all our sails amain, and chopped to an Anchor, where we rid till
midnight, for life and death: it blowing a merciless gale of wind, and the
Sea going very lofty, and all in a breach. The ground was foul ground too,
insomuch that we doubted our Cable, every minute.

The second in the morning was little wind: 2.
wherefore taking the opportunity of the tide, the Boat went forth to sound:
which returning again in two hours, told us how they had sounded about that
shoald, and had found a place of some safety to ride in; and had been in no
less water then five faddome. We weyed; and found our Cable galled in two
places: which had soon failed us, if the foul weather had continued. We stood
the same way, that the Boat did direct us: but it proved so calm, that we
came to an Anchor in 18. faddome. I took the Boat, and went ashoare on an
Island, that was to the Southward of us: which I named, The Earl of Danbyes
Island: From the highest place in it, I could see it all broken grounds and
shoalds, to the Southward: and rather worse, then any thing better, then that
which we had been in* I found that the Saluages had been upon it: and that it
was full of wood. I made haste to the Boat to sound the Baye for fear of
shoalds and sunken Rocks: but found it indifferent good. Toward the Evening,
it began to blow hard: wherefore we made toward the Ship. She put forth a Buoy
and a warpe; and we rowing for life to recover her, were put to Lee-ward of
her: but by getting hold of the warpe, we halde up to her. The boat we left
half full of water: our selves being as wet as drowned rats; and it made us
the more rejoice, that we had escapt this great danger. All night, we had a
very hard rode-steede; it blowing a most violent gale of wind, with snow and
hail.

The third about noone, 3.
the wind duld; and we had up our Anchor, standing in further into the Baye into
four fad. and a half water. Here we came again to an Anchor, with our second
Anchor: for many of our men are now sick; and the rest so weakened, that we can
hardly way our shoote-Anchor; I took the Boat, and went presently ashoare to
see what comfort I could find; This was the first time, that I put foot on
this Island; which was the same that we did after winter upon. I found the
tracks of Dear, and saw some Foul: but that that did rejoice me most, was,
that I did see an opening into the Land, as if it had been a river. To it we
make with all speed, but found it to be barred; and not 2. foot water at full
sea on the Bar: and yet within, a most excellent fine Harbor, having 4. fad.
water. In the Evening I returned aboard, bringing little comfort for our sick
men, more then hopes.

The 4. 4.
it did snow and blow very hard; yet I got ashoare, and appointed the boat to
go to another place, (which made like a River) and to sound it. In the mean
time, I went with four more, some 4. or 5. miles up into the Country; but
could find no relief all that way for our sick, but a few Berries only.
After we had well wearied our selves in the troublesome woods, we returned to
the place I had appointed the boat to tarry for me: where at my coming I
still found her, she having not been where I had ordered her, for it had
blown such a fierce gale of wind, that she could not row to wind-ward. Thus we
returned aboard, with no good news. It continued foul weather, with snow and
hail, and extreme cold; till the 6. when with a favoring wind, we stood in
nearer to the shore, and here moord the ship.

The 7. 7.
it snow'd all day; so that we were feign to clear it of the Decks with
shouels; and it blew a very storm withal. It continued snowing and very cold
weather, and it did so freeze, that all the bows of the Ship, with her
beake-head, was all Ice: about the Cable also, was Ice as big as a man's
middle. The bows of the boat were likewise frozen half a foot thick, so
that we were feign to hew and beat it off. The Sun did shine very clear;
and we tore the top-sayles out of the tops, which were hard frozen in them,
into a lump: so that there they hung a Sunning all day, in a very lump; the
Sun not having power to thawe one drop of them. After the Boat was fitted,
we rowed toward the shore: but could not come near the place where we were
used to land, for that it was all thickened water with the snow, that had fallen
upon the sands, that are dry at low water. This made it so difficult to row,
that we could not set through it with 4. oars: yet something higher to the
Westward, we got ashoare. Seeing now the winter to come thus extremely on upon
us, and that we had very little wood aboard; I made them fill the boat, and
went aboard and sent the Carpenter and others to cut wood; others to carry it
to the water side: whilst the boat brought it aboard, for I doubted that we
were likely to be debarred the shore, and that we should not go to and again
with the boat. It was miserable and cold already aboard the Ship: every thing
did freeze in the Hold, and by the fire side: Seeing therefore that we could no
longer make use of our sails (which be the wings of a Ship) it raised a many
of doubts in our minds, that here we must stay and winter. After we had
brought so much wood aboard, as we could conveniently stowe, and enough as I
thought would have lasted 2. or 3. months: The sick men desired that some
little house or houell might be built a shore, whereby they might be the
better sheltered, and recover their healths. I took the Carpenter (and others
whom I thought fit for such a purpose) and choosing out a place, they went
immediately to work upon it. In the mean space, I my self accompanied with
some others, wandered up and down in the Woods, to see if we could discover
any signs of Salvages, that so we might the better provide for our safeties,
against them. We found no appearance that there was any on this Island* nor
near unto it: The snow by this time was half leg high; and stalking through
it, we returned comfortless to our Companions: who had all this time wrought
well upon our house. They aboard the Ship, took down our top-sayles in the
mean while, and made a great fire upon the hearth in the hatch way; so that
having well thawed them, they folded them up, and put them betwixt deckes, that
if we had any weather, they might bring them again to yard: Thus in the
Evening we returned aboard.

The 12. 12.
we took our maine sail from the yard which was hard frozen to it: and
carried it ashoare, to cover our house withal: being first feign to thawe it
by a great fire; By night they had covered it; and had almost hedged it about:
and the six builders did desire to lie in it ashoare that night, which I
condiscended unto: having first fitted them with Muskets and other furniture;
and a charge to keep good watch all night. Moreover they had a shore 2.
Greyhounds (a dog and a bitch) which I had brought out of England, to kill
us some Dear, if happily we could find any.

By the 13. 13.
at night, our house was ready; and our six builders desired they might
travel up into the Country to see what they could discover.

The 14. 14.
betimes in the morning, being fitted with munition, and their order to keep
together (but especially to seek out some Creek or Cove for our Ship) they
departed. We aboard, took down our two top-masts and their rigging: making
account if we did remove, to make use of our foresayle and mizzen.

The 15. 15.
in, the Evening our hunters returned very weary, and brought with them a
small, leave Dear, in 4. quarters: which rejoiced us all, hoping we should
have had more of them, to refresh our sick men withal. They reported, that
they had wandered above 20. miles, and had brought this Dear above 12. mile:
and that they had seen 9. or 10. more: The last night, they had a very cold
lodging in the woods; and so it appeard, for they looked all almost starued, nor
could they recover themselves in 3. or 4. days after. They saw no sign of
Salvages, nor of any ravening wild beasts, nor yet any hope of harbor.

The 17. 17.
my Lieutenant and 5. more, desired they might try their fortunes in traveling
about the Island. But they had far worse luck then the others, although they
endured out all night, and had wandered very far in the snow (which was now
very deep) and returned comfortless and miserably disabled with the
coldness. But what was worse then all this, they had lost one of their
company, John Barton, namely our Gunners mate; who being very weary, merely to
save the going about, had attempted to go over a pond that was a quarter of a
mile over; where when he was in the very midst, the Ice brake and closed upon
him, and we never saw him more. Considering these disasters, I resolved to fish
no more with a golden hook: for fear, I weakened my self more with one
hunting, then 20. such dear Deeres could do me good. Being now assured, that
there was no Salvages upon the Island, nor yet about us on the other Islands: no
nor on the maine neither, as far as we could discover, (which we further
proved by making of fires) and that the cold season was now in that extremity,
that they could not come to us, if there were any: we comforted and refreshed
our selves, by sleeping the more securely. We changed our Island garrison, every
week; and for other refreshing we were like to have none till the Spring.

From this 10. to the 29. it did (by interims) snow and blow so hard, that the
boat could hardly adventure ashoare, and but seldom land, unless the men did
wade in the thick congealed water, carrying one another. We did sensibly
perceive withal, how we did daily sink into more miseries. The land was all
deep covered with snow; the cold did multiply; and the thick snow water did
increase: and what would become of us, our most merciful God and preserver
knew only.

The 29. 29.
I observed an Eclipse of the Moon, with what care possibly I could both in
the trial of the exactness of our instruments, as also in the observation: I
refer you to the observation in the latter end of this Relation: where it is
at large described. This month of October ended with snow and bitter cold
weather.

The first of November I cast up accounts with the Steward concerning our
victual: November 1.
the third part of our time being this day out. I found him an honest man: for
he gave me an account every week what was spent; and what was still in the
hold remaining under his hand: I would take no excuse of leakage or other
waste; unless he did daily show it me. Every month, I made a new survey; and
every six months, put what we had spared, by it self: which now was at least
a months provision of Bread; and a fortnights of Pease and Fish, etc.

The 3. 3.
day the boat indeauoured to get ashoare; but could not set through the thick
congealed water.

The 4. 4.
they found a place to get ashoare; and so once in 2. or 3. days, till the 9.
bringing Beer to our men ashoare in a barrel, which would freeze firmly in
the house in one night. Other provision they had store. The Ice Beer being
thawed in a kettell, was not good: and they did break the Ice of the pondes of
water, to come by water to drink. This pond-water had a most loathsome smell
with it: so that doubting lest it might be infectious, I caused a Well to be
sunk near the house. There we had very good water: which did taste (as we
flattered our selves with it) even like milk.

The 10. 10.
(having store of boordes for such a purpose) I put the Carpenter to work, to
make us a little boat which we might carry (if occasion were) over the Ice and
make use of her, where there was water. At noone I took the Latitude of this
Island, by 2. Quadrants: which I found to be 52. 00. I urged the men to make
traps to catch Foxes: for we did daily see many. Some of them were pied, black
and white: whereby I gathered that there was some black Foxes; whose skins,
I told them, were of a great value: and I promised, that whosoever could take
one of them, should have the skin for his reward: Hereupon, they made diverse
traps: and waded in the snow (which was very deep) to place them in the woods.

The 12. 12.
our house took a fire, but we soon quenched it: We were feign to keep an
extraordinary fire, night and day: and this accident, made me order a watch to
look to it continually: seeing, that if our house and clothing should be
burnt, that all we were but in a woeful condition. I lay ashoare, till the 17.
all which time, our miseries did increase. It did snow and freeze most
extremely. At which time, we looking from the shore toward the Ship, she did
look like a piece of Ice, in the fashion of a Ship: or a Ship resembling a
piece of Ice. The snow was all frozen about her; and all her forepart firm
Ice: and so was she on both sides also. Our Cables froze in the hawse,
wonderful to behold. I got me aboard: where the long nights I spent, with
tormenting cogitations: and in the day time, I could not see any hope of saving
the Ship. This I was assured of, that it was most impossible to endure these
extremities long. Every day the men must bear the Ice off the Cables: while
some within board; with the Carpenters long Calking Iron, did dig the Ice out
of the hawses: in which work, the water would freeze on their clothes and
hands, and would so benumme them, that they could hardly get into the Ship,
without being heau'd in with a rope.

The 19. 19.
our Gunner (who as you may remember, had his leg cut off) did languish
unrecoverably: and now grew very weak: desiring, that for the little time he
had to live, he might drink Sack altogether, which I ordered he should do.

The 22. 22.
in the morning he dyed. An honest and a stronghearted man. He had a
close-boorded Cabin in the Gunroome; which was very close indeed: and as many
clothes on him, as was convenient (for we wanted no clothes:) and a pan with
coals, a fire continually in his Cabin. For all which warmth, his plaster
would freeze at his wound, and his bottle of Sack at his head. We committed
him at a good distance from the Ship unto the Sea.

The three and twentieth, 23.
the Ice did increase extraordinarily: and the snow lay on the water in flakes,
as it did fall, much Ice withal drove by us: yet nothing hard all this while.
In the evening after the watch was set, a great piece came athwart our hawse;
and four more followed after him: the least of them a quarter of a mile broad:
which in the dark did very much astonish us, thinking it would have carried us
out of the Harbor, upon the shoalds Easter point, which was full of rocks. It
was newly congealed, a matter of two inches thick: and we broke through it,
the Cable and Anchor enduring an incredible stresse, sometimes stopping the
whole Ice. We shot off three Muskets, signifying to our men ashoare, that we
were in distress: who answered us again, but could not help us. By ten a
clock, it was all past; nevertheless we watched carefully: and the weather
was warmer then we had felt it any time this month. In the morning at break
of day, I sent for our men aboard, who made up the house, and arrived by 10.
being driven by the way, to wade through the congealed water; so that they
recovered to the Boat, with difficulty. There drove by the Ship many pieces
of Ice, though not so large as the former, yet much thicker: One piece came
foul of the Cable, and made the Ship drive.

As soon as we were clear of it, we joined our strengths together, and had up
our Eastermost Anchor: and now I resolved to bring the Ship aground: for no
Cables nor Ankers could hold her: But I will here show you the reasons, why I
brough her no sooner aground. First, it was all stony ground: some stones lying
dry, three or four foot above water: so that it was to be suspected, that it
was the like all about us. Secondly, it did ordinarily flow but two foot and a
half here; and if she should bed deep in the sands, we could not ever come
to dig her out again: for that she would not be dry, by four or five foot.
Thirdly, it was a loose sand which might rise with the surfe, or so mount about
her: that all our weak powers could not heave it away in the next spring time.
Fourthly, we doubted the tides would not high so much in the summer, as they
did now. Fifthly, we could not bring her out of the tides way; which does run
something quick here: and the Ice, besides, might drive and mount up upon her,
and so ouerset her, or tear her, and carry away her plankes, iron works and
all: so that we should have nothing left to finish our Pinnasse with. Sixthly,
if it did blow a storm at North-west, or thereabouts; the water would flow ten
foot, and upwards: and that wind being of the shore, it would blow away all
the Ice, and there would come in an extraordinary great surfe about the shoald
Ester-point; which was occasioned by a deep ouerfall. Moreover, she would
beat extremely: and if she were put up by the Sea or that surfe, it was very
doubtful that we should never have her off again. For these reasons we
endured all the extremity: still hoping upon some good and fortunate accident.
But now all our provident designs we saw to become foolishness; and that a
great deal of miserable labor had been spent in vain by us. With the flood
we weyed our Westermost Anchor, perceiving Gods assistance manifestly: because
it happened to be fine warm weather, otherwise we had not been able to work.
The wind was now South: which blew in upon the shore; and made the lowest
tides. We brought the Ship into 12. foot water: and laid out one Anchor in the
Offing, and another in shoald water, to draw her aland at command. Our hope
also was, that some stones that were to the Westward of us, would fend off some
of the Ice. We then being about a mile from the shore, about ten a clock in
the dark night, the Ice came driving upon us; and our Ankers came home. She
drove some two Cables length: and the wind blowing on the shore, by two a
clock she came aground; and stopped much Ice: yet she lay well all night, and we
took some rest.

The five and twentieth, 25.
the wind shifted Easterly: and put abundance of Ice on us. When the flood was
made, we encouraged one another, and to work we go: drawing home our Ankers
by maine force, under great pieces of Ice, our endeavor being to put the Ship
to the shore. But to our great discomforts, when the half tide was made;
(which was two hours before high water) the Ship drove amongst the Ice to the
Eastward (do what we could) and so would have on the shoald Rocks. As I have
formerly said, these two days and this day, was very warm weather: and it did
rain, which it had not yet but once done, since we came hither: otherwise, it
had been impossible we could have wrought. Withal, the wind shifted also to
the South: and at the very infant, blew a hard puff: which so continued for
half an hour. I caused our two Top-sailes to be had up from betwixt deckes,
and we hoyst them up with ropes in all haste, and we forced the Ship ashoare,
when she had not half a Cables length to drive on the Rocky shoalds. In the
Evening we broke way through the Ice, and put an Anchor to shoareward in five
foot water: to keep her to the shore, if possible it might be. Here Sir Hugh
Willoughby came into my mind, who without doubt was driven out of his Harbor
in this manner, and so starued at sea. But God was more merciful to us. About
nine a clock at night, the wind came up at North-West, and blew a very
storm. This wind was of the shore: which blew away all the Ice from about
us, long before we were afloat. There came in a great rolling Sea withal,
about the point; accompanied with a great surfe on the shore. And now were we
left to the mercy of the Sea, on the ground. By ten, she began to roll in
her docke: and soon after, began to beat against the ground. We stood at the
Capstang, as many as could: others at the Pumpes: for we thought that every
fifth or sixth blow would have staued her to pieces. We heaued to the uttermost
of our strengths, to keep her as near the ground as we could. By reason of
this wind, it flowed very much water: and we drew her up so high, that it was
doubtful, if ever we should get her off again. She continued thus beating,
till two a clock the next Morning, and then she again settled. Whereupon we
went to sleep, to restore nature: seeing the next tide we expected to be
again tormented.

The six and twentieth, 26.
in the morning tide, our Ship did not floate; whereby we had some quietness.
After prayers, I called a consultation of the Master, my Lieutenant, the Mates,
Carpenter, and Boate-swayne; to whom I proposed, that now we were put to our
last shifts; and therefore they should tell me what they thought of it: Namely,
whether it were not best, to carry all our provision ashoare: and that when the
wind should come northerly, it were not safest to draw her further off, and
sink her. After many reasonings they allowed of my purpose: and so I
communicated it to the Company, who all willingly agreed to it. And so we fell
to getting up of our provisions: first our bread, of which we landed this day
two Dryfats with a Hogshead of Beef: having much ado to set the Boat through
the thick congealed water. In the Evening, the wind came up at North-East,
and East: and filled the Bay choakefull of Ice.

The twenty seventh, 27.
the Bay continued full of Ice, which I hoped would so continue and freeze,
that we should not be put to sink our Ship. This day we could land nothing.

The twenty eighth, 28.
at break of day, three of our men went ashoare over the Ice, unknown to me:
and the wind coming vpat West, drove the Ice from betwixt us and the shore,
and most part out of the Bay also: And yet not so, that the Boat could go
ashoare for anything. I made the Carpenter fit a place against all sudden
extremities: for that with the first North-West, or northerly wind, I meant to
effect our last project. In the run of her, on the starboord side; he cut
away the sealing and the planke to the sheathing, some four or five inches
square; some four foot high from the keele of her, that so it might be boared
out, at an instant. We brought our bread which was remaining in the
Bread-roome, up into the great Cabin; and likewise all our powder; setting
much of our light dry things betwixt deckes.

The nine and twentieth at five a Clock in the Morning, 29.
the wind came up at West North-West, and began to blow very hard. It was
ordinary for the wind to shift from the West by the North, round about. So
first I orderd the Cooper to go down in hold, and look to all our Caske:
those that were full, to mawle in the bungs of them: those that were empty, to
get up, or if they could not be gotten up, to staue them. Then to quoile all
our Cables upon our lower tire: and to lay on our spare Ankers, and any thing
that was weighty, to keep it down from rising. By seven a Clock, it blew a
storm at North-West, our bitter enemy. The Ship was already bedded some two
foot in the sand, and whilst that was a flowing, she must beat. This I
before had in my consideration: for I thought she was so far driven up, that
we should never get her off. Yet we had bin so ferrited by her last beating,
that I resolved to sink her right down, rather then run that hazard. By
nine a cloak, she began to roll in her docke, with a most extraordinary great
Sea that was come; which I found to be occasioned by the formentioned ouerfall.
And this was the fatal hour, that put us to our wits end. Wherefore I went
down in hold with the Carpenter, and took his auger and board a hole in the
Ship, and let in the water. Thus with all speed, we began to cut out other
places, to boar through, but every place was full of nails. By ten,
notwithstanding, the lower tire was covered with water, for all which, she
began so to beat in her docke, more and more: that we could not work, nor
stand to do any thing in her. Nor would she sink so fast as we would have
her: but continued beating double blows; first abaft, and then before, that it
was wonderful, how she could endure a quarter of an hour with it. By twelve a
clock, her lower Tire rose: and that did so counter-beate on the inside, that
it beat the bulk heads of the Bread-roome, powder-roome, and fore piece, all
to pieces: and when it came betwixt deckes, the chests fled wildly about: and
the water did flash and fly wonderfully: so that now we expected every minute,
when the Ship would open and break to pieces. At one a clock she beat off
her Rudder: and that was gone, we knew not which way. Thus she continued
beating, till three a clock: and then the Sea came up on the upper deck: and
soon after, she began to settle. In her, we were feign to sink the most
part of our bedding and clothes: and the Chirurgions Chest with the rest. Our
men that were ashoare, stood looking upon us: almost dead with cold, and
sorrows to see our misery and their own. We looked upon them again: and both
upon each other with woeful hearts. Dark night drew on; and I bade the Boat
to be haled up; and commanded my loving companions to go all into her: who (in
some refusing complements) expressed their faithful affections to me; as loath
to part from me. I told them, that my meaning was to go ashoare with them. And
thus, lastly, I forsook the Ship.

We were seventeen poor souls, now in the Boat: and we now imagined that we
were leapt out of the Frying pan into the fire: The ebb was made; and the
water extraordinary thick congealed, with snow: so that we thought assuredly,
it would carry us away into the Sea. We thereupon doublemand four oars:
appointing four more to sit ready with oars: and so with the help of God we
got to the shore; haling up the Boat after us. One thing was most strange, in
this thick water: namely, That there went a great swelling Sea. Being arrived
upon the land, we greeted our fellows the best we could: at which time they
could not know us, nor we them by our habits nor voices: so frozen all over we
were, faces, hair, and apparel. And here I mean to take breath awhile, after
all this long and unpleasant Relation of our miserable endeauours: Craving
leave first of all to speak a word or two in general.

The winds, since we came hither, have been very variable and unconstant: and
till within this fortnight, the Southerly wind was the coldest. The reason I
conceive to be, for that it did blow from the Maine land; which was all covered
with snow: and for that the North winds came out of the great Bay which
hitherto was open. Add to that; we were now under a South Bank which did
shelter us: so that we were not so sensible of it.

A North-west, a North-west by North, and a North-North-west wind (if it blew
a storm) would raise the Tides extraordinarily: and in brief, from the West
Northwest, to the North North-east; would raise the tides in proportion, as
they did blow from the middle point: The wind being on the opposite points (if
it blew) it would flow very little at all. The harder it blew, the less water
it would flow. If it were little wind, or calm; it would flow indifferently.
The tides do high ordinarily (without being forced) about three foot: but
being forced with the forementioned winds; upward of ten foot. I could perceive
no difference betwixt Neape and spring tides: It flows half tide: that is;
the flood comes from the Northward: and thither returns again, two hours
before it be high water: and it is commonly so seen, in most Bays or Inlets.

The VVintering.
AFter we had haled up the Boat, we went along the breach side in the dark,
toward our house, where we made a good fire, and with it, and bread and water,
we thawde and comforted our selves, beginning after that to reason one with
another, concerning our Ship. I required that every one should speak his mind
freely. The Carpenter, (especially) was of the opinion, that she was founderd;
and would never be serviceable again. He alleged, that she had so beaten,
that it was not possible, but that all her Ioints were loose, and seames open:
and that by reason it flowed so little water, and no Creek nor Coue being
near, wherein to bring her aground, he could not devise how he might come to
mend it. Moreover, her Rudder was lost, and he had no Iron-worke to hang on
another. Some alleged, that we had heaued her up so high upon the sands, that
they thought we should never have her off again: and that they were assured
she was already dockt three foot. Others, that she lay in the Tides way; and
that the Ice might tear her to pieces off the ground: besides which, two of
our Ankers we could not now get from under the Ice: which when the Ice brake
(which would be of a great thickenesse by the Spring) would break our Ankers
to pieces, and then we should have no Ankers to bring us home withal: supposed
we got off the ship, and that she proved sound also. I comforted them the best
I could with such like words: My Masters and faithful Companions: be not
dismaide for any of these disasters, but let us put our whole trust in God. It
is he that gives, and he that takes away: he throws down with one hand, and
raises up with another. His will be done. If it be our fortunes to end our
days here, we are as near heaven, as in England; and we are much bound to God
Almighty for giving us so large a time of repentance, who as it were daily
calls upon us, to prepare our solues for a better life in heaven. I make no
doubt, but he will be merciful to us, both here on earth, and in his blessed
Kingdom: he does not in the mean time deny, but that we may use all honest
means to save and prolong our natural lives withal: and in my Judgment, we
are not yet so far past hope of returning into our native Countries, but that
I see a fair way by which we may effect it. Admit the Ship be foundered
(which God forbid, I hope the best) yet have those our own nation, and others,
when they have been put to these extremities, even out of the wrack of their
lost Ship, built then a Pinnasse, and recovered to their friends again. If it
be objected, that they have happened into better Climats, both for
temperatenesse of the air, and for pacificke and open Seas: and provided
withal, of abundance of fresh victual: yet there is nothing too hard for
courageous minds: which hitherto you have shown, and I doubt not will still
do, to the uttermost.

They all protested to work to the uttermost of their strength, and that they
would refuse nothing that I should order them to do, to the uttermost hazard
of their lives. I thank them all: and to the Carpenter for his cheerful
undertaking, I promised to give him so much plate presently, as should be worth
ten pound sterling: and if so be I went to England in the Pinnasse, I would
give her him freely, and fifty pounds in money over and above, and would
moreover gratify all them, that I should see painful and industrious. Thus
we then resolved, to build us a new Pinnasse, with the timber we should get
upon the Island: that so in the spring, if we found not the Ship serviceable;
we might tear her up, and planke her with the Ships planks. And so for this
night we settled our selves close about the fire: and took some rest till
daylight.

The thirtieth betimes in the morning, 30.
I caused the Surgeon to cut the hair of my head short, and to shave away
all the hair of my face: for that it was become intolerable; and that it would
be frozen so great with Ice-sickles.

The like did all the rest: November.
and we fitted our selves to work. The first thing we were to do, was to get
our clothes and provisions ashoare: and therefore I divided the company. The
Master and a convenient company with him, were to go aboard; and to get things
out of Hold. The Cock-swaine with his ging, were to go in the Boat, to bring
and carry things ashoare. My self with the rest, to carry it half a mile
through the snow, unto the place where we intended to build a Storehouse; As
for the heavier things, we purposed to lay them upon the Beache. In the
afternoon, the wind was at South South-west, and the water veerd to so low an
ebb, that we thought we might get something out of our Hold: we lanched our
Boat therefore: and with oars, set through the thick congealed water: It did
freeze extreme hard: and I did stand on the shore with a troubled mind,
thinking verily that with the ebb the Boat would be carried into the Sea; and
that then we were all lost men. But by Gods assistance they got safely to the
Ship and made a fire there, to signify their arrival aboard. They fell
presently to work; and got something out of the Hold, upon the decks: but
night coming on, they durst not adventure to come ashoare, but lay on the bed
in the great Cabin, being almost starued.

The first of December was so cold, December 1.
that I went the same way over the Ice to the Ship, where the Boat had gone
yesterday. This day we carried upon our backs in bundles 500. of our fish: and
much of our bedding and clothes; which we were feign to dig out of the Ice.

The second was mild weather: 2.
and some of the men going over the Ice, fell in, and very hardly recovered: so
that this day we could land nothing, neither by Boat nor back: I put them
therefore to make us a Storehouse ashoare. In the evening, the wind came up at
West: and the Ice did break and drive out of the Bay: It was very deep and
large Ice: that we much doubted it would have spoiled the Ship.

The third day, 3.
there were diverse great pieces of Ice that came athwart the Ship: and she
stopped them, yet not so, that we could go over them. We found a way for the
Boat: but when she was laden, she drew four foot water, and could not come
within a slight-shot of the shore. The men therefore must wade through the
thick congealed water; and carry all things out of the Ship upon their backs.
Every time they waded in the Ice, it so gathered about the^, that they did
seem like a walking piece of Ice, most lamentable to behold. In this extreme
cold evening, they cut away as much Ice from about the Boat as they could, and
picked it with hand-spikes out of her, and endeavoring to hoyse her into the
Ship. There being small hope, that she could go to and again any more. But
use what means they could, she was so heavy, that they could not hoyse her
in: but were feign there to leave her in the tackles by the Ships side.

The fourth being Sunday, 4.
we rested; and performed the Sabbath duties of a Christian.

The fifth and sixth were extreme cold: 5. and 6.
and we made bags of our store shirts: and in them carried our loose bread
over the Ice ashoare upon our backs. We also dug our clothes and new sails
with hand-spikes of iron, out of the Ice: and carried them ashoare, which we
dried by a great fire.

The seventh day was so extremely cold, 7.
that our noses, cheeks, and hands, did freeze as white as paper.

The eighth and ninth, 8. and 9.
it was extreme cold; and it did snow much, yet we continued our labor; in
carrying and rolling things ashoare. In the evening the water raised the Ice
very high: and it did break two thoughts of our Boat: and break in the side
of her: but for that time, we could not help it.

The tenth, 10.
our Carpenter found timber to make a Keele, and a Stern for our Pinnace: the
rest wrought about our provisions, until the 13. day: and that we spent in
digging our boat out of the Ice: which we were feign to do to the very Keele:
and dig the Ice out of her, and then we got her up on the Ice: in which doing,
many had their noses, cheeks and fingers, frozen as white as paper. The cold
now increased most extremely. By the 19. we could get no more things out of our
Hold: but were feign to leave 5. barrels of Beef and Porke, all our Beer; and
diverse other things: which were all firm frozen in her.

The one and twentieth was so cold, 21
that we could not go out of the house.

The three and twentieth we went to have our boat ashoare; 23.
running her over our oars: but by 10. a clock there came such a thick
fogge, that it was as dark as night. I made them give over, and make what
haste we could to the shore: which we had much ado to find, for the time,
losing one another. At the last we met all at the house, the miserablest
frozen, that can be conceived. Upon diverse, had the cold raised blisters as
big as wall-nuts. This we imagined to come, by reason that they came too
hastily to the fire. Our Well was now frozen up: so that dig as deep as we
could, we can come by no water. Melted snow-water is very unwholesome: either to
drink or to dress our victuals. It made us so short-breathed, that we were
scarce able to speak. All our Sack, Vinegar, Oil, and every thing else that
was liquid, was now frozen as hard as a piece of wood, and we must cut it with
a hatchet. Our house was all frozen on the inside, and it froze hard within a
yard of the fires side. When I landed first upon this Island, I found a spring
under a hills side: which I then observing, had caused some trees to be cut for
marks to know the place again by. It was about three quarters of a mile from
our house. I sent 3. of our men which had been formerly with me, thither upon
the 24. These wading through the snow, at last found the place, and shoueling
away the snow, they made way to the very head of it. They found it spring very
strongly: and brought me a Can of it, for which I was right joyful. This
spring continued all the year; and did not freeze: but that we could break
the Ice and come to it. We labored very hard, these three or four days, to
get wood to the house, which we found to be very troublesome, through the deep
snow.

We then settled our bedding and provisions, providing to keep Christmas day
holy: which we solemnized in the ioyfullest manner we could: So likewise did we
Saint John's day: upon which we named the wood we did winter in, in memory of
that Honorable Knight Sir John Winter, Winters Forest. And now in stead of a
Christmas Tale, I will here describe the house that we did live in, with those
adjoining.

When I first resolved to build a house, I chose the most warmest and
conuenientest place and the nearest the Ship withal. It was amongst a tuft of
thick trees, under a South bank; about a flight-shot from the Seas side. True
it is, that at that time we could not dig into the ground, to make us a Hole
or Cave in the earth, (which had been the best way) because we found water
within 2. foot digging: and therefore that project failed. It was a white
light sand; so that we could by no means make up a mud-wall. As for stones,
there were none near us: which, moreover, were all now covered with the snow.
We had no boords for such a purpose; and therefore, we must do the best we
could, with such materials as we had about us.

The house was square; about 20. foot every way: as much namely, as our
mayne-Course could well cover: first we drove strong stakes into the earth,
round about: which we watteled with boughs, as thick as might be, beating
them down very close. This our first work was six foot high on both sides,
but at the ends, almost up to the very top. There we left 2. holes, for the
light to come in at: and the same way the smoke did vent out also. Moreover, I
caused at both ends, three rows of thick bush trees: to be stuck up, as
close together as might be possibly. Then at a distance from the house, we cut
down trees: proportioning them into lengths of six foot; with which we made
a pile on both sides, six foot thick, and six foot high: but at both ends,
ten foot high, and six foot thick: We left a little low door to creep
into; and a portall before that, made with piles of wood, that the wind might
not blow into it. We next of all fastened a rough tree aloft over all: upon
which we laid our rafters; and our Main Course over those again: which lying
thwart-wayes over all, did reach down to the very ground, on either side. And
this was the Fabric of the outside of it. On the inside, we made fast our
bonnet sails, round about. Then we drove in stakes and made us bed-stead
frames; about three sides of the house: which bed-steads were double, one under
another: the lower-most, being a foot from the ground: These, we first filled
with boughs, then we laid some spare sails on that, and then our bedding and
clothes. We made a Hearth or Causie in the middle of the house, and on it, made
our fire: some boords we laid round about our Hearth, to stand upon: that the
cold dampe should not strike up into us. With our Wast-clothes, we made us
Canopies and Curtains: others did the like with our small sails. Our second
house was not past 20. foot distant from this, and made for the watteling much
after the same manner, but it was less, and covered with our fore-Course: It
had no pyles on the South side: but in liew of that, we pilde up all our
Chests, on the inside: and indeed the reflexe of the heat of the fire against
them, did make it warmer then the Mansion house. In this house, we dressed our
victual: and the subordinate crew did refresh themselves all day in it. A
third house, (which was our storehouse) we likewise made, some twenty paces
off from this; for fear of firing. This house was only a rough tree fastened
aloft: with rafters laid from it to the ground, and covered over with our new
suite of sails. On the inside, we had laid small trees, and covered them over
with boughs: and so stored up our Bread, and Fish in it; about two foot from
the ground: the better to preserve them. Other things lay more carelessely.

Long before Christmas, our mansion house was covered thick over with Snow:
almost to the very roof of it. And so likewise was our second house: but our
Storehouse, all over: by reason we made no fire in it. Thus we seemed to live
in aheape, and Wilderness of Snow; forth adores we could not go, but upon the
snow: in which we made us paths middle deep in some places: and in one
special place, the length of ten steps. To do this, we must shouell away
the Snow first; and then by treadding, make it something hard underfoot: The
Snow in this path, was a full yard thick under us. And this was our best
gallery for the sicke-men: and for mine own ordinary walking. And both houses
and walks, we did daily accommodate more and more, and make fitter for our
uses.

The twenty seventh, 27.
we got our Boat ashore: and fetched up some of our provisions from the beach
side into the Storehouse: and so by degrees did we with therest of our
provisions: with extremity of cold and labor, making way with shouels through
the deep Snow; even from the Seaside unto our Storehouse. And thus concluded
we the old year. 1631.

January, 1632.
The first of January (and for the most part all the month) was extreme cold.

The sixth, 6.
I observed the latitude, with what exactness I could (it being very clear
Sunshine weather) which I found to be 51. 52. This difference, is by reason
that here is a great Refraction.

The one and twentieth, 21.
I observed the Sun to rise like an Ouall, along the Horizon: I called three
or four to see it, the better to confirm my Judgment: and we all agreed,
that it was twice as long as it was broad. We plainly perceived withal, that
by degrees as it gate up higher, it also recovered his roundnesse.

The six and twentieth, 26.
I observed, when the Eastern edge of the Moon did touch the Planet Mars, the
Lions heart was then in the East quarter 21. 45. above the Horizon: but all
this was not done with that exactness, that I have done other observations.

The thirtieth and one and thirtieth, 30. and 31.
there appeared in the beginning of the night, more Stars in the firmament,
then ever I had before seen by two thirds. I could see the Cloud in Cancer
full of small Stars: and all the via lactea, nothing but small Stars: and
amongst the Plyades, a great many small Stars. About ten a Clock, the
Moon did rise; and then a quarter of them was not to be seen. The wind for
the most part of this month, has been Northerly, and very cold: the warmest
of which time we employed our selves in fetching Wood, working upon our
Pinnasse and other things that happened. In the beginning of this month, the
Sea was all firmly frozen over, so that we could see no water any way. I hope
it will not seem tedious to the Readers, if I here deliver mine own opinion,
how this abundance of Ice comes to be ingendered.

The Land that encircles this great Bay, (which lies in a broken Irregular
form, making many little shoald Bays, and Guts, being, moreover, full of
Islands and dry sands) is for the most part low and flat, and has flat shoalds
adjoining to it, half a mile or a mile, that are dry at low water. Now you
must know, that it flows half tide (as I have often experienced) that is,
from whence the flood comes, the water thither returns, two hours before
it be high water, or full Sea. It seldom raines, after the middle of
September: but snowes: and that Snow will not melt on the Land nor Sands; At
low water when it snowes (which it does very often) the sands are all covered
over with it; which the half tide carries officiously (twice in twenty four
hours) into the great Bay, which is the common Rendezvous of it, Every low
water, are the sands left clear, to gather more to the increase of it. Thus
does it daily gather together in this manner, till the latter end of October,
and by that time has it brought the Sea to that coldness, that as it snows,
the snow will lie upon the water in flakes without changing his color; but
with the wind is wrought together; and as the winter goes forward, it begins
to freeze on the surface of it, two or three inches or more in one night: which
being carried with the half tide, meets with some obstacle, (as it soon does)
and then it crumples and so runs upon it self, that in a few hours it will
be five or six foot thick. The half tide still flowing, carries it so fast
away, that by December it is grown to an infinite multiplication of Ice. And
thus by this storing of it up, the cold gets the predomination in the Sea
(which also furnishes the Springs and water, in the low flat lands) that it
cooles it like it self. This may appear by our experience, though in all
this, I freely submit my self unto the better learned. Our men found it more
mortifying cold to wade through the water in the beginning of June when the Sea
was all full of Ice; then in December, when it was increasing. Our Well,
moreover, out of which we had water in December, we had none in July.

The ground at ten foot deep, was frozen. The quantity of the Ice, may very
easily be made to appear, by Mathematical Demonstration: and yet I am not of
the opinion, that the Bay does freeze all over. For the one and twentieth, the
wind blowing a storm at North, we could perceive the Ice to rise something in
the Bay.

February, 1632.
The cold was as extreme this month, as at any time we had felt it this year:
and many of our men complained of infirmities. Some, of sore mouths; all the
teeth in their heads being loose, their gums swollen, with black rotten flesh;
which must every day be cut away. The pain was so sore on them, that they
could not eat their ordinary meat. Others complained of pain in their heads,
and their breasts: Some of weakness in their backs; Others of aches in their
thighs and knees: and others, of swellings in their legs. Thus were two
thirds of the company, under the Chirurgions hand. And yet nevertheless, they
must work daily; and go abroad to fetch wood, and timber; notwithstanding the
most of the^ had no shoes to put on. Their shoes, upon their coming to the
fire, out of the snow, were burnt and scorcht upon their feet: and our
store-shooes were all sunk in the Ship. In this necessity they would make
this shift: To bind clouts about their feet, and endeavored by that poor
help, the best they could to perform their duties. Our Carpenter likewise is
by this time fallen sick to our great discomforts. I practiced some
observations by the rising and setting of the Sun, calculating the time of
his rising and setting, by very true running glasses. As for our Clock and
Watch, notwithstanding we still kept them by the fires side, in a Chest wrapped
in clothes, yet were they so frozen, that they could not go. My observations
by these Glasses, I compared with the Stars coming to the Meridian. By this
means we found the Sun to rise twenty minutes before it should: and in the
evening to remain above the Horizon twenty minutes (or thereabouts) longer
then it should do. And all this by reason of the Refraction.

Since now I have spoken so much of the cold, I hope it will not be too coldly
taken, if I in a few words make it someway to appear unto our Readers.

We made three differences of the cold: all according to the places. In our
house, In the woods: and in the open Air, upon the Ice, in our going to the
ship.

For the last, it would be sometimes so extreme, that it was not indurable: no
Clothes were proof against it; no motion could resist it. It would, moreover,
so freeze the hair on our eyelids, that we could not see: and I verily
believe, that it would have stifled a man, in a very few hours: we did daily
find by experience, that the cold in the Woods would freeze our faces, or any
part of our flesh that was bare; but it was yet not so mortifying as the other.
Our house on the outside, was covered two thirdparts with Snow; and on the
inside frozen, and hang with Icesickles. The Clothes on our beds would be
covered with hoare frost: which in this little habitacle, was not far from
the fire. But let us come a little nearer to it. The Cooks Tubs, wherein he
did water his meat, standing about a yard from the fire, and which he did all
day plye with melted Snow-water: yet in the night season, whilst he slept but
one watch, would they be firm frozen to the very bottom. And therefore was
he feign to water his meat in a brass Kettle close adjoining to the fire;
and I have many times both seen and felt by putting my hand into it; that side
which was next the fire, was very warm, and the other side an inch frozen; I
leave the rest to our Cook; who will almost speak miracles of the cold. The
Surgeon, who had hung his bottles of sirrops, and other liquid things as
conveniently as he could to preserve them, had them all frozen: our Vinegar,
Oil, and Sack, which we had in small Caske in the house, was all firm
frozen. It may further in general be conceived, that in the beginning of June,
the Sea was not broken up: and the ground was yet frozen, and thus much we
found by experience, in the burying of our men: in setting up the Kings
Standard toward the latter end of June: and by our Well, at our coming away
in the beginning of July: at which time upon the land for some other reasons,
it was very hot weather.

March, 1632.
The first of this month being Saint David's day, 1.
we kept Holyday, and solemnized it in the manner of the Ancient Britains:
praying for his Highness happiness Charles Prince of Wales.

The fifteenth, 15.
one of our men thought he had seen a Dear: whereupon he with two or three
more desired that they might go to see if they could take it: I gave them
leave: but in the Evening they returned so disabled with cold, which did rise
up in blisters under the soales of their feet and upon their legs, to the
bigness of Walnuts; that they could not recover their former estate (which was
not very well) in a fortnight after.

The six and twentieth, 16.
three more desire that they also might go out to try their fortunes: but they
returned worse disabled, and even almost stifled with the cold.

This Evening, the Moon rose in a very long Ovale along the Horizon.

By the last of this month, the Carpenter had set up 17. ground timbers: and
34. Staddles; and (poor man) he proceeds the best he can, though he be
feign to be led unto his labor.

In brief, all this month has been very cold. The wind about the N. W. The
snow as deep as it has been all this winter; But to answer an objection that
may be made, You were in a wood (may some men say unto us) and therefore you
might make fire enough to keep you from the cold. It is true, we were in a
wood; and under a South-banke too: or otherwise, we had all starued. But I must
tell you withal; how difficult it was to have wood in a wood: And first, I
will make a muster of the tools we had: The Carpenter in his Chest had 2. Axes
indeed: but one of them was spoiled in cutting down wood to pile about our
house before Christmas; When we came first a land, we had but two whole
hatchets, which in a few days broke 2. inches below the Sockets. I called for 3.
of the Coopers hatchets: The Carpenters axe and the Coopers best hatchet I
caused to be locked up: The other 2. hatchets to be new helu'd, and the blades
of the 2. broken hatchets, to be put into a cleft piece of wood, and then to be
bound about with rope yame as fast as might be: which must be repaired every
day. And these were all the cutting tools we had: moreover the 6. of February
the Carpenter had out his best axe about something, and one of the company in
his absence, by his indiscreet handling of it, brake that too, two inches
below the Socket: we must henceforth order these pieces of tools the best we
could: wherefore I gave order, that the Carpenter should have one of the
Coopers hatchets: they that looked for timber in the woods, the other: and they
that cut down wood to burn, were to have the 2. pieces. And this was before
Christmas.

The three that were appointed to look crooked timber, must stalk and wade,
(sometimes on all four) through the snow: and where they saw a tree likely to
fit the mould: they must first heave away the snow, and then see if it would
fit the mould: if not, they must seek further: if it did fit the mould; then
they must make a fire to it, to thawe it: otherwise it could not be cut. Then
cut it down, and fit it to the length of the mould: and then with other help,
get it home: a mile through the snow.

Now for our firing. We could not burn green wood, it would so smoke, that it
was not indurable: yea the men had rather starve without in the cold, then sit
by it. As for the dry wood, that also was bad enough in that kind: for it was
full of Turpentine, and would send forth such a thick smoke, that would make
abundance of soote: which made us all look, as if we had been free of the
company of Chimney-Sweepers. Our clothes were quite burnt in pieces about us:
and for the most part, we were all without shoes: But to our Fuellers again.
They must first (as the former) go up and down in the snow: till they saw a
standing dry tree: for that the snow covered any that were fallen. Then they
must hacke it down with their pieces of hatchets: and then others must carry
it home through the snow. The boys with Cuttleasses, must cut boughs for the
Carpenter: for every piece of timber that he did work, must first be thawed in
the fire: and he must have a fire by him, or he could not work. And this was
our continual labor, throughout the forementioned cold: besides our tending
of the sick, and other necessary employments.

April. 1632.
The first of this month being Easter Day, 1.
we solemnized as religiously as God did give us grace. Both this day and the
2. following Holy Days were extreme cold: And now sitting all about the fire,
we reasoned and considered together upon our estate; We had 5. men (whereof the
Carpenter was one:) not able to do any thing. The Boateswayne and many more,
were very infirm: and of all the rest, we had but 5. that could eat of their
ordinary allowance. The time and season of the year came forwards apace: and
the cold did very little mitigate. Our Pinnace was in an indifferent
forwardness: but the Carpenter grew worse and worse: The Ship (as we then
thought) lay all full of solid Ice: which was weight enough to open the seames
of any new and sound vessel: especially of one that had layne so long upon the
ground as she had done. In brief, after many disputations, and laying open of
our miserable and hopeless estates, I resolved upon this course: that
notwithstanding it was more labor, and though we declined, weaker still and
weaker: yet that with the first warm weather, we would begin to clear the
Ship: that so we might have the time before us, to think of some other course.
This being ordered, we looked to those tools we had, to dig the Ice out of
her: we had but 2. Iron bars ashoare: the rest were sunk in the Ship: and
one of them was broken too. Well! we fell to fitting of those bars, and of 4.
broken shouels that we had: with which we intended (as after we did) to dig
the Ice out of her: and to lay that Ice on a heap, upon the Lar-boord bow,
and to sink down that Ice to the ground so fast, that it should be a
Barricadoe to us, when the Ice brake up; which we feared would tear us all to
pieces.

The 6. was the deepest snow we had all this year: 6.
which filled up all our paths and ways, by which we were used to go unto the
wood: This snow was something moyster and greater, then any we had had all this
year: for formerly it was as dry as dust; and as small as sand, and would
drive like dust with the wind.

The weather continued with this extremity, 15.
until the 15. at which time our spring was harder frozen, then it had been
all the year before. I had often observed the difference betwixt clear
weather and mistie Refractious weather: in this manner. From a little hill
which was near adjoining to our house; in the cleerest weather, when the Sun
shone with all the purity of air, that I could conceive: we could not see a
little Island; which bare off us South South-east, some four leagues off: but
if the weather were mistie (as aforesaid) then we should often see it, from the
lowest place. This little Island I had seen the last year, when I was on Danby
Island: 13.
The 13. I took the height of it instrumentally; standing near the Seas side:
which I found to be 34. minutes: the Sun being 28. degrees high. This shows,
how great a Refraction here is. Yet may this be noted by the way; That I have
seen the land elevated, by reason of the refractious air; and nevertheless,
the Sun has risen perfect round.

The sixteenth was the most comfortable Sunshine day, 16.
that came this year: and I put some to clear off the snow from the upper
decks of the Ship; and to clear and dry the great Cabin, by making fire in
it. Others I put to dig down through the Ice, to come by our Anchor, that was
in shoald water, which the 17. in the afternoon we got up, 17.
and carried aboard.

The eighteenth, 18.
I put them to dig down through the Ice, near the place where we thought our
Rudder might be. They dug down, and came to water: but no hope of finding
of it: we had many doubts, that it might be sanded: or that the Ice might have
carried it away already, the last year: or if we could not recover it by
digging before the Ice brake up, and drove, there was little hope of it.

The nineteenth we continued our myning work aboard the Ship; 19.
and returned in the Evening to Supper ashoare: This Day, The Master and two
others, desired that they might lie aboard: which I condiscended to: for indeed
they had lain very discommodiously all the winter, and with sick
bed-fellowes: as I my self had done; every one in that kind taking their
fortunes. By lying aboard, they avoided the hearing of the miserable groanings:
and lamenting of the sick men all night long: enduring (poor souls)
intolerable torments.

By the one and twentieth, 21.
we had labored so hard, that we came to see a Caske; and could likewise
perceive that there was some water in the Hold. This we knew could not be
thawed water; because it did still freeze night and day very hard aboard the
Ship, and one the land also.

By the three and twentieth in the Evening, 23.
we came to pierce the forementioned Caske: and found it was full of very good
Beer, which did much rejoice us all: especially the sickemen, notwithstanding
that it did taste a little of bulgewater. By this we at that time thought that
the holes we had cut to sink the Ship, were frozen, and that this water had
stood in the Ship all the Winter.

The four and twentieth, 24.
we went betimes in the morning to work: but found that the water was risen
above the Ice where we had left work, about two foot: for that the wind had
blown very hard at North, the night before. In the morning, the wind came
about South, and blew hard, and although we had little reason for it; we yet
expected a lower veere of the water. I there upon put them to work on the
outside of the Ship: that we might come to the lower hole, which we had cut in
the Sterne-Shootes. With much labor by night, we dug down through the Ice
to it; and found it vnfrozen (as it had bin all the Winter) and to our great
comforts, we found that on the inside, the water was ebd even with the hole:
and that on the outside, it was ebd a foot lower. Hereupon I made a shot-boord
to be naild on it: and to be made as tight as might be, to try if the water
came in any other way. To the other two holes, we had dug on the inside: and
found them frozen? Now I did this betimes, that if we found the Ship foundered,
we might resolve of some course to save, or prolong our lives, by getting to
the maine before the Ice were broken up: for, as for our Boat, it was too
little, and bulged, besides that. Our Carpenter was by this time past hope: and
therefore little hope had we of our Pinnasse. But which was worst of all, we
had not four men able to travel through the Snow over the Ice, and in this
miserable estate were we at this present.

The 25. we satisfied our longing: 25.
for the wind now coming about Northerly, the water rose by the Ships side
(where we had dug down) a foot and more above the Hold: and yet did not
rise within board. This did so encourage us, that we fell very lustily to
digging, and to heave out the Ice, out of the ship. I put the Cook and some
others, to thaw the pumps: who by continual pouring of hot water into them; by
the 27. in the morning they had cleared one of them: which we say-ing, found
that it did deliver water very sufficiently. Thus we fell to pumping: and
having cleared two foot water, we then left to have a second trial. Continuing
our work thus, 28.
in digging the Ice; by the 28. we had cleared our other pumpe: which we also
found to deliver water very well: We found likewise, that the water did not
rise any thing, in Hold.

The 29. it rained all day long, 29.
a sure sign to us, that winter was broken up.

The 30. we were betimes aboard at our work: 30.
which day, 31.
and the one and thirtieth, were very cold, with snow and hail: which did
pinch our sick men more then any time this year. This evening being May Even;
we returned late from our work to our house: and made a good fire, and chose
Ladies, and did ceremoniously wear their names in our Caps: endeavoring to
revive our selves by any means. And because you hear us in this merry humor;
I will make known to you what good cheer we kept at Christmas and Easter: and
how we had dieted our selves all the winter.

At our coming forth of England, we were stored with all sort of Sea
provisions: as Beef, Porke, Fish, etc. but now that we had little hope of
refreshing, our Cook did order it in this manner.

The Beef which was to serve on Sunday-night to Supper; he did boil on
Saterday-night, in a Kettle full of water, with a quart of Oaterneale, about an
hour: Then taking the Beef out, he boiled the rest till it came to half the
quantity: And this we called porridge: which with bread we did eat, as hot as
we could: and after this we had our ordinary of fish. Sunday dinner, we had
Porke and Pease: and at night the former boiled Beef made more porridge. In
this manner our Tuesdayes Beef was boiled on the Monday nights: and the
Thursdayes, upon the Wednesdayes. And thus all the week (except Friday night)
we had some warm thing in our bellies every supper. And (surely) this did us a
great deal of good. But soon after Christmas, many of us fell sick, and had
sore mouths: and could neither eat Beef, Porke, Fish, nor Porridge. Their
diet was only this: They would pound Bread, or Oatmeale in a mortar, to meal:
then fry it in a frying pan, with a little oil, and so eat it. Some would
boil Pease to a soft paste, and feed as well as they could, upon that. For the
most part of the winter, water was our drink. In the whole winter, we took
not above a doozen Foxes: many of which would be dead in the traps, two or
three days, oftentimes; and then when the blood was settled, they would be
unwholesome. But if we took one alive, that had not bin long in the trap, him
we boiled, and made broth for the weakest sick men of him: the flesh of it
being soft boiled they did eat also.

Some white partridges we killed: but not worth the mentioning toward any
refreshing.

We had three sorts of sickemen. Those that could not move nor turn themselves
in their Beds, who must be tended like an Infant. Others that were as it were
creepled with scuruy Aches. And others lastly, that were something better. Most
of all had sore mouths. You may now ask me, how these infirm men could
work? I will tell you: Our Surgeon (which was diligent, and a
sweet-conditioned man, as ever I saw) would be up betimes in the mornings; and
whilst he did pick their Teeth, and cut away the dead flesh from their
Gummes, they would bathe their own thighs, knees, and legs. The manner
whereof way this: There was no tree, bud, nor herb; but we made trial of it:
and this being first boiled in a Kettle, and then put in a small Tubs, and
Basins: they put it under them, and covering themselves with Clothes upon it;
this would so mollify the grieved parts, that although, when they did rise out
of their Beds, they would be so crippled, that they could scarce stand: yet
after this done half an hour, they would be able to go (and must go) to
wood, through the Snow, to the Ship, and about their other business. By night,
they would be as bad again: and then they must be bathed, anointed, and their
mouths again dressed, before they went to Bed. And with this diet, and in this
manner, did we go through our miseries.

I ever doubted, that we should be weakest in the Spring; and therefore had I
reserved a Tun of Alegant Wine unto this time. Of this, by putting seven parts
of water, to one of wine, we made some weak Beuerage: which (by reason that
the wine by being frozen, had lost his Virtue) was little better then water.
The sicker sort had a Pint of Alegant a day, by it self; and of such poor
Aqua vitae too, as we had, they had a little dram allowed them next their
hearts every morning; and thus we made the best use of what we had, according
to the seasons.

May, 1632.
The first, 1.
we went aboard betimes, to heave out the Ice.

The second, 2.
it did snow and blow, and was so cold, that we were feign to keep house all
day. This unexpected cold at this time of the year did so vex our sick men;
that they grew worse and worse: we cannot now take them out of their beds, but
they would swound: and we had much ado, to fetch life in them.

The third, 3.
those that were able, went aboard betimes to heave out the Ice. The Snow was
now melted in many places upon the Land, and stood in plashes: and now there
came some Cranes, and Geese to it.

The fourth, 4.
while the rest wrought aboard, I and the Surgeon went with a couple of pieces,
to see if we could kill any of these foul for our sick men, but never did I
see such wild-fowle: They would not endure to see any thing move. Wherefore we
returned within 2. hours, not being able to endure any longer stalking through
the snow, and the wet plashes. I verily thought that my feet and legs would
have fallen off, they did so torment me with aching.

The 6. John Wardon, 6.
the Master of my Ships chief Mate dyed, whom we buried in the Evening (in the
most Christian-like manner we could) upon the top of a bare hill of sand: which
we called Brandon Hill.

The weather continued very cold: freezing so hard in a night, that it would
bear a man.

By the 9. we were come to, 9.
and got up our five barrels of Beef and Porke, and had found 4. Buts of
Beer, and one of Cydar, which God had preserved for us: It had layne under
water all the winter; yet we could not perceive that it was any thing the
worse. God make us ever thankful for the comfort it gave us.

The 10. it did snow and blow so cold, 10.
that we could not stir out of the house: yet nevertheless, by day the snow
vanishes away apace on the land.

The 11. we were aboard betimes, 11. and 12.
to heave out Ice. By the 12. at night, we had cleared out all the Ice, out of
the Hold: and found likewise our store-shooes which had layne soakt in the
water all the winter: but we dried them by the fire, and fitted our selves with
them. We struck again our Cables into the Hold; there stowd we a But of Wine
also, which had been all the Winter on the upper deck, and continued as yet,
all firm frozen. We fitted the Ship also: making her ready to sink her
again, when the Ice brake up. We could hitherto find no defect in her: and
therefore well hoped, that she was stanche. The Carpenter, nevertheless, did
earnestly argue to the contrary: alleging, that now she lay on the ground, in
her Docke; and that the Ice had filled her defects: and that the Ice was the
thing that kept out the water: but when she should come to labor in the sea;
then doubtless, she would open. And indeed we could now see quite through her
seames, betwixt wind and water. But that which did trouble us as ill as all
this, was the loss of her Rudder: and that she now lay in the very strength of
the Tide: which, when ever the Ice drove, might tear her to pieces. But we
still hoped the best.

The 13. 13.
being the Sabbath Day, we solemnized; giving God thanks for those hopes and
comforts we daily had: The weather by daytime was pretty and warm: but it did
freeze by night: yet now we could see some bare patches of land.

The 14. 14.
we began a new sort of work. The Boateswaine and a convenient number sought
ashoare the rest of our Rigging: which was much spoyld by pecking of it out of
the Ice: and this they now fell to fitting, and to serving of it. I set the
Cooper to fit our Caske, although (poor man) he was very infirm: my intent
being, to pass some Cables under the Ship, and so to Buoy her up with these
Caske; if otherwise we could not get her off. Some others, I ordered to go
see, if they could kill some wild-fowle for our sick men: who now grew worse
and worse. And this is to be remembered, that we had no shot, but what we did
make of the Aprons of our Gunnes and some old pewter that I had: for the
Carpenters-sheet-lead, we durst not use.

The 15. I manured a little patch of ground, 15.
that was bare of snow; and sowed it with Peason: hoping to have some of the
herbs of them shortly, to eat: for as yet we can find no green thing to
comfort us.

The 18. our Carpenter William Cole dyed, 18.
a man generally bemoaned of us all: as much for his innate goodness, as for
the present necessity we had of a man of his quality. He had endured a long
sickness, with much patience, and made a very godly end. In the Evening, we
buried him by Master Wardon: accompanied with as many as could go: for 3. more
of our principal men, lay then expecting a good hour. And now were we in the
most miserable estate, that we were in all the voyage. Before his extreme
weakness, he had brought the Pinnace to that pass, that she was ready to be
boulted and trenneld; and to be joined together to receive the planke: so that
we were not so discouraged by his death, but that we did hope of our selves to
finish her: if the Ship proved unserviceable.

This our Pinnace was 27. foot by the Keele, 10. foot by the Beam, and 5. foot
in Hold: she had 17. ground timbers, 34. principal Staddles, and 8. short
Staddles. He had contrived Her with a round stern, to save labor: and indeed
she was a well proportioned Vessel. Her burden was 12. or 14. Tun.

In the Evening, the Master of our Ship, after burial returning aboard Ship,
and looking about her: discovered some part of our Gunner; under the Gun-roome
ports. This man, we had committed to the Sea at a good distance from the Ship,
and in deep water, near 6. months before.

The 19. in the morning, 19.
I sent men to dig him out, he was fast in the Ice, his head downwards, and
his heel upward, for he had but one leg; and the plaster was yet at his
wound: In the afternoon, they had digd him clear out: after all which time,
he was as free from noisomeness, as when we first committed him to the Sea.
This alteration had the Ice and water, and time only wrought on him: that his
flesh would slip up and down upon his bones, like a glove on a man's hand. In
the Evening we buried him by the others. This day, one George Vgganes (who
could handle a tool best of us all) had indifferent well repaired out boat:
and so we ended this mournful week. The snow was by this time prettily well
wasted in the woods: and we having a high tree, on the highest place of the
Island, which we called our watch-tree; from the top of it we might see into the
sea, but found no appearance of breaking up yet.

This 20. being Whit-Sunday, 20.
we sadly solemnized, and had some taste of the wilde-fowle: but not worth the
writing.

The one and twentieth, 21.
was the warmest Sunne-shine-day, that came this year. I sent 2. a-fowling:
and my self taking the Master, the Surgeon, and one more, with our pieces and
our Dogs, we went into the woods to see what comfort we could find. We
wandered from the house eight miles; and searched with all diligence: but
returned comfortless, not an herb nor leaf eatable, that we could find. Our
Fowlers had as bad success. In the woods, we found the Snow partly wasted
away, so that it was passable. The ponds were almost vnthawd: but the Sea from
any place we could see all firm frozen.

The snow does not melt away here with the Sun or rain; and so make any
land-floods; as in England: but it is exhaled up by the Sun, and sucked full
of holes, like honeycombs: so that the sand whereon it lies, will not be at all
wetted. The like observation we also had: that let it rain ever so much, you
shall see no land-floods after it.

The two and twentieth, 22.
we went aboard the Ship: and found that she had made so much water, that it
was now risen above the ballast, which made us doubt again of her soundness.
We fell to pumping, and pumpt her quite dry. And now by day sometimes, we have
such hot gloomes, that we cannot endure in the Sun: and yet in the night it
would freeze very hard. This unnaturalness of the season, did torment our men,
that they now grew worse and worse daily.

The three and twentieth, 23.
our Boat-swayne (a painful man) having been long sick, which he had
heartily resisted, was taken with such a painful ache in one of his thighs;
that we verily thought he would have presently dyed. He kept his bed all day in
great extremity: and it was a maxim amongst us; that if any one kept his bed
two days, he could rise no more. This made every man to strive to keep up,
for life.

The four and twentieth was very warm Sunshine: 24.
and the Ice did consume by the shores side, and cracked all over the Bay, with
a fearful noise. About three in the afternoon, we could perceive the Ice
with the ebb to drive by the Ship. Whereupon I sent two with all speed unto
the Master, with order: to beat out the hole, and to sink the Ship: as
likewise to look for the Rudder, betwixt the Ice. This he presently performed:
and a happy fellow, one David Hammon, pecking betwixt the Ice, struck upon it,
and it came up with his lance: who crying that he had found it, the rest came
and got it up on the Ice, and so into the Ship. In the mean space, with the
little drift that the Ice had, it began to rise and mount into high heaps
against the shoald shoares, and rocks: and likewise against the heap of Ice,
which we had put for a Barricado to our Ship: but with little harm to us. Yet
we were feign to cut away 20. faddome of Cable which was frozen in the Ice.
After an hour, the Ice settled again, as not having any vent outward. Oh!
this was a joyful day to us all: and we gave God thanks for the hopes we had
of it.

The five and twentieth was a fine warm day; 25
and with the ebb, the Ice did drive against the Ship, and shake her shrowdly.

The six and twentieth, 26.
I took the Surgeon with me, and went again to wander the woods: and went
to that Bay, where last year we had lost our man John Barton. But we could
find no sign of him, nor of other relief.

By the eight and twentieth it was pretty and clear, 28.
betwixt the Ship and the shore, and I hoped the Ice would no more dangerously
oppress us. Wherefore I caused the lower hole to be firmly stopped: the water
then remaining three foot, above the Ballast.

The nine and twentieth, 29.
being Prince Charles his birth day; we kept Holy Day, and displayed his
Majesty's Colors: both aland and aboard; and named our habitation Charles
Town; by contraction Charlton: and the Island, Charlton Island.

The thirtieth we lanched our Boat; 30.
and had intercourse sometimes betwixt the Ship and the shore by Boat: which
was news to us.

The last of this month, we found on the Beach some Vetches, to appear out of
the ground; which I made the men to pick up, and to boil for our sick men.

This day, we made an end of fitting all our Rigging and Sails: and it being a
very hot day, we did dry and new make our Fish in the Sun: and ayred all our
other provisions. There was not a man of us at present, able to eat of our
salt provisions, but my self and the Master of my Ship. It may be here
remembered, that all this Winter we had not been troubled with any rhumes, nor
flegmaticall diseases. All this month the wind has been variable, but for
the most part Northerly.

June. 1632.
The four first days, it did snow, hail, and blow very hard; and was so
cold, that the Ponds of water did freeze over: and the water in our Cans did
freeze in the very house: our clothes also that had been washed and hung out
to dry, did not thaw all day.

The fifth, 5.
it continued blowing very hard in the broad side of the Ship: which did make
her swag and wallow in her Docke for all she was sunken: which did much shake
her. The Ice withal did drive against her, and gave her many fearful blows.
I resolved to endeavor to hang the Rudder; and when God sent us water,
(notwithstanding the abundance of Ice that was yet about us) to have her
further off: In the afternoon, we vnder-run our small Cable to our Anchor,
which lay a-Sterne in deep water; and so with some difficulty gate up our
Anchor: This Cable had lain slack underfoot, and under the Ice, all the
Winter: and we could never have a clear slatch from Ice, to have it up,
before now; we found it not a jot the worse. I put some to make Colrakes; that
they might go into the water, and rake a hole in the sands to let down our
Rudder.

The sixth, 6.
we went about to hang it. And our young lustiest men took turns, to go into
the water, and to rake away the sand: but they were not able to endure the cold
of it half a quarter of an hour, it was so mortifying: yea, use what comforts
we could, it would make them swound and dye away. We brought it to the
Sternepost: but were then feign to give it over, being able to work at it no
longer. Then we plugg'd up the upper holes, within board: and fell to pumping
the water again out of her.

The seventh we wrought something about our Rudder, 7.
but were again forced to give over; and to put out our Cables ouer-boord,
with Messengers unto them: the Ankers lying to that pass, that we might keep
her right in her docke, when we should have brought her light.

By the eighth at night, 8.
we had pumpt all the water out of her: and she at a high water would fleet in
her docke, though she were still dockt in the sands, almost fourefoot. This
made us to consider what was to be done. I resolved to heave out all the
Ballast: for that the bottom of her being so soakt all the winter, I hoped was
so heavy, that it would bear her. If we could not get her off that way, I then
thought to cut her down to the lower deck, and take out her Masts: and so
with our Caske to Buoy her off.

The ninth, 9.
betimes in the morning we fell to work, we hoyst out our Beer and Cydar,
and made a raft of it; fastening it to our shoare-Anker: The Beer and Cydar
sunk presently to the ground: which was nothing strange to us; for that any
wood or pipe-slaues that had layne under the Ice all the winter, would also
sink down, so soon as ever it was heaued ouer-boord: This day we heaued out
ten tun of Ballast. And here I am to remember Gods goodness toward us: in
sending those forementioned green Vetches. For now our feeble sick men, that
could not for their lives stir these two or three months, can endure the air
and walk about the house: our other sick men gather strength also: and it is
wonderful to see how soon they were recovered. We used them in this manner:
Twice a day we went to gather the herb or leaf of these Vetches, as they
first appeared out of the ground: then did we wash and boil them, and so with
Oil and Vinegar that had been frozen, we did eat them: It was an excellent
sustenance and refreshing: the most part of us ate nothing else: we would
likewise bruise them, and take the Juice of them, and mix that with our
drink: we would eat them raw also, with our bread.

The eleventh was very warm weather, 11.
and we did hang our Rudder. The tides did now very much deceive us: for a
Northerly wind would very little raise the water. This made us doubt of getting
off our Ship.

The thirteenth I resolved of the Latitude of this place, 13.
so that having examined the Instruments, and practiced about it this
Fortnight, I now found it to be in 52 degrees, and 3 minutes.

The foureteenth we had heaued out all the Ballast, 14.
and carried all our Yards, and every thing else of weight ashoare, so that we
now had the Ship as light as possible it could be.

The fifteenth we did little but exercise our selves: 15.
seeing that by this time, our men that were most feeble, are now grown
strong, and can run about. The flesh of their gummes became settled again,
and their teeth fastened: so that they can eat Beef with their Vetches.

This day I went to our Watch-tree: but the Sea (for any thing I could perceive
to the contrary) was still firm frozen: and the Bay we were in, all full of
Ice, having no way to vent it.

The sixteenth was wondrous hot, 16.
with some thunder and lightning, so that our men did go into the ponds
ashoare, to swim and cool themselves: yet was the water very cold still.
Here had lately appeared diverse sorts of flies: as Butterflyes, Butchers-flyes,
Horseflyes: and such an infinite abundance of bloodthirsty Muskitoes, that we
were more tormented with them, then ever we were with the cold weather. These
(I think) lie dead in the old rotten wood all the winter, and in summer they
revive again. Here be likewise infinite company of Ants, and Frogs in the
ponds upon the land: but we durst not eat of them; they looked so speckled like
Toads. By this time were there neither Bears, Foxes, nor Foul to be seen:
they are all gone.

The seventeenth, 17.
the wind came Northerly, and we expecting a high Tide, in the morning
betimes, put out our small Cable asterne out at the Gun-roome-port: but the
morning Tide we had not water by a foot. In the Evening I had laid marks, by
stones, etc. and me thoughts the water did flow apace. Making signs therefore
for the Boat to come ashoare; I took all that were able to do any thing with
me aboard: and at high water (although she wanted something to rise clear out
of her docke) yet we heau'd with such a good will, that we heaued her through
the sand into a foot and a half deeper water. Further then so, we durst not
yet bring her, for that the Ice was all thick about us. After we had moored
her, we went all to prayers: and gave God thanks, that had given us our ship
again.

The 18th. 18.
we were up betimes: the Cooper, and some with him, to fill fresh water: my
self with some others, to gather stones at low water; which we pyling up in a
heap, at high water the Cock-swaine and his Ging, fetched them aboard: where
the Master with the rest stood them. The Ship at low water had a great lust to
the offing: by which means we could the better come and stop the two upper
holes firmly: after which we fitted other convenient places, to make others to
sink her, if occasion were.

The ninteenth, 19.
we were all up betimes to work, as before specified: these two days, our Ship
did not fleet: and it was a happy hour, when we got her off, for that we never
had such a high Tide all the time we were here. In the Evening, I went up to
our Watch tree: and this was the first time I could see any open water, any
way: except that little by the shoareside, where we were. This put us in some
comfort, that the Sea would shortly break up: which we knew must be to the
Northward; seeing that way we were certain, there was above two hundred
leagues of Sea.

The 20. 20.
we labored as aforesaid. The wind at N. N. W. The tide rose so high, that
our Ship fleeted, and we drew her further off, into a foot and a half deep
water. Thus we did it by little and little; for that the Ice was still
wonderful thick about us.

The 22. 22.
there drove much Ice about us, and within us, and brought home our
Sterne-Anker. At high water (notwithstanding all the Ice) we heau'd our Ship
further off: that so she might lie aflote at low water.

The next low water, we sounded all about the Ship: and found it very foul
ground, we discovered stones 3. foot high, above the ground, and 2. of them
within a Ships breadth of the Ship: whereby did more manifestly appear Gods
mercies to us: for if when we forced her ashoare, she had strooken one blow
against those stones, it had bulged her. Many such dangers were there in this
Bay: which we now first perceived, by the Ices grounding and rising against
them. In the Evening, we towed off the Ship, unto the place she rid the last
year, and there moord her. Shering the Ship, night and day, flood and ebb,
amongst the dispersed Ice that came athwart of us.

The 23. 23.
we labored in fetching our provisions aboard: which to do, we were feign to
wade to carry it to the boat a full flight-shot: and all by reason the wind
was Southerly. This morning, I took an Observation of the Moons coming to
the South, by a Meridian line of 120. yards long: which I had rectified many
weeks beforehand.

The 24. 24.
I took another Observation of the Moons coming to the Meridian: for which I
refer you to the observations in the latter end of this Iournall.

Whereas I had formerly cut down a very high tree, and made a Cross of it, to
it I now fastened (uppermost) the Kings and Queens Majesty's Pictures; drawn
to the life: and doubly wrapped in lead, and so close, that no weather could hurt
them. Betwixt both these I affixed his Majesty's Royal Title: Viz. Charles the
first King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland: as also of New Foundland,
and of these Territories, and to the Westward, as far as Nova Albion, and to
the Northward to the Latitude of 80. degrees, etc.

On the outside of the lead, I fastened a shilling and a sixepence of his
Majesty's Coin: under that, we fastened the Kings Arms, fairly cut in lead:
and under that, the Arms of the City of Bristoll. And this being
Midsummer-Day, we raised it on the top of the bare Hill, where we had buried
our dead fellows: formally by this ceremony taking possession of these
Territories, to his Majesty's use.

The wind continuing Southerly and blowing hard, put all the Ice upon us: so
that the Ship now rid amongst it, in such apparent danger, that I thought
verily we should have lost her. We labored, flood and ebb, both with poles
and oars, to heave away and part the Ice from her. But it was God that did
protect and preserve us: for it was past any man's understanding, how the Ship
could endure it, or we by our labor save her. In the night, the wind shifted
to the Westward, and blew the Ice from us: whereby we had some rest.

The 25. 25.
in the morning, the Boate-swayne with a convenient crew with him, began to
rigge the Ship: the rest fetching our provisions aboard. About 10. a clock,
when it was something dark, I took a Lance in my hand; and one with me with a
Musket and some fire, and went to our watch-tree; to make a fire on the
eminentest place of the Island: to see if it would be answered: Such fires I had
formerly made, to have knowledge if there were any Saluages on the maine or the
Islands about us. Had there been any, my purpose was to have gone to them, to
get some intelligence of some Christians, or some Ocean Sea thereabouts. When I
was come to the tree, I laid down my Lance, and so did my Consort his Musket:
and whilst my self climed up to the top of the tree, I ordered him to put
fire unto some low tree therabouts. He, (unadvisedly) put fire to some trees
that were to wind-ward: so that they (and all the rest too by reason it had
been very hot weather) being sear and dry, took fire like flax or hemp:
and the wind blowing the fire toward me, I made haste down the tree. But
before I was half way down, the fire took in the bottom of it, and blazed so
fiercely upwards, that I was feign to leap off the tree, and down a steep
hill, and in brief, with much ado, escapt burning. The moss on the ground
was as dry as flax: and it would run most strangely, and like a train along
the earth. The Musket and the Lance were both burnt. My Consort at last came to
me, and was joyful to see me: for he thought verily I had bin burned. And thus
we went homeward together, leaving the fire increasing, and still burning most
furiously. We could see no answer of it. I slept but little all night after:
and at break of day, I made all our Powder and Beef, to be carried aboard.
This day, I went to the hills, to look to the fire: where I saw how it did
still burn most furiously: both to the Westward, and Northward: leaving one
upon the hills to watch it, I came home immediately, and made them take down
our new suite of sails, and carry them to the seas-side, ready to be cast in,
if occasion were, and to make haste to take down our houses. About noone, the
wind shifted Northerly; and our Sentinel came running home, bringing us word
that the fire did follow him at hard heels, like a train of powder. It was no
need to bid us take down and carry all away to the seaside. The fire came
toward us with a most terrible rattling noise: bearing a full mile in breadth:
and by that time we had uncovered our houses and laid hand on, to carry away
our last things: the fire was come to our Town and seized on it, and (in a
trice) burnt it down to the ground. We lost nothing of any value in it: for we
had brought it all away into a place of security. Our dogs, in this
combustion, would sit down on their tails, and howl, and then run into the
Sea, on the shoalds, and there stay. The wind shifted Easterly: and the fire
ranged to the Westward, seeking what it might devour. This night, we lay all
together aboard the Ship, and gave God thanks, that had Shipped us in her again.

The twenty seven, 27.
twenty eight, and twenty nine; we wrought hard, in fetching our things
aboard, as likewise our water, which we must towe off with the ebb, and bring
it to the Ship with the flood. Moreover, we must go about the Easter-point for
drift-wood: for our tools were all so spent, that we could cut none.
Wherefore, about some three days agone, I had caused our Pinnace to be sawed
to pieces, and with that we stowed our Caske, intending to burn it at low
waters, and such other times, as we could not work in carrying things aboard.
I employed the men in fetching stones: and we did build three Tombs over our
three dead fellows; filling them up with sand in a decent and handsome
fashion. The least Tomb, had two tons of stones about it.

The thirtieth, we most earnestly continued our labor: and brought our sails
to yard: and by eleven a clock at night had made a priddy Ship: meaning to
have finished our business with the week and the month, that so we might the
better solemnize the Sabbath ashoare to morrow, and so take leave of our
wintering Island.

The wind has been variable a great while: and the Bays are now so clear of
Ice, that we cannot see a piece of it: for it was all gone to the Northward.
Hoping therefore that it give content to some Readers: I will relate the manner
of the breaking of it up. It is first to be noted, that it does not freeze
(naturally) above six foot: the rest, is by accident. Such is that Ice that
you may see here, six faddome thick. This we had manifest proof of, by our
digging the Ice out of the Ship: and by digging to our Ankers, before the Ice
broke up.

In May, when the heat increases, it thawes first on the shoald by the shore
side: which when it has done round about, then the courses of the tides (as
well by the ebb and flood, as by their rising and falling) do so shake the
maine Ice, that it cracks and breaks it. Thus, when it has gotten room for
motion; then runs one piece of it upon another: and so bruises and grinds it
self against the shoalds and rocks, that it becomes abbreuiated, insomuch that
a Ship may have well passage through it. Besides this; much of it is thrust upon
the shoalds, where it is much consumed by the heat of the Sun. The season
here in this Climate, is most unnatural: for in the day time, it will be
extreme hot: yea not indurable in the Sun, which is, by reason that it is a
sandy country. In the night again, it will freeze an inch thick in the
ponds, and in the tubs about and in our house: And all this, toward the latter
end of June.

The Muskitoes upon our coming away, were most intolerable. We tore an old
Ancient in pieces, and made us bags of it to put our heads in: but it was no
fortification against them. They would find ways and means to sting us, that
our faces were swollen hard out in pumples, which would so itch and smart, that
we must needs rub and tear them. And these flies, indeed, were more
tormenting to us, then all the cold we had heretofore endured.

July. 1632.
The first of this month being Sunday, we were up betimes. And I caused our
Ship to be adorned the best we could: our Ancient on the Poope, and the Kings
Colors in the maine top. I had provided a short brief of all the passages of
our voyage to this day: I likewise wrote in what state we were at present, and
how I did intend to prosecute the discovery, both to the Westward, and to the
Southward, about this Island. This Brief discourse I had concluded, with a
request to any Noble minded Trauaylor that should take it down, or come to the
notice of it: that if we should perish in the Action, then to make our
endeavors known to our Sovereign Lord the King. And thus with our Arms,
Drum and Colors, Cook and Kettle, we went ashoare, and first we marched up
to our eminent Cross, adjoining to which we had buried our dead fellows.
There we read morning prayer, and then walked up and down till dinner time.
After dinner we walked to the highest Hills, to see which way the fire had
wasted. We descryed that it had consumed to the Westward, sixteen miles at
least, and the whole breadth of the Island: near about our Cross and dead, it
could not come: by reason it was a bare sandy Hill. After Evening prayer, I
happened to walk along the Beach side: where I found an herb resembling
Scuruy-grasse. I made some to be gathered: which we boyld with our meat to
supper: It was most excellent good, and far better them our Vetches. After
supper we went all to seek and gather more of it: which we did, to the
quantity of two bushels which did afterward much refresh us: And now the Sun
was set, and the Boat comne ashoare for us: whereupon we assembled our selves
together, and went up to take the last view of our dead, and to look unto
their Tombs, and other things: here leaning upon mine arm, on one of their
Tombs I uttered these lines, which though perchance they may procure laughter
in the wiser sort (which I shall be glad of) they yet moved my young and
tenderhearted companions at that time with some compassion. And these they
were.

I Were unkind, unless that I did shead,
Before I part, some tears upon our dead:
And when my eyes be dry, I will not cease
In heart to pray, their bones may rest in peace:
Their better parts, (good souls) I know were given,
With an intent they should return to heaven.
Their lives they spent, to the last drop of blood,
Seeking Gods glory, and their Countries good,
And as a valiant Soldier rather dies,
Then yields his courage to his Enemies:
And stops their way, with his hewed flesh, when death
Has quite deprived him of his strength and breath:
So have they spent themselves; and here they lie,
A famous mark of our Discovery.
We that survive, perchance may end our days
In some employment meriting no praise;
And in a dunghill rot: when no man names
The memory of us, but to our shames.
They have out-liu'd this fear, and their brave ends,
Will ever be an honor to their friends.
Why drop ye so, mine eyes? Nay rather power
My sad departure in a solemn shower.
The Winters cold, that lately froze our blood,
Now were it so extreme, might do this good,
As make these tears, bright pearls: which I would lay,
Tomb'd safely with you, till Doomes fatal day.
That in this Solitary place, where none
Will ever come to breathe a sigh or groan,
Some remnant might be extant, of the true
And faithful love, I ever tenderd you.
Oh, rest in peace, dear friends, and let it be
No pride to say the sometime part of me.
What pain and anguish does afflict the head,
The heart and stomach, when the limbs are dead:
So grieved, I kiss your graves: and vow to dye,
A Foster-father to your memory.
Farewell.

So fastening my brief to the Cross, which was securely wrapped up in Lead: we
presently took Boat and departed: and never put foot more on that Island. This
Island and all the rest, (as likewise the maine) is a light white sand; covered
over with a white moss, and full of shrubs and low bushes: excepting some bare
hills, and other patches. In these bare places, the sand will drive with the
wind like dust. It is very full of trees, as Spruse and Juniper: but the
biggest tree I saw, was but a foot and a half over. At our first coming
hither, we saw some Dear and killed one: but never any since. Foxes, all the
winter we saw many, and killed some dozen of them: but they went all away in May.
Bears we saw but few, but killed none: we saw some other little beasts. In May
there came some foul, as Duckes and Geese: of which we killed very few. White
Partridges we saw; but in small quantities: nor had we any shot, to shoot at
them. Fish we could never see any in the Sea: nor no bones of fish on the
shore side: excepting a few Cockle-shels: and yet nothing in them neither.
Other things remarkable I have before mentioned.

OUR DISCOVERY and coming Home.
July, 1632.
Monday being the second of July, we were up betimes: about Stowing and fitting
our Ship, and waying of our Ankers, which when the last was a trippe, we went
to prayer, beseeching God to continue his mercies to us, and rendering him
thanks for having thus restored us. Our Ship we found no defect in; we had
abundance of such provisions, as we brought out of England: and we were in
indifferent health, and did gather strength daily. This being done, we wayed,
and came cheerfully to sail. The wind at North-west, bad to get away.
Wherefore we stood over to Danby Island, to take in more wood; and there to be
ready to take the opportunity of a fair wind. I went ashoare my self with
the Boat: for that some of the company had told me, they had seen some stakes
the last year drouen into the ground. When we came ashoare, whilst some
gatherd wood, I went to the place: where I found two stakes, drouen into the
ground about a foot and a half, and firebrands, where a fire had been made
by them. I pulled up the stakes, which were about the bigness of my arm; and
they had been cut sharp at the ends, with a hatchet, or some other good Iron
tool, and driven in as it were with the head of it. They were distant about a
stones-throw, from the water side. I could not conceive, to what purpose they
should be there set; unless it were for some mark for boats. This did augment
my desire, to speak with the Saluages: for without doubt they could have given
notice of some Christians, with whom they had some commerce. About 4. in the
Evening, I returned aboard with a boats lading of wood: and the wind something
favoring, we wayde; with our lead seeking out a Channel amongst these
perilous shoalds. In the Evening, the wind opposing it self; we came to Anchor
betwixt Charleton Island, and that Island we named the last year, (in memory of
that Honorable Gentleman Master Thomas Carry, one of the Bedchamber to the
King) Caries Island: where we rid all night.

The 3. at break of day, 3.
we wayde with a bare wind, and sounding up and down for a Channel, we were
many times in 5. and 4 fad. water. The wind larging upon us, we stood away
West: by noone, we saw all Ice to the Northward of us. Indeauouring,
therefore, to compass about the Westerpoint of Charleton Island: and so to
seek to the Southward: We found it all shoalds, Rocks, and breaches. By 4.
in the afternoon, we saw the Western-land; but all full of Ice: whereupon, as
the wind favored us, we stood along it in sight to the Northward.

The fourth was calm, but so very thick fogge withal, 4.
that we could not see a Pistoll-shot about us. Wherefore we came to an Anchor,
and there rid all this day and the next night.

The fifth, 5.
at three in the morning, we waide: but Ice being all about us, we knew not
which way to turn us now to avoid telling the same thing 20 times: we were
continually, till the 22. so pestered and tormented with Ice; that it would
seem incredible to relate it: sometimes we were so blinded with fogge, that we
could not see about us: and being now become wilful in our endeavors, we
should so strike against the Ice, that the forepart of the Ship would crack
again; and make our Cook and others to run up all amazed, and think the
Ship had been beaten all to pieces. Indeed we did hourly strike such
unavoidable blows, that we did leave the hatches open, and 20. times in a day,
the men would run down into the hold, to see if she were bulged.

Sometimes, when we had made her fast in the night, to a great piece of Ice; we
should have such violent storms, that our fastening would break: and then the
storm would beat us from piece to piece most fearfully: Other-while, we
should be fast enclosed amongst great Ice, as high as our poope. This was made
(as I have formerly said) by one piece running upon another: which made it draw
8. or 10. fad* water. Besides which, the lower-most would rise from underneath,
and strike us under the bulge, with pieces of 5. 6. yea of 8. tun, that many
times we have pumpt clear water for an hour together, before we could make
the pumpe suck* Amongst these several and hourly dangers, I ouer-heard the
men murmr; and say that they were happy that I had buried: and that if they
had a thousand pounds, they would give it, so they lay fairly by them: for we
(say they) are destined to starve upon a piece of Ice. I was feign to endure
all this with patience: and to comfort them up again, when I had them in a
better humor.

The 22. having been vexed with a storm all last night, 22.
and this morning with a thick fogge; we drove in 13. faddome water. About
noone, it cleared; and we saw the land: and at the instant, had a good
observation: whereby we knew it to be Cape Henrietta Maria. I made the Master
stand in with it; and in the mean time we fitted a Cross, and fastened the
Kings Arms, and the Arms of the City of Bristoll to it; we came to an Anchor
within a mile of the shore, in 6. fadd. water: so we hoyst out the boat, and
took our Arms and our Dogs, and went ashoare. Upon the most eminent place, we
erected the Cross: and then seeking about, we soon saw some Dear; and by and
by more and more. We stole to them with the best skill we had, and then put our
Dogs on them: but the Dear ran clear away from them at pleasure. We tired
the Dogs, and wearied our selves, but to no purpose: neither could we come to
shoot at them. I saw in all, about a dozen (old and young) very goodly beasts.
We took half a doozen young Geese, on the pooles, by wading in to them; and
so returned to our Boat vexed, that now we had found a place where there was
refreshing, and we could get none of it. Whereas, therefore, we had kept our
Dogs with a great deal of inconvenience aboard the Ship, all the winter; and
had pardoned them many misdemeanors, (for they would steal our meat out of
the steeping tubs) in hope they might hereafter do us some service: and seeing
they now did not; and that there was no hope they could hereafter: I caused
them to be left ashoare. They were a Dog and a Bitch: Bucke Dogs, of a very
good race. The Dog had a collar about his neck, which it may be hereafter,
may come to light. I did see no sign at all, of any Saluages: nor could we
find any herbs, or other refreshing here.

In the Evening, (being returned aboard) and the wind blowing fair at South;
I caused the Master to weight, and come to sail, and to lose no time. For we
did hope for an open Sea to the North-west. This Cape has a very shoald point,
that lies off it: which we indeauoured to compass about.

Sailing therefore amongst shattered Ice, we came to very shoald water, (4. and
5. faddome deep) and could not avoid it. At length, standing North, the water
deepened; but we came withal amongst great pieces of Ice; which by reason of
some open water, there went a pretty sea. These hard pieces of Ice, made a most
fearful noise. It proved a fair Moone-shine night: otherwise it had gone ill
with us. We turned amongst this Ice, staying the Ship sometimes within her
length, of great pieces, as bad as Rocks: but by reason we were often forced to
bear up, we did sagge upon the maine rand of Ice, and that we thought would it
be worse for us; we let fall an Anchor, and stood all on the decks to watch the
Ices sheering of the Ship, (to and again) to avoid it. Thus having poles and
oars to fend it, we could not keep our selves so clear, but many pieces came
foul of us. We brake two of our great poles with it: which were made to be
handled by four men, besides some other damages. At break of day, we wayed;
and sought all ways to clear our selves of Ice: but it was impossible. I
conceive it impertinent to relate every particular days passages; which was
much alike to us. Our endeauours were sometimes with our sails; giving and
receiving 500. fearful blows in a day. Sometimes, we would stop at an Anchor,
when we could get a little open water: and so suffer the Ice to drive to
Leeward: Other-whiles, we should be enclosed amongst it; and then it would so
break, and rise, and leap up under us; that we expected to be beaten every
hour to pieces.

Moreover, we should have such storms in the dark nights, that would break
the moorings we had made fast to some piece of Ice for security in the night
season: and then we should beat most dangerously from piece to piece till
daylight, that we could see to make her fast again. I forbear to speak of
thick fogges which we had daily; which did freeze our Rigging day and night:
Besides all which, we should come into most uncertain depths: sometimes 20.
faddome: next cast 10. next 15. then 9. Rocky foul ground. The great deep Ice
withal, driving on these uncertain depths, did so distract the tides, and
deceive us so much in our accounts, 30.
that by the thirtieth we were driven back so far, to the Eastward, and to
the Southward of the Cape; that at five a clock in the evening, it bare
North-west of us some three leagues off, contrary to our expectations. With all
these mischiefs, our Ship is now becomne very leaky: that we must pumpe every
half watch. Here I called a consultation: and after consideration of all our
experience, we were all of the same opinion; that it was impossible to get to
the Northward, or to the Eastward; by reason of the Ice. Wherefore I resolved
upon this course: When the wind blew South, it would blow the Ice off the
South shore, then we would seek to get to the Westward, betwixt it and the
shore. I must confess that this was a desperate resolution: for all the coast
we knew to be shoald and foul ground, all rocks, and stones: so that if the
wind should shift to the Northward, there would be (without Gods mercies)
little hope of us. But here we must not stay: The nights grew long; the cold so
increased, that betwixt the pieces of Ice, the Sea would be frozen. I caused
the Ship to be fitted, and places convenient again prepared to sink her the
second time, if so be we were put to extremities. We presently put our project
in execution (the wind being at South) and got about the shoalds of the Cape;
standing then into the shoare-ward, to get betwixt it and the Ice: we came into
four faddome water (very foul rocky ground) thinking to come to an Anchor all
night, and let the Ice drive to Leeward. But still there was so much Ice
betwixt us and the shore, that we were feign to bear up amongst it into
deeper water, and to let the Ship drive amongst it. The wind increasing, we
endured a most dangerous dark night of it. In the morning. we fell to work,
to get the Ship again out of the Ice into some clear water, which we saw West
by South of us. Some of our company out upon the Ice, to heave her with their
shoulders: whilst others stood aboard with poles. The rest stood to spill and
fill the sail. By nine in the morning, we had gotten into some clear water:
and stood West and by South; and into four faddome water, foul ground. But
being not able to weather some rands of Ice, which did drive; we were feign to
stand off again, and (when the evening grew dark) to come to an Anchor.

About midnight, there came a great piece of Ice, (which we could not avoid)
athwart of our Cable; and made the Ship drive and dragge her Anchor. This drove
her into shoald water, it being very rocky and foul ground. We brought the
Cable to Capstang, and heau'd with such a courage, that we heau'd home our
Anchor from under it. Thus we did endeavor (the best we could) to keep our
selves in eight and ten faddome water. It then pleased God, that the wind blew
along the shore: otherwise it had gone far worse with us.

August. 1632.
The first of this month at break of day, when we could see a little about
us, 1.
we fell to struggle and strive again with the Ice; and to get in nearer to
the shore. There, by reason the wind was opposite to come to an Anchor, we let
the Ice drive to Leeward: hoping that there was a clear Sea to the Westward.
The Ice drove very thick upon us, and one piece came foul of us; which did
touch our Spreet-sayle Yard, and made the Ship drive: But we soon cleared our
selves of it. Then we wayed, and stood in nearer to the shore: but the water
shoalded, and there were so many great rands of Ice betwixt us and the shore,
that there was no coming to an Anchor. So we turned betwixt the Ice: many
pieces of it being aground in shoald water; and few pieces distant one from the
other a Cables length. This day, we saw two Sea Morses on the Ice.

The second in the morning, 2.
we were glad of the break of day: having most dangerously turned amongst the
Ice all night, and endured many a heavy blow. We stood in again to the
shoare-ward; to see if we could get some clear water: for to the Northward it
was all impassable Ice. We stood into five aad four faddome: but still all
incompast with Ice. So we stood off again into deeper water: and in the
Evening we were enclosed amongst extraordinary great pieces. It was a very
thick fogge withal: so that we made fast the Ship to a great flat piece, and
went to sleep and refresh our selves after our extreme pains taking.

The third, fourth and fifth, 3. 4. and 5.
we were enclosed amongst very great Ice: and it blew such a storm of wind,
that we sometimes indeuouring to get forward to the Westward, did strike such
heavy blows, that made all the forepart of the Ship crack again. Then we
would give over working and let her alone amongst it; but then the Ice would
break and rise under us, that would endanger as bad us as the former. Our ship
does make above a tun of water every watch, which we must pumpe out, beside our
other labor. God think on us, and be merciful to us amongst all these
dangers.

The fifth at noone, 5.
we were in Latitude 55. 30. The Cape bearing off us South-East, by East, some
twelve leagues off. And this is all we have gotten, since the two and twentieth
of July. All night it blew a violent gale of wind, at West, North-West: and
about midnight, our hawser (by which we had made fast to a piece of Ice) broke,
and we lost 14. faddome of it. We beat all night most fearfully, being tossed
from piece to piece, because that in the dark we durst not venture our men to
go forth on the Ice, for fear of losing them.

All the sixth, 6.
the storm endured, and drove us again with the Ice, almost to the Cape.

The seventh was the most comfortablest day we had, 7.
since we came out of our wintering place; the wind came up fair at East; and
we got (although with our former inconveniences and dangers) nearer to the
shore, and into some open water, making good way to the Westward. Moreover,
our leake now stopped of its own accord: so that now we pumpt but little. We
sayld all night; keeping good watch on the forecastell: bearing up for one, and
looffing for another.

Thus did we the eighth also, but then the wind shifting to the North-west, it
drove the Ice on the shore: and we came to an Anchor, in eight faddom water.
The maine Ice, we had some two mile to windward of us: but the set of the tide
kept it off from us. At noone we were in Latitude 55. 34. In the Evening, a
range of Ice drove upon us, which made us weigh, and stand in nearer the
shore, into six faddom, and there to come to an Anchor. The wind increasing
about midnight, the Ship did drive, and was quickly in five faddom water:
wherefore we let fall our Shoot-Anker; and both held her. But that that
troubled us, was, that was expected every minute, when the maine Ice would come
upon us: and then there would be no hope, but to be put ashoare.

The ninth, 9.
in the morning, we waide our second Anchor: the Ice being within less then a
mile of us. About eight in the morning, a point of it came foul of us: which
we prevented, by waying, and came to an Anchor in three faddom and a half
water. The wind continued North North-West, which was in on the shore. This
morning, I caused all our empty Caske to be filled with water, and the Ship to be
left vnpumpt: and the places looked to, that we had prepared to sink her. For
we were at present in as apparent danger, as any time this voyage: and (to our
great griefs) it was all foul rocky ground. The danger of this was, if we
made fast to a piece of Ice that drew deep water; then, as soon as it came to
ground on these rocks, it would break all to pieces, and betray us to our
destruction. About noone, there came foul of us the point of a range of Ice;
which we resolved to endure the extremity of, with an Anchor: thinking to ride,
and break through it, we now perceiving some open water beyond it. Thrusting
therefore, and fending with our poles; at last a great piece came thwart our
hawser, and there went a pretty Sea amongst it. The Ship did now fall upon it
so violently, that I expected every blow, she would beat out her bows. At
length, she did drive with it, so that I thought the Cable had bin broken. We
brought it to Capstang to heave it in: but found that our Shoote-Anker was
broken in the middle of the shanke. We presently set our sails thereupon:
indeuouring that way to edge in amongst the Ice off of this perilous shore. It
pleased God to favor our labor so, that by eight in the Evening we got off
into seven faddom: and a dark night coming on, we made fast to the biggest
piece we could find. It blew fairly all night: but about midnight, the wind
came up at North, which was more on the shore then before. 10.
By break of day, on the tenth, we were driven into four faddom, very foul
ground: so that the lead did fall off the rocks three or four foot, we set
our sails, and used our uttermost endeavors to edge off. Some of us went upon
the Ice to hale her: others stood with poles to thrust by night. At night we
had gotten off, into eight faddom: and made fast to the biggest piece we could
find. If any man should ask why we now kept so near to the shore, in this
continual danger: I answer; Because that in the offing, the Ice was so
extraordinary thick, that we could make no way, any way through it. Moreover,
when we were in that great thick Ice, and that the wind came up fair at
South or South-East or East, we could not get out of it. Wherefore we chose to
run this adventure; and so prevent and overcome all dangers with Gods
assistance and our extreme labor.

The eleventh in the morning was a thick fog: 11.
yet there sprung up a gale of wind at East: and we made in for the shore.

From the eleventh till the foureteenth, the wind continued fair: and we made
all the sail we could (night and day) as the Ice would suffer us. We had the
shore in sight by day, on one side, and the Ice within two miles, on the
other: and we saild amongst dispersed pieces; luffing for one, and bearing up
for another.

The 14. at noone, 14.
we were in Latitude 57. 55. In the Evening, we were imbayed in Ice; and stood
S. W. to clear our selves of it, but could not. But seeing from topmast head,
clear water over it, we put into it: but there rose a very thick fogge, and
night came on withal, that we were feign to fast to a piece of Ice, expecting
day and better weather.

The 15. in the morning, (although the fogge was very thick) we indeauoured to
get out of the Ice, and stood away West: but within 2. hours the water
shoalded from 40. faddome to 25. whereby we knew that we had the shoalding of
the Western-shoare. Then we shapte our course to the Northward; the fogge
continuing so thick, that we could not see a Pistoll-shot about us. We had not
stood this way 2. hours, but we heard the rut of the Ice ahead of us, which
made the most hideous noise, of any we had heard this voyage. We haled our
tackes aboard, and stood to the Westward, in this day darkness: hearing of it
sometimes, and sometimes seeing of it: which was very large, deep, and high
Ice, above the water. We weathered it all, except some few pieces, and got into
open water. About Sunne-set, there came a sudden gust at N. N. W. and before we
could handle our sails, it was with us, and put us to some trouble. It dallied
with us by gusts, till 9. a clock: and then it fell into a most violent
storm. We considered where we might have the cleerest drift: and so took in
all, and let her drive, her head to the shoare-ward. Before midnight, the
water shoalded on us, to 15. fadd. Then we turned her head to the Eastward: and
set our maine Course low set, but as much as she could endure. The water
deepned but little; and we knew that we were on those rockie shoalds, which we
struck on the last year. God be merciful to us. Here was the first great
breaking Sea that we had this year.

The 16. 16.
in the morning, we were driven to a great Rand of Ice; to avoyde which, we set
our fore-course too: and stood to the shoare-ward, in 13. fad. water: and then
about again. We stood in, a mile into the Ice: but there went such a great
swelling Sea in it, that it was not indurable: so we stood out again. About 3.
a clock in the afternoon, the storm broke up; and blew fair at N. W. which
proved good for us: for we had not drift for 4. hours: Besides, it was but 2.
leagues betwixt the shoalds and the Ice. We set all our sails, and indeauoured
to weather the Ice: but in the Evening we were still pestered with it. By
midnight, we knew not which way to turn; nor what to do: so we took in all
our sails, and let her drive amongst it. The Ice beat us on every side: for
there went amongst it a very great full Sea.

The 17. 17.
in the morning, when we could see about us; we were in the midst of the Ice:
but with the last storm it was all broken into mammocks, as big as a boat of
3. or 4. Tons, which did give us many a heavy blow in the dark night. If
this storm had taken us amongst it, it had beaten us all to pieces, without
Gods miraculous preservation. We made sail, and indeauoured to clear our
selves of it to the Northward, which by 8. in the morning, we had done.

We then went to prayer, and gave God hearty thanks, that had delivered us out
of it. For we were hourly, for the space of six weeks, as it were in the
Jaws of death: yea never any (that I have heard of) have been so long, in
such long nights, upon a foul shoald shore, tormented with Ice, as we have
now been. At noone we were in Latitude 58. 20.

Now as touching the dissolution or ruining of the Ice; we found that this
storm had torn and shattered this Rande of Ice, which was on the outside:
although it must have a long time, to work into the maine body of it. I have
in July, and in the beginning of August, taken some of the Ice into the Ship;
and cut it square, 2. foot, and put it into the boat, where the Sun did
shine on it with a very strong reflexe about it. And notwithstanding the warmth
of the Ship: (for we kept a good fire) and all our breathings, and motions; it
would not melt, in 8. or 10. days.

It was our practice when we should be two days together fast to a piece of
Ice, to set marks on it, to see how it did consume: but it yielded us small
hope of dissoluing. We could not in that time, perceive any diminution by the
sinking of it or otherwise. Nevertheless, I think that it is ruined with
storms, or consumed with heat some years: or else the Bay would be filled
choke-full: But I confess, that these secrets of nature are past my
apprehension.

Being out of it (but no otherways then that we yet saw it from off the
deckes, all to the Eastward) I ordered the Master to stere away North and by
East, keeping the shoalding of the Wester-shoare.

The 18. 18.
at noone, we were in Latitude 59. 30.

The 19. 19.
we continued our course betwixt the N. N. E. and the N. by E. and at noone
were in Lat. 61. 7. some 12. leagues off the shore. I ordered the Master, to
shape his course North-East, to look to that place betwixt Caries Swans-nest,
and Ne vltra.

The 20. 20.
we were in Latitude 61. 45. This day we saw some few Seals about the Ship.

The one and twentieth the water shoalded; so that we 21.
made account we did approach the land: but about noone, the wind came up at N.
E. our direct opposite. We looft as near it as we could, and as it larg'd, we
came to stand East, and East and by North.

The two and twentieth, 22.
we fell with the land to the Westward of Caries Swans-nest: Where we had
forty faddome, three leagues off. We stood in, within a league of the shore,
into thirteen faddome: and seeing the land to the Southward of us, we compast
about it: it being Caries Swans-nest: which is in Latitude 52. degr. 00.
Minutes.

All the 23. 23.
we sailed North-East; and for the most part in sight of land.

The four and twentieth at noone, 24.
(by Judgment) we were in Latitude 63. 30. having sayld a North-East course.
All this day was a very thick fog: which about one a clock, cleerd a little:
so that I expected to see the land. Some of our men being better sighted, spyed
it out about some two leagues off from us. I knew it could be no other then
Nottingham Island: though it were something contrary to the expectation of our
best Mariners. We stood into it to make it. It was the North end of it: and it
bare off us, due East. I was soon assured of it; and I ordered the Master to
shape his course North-West, and by North. Both he and others were unwilling:
but without much ado, submitted themselves: (how loath so ever) for that it was
so very foul thick weather. The reasons of my resolution were these: The time
of the year was far spent; and the discommodities of Winter came upon us: and
therefore would I make the shortest way, betwixt the lands already discovered.
If I found an open Sea, I had my desire, and did then intend to proceed to the
uttermost of our power: if we met with the land, I should then finish the
discovery: it being not passing fifteen leagues from land to land, and not
passing ten leagues from Nottingham Island, to the maine of the North shore.
We made what sail we could; it blowing a very stiff gale of wind until eight
in the Evening: then it began to blow fiercely: and we took in our topsayles,
and stood under our two courses and Bonnets. At nine, it blew a violent storm
at South, South-East, so that we took in our fore-saile, and let her drive
North-West. All the night it continued an extraordinary storm: so that we
heaued the Lead, every half watch: But the Ship did drive so fast, that she
would be past the Lead, before there was twenty faddom of line out, all the
night being exceeding cold withal.

The five and twentieth, 25.
the storm continued in his uttermost malice, and did so perplexe us, that
there were but few that did sleep or eat a bit these twenty four hours.
About six a clock in the afternoon, the Storm began to slaken: yet blew
there a fierce gale of wind betwixt the South and South-West. We stood West,
North-West, and made a North-West way, when suddenly the Sea became very
smooth. We reasoned thereupon amongst our selves, what might be the cause of
it. We all thought it, to be the Lee-ward tide; nothing doubting what
afterward we encountered. The Ship had very quick way in this smooth water.

The six and twentieth, by two a clock in the morning, we were suddenly come
in amongst the Ice: and it pleased God, 26.
that the Moon at the instant gave us so much light, that we could see a
little about us. We would have staid the Ship, but it was so thick to
wind-ward, and so near us, that we durst not. We then bore up in this
unexpected accident; and (I verily believe) did not escape striking, the length
of a foot, against the Ice as hard as rocks, two or three times: the Ship
now having way, after twelve leagues a watch. Then we stood close by a wind to
the Eastward; expecting day, that we might see about us. We could from
topmast head see the Ice to the North North-West, the North-west, and so round
about by the South, to the East, and some there was to Leeward of us. It was
all flat sound Ice, in maine rands: and the Sea as smooth as a well amongst it.
This struck us all into a dumpe: whereupon I called a consultation of my
Associates: namely, Arthur Price, Master: William Clements, Lieutenant; John
Whittered, Masters Mate; Nathaniel Bilson, Surgeon; and John Palmer,
Boateswayne: requiring them to advise and counsel me, how to prosecute our
business to effect. These all went together, and reasoned amongst themselves;
and then brought me their opinions in writing, under their hands:

Videlicet, Our advice is, that you repair homeward, from this present twenty
sixth: and that for these reasons. First, for that the nights are long and so
extreme cold withal; that we can hardly handle our sails, and riggings.
Secondly, the times are now subject to stormy and gusty weather: as witnesses
the present season: it having continued a storm ever since the twenty fourth,
and does yet continue, no weather to discover in. Thirdly, we doubt whether
Hudsons Straights be so clear of Ice, that it may be passable in convenient
time: (winter coming now on apace) before we be frozen up: seeing the Ice lies
here all over the Sea in rands and ranges. Fourthly, we must have a set of
fair weather, to pass the Straight; which we may stay a long time; for, if we
neglect the first opportunity. Fifthly, for that our Ship is very leaky, so that
in foul weather we are feign to pumpe every glass: which is great labor.
Moreover, we know her to be so sorely bruised with rocks, and blows of the
Ice; that she is no more to be aduentur'd amongst it, but in saving of our
lives homewards. Besides all this, our men grow very weak and sickly, with
extreme labor.

Sixthly, the season of the year is so far spent, that we can expect no
other weather, then we have had; both lately and at present: That is to say,
snow and fogge; freezing our rigging, and making every thing so slippery, that
a man can scarce stand: And all this, with the wind Southerly; which if it
should come to the Northward; then we are to expect far worse. Seventhly and
lastly, that the Ice lies all in thick rands and ranges, in the very way we
should go: as you and all men here may see. And therefore we conclude, as
aforesaid; That there is no possibility of proceeding further: wherefore we
here counsel you to return homeward: hoping that God will give us a
favorable passage, and return us home safe into our native countries: If we
take time, and not tempt him too far, by our wilfulness.

Indeed most of these reasons were in view; and I could not tell what to say to
oppose them: no nor any reason could I give, how we might proceed further:
wherefore (with a sorrowful heart, God knows) I consented, that the helm
should be borne up, and a course shapte for England: well hoping, that his
Majesty would graciously censure of my endeauours, and pardon my return. And
although we have not discovered populous kingdoms, and taken special notice
of their Magnificence, power, and policies, brought samples home of their
riches and commodities: pryed into the mysteries of their trades, and
traffic: nor made any great fight against the enemies of God and our Nation:
yet I wish our willingness in these desert parts may be acceptable to our
Readers. When we bore up Helm, we were in latitude 65. 30. at least;
North-west and by North, from Nottingham Island. Some were of an opinion, that
we were further to the Northward: but by reason it was by Judgment, I chose to
set down the lesser distance.

The twenty seventh, 27.
the wind came up at North-west: with which wind we could not have gone on
our design. That wind made no great swelling Sea. By noone, we were athwart
of Cape Charles: so that we went in betwixt that Cape, and Mill Islands. The
last night it did snow very much; and was very cold: so that all our rigging
and sails were frozen, and all the land covered over with snow. And here,
(sithence I have formerly spoken that it snowes very much) it will not be
amiss to consider of the reasons of it. When I was upon Charleton Island, (our
wintering place) and in June, when the snow was cleereliest gone off the
ground; I have in the nights, (and some of them following the hottest days)
observed, whether there fell any dew or no: but I could never perceive any, and
(under correction of the learned) from moss and sand, little (me thoughts)
was to be expected. Now, of what was exhald from the snowy Ice, and cold Sea;
could there probably be returned but the like again. Generally, we continued
on our course, blinded with foggie and durtie weather; and that, intermixed with
snow, and frost; amongst dispersed pieces of Ice: many of them higher then our
Topmast head.

With great variety of winds, we were also driven within three leagues of both
shoares: so that the last of this month, we were in the narrow of the
Straight: which is about fifteen leagues over: the South shore was much
pestred with Ice.

September. 1632.
The first, 1. and 2.
and second, we continued our endeavor to get on our way. The third in the
evening, as the weather cleared up; we did see the South end of the Island of
Resolution.

These three days and nights had been extreme cold, 3.
with fogge and frost: insomuch that our men in the evening, could hardly take
in our Top-sayles and Spreet-sayle. We have sailed through much mountainous Ice;
far higher then our Topmast head. But this day we sailed by the highest that
I ever yet saw: which was incredible, indeed, to be related. Now as the wind
comes Easterly, we feel another Sea, out of the Ocean, and the Ship labors
with another motion, then she has done with any that ever we observed, to come
out of the Westward.

From the third to the eighth, 8.
we had variety of winds; and were gotten clear out of the Straights: but
were now comne into such a tumbling Sea, (the weather durtie and gustie, and by
interims calm again) that the Ship did so labor, and roll, that we thought
verily she would have rolled her Masts by the board. This made her so leaky,
that we were feign to pumpe every glass: yea, her seames did so open aloft,
that we lay all wet in her.

This was the last day that we saw any Ice. The wind now favoring us; we
made all the haste we could homeward. By the way, (having endeavored,
observed, and experimented some things in my unfortunate voyage) I perfected up
my said observations: which being after commanded to publish; I here most
submissely offer unto the Judicious Readers: and rain our private opinion
withal, concerning the faiseablenesse of the Action intended; which was to
find a passage into the South Sea.

What has been long ago fabled by some Portingales, that should have comne
this way out of the South Sea: the mere shadows of whose mistaken Relations
have comne to us: I leave to be confuted by their own vanity. These hopes
have stirred up from time to time, the more active spirits of this our
Kingdom, to research that merely imaginary passage. For mine own part, I
give no credit to them at all; and as little to the vicious, and abusiue wits
of later Portingals and Spaniards: who never speak of any difficulties: as
shoald water, Ice, nor sight of land: but as if they had been brought home in
a dream or engine. And indeed their discourses are found absurd: and the
plots, (by which some of them have practiced to deceive the world) mere
falsities: making Sea where there is known to be maine land: and land, where
is nothing but Sea.

Most certain it is, that by the only industry of our own Nation, those
Northern parts of America have been discovered, to the Latitude of 80.
degrees, and upwards. And it has been so curiously done, (the labors of
several men being joined together) that the maine land has been both seen
and searched; and they have brought this supposed passage to this pass; that it
must be to the North, of sixty six degrees of Latitude. A cold Clyme, pestered
with Ice, and other discommodities, and where the Spaniards dispositions, and
their weak Speak Ships, can hardly long endure it. And withal, it is thus
known, that the entrance of Hudsons Straights is but 15. leagues broad: in the
middle not so much. And betwixt Salisbury Island, and the maine; that it is but
8. leagues. Then proceeding to the Northwards, toward the forementioned
Latitude: it is but 15. leagues from main to main. This in length, is but
about a hundred and forty leagues: as may more plainly appear by the Map.
Most infinitely pestered withal it is with the Ice, until August, and some
years not passable then: yea I believe the straight is never clear of Ice
thoroughly.

Now most probable it is, that there is no passage: And that for these reasons
following.

First, that there is a constant Tide flood and ebb, setting into Hudsons
Straights: the flood still coming from the Eastward: which as it proceeds,
(correspondent to the distance,) it alters his time of full sea. This also
entering into Bays, and broken ground, it becomes distracted, and reuerses
with half tides.

Secondly, here is no small fish; as Cod, etc. and very few great ones, which
are rarely to be seen. Nor are there any bones of Whales, Sea-horses, or other
great fish, to be found on the shore: nor any drift-wood.

Thirdly, that we found the Ice in the Latitude of 65. 30. to be lying all over
the sea in randes: and I am most certain, that the shoalds and shoald-Bayes
are the mother of it. Had there now been any Ocean beyond it, it would have
been broke all to pieces: for so we found it coming through the Straight into
the Sea, to the Eastward.

Fourthly, the Ice seeks his way to the Eastward, and so drives out at Hudsons
Straight: which I have often observed being aland, upon the Island of
Resolution, and driving amongst the Ice in the Straight.

Now admit there were a passage, yet is it known, that it is partly narrow,
for a hundred and forty leagues, and to be infinitely pestered with Ice
withal: as every one have found, who have gone that way. Comparing therefore
some observation taken at Bantam, Gulolo, and at Firando in Iapan: and the
distance betwixt Iapan and the Wester-part of Califurnia: with the observations
taken at Charleton Island, (referring all to the Meridian of London) and then
the distance betwixt the Meridians of Cape Charles, and the Westerpart of
Califurnia, will be found to be about 500. leagues, in the Latitude of 66. 00.
where yet the Meridians incline very much together.

To this may be added, that near about Cape Charles, the variation is 29
degrees to the West: which is a probable argument, that there is much land to
the Westward: and that this straight must be very long, and that you have no
time to pass it but in August and September: when the nights are so long, and
the weather so cold, that it will not be indurable.

Add to this, That neither can any great Ships, which are fit for carrying of
Merchandise, endure the Ice, and other discommodities: without extraordinary
danger.

Moreover, a thousand leagues is sooner sailed to the Southward, and about the
Cape de Bona Speranza, (where the winds are constant) and that with safety,
then a hundred in these seas, where you must daily run the hazard of losing
Ship and lives. Put hereunto, that comfort for the sick, or refreshing for
your men, here is none to be had in these quarters.

Toward the latter end of August, and in September, the weather grows
tempestuous, and the winds incline to be Westerly, that there will be but small
hope of performing your voyage this way.

But let us (by way of imagination only) enlarge this Straight, in this
Latitude; and free it of Ice: yet what advantage, in speedy performance, will
be gotten by this passage, if the winds be withal considered? To Iapan, China,
and the Northern parts of Asia, it may be the nearer cut: but in Navigations,
the farthest way about, is well known, in fewer days to be performed, yea
with lesser pains, and more safety of Ship and goods.

Again; to the East Indies, and other parts, where we have the greatest
Commerce and employment of shipping; the other way is as near. What benefit of
Trade might have been obtained in those Northern parts of Asia, I will not
presume to speak of: holding that there is a great difference betwixt those
parts, and the Northern parts of America; whereas I am sure that there is none
in any place where I have been, all this voyage.

The two and twentieth of October, 22.
we arrived in the Rode of Bristoll: having been hindered and crossed with much
contrary tempestuous winds and weather. The Ship being brought into Harbor,
and halde dry aground to look to her: it was there found; that all her
Cut-water and Stern were torn and beaten away, together with fourteen foot
of her Keele; much of her sheathing cut away: her bows broken and bruised, and
many timbers cracked within board: and under the Star-boord bulge, a sharp
Rock had cut through the sheathing, the planke, and an inch and a half into a
timber that it met withal. Many other defects there were besides, so that it
was miraculous how this vessel could bring us home again. Being all here
arrived; we went all to Church, and gave God thanks for his preservation of us
amidst so many dangers. I very well know, that what I have here hastily
written, will never discourage any noble spirit, that is minded to bring this
so long tried Action to absolute effect. And it is likely withal, that there
be some, who have a better understanding, and a surer way of prosecuting of it,
then my self have. To whose designs I wish a happy success. And if they do
but make a reuiew of what has been done, and give more certain Celestial
observations, Hydrographicall descriptions, or exacter practice in Navigations:
it will be a most commendable labor. For although I have spent some years of
my ripest age, in procuring vain intelligence from foreign Nations: and have
travailed unto diverse Honorable and Learned personages of this kingdom, for
their instructions; have bought up whateuer I could find in print, or
manuscript, and what plot or paper soever conducing to this business, that
possibly I could procure; and have served voluntary besides; and spent some
time in rendering a relation (since my coming home) and expended withal of my
own moneys, in my foresaid endeavors, and in furnishing of extraordinary
necessaries, above two hundred pounds in ready money: yet I repent not my
self, but take a great deal of comfort and joy, in that I am able to give an
account (in some reasonable way) of those parts of the world; which heretofore
I was not so well satisfied in.

FINIS.
THE COPY OF THE Letter I left at CHARLETON, fastened to the Cross the first
of July, 1632.
BE it known to any that shall happily arrive here, on this Island of Charleton:
That whereas our Sovereign Lord Charles the first, King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith, etc. having a desire to be
certified, whether there were any passage, or not, by the North-west or
Northwestward, through these Territories, into the South Sea: Some of the
better-minded Merchants, of the Worshipful Company of Merchant-aduenturers of
the City of Bristoll, to satisfy his Majesty therein; did voluntarily offer
to set forth a convenient Ship for that purpose, well manned, victualed, and
furnished with all other necessaries. This free offer of theirs was not only
commended; but graciously accepted of his Majesty. Whereupon, they fitted and
furnished forth a Ship, called the Henrietta Maria, of the burden of seventy
Tuns, victualed for eighteen months A number thought convenient to manage
such a business, was twenty two, whereof nineteen were choiceable men, two
yonkers, and my unworthy self their Commander. All which, the Bristow
Merchants did most iudiciously and bountifully accommodate, and had in a
readiness, the first of May, 1631.

The third of May, we began our Voyage out of the Rode of Bristoll; commonly
called Kings Rode: Passing about the Cape Clear of Ireland, upon many courses,
but reduced to a West North-west, we sailed along: and upon the 4. of June, we
made the land of Groynland to the Northward of Cape Farewell: where for the
space of two days, we were dangerously ingagde amongst the Ice. Being clear
of it, we doubled Cape Farewell to the Southward, and so continued our course
to the Westward; continually sailing and thrusting the Ship through much Ice.
The 19. of June, we made the Island of Resolution: and endeavoring to compass
about it to the Southward, we were taken with a strong Westerly wind, which
drove the Ice, and it us, upon the shore. In that distress, (seeing it was
broken grounds and maine inlets into it,) I sent the Shallop to seek and sound
a place, for our refuge; but when she was departed, she was in as great danger
as we: and could not return to us, by reason of the Ice. We being now driven
very near the rocks, were feign to set our Sails, and force the Ship into an
opening: aduenturing her amongst unknown dangers, to avoid apparent; before we
could moore her in a place (as we thought) safe from danger. The 22. of June
(this Inlet being full of Ice,) that Ice upon the ebb, so Iambde one piece
into another, that it altered the ordinary course of it, and it came upon the
Ship, and put her against the rocks: notwithstanding our utmost resistance. As
the water ebd away, the Ship hung by the Keele upon a rock; and heeld to the
Offing. As soon as we perceived this, we made fast some Hawsers to her Masts,
and to the rocks, to hold her upright. But all in vain; she sunk still, as
the water ebbed away: so that she was so turned over, that we could not stand
in her. Hereupon, we got all upon a piece of Ice, looking upon her, and praying
God to be merciful to us. The rock that she hung upon, was a little abaft the
maine Mast; which made her hang after the head: and she sunk over so much,
that the Portlasse of the Forecastell was in the water. At length, it pleased
God, the flood came; before it had ebd so low as the tide before and after, by
a foot: and the Ship rose, and was safe and sound. And thus were we
miraculously delivered. With the first wind, we proceeded to the Westward:
continually being pestred with so much Ice, that it was about the middle of
July, before we could attain to Sir Dudly Digges Island. And here I was put to
my consideration: for whereas by my directions, I was to search especially two
places; one from Digges Island to the Northward; and failing there, to go to
the Checks and Hubberts Hope, and so to search it to the Southward; I now
finding the Sea much pestred with Ice in the latitude of 64. 00. and as far
as we could see to the Northward; and that the time was so far spent, as that
before I could do any thing that way, it would be Aug. and then as much trouble
to return again to Digges Island: and that by that time, the year would be so
far spent, the nights so long and cold; that I feared I should be forced with
shame to return into England again that year. Wherefore I took my way to
the Westward, by Mansfields Island; on which I landed twice, still hindered and
encumbered with Ice. Thence I proceeded to the Westward; hoping for an open Sea
in the Bay. We were there more troubled with Ice, then in any place before: so
that it was the eleventh day of August, before we had sight of the Western
land; which we made in latitude 59. 30. something to the Southward of the
Checkes. We were not able to attain thither, by reason of the contrary winds
and Ice: but were obseruant of the current of the tides: which after, by
experience, we found to come from the Northward. We coasted along the shore,
in sight of land; and in 10. faddome water, to the Southward: and entered that
Inlett, which heretofore was called Hubberts Hope: which was the very place,
where the passage should be, as it was thought by the vnderstandingest and
learnedest intelligencer of this business in England. We sayld to the very
bottom of it, into three faddom water: and found it to be a Bay of some 18. or
19. leagues deep. From thence we proceeded to the Southward, in sight of land
for the most part; and although I was as careful to keep the lead always
going (it blowing a fresh gale of wind, and a pretty big Sea) our depth 8.
9. 10. faddome: yet before the lead was up, the Ship struck upon a flat rock:
(she then being under foresayle, fore top-sayle, maine top-sayle, and
Spreetsayle) and gave three fore knocks, and got over it. Being past this
danger, we proceeded, and past by Port Nelson. Finding the land trend to the
Eastward, we began our discovery of it more carefully: because that no man
(that ever I could hear or read of) did ever see this land before. We stood
into six and five faddome: for it is very low land, and trends for the most
part East South-east, and East by South.

The seven and twentieth of August, I entered upon it, and in the name of the
Merchants Adventurers of Bristoll, took possession of it, to his Majesty's
use; naming it, The New South-west Principality of Wales. I brought from the
land, some small trees and herbs, and killed diverse sorts of foul; in sign of
seysure, which I brought aboard. Not long after, (being put back to the
Westward with contrary winds) we spoke with Captain Fox, in a Ship of his
Majesty's, set forth for the same purpose that we were: I invited him aboard,
and entertained him with such fare, as we had taken in this new discovered
land: and made him relation of all our endeauours: The like did he to us, and
withal told us, that he had been in Port Nelson: where he had put up a
Shallop, and found there many things which Sir Thomas Button had left there.
The next day, he departed from us, and stood to the Westward; and we never saw
him since. His Ship, He, and all his Company, were very well. We continued our
discovery to the Eastward, and came to the Easter point, which is in latitude
55. 06. which we named it Cape Henrietta Maria. There the land trends to the
Southward, and we followed it in sight; but were put off with foul weather;
which being ouer-blowne, we stood in again for the Westershoare (that we might
leave no part unseen) and followed it again to latitude 54. 40. The second
time we also put off, with like foul weather: which made us stand to the
Eastward. In this way we past by some Islands, and happened amongst broken
grounds, and rocks; in latitude 53. 30. where we came to an Anchor, and
sheltred our selves some few days, shifting Rodes. Now the Winter began to
come on, and the nights to be long and cold; that amongst these dangerous
places, we were feign to spend the day to look for security for the night.
Here, by misfortune, our Ship came aground; and that amongst great stones, as
big as a man's head; where she did beat for the space of five hours, most
fearfully. In this time, we lightened her, and carried some of our things
ashoare: so that by the great favor of God, we got her off again, whereupon
we named this Island, the Island of Gods favor. After that again, amongst those
Rocks, we were put to many extremities. At length, (having a gentle Southerly
wind) we stood along the Eastershoare, to the Northward: now looking for a
convenient place to winter in. And here again, were we assaulted with a
violent storm, in which we lost our Shallop, and were driven amongst diverse
dangers: and seeing an opening betwixt two Islands, we ventered to go in, in
very foul weather. We found it to be a very good Sound, and there we came to
an Anchor. We landed on one of them, which we named the Lord Westons Island; and
manned out our old Ship boat upon it. The other Island we named my Lord of
Bristols Island. Parting from hence, we stood to the Southward, to look for a
wintering place: because the time of discovery was past for this year. Many
were our troubles amongst these Islands, shoalds, and broken grounds; which made
us strain our ground tackle for life, many a time.

The 6. of October, we arrived in this Bay; it seeming a very likely place to
find a Harbor in: but searching the likeliest places, we found it all so
shoald flats and Rocks, and stony by the shore side; that we could by no
means bring our Ship near the shore, but were forced to ride a league off,
in 3. faddome and a half water.

The winter came on apace, the weather proved tempestuous; and the cold so
multiplied, that our sails froze in lumps to the yards, vnmanuable. Neither
could our only boat go from the Ship, by reason of the weather. About the
middle of October, I caused a house to be made ashoare where our sick men
might the better recover: but always with an intent to take it down, if we
found other-where, a place for our Ship. I sent likewise men afoote (seeing the
boat could not go) to discover the Island, and to see if they could find some
Creek or Coue; but all in vain, we spent the time with hope of fairer
weather, till now the Cables began to freeze in the house, and the Ship to be
frozen over with the sprewe of the Sea: so that we were feign to shouell the
snow off our decks. Moreover, the water began so to congeale by the shore
side, that the boat could hardly get ashoare. Yet for all that, if the wind
blew N. W. there went a very great surfe on the shore, and such a great Sea in
the Bay, that there was no bringing of our Ship aground. Besides this, she
would have then lain open to the E. and S. E. and S. and indeed the nearest
land, all about that way, was 2. leagues off. Hereupon, we continued out the
extremity, at an Anchor.

The 29. of November, the Ice came about us on all sides, and put us from our
ground tackle, and would have driven us out of the Bay upon Rocks and shoalds
(where undoubtedly we had perished) but that by Gods great goodness, it proved
so warm a day (the wind at S.) that suddenly we brought up some sail, and
hoyst it up with ropes, and so forced her ashoare; where she beat all that
night very sorely. The Ship being now grounded and quiet, we considered what
was best to do with her, and resolved to sink her: but the next tide, before
we had any of our provisions ashoare, the wind came N. W. so that the Ship
beat most fearfully. We got all our dry provisions up to the upper deck, and
made a hole to sink her: but before she was sunk, she beat so
extraordinarily, that we all thought she had been foundered. Being sunk down
so low, that the water came on the upper deck, we took our boat and went all
ashoare, in such pitiful cold weather, that we were all so white frozen, that
some sick men that were ashoare before, did not know us one from another.

The next day we fell to land our provisions; first our Bread, Fish, and dry
things, the men driven to wade in the water up to the middles, most lamentable
to behold. Within 2. days, what with great flat pieces that stuck about us,
and that which froze, it was becomne firm Ice, betwixt the Ship and the
shore: so that then we were feign to carry all things on our backs a mile from
the Ship to the house. Within few days, the hold became so frozen, that we
could not get all our things out of it, but were feign there to leave it
frozen, till the next year. Then we made us 2. other houses: our first house
was our Mansion house, wherein we did all lie together: our other was to dress
our victual; and the third for a storehouse: which we built a pretty distance
off, for fear of fire. And now we considered of the estate we were in, we all
doubted that the Ship was foundered: especially our Carpenter. But suppose she
were sound: yet was it a question, whether we could get her off in the Summer,
when the tides are low. Moreover, she might be spoiled, lying in the tides way,
when the Ice brake up: and then we should be destitute of any vessel to bring
us home. The Carpenter undertook to build a Pinnace, of the burden of 12. or
14. tons, that should be ready by the Spring: that if we found the Ship
unserviceable, we might tear her up, and planke her with the Ships planke.
Upon this we resolved, and by May brought it to that pass, that she was ready
to be joined together, to receive the planke. But God mercifully provided
otherwise for us: We endured a bitter cold winter, in which it pleased God to
visit us with sickness: so that in the beginning of May 1632. there was but my
self and the Master and Surgeon perfectly sound: and he began to find some
defect also. About the beginning of April, we began to dig the Ice out of
our Ship, which by the middle of May, we had effected.

The 24. of May, the Ice began to break up betwixt the Ship and the shore:
and about the middle of June, we had off our Ship, and found her to be stanch
and sound, contrary to all our expectations. Before this time, about the middle
of May, our Carpenter dyed: and with him, the hope of our Pinnace: Master
Wardon dyed the 6. of May: our Gunner Richard Edwards had his leg broken
(which was cut off) at the Capstang in August 1631. and languished till the 22.
of November: on which day he dyed. These three men lie buried here under these
Tombs of stones. We lost another man; one John Barton our Quartermaster, who
mis-carried in the little Bay that is due West from this Cross 3. mile: the
Ice breaking under him, so that he sunk down, and we never saw him more. The
two Pictures which are wrapped in lead, and fastened uppermost on this Cross,
are the lively pictures of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, Charles, the first;
and Queen Mary his wife; King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, etc. The next under that, is his Majesty's Royal Arms: the lowermost
is the Arms of the City of Bristoll.

And now we are in a readiness to depart this day, and I intend to prosecute
our discovery to the Westward, in this Latitude of 52. 03. and to the
Southward also, although with little hope. Failing there, I mean to haste to
Diggs Island, and endeavor to discover to the Northward. Thus having had some
experience of the dangers of the Ice, shoalds, and Rocks of unknown places: I
thought it necesary to leave this testimony of us and our endeavors, if God
should take us into his heavenly Kingdom, and frustrate our return into our
native Country. Wherefore I desire any noble minded Trauailer, that shall take
this down, or come to the knowledge of it: that he will make relation of it to
our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, and to certify his Grace, that we
cannot as yet find any hope of a passage this way: and that I do faithfully
persevere in my service: accounting it but my duty, to spend my life to give his
Majesty contentment; whom I beseech God to bless with all happiness. And
that they would likewise advertise our worshipful Aduenterers, of all our
fortunes; and that if as aforesaid we perish, it was not by any want or
defect in Ship or victual, or other necessaries; all which we have in
abundance for four months and above: which if occasion be, we can prolong to
six months. Thus being at present unable to express a grateful mind
otherwise but in my prayers to God: I heartily beseech him to power out his
bountiful blessing upon all their honest endeavors, and to continue their
noble dispositions in Actions of this kind. And I faithfully promise, that if
I shall come where the like Letters and Tokens shall be left, to make a true
relation of it, as it shall be desired. So desiring the happiness of all
mankind, in our general Savior Christ Jesus: I end.

Charleton, July the second. 1632. Thomas James.

THE NAMES OF THE several Instruments, I provided and bought for this Voyage.
A Quadrant of old seasoned Pearetree-wood, artificially made: and with all
care possible divided with Diagonals, even to minutes. It was of four foot
(at least) Semidiameter.

An Equilaterall Triangle of like wood; whose Radius was five foot at least;
and divided out of Petiscus Table of Tangents.

A Quadrant of two foot Semid. of like wood: and with like care proiected.

The Sights, Centers, and every other part of them looked to, and tried with
convenient Compasses: to see if they had been wronged or altered. And this
continually, before they were made use of.

Staves for taking Altitudes and Distances in the heavens.
A Staff of seven foot long; whose Transome was four foot; divided into
equal parts by way of Diagonals, that all the figures in a Radius of ten
thousand, might be taken out, actually.

Another of six foot, near as convenient: and in that manner to be used.

Masters Gunters Crosse-Staffe.

Three Jacobs Staves, proiected after a new manner: and truly divided out of
the Table of Tangents.

Two of Master Davis Backe-staues: with like care made and divided.

Of Horizontall Instruments.
Two Semicircles, two foot Semidiameter: of seasoned Pearetree wood: and
divided with Diagonals, to all possible exactness.

Six Meridian Compasses, ingeniously made; besides some doozens of others,
more common.

Four Needles in square boxes, of six inches Diameter: and other six, of
three inches Diameter.

Moreover, four special Needles, (which my good friends Master Allen and
Master Mar gave me) of six inches diameter: and touched curiously, with the
best Loade-stone in England.

A Loade-stone to refresh any of these, if occasion were: whose Poles were
marked, for fear of mistaking.

A Watch-clocke, of six inches Diameter: and another lesser Watch.

A Table every day Calculated; correspondent to the Latitude: according to
Master Gunters directions in his book; the better to keep our Time and our
Compass, to judge of our Course.

A Chest full of the best and choicest Mathematical books, that could be got
for money in England: as likewise Master Hackluite, and Master Purchase: and
other books of Iournals and Histories.

Study Instruments, of all sorts.

I caused many small Glasses to be made; whose part of time, I knew to a most
insensible thing: and so divided and appropriated the Logg-line, to them:
making use of Wilbrordus, Snellius his numbers of feet answering to a Degree:
and approved of by Master Gunter.

I made a Meridian-line, of 120. yards long: with six Plumb-lines hanging in
it: some of them being above 30. foot high, and the weights hung in a hole in
the ground, to avoyde wind. And this to take the Suns or Moons coming to
the Meridian. This line we verified, by setting it by the Pole it self, and
by many other ways.

Two pair of curious Globes; made purposely: the workman being earnestly
affected to this Voyage.

This was the manner that we took the variation of the Compass, and that as
often as conveniently we could, but diverse of the Tables by negligence of my
Boy are lost: but these (I hope) may suffice to give satisfaction of our care
in Navigations.

July 13th. 1631.
These 13. Azimuths with the Altitu. Dec. were taken upon a great piece of Ice,
with three Needles together: then the Declination was not equated, the last
three set forth by themselves, proves the rest: viz. the Azimuth of West with
his variation: the Azimuth at due West, And the variation by the Altitude and
Azimuth at due West.

These were taken twenty leagues to the Eastward of Salisbury Island; and 2.
quad. one of 4. another of 2. foot Semid. Semicircle of 2. foot Semid.

La. Deon. AL. AZM F. T. AZ F. Var. 63 01 20 14 39 42 77 50 S 50 11 S 27 39 63
01 20 14 35 33 90 00 62 12 S 27 48 63 01 20 14 34 24 76 30 N 65 07 S 27 23 63
01 20 14 31 24 80 18 N 72 12 S 27 30 63 01 20 14 30 57 78 53 N 73 21 S 27 46 63
01 20 14 29 00 74 50 N 77 28 S 27 42 63 01 20 14 27 10 71 00 N 98 42 N 27 42 63
01 20 14 25 52 68 28 N 96 02 N 27 34 63 01 20 14 25 00 66 40 N 94 16 N 27 36 63
01 20 14 24 00 64 50 N 92 16 N 27 26 63 01 20 14 23 30 64 00 N 91 18 N 27 44 63
01 20 14 22 50 27 35 N 89 58 N 27 33 63 01 20 14 22 30 61 24 N 89 18 N 27 44
The mean Varon is 27. 36. The variation of the Altit: and Azim: of West. 27
33. The variation of the Azimuth of West. 27. 48. The variation by Azim. at due
West. 27. 35. The mean of these three is 27 38.

July 22. 1631.
These three Azimuths and Altitudes were taken upon a piece of Ice the
Magneticall Azimuths by the Suns shade in the water, the air thick of
fogge, that the Sun gave no perfect shade otherwise: 10. leagues West from
Mansfields Island.

La. Decl. AL.. AZM F. T. AZ Fr Var. 60 33 18 25 34 06 90 00 S 64 34 S 25 26 60
33 18 25 31 34 84 48 N 70 08 S 25 04 60 33 18 25 18 25 71 35 N 82 54 N 25 21
The mean is 25. 17

July 24. 1631.
These 11 Azimuths, were taken upon a piece of Ice about the middle of the
great Bay: some of them by the shade, and some by the sight of the Sun in the
water, the weather being thick of fogge.

La. Decl. AL.. AZM F. T. AZ F. Var. 59 20 17 40 36 44 82 50 S 59 04 S 22 46 59
20 17 40 35 44 83 40 S 61 18 S 22 22 59 20 17 40 33 02 90 00 67 14 S 22 46 59
20 17 40 29 49 84 25 N 73 40 S 21 55 59 20 17 40 27 25 79 50 N 75 10 S 22 00 59
20 17 40 26 27 78 10 N 87 14 S 22 14 59 20 17 40 23 48 72 35 N 84 38 S 22 47 59
20 17 40 21 16 68 47 N 88 38 S 22 35 59 20 17 40 20 40 67 30 N 90 00 22 30 59
20 17 40 20 10 67 00 N 89 00 N 22 12 59 20 17 40 19 34 66 00 N 88 10 N 22 10
The mean is 22d. 23. 21.

July 31th. 1631.
These several Azimuths were taken upon a piece of Ice: 50. leagues off the
Wester-shoare.

AL.. AZ. M F. T. AZ F. Var. 24 00 76 26 N 99 20 N 22 54 Latitude 23 35 76 00 N
98 38 N 22 38 58 43 43 22 50 75 00 N 97 18 N 22 18 22 05 73 40 N 96 04 N 22 24
Declina. 20 32 71 20 N 93 32 N 22 12 15 43 43 18 40 67 55 N 90 24 N 22 29 18 30
67 30 N 90 02 N 22 32 The mean is 22. 29. 34.

August 1. 1631.
These several Azimuths were taken upon a piece of Ice: about 40. leagues off
the Wester-shoare.

AL.. AZ. M F. T. AZ F. Var. 26 36 83 05 N 104. 36 N 21 31 Latitude 25 24 81 25
N 103. 06 N 21 41 50. 45. 24 26 78 38 N 100, 42 N 22 04 22 30 75 16 N 97 22 N
22 06 21 31 73 50 N 95 42 N 21 5 Declina. 20 10 71 27 N 93 24 N 21 57 15. 25.
18 42 68 40 N 90 58 N 22 18 18 07 67 25 N 89 56 N 22 31 The mean is 22. 00.

August. 5th. 1631.
These Azimuths were taken upon a piece of Ice, and calculated by all the
figures of the Canon about 40. leagues off the Wester-shoare.

AL.. AZ. M F. T. AZ F. Var. 23 14 79 12 N 101. 02 N 21 50 Latitude 22 11 76 40
N 99 12 N 22 32 58. 37. 21 11 75 11 N 97 28 N 22 17 20 00 73 02 N 95 48 N 22 46
18 59 71 24 N 93 47 N 22 23 Declina. 17 15 68 35 N 90 53 N 22 18 14. 12. 16 42
67 28 N 90 00 22 32 15 39 65 32 N 88 18 N 22 46 The mean is 22. 25. 30.

These observations were taken the 10th. of November: 1631. the Lat. 52. 03.
the difference may be conceived, to grow by reason of the Suns low Altitude
and Refraction. The others about the Summer Solstice, where difference of
Meridians is avoided, and are more exact.

Alt.. AZ. M. T. AZ. Var. West. G. M. G. M. G. M. G. M. 14 25 42 25 16 11 16 14
14 00 45 25 27 30 17 55 13 15 47 25 29 54 17 31 12 18 48 10 32 33 15 37 12 03
49 20 33 16 16 04 11 41 51 07 34 15 16 52 10 57 53 25 36 04 17 21 9 42 55 25 38
38 16 27 9 15 57 45 40 00 17 14 8 50 58 37 40 52 17 45 The means is 16. 57.
West.

An Appendix touching Longitude.
LAtitude and Longitude are two primary affections of the Earth, by the help
of these two, does the Geographer strive to represent the parts of the Earth
that they may keep Symmetry and Harmony with the whole. Latitude then is an
arch of the Meridian, comprehended between the Equator and a Parallel; but
Longitude is an arch of the Equator, intercepted by the Prime Meridian and the
Meridian of a Place, the difference of Longitudes being the difference of two
Meridians. The measure of the former is the Meridian, the Equator of this
latter. For the exact settling of Latitudes we have many and absolute helps,
so that the Error if any happen, ought to be imputed to the imperfect handling
of the Artist. But the Longitude of a Meridian is that which has, and still
wearieth, the greatest Masters of Geography. Nevertheless has not the wise
Creator left Man unfurnished of many excellent helps to attain his desire:
For besides Eclipses, especially of the Moon, (whose leisure we must often
wait, and perhaps go without, if the Heavens be not propitious to us) we have
the Concurse of quick paced inferior Planets, with superior slow ones, or
their Appulses with some fixed Star of known place, or else some other
Artifice derived from Motions and Positions. As for the Magneticall Needle to
argue a Longitude from its Variation, is altogether without ground. And though
well furnished Seamen are able by their dead Reckonings (as they term them) to
determine the difference of Meridians somewhat near, yet by reason of the
unknown quantity of a Degree in a given measure (which is the Rule of the
Ships way) Varieties of adverse winds, Different sets of Tides, and other
inuolued incombrances, they come often wide of the mark they aim at. The best
way yet known to the world, is that which is deduced from the Celestial
Apparences, which being performed by Judicious Artists, may in short time
rectify our Geographicall and Hydrogaphicall Charts hitherto in most places
foully distorted. It is my intent here, to give an instance from two several
observations drawn from the Celestial Bodies, by the Author of this
discourse, in his discovery for the N. W. at the bottom of the Bay, being his
wintering place, and called by the name of Charloton* which for Judgment,
Circumspection and Exactnes may compare with most: The first from the Eclips of
the Moon; The second from the Moons Mediation of Heaven, or Her coming to
the Plane of his Meridian of Charleton.

The Captain then mindful of the Lunar Eclips which was to happen October 29.
Anno 1631. was waiting on the Moon with his Instruments, but by reason of the
Interposition of the clouds, could made no Observation on the beginning of her
Obscuration, but at her Emersion or Total Recovery of Light, the heavens being
more Serene, he took the Altitude of the Superior Limb of the Moon 29. gr.
11. m. The Latitude of Charlton being 52. gr. 3. min.

At that very time, my self with some friends found the exact time of the
Moons Emersion at London in Gresham College (by a Quadrant of six foot
Radius, actually cut to each minute of the Quadrant) to be October. 29. 13. h. 7.
m. 28 sec. or October. 30. d. at one of the clock, seven minutes, and about a
half in the morning.

Now because the Tables of the Celestial Motions, lately published by that
most Learned and Industrious Lansberg, do much amuse, the world with that
lofty title of Perpetuity, it shall not be amiss to enquire after the time of
the Captains Observation from them, that so by comparing the one with the
other we may obtain the difference of Meridians, which is the matter now
sought after.

The middle motions of the Luminaries answerable to the equal time of the
Emersion of the Moon, are these which follow.

Sex. Gr. M. S. The middle motion of the Sun 3. 47. 39. 26. Center of the 3
15 49 58 Apogaeu^ of the 1 35 45 44 The middle motion of the Lo^gitude of the)
2 59 29 1 Anomaly of the) 0 5 11 30 Latitude of the) 4 32 8 15 The
Prosthaphaeresis of the Aequinox -- 0 0 12 30

Being thus furnished with these middle motions we are next to enquire for the
true places of the Luminaries and their Concomitants, as their right
Ascentions, the Declination, Latitude, Semidiameter, Parallax, and Refraction
of the, that so the true Altitude of the center, and consequently the time of
the Emersion may be had at Charleton.

For the Suns true place.
Sex. Gr. M. S. The middle motion of the Center. -- 3. 15. 49. 58 The
Prosthaphaeresis of the Center add. -- 0. 1 37. 0 The Proportional Scruples.
-- 1. The middle motion of the Apogaeum. -- 1. 35. 45. 44 The true motion of
the Apogaeum subtr. -- 1. 37. 22. 44 The middle motion of the is -- 3. 47. 39.
26 The Anomaly of the orb -- 2. 10. 16. 42 The Prosthaphaeresis of the orb --
0. 1. 32. 43 The excess to be added -- 0. 0. 0. 20 The absolute Prosthaph. of
the orb subtr. 0. 1. 33. 3 The midd. mot. of the from the true Aequi. 3. 47.
51. 56 The true mot. of the from the true Aequi. 3. 46. 18. 53 Therefore the
true place was in -- 0. 16. 8. 53 And his right Ascension -- 223. 49. 53

For the Moons true place.
The Anomaly of the Center -- 5. 59. 18. 2 The Prosthaphaeresis of the Center
-- 0. 0. 5. 36 The proportional Scruples -- 0. The Anomaly of the orb -- 0.
5. 11. 30 The Aequated Anomaly of the orb -- 0. 5. 5. 54 The Prosthaphaeresis
of the orb subtr. -- 0. 0. 24. 4. The mid. mot. of the Longitude from the. 2.
59. 39. 1 The true motion of the Longit. from the. 2. 59. 14. 57 The mid. mot.
of the from the true aequin. 3. 47. 51. 56 The true mot. of the from the true
aequin. 0. 47. 6. 53 Therefore the true place was in -- 0. 17. 6. 53 For the
Latitude The middle motion of the Latitude. 4. 32. 8. 15. The absolute
Prosthaph. of her Orb subtr. 0. 0. 24. 4. The true motion of Latitude. 4. 31.
44. 11. The Northern Latitude was. 0. 0. 9 5. And her Reductiue Scruples
Subtr. 0. 0. 0. 26. But the true motion in her proper Orb was 0. 17. 6: 53:
Therefore the true place reduced to the Eclipt. 17. 6. 27. And because the
North Lat. of the was 0: 9: 5: Therefore will her Right ascens be. 44: 35: 10
And her Declination -- 17: 7: 49 And because we have the distance of the Moon.
From the earth in Semidiameters of the earth 64 15 Therefore shall the apparent
Semidiam: be -- 0. 15. And her parallax of Altitude. 0. 47. 0. Now because the
Altitude of the limb of the was found by observation to be -- 29: 11: If we
shall substract her Semidiameter -- 0: 15: And the refraction -- 0: 2: We have
the apparent Altitude of the center -- 28: 54: To this if we add the parallax
of Altitude -- 0: 47: We shall have the true Altitude of the Center: 29: 41:

Having thus the Latitude of the place, the true Altitude with her declination,
by the resolution of a Sphaericall Triangle according to the 11 Problem, lib.
2. Part. 2. of our British Trigonometry we have the distance of the from the
Meridian -- 63: 26:

And by comparing this Arch with the difference of the ascentions of the
Luminaries, the Time of the total recovery of her light at Charlton will be 7.
hou. 49. min. 28. sec. Which subtr. from the time of the Emersion at London. 13
hou. 7. min. 28. sec.

The difference of Meridians in respect of time will be 5: h. 18: m. o. So that
Charlton is removed from London Westwards, 79. gr. 30. m.

This may likewise be confirmed by a second different observation made at the
instant of the Moons Culmination or Mediation of Heaven, at which time the
Altitude of the brightest Star in the Asterisme of the Northern Crown,
(being of the second Magnitude) was found to be 33. gr. 27. m. Easterly. Ann.
1632. June 23.

It may be Problematically delivered after this manner. Having the Latitude of
a Place, with the Altitude of a known fixed Star at the moment of the
culmination, to find the Longitude.

This fixed Star is of known longitude and latitude, therefore was his
Declination 27: 59: and right ascension 229. 46. Now by the resolution of a
Sphaericall Triangle of 3. known sides we have the distance of this Star from
the Meridian, and by consequence the right ascension of the, whence we conclude
her Culmination to be with the 28: 10: m. of. but the Moons true place was
much less. Here note that the scrupulosity of time is unknown, and therefore
we cannot argue the true place from thence (though I grant it might be euinced)
for that were to beg the Question, and to know that first, which we look
after.

In the next place we are to inquire with what point of the Ecliptique the did
culminate with us here at London, that so from the difference of her places, of
the like affection, we may deduce the difference of Meridians.

Observation on the Culmination here at London we made none, therefore must we
have recourse to the aforesaid Tables of Lansberg, and from thence calculate
the same. Now because the was not far removed from the opposite point. It
will not be amiss to enquire first the place at midnight.

Sex. Gr. M. S. The opposite place at midnight in 0 11. 18. 15. The true place
at midnight reduced to the Ecliptique was in -- 0. 23. 33. 18. The South
Latitude of the Moon was -- 0. 4. 56. 38 Therefore the difference of
Ascensions will be -- 14. 6. 0 The Diurnall motion of the Moon -- 14. 24 0
Therefore the Moons proper motion answerable to the difference of Ascensions
is -- 0. 33. 50 Which added to the Moons true place at midnight 23. 33. 18
Gives us the Moons true place reduced to the Ecliptique at her Culmination at
London -- 24. 7. 8

Now because the Southern Latitude was 4. 56. 38, the Arch therefore of the
Ecliptique comprehended between the Moons true place and the culminating
point of the Eclipt. will Trigonometrically be found to be 54: m. 38. s. which
added to the true place before found gives us the culminating point of the
Eclipti. 25. gr. 1. m. 46. s. which is less then that found at Charleton: the
difference being 3. 8. 24. therefore is the place of Observation Westerly of
London. Having therefore the Diurnall motion and the difference of the
culminating points we conclude the Meridian of Charlton to be distant from this
of London 5. h. 14. m. of time or 78. 30. of the Equator.

The difference between that of the Eclipse, and this latter observation is
only 4. minutes of time or one degree, a difference easily pardoned, especially
if we shall compare the same with some other places, yea even such as border
nearly on each other. To give an instance on 2 eminent places which lie in the
heart of Europe, Rome and Norenberg: Their difference of Longitude
Regiomontanus makes 36. Werner 32. Appian 34. Maestlin and Origan 33. Stofler
18. Maginus 26. Schoner 12. Mercator and Hondius as much. Stadius 13. Iansonius
10. Longomontaus 16. Lausberg: 10. Kepler by 2. observations on 2 Lunar
Eclipses, but 4 minutes of time.

This variety among these great Artists, will I hope pardon us this difference
of 4. m. and be a means to encourage our English Seamen and others, to make
such or the like observations in foreign parts as the heavens shall be offered
unto them.

H. GELLIBRAND.

To the venerable Artists and younger Students in Divinity, in the famous
University of CAMBRIDGE.
YOU nobly-witted, and ingenuously-studied Academians: whose excellency in all
kinds of learning, all foreign Universities do admire, and none atteine
unto. I here present you a Voyage to Cholcos, though not the Golden-fleece with
it: the Search, I mean, but not the finding; of that so much talked of, so
often sought for, North-West Passage, and nearer way into the South Sea. That,
wherein so much Time and Treasure have been expended, so many brave Spirits
employed, and yet none discovered. Perchance, there is no such Passage to be
found: and that the Spaniards, by the gullery of their false Sea-Cards, and the
fable of an old Greek Pilote; have but diuerted our English and Dutch Seamen,
from their golden Indyes. This plot of theirs has taken, for these many
years: and it appears to be but a plot, for that themselves never make use
of this Passage. For mine own part, I suppose that the Philosophers stone is
in the North-West Passage. My argument for it is, For that there is so much
Philosophy in the way to it.

So much, and such variety: such variety, and that so various, (I think) from
what is received in the Schools: that it were well worth the disquisition of
an University, (and I wish you the first honor of it) either to find out, how
these Observations may be reduced to Aristotle's Philosophy: or whether they
need any other enquiry, and ought to be examined by some other Rules, then
Aristotle has yet light upon. This is my purpose of inscribing it unto you. Of
this one thing am I confident: that you are all so rational, and ingenuous, as
to prefer Truth, before Authority: Amicus Plato, amicus Aristoteles, but
magis amica veritas. Your Sciences, then, being Liberal; your Studies, I know,
have so far passed into your manners, that your minds are so too, and that
such as have already profited beyond the credulity required in a young learner,
and are themselves promoted to be Masters of the Arts; though they still
reverence their old Greek Tutor, yet they will not suffer that of Pythagoras
School, so to domineere in Aristotle's, as to let an Ipse dixit, go away with
it: much less allow it the authority of a Mayors hammer, with one knock to
silence all arguments.

Upon this confidence, I, with all due respects, here prefer two Propositions
unto your discussing. The first this, Whether those Rules of Aristotle's
Philosophy be to be allowed so Universal, that they hold all the world over.
The second this, Whether they ought to be so magisteriall, as to prescribe
against all other examinations. The first of these, I shall but problematically
propound unto you: but in the second, I hope a man of my clothing, may be
allowed the freedom of being something more earnest.

But that I may not come with prejudice to the making of these motions, or be
thought, upon some ignorance or ambition, to speak against the incomparable
Aristotle; I shall desire all my fellow Academians to allow me so much
discretion, as to know, That he that shall in your hearings, oppose your
Aristotle; does like the Ship here spoken of, run against a Rock, endanger
his own bulge, and the stauing of his vessel. No, I so far honor the old
Aristotle, that I well allow him to be Master and Moderator of the Schools:
and that there is the same respect due to him in the Schools, which, by Reason
and long Custom, is due to one of the Kings Ships in the Narrow Seas; That in
acknowledgement of a Sovereignty, every other name ought to strike sail to
him. Aristotle (it must be confessed) has made all learning beholding to him: no
man has learned to confute him, but by him; and unless he has plowed with
his heyfer. He had the most incomparable wit, and was the most Logical and
demonstratiue deliverer of himself, of all the Sons of nature: One, who best
of all deserved to be called Her Principal Secretary: one, who not only adornes
a Library, but makes it: Qui habet Aristotelem, habet Bibliothecam, is truer of
him, then of the Great Comparer. This is my opinion of him; and I wish him more
studied.

It Is not, 1.
therefore, the name, or the authority of the great Aristotle, that my
Propositions meddle withal: but whether his observations gathered out of this
part of the world alone, could, like a royal Pass or a Commission, carry a
man all the world over?

It must be confessed, That in respect of the Equinoctial and the Latitude that
Aristotle lived in, he was but a Northern man: and it was his own Rule, that
Nihil agit extra Sphaeram actiuitatis suae. So then, it would be put to voices
to consider, whether he that knew but these Northern parts, and the
Mediterranean Sea; could possibly make such collections, by what was here to be
learned, as should be vnfaileable in the Southern Haemisphere and the two
Indyes? Plainly, those that are conversant in the nauigations and books of
voyages into those parts; have found so many contrarieties to observe; that it
were rather tedious, then difficult, to fill up a Notebooke with them.

The Ancients, we know (as if they had measured the world by the Yeard-wand)
restrained the limits of temperature, and habitation, by the five Zones:
without consideration of any interloping or concurring causes, which experience
has now found out, to have quite altered their observation. I add, that a
good leisure and diligence might observe, how in the contrary part of the
world, there be found clean contrary Causes and Effects, unto those in this
part of the world. The South Wind there, brings cold and Winter: and the North,
is the rainy wind. How will the Thunder and the Wind, be made agree with
Aristotle's definition of a Meteore? In some places of the Mountains Andes by
Peru, it thunders ever. The East-Indyes have their Monsons and their steady
winds, constant for six months together: and who shall assign their causes?
Then the doctrine of the Tides, nothing so uncertain: which ebb and flow in
some places, different; and in others contrary, to the Moon and her motions.
This (as I remember) is Aristotle's definition of a Meteore, Aristoteles, 1.
Meteor 1.
That it is, An imperfect mixed body, generated out of an infirm and inconstant
concretion of the Elements; which therefore cannot be durable. Now the Monson,
is both constant in his continuance this year, and in his return next year;
most constantly keeping his seasons half year one way, and half year
another way, for all ages: nothing more constantly or durably; and therefore
nothing like Aristotle's Meteore. And so for the Thunder upon the Andes: it is
first perpetual; secondly, not caused by a dry exhalation, (as Aristotle
wills) but hanging over such hills as are covered with snow and a perpetual
winter. Witness the Thunder on the Alps also: yea and that in the middle of
the Sea, 500. leagues from shore, or any thing that is dry. yea, it frequently
both Snowes and Thunders upon the Andes, at one instant: and in dry places that
are hard by, scarce ever Thundering.

But not to pass the Line for it; You see in this little Book, how Charlton
Island, which is no more Northerly then your Cambridge; is yet so vnsufferably
cold, that it is not habitable: and that there encounter so many different, (at
least so seeming) occurrences of nature, as were well worth the disquisition of
a Philosopher. I could, (in my small reading) instance in many many other
particulars: which I had rather should be found out by some industrious
searchers after Nature, in the Modern Relations of our Discoverers, then in
this my short Proposition. It Is not to be doubted, but that the careful reading
of our Books of Voyages, would more elucidate the History of Nature, and more
conduce to the improuement of Philosophy, then any thing that has been lately
thought upon. These Navigations have in part fulfilled that of the Prophet,
Dan. 12. 4.
Many shall pass to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. This, I
suppose, might be observed from this study, That the great and infinite Creator
has so disposed and varied every thing, that it is impossible for man's reason
and observation to conclude him: and therefore, though vulgar and received
Philosophy, may give a man a general hint, all the world over; yet no
Universal and vnfayling certainty.

This brings me to my Second Proposition, 2.
That seeing God will not have his works, (no more then his Kingdom) to come
by observation; Luke 17. 20.
Whether, then, ought any humane dictates to be so Magisteriall, as to
prescribe against all other examination?

No humane study more conduces to the setting forth of Gods glory, then the
contemplation of his great works, in Philosophy: for though a smattering
knowledge in Second Causes, warps the mind toward Atheism; yet a higher
speculation of them, brings about again to Religion. No man, I believe, will
think it fit for us to have a Pope in Philosophy; one, that no body shall
presume to censure of: but all be bound to advance his Decretalls, above the
Holy Scriptures. This is the scandal that my self, and diverse good men take,
at the undue authority in some heates pinned upon the Stagerite.

I am sorry that the Israelites dotage upon Salomons Philosophy, Suidas, and
Rabbini.
should have caused the zealous Hezekiah to call in and to suppress those
invaluable Physics: for fear, I suppose, lest their credit should have as
much derogated from the authority of the Holy Scriptures; as the brazen Serpent
(which he destroyed about the same time) had done from Religion. None will
believe, that Salomons Philosophy was contrary to the Scriptures; seeing the
Scripture commends Solomon for them. It Was not Hezekiahs fear, therefore, (or
not only) lest there might have been a competition between them, but a
neglect of one of them: he was jealous lest the Scripture might have any
writing set up by it, though not against it.

Can Divines, then, be blamed for speaking, when they hear Aristotle's
Philosophy to be solely magnified, and the study of the Scripture Philosophy,
disrespected? Or that when it is confessed, That such a thing is true in Divinity,
and yet the Moderating of the point determine for Philosophy? Nay, to hear it
called absurd and ridiculous, to have Scripture urged at all, in point of
Philosophy? No doubt there is, But whatsoever is false in Divinity, is also
false in Nature, how much show of truth soever it passes with, in Philosophy.
Philosophy has taken its turn in the Schools: and the holy Texts by the
Schoolmen, have even been submitted unto Aristotle's: yea, to the great
corruption of Theology, as the complaint is, has this man been so far
advanced, That Contra est Philosophus, and Contra est Apostolus; have
familiarly passed up and down, for equal Oppositions: so that it has been a
measuring cast oftentimes, betwixt the Prophet and the Peripatetick: and by
foul play has the measure been made to stand the harder at the Peripatetick,
for that the Prophet has been enforced to comply with him by a wrested
interpretation. Thus had S. Paul need give his caveat unto Theology, as well
as unto Theologues, Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy.

All this were to no purpose, unless the Text of God were excellent in this
kind; and embellished, here and there, with most admirable Philosophy. What
incomparably rare footsteps of it, have we in the Books of Genesis, Job, and
the Psalms? How noble a Study then were it, and how worthy the leisure of some
excellently learned; to bestow some time upon it? Valesius the Physician, has
in his Sacra Philosophia done something in this kind: who yet might have done
better, here and there, for the honor of the Scriptures. I am not so sottish
to believe, That every particular is to be drawn out of Scripture: it is none of
my doteage, that. Or that God in Scripture did intend, every where, the
accuratenesse of Philosophy; or stand to be so curious in definitions and
decisions. Nor so foolish would I be thought, as to have all Philosophy taken
in pieces, and new molded by the Scriptures. Nor, that nothing should be
determined on, till a Text confirmed it. But this, perchance, might profitably
be thought upon: That where the Scriptures have any thing in this kind, it
should more reverently be esteemed; Collections out of scattered places, (as is
done out of Aristotle) made: these compared, and their Resultances observed.
This, surely, would amount to more, then is yet thought of: and, a- Gods name,
let Scholars be so bold with Aristotle, as to examine him upon good assurance,
by what is Truths Touchstone: Received Philosophy is a most necessary
handmaid to the Scriptures; but let her not be set above her Lady, nor no
competition be maintained betwixt them.

Something else remains to be thought of: That seeing the same God, who gave
Aristotle these good parts; has, in like manner, raised up many excellent
Spirits more: whether it were not injurious unto what is done, and a
discouragement to what might be done; to have the inventions or observations of
those excellent wits and great industries, so abasht with Aristotle's
authority; that they can have no credit in the world, for that his Dictates
have pre-occupated all good opinion? Let it not then be thought unequal, to
examine the first cogitations of the old Philosophy, by the second thoughts of
our more modern Artists: for that the same improuement may by this means
accrue unto our Physics, that has advanced our Geography, our Mathematics,
and our Mechanics. And let it not be thought so insolent, to refuse Aristotle's
authority singly, where his reason is not so concluding; seeing other men have
taken the boldness to do that before us, in several kinds. Some have
perfected, and others controld his Ethics, by the Scriptures: as Scultetus,
Wallaeus and some others. Justin Martyr sir-named the Philosopher, has
purposely written Contra dogmata Aristotelis: Basson and Gassendus, (two brave
men) have newly written pointblanck against him: nor have they taken away all
liberty, from those that are to follow them.

And thus, with renewing my former protestation for mine own respects to
Aristotle, I conclude my two Propositions: which I desire may receive a
favorable construction from all ingenuous, imcapricious Scholars. I meant
them, out of good will to promote learning; to encourage and countenance future
undertakings: and in such a case, a little too much saying, may be thought not
to have exceeded an honest Rhetorication: for I would not be thought too
earnest in it. The hint for all this, I took from this book: which in mine
own and some better Judgments; is (to say no more) as well done, and enriched
with as sure and useful observations, as any in this kind. I was desired by
the able Author, and some other friends; to ouer-looke the written Copy of it,
and to amend the English here and there; in which I did not despair of doing
something: for that, in my younger time, I had a little acquainted my self with
the language of the Sea. That which put me in the head to inscribe it unto your
Names (most excellently learned Academians) was, for that the place of this
Wintering, was within a minute or two, of the height of our Cambridge. Which
my prayer to God is, that your Studies may make famous.

Yours William Watts.


